A TREATISE OF SPECTERS OR strange Sights, Visions and Apparitions appearing
sensibly unto men.

Wherein is delivered, the Nature of Spirits, Angels, and Devils: their power
and properties: as also of Witches, Sorcerers, Enchanters, and such like.

With a Table of the Contents of the several Chapters annexed in the end of
the Book.

Newly done out of French into English.

AT LONDON Printed by Val. S. for Matthew Lownes. 1605.

TO The Kings most excellent Maieslie, of great Brytaine, France and Ireland,
etc.
Most gracious and dread Sovereign;
AS it is a duty imposed upon parents by Nature, to provide for the education
and maintenance of their infants: so it is a privilege allowed unto the
studious, both by reason and custom: to secure the fruits of their studies
from the detractions of the envious, by the countenance and patronage of some
great personages, either excellent for their virtues, or eminent for their
greatness. Upon this ground (as also upon some other special inducements) I
have presumed to present unto your Highness this Treatise touching the
Apparition of Spirits: and discoursing of the Nature, properties and power,
both of Angels, Devils, Sorcerers, Witches, and such like. One of the special
reason; inducing me hereunto, is: for that as the first Author thereof, a
Frenchman and a Civil Lawyer, did dedicate it to the Queen mother of France
Katherine de Medicis, a great Princess: to whom (it seems) in regard of his
particular preferment he was specially obliged: so my self, his like in
profession (though wanting the means of like hope and fortune) had a desire
that this French stranger (now made an English Denison) might soiourne here
under the royal protection of your Greatness: whose excellency of puissance,
surpassing knowledge, and princely virtues exempted from comparison, have made
you observed of the greatest, admired of the wisest, and endeered in the love
and hearts of all good men.

A second Motive was, the desire of the party by whose Motion I undertook to
bring him acquainted with the English: who being a man worthily regarded of the
best, and not unknown to your Maiestic, did wish to have him presented to your
Highness. The third and last (though not the least cause) which drew both our
desires to concur in this point, was: that I may use his own words written
to a great Peer of this Realm, touching this Treatise: Because your Majesty
has heretofore most religiously and learnedly written of this Argument, and
has concluded, That Witches are the generation of Vipers, and the seed of the
wicked Serpent: whose head you have also bruised, both by divine law, and by
Act of Parliament. Wherefore seeing this stranger is not only a professed foe
to all these damned arts, and diabolical illusions of Witches, Sorcerers, and
Coniurers, and to all their favorers and adherents: but like a stout and most
worthy Champion, has also overthrown all their forces, and trodden their
defenses under foot: All these reasons put together, do yield me a full
assurance, that as your Highness is best able, so you will most graciously be
pleased to patronize and protect him; and the rather, because he is a
stranger. This favor if your most excellent Majesty shall vouchsafe him: for
mine own part, as my heart was long since vowed yours in all duty, love, and
fidelity; so my soul shall power it self forth in prayers for the blessed
preservation of your Majesty in all happiness, both of temporal and eternal
felicity.

Your Majesty's Most faithful subject in all humility.

The Epistle of the French Author to the Queen Mother of the King.
MAdame, albeit the first subject moving me to write this Treatise of
Specters, was principally to confute certain ancient Philosophers, Atheists
and Libertines, who did hold and maintain this opinion, that there were not
any substances in being, but such only as were corporal and having bodies: Yet
so it is, that I have not herein employed my pen against those whom both all
the Books of the whole world, and venerable antiquity, and even Nature it
self have condemned: so much as I have done against certain perverse spirits
and brainsicke persons of our age, who have invented most strange and variable
opinions: as also against some new Dogmatists, who to the intent they might
secretly insinuate (as I This is but a suppose; For it is no consequence,
because the souls of dead men appear not, that therefore they are not.
suppose) into the minds of men, an error of the Epicures: That the souls of
men have no being after death) have altogether denied their apparition.
Howbeit, that all the Doctors of the Church do confute them: and Saint Jerome
particularly has written thereof, a certain Book against Vigilantius the
Gaul: wherein he shows by lively reasons, that the souls of the Saints
after their dissolution may haunt or frequent these inferior places. Now
(Madame, I knowing that you have in detestation all such Dogmatists, and that
your desire is above all things, that our France should be purged of such
monsters: which (as the same Saint Jerome writes to Vigilantius) could never
endure or suffer such persons: My desire was that this work of mine should
come forth under the name of your Highness, to the intent the same might
march the more hardily under your favor throughout France, in despite of all
detractions, and malignant persons: who will so much the more fear to assail
or reprove it, when they shall see that it is under your protection and
defense: and that you have with a gracious countenance receyved it. Madame, I
pray God the Creator to give you long life, with increase of greatness and
prosperity.

From Angiers this 21. of June 1586. Your most humble subject: PETER DE LOIRK.

To the learned Reader.
MY Masters, the worthiness of this work commended by some of good
indgement, and the friendly intertainment which you gave the Epirot Prince
Scanderbeg (when of French he became English) has caused this stranger and a
Frenchman to be recommended unto me by my friend, with a desire to have him
brought acquainted with our English language and fashions. To satisfy his
request, I have undergone the pains, and you are now (if you please) to reap
the pleasure. For having apparelled him (as you may see) in this English habit,
I do now send him unto you, trusting you will afford him as friendly a welcome
as you did to my French Epirot. It may be he will prove worthy of your liking
and good acceptance. For if I be not deceived, in conversing with him, you
shall find both delight and profit: delight by the variety of sundry matters,
and variable Histories, which he will discover and recount unto you: profit in
regard of his sound Arguments, and profound knowledge in all kinds of learning
and philosophy, accompanied with great reading and experience in the
antiquities of the aucients, both Jews, Arabians, Greeks and other nations:
besides many things in him of worthy observation. Amongst all which parts, if
in some points you find him not so sound a Divine as the excellency of this
work would have required: You must bear with one defect: and consider, that
being a Civilian by profession, his breeding, bringing up, and practice, was in
the Court and constitutions of Rome. From whence what can we expect but Romish
Divinity. Herein therefore your discretion must supply the partiality and
particularitie of his opinion. And for other points in him, I will rather
refer h^^ to be commended by your own censure and judgment, the^ seek by
any insinuation of mine, to work him into your good affections. Wherefore
recommending this Orphan stranger to that courtesy which gentle spirits do
usually yield unto strangers, I leave him to his Fortune; and to you wish all
contentment. So fare you well.

A Catalogue of the Authors alleged in the Treatise of Specters.
A
ABdias Babilonian. Abacuc prophet. Abraham the Jew. Achilles Statius.
Accursius. Acts of the Apostles. Aeschines. Aelianus. Agellius. Agathias
Scholasticus. Agrippa. Aimonus Monachus. Alexander Aphrodiseus. Alexan. Doctor
of the civillavv. Albertus Magnus. Albert Crantz. Albericus. Alexander
Trallianus. Alexander ab Alexandro. Algazell. Alciat. Albumazar. Alpherius.
Alliac. Alcoran of Mahomet. Alpetragius. Alpharabius. Alphonso Vlloa. Saint
Ambrosius. Amatus the Portingall. Ammianus Marcellinus Anastasius Nicaenus.
Anastasius Sinaites. Anacreon. Antonius Liberalis. Ancharanus. Angelus. Annals
of France. Annals of Aniou. Apollonius Rhodius. Apollonius Historicus.
Apollonarius. Appian of Alexandria. Apomazar. Apuleius. Aristophanes.
Aristotle. Aretinus the Civillian. Arnobius. Aristenetes. Artemidorus.
Archines, or the Records of the Church of Saint Maurice in Angiers. S.
A^hanasius. Athenagoras. Atheneus. Averrois. Saint Augustine. Avenzoar. Avicen.
Avicebron. Avanpares. Aventinus. Ausonius. Authors of Zoar. Authors of Mechitha
Authors of Midrashim.
B
BAldus Bartholus. Baptista Egnatius. Baptista Fulgosius. Baptista Severinus.
Balthazar Castilion. Baptista de la porta. Saint Basil. Basiliques.
Bartholmeus de fide. Barnaby Brisson. Beatus Rhenanus. Beda. Benedictus a
Civilian. Bembus. Belon. Saint Bernard. Boethius. Boccace. Boerius. Bonaventure.
Budaeus. Book of the nursing of Mahomet
C
Caball of the Jews. Caelius Rhodignus. Cadamostus. Calender of the Romans
old. Cardan. Cassiodorus. Cato Censor. Catullus. Celsus a Physician. Celsus a
Civilian. Cedrenus. Censorin. Chion the Philosopher. Chaldeans. Chrisippus.
Christophorus Porrus. Cicero. Saint Ciprian. Saint Cirill. Claudiau. Saint
Clement. Clement of Alexandria. Codes of Justinian. Codes of Theodosius.
Councels of Nice. Councels of Elliberum. Councels of Ancyra. Councels of
Constance, Councels of Ariminum. Councels of Carthage. Councels of Lions.
Councels of Ephesus the second. Copernicu^. Constantinus magnus. Constantine
Author of the Geoponiques. Contaren. Customs of Aniou old. Crinitus.
Cresias. Curtius Doctor of the civil law.
D
Dant Alhiger. Daniel. David Prophet. Demosthenes Denis. Decrees of Gratian.
Dion. C^fsius. Dion Chrysostom. Dionisius Halicarnasseus. Diopenes laertius.
Didaccus Covarruvias.
E
EMpcdocles. Epigrammes Greek. Epictetus. Eron. Erasmus. Eunapius. Euripides.
Eusebius. Eustathius. Euthim^s. Eucherius. Ezechel Prophet.
F
Felin. Felix Malcol. Fernelius. Ferron a Civilian. Festus Pompeius. Feudes.
Fortunatus. Forcatel a Civilian. Francis Pic of Mirandola. Franciscus Ripa a
Civilian. Froissard. Fulgosius Doctor of the Civil Law.
G
GAguin. Galen. Galatin. Gemestius. Genesis. Georgius Venetus. Georgius
Agricola. Ghirlandus. Gerson. Glossa old. Giovan Baptista Alfaqui, Gregorius
Nazianzenus. Gregorius Magnus. Gregorius Nicenus. Gregorius Turonensis. Guido
Pape. Guicciardine. Gulielmus Parisiensis. Gulielmus Tirius Archiepise.
H
HArpocration. H^liodorus. Hector Boethius. Herodian. Herodotus. Heraclides
Ponticus. Hesiodus. Hildegardis. Hippocrates. Hippolitus Civilian. Saint
Hierome. Hieronimus Mengus. Hieronimus Gagnolus civilian. History of the
Indies. Homer. Horace. Hostanes. Hostiensis. Hugo Cardinal.
I
IAcobus a Clusa, Iamblicus. Ieber. Saint John Evangelitt. John Chrysostom.
John Damascene. John Pic of Mirandala: John Leon Affrican. Jeremy Prophet.
Isaias Prophet. Jesus Syrach. Saint Ignatius. Imola. Inscriptions ancient.
Io^l Prophet. Job. Johannes Tzetzes. Johannes Andre^s Civilian. Johannes
Nivizanus Civilian. Johannes Britto. Iornandes Gothus. Josephus the Jew.
Ioachimus Camerarius. Josephus Scaliger. Saint Ireneus. Isocrates. Isaeus.
Isaac Syrus. Julius Capitolinus. Julius Caesar Scaliger. Julius Maternus
Firmicus. Julian the Apostate. Julius Pollux. Julius Obsequent. Iustine Martyr.
Iuvenall.
L
LAbeo. Laonicus Chalcondilas. Lactantius. Lavater. Laudensis Doctor of the
Civil law. Langius. Leon Philosophus Emperor. Leo Papa. Levinus Lemnius.
Lexicon Greek old. Lysias. Laws of the Lombardes. Laws of the Phrisons.
Laws of the Saxons. Laws of the Vandales. Laws of the French. Laws of
the Burgonians. Laws of the Ripuarians. Laws of the Salique. Lodovicus
Vives. Lodovicus Romanus Doctor of the Civil law. Saint Luke Evangelist.
Lucan. Lucian. Lucretius.
M
MAcrobius. Machabees. Saint Mark Evangelist. Marcilius Facinus. Martial.
Martian Civilian. Martirologe ancient. Marianus Doctor of the Civil law.
Saint Matthew Evanglist. Mathiolus. Matthias Amichou. Maximus Tirius
Philosopher. Melancton. Melchior Flavin. Memnon. Marcurius Trismegistus.
Michael Glicas. Moises. Modestin Civilian.
N
NAngis. Nazarius. Nemesius. Neron. Nicephorus Calixtus. Nicetas. Nigidius
Figulus. Nicholas Lyra. Nicholas Damasce^us Philosopher. Nider. Nonnus
Monachus.
O
OLdradus. Olaus Magnus. Ordinances of Fraun^e. Ordinances of Naples. Oracles.
Orpheus. Origin. O^id.
P
PAedianus. Pamphilus Physician. Pandectes. Panormitanus Civilian. Pandulphus
Collenucius. Parthimus. Paris de Puteo. Saint Paul. Paulus Iovius. Paulus
Diaconus. Paulus Egineta. Paulus Venetus. Paul Civilian. Pausanias. Petronius
Arbitrer. Petrus de Abano. Petrus Comestor. Peucerus. Pherecides. Phavorin.
Philostratus. Philip Comines. Phlegon Trallianus. Philo Iudeus. Philo
Christianus. Saint Peter. Pindarus. Picatrix. P^thagoras. Pl^^o. Pl^ti^^.
Plautus. Plinius secundus. Plinius Cicilius. Plutarch. Poliaenus. Polemo.
Polidor Virgill. Pomponatius. Pomponius Mela. Porphirius. Proclus. Procopius
historius. Procopius Theologus. Propertius. Psellus. Ptolomeus.
Q.
QVintillian.
R
Rabins. Ahias. Rabins. David Kimhi. Rabins. Eleazar. Rabins. Hacodus, Rabins.
Iehosuas. Rabins. Jonathan. Rabins. Ioses. Rabins. Levi Rabins. Moses. Rabins.
Rechanati. Rabins. Selomo Iarry. Rabins. Simeon. Rabins. Seadias. Rabins.
Tanhuma. Rabins. Isaac. Raymundus Lullius. Rasis. Rebuffius. Reuchlin. Roger
Bacon. Ruffinus Aquileiens.
S
Sabellicus. Solomon. Sapho. Saxo Grammaticus. Scholiasts Greek of Homer.
Scholiasts Greek of Pindarus. Scholiasts Greek of Hesiodus. Scholiasts Greek
of Sophocles. Scholiasts Greek of Apollonius Rhodius. Scholiasts Greek of
Eutipides. Scholiasts Greek of Aristophanes. Sebastian Physician. Servius
Maurus. Seneca. Sextus Philosophus. Sleidan. Simplicius. Silius Italicus.
Sigebert. Silvester Prieras. Sibilles. Cumana. Sibilles. Erithrea. Sibilles.
Erophila. Symmachus. Sinesius. Socrates Ecclesiasticus. Sozomen. Solion. Socin
Civillian Spartian. Spranger. Stobeus. Strabo. Suidas. Sulpitius Severus
T
TAcitus. Talmud. Tarantasia. Tarrutius Firmanus Tatianus. Tertullian.
Theophrastus. Themistius. Themison. Theophilact. Theon. Theodorus. Theodoret.
Theodorus Gaza. Thodorus Lector. Thocritus. Thomas Brabantius. Thomas de Vio
Caietanus. Thomas Aquinas. Thucidides. Tibullus. Titus Livius. Timaeus
Tiraquellus. Tobiah. Twelve Tables.
V
VAlerius Maximus. Valerius Antias. Varro. Vincentius Historicus. Vitae Patrum.
Virgill. Vlpian. Vopiscus.
X
XEnophon.
Z
ZAbarella Doctor of the Civil law. Zonara. Zofimus. Zoroastres.
FINIS.
A TREATISE OF Specters, strange Sightes, or Apparitions.
CAP. I.
The Definition of a Specter, or Apparition, and of the Imagination:
togetherwith the several kinds thereof.
BEfore we make an ^ntrie into this our matter, whereo^ we purpose to
entreat, touching strange Sights, Specters, or Apparitions, it will be
requisite, that we define what a Specter is. A Specter, or Apparition,
Definition of a Specter. In Latin it is called Spectru^ a spectando, of seeing.
is an Imagination of a substance wihout a Body, the which presents it self
sensibly unto men, against the order and course of nature, and makes them
afraid. And notwithout great reason do I make the Imagination to be the Genus
unto a Specter: because the Imagination (according to the judgment of
Themistius) is no other thing, but a motion of the soul, which the sense
(being set in action) does create and engender. And forasmuch, as the sight is
of all other senses the most excellent, lively, and active: therefore is it,
that the Imagination has sometimes taken the name of a Specter, or strange
sight: of a Phantosme, and of a vision. And the Fantasy also, which is formed
in the spirit or understanding, has been called by the name of light: or
rather of the Greek word (...): which comes of the eyes, and of the light,
without which nothing can be seen or discerned. So that the several and
special kinds of the Imagination are, the Specter or strange sight, the
Phantosme, the vision and the fantasy, which the Greeks severally call (...).
And first of all Suydas says, De placitis philosop ^ru^n Definition of a
phantosme, what it is.
That a Phantosme (which is (...)) is an imagination of things which are not
indeed, and does proceed of the senses being corrupted: which Plutarch also
does seem to confirm: Howbeit that some modern Physicians do go further,
and do confound a Specter and a Phantosme together, taking both the one and
the other for a false vision. The which opinion for my part I cannot allow:
because in very truth the Specter is that which our Civil Lawyers have called
(...): L. ostentum D de verb. signiff. Glossar.
and the Phantosme, which comes of (...)is taken for a false imagination, by
which we do persuade our selves (be it in sleeping or waking) that some
object does present it self unto us. (...) Mostellum. Math. 14. Mark. 6. The
difference between a Phantosme and a Specter.
And albeit many Authors, and namely the holy Scriptures, do take a Pha^tosme
for a Specter, truly appearing unto the sense not corrupted nor deceived: yet,
if we will soundly interpret them, we must say, that they must be understood
to speak according to the vulgar and common opinion, which does confound the
Specter and the Phantosme together: or else that they regarded the property of
Spirits, the which do use to take a fantastique or imaginatiue body to appear
unto us. And to show yet further, what difference there is between the^ both:
Certain it is, that a Phantosme is a thing without life, and without
substance: And the Specter has a substance hidden and concealed, which seems
to move the fantastique body, the which it has taken. Moreover, the Phantosme
(being as it is) a thing without life, has not any will: whereas the Specter,
if it will, does appear unto us: if it will not, it does not appear. And as
Saint Ambrose says, Huius naturae est non videri, voluntatis videri: Li, I. in
Lucam ca. I. de Angel. apparit.
The nature thereof is not to be seen: but the will of it is to be seen.

Of Visions and their general kinds.
After the Phantosme and the Specter, comes the vision to be considered, of
which Saint Augustine makes three sorts, one which is done by the eyes of the
body: as that of the three men, who appeared unto Abraham: Lib contra
Adimantum. Genesis 18. Exodus 3 Math. 17. Mar. 9. Luke 9.
and that of Moses, who saw the bush to burn: and that also of the Apostles,
who saw Moses and Elias, when Christ was transfigured in the mountain before
them. Another sort of visions, is by Imagination, which is done when our
thought is ravished unto heaven, and we see nothing by the exterior senses:
but we imagine only by some divine and heavenly inspiration: as was that of
Saint Peter, Acts. 10.
when he was ravished in an ecstasy, he saw all sorts of unclean creatures,
and heard a voice, which bade him eat of that he saw. The third sort may be
said Intellectual: because it is done only in the understanding, Daniel. 5.
as when Balthazar saw a hand writing upon the wall. To these three sorts of
visions, we may well add a fourth and fifth, which happen in dreaming, and do
present themselves only either in full sleep, or between sleeping and
waking, when we neither sleep nor wake, which the Hebrews call Thardema. And
first for that in our sleep, when one dreameth, or seems to behold any
thing, which shall betide and happen in very deed according as was dreamed.
And thus does Macrobius define a vision, in his Commentary upon the dream of
Scipio, where he discourses of all dreams in general: and he produces
these examples. One dreameth (says he) that his friend (whom he thinks to
be away in a far country) is returned, and the next day he sees him, and
finds that his dream falls out to be true. Or he dreameth, that his friend
has left certain money with him: and the next day he sees his friend
repair unto him accordingly, and to commit a su^me of money unto his trust and
fidelity. And as touching that which is between sleeping and waking, (which
some call, To be in a traunse) It is when partly in sleeping, and partly with
the bodily eyes waking, one sees any thing to appear before him. Such was
that vision of the Domestical or household gods of the Phrigians, which Aeneas
perceived between sleeping and waking, when he was in Candye. For after that
Virgil had said a little before, That those gods which Aeneas had saved, and
taken out of the midst of the fire, at the burning of Troy, had appeared to
him sleeping: he adds in the end; Yet sure this was no sleep, nor dream:
me thought their faces bright,
Their hair wrapped up in foldes I saw: I knew them well by sight.
A cold sweat trickling down my limbs then did me sore affright.


All these sorts of visions have their name amongst the Hebrews: The one they
call, The Daughter of the voice: another, The clear mirror: another, The
rauishment of kissing: and the last (as we said) is called Thardema: of al
which we shall speak more amply in the Treatise of Angels, and especially of
that vision of the Face (which Moses only enjoyed) and which properly is not to
be called a vision, whatsoever the Rabbis do dream thereof. For, the word of
God in the holy scriptures does plainly express, That the vision of face to
face, Numb. 12. ver. 6.^.8.
is far diverse and different from the other visions above specified. For when
Aaron murmured against Moses, in that he did so manifestly and apparently enjoy
this privilege, to see God face to face: he heard how God said unto him, That
his servant Moses might see him with out any impediment; but that other
Prophets should see him only by vision. The Hebrew Text is Bammara Elau
ethuadaa: That is to say, I will manifest my self to them in vision.

Definition of a Fantasy, what it is.
It rests now that we speak of the Fantasy, which is no other thing, but an
Imagination and impression of the Soul, of such forms and shapes as are
known: or of such as shall be imagined, without any sight had of them: Or
which shall be received and understood of others, to be such by reasons and
arguments. This definition gives S. Augustine, writing to Nebridius. And
first, as touching the imagination of things known: Episto: 72
It is most plain and evident, that whenever we dream of them, presently
there comes into our thought the Phantosme and Image of them. As if we dream
of our friend: Immediately he presents himself to our minds and imagination,
in the same stature, face, habit, person, and a thousand other such
particularities, which are notable in him. So if we dream of our Country: It
seems unto us that we see the very ways before us, whereby we travel: our
houses, our lands, and our friends: which Apollonius the Rhodian very well
expresses in these verses; As when it chances: In Argonaut^.
(a thing to men often chauncing)
That one in foreign soil far off goes wandering:
Yet finds no place so far (though farthest off)
But when he listes can see the same: and through
The high ways of his Country sometimes erreth,
Sometimes his house, his goods, his lands beholds:
Now here, now there, his curious thoughts often turning,
He leads them through a thousand places running.


This sort of Fantasy, Cattius, a famous Epicure of his time, (of whom Horace
makes mention in one of his Satyrs) does call a Specter. But Cicero writing
to Cassius iesteth at him, and that not without cause. The difference between
a Specter and a Fantasy. A vision or (...)is a sensible apprehension: and
(...)is a motion of the heavenly spirits, as says S. Ba. upon Esaias
For there is a very great difference between the one and the other: for that
the one is a simple imagination of the spirit or mind, and the other is a
sensible vision: The one is (...), a thinking, or imagination (as Homer calls
it. The other ((...)) is plainly and manifestly seen, and the same Poet in
another place calls it (...).

Now as touching things not known nor seen, but imagined in the mind, they
are for the most part spiritual, and without corporal substance, or they are
conceived and understood by humane reason, and gathered by demonstrations: as,
to believe that there is a God which governs the world, and has a care and
oversight of mankind. Now these Fantasies (which may be named also
Intellectual) are comprised (as the Stoics say) partly by similitude: as
Socrates by his Image: and partly by the proportion or Analogy of one thing to
another, and that is either by way of increase or diminution: by increase as
Cyclops and Titius, Giants: by diminution as a Pigmey and a Dwarf: and partly
by translation, as (we say) the eyes of the breast: and by composition, as an
Hippocentaure, a Tragelaphe, and others such like monsters composed of two
several kinds of creatures: and by the contrary of a thing, as death, by
life. And generally those things which are incorporall, and universal, are
comprehended by the means of such things as are corporal, according to the
saying of the Ciuilians. For by the ground (say they) which owes servitude,
and yields benefit, a man may comprehend the service and benefit belonging
thereunto, which are things merely incorporall.

Now of al these kinds of Imagination (which we have so amply and at large
described) It may be gathered, that there are two sorts of Imagination, Two
kinds of Imagination.
namely, one Intellectual, and without corporal substance: The other sensible
and corporal. Intellectual Incorporall. Sensible and Corporal. Imagination
Intellectual what it is.
The Intellectual is the Fantasy, of which is bred and engendered in us a
memory or remembrance (as the Peripatetickes speak) and the discourse of the
reasonable soul: I mean that discourse which is proper only unto man: by the
which he ballanceth and weighs the things present, by those which are past,
and foreseeth by things past, those which are to come after. For albeit the
unreasonable creatures do sometimes seem to have a kind of discourse, or
dreaming in them, (as is to be seen in Horses and Dogs) yet this dreaming or
discourse in them, is no other, then merely bestial and brutish: which does
not accomodate nor apply it self, but only to things present, by an
unreasonable appetite and desire unto those things which they love, and by
eschewing and abhorring to their utmost powers, that which may be fearful or
contrary unto them.

And therefore Epictetus, speaking of those fantasies, Theocritus.
which are suddenly carried by the outward senses into the inward powers of the
soul, and do carry fear and terror with them (as namely, Thunders,
Earthquakes, fearful sights, and terrors, and other such like things, He
said very well, that they are common to us with the brute beasts which are
guided only by their brutish senses. But that the resolution (which he
calls (...)is proper and peculiar unto man: And for as much as it happens,
that such fantasies are out of the power, will, Terrors bred in the mind by
the sense, common to men with with brute beasts.
and election of the soul: It follows, that they proceed of the senses,
which being no longer held under the rule and government of the reason, they
do more savor of the brutall then the reasonable part of the soul. And if
peradventure it shall be objected, that often times even wise men themselves
are not exempted from these fears and apprehensions: To this I answer: that
it is not possible but the body of man should tremble and start at those
things, as being framed and compounded of Spirits apprehensiue, subtle, and
sensible: but it is soon quieted, and (as it were) brought in temper again by
the soul, which does reassure, and restore courage unto it: As when one
casts a stone into the water, he shall see the water for a while to bubble up,
and be troubled; but soon after it returns to it former estate.

Imagination sensitive twofold, and whence it comes. The definition of a
Specter opened and confirmed in the several parts thereof.
Now touching that Imagination which is sensitive: either it is false and
comes either of the imaginatiue power corrupted, or of the senses hurt and
altered: or else it is true; and then it is that which we call a Specter: which
we defined to be a substance without a body, presenting it self sensibly unto
men. I say a substance without a body: because that every body must of
necessity have longitude, latitude, and profunditie, which otherwise we call
thickness; and ought therefore by consequence to be palpable and subject to
handling, which in Spirits is not possible, who clothing themselves with an
ayrie body, and being of themselves substances without bodies, are not
palpable, neither can be touched with the hand.

But of this we will entreat hereafter more at large; and of this point
especially, Lib. 1. (...).
whether the devils have a body of air, as Origin maintained; or whether they
be pure and simple Spirits, and may enter into a dead body and move the same
as if it had sense and feeling! which is a thing that happens very seldom,
and is against the nature of Spirits and Apparitions.

It follows in our definition, (which presents it self, and appears unto
men sensibly:) I say to men; because Specters do never appear to any other
creatures, but unto those which are reasonable. Numeri. 22. Homil. 13. in
Numer. sub finem.
And although we read in the Bible, that the Ass of Balaam saw the Angel: yet
(as Origin writes) That was contrary to his own proper nature, not only that
it perceived, and saw the Angel, but also that God opened his mouth, and made
him to speak. So that both the one and the other of these points, is (in very
truth) an impossibility to all beasts, and unreasonable creatures: as well for
that they want the Organ or instrument of man's voice; as also for that they
neither have reason whereby to discern Specters and Phantosmes from true
bodies: nor yet understanding, whereby to be illuminated with the bright beams
of discerning superior things: which do only enter into the consideration of
the soul, and into the discourse and judgment of humane understanding. The
consideration whereof having with some prevailed more the^ was fit; who being
not able to conceive in their thoughts how an Ass should be able to see an
Angel, or to speak, they were persuaded (moved thereunto peradventure with the
authority of some Rabbis) that the Ass was a Devil disguised, which Balaam
by force of his magic Charms had coniured to carry him toward Balaac. But in
my opinion, there is neither reason nor any appearance of truth in their saying.
But we ought rather to take the very litterall sense and meaning of the
Scripture, and to think that it was a very natural Ass, and not forged and
framed by enchantments.

Moreover, it is added in the definition of a Specter, that it presents it
self against Nature: (That is to say) against that common order of things,
which naturally is established in the world since the creation thereof. So that
all Apparitions as well of Angels as of devils, may be accounted as miracles:
and do never show themselves but that they presage and fore-shew something.
Besides, this word (against Nature) does put a difference between the name of
a Specter or Apparition, and those which the Latynes call Prodigium, and
Portentum. The former of which, the Hebrews name Mopheth, and we not having
any apt term for it may call it a Prodigy: and the latter, (for that we
cannot otherwise name it in our language) we may likewise call a Portent.
Lauater says, Portentum is a betokening of strange things to come in time.
Now the Prodigy does differ from a Specter, in that it comes naturally,
and happens often: and yet notwithstanding does always presage some evil or
strange thing to come. And the Portent is, when certain Celestial bodies
unusual and unaccustomed (of which notwithstanding a natural reason may be
rendered) do appear in the avre: as Comets, or Blazing-starres, Flashings of
fire, Lightnings in a clear and fair weather, and others of this kind; which
do always presage some evil to ensue after a certain season. For so does
Fostus Pompeius define Portentum, and all the Grammarians after him. Some may
say unto me, That a Mouster is also against nature, and that therefore my
difference is of no strength nor certainty. But the answer is easy: because
I said before, That a Specter is a substance without a body, which puts a
notable and plain difference between a monster and a Specter. For a monster
is a living creature: and by consequence a corporal substance, which is borne
or brought forth, having strange members: or is of another kind then that
whereof it is engendered. This therefore shall suffice for the definition of a
Specter, or strange Sight, and Apparition.

CAP. II.
Of the diverse Names, and terms which are often used in the matter of
Specters.
IT will not be amiss, if now in the Discourse following, we deliver and
explane all those terms and ancient Names, by which both the Hebrews,
Greeks, and Latynes have used to express, and name all kinds of Specters,
both good and bad: to the which we will also adioyne those of the Arabians, and
of other modern and later Authors, both French and Italian: to the intent
that nothing may be wanting, whereby this our Discourse may be beautified and
enriched. Of the several names of good Angels.
The good Angels do always take their Names, their virtues, and their
properties of God: as Michael, Gabriel, Raphael: and by the two principal
Languages (to wit) the Hebrew and Greek, they are named by the Name of
Messengers. For, Malach, in the Hebrew, signifies a Messenger: and comes of
the unusual word Luach, which signifies to declare, or denounce. And (...)and
(...)in the Greek, do denotate as much. The Arabians do a little change the
Ebrew word, and do call an Angel, Melech: as is often read in the Alcoran of
Mahomet. Moreover, in the same signification of a Messenger, or Celestial
Ambassador, is taken also the Hebrew word, Chasmal: whereof as I think, was
deryued the ancient name of Chasmillus by which both the Thuscans and Latins,
in former times, did name and design Mercury, the Messenger of the Gods. For
(as we shall show in another place) the greatest part of the names of the
Paynim Gods, both those which they placed in the Heavens, as also their
home-borne or country Gods, and their Infernal Gods likewise, were drawn
from the Hebrews. The which if Chrisippus had understood, he would not have
labored and toyled himself so much, to find out the Etimologie of their
Names, In lib dena. ^u^ Deo^um.
as he did, as Cicero witnesses of him. Moreover, the Angels are called
Ruhhoth: that is to say, Spirits which David also testifies, saying: R^h, in
the A^^bian tongue i^ an A^gel; and comes of Ruach, a Spirit.
Ose malachau ruhhoth: Who makes his Angels, his Spirits: placing Ruhhoth in
the plural number; as if he would have us to understand, that Intellectual
and Spiritual things, such as are pure, subtle, and separated from all
confused, gross and ayrie matter were made Angels, by God the Creator. And so
does S. Lib. 15. cap. 23. de ciuitate Des.
Augustine interpret that place. And forasmuch as the Angels were created by
God, strong and puissant, and are ordained as Judges of the world, having the
Regiment and government thereof in diverse charges, degrees, and authorities:
For this cause the Hebrews call them also Abirim, which signifies strong; and
Elobim, Gods or Judges. And because they have their understanding sharp,
quick, and subtle, therefore they call them also Shanim; which ought to be
understood both actiuely and passiuely. For besides that, of themselves they
have their understanding quick and subtle, they do also sharpen and open the
understanding, and Intellectual powers of men whom they visit.

Of the several names of Diuils or evil Angels amongst the Hebrews, Greeks
and Arabians.
Now the evil Angels, and devils, are also named (like as the good Angels are)
Malachim, by the name of messengers: yet so, as they have an addition of an
Epithet, sit and answerable to their wicked and evil nature: which is Raaim.
The which (some being deceived by the affinity of the Letters) have turned
into Rashim which signifies Heads, Chiefes, or Colonels. But I do not know
that I did ever read the word Rashim simply for Devils: And if it be in any
place used for the same, it is rather by way of an Allegory then otherwise: as
I am not ignorant that the Hebrews allegorically do call the Devils, The
devils in the ancient French were called Guelsers: of the Almanie word
Vaguerant. id est, Vagabond which comes of the Hebrew word Gala.
Rashe-galijoth; That is, Heads or Chiefes of Captivity: and Chiefes of
mishappe, and of encombra^ce. Moreover, the devils are called also as the
angels Ruhhoth, Spirits: and in Greek, (...), that is, Spirits deceivers, and
wicked and evil spirits. They are also termed by the Greeks, Daemones and
Diaboli: Daemones, because they bring fear unto men, and Diaboli, because they
are Detractours, Liars, and slaunderers; which the Hebrews do express also
in their Language, by the Name of Satanim: which in the vulgar Translation, is
translated, Devils, Calumniators, and enemies. And the Arabians, even to this
day, do retain this name. For they call the Devils Satainim: as is to be
seen in diverse places of the Alcoran. Besides, they are called of the
Hebrews, Elilim, as authors of all Idolatry, and of the Idols of the
Paynims. And of this name (in my opinion) is deryued the word (...)by which
(as writes Macrobius) The ancient Greeks did use to call both Apollo and
Bacchus: which in very truth, were two Devils, that had more Images erected in
their names then any other of the Heathen Gods: and did longest of all abuse
and seduce the Greeks, the inuentours of all Idolatry.

The several names of devils amongst the Latynes.
The Latynes also for their parts are not unfurnished, nor unprovided of fit
Names, proper and significatiue touching Devils. For they used by diverse and
several Names to call them: Lares, Laruae, Lemures, Genij, Manes. And that
those which they termed Lares, were Devils: It appears, in that Cicero
translating Plato his Timeus, calls that Lares, which the Philosopher named
(...)or Devils.

The Grammarian Festus (agreeing with Cicero) says also, that they are
Infernal gods, or the souls of men. And as touching the regard of the souls:
It is no strange matter to find in S. Augustine, and other ancient Authors,
That our forefathers, being Gentiles, did think, That the souls of men after
their dissolution from the bodies, did become Daemones or Devils. Of Lares, or
Domestical gods or devils In lib. 6. Acneidos in the expheatio^ of the ver.
Sedibus huncrefer ance suis.


Now these Lares were domestical or household gods: because (as Seruius said) in
old times the dead bodies were usually enterred and buried in their houses:
And therefore those Lares (that is to say) the souls of the dead, were adored
and worshipped every one particularly in that house, where their bodies were
enterred.

Of the name of Lares, was derived that of Laruae, which were Shadows or
Ghostes tormenting the domestical and particular inhabitants of private
houses: And certain it is, that even in the time of our fathers, the
Polapians, being a certain Northern people, before they were reduced to the
Christian faith, did bury the bodies of their parents in the harthes of their
Chimneies: and for default thereof, they were vexed and tormented with Spirits,
that appeared unto them. The Philosopher Plutarch likewise does affirm, that
these Lares have the oversight of houses, In Problem. R^^
and that they are most severe and cruel exactors and punishers of faults
committed, and searchers or Inquisitors of the life and actions of those
persons which are within their jurisdiction or precincts. And he says, that
they are clothed with Dogge-skinnes, because as the Dog is a beast, that
excels in sent and smelling: so do they (as it were) smell out, a far
off, the sins and misdeedes of men: to the intent they may sharply punish and
chastise them for the same. But he might have added this rather (if he had
been a Christian) That as Dogs are naturally envious: So these Lares, or
Devils of this kind, do bear envy and malice to mankind. Notwithstanding
Festus (whom we do gladly allege) seems to affirm, That these Lares are
sometime good: for he names them sometime Praestites, because they were thought
to make all things safe, and to keep and preserve all things carefully: and
sometimes Hostilios: for that they were supposed to drive away enemies. But
howsoever it be, certain it is they were no other then very Devils; who if
they seemed sometimes to aid and help men, and to do them some good: yet the
same was to the intent they might afterward work them the more and greater
harm and damage, as well inwardly in their Souls and consciences, as outwardly
in their bodies and goods.

Touching those Spirits which they call Lemures: they are reckoned amongst the
Laruae or hurtful Spirits, Of the Spirits called Lemures
and are indeed Devils, which do appear in the night, in the form of diverse
Beasts: but most commonly in the shape and figure of dead men. And Parphirus
the Interpreter of Horace, calls them the Shadows or wandering souls of men,
that dye before their time (which is but an error of the Pagans): and he
adds, That the name of Lemures, comes of Romus, the brother of Romulus (by
the changing of one letter into another) because the Ghost or shadow of that
Prince, did pursue Romulus his murderer: who, to the intent he might pacify
it, instituted a feast, which (as the ancient Roman Calender and Ovid do set
it down) was solemnized on the ninth day of the month of May: Li. 5. Fastorum
and by the Romans was called Lemuria, which is (as a man should say) The feast
of the Hob-Goblins, Gli Farfarelli Maz zaruoli, or Mazzapengoli.
Warre-Wolues, or Night Spirits: or as the Italians use to term them,) Gli
Farfarrelis, etc. That is, Spirits that use to walk only in the night times.

O^t^e Spirits called Genti. De Demonio Oratisin Apologetico.
Those Spirits which the Latins call Genii, are devils also (as both Apuleius
and Tertullian do witness) and the like affirms the Greek Comic, who
says, That; To every man on earth, a Demon is ordained,
The which his life to rule and govern is enjoined.


According to the tradition of the Church of Rome.
For certain it is, that these Genii and no other have charge to keep and
protect every man that is borne into the world. And they are named Genii, (as
Censorm says) because to them is committed the care of our generation: or
because they are borne with us: or for that they do receive and guard us,
after we are engendered. And these Genii have not only the oversight and charge
of every particular person: but every kind of people also have their proper
and peculiar Genius: according as Symmachus, a very famous Author has written:
Saying, Lib. 10. Epist.
That as the souls of men are given unto them, with which they are borne: So
are the Genii attributed unto several peoples and Nations. So likewise every
particular Town had his Genius, to the which it offered Sacrifices. And there
have been found many Titles and Inscriptions, in the old ruins of ancient
Towns; in the which has been written, Genio Ciuitatis: To the Genius of the
City. So likewise there was not any troop of men at Arms amongst the Romans,
nor the Senate of Rome, but had their particular Genius. But above all, the
Genius of the Roman Emperor was had in great honor, and it was a common
thing to swear by it; and to invoke and call upon it, in testimony of that
Obeisance and subjection which they ought unto the Prince, whom that Genius
had in protection. And this superstition did endure and continue even to the
time of Tertullian: In Apologetic^.
(who reproouing the same, did will and enjoin the Christians not to invoke
or call upon the Genius of their Prince) and from him, even to the time of
Justinian, at the least: as is to be seen by a Law of Vlpian; which was
never changed nor refined by Trebonian, L. si due patroni. Gli. D. de lure lur.
as others were, that had less superstition in them.

This law did defend and prohibit any to swear falsely by the Genius of the
Prince: and enacted, that those which did so offend, should suffer the
Bastonado, whereby they might be admonished not to swear again, so rashly and
unadvisedly. And we may not forget, That these Genii were sometimes painted by
the Paynims, in the form and shape of men, having a horn, betokening plenty
or abundance, in their hand: as is yet to be seen in many old and ancient
stampes or coins: and sometimes in the form of Serpents: which may well serve
to understand that verse of Perseus, where he writes; Pinge duos angues,
Satir. 1.
pueri sacer est locus: extra meite.

And this did not Seruius forget, In lib. 5. Enei^ dos in expisca^ione versus,
Cum lubricus anguis ab ^mis septem ingens gyros.
speaking of that Serpent which Aeneas (in his Anniuersaries, or yearly
sacrifices, celebrated to the name of his father Anchises) did see to creep
upon his Tom be: Touching the which (as Virgill says) Aeneas was uncertain,
whether it were the Genius of his father, or of the place. And this may also
help to the interpretation of another place in Theocritus, in his Book of
Characters (which I have also corrected from the vulgar and common reading)
where he says: That a superstitious person, seeing by chance a Serpent in his
house, did consecrate unto it a little chapel in the same place. But my
meaning is not here to speak of Serpents, which (as Plutarch says) were
consecrated unto Noble and Heroical persons, In vita Cleomedis.
and which after their deaths, did appear near to their corpses: for this is
not any part of our matter; albeit a man may very well fit, unto the Genii, that
same which he has delivered, touching this point.

Of the spirits called Manes. Glossaer. manes (...).
To proceed therefore with our purposed Discourse, let us now ^nter to entreat
of those Spirits which the Latins call Manes: which also are no other then
very Devils: and are therefore of Festus called also by the former name of
Laruae. Also the manner was to paint them black and hideous, as we use to
paint Devils and hellish Ghostes or shadows. And to this purpose there is a
very pleasant and merry History, in Dion, in the life of Domitian: Xiphilin.
the Abbre^^ator of Dion.
the which I think will not be unpleasing, if I discipher it here at large.

After the victory had and gotten against the Gethes, the Emperor Domitian
caused many shows and triumphs to be made, in sign and token of joy: and
amongst others, he invited publicly to dine with him, all sorts of persons,
both noble, and unnoble, but especially the Senators and knights of Rome, to
whom he made a feast in this fashion. He had caused a certain house, of al
sides to be painted black, the paueme^t thereof was black, so likewise were the
hangings, or seelings, the roof and the walls also black; and within it, he
had prepared a very low roomth, not unlike a hollow vault or cell, full of
empty siedges or seats. Into this place he caused the Senators and knights,
his ghests, to be brought, without suffering any of their Pages or attend ^nts
to enter in with them. And first of all, he caused a little square pillar to
be set near to every one of them, upon the which was written the parties name
sitting next it* by which there hanged also a lamp burning before each seat, in
such sort, as is used in Sepulchers. After this, there comes into this
melancholicke and dark place, a number of young Pages, with great joy and
merriment, stark naked, and spotted or painted all over with a die or color,
as black as Ink: who resembling these Spirits, called Manes, and such like
Idols, did leap and skip round about those Senators and Knights; who at this
unexpected accident, were not a little frighted and afraid. After which, those
Pages sat the^ down at their feet, against each of them one, and there
stayed, whilst certain other persons (ordained there of purpose) did execute
with great solemnity, all those ceremonies that were usually fit and requisite
at the Funerals, and exequies of the dead. This done, there came in others, who
brought and served in, in black dishes and platters, diverse meats and viands,
all colored black; in such sort, that there was not any one in the place, but
was in great doubt what would become of him, and thought himself utterly
undone, supposing that he should have his throat cut, only to give pleasure
and content to the Emperor. Besides there was kept the greatest silence that
could be imagined. And Domitian himself, being present, did nothing else but
(without ceasing) speak and talk unto them of murders, death, and
s^ragedies. In the end the Emperor having taken his pleasure of them at the
full, he caused their Pages and Lackies, which attended them without the gates,
to come in unto the^, and so sent them away home to their own houses, some in
coches, others in Horselitters, guided and conducted by strange and unknown
persons: which gave them as great cause of fear, as their former
entertainment. And they were no sooner arrived every one to his own house, and
had scant taken breath from the fear they had conceived: but that one of their
servants, came to tell them, that there were at the gates, certain which came
to speak with them, from the Emperor. God knows how this message made them
stir: what excessive lamentations they made, and with how exceeding fears
they were perplexed in their minds: there was not any, no not the hardiest of
them all, but thought, that he was sent for, to be put to death. But to make
short, In the end, those which were to speak with them from the Emperor,
came to no other purpose, but to bring them either a little pillar of Silver,
or some such like vessel or piece of Plate, (which had been set before them,
at the time of their entertainment: after which, every one of them had also
sent unto him, for a present from the Emperor, one of those Pages that had
counterfeyted those Manes or Spirits at the banquet; they being first washed
and cleansed, before they were presented unto them.

This History puts me in remembrance of a gentle frumpe, given by Plancus,
unto Pollio: who (as Plancus was informed) having made a book against him, and
being not purposed to publish it, till after his death, he said very well, and
merrily, that with dead men none did contend, but the Laruae* that is Ghostes
and shadows.

But to our purpose: it is evident, that the ancients did confound together al
those Spirits, which they called Laruae, Manes, and Daemones. And Festus says,
that the Manes were called Daemones, or Devils: by contrariety of speech, as
not being good. For Manuus, in the ancient verses of the Gentiles, which they
s^ng unto their Gods in dancing, did signify, Good. And those Manes were ever
numbered amongst unlucky spirits: for Virgil calls them, Numina Leua:
Sinister, or unlucky Powers, such as they used to appease by Sacrifices; to
the intent they should not annoy nor endamage them. The Paynims also did
imagine and believe, that these kind of Spirits, Manes, did send ill and
unlucky dreams to these that contemned them. Which the Poet Tibullus
confirms, saying; Lib. 2. Elege.
Ne tibi neglectimittant insomnia Manes. The like also is affirmed by Virgil,
in this verse; Lib. 6. Eneid.
Et falsa ad coelum mittunt insomnia Manes. And I am of opinion, that these are
the same sort of Spirits, Lib. 1. aduersus haereses. cap. 20
which (as Irenaeus writes) the followers of Simon Magus, called (...): that
is, Devils which sent dreams unto such men, as had contracted a league of
alliance with them: as did the Simoni^ns. Some learned men do confound also the
Manes, and Genii together: and they say, that those which were our Genii during
our lives, do not leave us after our deaths, but dwell and inhabit with us in
our graves and Sepulchers. And therefore those men that did destroy and deface
the sepulchers of the dead, or did (as the Ciuilians speak) offer violence
unto those monumentes: They were punished as troublers of the rest and ease of
the Gods Manes: and especially if they did transport or carry away the bones of
the dead out of their Sepulchers. And it was always the manner to set upon
their Tombs or Sepulchers, an Inscription to the Gods Manes; which was
expressed in these two letters, D. M. that is, Diis Manibus: And there was
nothing more common, throughout all the ancient Marbles, and Monuments, both
of Rome and other places: which makes me in a manner to believe, that the name
of Manes may well be drawn and derived of the Hebrewe word Manuach, which
signifies rest: as if a man would say, The Gods of rest, or The Gods of the
dead which are at rest. I know well, that the Soothsayers of the Romans, did
hold this opinion, That they were called Manes, because that of them they
thought to proceed and spring forth all things whatsoever in the whole world.
And for this cause they made and reckoned them both for supreme or celestial,
and infernal Gods also. And others likewise have derived their name of
Manando, a Latin word, which signifies to spring forth, or to issue from: and
they say, that those places which are between the circle of the Moon and the
earth, are full of these spirits, Manes; the which the Poet Lucan seems to
allude unto, and to affirm in these verses; That which appears a void and
empty space, Lib. 9. de Bell^. Ph^^salic^.

Between the Moon and this our earthly Base,
The Manes Demie Gods do it inhabit:
Whose chiefest care was (whilst they lived in it)
To lead their lives in honesty and goodness:
Whose holy virtues, shining with beams of brightness,
Did give them strength themselves aloft to rear
Between the fiery Region and the air,
There to live ever: their blessed souls arranging,
In circles round, and Globes of fire flaming.


Wherein we are to observe, that Lucan held opinion, That the souls of such as
lived well in this world, were, after their departure, changed into these
Manes; that is, into Spirits or Devils: which confirms what we have before
said: namely, That the Painims did believe, that the souls of me^ departed
were transformed into spirits, of an ayrie Diabolical nature. But of this we
shall speak more another time, when we shall handle the question of the souls
of men. We will now proceed to speak of other kinds of Spirits or Devils,
which the Ancients had, and observed with names more special and particular.

Of particular Devils, and their names, used amongst the ancients, Of Hecate.
The most famous and notable Devil, which first comes to be considered in
particular, is that hellish, and infernal Hagge, which the Ancients called
Hecate: and as the Greeks affirmed, did use to send Dogs unto men to fear
and terrify them. And Lucan affirms: that these Dogs were held to be
excessive great as Elephants, and exceeding black and hayrie. These Dogs may
well be compared to Arthurs Chase, which many do believe to be in France,
Arthurs chase: in France.
saying; That it is a Kenel of black Dogs followed by unknown Huntsmen,
with an exceeding great sound of Horns, as if it were a very hunting of some
wild beast. But Nonnius a Greekish Monk, in a Book not yet Imprinted
(wherein he interprets the Fables and Hystories, which Gregory Nazianzene
has set down, in his Prayers against Julian the Apostata;) says, that these
Monsters of Hecate, (which she makes to appear unto them, that invoke and
call upon her by way of Conjuration) are not Dogs, but unmeasurable great
Dragons, with heads so fearful and hideous that they which see them, do rest
so amassed and confounded as they become for the time, like dead men. And
therefore it is feigned of Ulysses, Odisse. ^
that in his going down to hell, to see and question with the soul of
Tyresias, after he had spoken to the souls of many dead men, he would not
stay (says Homer) the coming of Hecate, for fear least she should present,
unto him, the head of some hideous Monster. The custom of Hecate was to howl
in the night about the streets and turnings of Cities and Towns, Lib. 4.
Aeneid.
(as Virgil recounteth): which is the cause that some have thought why the
Greeks did call her Brimo. Howbeit, that the Scholiast of Apollonius the
Rhodian recyteth, that she was so called, because that Mercury being willing
to ravish her by force, she growing enraged, made so filthy a noise, and
gruntled so horribly against him, that the God for fear left her, and fled
from her.

The husband of this Infernal Goddess, was Pluto, of Pluto, alias Dis.
or Dis; so called of the name of Riches: as we know that amongst the Hebrews
likewise, the Devil for the same reason is called Mammona. Mammon.
He was called also (...), not for that he is (...), that is to say, in
Darkness and Invisible: But because he was the Cause, and Author of the death,
destruction, and desolation of mankind by his temptation. And for this cause,
he is termed (...)of the Hebrewe word Ed; and is the very Ophioneus or
Serpent, the sworn enemy of God; which as Pherecides said, did contend and
fight with Saturn: and is the same Ate, which Jupiter chased from Heaven,
which at this day does range up and down marching and wandering in the Heads of
men: That is to say, does ordinarily and continually tempt them: and cannot be
chased nor driven away, but by Prayers, which are said to be the Daughters of
Jupiter. The Egyptians did by another name call this Prince of devils, Serapis
the God of the Egyptians, and the deriu^^^^n thereof. Charon, whence deued.
Serapis; which comes of Saraph, that is, to Burn. And in the same sort may
the name of Charon the Ferrie-man of Hell, be derived of the Ebrew: For Charon,
is as if one should say, Fury, Wrath, or Rage: But in the Creek it signifies
not any thing. Howbeit, it is not to be thought that the Paynims would have
given him that name without some reason. Gods of the Paynims. Their names
derived from the Hebrewe.
And I am persuaded, that they retained this name (as also many others of their
Ancient Gods) by tradition from Iaphet and Iauan, and Dodanim, and their
children, who did yet speak the Hebrew tongue. Of the self same Original
came Cerberus, Cerberus, whence derived.
the tryple-headed Dog of Hell: which the Greeks did strive to interpret;
but in vain: and which I cannot think to come of any other, then of Celeb
baarets, (which is to say,) Dog of the Earth, or Devil Infernal. For by the
name, Dog, the Devils were sometimes signified and designed: and namely, in
the Magic of Zoroastres they are called Dogs of the earth, And certain
Cabalists interpreting that which is written in their Caball; How the people of
Israel coming out of Egypt, no Dog did bark against them: They say, that
by Dog, is to be understood, the horrible and hideous face of the Devils:
whom Moses did so well bridle by the Divine Power, that they could not work
any let nor hinderance to the Israelites in passing on dry foot through the
red Sea.

Of the names of Devils appearing in the shape of men.
But let us pass on to other Devils: and first of all, let us entreat of those
that use to show themselves, in the Masculine form, and shape of Men: and
afterward we will speak of those Specters, that usually appear in the shape
of women. There was amongst the Greeks, Of wrestling spirits or Devils.
a Devil which was named (...)that is, the wrestling Devil: And thereof
comes the name of Lutin, or Luitton: which is very usual and common in
France. For Lutin comes of Luitte, which signifies to wrestle: and I
remember to this purpose, that there was one of those wrestling devils, of
which Strabo speaks, who wrastled against all Strangers that happened to come
into Temesa, a Town of the Brutians in Italy, and was called the Temescan
Devil, or Wrastler. He was in times past, a man named Polites, one of the
Companions of Ulysses: And having been slain of the Brutians by treason, he
enforced himself after his death, to torment as well Strangers as those who
had been the authors of his death.

Of the spirit or devil Alastor, or the destroier.
Besides, there was the Devil Alastor, the auenger or punisher of misdeedes:
which the Scholiast of Euripides writes to be so called, because nothing was
hidden from him: In Medea.
and (as it is in the Greek) (...). And it may be that this is the Devil,
called the Destroyer: which the holy Scriptures and Origin do call Azazel: and
which Zoroastres allegorically names the Hangman, Contra Celsum
or Executioner; saying that it is not good to stir abroad, or to issue forth
when the Hangman is walking in the Country: that is, when the Devil the
Destroyer, does execute the vengeance of God.

The Onosceles are also men Devils, having legs like unto Asses (so says
Psellus) and the Satyrs likewise, Of spirits or devils called Onoscels. and of
Satyrs.
which are Demi Goats; which the holy Scripture calls Hayrie Devils, or
Sairim, inhabiting desert places, and far off from the frequence of men. Of
these Satyrs, Faunus prince of the Satyrs.
Faunus was the chief or Prince, to whom the Romans did attribute all kinds
of fearful sights, or terrors, and those Specters that presented themselves
to be seen in diverse forms: and they named him, Jupiter Faunus. And
whenever they heard any horrible or devilish voice, they appeased him by
Sacrifices: yea, they raised an Altar unto him in the Mount Auentine, I^^h. 6.
Ro^. hist. Of Pan the God of Shep beards.
as witnesses Dionisius Halicarnasseus.

The God Pan was not much unlike in shape to Faunus. For he was as the other, a
Demi Goat, from the navel downwards: and as it is well known to all men
generally, he was chief of Sheepheards; of whom Virgil writes; Of Sheep and
Sheepheards too, God Pan he has the care.

He was called of the Latynes, Inuus, so says Macrobius, in his Saturnals; A
name, that in my opinion comes of Aeanas, which signifies to afflict and
torment. Idilio prime.
And it seems that Theocritus did esteem him the devil of the Midday:
saying, That he was very terrible and to be feared when he presented himself
that hour. Theocritus does place the choler in the end of the n^st^ls. So in
the Heb we, Ap does express both the one and the other.
And he brings in the sheepheards conferring, and one of them speaking thus;
No, it is not good nor safe to sing at Noone,
I Will fear God Pan, who then to wrath is prone:
Redoubted ^an whom cruel fierceness haunteth,
When that has choler at his nostrils hangs.


And in very truth, it is not without reason to think, That Pan is the Devil
of the Midday, because that all Devils, that are in any sort terrestrial and
material as Pan, do love the Sun (as Psellus affirms) and the greatest
force which the sun has is at Midday. And this may very well serve to
interpret that Fable, which recounteth how Pan loved Echo: which Macrohuis
interprets to be the Sun: which, being as the harmony of the world, Pan
loves and follows perpetually.

Of the devil of Midday, what it means.
But seeing we are now entreating of the Spirit or Devil of the Midday, It is
to be understood, that the same is a certain diabolical and pestilentiall
blast or puff of wind, the most dangerous that may be. I say a blast or
Spirit that comes from the Desert (as is written in Job,) and destroys,
ouerturneth, Job. 1.19.
and breaks down, all that it encountreth or meets withal. Likewise David
names it, Cetch, Psalm. 9.5.6.
Iashud tsahorim: That is to say, The Devil that ^poilethand destroys at
noone day, For, I^shud signifies the Devil and is derived of Shad, having the
same signification. And it is to be marked, That David there sets down
three sorts of devils, very horrible and fearful; The Arrow that flies by
day: that is to wit; the secret temptation of the Devil, made under some fair
pretense, which is so dangerous that it sooner strikes and hurts, then can
be perceived whence the blow comes. Secondly, the Plunge, or trouble, that
is the Devil (For the Hebrew has Deber:) which walks in the darkness, or
during a dark and obscure tempest or storm: for the word Ophe, does import
both the one and the other. And certain it is that in the night, and during
any strong and violent tempest, the Devil has great power and puissaunce
either to tempt men, or to afflict and torment them both visibly and vnuisibly,
as we shall have occasion to show in another place. The third and last is, The
Plague that destroys at Noonday; or, the Devil of the Midday; In lib. Job.
which Origin writes to be more violent in his tempations at that hour, then
at any other time or hour of the day: and if he do then appear, he is more
furious, and abounding in rage and fury. This sort of Devils the Hebrews do
name Meririm, and Reshaphim; That is, Devils raging in fury at Noone-tide,
Pestilentiall Devils, Burning Devils: that with their breath or touching only,
do kill and destroy: as appears by that Devil of the midday, the which (as
Procopius makes mention) showed himself in his time: Lib. 2. de bello
Persico. Of the Devil or Spirit, called Empusa.
the history we shall take occasion to recite in another place. The Greeks gave
it the name of Empuse; which both Suydas, and the Scholiast of Apollonius have
noted; interpreting it, (...). And Aristophanes does very pretily describe it,
where he brings in Dionysius and his servant Xanthias, going down into hell,
to bring Euripides from thence back again into the world: where, as they were
arrived, Xanthias cries out unto him, in this manner; X. Oh I perceive a beast
most horrible and strange.

D. What beast? tell me. X. I know not. It does change
Her form into a thousand shapes: for sometime
Its like an Ox, and straight it is a mountain:
Sometimes it seems a woman of great beauty.

D. Oh, where is she? where is she? show her to me:
I Will go and give her battle presently.

X. But O good Gods, what strange sight do I see!
Even in an instant she her shape has altered,
And from a woman, is to a dog transformed.

D. Oh then it is an Empusa. X. A sparkling flame
Shines brightly glistring round about her face:
Her eye through piercing, her look is inhumane,
A logge of brass supports her in her pase.



Of the Spirits called Familiars.
But this shall suffice touching the Devil of the midday: after which, next
comes to be considered those Spirits, which the Greeks call (...), and are
those that the Magicians do use to shut up in a vial or box, or in some
character, or cipher, or in a ring, which they carry about the^. Lib. lection.
antiqua.
And it seems that Celius did not understand this word (...), when he
undertook to interpret Eusebius, whom he did rather make more dark and obscure,
then give any light unto him: as it was ever his custom so to do with all good
Authors. But if we will rightly interpret it, word for word, it may be termed
a Devil giving Counsel, or a Familiar Devil; giving his advice unto such as
have made a compact and conuention with him.

Of Devils that speak out of the bodies of persons. De defect. Oracul.
Next to these Spirits, there are others not much differing from them; and are
those that entering into bodies do speak through the bellies of the parties
possessed with them. The Greeks called them Pythons, Engastrimythes, or
Euriclees, as Plutarch affirms. And the Hebrews named them O bim.

Of the Spirits called Incubi, in English, the Nightmare. The ^lde (...)
^^xico^. (...) way (...) the (...) incubus (...). Lab 15. de Ci^^^ate Dei.
There be also a kind of Devils, or Spirits, in the sorme of men, whose delight
is in lasciuiousnes, and are as wanton and lecherous as Goats: of who^ (as I
suppose) amongst the Greeks Pan was esteemed the chief commander: howbeit the
Latins do term him Incubus. I have read in some Hebrew Doctors, that the
Prince of these Devils is called Haza: we in France do call them
Coquemarres, and Folletts: and the ancient Gauls, (as S. Augustine affirms)
named them ^r^s^es, or Devils of the Forests. And their nature is,) as the
same Doctor says) to desire to ravish and force women, Lib. eodem and 4.
quaest. in Genesim.
and in the night time to go into their beds and to oppress the^, striving to
have carnal company with the^.

O the spirits called Succubi.
The like do those Spirits which are called Succubi, which are devils passive,
as the former active, and taking the form of women, do seek to enjoy their
pleasure of men. Of which Succubi, the chief Princess or Commandresse is
called by the Rabbis, Liluh: That is to say, An App^rition of the Night, The
I^wes in the^r praye^s at ^^^^ing, d^e yet at this da^ (...) ^^^od to k^^^^
them from (...). P^^^^is.
of the name Laila, which signifies Night. For such devils do not use nor
exercise their force against men, but in the Nightime.

But to conclude this Part of our D. scourse touching diu^ls, showing
themselves in the form of men, I may not forg^t that devil, which the Greeks
called Eurynomus, so famously reported of by Pausanias, who writes; Of the
Spirit called by the Greek (...) Eurynomus.
That it eats and feeds only on the carcasses and bodies of the dead: in so
much as it leaves not any part of the^ but the bare bones: that it has teeth
of an exceeding great length, and sticking far without his mouth: that the
flesh thereof, was of a leaden, pale and wan color, such as our Muscles are
when they are separated from the other flesh: and that it shows it self
continually clothed in a Foxe-skin. Which description of it, makes me to
think, that the Ancients did signify and denotate by this Devil no other
thing but death: which, after the decease of men, does consume their bodies,
leaving nothing but their bones, which cannot wax rotten in the earth, and
has long teeth because it deuoureth all: and is clad in a Foxe-skin; that is
to say, takes men at vnawaies and unprovided, using suttletie and cunning as
does the Fox.

Now that we have sufficiently entreated of me^ devils, we will come to those
that have the form of women. Of spirits appearing in the shape of women. Of
the Gorgon.
Of which kind were those Gorgons, which the Antiquity fained to be ravenous
and gluttonous. Of this number also are Acco, and Alphito, monstrous women; by
naming of who^ Nurses did use to fear their little children from crying, and
from running forth of doors. In like sort Mormo (of which is derived the Greek
word (...): Mormo.
and the first word Marmot) was one of those with which they terrified little
children: of which Theocritus makes mention in one of his books; (...)
where he brings in a woman, speaking and threatening her Infant with the
Marmot. And Nicephorus, in his Ecclesiastical History, writes of a woman
Specter, which used to appear in the night, and was named Gilo. Gilo.


Erynnes, or the three Furies o^ h^ll. Alecto, M^gera, Tisiphone.
Likewise those which the Greeks called Erynnes, or Eumenides, were evil
Spirits, which, having the figure of a woman, were thought to appear unto
those, which had their hands defiled with murder. And to every one of them was
given a proper name: for the one was called Alecto: that is Incessantly
tormenting. Another was named Megera: which signifies Enraged. And the third
Tisiphone, which is as much, as to say, The auenger of murder. These Furies,
or Spirits (as old fables tell us) did appear unto Alemeon, and Orestes,
after that the one had killed his mother Eriphile: and the latter his mother
Clytemnestra: and they did so torment them, that both the one, and the other,
became mad and furious. But Orestes to appease them as says the Greek
Interpreter of Sophocles) did dedicate a Temple unto them, and named it the
Temple of the Eumenides; that is, In Aia. Mas^^ goph.
of the peaceable and gracious Goddesses. The Poet Euripides does very lively,
and naturally, represent the fear which Orestes co^cciued, seeing these
Infernal Furies to approach near unto him. For he makes him to pray and
entreat his mothet Clytemnestra, not to send, after him, these Furies, which
(says he) have their eyes so bloody, and more horrible then Dragons.

Of the Spirits called Lamiae.
The Lamiae were likewise Spirits and Specters of the female kind: Howbeit
Dion Chrysostom says, that these are certain living creatures, or wild
beasts, inhabiting the utmost and desert places of Afrik^* which, from the
face to the nauel downwards, were so excellently well and perfectly formed and
proportioned in beauty, throughout all those parts and members of their
bodies, as the most exquisite Paynter could not with his Pensill so well
express them. And their fashion was to lay open and discover their Alablaster
necks, their breasts, and their fair pappes, to the eyes and sight of men;
that so they might allure and draw them near unto them, and the^ would they
forthwith eat and devour them. And to this purpose the Prophet Jeremy says;
The Lamiae have discovered, Lament. 4.
and drawn forth their breasts, and have showed their dugs. The Hebrew word of
Lamiae, in that place of the Prophet, is Thanin: which signifies a Dragon, and
a Whale: which shows that these Lamiae, besides the face of a woman, had some
monstrous (I know not what) thing in them. Also Dion (whom I before alleged)
writes, that in stead of feet, they had the heads of Dragons. But howsoever it
be, that some say they are living creatures, yet the Hebrew Doctors do
interpret them Devils of the Desert; in expounding that word of Esaias Tsiiim,
Esaias. 13. In vita Apollo. nii.
that it should signify Lamiae. And Philostratus is of the same opinion, and
co^foundeth the Empusae, the Lamiae, and the Laruae, all which he calls
(...); and says, that these women after they have allured unto them, by their
deceitful entisements, such as are fair and beautiful, they do fat them up,
and being fat, they kill them, that they may suck their blood, of the which
they are wonderfully desirous; holding it to be most delicious and delicate.
And to this purpose he recites a most memorable History (or rather a Fable) of
one Menippus, a young and beautiful Philosopher.

A History of one Menippus beloved of a Devil.
This Menippus had been beloved of one of these Lamiae, which did entertain
and dandle him with all manner of delights and pleasant allurements, that it
could possibly devise: to the intent she might afterward execute her will upon
him, as she had formerly done to others, whom she had bewitched and enchanted
with her love. It chanced that one day Menippus invited the Philosopher
Apollonius, borne in Thyana, to dine with him. The Tables were very curiously
dressed and furnished with all kind of exquisite and delicious dainties: The
Court Cupboord well garnished with great store of Plate, both gold and silver:
The Hall hanged with rich Tapistrie: and nothing was wanting, that could
possibly be prepared. But Apollonius having discoursed and made known unto
Menippus, that the Mistress of this goodly feast was a Lamia; in continently
all vanished away, both the woman, the Table, the Cupboord, the Plate, and the
Tapistrie: yea, and the very lodging it self (which before seemed to be mounted
aloft, in a most proud and stately building, and the goodly high hal, the roof
where of hanged full of la^ps) became suddenly to be a little poor cottage, or
cabin: wherein nothing remained after the dep^rture of the Lamia, but darkness,
horror, and a filthy stinking savor. I am not ignorant, that Sorcerers are
termed by Apuleius, Lamiae. In Asino aureo Glossarium. Strigae. Lastrygones.
And they of the country of Auergne in France, do call them Fascignaires: that
is, Witches, or Inchaunters, of enchanting or bewitching men with their looks.
And the Italians call them Fatechiare, or Streghe, of the Latin name Strix:
which is a bird, reported to suck the blood of little children, lying in the
cradle; of which the Lamiae are also very greedy and desirous: the reason
whereof is yielded both by Suydas, and the Philosopher Fauorin, born at Arles in
Province: The which they ground upon a certain old stale fable, which is
this; That Jupiter falling in love with a beautiful Nymph, named Lamia, did
beget on her a child, which Juno of a ielosie caused to be strangled: whereupon
the said Lamia, of pure despite, did never cease from that time forwards, to
work mischief to other folks children. Howsoever it be, so is the report, that
Sorcerers do likewise use to stra^gle little infants. And because they haunt
and frequent the graves and Sepulchers of the dead, and use to be abroad in
the night time, as do the Strigae; It is not without reason, that they are
called Lamiae, and Struiae, and birds that fly and frequent the graves. The
which was not unknown unto Lacian, and Apuleius: who in their Metamorphoses,
have fained, that a Witch or Sorcerer, by means of a certain Ointment, did
change himself into a Bird, and so flew unto one, of whom he was enamoured.

But as touching that Bird, which of the Latins is named Strix, and of the
Greeks (...): In French it may be called Frezaie, Of the Scritch-Owle. Lib.
11. cap. 39 Nature. Histor.
(that is in English) a Scritch-Owle. Howbeit, that Pliny knew not what bird it
was rightly, and nevertheless, he placed it amongst the Injuries of the
Ancients. And by certain Greek Verses, which Festus alleges, one may soon
see, that it was held a Bird full of unluckiness and misfortune: the sum of
which verses, is thus; Drive hence (O powrefull Gods) this hateful Scritch-Owle
That thus by night does fright us in our bed.
Dislodge (O Gods) this most unlucky Foul:
Send him to sea, on shipboord to be lodged.


Next after the Lamiae, we may reckon, in the number of women Devils, Of the
Harpies
the Harpies, which the Greeks called the Dogs of Pluto, and the
executioners of his vengeance: of whom Virgill writes, that they spoke unto
Aeneas, Lib. 3. Eneid.
and foreprophecied, what should betide and happen unto him, after his arrival
into Italy.

The Sphinx also was a woman, as touching her head, and for the rest of her
body like unto a bird, Of the Monster, or Devil called Sphinx.
having her wings of so variable and changeable colors, that (as Plutarch
writes) turning them toward the beams of the Sun, they had the color of
Gold: and casting them toward the clouds, they were of an azure, and like
unto the sky, or the Raine-bowe. Those that have read the fabulous History of
the Thebans, do know what notable mischief was wrought unto them, by this
mo^ster (which either was a Devil, or possessed with a Devil) till such time
as Oedipus had resolved and expounded his Riddle. But I will not speak any
further hereof: for that the fable is sufficiently known to most men.

I will now come to entreat of the Nymphs of the ancients, Of Spirits called
ye Nymphs in English the Fayries.
which are those whom we at this day do call Fees, and the Italians Fate, in
English the Fayries. And that these Nymphs were of the nature and number of
devils: It appears by this; that in former times they which were possessed
with Devils, were called, (...): that is, Ravished and taken by the Nymphs:
whose manner was to run up and down, as furious and mad persons distracted,
and did foretell, to men, things to come. Now there were Three sorts of
Nymphs. One sort was of the Air: as that Sibylla, Three sorts of Nymphs: of
the Avre, the Earth, the Water.

which Plutarch affirms to wanderround about the Globe, or Circle of the
Moon, and there to chau^t what things should afterward ensue. Others were of
the Earth: as the Oreades, Dryades, Amadryades, Carmenta, Fatua, Marica,
Egeria, and other such like Nymphs. De sera numivindict.
And the last were of the Water: as ye Naiades, the Sirens, the Nereides: which
we may derive of the Hebrew word Nahar, which signifies a sloud, Of Nahar a
River is derived Nar a river in Italy, and another Nar in Dalmatia, and lik^
wise Nereus is the father of Rivers.
or a River: for that these Nereides are no other, then the Rivers, Daughters
of Nereus, or of the Ocean, father of the Sea, and of Tethis, who is called
Tit, that is, the Earth: within the cauernes and pores whereof (being first
engendered of the salt seed of the Ocean) they do for a time abide and
remain; till such time, as being sweetened, they do issue out, by their
fountains and springs, and (as good and obedient daughters) do go to yield
tribute to their father and their mother, that engendered them: and with whom
they do perpetually remain and continue, being still new bred or engendered,
with a new birth or generation still continuing.

And seeing we are now gotten into this Allegory of the Nereides: Of the Muses
and the Sirens and the Allego ricall meaning of them both.
It seems good unto me, to touch also that of the Nymphs, under whom I will
purposely confound, or join in one, both the Muses and the Sirens. For like as
we have said there be three sorts of Nymphs; Of the Air, of the Water,
and of the Earth: Three sorts of Muses.
so Varro makes Three sorts of Muses: One that takes their original of the
moving and stirring of the Water. Another that is made by the agitation of the
Air: and engenders soundes. And the third, which consists only in the
Voice, and is earthly. Three sorts of Sirens.
The like may we affirm of the Sirens: because Parthenope (which has a
feminine face and countenance) notes the Voice; which, being of the Earth, is
as the most grave and weighty. And Lygia, being full of sweet and pleasant
Harmony, designeth the soundes of the Air. And Leucosia, termed the White
Goddess, designeth the motion of the Water, whereof is engendered the white
froath, or foame of the Sea. So that we see, that by the Allegory both of the
Muses, Nymphs, and Sirens, is nothing signified or comprehended, but the whole
Art of Music: which consists in three things; Harmony, Rythme or Number,
Music consists in three things; Harmony, Rythme or Number, the Voice.
and the Voice, which the Greeks call (...). The Harmony is of the Air. The
Number is of the Sea: which passes not beyond the bounds that GOD has set
and limited it: and goes continually to and fro in his course of ebbing and
flowing, according to the increase and decrease of the Moon, which serves it
in manner (a man may say) as a Minstrell, by which it measures his pase. And
last of all the Voice, (which the Ancient French Romants do call Dictier) is
of the Earth: To Harmony are proper all Soundes: To Number Daunses: To the
Voice Poems.
because it is the most weighty and peasant, by reason of the Accent of Verses
which go solemnly, and slowely. To Harmony are properly appertayning the
Soundes: To Number or Rythme, Daunses: And to the Voice, all kinds of Verse
and Poetry.

Sometimes Harmony and Number are mingled together: as in the Violins, and in
playing with the Flute, Cornet, and such like Instruments. And sometimes also
all three are mingled in one; both Harmony, Number, and the Voice: as in
Tragedies and Comedies, in the Poems called Dithirambiques: and in the Airs of
Music, of the Greeks named (...), which are sung upon the Viols, the Lute,
or the Harp: and then is the Music perfect, and accomplished in all points.
And all this may in the like sense, Of the nine Muses, Urania the mistress of
Harmony alone.
in an Allegory, be applied to the nine Muses. For in regard of Harmony
alone, it is certain that the Muse Urania is chief and Mistress thereof:
whom the Poets do affirm to have first taught the motion of the Heavens. Of
Numbers, Polymnia is Mistress: as having first invented the Art of
Rhetoric, and Histrionicke, or Acting by Gestures: both which do consist in
Numbers and gestures, well ordered and measured. Calliope and Clio mistresses
of the Voice alone.
And the Voice, or (...), is under the power of Calliope and Clio: one of the
which found out the making of the Verses, called Heroykes: and the other first
invented Histories, and the Art of Divination. Euterpe and Terpsichore
mistresses of Harmony, and Numbers conjoined.
Over Harmony and Rythme conjoined, Euterpe and Terpsichore are the chief
Presidents: Of the which, the one is reported to be the Inuentresse of the
Pipe: and the other of the Harp. Over Harmony, Numbers and the Voice jointly,
Melpomene, Thalia, and Erato, have the command: Melpomene, Thalia, and Erato,
mistresses of Harmony, Numbers and the Voice conjoined.
to the first of whom is attributed the Tragedy: to the second the Comedy:
and to the third, the Lute and Viole, with the which she mingleth and
conioyneth the Voice.

The like may be said of the Sirens, which being Three in number, do also make
the Music in all points perfect, and fully accomplished, both with Harmony,
with Number, and with the Voice: which is manifest by that which Homer
alleges of the^, Odiss..
where he makes the^ to mingle in their Enchaunting songs (consisting of
numbers) both the voice and verses together: to the intent, that by this
musical perfection, they might the more easily allure Ulysses and his
companions unto them. And this is the reason, Sirens called Enchantresses, and
why?
why they are called Inchauntresses, of the excellency of their singing. Of
which name, if we will have the translation word for word, it comes of the
Hebrew word Shir: that is to say, a Song, and not (as Macrobius says) because
they inchant the gods: Lib. 2. in somnium Scipionis cap. 3.
but of this Etimologie, we will hereafter entreat more to the purpose. This
nevertheless we may not forget by the way, that, in the Arabian tongue, Sair
signifies a Poet: because it is he that furnishes men with Songs and Sonets,
and with Airs of Music. And for this cause a Poet is of the Greeks called
also (...), or a Singer.

But to continue on with that which we began, touching the discourse of the
Nymphs: we shall easily see, that the same may be said of them, as has
been spoken of the Muses, and the Sirens: And that each of them, according to
the distinction and diversity of the Elements, in which they are abiding, have
a quality and property, answerable and agreeable to the same: the which they
never change nor alter. The Nymphs of the Air, Of the Nimphs of the Air, and
that harmony is propet to them. Of the Nymph Mellusina.
have the Harmony, (which the Greeks call (...)) proper unto them. And thereof
do I think that the Nymph Mellusine took her name: as if one would say (...).
The French (who do tell great wonders of her, and have full stuffed their
Romaunts with such meruels) do feign her to be a Devil, that has her abiding
in the Air, and fortelleth things to come. But touching that which they talk,
how she was Countess of Melle, and of Lusignan, whereof she should be called
Mellusine; and that she was married to Raymond, Earl of Poytiers, by whom she
had goodly children: seems in my opinion, a mere fable, like unto that we
lately repeated, of Lamia, and that of Egeria, who was said to be conversant
with Numa. And I can no more believe it, then those old wives Tales, and idle
toys and fictions of the Fayrie Pedoqua, and of the Fayrie Morgua, and Alcina
the Lady of the lake of Aualon, and other such like Fayries, so famously
talked of, by the French, and English. For my part, I should rather think, that
that which the French have reported of Mellusine, they learned of the Jews
(who for a long time were abiding in France) and out of their Caball. For the
Jews do say that there is an Helias, which wandreth up and down in the Air,
and foretells things to come: And that it is that voice of the Bird, or Col
hatsipor, Eccles. 12.4.
which Solomon speaks of: whereof we will speak somewhat hereafter, in the
Discourse of Souls. The like do the Greeks affirm of their Empedocles;
supposing that he wa^dreth, flying up and down the Air: and of that Sibylla,
of whom we spoke before: who (as they say) makes verses, which are yet
extant, and are inserted in the works of Phlegon Trallian: by the which also,
(as a Goddess of the Air) she rules and commands over all such voices
and ominous speeches as are uttered of men at unawares or by happe-hazard, and
causes the same to succeed and to fall out accordingly: notwithstanding that
the parties who speak them, do think neither well, nor ill; neither happily,
nor unhappily, at the time that they do utter and pronounce them. The Greek
and Latin Poets have feigned likewise, Iris of the Ra^^^t (...), feigned by the
Poets to be a Nymph of the Air. Of the water Nymphs, and that numbers are
proper unto them.
that Iris was a Nymph of the Air, and the handmaid of Juno, who had the
command of the Air, calling it her messenger, as the Etimologie thereof
(being a Greek name) does also denotate.

Next after these Nymphs of the Air, do follow those of the water, which
have the Numbers, and the Cadence or fall of Numbers proper only unto them.
And true it is, that the Poets did feign the Naiades, and Nereides to lead a
perpetual dance upon the waters: and that in dancing and leaping, they
approach and come near to Mariners, or Sea passengers, and so to guide and
conduct them to their desired Haven. Now daunses, or leaping and vawting in
measures, have need of nothing (as says Aristotle) but only of Number,
measure and true cadence.

Finally, the Nymphs of the Land, have the Voice, Of the land-Nymphes, and
that the Voice is proper to them. Fatum, or Fate whence derived. That the
Nymphs are no other then Devils.
proper unto them. And for the most part, they are feigned to be Diuiners,
Prophets, and Poets: as Egeria, Hersilia, Carmenta, the Camenae, and the
Goddess Fatua, the wife of Faunus: of whom I may derive the name of Phataa:
that is to say, Destinye, and where of is come the Latin word Fatum.

Now for a conclusion of all this Discourse: certainly if all these Nymphs (of
which I have spoken) have at any time appeared unto men: It can not be
imagined, but that they must needs be Spirits and Devils. And the truth is,
that even at this day, it is thought, that in some of the Northern Regions,
they do yet appear to diverse persons. And the report is, that they have a
care, and do diligently attend about little Infantes lying in the cradle: that
they do dress and undress them in their swathling clothes, and do perform
all that which careful Nurses can do unto their Nurse children. And surely the
Ancients had the same opinion of them: For the Poets say, that Jupiter was
kept in his Infancy of the Nymph or Fairie Melissa: and that Bacchus, as soon
as he was borne, was carried away by the Nymphs or Fayries, Nysa was said to
be nurse of Bacchus, and of her he is call led Nyseus.
to be nourished by them in the Den or Cave of Nysa: and that by them Hylas,
a young lad, was ravished and carried away, Antinous taken, and Adonis pulled
away from the Bark of the Myrrh tree, which was his mother, transformed and
Metamorphosed. To be short, if I should recite all the Fables which are written
of them, I should never make an end: Only this I will add, that those
Fairies or Nymphs, which I said did attend about little Infants to dress them
as Nurses, may well be those Devils or ancient Goddesses, which were said to
have the charge of the birth of Children: and for that cause were named (...).
But I would gladly know and learn, who did put it in the heads of old
folks, and other simple persons and Idiots, that the Arcades, the Theaters,
the old Fountains, or Water Conduits, the Bathes, and Great stones pitched up
aloft, Of diverse old famous works and buildings, supposed to be the works and
dwellings of the Nymphs
were the works of the Nymphs or Fayries. Was it, trow ye, because it has
been continually held, and commonly thought, that the Spirits, and Nymphs, or
Fayries, have loved ruinous places: and that for this cause the old ruins of
great, proud, and admirable buildings decayed, have been said to be the houses
and dwelling places, or the works of the Nymphs? Surely as touching their
inhabiting in ruinous places; Esaias witnesses it, where he says, Esaias. 13.
That the Sirens or Nymphs shall possess their houses, and there make their
retrait and abiding. The dwellings of the Nymphs described in Homer, and
Virgil, are sufficiently well known: that they were in dens or caves, far
removed and concealed from the sight and company of men: builded and wrought by
themselves in the natural rocks and hard stone. And Homer for his part has so
well and perfectly described the Cave of Ithaca, where these Fayries did abide,
that Porphyrius has taken the pains to interpret and explane, at large, the
ingenious order of their building, and Arctitecture. At this day is to be seen
the Cave of Sibylla Cumana, near to Naples: of which also Justin Martyr does
partly make mention; and says, that the report went, how in that Cell she
wrote her Prophecies. Besides the Temples of the Nymphs (called by the Greeks
(...); and of the Latins Lymphaea) were always situated without the Cities
and Towns, in solitary places, and far removed from any dwellinges: as
appears by the Lymphaeum of Rome, which was on the other side of Tyber, and
stood alone, and aside fro the Suburbs. And so did the other Teples and caves
of the Nymphs, whereof Strabo, and other Authors have written. But seeing we
have sufficiently discoursed of the names of Angels, Spirits, and Devils: It is
requisite, that we now set down the reasons, and arguments of those men, that
deny their Apparition: to the end we may, to the utmost of our power, confute
and refell them.

CAP. III.
Of the Opinions and Arguments of the Saduces, and Epicures: by which they
would prove, that the Angels and Devils do not appear unto men.
MAny there have been at all times, and in all ages, which have impugned, and
stiffely denied the Apparitions of Devils, Angels, and Spirits: But some have
done it in one sort, and some in another. For there be some, who (to rid
themselves altogether from the question and disputation, that might be made
concerning particular and special matters, which are often alleged, in regard
of the Apparition of Specters) do bend themselves against them all in
general: That so by cutting of the root, and undermining the foundation of a
Principle well grounded, they may the more easily cause the overthrow and
downfall of all that which depends upon the same.

They deny therefore, Of the several opinions of sundry sorts of persons, that
de nv^d the being of sp^tus, etc. and their Apparitions.
that there are any Angels, or Devils at all: or any Spirits severed and
abstracted from a corporal substance or body: to the end that by consequence
they may infer and conclude, that there are not likewise any Specters, nor
Apparitions of Spirits. Such were the Saduces, as we may read in the Acts of
the Apostles: and the Epicures, Acts. 23. The first opini on of the Saduces,
Epicures, and other Atheists.
and the greatest part of the Peripatetickes, and all sorts of Atheistes
whatsoever. Of which last, there are at this day more huge numbers abounding
within this our Realm of France, then would be tolerated. These men would not
stick to affirm (if they durst, and were it not for fear of the Magistrate)
that it is free for men to abandon themselves to all kind of iniquity,
impiety, and dissolute living: for so do they murmr, and mumble, when they
are alone and by themselves; that there is not either God, or any Spirits at
all, good, or evil: nor yet any hell, where the souls of men should suffer any
pains or punishment; but that they dye together with the body: And that all
whatsoever is said or alleged, touching hell torments, is nothing but a vain
and superstitious toy, and fable; only to make babes and children afraid: and
to wrappe and tie the greatest persons of the world in certain bonds of a
religious superstition: for so are the words of Lucrece, in this behalf. And
I do believe, that they do often say in their hearts, that which Pithagoras,
the Samian, is alleged in Ovid to have said to the inhabitants of Crotona in
Italy; Why stand you thus in fear of Styx, and such vain dreamings
Of Manes, and of Spirits, which are naught else but leasings?


Certainly he that should take upon him, to instruct these Athiests, should
but loose his time: because they will admit of no reasons, no not of those that
are merely natural. For seeing they do not believe him which has the command
and rule of nature, how can they yield any credit or beleese unto those reasons
that are drawn from nature it self?

Other persons there are, who, The second opinion.
being more religious and honester men then those former, yet have no less
denied, the essence of Angels, Devils, and Spirits: Howbeit they have been of
this opinion: that by reason both of the distance between them and us, and of
the difficulty of appearing in a humane body: they cannot possibly present
themselves unto us,

Others also there have been, who have referred all that which is spoken of
the vision of Spirits, The third opinion or the Skeptics and other followers
of the Philosopher Pirrhon.
unto the natural and perpetual deprauation of the humane senses. Such were
the Sceptikes, and the Aporreticks, who were the followers of the Philosopher
Pirrhon: as also the second and third Academie, who held, That the senses, were
they never so sound, could not imagine any thing, but falsely and untruly.

Again, The fourth opinion.
some others, with more appearance of reason then the Scepticks, have affirmed,
that abundance of Mel^acholy, and Choler adust, frenzy, fevers, and the
debilitie or corruption of the senses (be it naturally, or by accidet) in any
body, may make the to imagine many things which are not. And they do infer,
that such as happen to be attainted with these maladies, do think that they
have seen Devils, and other such like Specters. They add moreover, that the
fear, superstition, and credulity of many, is such, that they will most
commonly suffer themselves to be drawn into a belief and persuasion of that,
which is quite contrary to truth.

To make short: The fist opinion of Lucian and others.
Others there be, wise enough and fine conceited: yet nevertheless (being
great mockers, and incredulous, because they themselves did never happen to see
any vision, nor have ever heard or touched any supernatural thing) they have
been of this opinion; that nothing could appear unto men, that exceeded or
went beyond the course of nature. Lucian an Infidel, Atheist, and Scoffer.
And of this number Lucian was one: who (being also as great an Infidel as any
could be) said: I believe no part of all these Apparitions: because I only
amongst you all did never see any of them. And if I had seen of them, assure
yourselues, I would believe them, as you do. Notwithst^ading for all this, he
opposed himself against all the famous and renowned Philosophers of his time,
and held argument against them, though (as himself confessed) they were the
chiefest and most excellent in all kind of knowledge and learning. And he was
not ashamed to stand only upon his own bare conceit and opinion: impudently
maintaining, without any reason at all, against them that were as wise, if not
more wise then himself, and more in number: that forsooth nothing at all,
whatsoever was said or alleged touching Specters, ought to be admitted or
believed. But what reasons I pray you does he bring, to confirm his saying?
Truly none all: but that only of his own absolute and vncontrowled
authority, he will draw to his incredulity, all others, whom he sees to
be assured and settled in their opinion: Notwithstanding, that they are
certainly resolved of the truth, by the exterior senses, with which they have
perceived and known that to be true, which so constantly they do maintain
and defend. But how can it possibly be, that a man should think, without any
show of reason, by incredulity and mockery only, to confute and overthrow
that, which has been ever of all men, and in all ages, received and admitted?
Certainly, this is the fashion and guise of mockers, and scorners, that that
which they cannot deny, nor yet have a will to confess, they will find the
means to put it off with a ^est and laughter: and so think secretly to
insinuate themselves into the minds and conceits of their hearers;
especially, such as look not, nor have a regard to the truth and substance of
a thing, but only to the outward shadow, and grace of words and glorious
speeches. Such a scorner needs not any great knowledge: because it is
sufficient for him to be superficially skillful in any thing; so that he can
with a kind of grave and smiling grace, shift off the reasons and arguments of
those, whose knowledge, and learning, is so exceeding far beyond his, as
during his whole life, he will never attain unto the like. Thus did Machiauel
carry himself: who amongst the learned, Machiauel a Scoffer, and an Atheist.
and men of skill and judgment, knew well how to make his profit of his
scoffs, and pleasant grace in jesting; whereby he would many times strike them
out of countenance, in the sight of them that heard him: whereas, if he had
come to dispute with them, by lively reasons, and solid Arguments, he would at
the very first blow have been overthrown and confounded. But in the end he
discovered himself sufficiently, and was reputed of all men, no other then a
Scoffer, and an Atheist, In Musas.
as Paulus Iouius testifies of him.

But we will cease to speak any further of him, of Lucian, and of those of
their humor, and will return to our matter, touching Specters: the which, that
we may the better explane (now that we have briefly declared the diversity
of opinions, of those that insist upon the contrary) we will answer unto
each of them in order, as they have been propounded. And first, as touching
the Sadduces, the Epicures, the Peripatetickes, we will severally answer
their Arguments which they object against us: Next, we will remove those
difficulties, which are objected, and show how the Angels, and Devils, may take
upon them a body. Afterward, we will show and discover unto the
Skeptics, that the humane senses are not so faulty and uncertain, as they
would make men believe. And last of all, (to the intent we may leave nothing
behind) we will not forget to show, by what maladies and infirmities the
senses may be hurt and troubled: and the Imaginatiue power of man wounded and
changed: so as all that which is supposed to be seen, is merely false and
untrue.

To come first of all to the Sadduces: It is most certain, The opinion of the
Sadduces.
that of all men they were the most gross and carnal: and did not believe
that any thing was spiritual: but they did imagine all to be corporal:
because they said, that the Humane understanding does always work with the
Phantosme, and with the thing Imagined. And it appears, that in dreaming of
any thing whatsoever, we do always imagine it to be corporal: whereupon they
conclude, that all things are corporal: and therefore that even God also is a
corporal Substance, which is the greatest absurdity and blasphemy, that can be
imagined in the world. For if we should restrain God into a body, we must also
make him subject to a body (so says Saint John Damascen) which, in a word, is
to restrain and shorten the power and omnipotency of God: the which being
infinitely above al substances, both corporal and incorporall, is not subject
to their Category. Exodus 3^. Homil. 22. in Marth.
The reason that moved them to believe that God was corporal: was a place of
Moses (for they did not receive nor admit of any Scriptures but the five Books
of Moses, as says Origin) wherein it is written, That God made Moses to stay
in the Cave of a rock or mou^tain: and putting his hand upon him, did show him
his hinder parts, not suffering him to see his face. And therefore, in regard,
that Moses attributes unto God a face, a hand, and other parts, they conclude,
that God has a body. Of the same opinion also was Tertullian (as witnesses
Saint Augustine, De Origius Animaium. Volum. 2. Tit. 23.
writing to Optatus) and the Bogomilles, being certain Heretics of Bulgarie:
who thought that God was, as we are (so writes Enthymus): and that from his
two eyes, out of his brain did issue two beams; the one called the Sun, and
the other, the Holy Spirit: which is a most blasphemous and intolerable
error.

Now the occasion, why the Sadduces did so egerly defend and maintain, that
God had a body; was, because they would deny all incorporall substances: to
which effect they thus argued. The argument of the Sadduces.
If God (say they) have created any substances, he created them to his own
Image and likeness: and therefore when he made man he said, That he made him
according to his own Image; showing thereby, that he was of a corporal
substance: because that man, whom he formed to the pattern of his own face, is
corporal. And if God have made nothing, but what is corporal: It follows,
that the Angels and Devils which are said to be Spirits, are nothing but
mere fables: and that there be not any souls, or spirits separated from a
corporal substance: and by consequence, that the soul of man is mortal, as
the body: and has no need to be reunited thereunto by the general
resurrection.

But it is easy to answer them; by denying plainly, that God is corporal,
The argument of the Saduces answered.
or has any body. For albeit, the holy Scripture does attribute, unto God,
hands, feet, face, eyes and other parts of a body: yet this must be understood
spiritually; and by those corporal and bodily members, we must imagine the
spiritual* virtues of God (according as says S. Gregory): In Moralibus.
as, by his eyes, we must understand his foresight and his knowledge; to the
which all things are open, and from which nothing is hidden and concealed: By
his hand, is meant, his Almighty power and puissance: By his face, the
plenitude and fullness of his glory. By his hinder parts, his glory is
shadowed, as under the veil of some certain form and similitude. And whereas
they say, that the understanding does work with the Imagination: and that we
do imagine God to be a corporal Substance: This has no reason, nor any
appearance of truth at all; but is an error, common to them, with the Epicures:
to the which we will answer anon. And as touching the Angels: I do greatly
marvel how the Saduces can deny the being of them; seeing that Moses in many
places does make mention of them, and of their Apparition. We may therefore
very well say of them, that they use the Books of Moses, as men use their
Stirroppes, in lengthening, and shortning them, at their pleasures. This is the
reason, Contra Tryph.
why Iustine Martyr did not reckon them in the number of the Jews (and that
worthily) but reputed them as Heretics: not allowing them any place in the
Jewish Church, by reason of the fond and absurd opinions which they held, not
only of God, but also of the Angels, Devils, and souls of men, which they
affirmed to be mortal. But as concerning this latter point, we shall speak
more hereafter. Let us now consider the Arguments of the Epicures.

The first error of the Epicures is, The opinion of the Epicures
that God has a body: as the Saduces did believe likewise. And their first
Argument was, That nature it self (forsooth) did teach and admonish us, to
believe, The first argument and reasons of the Epicures.
that both God and all Celestial essences were corporal; for two reasons: The
former was, because the Gods are not figured in any other, then in a humane
form. And the second, because, whether it be in sleeping, or in waking, when
we dream or imagine of the Gods, no other form does present it self unto
our imaginations, but a humane shape: And therefore they conclude, that the
Gods are in figure like unto men. But unto this argument, Cicero answers
sufficiently; Lib. de natura Deorum.
That such humane shape, and form, is attributed unto the Gods, Answer to the
first argument of the Epicures
by the invention of men: and that either it proceeds from the wisdom of
the Ancients; who thought thereby they should the more easily draw the spirits
and minds of the ignorant, to the knowledge of spiritual, and supernatural
things: and that they should the sooner bring and reduce them into the way to
live well and virtuously: Or else that the same had it beginning and first
footing from a blind superstition: which does most easily allure men to adore
those gods which are portrayed and carved in a form most pleasing, and
agreeable unto men: Or else that it is but a fiction of Poets and Paynters; who
have always been audacious to feign and devise any thing, rather then that
which should be according to truth and verity. And this last point may well serve
to answer that, which ye Epicures say: that be it in sleeping, or in waking ye
gods do not preset themselves unto us, in any other, then a humane form: For
this is certain, that by the portraiture and pictures which we see of the Gods,
in those forms which are common and familiar unto us; we do imagine (though
falsely) that which may resemble unto us, the same which we have seen to be
painted. Insomuch, that Jupiter seems unto us, to have a face and countenance
terrible, with his hair black, and hanging backwarde, as Phidias did grave
him. And Minerua had her eyes blewe, or of an azure color: as Homer describes
her. Mercury was painted like a young man, having his eyes always open, as one
that was ever waking: with bright yellowe hair, and a yellowe down upon his
chinne and cheeks, as if it did but newly begin to frizzle or to curle. Venus
had her eyes delicate and wanton, and her locks of gold yellow. Juno had
gross and thick eyes, rising up toward her head, like unto the eyes of an
Ox. And so generally were the rest of the Gods painted by the Gentiles, in
diverse forms and fashions. Notwithstanding, all this proceeded of nothing
else, but from the error of our Imagination, which suffers it self to be
deceived and seduced, by the painting, which imprinted in it a kind of false
notion. I say a notion: because the ignorant common sort of people, is
persuaded of the same, and suffers it to take place in their mind, or
understanding: which is as easy also to be deceived, as is their Imagination.
But a man of wisdom and judgment, (who has his understanding more clear
and open) is not easily therewithal seduced: but notwithstanding al paintings
and fictions, his Intellect or understanding power pierces through the
Imagination (as the Sun pierces or shines through the clouds): and
spreading it self, with her light, does easily believe in a spiritual manner,
that God and the Angels are Spiritual.

The second Argument of the Epicures.
The second Argument of the Epicures, touching the humane body of God; was,
that God took upon him that form, which was, or could be imagined, to be the
most beautiful in the whole world. And they say, that the humane form, or
shape, is of all others, the most goodly and excellent: And therefore we ought
to think, that God is carnal and corporal, as men are. Hereunto needs no
answer to be made: because the consequence of their argument is not good:
Answer to the 2. Argument.
viz. That God should retain unto himself the Figure of a man, because the
same is the most excellent of all other creatures in the world. For the
Divinity of God, neither is, nor can be, in any corporal substance: But it is
an Incorporall and spiritual essence, which has nothing common with that
substance which is proper unto these earthly creatures.

The 3. Argument of the Epicures.
The third and last argument of these Philosophers, is a Gradation or heaping up
of Syllogismes: which kind of argument, the Greeks call a Sorites: and they
frame it in this sort; It is held and confessed of all, that God, and all other
celestial powers, are exceedingly happy: But no person can be happy, without
virtue: And virtue cannot be present in any, without reason: and reason can
be in none, but in the figure and shape of man. Therefore it must be granted,
that the Gods, which have the use of reason, have the form of man also. But
the whole frame of this Argument, Answer to the 3. Argument.
may soon and easily be dissolved, by denying, that reason can be in no
other, then in a humane shape: For both God and the Angels, who have a divine
and spiritual understanding, have the use of reason, notwithstanding, that
they be not of a corporal substance. And reason in man, comes not of the
humane body: but from the soul of man, which is Spiritual and Divine, made
unto the likeness of God, and capable of reason, of prudence; and of wisdom.

Now, whereas it might be objected to the Epicures; That in making their Gods
to have a humane body, they do therein make them subject to death and
dissipation. To avoid this absurdity, Absurdities in the opinion of the
Epicures.
they do tumble into a greater; affirming, that their body is as a body; and
their blood, as blood; not having any thing, but the lineame^ts and proportion
of a man, and being exempted from all crassitude and thicknes: which, in a
word, is as much as to say, that their Gods were rather Idols of men, the^ very
men; and rather framed by the pattern of men, the^ as men in truth and
substance: which is a thing the most ridiculous that can be imagined.

But will some say, To what purpose serves all this, touching our matter of
Specters? I have said before, that the Saduces did maintain God to have a
body, to the end they might the better deny the appearing of Specters; which
are substances without a body. Also the Epicures made their Gods to have
bodies; that so they might hold them in the heavens idle and doing nothing:
and by consequence might deny their Apparition upon Earth. Of the opinion of
the Epicures who thought there were no Devils nor Spirits. In vita Bruti.
For as touching Devils or Spirits, they believed there were not any: but did
confound them all in the number of their Gods. And that they did but make a
jest of Specters, appears by the speech of Cassius in Plutarch: and in that
that Celsus (half an Epicure) writing against the Christians, Lib. 2.6. and 8.
^^^tra Celsum
did deny them flatly and absolutely, (as is to be seen in Origin, who has
answered him) and did reprove the Christians, in that they would allow of any
powers, or Spirits, contrary to the Gods: supposing (according to his own
saying, and opinion) that there were no Devils. Besides that, he made a mock
and a jest of Angels, and of the Resurrection of the body: and generally of
all those Apparitions, which were made, both in the old and new Testament.

And now that we speak of contrary powers, Contra St^ices
it puts me in remembrance of a speech of Plutarch, who reproves
Chrisippus, for that in this universal body of the world, so well ordained
and framed, he should grant so great an inconvenience, (to wit) that there
should be a kind of Devils afflicting and tormenting men, to the disturbance
of the concord and harmony of the world: Which being well ordained by the
Author and maker thereof, ought not to be thought to bear or sustain any
thing which should be incommodious to it self, and by lapse, and continuance of
time, should work the confusion and destruction of the same. But it seems,
that Plutarch reprehe^ded Chrisippus, upon a desire and humor of contradiction,
rather then moved upon any just cause, or matter of truth. For the devils do
not work any damage or inconvenience to the world, being bridled and
restrained by the hand and power of God. And if they do torment men or tempt
them, it is to exercise them, or to manifest the glory and justice of God, of
the which they are sometimes made the executioners. S. Bernard. in Sermon 1.
de transla. S. Malach. Diabolus, inquit, malleus calest is opificis, factus est
malleus vniuersa terra.
And as in each Commonwealth, well instituted, there be executioners
ordained, for the punishment of Malefactors, and such as trouble and disturb
the public peace, and good of the commonweal: and yet the universal body
of the co^mon-weale, is not thereby offended, or endamaged: but to the contrary
rather it receives much more profit and commodity. Even so God has placed,
and left here below in this world, Devils and wicked Spirits, to be as
tormenters and executioners to wicked men: that so his justice might shine the
more glorious, to the comfort of the godly, and of his elect, that live in the
love and fear of him.

But to come again unto the Epicures: It is most certain, that they were no
other, then the followers of nature: and that only so far as things did
fall under their outward senses. Of the Arguments of the Epicures mad. against
Specters, and Apparitions.
And if one should allege unto them, that any Specters, Images, and Visions,
had presented the^ elues: they would refer the same, for the most part, to the
co^course and perpetual flux of their Atoms: or to some other like reasons:
the which we hold it not amiss to discover and discipher at large, as we
have drawn them out of Ciccro, Lib. de nature. Dcorum. Lib. 4.
or of Lucrece. All Images (say they,) which do externally present themselves
unto our senses, either they are visible, or invisible: If they be Invisible,
The 1. Argument.
either they are created in the Air, or in our own minds and conceits. As
touching those made in the Air: It is not any strange thing, or abhorring
from reason, that in the same should be engendered certain voices: like as we
see it is natural, that cold comes from the Rivers: ebbing and flowing,
from the Sea: and heat, from the Sun. And it may be, that some voice, being
spread abroad within the valleys, does not only rebound back again, to the
place from whence it came; but does dilate and scatter it self here and there,
throughout the Air, as do the sparks that mount up from the fire. So that for
one voice there are many engendered: which running through the empty Air, do
enter within the ears of those, that knew nothing of the natural voice: and
do put them into a misconceit, and fond opinion, that they have heard either
some of the Fayries, or Satyrs, or Nymphs, playing and sporting amiddest the
woods.

As concerning those, Their 2. Argument.
that are bred in the mind; They say, Atoms signis fie motes in the Sun, or
things so small as cannot be divided.
that for the innumerable course of Atoms: all whatsoever we do dream, or
think of, comes incontinently into the spirit or mind, and sometimes
passes by visions and Images into the bodily eyes.

But if the Images be visible: either they are ^euerberated and beaten back,
from the Crystal and transparent Air, exceeding clear in her superficies:
or they come of the Spoils and Scales of natural things. Their 3. Argument.
Touching the Air: That it may of it self cast some kind of Image, having
power to appear, they prove it in this, sort; Al Air that is Chrystalline, or
transparent, has a kind of refraction, as appears by the mirror (whereof
looking Glasses are made and polished) and by the water, and by a thick and
darkened Air. And this do the Catoptickes themselves teach in their
principles: Catoptikes are professors of the Optikes or Art Speculatiue.
Now (by the comparison and similitude of the mirror, and the water) all Air
which has a refraction, does of it self yield some certain form. And
therefore it is not any thing strange, if in an Air a man may see certain
forms and Images. And they do bring also this comparison. Even as the
Tapistrie hangings in a Theater, or a large wide hall, do cast abroad round
about, their natural color, where they find an Air opposed against them:
and the more that the beams of the Sun do beat or shine upon them, the more
bright and shining luster they carry with them; and seem to have cast off and
left their color, in the same place, which is directly in opposition against
them: So is it most certain, that the Air may of it self cast abroad
certain forms and figures: the which, look by how much the more they be made
clear, by the light which does bring and tie them to our object, so much the
more comprehensible shall they be unto our sight.

In brief, concerning the spoils and scales cast from natural things, of
which, in their opinion, Their 4. Argument.
Images should be engendered: They do make this Argument; The Caterpillars (say
they) do leave their spoils in the hedges or bushes, like unto themselves: so
do the Serpe^ts among the thorns or stones: and the little creatures, at the
time of their birth, do leave behind them their after burden: which is a
little thin and slender skin, which they bring with them, from their dammes
belly: Why therefore may there not be left or cast from the bo dies of natural
things, certain thin and subtle forms, or Images, proceeding from them
as well, as a little skin and the after burden does remain of the superfluity
of little creatures? But all these Arguments may very easily be dissolved.
Answer to their. 1. argument. The voice defined what it is


And first, as touching the voices, which they say, may simply be created of
the Air: I will not deny that: For it is most certain, that the voice, is a
certain beating and concussion of the Air, which falls under the sense of
hearing, (as is affirmed by the Grammarians.) And the matter of the voice (as
says Galen) is the breath, Lib. de Voce.
and respiration of the Lungs: but the form thereof is the Air, without the
which, neither can it be understood, nor can it be called a voice. Besides I
will not deny, but that the sounds are raised within the empty Air, be it
either by the winds, or by some other external cause. But to say, that the
voices, and the sounds are natural and adherent to the Air, as the Tide to
the Sea; and coldness to the Rivers; and heat to the Sun: It would the^; follow,
that without any external cause at all, both the voice, and the senses should
be created in the Air, and should perpetually adhere unto the Air, as the
Tide does to the Sea; and cold to the waters; and heat unto the Sun. But so it
is, that the winds are not always in the Air: and the sounds and voices are
external things, coming into the Air, by the means of some other subject:
the which is nothing so, neither in the Sea, nor in the Rivers, nor in the
Sun: because that in the Seas the Tide; and cold in the waters; and heat in
the Sun, are unseparably and continually. And there is great difference
between Accidents that are Separable, and those that are Inseparable. For the
separable Accident as the Voices and the Soundes in the Air, may be
abstracted and drawn from the substance of the Air, and yet the Air shall
neither perish, nor be the sooner altered thereby: But ebbing and flowing
cannot be taken from the Sea, but the nature thereof must needs be changed:
Nor can the heat be separated from the Sun, but that he must then loose
his light: Neither can the cold be severed from the Rivers, but that the
quality and nature of the water must be changed: which cannot possibly be,
because naturally water is cold. And these three Accidents, are inseparably
knit to those three substances, no less, then blackness is to the Raven, and
whiteness to the Swan. Moreover, it is a far greater foolery, to say, that
of voices articulated and knit together, the voices themselves should be bred
and engendered in the air: For that is not only against the nature of the
Air, but against all order established in the world. Neither is it to any
purpose, to allege for an instance, the voice of an Echo: the which being
carried in the Air, does spread it self, and scatters (as a spark from the
fire) here and there, not only toward the party that made and dispersed the
sound, The Echo, whereof it comes.
but to some other places likewise. For the voice of the Echo, is engendered of
the voice of the party, and not of the air, and is dispersed (as themselves
confess) by the speech of the man, from whom it took it original and first
beginning. Neither will I easily grant unto the^, that the voice of the Echo
does disperse it self on all sides, without loosing it self, or being
extinguished. For it is a thing very notorious, and sufficiently proved, that
if the Echo be dispersed into another place, then that from whence it first
received her voice, she is no more discerned or understood as the voice of a
man, but only as a confused and uncertain sound; which ra^ging through the
valleys, cannot be discerned, but only for a resou^ding noise, and not
otherwise. Now as concerning those Images, Answer to their 2. argument.
or similitudes, which the Epicures allege to be created in the thought, or
conceit: saying, that the mind of man does refer unto the eyes, whatsoever it
dreameth, or thinks on: and that by means of the abou^dance or co^course of
the Atoms; I do make them the same answer, which Cicero yielded the^: That if
the mind and the eyes do so sym bolize and agree together in operations, that
whatsoever the mind shall imagine and conceive, the eye may presently see: It
must needs then follow, that some things shall present themselves to our
eyes and sight, which never were in being, nor ever can be. For I may dream,
or think of a Scylla, a Chimera, a Hippocentaure, and such like co^ceited
fictio^s, which never were, nor can be. And I may feign unto me self, in my
mind, strange Monsters, and Antiques; such as Painters do many times make,
which neither are things, nor can possibly be. To be short, If this argument of
the Epicures were true; it must needs be, that all things whatsoever the m^nde
presents, should be of a certainty: and they should fall so subject to our
sight as we might plainly and sensibly see them: the which is the greatest
folly, that can possibly be imagined. Neither can they defend themselves with
the continual concourse of their Atoms, which (they say) do incessantly
bring certain Images into the mind, and into the eyes of men. For be it, that
we should confess, that their Atoms do slide into the mind of man: how can
they conclude thereof, that they descend into the sight: nay, how can they
descend; but that even by their own reasons, their ignorance and sottishness
may be discovered. For, if their Atoms do enter into the mind, it must needs
be then by that means, that they be Invisible: and that they do fly up and
down very closely, and subtly (as the very word does also import.) Now if
they fly inuisibly in the mind: how can they of themselves so readily make
any thing visible and apt to be seen? Certainly, to make their Atoms visible
and corporal, there must be of necessity, before hand, a great concurrence
and huge heap of them drawn together; which cannot be suddenly done, but will
require a great time. Now in the mean while that these invisible Atoms shall
be a gathering and getting together into the mind, they will be flitting and
flying away some other where, as soon as the mind (which never retayneth one
thing very long) has put them out of remembrance. So that by this means they
have not any leisure to form themselves visible to the eyes of the body: but
they return back again, even as they came at first, invisible.

Now let us proceed, and pass on to those Images, which (say the Epicures) are
reuer berated from the Air, Answer to the 3. argument of the Epicures.
being clear and transparent in her supersicies. I do agree with them, that
the Catoptike, that is to say, the Speculatiue, (being one of the kinds of the
Art Optike) does hold, that the refractio^, which is made of forms, (be it
either in a mirror, in the Air, or in the water) comes either of the
densitie and thickness of the mirror, polished and made bright, the which
keeps sight, that it does not disperse and scatter it self: whereas
otherwise, if the mirror were transparent, or had any pores, whereby one might
see through it, the sight would disperse and scatter it self abroad: Or else
it comes of the thickness of the Air next adjoining: or of the humid and
moist concretion of the Water, which staieth and limiteth the beams of the
eyesight. And that is the reason, why one may as well see his visage in the
water, as in a mirror or looking Glass: and so also in the water of the Sea,
when it is not troubled not tossed with the winds, but rests calm and
quiet: which Virgill testifies in these Verses: In Bucolicis.
Of late (upon the shore) I stood, my self beholding
In waters of the Sea, no stormy winds then stirring.


But what will they infer of this, which every man will confess to be true
and infallible? So it is, (say they) that the Air being clear in her
Superficies (like as does the mirror or looking Glass): so will it yield of
it self, some form or figure. Let this also be granted them: And what of
that? For sooth they conclude, that therefore in the Air, The Schoolmen call
this a Fallacy, A dictosecundum quid ad id quod est sim pliciter dictum
a man may see figures and Images. But who sees not, that this conclusion is
ridiculous, and Sophistical: For it does not answer to the terms of their
proposition: but simply carries away the Subject, without speaking of that,
which is thereunto attributed, and which is the knot of the whole question. But
I would know of the Epicures, how they can prove unto us, that by their Atoms
the Air may naturally engender forms and Images of themselves, which should
be visible: and, which should be moving and living, as the Specters are. I do
assure me self, that they have not any arguments so good, but they may as
easily be dissolved and avoided, as was the former. But they will say,
perhaps; that we see often in the Air Comets, Fiery Flames, and other
Prodigies. True: this I will not deny: but these things (which they say are
seen in the Air) do not take their original neither of their Atoms, nor of
the Air: but are engendered of the vapors dried up from the earth: as it is
well known by the writings of good Philosophers. And the Air is susceptible
and capable of them, by reason of some emptines in it, which does easily yield
and give place, and receives that which is sent unto it from below. Besides it
is very evident, that such figures and Images as are seen in the Air, have
not any life in them, as have the true Specters: the which also (the Epicures
ought to show by good reasons) to be carried to and fro, and to move
themselves in the Air. For if they had attributed motion and stirring unto
Specters: and had proved, that naturally, without having any soul or life,
they might notwithstanding be seen wandering, and running hither and thither,
in our form, or in any other: and that they are not only to be seen in all
parts of the air, but in all other places whatsoever: then this might have
stood them in great stead, to have impugned the Apparition of Specters,
supernaturally, or against nature.

Moreover, if they will affirm, that the transparent and thick Air,
receiving our figure by refraction, does move it self as we do: and does live
and change from place to place, as we do: then must they also prove unto us,
that the same should be a Specter: and not the Image of the object opposed
thereunto, the which vanishes away as soon as the same does absent it self
from it.

Of the Apparition of Images formed in the Air, by way of reflection.
And seeing we are now in the Discourse of Images, formed in a thick Air: It
is to be understood, that their nature is to appear either by the refraction
of our own natural and proper form, or by reflection. As touching their
appearance by refraction, we have already spoken sufficiently: Of Images
appearing in the Air by reflection, and how it is done.
But as concerning those which are by reflection; It is most certain, that
their property is to appear by another form then ours: namely, of some
lightsome body, which grows into the thick and gross Air, in the humid
and moist concretion of the same: or into the Glass of a mirror, making a
reflection of that thing which is reuerberated and beaten back again into our
sight. Thus by way of reflection may a man see within a looking Glass, those
men which are walking and marching in the streets. And sometimes a man shall
think that men are walking near the walls of his chamber; which
notwithstanding is nothing so: but that only there is a reflection of those
persons who^ we see aloof, walking and going up and down. So likewise by way
of reflection, may a man see in the heavens sometimes a second Sun, the Image
of the true Sun: and so likewise of the Rainbowe. Howbeit that this latter
(as Aristotle would have it) is not any reflection, but a relation of the Aspect
unto our eyesight. But under his correction, that is not so: For if the
Rainebowe in the heavens do not yield a reflection to our sight, it would not
be seen in the water, or in a looking Glass, as it is, and as daily
experience shows us. And this also may serve for a solution to that Argument
of the Epicures, who by comparison of the clothes of Tapistrie, that imprint
their colors in the wall opposed, would prove, that the Air may al^o cast any
form or Image of it self. For the colors of the Raine-bowe, and of Tapistry
Hangings are for the most part lively colors, as Azure or sky color, red,
carnation, and green: all which do naturally cast a great luster, which may
easily yield an impression upon any solid thing, and may reflect unto our eyes.
And yet nevertheless, I see not how this can be a good argument, to show that
the Air can engender forms or figures: which may refer themselves to the
eyes, as Specters, and not rather, as colors.

Answer to the 4. argument of the Epicures.
Last of all, touching that which the Epicures affirm: how, of the bodies of
things do issue and remain certain Spoils: The same has not any foundation
upon natural reason, or upon any appearance of truth. For, is there any
likelyhoode, or probability, that if the creatures do leave behind them
their after burdens, or other such spoils, bereaved from them, in the places
where they have been: That therefore the bodies (be they dead, or be they
alive) do leave an Image, or impression of themselves, in their absence, after
they are departed from those places? It is most certain, that the bodies of
any creatures, have not any thing in them, which either in their life time, or
after that their substance is perished, can be abstracted or separated from
them. For otherwise, of one body there should be two made: which were a
strange thing, and altogether abhorring from nature. And were not much
different, either from the Fables of the Poets, who of a dead body, made the
abstraction of a shadow, In lib. 4. Eneid. In his Dialogues of the dead, where
he brings in Diogenes and Hercules speaking.
which they called the Image and I doll thereof, (as is affirmed, both by
Sergius, and Lucian, and the Commentator upon Homer) or else from those
fabulous and idle dreams of the Rabbis, and Talmudistes, which had their
Nephes, as says the Author of Zoar. But the truth is, that those creatures
which do use to cast their spoils from them, do leave no other then a thin
sle^der skin, I had. (...).
which being superfluous, is no more remaining or abiding with the body:
Howbeit, that it comes from the body: as appears both by the afterburthens
of all creatures, wherein the young ones being wrapped and enfolded in the
bellies of their dams, yet in coming from thence, do easily and naturally
cast them off) as also by the spoils of the Serpent, or Snake, and by the
skins of the Silke-wormes, and the Caterpillars: the which superfluities, are
drawn and cast off particularly from these beasts or creatures, as a mark to
the one, to wit, the Silke-wormes, and Caterpillars, that they do change from
their former state, and to the other, namely the Serpents, to show the poisons
and ill herbs and seeds, which they have eaten all the Winter, according as
Virgil writes of them. Lib. 2. Eneid. The opinion and Argument of ye Epicures
touching the cause, why me^ do conceive fear at the sight of strange forms
and figures.


These Arguments being thus finished: let us now come to that which the
Epicures affirm to be the cause why any should be touched and attainted with
fear: when they see such Images and figures, which they affirm naturally to
flit and fly up and down. We (say they) are affected and altered, according
to the things which we see, and which are next unto us. As for example; we
perceive (I know not) what salt humor being near the Sea: and in touching of
Worm wood, and of Rue, we find a kind of bitterness: and when we are near
a Smith, we feel our teeth to gnash, and to be set on edge, at the noise of
his File, or Saw, wherewith he works. So likewise, when these Images and
figures do present themselves unto us, we cannot possibly abide nor suffer
them: but we find our selves altered and changed in our understanding:
howbeit some more then other some. For like as there be certain seeds within
the eyes of Cocks, which shining and shooting into the eyes of the Lions, do
so strike and pierce their eye-liddes, and do inflict upon them such pain
and grief, that they are constrained to fly from them, being not able to
abide or endure the sight of the Cock: So are there some men, who have their
senses so apprehensiue and subtle, that they cannot hold from being afraid
when they see such vain Images and figures before them.

Answer to the argument of Epicures, touching the cause of fear at the sight
of strange Specters.
But hereunto we must give them this answer: that the fear which men have by
the sight of Specters or Spirits, comes in regard that the things are
unaccustomed and admirable to the bodily senses: and not from any secret seeds,
which are contrary to our nature, and much less from any natural passion:
such as that, is that wherewith men are touched, that abide near the Sea, or
those that see Rue or Wormwood, or do hear the noise of a Smithes file or
saw. For if it were of any natural passion that this fear proceeded: then
would not the party terrified, That the fear bred by the sight of Specters,
is because they are supernatural and unusual.
be so confounded and astonished even in the very powers of the soul, as it
is commonly seen that men are, at the sight of Specters or Spirits: but rather
he should be only moved by a certain Antipathie or abomination (as Pomponatius
calls it) and would only abhor and fly from that which he so fears.
Besides, things that are supernatural, do much more touch the senses of man,
then those things do, That Antipathies, and things which are naturally
abhorring to men: are by a secret cause in nature concealed and unknown. In
Problemat. proanno.
which are natural. Neither are they to be compared with such things, as
having a natural cause (howbeit secret) do happen to be seen daily and
ordinarily. Now I say, that the cause of these things (though natural) is
secret: For Alexander Aphrodiseus, speaking of the noise of the File, and how
it sets the teeth on edge, with other things of like nature, says, that
Nature has reserved the reason thereof unto her own secret knowledge, not
being willing toimpart the cause thereof unto men. The like may be affirmed of
the greatest part of those Antipathies, which being concealed from men, yet
cannot come of any secret seeds, that are contrary or enemies to nature (as
the Epicures dote) but are hidden in the secret Magazin or Storehouse of
Nature, which has not revealed or laid the same open unto any person. Who can
tell the reason why the Conciliatour, otherwise called Peter de Albano, did
abhor milk? Why Horace, and Jacques de Furly could not abide garlike? nor
Cardan could away with Eggs. And why that Gentleman of Gascoigne (of whom
Julius Caesar Scaliger speaks) could not abide the sound of a Violl? And of
this latter in Cardan you may read the History. The Physician Scaliger
writes, how he himself knew a Gentleman, his neighbor, which had in him such
an Antipathy at the sound of a Vyoll, that as soon as ever he heard it (were
he in any company, Another Genesis of this quality lived of late in Deuon near
Exces^er, who could not endure the playing on a Bagpipe.
even of the best fort, and that either at table, or elsewhere) he was
constrained to forsake the place, and to go away to make water.

Now it happened, that certain Gentlemen having of along time perceived and
known this strange nature and disposition in him, did one day inuit this Gent.
to dine with them: and having provided and suborned a certain Minstrel of
purpose, they caused him to be kept close till the appointed dinner time, when
being set at Table, they had so placed the Gent. in the midst of them, as it
was not possible for him to get forth. Now as they were in the midst of their
dinner, in came the Fiddler, and began to strike up his Violl near unto the
Gent. he that never heard the sound of that Instrument, but was presently taken
with an extreme desire to piss, grew into an exceeding great pain: for being
not able to get from the table, nor daring to lay open his imperfection to the
whole company; the poor man showed by the often change of his countenance, in
what pitiful case and pain he was. But in the end he was constrained to
yield to the present mischief, and to reveal his imperfection. He that
should undertake to search and find out the cause of this so admirable an
Antipathie, I assure me self he should be as long a time about it, as was
Aristotle in seeking out the cause of the Flowing and Ebbing of the Seas,
(whereof have written Gregory Nazianzon, Iustine Martyr, Eusebius, and others)
and yet he could never learn the certain cause thereof.

But as touching the reason why the Lion does fly from the Cock: It comes
not from any seeds that lie hidden within the eyes of the Cock, and which
from thence, should strike into the eyes, and hurt the sight of the Lion: The
reason why the Lion flies from the Cock.
but it is by a kind of Antipathie, whereof we have formerly spoken. By which
also the Eliphant does fly from the Hog, and the Horse from the Stone
Taraxippe: Or else it is for that the Cock and the Lion, partaking both of
them of the nature of the Sun (but the Cock more then the Lion:) It happens
that the Lion perceiving it, does presently fly from him; as the valiant
Hector is said to fly before Achilles, who was more brave and more warlike
then he. Or else it is because the Cock, being a celestial foul, and the
Lion a terrestrial creature, and of a grosser matter (having the Spirits more
sensitive and brutall then the other) does therefore by nature yield and give
place, to that which is more excellent. And this reason seems unto me in some
sort allowable: the rather, for that those Devils which are of a more material
and terrestrial nature, and be called Devils of the Sun, do fly the voice
of the Cock, as well as the Lion (as Psellus teaches us). And thus, in my
opinion, you see sufficiently how all the Arguments and foolish dreams and
fancies of the Epicures, may be soon answered, and easily dissolved. We will
now therefore consider what the Peripatetickes, both ancient and modern, do
allege to impugn all Apparitions against nature.

CAP. IIII.
Of the Opinions and Arguments of the Peripatetikes, by which they would
impugn the Apparitions of Spirits.
THe first of the Peripatetikes, that I will have to deal withal, The opinion
and arguments of Al. Aphrodiseus, that denied the essence of Spirits.
shall be Alexander Aphrodiseus, who contrary to the opinion of all others,
even of his own Sect that went before him, does altogether and absolutely deny
the essence and being of Spirits: therein contradicting even Aristotle
himself, the Prince of that Sect: to whom also he endeavored to ascribe that
error of his, by interpreting him after his own fancy, in those places where
he writes of Devils and Spirits: as amongst others, in that of the
Metaphisikes, where he says; That the Earth, Li. 4. Metaphi.
the Fire, and the Water, are Substances: as also all those bodies that come
and are engendered of them: as the Devils, and all living creatures and their
parties. This place of Aristotle, is the most clear and manifest that may be:
And yet nevertheless Alexander Aphrodiseus expounding it, says; That either
Aristotle did follow the common opinion of the vulgar sort, who falsely and
erroneously maintained the being of Spirits and Devils: or did understand here
by Devils, the Divine bodies, and the Stars. But both the one and the other
Interpretation is of no value. For first Aristotle speaking of the first
principles, Answer to the argument of A. Aphiodiseus
and of the being of each kind of Substance, did entend to verify and
affirm the whole by demonstrations and reasons, even from nature it self. And
it is not credible, that he would strengthen and confirm some of them by true
and infallible Axioms of nature, as The Fire, the Water, the Earth, and other
living creatures: and that other some of them he should ground and maintain
upon the common opinion: as namely, The being of Devils and Spirits. Howbeit
he was deceived in saying that they were engendered of the Elements. But this
is no place to reprehend him for that opinion. Again who told Aphrodiseus,
that Aristotle by Devils should understand the Stars, or the divine bodies?
Is not this to belie the Author who me he interprets, in making him to say
that which he never meant? For if Aristotle did understand the Stars, by the
word Devils, then must it needs follow by his speech, that the Stars should
be engendered of the Elements: But the Stars in the Firmament above, cannot
be engendered of the Elements beneath: either therefore must Aristotle be
deceived, or (which is more likely) he meant not the stars (as Aphrodiseus
would make us believe): but by the word Demones, he understood simply and
plainly the Devils.

But come we to Auerrois, Of the opinion of Auerrois the Peripatetike,
touching Spirits.
who being as notorious an Atheist as any of them: yet was a little more
scrupulous in the expounding of Aristotle, then was Aphrodiseus: For though he
believed no more then the former, that there were any Spirits: yet when he
came to explane that place of Aristotle, he thought it his best part, to be
altogether silent, because he would not bewray his ignorance, by saying nothing
that should be repugnant to the Doctrine of his Author, whom he interpreted.
And yet for all that, how did he interpret (or rather pervert) the word (...),
which is in the Text of Aristotle? That which all the Ancients took and
interpreted for spirits, he turned and termed Idols: whereas it is to be seen
in Homer, that (...)signifies Spirits, and a Specter. But the truth is, he was
nor, ignorant of Aristotle his meaning, which ought to have made him ashamed,
and did indeed secretly reprove him, as one that was a bad obseruer of his
own Religion: for by profession he was a Mahumetist, and the Mahometistes do
confess and believe that there are both Devils and Spirits. The same
Auerrois, to rid himselse altogether from all arguments that might be made
against him, touching the Apparition of spirits: forasmuch as he knew well,
that few doubted of their essence and being, and that many testimonies of men
worthy of credit, did acknowledge no less, he would not directly deny them,
knowing full well that he should fall into a most gross error in Philosophy,
which does always presume, that after the question (...): That a thing is: It
necessarily follows to be enquired (...); What it is: and in vain should
any one demand what a Specter is, if it be not first presupposed that there
are Specters. He confessed therefore that Specters do appear: but he denied
that they were a Substance: and said; Auerrois did confess the Apparition of
Spirits, but denied them to be Substances.
That a Specter was only a Phantosme imagined in the mind, and thence carried
to the outward Senses, by the great contemplation of men that were
Melancholic, and given to Speculation: whose understanding he affirmed to be
sound and entire: but only the operation thereof was wounded and offended for
a season.

But it shall not be amiss to set down somewhat at large, that which he
says touching this matter. The Argument of Auerrois, to prove that Specters
are not a Substancer, but an imagined phant^^me.
When the mind (says he) which is always attending on the Imagination)
does receive in imagining any forms of devils or dead men, either in sound or
in quality, in odor, or in touching. And that this Imagination is transferred
unto the Sense, correspondent to his proper action: (as the odours do refer
themselves to the particular Instrument of smelling: and that which is heard,
to the Ears; and the Specters, to the Eyes:) then shall any man think that he
sees, hears, or smells something, without that any object does truly
present it self to the sight, to the hearing or smelling. And as touching the
sense of seeing, although it be so, that the vision be no other thing then a
perceiving of some shape which is made within the lively crystal of the eyes;
which we call the Ball or Apple of the eye. Certainly whether it be so, that
some object does present it self to the sight, or not, but is only imagined,
yet it appears, that the party does perfectly and assuredly see something.
And so likewise even in wakening, it happens that some see Devils and dead
men: and sometimes they suppose that they hear the voice of them who^ they
once knew: and that they smell certain sents and perfumes: yea, more then
that, that many times they do feel and touch such things, as appears by
those which are troubled with the Inoubae and Succubae, or the Nightmare. How
beit these imagined forms are more seldom and rarely seen, then they are
either heard, smelt, or touched, because that in all the other senses, save in
the sight only, it is not needful to observe any more then one only
difference. And therefore one only Spirit transferred unto the sense, together
with the thing that is imagined, will very easily represent the same. But to
the eyes there are many differences necessary, as the greatness, the form, the
color: and therefore it must be of necessity, that many Spirits be
transferred thereunto. Besides those Sinews that appertain to the eyes,
nature has made them hollow: And they only of all the other senses are so,
because they have need of many spirits in their operations. And it happens,
that we are sooner wearied in looking and beholding atte^tiuely upon any
thing, then we are in the using and exercising of any other of the bodily
senses whatsoever.

Thus you see the very words and reasons which Auerrois uses, Answer to the
Argument of Auerrois.
in confirmation of his opinion: To the which it is easy to answer, by
saying, that the great Imagination of men, being bent and set upon any thing by
earnest speculation, may well alter and hurt a little the operation and force
of the mind and understanding. But that the same can make or cause a man to
see any Specters of a moving and a living nature: and (more then so) to touch,
to hear, or to smell any thing of a vain and phantasmaticall nature, unless
the same happen by the operation of the Devil, and that also very
extraordinarily: This shall not Auerrois make me to believe. For it was never
yet seen, heard, nor approved, that such a thing could befall in the course of
nature, except it were only to such men, as had their senses so decayed and
perished, and their imaginatiue powers so weakened and corrupted, as the
understanding did thereby rest not only hindered in his operation, but
altogether dulled and darkened. In Libro. de Somno and Vigilia.
And well says Aristotle, that it must of necessity be a great and strange
passion, when in waking the sense is so perverted, that it suffers it self
to be guided and moved by the same: Nay, let it be, that this melancholy
(where of Auerrois speaks) be not a passion, but a very natural and sound
imagination (whereunto they which be of a melancholic humor, and the wise
Philosophers are subject): who (as Aristophanes in one of his Comedies writes
of them) do scale or clime the heavens, and do fly above the Sun by their
lively contemplation: yet nevertheless for all that, they do not any thing the
sooner either see, or hear, smell, or touch, any Specters: Howsoever sometimes
they may have their minds so subject to the Imagination, that they remain as
men astonished and immovable. But it is not necessary, that all whatsoever
one imagines by the senses, should incontinently fall into them sensibly. And
there is a very great difference in the Imagination which is internal, and the
Action of the senses which are external. And yet I will easily agree to that
saying of Aristotle: That naturally, De Somno et Vigilia.
even in the sou^dest men, when they sleep, the senses do seem to move
themselves by a local motion of the humors, and of the blood that descends
even to the Organs, which are sensitive and apprehensiue: in such sort, that
being wakened, they think they see those very forms and Images which they
dreamed of. And this happens often to young persons, who of a sudden are so
frighted, that they think they see many vain Images and figures, that for
very fear they hide themselves under the couerings of their beds. But such
fears do not last nor continue long, but as soon as the party is thoroughly
and well wakened, they do vanish away from the fantasy, which had before
apprehended and received them vainly and falsely. The opinion and reasons of
Cassius the Epicure, touching Spirits and Specters, that they are but an
Imagin^tion proceeding of me lancholy, or of the senses de^ceiued.


And this may serve very well to refute that discourse of Cassius the Epicure,
who would needs persuade Brutus his Companion (as Plutareh writes) that the
Specter which he saw with his bodily eyes, not in sleeping, but in waking) was
but a false Imagination. The reasons by which he went about to persuade Brutus
hereunto, were these; Our opinion (quoth he, O Brutus) is, that we do not
endure passiuely, all things that seem so, neither do we in truth and
verity see them, Plu^n Vit. Bru.
but only by a false persuasion of our senses, which are mutable and
deceiuable. Moreover, our Imagination is sharp, prompt, and of a lively
disposition to move our senses, and to make or build any form upon a subject,
which in truth shall be none at all. For the Imagination is like unto wax, and
is very facile and ready to the mind of man, which does feign unto it self al
things, and does vary and compose in it self one and the same thing diversely:
as is evident by the often chaunges of Dreams, which in a very short moment
the fantasy does turn and alter into diverse kinds of forms and shapes. To
be in continual motion, is a thing not abhorring from the nature of the mind
of man: now the motion thereof is but a certain fantasy or a kind of
intelligence. And as touching thy self (O Brutus) thou art of a Melancholic
nature: which is the cause that thy understanding is always diuerted and
lifted up to contemplation. And as concerning the Devils or Spirits, it is
very credible that there are at all, or if there be any, they have not any
humane form, neither have they avoyce, nor any such power as may pierce and
come near unto us. Thus you see what was the opinion of Cassius, touching
Specters, and how in the end of his discourse he sets it down very
doubtfully whether there were any Spirits and Devils, or not. And yet he is
more Religious then are either the Epicures or the Peripatetikes, who deny them
altogether. But as concerning that which he says of the Imagination, and of
the false persuasion of the senses, he declares sufficiently, that he would
not that a man should believe himself: seeing ee will not believe that which
he sees certainly with his eyes: how beit the sight be one of the most
certain senses that a man has, and which of all the others is least deceived.
And hereby shows plainly, that he was of the opinion of the Sceptikes, who
affirmed that the senses were false and deceiuable.

But leaving Cassius and Auerrois, The opinion of Galen touching Specters
let us next come to Galen, who was of another opinion, and different from
them: for he did not refer Specters to the falsitie and deceiuablenes of the
senses and Imagination, or to melancholy, as did Cassius and Auerrois: but
rather to the subtlety of the sight, the smelling, and the hearing: by the
which (he said) that men did persuade themselves of many vain forms and
Images. And to this purpose I have read in Cardan, Lib. 2. contrad. medic.
how in the City of Millan diverse did persuade themselves that on a time they
saw an Angel in the clouds: whereat the Citizens growing to be exceedingly
abashed: there was a certain Civil Lawyer, who showed them that it was not a
true Specter, or Apparition of an Angel, which they saw: but that the same
proceeded from a certain Statue or Image of an Angel, which being set aloft
upon the top of the Steeple of S. Goddard, and giving an impression into the
clouds, did yield a reflection to the eyes of such as had their sight more
sharp and subtle then the rest. The like did I me self see at Toulouse, when
I was there a Student: For me thought I saw in the Air, the Image of Saint
Frauncis, which was there made of lead, and stood fixed upon the top of the
Church of the Franciscanes of Toulouse: whereas in truth it was nothing but a
thick cloud, which made the Image give a reflexe unto my sight. And of this a
man may yield a natural reason, drawn from the Art Optike. And it does
happen very often, that if a man do behold near at hand any Image in a thick
and gross Air, in casting aside his eyes, or turning them awrye of another
side, (yet so as he loose not out of his sight notwithstanding the object of
the Image which he beholds:) he shall see the same to reuerberate and cast
back a representation of it self, as if it were in a mirror or Steel
Glass, and yet not perfectly and exactly, for it will seem as if it were
vanishing away, and departing out of sight: The opinion of Galen disproued.
Nevertheless this comes not, nor is caused by reason of the subtlety of
the sight, but of the thick and gross Air, the which (as we have before at
large declared) is susceptible of any forms opposed against it, making them to
yield a reflection toward us.

But what shall we say touching the opinion of Pomponatius? Of the opinion of
Pomponat.
who affirms, that they which have their sight very subtle, quick, and
lively, do see many times in the Sun and Moon, the Images and Figures of
things that are inferior and below? Certainly, we cannot give any natural
reason for this: but the same which both he and Cardan do allege touching
the blood of a Goat, and of two Steel Glasses opposed together against the
brightness of the Sun, or of the Moon, which in my conceit is done only by
Negromancie and Art Magic: And yet it does serve as a proof rather to
confirm, then to disprove the Apparition of Specters. And to show that the
same is but a kind of magical work, and done by the cooperation of the
Devil: I hold it not amiss to set down that which I have read in the
Interpreter of Aristophanes, touching a kind of mervaile imagined in the Moon;
almost like unto those which Pomponatius speaks of, and which as he says,
are to be seen in the heavens. And this is in that Comedy entitled, Of the
Clouds. Upon that speech of Stepsiades, who being desirous to defraude his
Creditours, demanded counsel of Socrates, and speaks thus unto him;

I will go get some witch of Thessaly,
That can by Magic spell draw from on hie,
The Silver Moon, and in some place can shut her,
As in a shyning plain bosse-bellied mirroer.
In which place, the Interpreter discoursing upon that which is said their of
a great or bosse-bellied mirror (which the Greeks call Catoptron stroggulon,
he sets down this report following. Pithagoras (quoth he) that most
famous and learned Philosopher did write with man's blood upon a mirror or
Steele-glasse (which was made with a great bosse or compass belly) certain
words which himself thought good. And afterward) setting and opposing the
face of the Glass, and the letters therein written, against the face of the
Moon which was then in the full, and he standing behind the Glass, and not
looking into it, did see the same letters written in the Moon. Now I leave it
to the consideration of Pomponatius, and his sect, whether that this mirror of
Pithagoras, and the letters therein written with man's blood, were not like unto
their Goats blood, and the two mirrours whereof wespake before: both which no
doubt came by the Art of the Devil, and no otherwise. And as touching
Pithagoras, he was the greatest Magician that was in his time: and that he had
very great familiarity, and near acquaintance with the Devil, we need no
other witnesses then those false miracles and impostures which are recorded of
him, and are worthy and befitting such a one as he was.

The common opinion of the Peripatetiques touching specters. That they proceed
from the Celestial influences.
Of that Argument of Pomponatius, touching the subtlety of the sense piercing
even to the celestial bodies, arises another opinion commonly held by the
Peripatetiques: who do affirm, that all whatsoever is said and reported of
Specters, and of their apparition, does altogether proceed from the virtue of
the celestial bodies and influences, or some other things natural In
confirmation whereof, they thus argue. Every body is apt to receyve the
Celestial influence: because there is not any body so thick and massive, The
first argument of the peripatetiques for proof of their opinion.
which has not some pores and perspicuities (if I may so speak) by the which
it receyveth the celestial light, and by the same, the virtues also of the
Heavens, which being clear and lightsome do work upon it: now it is most
certain (say they) That the Specters are celestial virtues, and therefore the
bodies of men may receive them. And to prove that the Specters are celestial
influences, Lib. 3. de Ci. Dei.
they bring the authority of Porphirius who (as writes Saint Augustine)
maintained, that by the means of certain herbs, stones, minerals, creatures,
voices, soundes, figures and Characters, which might be used in observing the
conversion of the Heavens, and the motion of the Planets: One might produce in
nature many things strange and mavelous, which might be referred to the
puissaunce of these Stars, under the which a man had enterprised and begun
his work. And thereof they conclude, that the Specters which are said to
appear and present themselves to Magitians, do come and proceed only of the
secret causes of the Stars, and of the Revolutions; and the Magicians do
observe, when they will make and produce any thing that is strange and
admirable.

Answer to their first argument.
But all this is soon and easily overthrown: for that there are seen many
sorts of operations, both of Angels and Devils, which cannot in any wise
proceed of natural causes, according as says Thomas Aquinas. And as touching
minerals, herbs, Caracters, Rings, and such like drugges and toys, In
Questione An Demones habeant corpora naturaliter sibi 0 vnita. Li. 1.
Perplexorum cap. 72. Alber. Magn. lib. 2. Mineralium trac. 3. ca. 1. and 3.
which are said to have so much power and puissance to work miracles: Rabbi
Moses Egyptian mocketh and scoffeth at them that believe it: and calls them
deceyvers and liars that go about to persuade the simple and credulous people
to believe such fooleries. And it had been well done of Albertus Magnus if he
had held his tongue, and been silent, when he wrote of the confection of
those Rings and Caracters which he referred to the stars. But that such
kind of Rings and Caracters are merely superstitious and Diabolical: And
that the Devil does sometime enter into them, and enclose hmselfe within them:
I will cite no other prooves unto you, then Andreas, and Pamphilus, two
Physicians, Lib. 6. Desimplicibus medecin.
and the Horoscopes or casters and calculators of Nativities, and such like
Starregazers, all which do gather their herbs at a certain set hour:
observing very curiously both the course of the stars, and the very hour
wherein the Devil has chiefest power and command over the herbs, which they
preserve and keep. And the same Andreas and Phamphilus did write certain
Books, which (as Galen writes) they entitled, (...): That is to say: The
charms and changes of herbs consecrated to the Devils. And more then that:
Pamphilus does teach and set down what ceremonies, words, and enchantments
ought to be used in pulling and gathering of the herbs and roots: to the
intent (says he) That the Devil who has rule and command over the herbs
that are gathered, may not do any hurt or annoyance to them that gather them.
You may see therefore, how that such superstitions ought not to be referred to
the celestial virtues or influences, but unto the power of the Devil, which
works upon them supernaturally, to deceive and seduce those that are given
to be so superstitious. The second argument of the Peripatetiques.


The Peripatetiques do yet insist further upon the Puissance of the Heavens:
And they say; That every natural Agent working upon diverse objects, does
continually produce diverse Actions: as if wax, mortar, and wood be put near
to the fire, the wax will melt, the mortar will grow harder, and the wood will
either burn, or bend: And yet notwithstanding all these operations have a
certain similitude from the part of the Agent: for if one being a far off do
see the wax to melt, he may judge that there is some fire ne^re: the which
upon occasion, can as well harden the mortar, and burn the wood likewise.
Wherefore the heaven being a natural Agent, and having many things near
adjoining unto it: It must needs be, that it must work many effects: Of the
which, the one is particularly the certain sign of the other; albeit many of
them do never take effect, nor can be known what they be. And forasmuch as of
great events, it must needs be that the causes be strong and forcible, so
contrariwise, where the causes are powerful and puissant, the effects also must
of necessity be admirable; because in nature the causes are ever answerable to
the effects. It is therefore no mervaile if the heaven do produce Specters, and
such like micaculous effects, it having such power over the inferior Bodies.

Answer to their second Argument.
But this argument may be soon answered in two words: That the influence of
the heavens does work by the will of God, many things that are strange and
admirable; and yet such nevertheless as are natural: But that the heavens
have the power to work above nature, and so to produce Specters, that can in
no wise be granted nor admitted; because Nature it self is contrary thereunto:
the which ought first to be regarded and considered as the cause, before we
can admit or allow of her effects. Thus you see how easily all the reasons of
the Peripatetiques are refuted and overthrown, how strong soever they seem to
be made, to prove such power in the heavens. Let us now therefore see what
they allege to deny the essence and being of Devils. The first Argument of
the peripatetikes, to pro, that there are no devils.


Their first argument is, that the Art Magike, is nothing but merely vain and
false. But the intention of Magike, is held to be principally of and by the
Devils. Therefore the Devils are not at all, but are a vain and false thing.

To this argument I answer: That true it is that Magike is a vain Science and
prohibited; Answer to their first Argnment.
that the effects thereof are full of abuse and scandalous. But that the Art
Magic is nothing, and that the devils can not work by it, by the means of
Magicians and Sorcerers, is no consequent.

Their second Argument.
Their second argument is, that if there be devils, then they have a soul and
members necessary to execute and perform the functions of the soul, as we
see in living creatures. And to the end that such things should consist and be,
the devils must of necessity have a more solid and firm element then the
air, to wit, the water or the earth, where it behooveth them to abide and
remain.

Answer to their second Argument.
But this argument is of no sorce: for I deny that it is necessary the devils
should have a body; and admit they do make a show of one when they appear
unto us: yet that follows not that they have such a one of their own nature;
but they do fit and accommodate themselves to our senses, taking unto them a
body of an ayrie subtle and thin substance.

Their third Argument.
Their third argument is, that if it be granted there be Divelles, it is
principally in respect of Specters: But the Specters are vain, or come, for
the most part, of the secret causes of the Heavens, or of Nature: and
therefore all that which is said of devils is merely false and untrue.

Answer to their third Argument.
To this argument we need not make any answer, seeing we have before
sufficiently satisfied them in this point.

Their fourth Argument is, that it is not probable there should be any devils
in that spacious emiptie circuit of the air, or in the earth: because, Their
fourth Argument.
if they be in so great a number as it is affirmed that they are, they might be
then as thick, and in as great a multitude, as the birds of the air: and so
every place would be full of Specters, spirits, devils: which would yield
diverse fears and terrors unto men. But that is not so: For hardly shall a man
see in the space of twenty years, that in any Province any Specters do appear
and present themselves: and when they do at any time show themselves, it may be
attributed unto Nature. Again they add this reason, that if there be devils,
they should be either friends or enemies unto men: if enemies, then some should
be hurt and offended by them, especially such as make a mock and jest at them
and their essence: as namely the Epicures, the Sadduces, and the
Peripatetiques: But we never heard that any of all these (for contemning of
them) have bin any thing the more vexed or tormented. And in very deed they
are of so thin and subtle a substance, as they can not huit them. And yet
this is nothing to the purpose. For what should hinder them but that they may
cast and hurl about tiles and brickes, and so hurt men down from aloft, or
from the tops of mountains: or that they should not, like a Gad-bee or
Horse-fly light upon the tails of men's horses, and so to cause them to be cast
off, and to tumble to the ground, seeing we do believe that they have the power
even to tempt men in their souls?

Answer to their fourth argument.
But this Argument is ridiculous, and it is needless to make answer there
unto: save that a man may pay the Peripatetiques with the same money, in telling
them: That the devils are in a region of the air, separated from this of ours.
from whence they cannot issue forth, either to harm us, or to appear unto us:
no more then an infinite number of Sea Monsters, the which do but very seldom
show them selves unto us. And if peradventure they do sometimes hurt and annoy
us: it is no otherwise then as we do endomage the fishes of the sea, which are
in another Element then this that we are in. For as among a thousand sorts of
fishes that swim in the plains of the Ocean, we can take but some few of
them: so may the Devils well work harm and mischief unto some men, but not
unto all. Thus I say, might a man answer them in natural reason: But to
answer them according to divinity, (at least if they do admit of divinity)
It is sufficiently known that the Devils have no further power to hurt or
annoy men, then God does permit and suffer them.

Their fifth argument.
Their fifth and last Argument does in some sort depend of that which went
before, and is thus. If there be Devils, either they are inferior or equal
unto the Angels: If they be inferior, then should they be both mortal, and
immortal together, as participating of the nature angelical (to whom they are
inferior) and of humane nature also, (to whom they are superior) by reason
they are placed and put in the air between men and Angels. But it is not to
be believed that the spirits should be both mortal and immortal together.
Again, if they be equal unto the Angels; what should let and hinder them
that they should not destroy mankind, they being invisible, and not being under
the command and government of the Angels?

Answer to their fifth argument.
Hereunto I answer, That the Angels and Devils are indeed equal as touching
their spiritual nature, but in regard of grace and puissance, there is great
difference between them. For the Devils are perpetually and for ever exiled
and banished from heaven, by reason of their transgression: and they are
subject to the scourge and vengeance of God, as themselves have sometimes
confessed by their Oracles. And as touching their power and puissaunce, albeit
the same be very great: and that no earthly puissance may be compared to that
Leviathan, (as is written in the book of Job:) yet so it is, that the Angels
do rule and bridle them, and do restrain and hinder them from exercising
their rage and fury, as being their superiors, and having power of rule and
command over them.

Derarieta. r^r. The opinion and reason of Cardan, ton^^ing Specters, end
appearing about the sepulchers of the dead.
But to finish this Discourse now in question, to wit, whether there be any
Devils, or not, let us come to examine certain reasons alleged by Jerome
Cardan, by which he assayeth to prove, that those Specters that do usually
appear either about the toombes and sepulchers of the dead, or in certain
Countries of the Occident and Western parts of the world, be no other then
things merely natural.

As concerning those of sepulchers, he says; That naturally a man may see out
of them certain shadows, which by way of impression, do refer and make
show of the visage, the port, and the greatness of those that have been there
buried and enterred in no great depth within the ground: And his words are
these; That the carcases being yet moist and fresh, may send forth of the earth
a kind of shadow which shall represent their shape and likeness. Whereunto I
say, that the corpse or bodies which are newly dead, have their pores stopped and
shut up: so as they cannot yield any exhalation from them, but only when they
come to putrefaction: I do not say but that they may cast from them by the
natural conduits a certain putrefied humor. But that cannot make any entire
shadow, much less may a man affirm, that when they are putrified, they can
evaporate any thing which may resemble their form and shape. For from an
entire and whole body, an entyre and whole shadow ought to be made. But the
bodies which are putrified are not entire, but begin to dissolve and to be
reduced into dust or ashes. Yet will i easily agree to that he aledgeth in an
other place, touching the sepulcher of Alexander de Medicis, which is to
beseene at Florence: and that is, that the fat of his corpse had so pierced
clean through his Sepulcher, which was of fair white Marble, that the same
was therewithal wholly spotted and blemished. And there is some more appearance
of reason in this, then to say that the vapor of a dead body, evaporated out
from the same, can express the stature and form of the body. But indeed it
was the custom of Cardan to be opinionative and obstinate, as well in things
natural as supernatural: and he would seem both of the one and the other, to
yield some reason which should many times serve to carry a great show and
appearance, though most commonly they were very simple, and of small strength
and substance.

Opinon of Cardan touching Specters appearing in the vvestern countries of the
world, as Iseland, etc.
And as touching the Occidentall and western Countries, as the Isle of Iseland,
where the inhabitants do usually see their friends and acquaintance after
their decease and burial to appear unto them, to embrace them, and in the
midst of their embracings, after they have spoken and talked unto them, so
dainly to vanish away and be no more seen, He says, That such Specters are
not seen indeed, but only imaginatively, and he gives a reason for it: the
which it shall not be amiss to set down word for word as he has alleged
it, to the intent it may be known upon what foundation he builds his
opinion.

The Isle of Iseland (says he) is full of a kind of pitch, or clay, partaking
of the nature of Sulphur or Brimstone, and the inhabitants thereof live for the
most part of the year upon Apples and roots, and upon bread made with meal of
the bones of fishes, and of pure water: because the Island is so barren that it
bears neither corn nor wine. By reason whereof, the spirits of the people
do become very gross and dull, partly in regard of their manner of living,
and of the air, and partly in respect of the nature of the soil, and by
means of the extreme cold that there exceeds. And thereof it proceeds
that for the thickness of the air, and for the vapors which are engendered by
reason of the cold, many images and forms are seen wandering and straying
here and there: the which the fear, and imagination, and the weakness of the
brain in the inhabitants, does conceive and retain even so long till they
come to fall under the sense of the sight, which suffers it self to be
persuaded, that they are true forms and shapes in very deed. And when the
sight (which is the most sharp and quickest of all the senses) is once
offended and abused; then do those Ilanders think and believe, that they see,
touch, and embrace the Specters and vain Images of such men as are dead, and
were known, unto them in their life time: for that the mind does always
ways persuade it self of things known unto them, and conceyved in their
fantasy. And he adds: But this may be thought very strange, how these
vain visions of spirits should seem in the end, to speak and talk unto
them, and when they are vanishing away from them, to tell the inhabitants that
they go thence into the Mountain Heclae. Nevertheless, we must know thus
much, that this Mountain is like that of Mongibell in Sicilye, which at times
does vomit out flames of fire: which is the cause, that through a long and
inveterated persuasion, the inhabitants of this Isle have been of opinion,
that within the hollow places and Caverns of this Mountain, the souls of the
dead do endure their purgatory: like as many also are persuaded, that the
souls did suffer in Mongibell, which in times past was held to be the Forge
and furnace of Vulcan, and of late has bin callet Aetna, a name which in mine
opinion comes of Athuna; that signifies an Oven.

Thus you see what Cardan says concerning those spirits, that do sometimes
show themselves and appear in Island: whereunto answer may be made: That the
Isle of Thule now called Iseland, Answer to the latter reason of Cardan.
is not so barren and unfruitful as he reports it: neither are the
inhabitants so poor and miserable, as that they do live of nothing but of
meal of fish-bones, in stead of bread. Those that have been in this Isle, do
report no such matter. And as touching the nature of this soil, being full of
a kind of pitch of the nature of Sulphre, or Brimstone: I believe Cardan in
that point: but yet that the bad and corrupt feeding, and nouriture of
unwholesome and gross nutriments, or that this pitch it self can so thicken
the air, and the sensitive spirits in such sort, as a man should imagine
himself to see, touch, and embrace spirits and specters: that is beyond my
knowledge. I make no doubt but that herbs and roots being taken without any
other nutritive substance: and those meats that are of evil digestion to the
stomach, or do carry a strong savor in the mouth, as Onions, Garlike, and
such like things do thicken and corrupt the air, so as it may cause
infection: And thereof comes the Proverb; That after a Famine, comes the
Pestilence. For the poor people not having bread to feed upon, do sustain
and norish themselves with such infectious victuals: And then when the Sun
has heated the air, and being at the height, does shoot and pierce into the
bowels of the earth, (as Homer terms it,) and does make us to feel the
force of her scorching beams and parching heat. Then incontinently does the
Pestilence also begin to grow hot by the infection of the air, which is
before infected by the corrupt feeding of the people. Moreover I know well that
Brimstone and Sulphre do thicken the air; insomuch as the birds sometimes
flying over it, do suddenly fall down dead. Nevertheless (as I have already
said,) I cannot conceive, that by reason of bread and ill feeding, or by virtue
of the soil partaking of sulphre, a man should see any Specters, and those
false and imaginative only: For the land of Iewry (where the like kind of
pitch or sulphre grows in the lake Asphaltites, does not complain of seeing
any Spectes, as the Islanders do. And if such pitch or sulphurous soil,
should cause the generation of Specters, assuredly they would appear and show
themselves more easily in the land of Iewry, then in Island: because in Iewry
the air is more warm and of much more heat then in Iseland, where the winds
do carry a great sway: The which will soon dissipate and scatter all figures
created in a gross and thick air, so as they shall not have any leisure to
form and shape themselves. For there must of necessity be such an air as may
be warm and mild, without any winds, that should cause them to stay and
abide so long, that a man may exactly discern them as Specters. And this is a
thing most clear and manifest, that the winter and the cold are so far from
making the air warm or thick, that they do rather make it clear, pure, and
subtle. Last of all, I will say this more, that if the Specters do proceed in
Iseland, by reason of the air which is perpetually thick and gross there in
that Country. We must conclude also, that the Specters there, should be
perpetual likewise. But the Iselanders do not see any but very seldom, and
that but once only in their whole life time: How then is it possible that the
air should be the cause of their generation?

But let us admit all these reasons of Cardan together with their absurdities,
and let us see what answer he will make to his own objection; in that he
affirms how these Specters do speak and talk unto men, saying; That they go
to the mountain Herlu. Is the pitch or sulpher in that soil the cause
thereof; or is it caused by the thick and gross air, or by the nuriture and
feeding of the inhabitants? Can the sense of hearing be offended and abused as
well as the sight, by means of the air, that it should enter within the
cartilage or gristle of the care, and that it should carry by the empty passage
thereof even into the brain, distinct and plain sounding voices, and yet such
as should notwithstanding be false and imagined? Truly these reasons are far
unworthy and unbeseeming a man any thing (though never so little) seen or
exercised in Philosophy: much more so great a Philosopher and Physician as
Cardan was. Nevertheless I am of the opinion that Cardan did not err in
Philosophy through ignorance, but having a desire continually to appear more
learned, he did ever bend himself to impugn that which he knew the soundest
and best part of men did hold and maintain. And amongst other things he did
ever show a mind and disposition in the greatest part of his books, to call
in doubt and question the apparition of Specters: In the which notwithstanding
he does mervelously repugne and contrary himself, not knowing if there were
any specters, or if there were none; sometimes alleging the authority of
Psellus, and sometimes that of Facius Cardanus, his own father: (Both which
did constantly maintain the Specters and Apparitions of devils, and
especially Facius Cardanus, who had not only one spirit and familiar, but
seven, all at one time, which did reveal unto him and acquaint him plainly
with many strange and goodly mervailes:) and sometimes affirming that all
whatsoever was spoken and reported of the Apparition of spirits and Specters,
was nothing else but ieasts, tales, and leasings. But this shall suffice for
the discussing of Cardan, his reasons and opinions. Let us now therefore
proceed to refute the opinion of those which affirm: that the Angels and
devils cannot take upon them a body like unto this of ours.

CHAP. V.
Of the Arguments of those which deny that the Angels and Devils can take
unto them a Body.
THey which do deny that the Angels and devils can take unto them a body, do
not aim at the mark to deny their essence, (as do the Saduces:) but they do
it only to disprove and impugn their Apparition. For it is a good consequent;
If the Angels and devils take not upon them any body, then can they not
appear: And if one should reply unto them and say; That in our spirit and
understanding the Angels and devils may give some show and token of their
presence. To this they have their exception ready: That things spiritual and
intelligible, and all sorts of intelligences, do represent themselves by
things that are sensible. We will see therefore by what reasons they endeavor
to prove, First objection to prove that Angels and devils cannot take unto
them a body.
that an Angel or a devil cannot take a body unto them?

No body (say they,) can be united to an incorporall substance, but only that
it may have an essence and a motion by the means of that substance. But the
Angels and devils cannot have a body united in regard of any essence: for in
so doing we must conclude, that their bodies should be naturally united unto
them, which is altogether untrue: and therefore it remains that they cannot
be united unto a body, but only in regard of the motion: which is a reason of
no sufficiency for the approving of their opinion. For thereof would follow an
absurdity in regard of the Angels: to wit, That they might take all those
bodies that are moved by them, which is a very great and gross error. For
the Angel did move the tongue of Balaams Ass: and yet he entered not in his
tongue. And therefore it cannot be said that an Angel, or a Devil, can take a
body unto them.

Answer to the first Argument, or objection.
To this Argument I answer, That true it is, that an Angel and a Devil,
cannot (to speak properly) take unto them every body that is moved: For to
take a body signifies to adhere unto the body. Now the Angels and the Devils
do take unto them a body, not to unite it to their nature, and to incorporate
it together with their essence: as he that takes any kind of meat for
sustenance: much less to unite the same to their person: as the son of God
took upon him the humane nature: But they do it only, that they may visibly
represent themselves unto the sight of men. And in this sort the Angels and
Devils are said to take a body, such as is apt and fit for their apparition,
Cap. 15. calest. Hierachiae.
as appears by the authority of Denis Ariopagyte, who writes, that by the
corporal forms the properties of Angels are known and discerned.

The second Argument.
Again they say, That if the Angels and Devils do take a body, it is not for
any necessity that they have, but only to instruct and exhort us to live
well, as do the Angels; or to deceive and destroy us, as do the Devils. Now
both to the one and the other, the imaginary vision, or the tentation is
sufficient: and therefore it seems, that it is not needful they should take
veto them any body.

Answer to the second Argument.
I answer: that not only the imaginary vision of Angels is necessary for our
instruction, but that also which is corporal and bodily, as we shall show
anon, when we entreat of the Apparition of Angels. And as concerning the
Devils, God does permit them both visibly and invisibly to tempt us, some to
their salvation, and some to their damnation.

Moreover they thus argue: The third Argument. Li. 3. ca. 11. and 12.
That God appeared unto the Patriarchs, (as is to be seen in the old
Testament, and the good Angels likewise,) as Saint Augustine proves in his
Books of the Trimitie. Now we may not say, that God took upon him any body,
except only in that mystery of his Incarnation. And therefore it is needless
to affirm, that the Angels which appear unto men, may take upon them a body.

Answer to their third Argument.
I answer, (as does Saint Augustine) who says: That all the apparitions which
were in the old Testament, were made by the ministry of Angels, who formed
and shaped unto themselves certain shapes and figures imaginary and
corporal, by which they might reduce and draw unto God, the soul and spirit
of him that saw them: as it is possible; that by figures which are sensible,
men may be drawn and lifted up in spirit and contemplation unto God. And
therefore we may well say, that the Angels did take unto them a body, when
they appeared in such apparitions. But now God is said to have appeared;
because God was the butte and mark, whereunto by vision of those bodies, the
Angels did endeavor and seek to lift up unto God the souls of men. And this
is the cause that the Scripture says, That in these Apparitions sometimes God
appeared, and sometimes the Angels.

Their fourth Argument.
Furthermore, they make this objection: Like as it is agreeing naturally to the
soul to be united to the body: so, not to be united unto a body, is proper
and natural unto the Angels and Devils. Now the soul cannot be separated
from the body when it will: Therefore the Angels and Devils also cannot take
unto them a body when they will.

For answer whereof, I confess that every thing borne and engendered has not
any power over his being: Answer to their fourth Argument.
for all the power of any thing flows from the essence thereof, or
presupposes an essence: And because the soul by reason of her being, is
united unto the body, as the form thereof: it is not in her puissance to
deliver herself from the union of the body. And so in like manner it is not in
the power of any Angel or devil to unite themselves to any body as the form
thereof: but they may well take a body whereof they may be the mooving cause,
and (if a man may so speak,) as the figure of the figure.

Their fist Argument.
They affirm moreover, that between the body assumed, (if I may use this
word,) and the party assuming, there ought to be some proportion and
similitude: But between an Angel or devil, and a body, there is not any
proportion; for both the one and the other are of diverse kinds, and by
consequent both of them are incompatible together.

Answer to their fist Argument.
To this I answer, That if the proportion be taken according to the quantity,
greatness, and measure, there is no proportion between the Angels or devils,
and a body; because their greatness is not of one and the same kind, nor of
one and the same consideration. Notwithstanding nothing can let but that there
may be a certain habitude of an Angel to a body: as of a thing that mooveth
to the motion, and of a thing figured to the figure, the which may be termed a
proportion.

The sixth Argument.
Another Argument they make which is this: No substance finite (whatsoever it
be) can have many operations together: An Angel is a substance finite; and
therefore it cannot both minister unto us, and take to it self a body together.

Answer to their fixed Argument.
But this is easily dissolved, for I say, that these two operations: To take a
body, and to serve in their ministry are ordained mutually to the Angels:
And therefore nothing hinders them, but that the Angels may use both of them
at once, Their seventh Argument.
and together.

Again they infer, that if Angels and devils do take a body, either it is
a Celestial Body, or some other having the nature of some of the four
Elements. Now the Angels cannot take a Celestial Body, for that the Body of
the heaven cannot devide it self, nor cannot make any abstraction from it
self: much less can the devils have that power, seeing the Angels have it
not. Besides, they cannot take unto them a body of Fire, for then they should
consume and burn the body, near to which they do approach: much less can
they take a body of the Air, for that is not figurable: neither can they take
any body that is a moveable Element, and retains no form; nor yet by the
same mean, can they have a Terrestrial body; for we see it written how the
Angels do very soon and suddenly vanish away out of sight, as it appeared by
that angel which came to Tobias. And the devils also when they show themselves
in any aparition, can in a moment withdraw themselves from the sight of men.
And therefore being unable and unapt to take upon them any body, either
Elementarie or Celestial: It must needs follow that they appear not at all.

Answer to their seventh Argument.
To this I answer, That the Angels and devils may take a body of any Element
whatsoever, and which themselves will; yea, and of many Elements mixed together.
Nevertheless it is most likely to be true, and the common opinion is; What
kind of body Angels and devils take unto them when they appear.
that they do soonest of all take unto them a body of the air, by thickning
the same and forming it of vapors, that mount and arise from the earth, and in
turning and mooving it at their pleasure, as the wind mooveth the clouds,
being able to make the same to disappeare and vanish away again whenever
they will, by reason that it is nothing but a vapor.

Their eight Argument.
But yet this will not satisfy them, but they go further saying; That every
assumption of a body, is limited and bounded with some Union: But of an Angel
and of a body, there cannot be made any of those Three means of unity, of
which Aristotle speaks: For they cannot be made one by Continuation, by
Inseparabilitie, Lib. 1. Phisico.
nor by Reason.

To this a man may answer as before, That there is not any union in the
assumption of a body by an Angel. For if there were a union, then in truth that
which Aristotle speaks, should be requisite between the Angel and the body
which it assumeth. But there is not between them any union, save only that
which is of a thing mooving to the thing moved, as we have before affirmed.

Again, the good Angels (say they) in appearing unto us, either do take True
Figures visible and palpable, or such as are altogether False. Their ninth
Argument.
If they have such as be True, it should then follow, that if they appear in a
humane body, then they do assume a True humane body: But this is impossible,
unless we should say; That an Angel may enter into the body of a man, which
is a thing not convenient nor agreeable unto the Angelical Nature. And if they
have False Figures, this would be much more unfitting and unbeseeming them, for
that all feyning and dissembling, or any kind of fiction is very unseemly in
the Angels of Truth. And therefore in what sort and fashion it be, the
Angels cannot take any Body upon them.

Answer to their ninth Argument.
To this objection I answer, That the bodies which the Angels do take, have
True and unfeigned forms so far forth, as they may be seen and perceived by
the senses, be it in their color or their Figure, but not according to the
nature of their kind: For that cannot become sensible but by accident. That
therefore is no cause why a man should say, that there is any fiction and
feyning in the Angels: for they do not oppose and set before our eyes humane
shapes and forms, because thereby they would be thought and esteemed to be
men: but to the end that by their humane properties, we should know the virtues
of the Angels. And like as Metaphorras speeches are not therefore any whit the
sooner to be reputed false, in which by the similitude of things, other
significations are comprehended: So the figures and forms of Angels are not
false, because they are taken and assumed to the similitude and semblance of
men.

More then so (they reply) that the Angels and devils by the virtue of their
Nature, Their tenth Argument.
cannot work or create any effects within humane bodies, save only by the
means of their natural virtues. But their natural virtues cannot be in
things corporal to form any Figure of a humane body, but only by the usual
and determined mean of generation, to wit, by the seed naturally ordained to
that effect: in which sort the Angels and devils cannot take a body upon
them. And the same reason and consideration is there of other figures, of
carthly bodies also which they take unto them.

But hereunto this answer may be made them, That albeit the natural virtues
of a body, Answer to their tenth Argument.
do not suffice to produce a true shape of a humane body, but only by the due
and ordinary mean of generation: Nevertheless so it is, that the Angels and
devils are capable to clothe themselves, and to put on a certain similitude
of humane body, as touching the color and figure, and other such exterior
Accidents, and that especially at such a time, as when it may suffice them by a
local motion, to moove any such bodies; by means whereof, both the vapors are
thickened, and again purefied and made thin; as also the clouds are diversely
painted and figured.

But they object again, that this is not sufficient: But (they say) that it
behooveth the cause, A reply to the former answer.
mooving to infuse some virtue into the body moved, but cannot infuse any
virtue, except it touch it. And if it be so that the Angels have not any
touching nor feeling with the body, it seems that then they cannot moove it.
And therefore it must needs be, that they cannot take upon them any body.

Answer to the reply.
But it may be said, that the Angels by their commandment only, may moove the
body with a motion local, which they give unto it in touching of it, not with
a corporal kind of touching, but a spiritual. A surreply to the former
answer.


Against this solution, they dispute further saying; It behooves the mover, and
the thing moved, to be connexed and united together, as appears by Aristotle.
But in saying that an Angel does command any thing of his own will, Li. 7.
Phisee.
it is to be presupposed that then he is not together with the body, which
is said to be governed by him: and therefore he cannot move the body only by
his commandment.

Hereunto I answer, That the commandment of the Angel does demand an
execution of his virtue and puissance: and therefore it must of necessity be,
that there be some spiritual touching of that body by which it is moved.

The eleventh Argument.
They insist yet further, and say: That the Angels cannot move bodies with any
local motion: and that therefore in vain should the bodies be obedient unto
them, seeing they should still remain immovable. And to prove this they bring
diverse arguments,

8. Phisicorum. Arguments urging that angels cannot move bodies with a local
motion.
Their first Argument is taken from the authority of Aristotle, who says: That
the local motion is the principal, and most perfect of all other motions. Now
the Angels (if it be granted that they take a body) cannot use any lesser or
inferior motions: It follows therefore by a more forcible reason, that they
can much less use any local motion, which is the greatest, and the most
excellent of all others.

Answer to the first reason.
But the answer is easy, and we say: That the Angels moving themselves with a
local motion by the phantasmaticall body which they take, may also cause the
other lasser motions, by using some corporal agents for the producing of those
effects which they purpose: like as the Smith uses fire to soften the iron,
and to reduce it to that which they have an intention to make of it. And as
touching that saying of Aristotle, That the local motion is the chiefest of
all motions: the reason thereof is, because every corporal nature having
life, as apt to move it self locally by the means of the soul, be it either
reasonable or sensitive, which gives life unto it.

The second reason.
Their second Argument is; That the local motion of natural bodies does follow
their forms: But the Angels are not causes of the forms of natural bodies,
and therefore they cannot be a mean to give them any local motion.

Answer to the second reason.
Nevertheless, answer may be made them, That in bodies there be other local
motions then those that do adhere unto the forms: as the flowing and ebbing
of the Sea, do not follow the substantial form of the water, but the
influence of the Moon: with much greater reason therefore may other local
motions (then such as adhere to the forms, follow spiritual and incorporall
substances.

The third reason.
Their third Argument is: That the corporal members do obey to the conception
of the soul in a local motion, in as much as they have from her the beginning
of life: now the bodies which the Angels take unto them, have not from them the
beginning of life: for then it would behoove that the bodies and the Angels
should be united together. And therefore it follows, that the bodies by them
assumed, cannot be obedient to any local motion.

Answer to the third reason.
I answer, That the Angels have their virtue less restrained or hindered then
the souls, insomuch that being separated from all corporal massinesse, they
may nevertheless take an ayrie body, the which they can move locally at their
will and pleasure.

Their twelfth Argument.
Besides all the former Arguments, they reply yet further, and say: That every
corporal motion does not obey to the command of the Angels, as touching the
forming and fashioning thereof: now the figure which the angels take, is as a
kind of form. And therefore by the only commandment of the angels, cannot
any body take any form or figure whatsoever, be it either of man, or of any
other diverse kind comprised under one gender.

To this the answer is, That the figure which the Angels take, Answer to
their twelfth Argument.
is in very truth a form which is made by the abscision and dismembring (as a
man may say) of the thickning of the air, or by the purefaction of it, or by
the similitude and motion which may be taken of the same matter. But there is
a very great difference between the form and Figure that is made so
accidentally, and that which is natural and according to the true substance of
a thing, the which cannot possibly be confounded with this accidental Figure.

Their thirteenth Argument, that devils cannot take a body.
This is not all which they object: for they say further touching the Devils;
That if they do invest themselves with a body, then they ought to be within
the body which they have taken. Now S. Jerome interpreting that place of the
Psalmist; The Lord in his holy Temple: and the Gloss do say, that the devils
do command and rule over images and idols externally, and cannot be in them
internally: and the idols are bodies as every man knows. And therefore it
cannot be said, that the devils can take upon them any bodies.

Answer to their thirteenth Argument.
I answer, That to be in or within a body of some substance, has a double and
two-folde entendment or understanding. In the first sort it is understood
under the T^rmes of Divinity. And in this manner, nothing lets but that the
Devil may be in a body. In the second sort it is meant according To the
essence, as in giving a being to the thing, and in working man in it, which is
proper unto God only: Howbeit that God does not make a part in the essence of
any thing: For God is a substance separated and abstracted solely and only in
it self. And for the further interpretation of Saint Jerome and the Gloss,
which say, That the devil is not in images: we may affirm, that they do
privily and closely reprehend the false opinion of the Paynims and Idolaters,
who made but one thing of the Idol (were it of wood, brass, or stone,) and of
the unclean spirit that remained within it: and by that means would have made
a living substance of that which in it own nature was senseless and without
life, not having either hands to touch withal, or feet to go on, or tongue
to speak with; except such only as the devil did seem to give unto it by
his deceitful illusions.

Their fourteenth Argument.
To make short, they object this argument also: If the Angels and devils do
take to them any body, either they are united unto The whole body, or to some
Part thereof: If they be united only to a Part thereof, then can they not
moove the other part, but only by the means of that part which they do moove.
But this cannot possibly be; for otherwise the body assumed, should have such
parts as should have the Organs determined to the motion, which is proper to
none but living bodies. But if the Angels and devils be United immediately to
the whole body, it behooveth them then also to possess every part of that
body which they have taken to them: and so by that means they should be in
many places, which is proper and appertaining to God only: And therefore the
Angels and devils cannot take any body unto them.

Answer to their fourteenth Argument.
To this argument answer may be made in this manner; That the Angel or devil
so taking any body upon him, is wholly in the whole body which it assumeth, or
else in a part thereof, as the soul is in the body. For albeit he be not the
form of the body which it assumeth, as is the soul; yet so it is, that he is
the moover thereof. Now it behooveth that the moover and the thing moved,
should be together: And it is nothing to the purpose to say, that an Angel or
devil, filling a body whole and entyre of substance, can be in diverse places:
for the whole body assumed by an Angel or devil, is not but in one place
only, albeit the same be admitted to have many members and many parts.

Thus far have I done my best, both to set down and to refute all the
reasons and arguments objected by those who deny that Angels and devils can
assume and take unto them a body: to the intent that from hence forth their
mouths might be stopped, and that they may not esteem as fables the histories
of Specters, and of the Apparitions of spirits.

Of the opinion of the Jewish Rabbis, touching the Apparitions mentioned in
the old Testament.
But before I come to conclude this discourse, I may not forget to tell you how
that many of the Rabbis and Jews which have taken upon them to interpret the
holy Scriptures, have held opinion and been of the belief, that those Angels
which appeared to the Patriarchs and Prophets, did not appear in any body, nor
did assume unto them any body to make themselves visible. And of this opinion
amongst others was Rabbi Moses, one of the most learned Rabbis of the Jews,
who said; That all that which is read and recorded in the old Testament of the
Apparition of Angels, did come by an imaginary vision: that is to say,
sometimes in sleeping, and sometimes in waking. But this position (as Saint
Thomas of Aquin calls it, The: Aquin quest: de Miracalis Arti. 7.
) cannot prevail against the truth of the Scriptures: for by the phrase and
manner of speeches which are usual in the books of the old Testament, it is
easy to know and discern a difference that which is signified and declared to
have Appeared purely and simply to our eyes, from that which is said to be
done by the means of a Prophetical vision. For when it ought to be
vnderstood^, that any Apparition was made by way of vision, there are some
words put down and insert, which do properly appertain to the vision, such
as the Scriptures do intend; as in Ezechiel, Ezechiel ce. 8.
the spirit of the Lord (says he) lifted me up between the heaven, and the
earth, and led me into Jerusalem, by the visions of the Lord. I say therefore,
that when it appears that things are said to be done simply, we ought to
understand them as done simply and truly. Now we read in the old Testament,
that many Apparitions have been made in body: And therefore we ought to grant,
that the Angels do sometimes assume and take unto them a body, in forming such
a body as is sensible and subject to the external and corporal vision, as
well as some kind of shapes do form themselves in our imagination, which do
produce an imaginative vision when we are sleeping. But this shall suffice
touching this matter. Let us come therefore to the Sceptiques, whose manner is
to doubt of all things, and do make a question whether our senses be true or
not.

CHAP. VI.
Of the opinions of the followers of Pirrhon, Sceptiques, and Aporretiques, and
what they allege, to show, that the humane senses and the imaginative power
of man are false.
HAving fully and amply satisfied those that deny the being of Angels and
devils, and the Apparitions of Specters: Now remains to be handled the last
point that we promised to speak of, to wit, Whether that which we do
perceive by our external and outward senses, sound and not corrupted, or, that
which our imaginative faculty apprehends in working, be false and not
considerable. And although this point does not almost deserve to have any place
in this Discourse, by reason that the opinion of all men, has in all ages
condemned such as have held nothing to be true and certain of that which
comes and falls under the senses: Yet, that we may make them to see at this
day the error and incredulity of some mad-headed and braine-sicke
Philosophers of former times, (like unto our Atheists and Libertines at this
day,) I was the more willing to set down thereasons which moved them to
think, That the truth of each thing was hidden from us, and that nothing could
be comprehended, but that which is false and untrue.

But you must understand that the source and first original of this error,
came from Socrates, who said; That he knew not any thing save this one thing
only: The opinion and saying of Socrates.
to wit, that he knew nothing. But therein he was repugnant to himself: for
seeing that he knew some thing, he showed, that he had at the least a certain
science and knowledge of that one thing. And in saying that he knew naught,
but only this, that he knew nothing, he showed; That he had the science and
knowledge of that whereof he was ignorant. Before him Heraclitus had said,
Opinion of Heraclitus.
That the truth was hidden in the bottom of a pit, from whence it never
returned back again, but there remained buried and overwhelmed out of the
knowledge of men. And if we have any knowledge at all, it is not but in a
shadow, and by some other mean then by our senses, or by our imaginative
faculty, both which are easy to be seduced and deceived.

After Heraclitus and Socrates came the first Academye, instituted by Plato,
Opinion of Plato and Xenocrates.
and by Xenocrates his disciple, which held, that the senses erred, but that by
the intelligence the truth might be discovered: like as when we set sail to
the seas in passing along the coast, we suppose that the land, the Isle, and
the haven, do moove and retire away from us, and we think that an Oar is
broken when we see it in the water, howbeit that we do in very deed soon
conceive and understand the contrary; to wit, that it is we our selves that
moove and depart away from the port and the shore; and that the Oar is sound
and whole. But the other Academye went much farther, Opinion of some other
Philosophers of the second Academye.
and maintained, That the intellectual part was also deceived: for if we had
the same, sound and entire, we should not be deceived and abused as we
commonly are. Besides it, denied, that we had any certain science or knowledge
of any thing; and affirmed that both the senses and the opinion, as also the
imagination, were all of them things false and deceitful: and peradventure
they were thereunto moved, by reason of that contrariety which it saw the
Philosophers held amongst themselves, upon the difference of the Opinion, the
Sense, The contrariety of opinions amongst the Philosophers, touching the
difference of imagination, the opinion, the sense, and intelligence.
the Imagination, and the Intelligence. For Plato does confound the Imagination
and Opinion together: And Aristotle did not always join the Imagination with
Opinion, because (said he) The Imagination is as an Impression, and (as it
were) the tracke and foote-step of the Sense, and not a determinate sentence or
resolution of the Opinion and of the Sense. For if you plunge or dippe an oar
into the water, it seems to be broken: and this does the Sense of the Sight
show unto us: And after comes the Imagination, the which by the Opinion that
resists the error of the Sight, is made to vanish and pass away again as
soon. So that we may see, that Aristotle esteemed the Opinion and Intelligence
to be but one thing, which notwithstanding is altogether false and untrue. And
in my conceit the Epicures seem to give a very good resolution upon this
point, in that they confound in one the Opinion, and the Imagination, and
affirm that both the one and the other may be true or false: But, that our
Persevering Opinion (which they call (...):) is not deceived: as when one
approaches near unto a Tower, and beholds it as it is indeed. And surely
Saint Bernard (according to the saying of the Epicures) shows that the
Opinion taken simply in it self, may be false, and makes it greatly to differ
from the Intellect where he writteth in this manner: Multi suam opinionem
Intellectum putaverunt and erraverunt. Et quidem opinio potest putari
intellectus: Intellectus opinio non potest. Lib. 5. de Consideracione.
vnde hoe accidit? Profecto quia haec falli potest, ille non potest. Aut si
falli potuit, intellectus non fuit sed opinio. verus nempe intellectus, certam
habet non modo veritatem, sed and notitiam veritatis. That is to say; many have
deemed that their Opinion was an Intellect, and they were deceived. And in
truth the Opinion may well be called the Intellect, or Understanding: but the
Intellect cannot be termed an Opinion: Whereof comes this? truly the cause
is, for that the Opinion may be deceived, but the Intelligence cannot, or if it
can be deceived, it was not an Intelligence, but an Opinion. For the true
Intellect has in itself, not only a certain truth, but also a knowledge of
the truth. And a little after he defines the Intellect, and the Opinion,
saying; Intellectus est rei cuinsque invisibilis certa and manifesta notitia.
Opinio est quasi pro vero habere aliquid quod falsum esse nescias: That is; the
Intellect, Opinion defined, what it is.
or Understanding, is a certain and manifest knoledge of a thing that is
Invisible: But the Opinion is when a man holds that for true, which he
knows not to be false. This definition of Opinion is agreeable to that which
the Civillians make saying; Aanrsius in responsa prudentum. Theophil: ibid:
Just: de Iur: not. Gent: and civili apud Iustinia.
That the Opinion is a kind of tymorous and doubtful answer, as, I think
that this thing ought to be done, and I think that it ought not to be done.

Now these Differences and Contrarieties of the Philosophers being full of
exceeding great curiosity and subtilty of Arguments and Reasons, have bin the
cause, that not only the Academiques were deceived, but after them also
Pirrhon the Elean Philosopher, who has congested into one, The opinion of
Phirrhon the Philosopher and others, viz. that all things, and particularly
senses, are uncertain and deceived.
and made, as it were, an heap of idle Dreams and Fooleries from all the
Philosophers his predecessors. For with Heraclitus and Democritus he held, that
the truth was hidden from men: and that he knew nothing of those things which
he saw: and that indeed he saw many things which in truth were not. Of the
which opinion also were Xenophanes, Zenon: Eleutes, and Parmenides. Of whom the
former held this herefie, That no man knew any thing perfectly. And the second
said, That all things were indeed nothing, or none at all. And the last
said, That all those things which seemed to be seen, were merely false. So
in like case Pirrhon, whatsoever argument or discourse were urged or made unto
him, his answer always was, That he doubted of it: and by such ambiguous and
uncertain answers he held in suspense all those that argued and disputed
with him. For this cause he was called the Aporrhetique or Sceptique, Phirrhon
called the Aporretique or Sceptick, and why?
because that to every thing which was propounded unto him, he never gave other
answer then this, (...), which is, I doubt of that. And there is in the Greek
Epigrammes a very pleasant Epitaph composed by Julian the apostata touching
Pirrhon, Lib. 3. Epigr.
the which in our language may not unfitly be thus translated.

Ap. O Pirrhon, art thou dead? P. Nay Siste, I doubt of that,
Ap. What? after death still doubt? P. Yea much more,
I now rest doubtful than I did before.
Ap. Poor man: It Is time thou now leave off thy doubting,
And let thy Tomb so ponderous and heavy,
Henceforth make cease all doubtfulnesse within thee.
Lucian also scoffing at him and his folowers, says, That they aid themselves
of their senses, as if they had none at all: in not believing that they do see,
that which they have seen, or to hear that which they have heard, as being
altogether senseless, and not assuring any thing for certain which may come
into the understanding by the senses. Sextus the Philosopher who was one of
this Sect, has written a very large volume, wherein he assayeth to maintain
the opinion of Pirrhon by the authority of many ancient Philosophers and
Poets: and to show by lively demonstrations and arguments, That the sight, the
hearing, the smelling, and other the humane senses are subject to be deceived,
be they never so sound: and that we do neither imagine nor take an opinion of
any thing, but falsely and inconsiderately.

But it is more than time that we do set down with as great brevitie as may
be, what should move Pirrhon and his disciples to be so obstinate to deny all
things though never so manifest, and to impugn the verity of the senses. It
is not without cause that I should touch this point: for it follows with good
reason, That if the Sonse, the Imagination, and the Intellect be false: then
that also which we comprehend by them (as the Specters) must needs be false
and deceitful likewise. The Arguments of the Sceptiques against Specters.
And as touching Specters: Behold what the Sceptiques do allege to refute
them. First they say, That of things incomprehensible no demonstration can be
made, and by consequence no judgment. And as it is most sure and certain that
the Specters are incomprehensible in nature: so is not possible for any man to
give any demonstration or judgment of them. For those things of which
demonstration may be made, have a substance, certain, comprehensible and
assured to be such; which cannot be said of Specters. The which even amongst
the dogmaticall Philosophers (who were most earnest maintainers of that opinion
is certain) were called in doubt: as namely by the Peripatetiques, who of all
other Philosophers being the most dogmaticall and opinionative, did wholly
impugn and deny the being of any Specters.

Answer to the first argument of the Sceptiques.
But to this argument I answer, That albeit the Specters be incomprehensible in
their own nature: yet when they appear unto us, they are comprehensible by
the senses, which do carry them to the Intellect or understanding: and the
same does then give such demonstration and judgment of them, according as is
the subject thereof; and that is, it judges of them supernaturally, as of a
thing supernatural.

The second argument of the Sceptikes. That the senses are uncertain and
deceived in regard of the uncertainty, and variety of the accidents in man,
which being known by the senses do cause in them diverse and different
imaginations and effects.
But (will the Sceptiques now say) The senses can not see or discern any thing
in truth: and how is it then possible, that upon an object falsely conceived, a
man may ground his judgment and maintain the essence thereof; But now let us
see what they allege for the regard of the senses. It is most certain (say
they) that the senses do not comprehend any thing but by th'accidents; Of the
which the essence is uncertain and variable according unto the subjects
wherein they offer themselves to be seen: For we see that in following the
uncertainty of the accidents, there are to be marked and observed diverse
imaginations fantasies and natures in creatures, of which the senses doe'
comprehend and perceive some things either more or less in them: as the Eagle
has her sight more clear then all other birds: and the dog has his
nosthrilles more subtle to smell, and to take the sent of any thing, far more
excellent than any other beast whatsoever. Contrariwise the Owl sees not at
all, but only in the night: and there are many creatures which can smell little
or nothing at all. And this proceeds not of any other thing than of the
accidents, which being diverse and different in creatures, does make their
imaginative powers to be as diverse and different likewise. That this is so, and
that the accidents do present themselves in creatures according to the
diversity of their condition or disposition. It appears even amongst men,
who according as they shall find themselves disposed, so will they always
imagine the things that are present. As those that have a fever, do judge all
things to be hot: and to them that have their tongue or taste distemperd by
means of any fever wherewith they are aggreeved: all meats do seem to be
exceeding bitter: and so is it likewise of all other accidents wherewith men
are touched, and whereof they have an imagination by their senses. Insomuch
that there are found some men who in their sleep walk and go up and down, and
(which is almost incredible) do execute all such actions as they use to do
when they are waking. With such a malady or infirmity were stricken, Theon,
Tithoreus the Stoicke, and the servant of Pericles, of whom we read, That the
one used to walk in his sleep: and the other did usually in his sleep creep
up to the top of the house, as is reported by Diogenes Laertius. Lib. 9. de
vita Philosophorum. Lib. examine is doctrine. Gent.
And Francis Picus of Mirandola writes, that himself knew many in his time to
whom the like had happened. Besides, Aristotle in his book of Auscultations
writes, That in the City of Tarentum, there was a Taverner, which in the day
time did use to sell wine, and in the night would run up and down through
the Town in his sleep, as if he had been mad or frantike, and yet would
so well look to the keeping of the keys of his Tavern or Wine-seller, which
he carried hanging at his girdle, that a many of gallants having plotted and
made a match to get it from him, yet lost their labor, and were disappoynted
of their purpose. Bar^bo^us also tells how there was a certain man in Pisa,
In lib. vt vim D. de Just. and Iur.
which in his sleep would use to arise and arm himself, and to run up and
down wandering through the town, still talking and singing as he went. And
Marian a Doctor of the Civil Law writes that there was a neighbor of his a
young woman, Cap. ad studientium.
that in her sleep would arise out of her bed, and bake her bread sleeping. In
like sort Laudensis writes how he had a companion his fellow student at
Paris, In Clem. 1. de homicid.
an Englishman borne, who without awaking, went in the night not far from the
Church of Saint Benet near the river of Seyne where on a time he slew a little
child, and returned thence into his lodging, and so laid him down again into
his bed. For my own part I have heard from Mesieur Chalvest President at
Tholousa, a man of great learning, how himself had sometimes a servant that
would arise in his sleep, and would answer very directly to any question that
was demanded of him, and after he had clothed himself and put on his
apparel still sleeping, he would not awaken for a quarter of an hour after.
The Philosopher Apuleius writes, Libello de Betonica.
that Betonie is good to cure this malady, and to hinder these walkings by
night. All this I have alleged thus diffusedly, as being still in discourse
of the opinion of the Pirrhonians, who affirm, That the accidents are nothing
of themselves: and that whatsoever does happen to man accidentally, is not to
be considered nor regarded, to the intent they may hereby infer, That the
senses can not comprehend any thing in truth, because the accidents are
uncertain. They add moreover, that by the particular nature of each singular
individual under the species of man is manifestly to be discerned the
incertaintie of the accidents, and of the qualities, yea and in some sort of
the humane senses also. For this they urge Demophon one of the Squires that was
Carver to Alexander the great. How that contrary to the nature of all other
men, he would grow hot and warm in the shadow, and would shake and quiver
for cold in the Sun. And An^ron the Argyve would travel throughout the most
dry and barren sandy places of the des^rts of Libia, without enduring of any
thirstinesse. Others there have been who only by seeing, yea and by smelling
of a Colewort, have fallen in a swound. And Mathiolus does assure us, that he
himself knew a man in whom this was natural. Comment. in Dioscor.
And albeit it be most certain that the Hemlocke be a strong poison, and that
Socrates was poisoned therewith in the City of Athens: yet does Gallen assure
us, that there was an old woman in that same Town, Galenus 3. Simplic. Cen^.
2. cura. 36.
which did feed and live upon the same herb: what flower is more pleasant
and odoriferous then the Rose in the sight of all men? And yet Amatus the
Porting all tells us, how he knew a man who by the only sight of a Rose, Of
this nature was the late L. Heneage
would fall into a swounding. Some there be that do not love flesh, others
cannot away with Fish, some do abhor Cheese: and there be some men to whom
fruit is so hateful, that if they do but see any to eat thereof, they will be
enforced to fall on vomiting. Some again have an excellent quick and sharp
sight in the night, and in the dark, as had Tiberius Caesar, and Cardan, and
they can see but very little or badly in the day. Others there be that will
swallow glass, metal, wool, bricks, and other such like things; and (which
is almost incredible) by the heat of their stomach will be able to digest them.

Answer to the former argument, and sundry examples of the Pirrhoneans,
touching the vari^tie and uncertainty of Accidents known by the senses.
But unto all this that they allege, the answer is soon and e^sily made; that
for one particular a universal ought not to be infringed or destroyed: neither
ought we to judge according to one only particular individual alone, but
according to that which happens most usually and commonly to the nature of
man. For as one only Swallow makes not summer; so upon one only and
particular property or quallitie natural, in any singular individual, we
cannot judge properly of the nature of the Species, or of the whole kind
universally.

This disputation thus finished, touching the Accidents known and discerned by
the Senses: The Pirrhonians do come next to the other part of their argument,
to show how easy the senses are to be deceived. Objections of the Pirrhonians,
to show how easy the senses are to be deceived.
And first of all they bring in the sight as the principal of all the senses,
which nevertheless is the most easy to be deceived. For first, if we will
look unto the Sun, which is the most noble Planet of all those that are
called wandering Planets: it is not esteemed by our sight, to be any more then
one only foot in breadth and length: howbeit that in truth it be ten times
more great then the whole earth. And who would be persuaded that the Sun did
moove, if he knew not the distance of the Orient from the South and the
Occident? Examples to prove that the Sight is deceived, and by how many and
sundry means.
Yea, some there have been, (as Copernicus) who have made a doubt whether the
earth did move or no, and whether the heavens were not fixed and abiding in one
certain place. This then shows evidently, that the sight cannot plainly and
manifestly judge of things; for if the sight could discern the swift motion of
the Heavens, from the weightinesse and vnmoveablenesse of the earth, in vain
were it for the Philosophers to endeavor to b^ing in and allege their reasons
and arguments, and they would sooner be refuted, then they could devise how to
make them good. And what made Aristotle (that great seacher of nature) to give
us so poor and simple a reason of the distance of the fixed stars, but only
the uncertainty of the sight? was that demonstration of his good, whereby he
would show, that the Planets were nearest unto us by comparison of the candle,
the which being near unto us does not sparkle, but being a far off, does
seem to sparkle and twinckle? Do we not commonly see the contrary to happen?
But wherefore by that reason of Aristotle, should not the Planets of Saturn,
of Jupiter, and of Mars, (which are so far distant from us) as well twinckle
as do the stars? It behooveth therefore that we seek out some other reason
thereof, then by the sight. And what makes us to imagine, that there is a
round crown or circle about the Moon, which notwithstanding is nothing else
but a little cloud or mist? Is it not because our eyesight is uncertain and
cannot discern it? Howbeit by the way, to this a man may say according to the
Art Optique: That many right and perpendicular lines coming from diverse parts,
as well from the eye on the one side, as from the beams of the sun on the
other side, (which is round and circuler) if they do come to encounter together
and fall equally upon one and the same point: This point must needs be the
center of a circle. And therefore for the same reason, if any thing be beheld
and contemplated perpendicularly (as the crown or circle of the Moon,) it is
not to be thought any thing strange if the same seem to be round, although it
be nothing so; neither ought any man therefore to say, that the sight is
deceived. The Pirrhonians do further allege, that our sight is deceived,
when we think that an oar is broken in the water: when in ryding we suppose
that the hills and mountains do move: when a shrub, or the trunk and stub of
a tree, broken and dissevered from the boughs and branches, does seem to us a
far off to be some man or some other quick creature: and when a Tower of a
square form does seem to be round: and that the highest mountains a far
off from us, do seem to be no other then clouds, and near at hand, to be
rough and craggie places with steep downe-falls.

Reasons out of the Art Perspective, to prove the sight to be deceived.
Besides if we should come to the very reasons of the Art Perspective; the great
towers and high steeples, the stately, high, and proud Castles, palaces and
houses, are seen better a far off, then near at hand: And this happens
(say the Optiques) by reason that all high buildings and colosses being a far
off, do oppose themselves equally against all the parts of the eye in a right
line: but being near at hand, they do not oppose themselves to all parts, but
to some only. In brief, it is most certain according to the same Art
Prospective, that the things which are seen by the greater Angle of the eye.
appear much the greater; because that by the same, we do cast and send forth
our light more lively; and those which were beheld by the lesser Angle, are
lesser, and by the equal, are equal, by the high are high, and by the lowest,
are low and humble. Moreover, if bodies of one and the same greatness, and the
self same magnitudes be pl^ced by spaces and distances interposed: those which
shall be nearest unto us, will be seen to our seeming according to the very
truth of them: and those which shall be fa^ther off, will be discerned not
according to the truth, but in a true semblance. And Plato says, that the
Painters and Carvers do observe this; that making a plain and broad picture,
or cutting a statue or image in bosse or compassewise; if the some be for to
s^rve near at hand they will make it according to the very true proportion of
the members thereof, and will give it his draughts, his lineaments, his
back-draughts, and his colors so proper and natural, as may best represent it
to the very truth and life of it. And if the same be to be set aloft upon the
top of some Temple, far from the sight of men, (as was the Minerva of
Phidias, upon the Acropolis of Athens:) then will they make it very great, not
regarding so much the making of it perfect, as to accommodate it to the eyes of
men, who will judge thereof, not according to the truth, but according to their
sight: which being uncertain and doubtful, does not judge of things being
far from it, but only in a semblance of the truth. And Plato adds, that
such a picture and carved image, may be said a Phantosme: for that it appears
to the eyes perfect and accomplished, according to the Art of painting, and
notwithstanding it is not. Wherefore even by his authority, it may be
inferred, that the sight most commonly may be deceived, and has not any
certainty and assurance.

Reasons to prove that the sight is deceived by mis-taking things seen
waking, as well as sleeping.
Besides, we do see many things waking, which we know not if we have seen
sleeping or waking But the reason hereof comes not of the uncertainty of
the sight; but it proceeds of this, that as soon as one has seen a thing,
he suddenly and immediately falls asleep, or else being drawn away with some
other more great and serious thought, he dreams nor thinks any more of that
which was first of all presented before his eyes. And I remember that I have
read in a certain Book of Belon the Physician this history, which he
recounteth to have happened unto himself: How that being in Corsa on a time he
arose suddenly out of his bed early in the morning, and hearing a certain
noise of women weeping, he put his head out at the window, and saw cert^yne
women that ran throughout the Town, with their hair hanging and scattered
about their shoulders, with their naked breasts laid open, crying and lamenting
most bitt^^ly: And returning unto his bed, he soon fell into a sleep again.
Afterward, when it was full day, and being ris^n up and ready apparelled, he
recounted unto his host that which he thought he had seen, not in truth
but (as he was persuaded) in his sleep. But the host assured hm of the
contrary, that he had truly and indeed seen, and not in a dream, those women
in the same sort as he had related it. And for my own part, I can witness
thus much: that not once, but often, I have seen those things which I could
not assure my self whether I did imagine them in dreaming, or had seen them
with mine eyes. Which also I think to be natural to the most part of those
men, who have their spirits and mind withdrawn, either by earnest study, or
by the weighty affairs which they have in hand: in such sort, that things of
little reckoning, and matters of small consequence which they have seen, shall
be esteemed as dreams or foolish fancies conceived in their sleep.

Furthermore, when a man rises early, by day break, and goes abroad, he
shall sometimes be deceived in his sight. And this may happen, not only to one
person alone, Lib. vlt. Regum cap. 3.
but even to a whole army. In the Books of the Kings we may read, That the
Moabites after the death of Achab their Prince did revolte and withdraw
themselves from the subjection of Ioram his son king of Israel, who being
advertised of their Rebellion, prayed Iehosaphat King of Judah, to give him his
aid and succo^rs against them. The which Iehosaphat did, and joining thri^
forces together; they went against this rebellious people, with a purpose to
reduce them to their obeisance. Whereof the Moabites having intelligence, they
slept not, but emol^ing and mustering up all such as were fit to bear arms,
they put themselves in a preparation to go against their enemies, rather than
they would suffer them in their presence to spoil and harrie all their
Territories. Wherefore taking the field early in the morning, and approaching
near these waters, which God had miraculously caused newly to spring up, at
the prayer of Elizeus, and seeing them to show red, by reason of the rising of
the Sun, which usually rising read, by her reverberation did give them that
color, they began to say amongst themselves: Lo, the kings our enemies have
foughten together within themselves, and have made a great slaughter each of
other as these waters do testify. Whereupon running forward pell mell,
without all order, to the intent they might have the sacking and pillage of the
baggage and tents of the Israelites and Jews their enemies, they encountered
them in the face well ordered and arraunged in battle array, and were
thereupon soon defeated, and put to flight. By this it is to be seen how a
whole camp thought those waters to have been bloody: and that this opinion
and conceit only did cause their ruin and overthrow.

That the sight may be deceived in dark and mistie close wether.
The like also may very well be, that the sight shall be abused at any time when
the air shall be mistie and overcast, or troubled with thick storms and
tempests, or with dark clouds, full of moisture. Philip of Comines (whom I
dare match, for the truth of his history, Lib. 1. of the acts of king Jews
the 11
with all the Historiographers as well greeks as latins, he they never so
famous) writes, how at the same time that the brother of K. Jews the II.
Charles Duke of Berry, and Charles count of Charolois, and the Earl of S. Paul,
with many other Princes, and great lords were joined together in a league under
the pretense of the weal and common good, and had besieged Paris: they were
advertized one day above the rest, that the King had determined the next
morning with all his forces to give them battle. The morrow being come, the
Count Charolois and the Princes commanded certain of their troop to go and
to epsy the countenance of their ennemies, and to bring them back certain
report what they could discover of them. Those that were chosen to be the
Avantcurrers, did obey this their command accordingly: And the air being at
that time very dark and clowdy, they discovered a far off (at least it seemd
so unto them) a great squadron of footmen making a stand with their pikes: But
passing on further (as the heavens began to clear up, and to wax more
fair) they perceived, that in the place where they had thought the King and
his men at Arms were to have been encamped, there was nothing save only a
number of great thorns or thistles, which a far off did show unto them as if
they had been pikes. Therefore, seeing that a whole troop has been thus
deceived, by reason of the clowdy and mystie season, why should we marvel or
think it strange, That as we travel on the way in the day time, the trees,
the stones, briars and thorns, roots and stumpes of trees do seem unto us to
be phantosmes of men or some other creatures.

That the sight may be deceived, by the darkness of the night by fear and and
errors, etc.
But what shall we say then to the darkness and obscurity of the night,
wherein, both fear, and the deception, and dimnesse of the sight, and the
obtusion of the other senses meeting and mingled together do cause mavelous
effects of false visions, of phantosmes, and of fearful terrors? But as
touching false visions which the night may engender, I reserve the speech
thereof to an other place. Nevertheless they are not of such prejudice as are
those Terrors, which being caused in the night by a false imagination
intermingled with Fear, have made even a whole Camp to betake them to flight,
and have been the mean of their def^^ct and overthrow: which may be prooved
by an infinite number of Histories taken either from Polienus, or out of
Frontinus. But I will content me with this one only, ^^eir books ^^rai^gems
which in my judgment seeme^h to be the most memorable of all others. For
thereby may be known, how that two mighty armies encamped as enemies each
against other upon an imagination, that some came to give a charge upon them,
did both at one time betake themselves to flight, the one flying one way, and
the other an other way. Diodorus the Sicilian tells how Agathocles the tyrant
of Syracusa and of Sicily, Lib. 20. Bibliothec.
being encamped in a certain place not far from the Camp of the
Carthaginians his ennemies (against whom he held wars and had passed the
Seas, with purpose to assail them in their own Country.) It happened on a
night, that as the Carthaginians were sacrificing to their gods; the fire, by
ill fortune, took from the Altar (where the sacrifice was made) and lighted
on their Tents next unto it; and from that Tent passing on to another, it held
so onwardes till at length it got to the lodging of the Colonel, and that with
such rage and fury, and making such waste and spoil throughout all the Camp,
that many lost their lives being scorched and burned to death. Whilst the fire
was thus furious and raging; It fortuned that certain Fugitives Libians (who
served Agathocles rather by constraint than for love, because he had put to
death their captain Opheltes) leaving his camp with an intent to run over
to the Carthaginians, came thither in great haste, riding post upon the spur
as fast as they could gallop. The Sentinel of the Carthaginians having
discovered them, gave a hot alarm to the whole Camp, who thinking that it had
bin Agathocles, and that he had assembled all his Greek forces to assail and
break in upon them, whilst they were in this terror: The imagination thereof,
(besides the misfortune of the fire not yet quenched) made them leave their
tents: and abandoning both their baggage and all their ^ngins for the war,
they fell immediately into a plain flight, with such a confusion, that they
were scattered on all sides, hither and thither, each man making away for his
own safety. The Libians perceiving by the brightness of the fire in their
tents, the disorder and flight of the enemy, turned bridle and returned
toward the Greeks, to advertise them of this accident. They seeing them to
come thus galopping in great haste, were presently persuaded that they were the
Carthaginians, which came thus by night to give them the Canvazado: And for
that they had not long before received certain losses in the war, and their
forces had been much weakened, it caused them, without any further stay, to
fall on flying: and as they fled, the Libians fell in amongst them: By means
whereof, their fear so increased, that forcing themselves in their flight, as
fast as their horses could carry them, they lost in this tumult more then four
thousand of their people that were slain amongst themselves. Thus we see what
effects are wrought by the false imaginations of the sight, not corrupted, but
only deceived and dimmed by the darkness of the night: in the which, it is
impossible for us to discern exactly the colors and qualities of things: and
therefore it is very easy for us to be seduced as having lost our proper and
natural functions.

That the sight may be deceived in the day even of it self, and in it own
nature.
Now the Phirrhonians go yet farther and say; that not only in the night a man
may be deceived in the colors of things, but in the day likewise: and that
therefore by that reason, the sight in every thing and on all sides is
uncertain. And as it is most sure, that a man cannot judge of substances, but
by the colors, and that the colors are not permanent in things, but are
variable and changeable according to the light. So it follows by consequence,
that the sight which would judge of them, does in very truth deceive and abuse
it self. And first of all the colors may vary themselves, according to the
voluntary motion and situation of the sight; as if I cast down mine eyes
upon a candle, it will seem unto me, that I see many beams coming from the
candle, the which according to the motion of the sight, do change and turn
themselves: and if I do hold my eyes wide open, I shall think it strange how
those beams do retire away and disappeare from my sight. And this may suffice
for an example as touching the eyes, that they do wittingly as it were deceive
themselves.

That the sight may be deceived by accident.
In a thick and obscure air, all ^^^^gs do appear dark and obscure; in a
green meadow all things seem green; and near unto a scarlet, of a quick
and lively color, all things do show to be red of color. The bodies of any
creatures being in a wood, does seem to be of another sort, then they do being
in the open and plain champaigne. The Sun being in the East, and in the
West, is different from that which is seen being in the South, and the clouds
(which are concrete and bred of moisture) at the rising and setting of the
Sun, do show red unto our eyes, and we do oftentimes see a great part of the
heavens to be of a red and fiery color. The colors of the Rainbow likewise
are false, as are those of the Peacocke and of the Dove, which we see about
their necks when they moove and stir themselves: And that the colors of the
Dove, are not natural in her, but do appear to be such only by the
agitation and stirring of her body; the verse of the Emperor Ner^ may witness
the same, which says;

Colla Citheriacae splendent agitata Columbae. By the same reason also we may
say, that the colors which pass through a glass full of water set against
the Sun, are not true colors, and that the sight is deceived in them. And
how many things may a man form by the Art Optique, with Mirrors, or
Steele-glasses, That the sight may be deceived by artificial means of
mirrours and looking glasses
either compast, hollow, or plain: and make them to represent faces and
figures, quite in an other form than the Mirror does receive them? I will not
here speak touching such Mirrours. To discuss, whether the Figures of our
bodies be sent into them, as separated from our bodies, or rather, whether it
be a certain repercussion of our bodies, yielding a reflection to our selves.
Lib. 1. Naturalium question. ca. 5. de sequen.
I will leave this to be disputed by Seneca, who has at large entreated of that
matter.

But this is certain, that there be some glasses which will represent seven
or eight faces, Of the sundry sorts of mirrors, and how the sight is deceived
by them.
of which some will seem dead, and others will show as if they were going out
of the glass, not without great wonder. And I am not ignorant, that there may
be alleged many other mervailes that are to be seen by such mirrors. For
besides that, they will represent (as I have said) to one only object, many
faces; some of a dead man, others of a person seeming to go out of the glass:
a man may also make them with such Art and cunning, that one would think he
saw in them, images flying in the air. And this does Car^an put amongst his
experiments, speaking of Artificial Specters: And wh^t? In Libr. de Subtilitat^
That glass or mirror which has many squares, cannot it vary and change the
forms by the same reason of the Art Optique, according to the diversity of
the squares which it shall have? Sometimes a man shall see therein, a face
reversed or turned vp-side down, especially if it be a hollow glass:
sometimes two figures, the one created by the refraction of the thing opposite;
the other by the figure it self, by means of the Angle, which in the extreme
or outmost parts thereof, being near unto it, on that part of the glass and
mirror which is plain, receives the figure of the figure natural. Sometimes
the same mirror shall represent but a half or demi face, if a man oppose his
face to the end of the Angle, which being (as it were) curbed and straightned,
cannot receive all the face. And it is not (as were the Tables of Moises) in
the which (after they were broken) a man might see the one half of the letter
Samech, in the extremity or utmost part of the edge of the margent, and the
other half might have been seen in the air. Those mirrors which are long
and straight, do make the face straight and round, and those which belong, in
a round form, do show the face long. To make short, those which have little
round marks in them like bubbles, will show as many faces, as there be
rundles in them, and for one man, will represent a troop of persons, and (as
it were) a number of people. Moreover, a man may besides these, make other
mirrors, by the which, (not without great admiration) a man may discover any
thing a far off, and in the which a man may represent sundry figures, beyond
their natural form. Hostius, (as Seneca reports) had certain
looking-glasses which showed the figure of any thing far greater then the
same received it. Lib. 1. Nature. quest. cap. 16.
This man was so wanton and voluptuous, that he placed such glasses in his
chamber, to the intent he might delight himself with a false greatness of his
secret parts, a thing not to be written without horror.

But can I let pass, without wrong unto my self that glass, which being set
against the Sun, did burn and set on fire, all things that were presented
unto it of a dry and combustible nature, In Nubibus.
the which Aristophanes called (...)? Or should I omit in silence, those
mirrors or glasses which Archemedis invented, and by means whereof, he burnt
the ships of the enemies, as Plutarch reports? And what shall I say
besides, In Marc ello.
touching other stones that are as splendant and shine as bright as glass?
That stone which by the Greeks is called Phengites, and by the Latins
Specularis, and which the French call Talc, is naturally so bright-shining,
that the very glass does not give that reverberation by the cleerenes
thereof, as it does. And that made Nero, when he builded the temple to the
goddess Fortune, to cause the same to be paved with this stone: the which did
yield such a reverberation round about the Temple, (as Pliny writes) that a
man might have seen it to shine and glister as if it had had many windows,
Lib. 36. cap. 22. natural. histor.
and as if the cleerenes of the light had been enclosed and shut up within the
walls thereof, notwithstanding that the day light never pierced into it. A
certain Author writes, In vita Horatii.
that the Poet Horace was so lascivious and luxurious, that he caused this
stone of Talc, to be placed in his chamber, to the intent it might represent
unto him his strumpets in the very action of dishonesty. But this was not a
thing peculiar unto Horace alone, but it was common unto him, with many
Emperors that did the like. And in truth this Poet was worthy to be the
friend and favorite of Mecenas, who was not only defamed to be wanton and
effeminat in his speech, in his habit, and in his going, but was a man of most
corrupt manners, and extremely addicted to lust and licensiousnes, in such
sort, that by the excessive riot of his youth, he became in his later years,
to be full of maladies and diseases, in so much, as be could not sleep nor
take his rest scarce a moment of an hour.

How the sight is deceived by many particular objects.
But to return to our purpose, it is well known, that ordinarily the
spectacles or sight-glasses, do make letters to seem more great then they are
indeed. And those things which a man beholds within the water, do seem
also far bigger then they be by nature: And let any letters be never so small
and little, yet are they very easy to be read through a vial filled with
water. Apples also. if they swim within a glass, do seem much fairer then
they are. The stars likewise are far greater to the sight, if a man behold
them through a cloud: And the like is to be seen of the Sun also. If a man
cast a ring into a cup or bole, though the ring be in the bottom, yet will it
appear as if it were in the superficies and top of the water. The sea seems
to be of an Azure color, and notwithstanding it has not any color certain.
In a bright and clear air, by an artificial fire, are to be seen many
colors and many figures which are false, by reason of the variety of the
matter of the fire. And sometimes a man would even swear that those that are
sitting at a table together, should be without heads, or should seem to be
dead men; or should have the heads of some other creatures. And the chamber
where men are supping together, will sometimes seem to be full of serpents:
and there will seem a Vine to spread and seatter abroad her boughs and
branches; though indeed it be a mere illusion. There be some men who in this
our age have stuffed their Books with such devises, as amongst others Cardan
and Baptista de la Porta a Neapolitane. De subtilitat. Imagine. natura. Tho.
Aquin. 1. part q. 11.4. art. 4.
And there is not so much as Saint Thomas of Aquine but has written of an
herb, the which being s^t on sire will make the rafters or beams of the
chamber seem to be Serpents. What should I say more? The clouds sometimes
will seem to be Monsters, Lions, Bulls and Woolves painted and figured: albeit
in truth the same be nothing but a moist humor mounted in the air, and drawn
up from the earth, not having any figure or color, but such as the air is
able to give unto it. The which is subject to a thousand impressions and
changes.

Of the uncertainty of the other senses, and of the difference and discord of
the^ together.
Now after that we have so largely discoursed of the sight, if we should come
to the other senses; by what means can we better argue their uncertainty
according to the opinion of the Sceptiques, than to show the difference that
they have together? which is in such manner, that they do not in any forte
accord and agree: neither have they any Sympathy, any colligence, or any
proportion one to another. And first of all, if we will compare the senses of
Smelling, Of the differense and discord betwixt the other senses and that of
the sight.
the Touching, and the Taste, with that of the Sight, what better example can
we have than the Apple, the which in sight will be pale, and yet in taste will
be sweet, in handling will be light, and in smell will be of a good and
pleasant odor? Hereby then it is manifest, that the senses are not of any
good accord together amongst themselves. And besides, what can better
demonstrate this, than the colors whereof we have erst spoken? the which as
they are unknown to the sight, so do they engender a great discord amongst
the senses. If a man should say, that every thing which is white in color
does proceed of a hot quality, the contrary will appear evidently by the
Snow, and by the Ice. And if a man would say, it were long of a cold quality;
The Ashes, the Lime, and the Plaster do sufficiently show that he were
deceived. The like may a man affirm of other colors, as well black, as those
that participate both of white and black. And how often is it seen that the
Physicians are deceived in judging of the temperature of their Simples, by the
sight only, and not by the other senses? I have seen a Practitioner in
Physic at Paris, who did brag in the open Parliament (in the hearing of my
self, and an infinite number of people that can testify the same likewise)
That by the simple sight alone he would know all the qualities, and
temperatures of herbs that any should show unto him: yea though they were
come from America, and such as the virtues of them were scarce yet known of
Physicians. But this Paracelsian was rejected and confuted with his Paracelsus,
and his ignorance was sufficiently discovered by such as had commission to
question with him. But what is the cause, That being in a hot Bath we do
think that our urine is cold? Is it not because our Touching or Feeling is
uncertain, and does not well accord and agree with the other senses. In the
winter, by reason that we are cold, all other external things do seem unto
us to be hot by the same reason that we alleged before of the Bath.

Of the differense and discord of the senses of hearing and the sight.
And to come from the difference of the Feeling to that which the Hearing has
with the Sight: Is it not most certain, that the Eye sees sooner than the
Hearing can understand or discern a thing? The experience of this may be seen
in the lightning: the brightness, and shining whereof is seen sooner than we
can hear the thunder. And sometimes the Hearing will judge that it has heard
two blows given at the striking of a thing which it has seen to strike no
more than once. And hereof a man may have the experience, by that which we
see daily to happen, as namely, when one strikes or beats with a rammer or
beetle any great stroke upon the water side, or near unto some river: For one
blow that shall be seen to be given, a man shall hear two, yea sometimes
three strokes afar off. Which comes of nothing else than of the resounding
of the Echo, which makes the sound of the rammer or beetle to resounde upon
the river, the same being carried through the air, and redoubling it self to
the ears of him that shall hear it. In Colliget. li. 1. That the sense of
hearing, be it never so sound will be deceived.
And Averrois cites also another example of Laundresses, who washing their
linen at the rivers side, do make their strokes to be heard redoubled two or
three times, howbeit that the sight does perceive the stroke sooner than the
hearing can discern or understand it: More than so, is not the hearing notably
deceived, be it never so sound and whole? Is it not an ordinary thing, That in
hollow places a man may hear a small gentle sound issuing forth of some hole
or chinke, which we would take to be a kind of Music, though indeed it be
nothing else but a soft whistling wind that blows? And in those banks of
rivers, which are indifferently or but meanly crooked, is to be perceived the
like sound and harmony as the natural Philosophers do affirm. And it is a
thing most assured, that a man may falsely hear a certain noise and shaking of
the walls, the windows, and the roofes of houses, which notwithstanding is but
a sign of some storm or tempest at hand, as of hail, or of thunder. Our
hearing will be deceived also when we think that we hear thunder, and
notwithstanding it is but some Coach or Chariot that passes by the streets.

Now, after that the Sceptiques have sufficiently (to their thinking) prooved
that the senses are false and easy to be deceived: The reason of the
Sceptikes, that the intellect and the imagination are deceived.
they come afterward to infer that the Intellect, and the Imaginative power
can comprehend nothing in certainty. For if it be so, that all things, which
may be said to have essence, do never enter into the Intellect, or into the
imagination, but by the senses which are their Organ: and that the senses are
faulty. Then it must needs follow with good reason, that the Intellect and
the Imagination do fail and are deceived, so that in truth all things are
(...), that is, They have not any certainety, or true essence of themselves,
but they do refer themselves to the senses, which do deceive and delude
themselves. After this the Sceptiques do come also to the signs of things;
the which they maintain to be neither sensible, nor intelligible: and by
consequence, that they are none at all, as not being able to appear either
sensibly, or in the understanding. And thus do they take away the causes, and
the definitions of things, and generally all kind of learning and discipline,
as that famous learned man Frances Picus de Mirandola has notably and at large
discovered, In lib. Exam. doctr. Gentil.
who does as lively and learnedly confute the Sceptiques, as before him John
Picus his uncle had confuted the Judicial Astrologers.

An answer to all the former Inductions and examples alleged by the Sceptiques.
But I will now content my self, in a word, to answer to the followers of
Pirrhon: letting them to know, that all their Inductions which they bring in
and allege, and all their Arguments heaped up with such a multitude of
examples, are not of any strength or validity to prove the uncertainty of the
senses, and especially of the sight: The which that grand workemaister has
placed in the head, to the intent the same might discover all things afar
off, as a Pharos, or Lantern set aloft upon a Tower. Besides, the Eye is of a
round and Sphericall figure, to the intent (as the Mathematitians affirm) it
may be capable to receive by the sight, the quantity and magnitude of things:
For if the ball or apple of the eye, (by which the fight is turned) were not
round, it could not cause it to discern or to perceive any thing but that
which should be equal unto it: which appears in this, That the sight does
perfect it self by right lines which do concur, (as it were) in a heap to
the center of the eye, and do there make their impression perpendicularly. So
that the Eye is certain without being deceived as touching the beholding of
the quantities of things next unto it: The sight is certain in be holding the
quantities of things, though it may be sometimes deceived in qualities.
and if it be sometimes deceived in the qualities of things: yet does it not
thereof follow, that the Intellect or Understanding faculty in man which
receives them, should therefore be deceived. For, albeit the sense do see a
cloth or garment to be green, by reason of some green meadowe that does
scatter or display it verdure upon it: yet so is it, that the Intellect and
Understanding of a man in it self will always take the garment to be
according as it is indeed, and will never be deceived. And as concerning the
senses of Feeling, Smelling, Tasting and Hearing: A man may say also to the
Sceptiques, That they are not altered nor changed by maladies or sickness;
or that by any other accident they are not easy to be seduced: and namely and
especially the Touching: the which being dispersed, and (as it were) spread
abroad throughout all the members, is esteemed to be more certain than the
sight. But as concerning the senses depraved and corrupted, we shall entreat
h^^reafter. And therefore we will first of all proc^ de in holding on our
purpose, as concerning the senses: how they being sound and entire, may
nevertheless be deceived: and we will discourse of such things as (being
either natural or ^rtificiall) yet for their strangeness are esteemed
prodigious, and approaching near to the nature of Sp^cters: and both the Sight
and the H^aring at the first view does receive them as things supernatural; by
reason that they are ignorant of the causes of them. And first of all we will
speak of such things as are Natural.

CHAP. VII.
That many things being merely Natural are taken by the Sight or Hearing
being deceived, for Specters and things prodigious.
IT is a thing most certain and assured, and it has oftentimes happened, Of
natural earthly things that seem prodigious Phantosmes and Specters by which
the sight is deceived.
That many natural things (because they be alittle beyond natural reason) do
put us in so great a fear and terror, as if we had seen before us some
Spirits or Phantosmes. And especially, if fear or superstition be added
thereunto, and that withal they happen in the darkness of the night: It is
then a most clear case, that they do work and produce wonderful effects in
the senses, and in the mind of man. Pliny recites, that alittle above the
country of Zeland, Lib. 16. cap. 1.
there are certain forests full of huge, great, and high Oaks, the which
being rooted up by the tempestuousnesse of winds, or storms, or by the waves
and billows of the sea, do carry with their roots a great mass of earth
which does counterpoise them in such forte, as a man shall see those great
oaks to swim up and down the sea, with their huge boughs and branches.
Certainly, if they should be seen in that manner in the night time, and that
therewithal any fear or superstition did surprise men upon the sight of them:
It is not to be doubted, but they would be thought to be devils and ill
spirits. Now if the fear alone of seeing such things have caused the
fantasy of those that have sa^led on that coast, so far to err, as they
have imagined them to be armies by sea. And if the Romans themselves when they
saw (as Pliny writes) these trees to come directly upon them, have prepared
themselves to battle, and have set in a readiness all their warrelike
engines, and disposed their fights and their grapples, supposing that the same
had been their enemies: What shall we then think of such as should have been
superstitiously affected in seeing them? Would not they (trow you) have bin
terrified beyond all comparison, when they should imagine them to be, not
enemies, but even. Divelles let loose? So likewise, if they should see the
Lakes of Cecubo, Lib. 8. epist. 10
and of Reate, and that same (whereof Pliny the younger makes so much ado in
his Epistles, calling it Lacus Vadimonis,) and which the Italians at this day
name the Lake of Bassanello: what would they think or imagine of it? These
lakes have many Islands that sloate and moove up and down with the wind, no
otherwise than as a ship tosled too and fro by the waves and surges of the sea:
And the same Pliny does so far advaunce this lake of Bassanello, as he
dares to compare it with all the miracles of Achaia, Aegipt, or Asia, that
have been so famously reported and spread abroad of them in all parts of the
world. And the truth is, That Pliny the elder, Lib. 2. Nature. hist. cap. 95.
Lib. 3. Not. qu. Lib. natural. auscult. Lib. 9. Decad. 1
Seneca, Aristotle, and Titus Livius, do make notable reports of this Lake, as
being such, wherein a thing so mavelous in nature does happen usually and
commononly. Nevertheless, they which should see those Isles thus to moove in
this manner, not knowing before that the same were natural: they would
entertain many and diverse apprehensions in their fantasy, and would imagine
that they saw a thing very strange and prodigious, Of natural fiery Islands
that seem prodigious Phantosmes and Specters by which the sight is deceived.
and such as did very near approach to the nature of some Specter and vision.

But what shall we say to those Sight and fiery Flames, which appearing in
the night, do seem to wander from place to place? A man cannot better compare
these fires, then to Torches which young men use in Maskes, to carry by night
in diverse troops and companies, in the time of their Shroving or Carnevall
feasts. For as a man shall sometimes see their lights joined all together, and
sometimes separated and divided far asunder, according as they do either
conioyne or separate themselves in sundry bands: so is it with these lights and
fiery flames appearing by night: that sometimes they will seem to gather
together in a heap, and make show as if there were but one bright shining
light: and suddenly again, they will be dispersed and divided asunder each
from other, making diverse and sundry lights, and as if they were vanishing away
in several fires, beginning to grow dim more and more and less lightsome.
Of the cause of fiery flames appearing from the earth in the night time.
These fiery flames (as I have said) so wandering and running up and down, are
not without a certain fear and terror unto passengers: howbeit a man may
assign unto them a natural cause why they be so. For the natural
Philosophers do hold, that from the earth there do proceed certain thick
and gross exhalations, the which are soon and easily kindled and set on fire.
That matter which is of a sulphurious and hot nature, and lies hidden in the
veins and secret corners of the earth: if alittle air do pierce thorough and
come near unto it, on a sudden it comes to be set on fire, seeking means
to issue out, and to break forth of the earth. And do we not see in certain
places of some countries, that the fire does arise and issue forth of the earth
in exceeding height, like unto a great tree, and as suddenly again, to be
extinct and consumed? But this is natural, and ought to be referred unto the
Gummie and fat matter, which being fired, does issue out of the veins of the
earth, seeking to evaporate it self in some one place or other. In those
places where there is store of Sulphre or Brimstone (which is a kind of hot
matter in the nature of metal:) The reason that the fire does not so soon
die and extinguish it self, is, because it has a nourishment that does hold
on and endure with a longer continuance. Those that sail by the coasts of
Sicely and of Malta, can report yet at this day, how that the Isle Abrocan, Of
diverse hills that burn with fire.
(which does a far off discover it self to the Sailors) is continually in a
fire and smoke. And histories are full every where, that in times past, the
Hill Mongibel did burn night and day. And Pindarus affirms, that by night
the fire of this mountain was very clear and bright-shining, and in the day,
was clowdie and dim, as is also at this day, the Isle Abrocan. The mountain
Vesuvius, not far distant from Naples, in the time of Titus Vespasian, did
cast up fire and flames in such abundance, that all the count^ie and the
inhabitants round about were destroyed by it, their Towns and Villages being
left desolate and burned, and those fields that were from thence somewhat
farther off, were all covered and filled with dust and ashes. And this is
testified by Saint Jerome, Pliny the younger, and Dion the Historiographer.
And it is not unknown, how that Pliny the second, being desirous to
understand and to search out the cause of the burning of this mountain, as he
approached near unto it, being by nature fat and corpulent, he was suddenly
smothered, or (as I rather believe) he fell into an Apoplexye, to the which
gross and fat men most commonly are subject, especially when they use not any
exercise as Pliny did not, being a man wholly addicted to study and learning.
And to return to those two mountains, Mongibel did burn in the year 1537.
it is very certain that even of late, in the time of our fathers, they did
still continue burning; and especially Mongibel, the which occasioned and
wrought infinite domages to the lands niece, adjoining unto it. For the report
is, that the fire of Mongibel did range and spread it self so far, that the
greatest part of Calabria was filled with the dust of the ashes and cinders
thereof; and two Villages, M^ntpilere and Li^olosi, were quite burned and
consumed And not these mountains alone are only subject ^ofire and continual
burning: Of the cause that the mountains do burn.
but Olans the Great writes, that in Iseland there is a mountain which
burns continually, the fire and flame whereof, does never fail no more then
that of Mongibel, in the time of Pliny; who writes, that the flame thereof
did never cease. The cause of these fires, Lib. 2. not hist.
does Aristotle well set down, and that in few words in his books of Meteors.
For as there be many places of the earth, Lib. 2. Meteor.
that have store of matter combustible, there needs no more but a trembling
and shaking of the earth; which being stirred up by an air, that has entered
in by some chinks and empty poares of the earth, and striving to issue forth,
does in an instant and at once, moove and shake the mountain; and so by the
stirring and agitation thereof, does set it on a fire; the which does subtly
evaporate it self, and takes it nourishment of the air so moved and
stirred. And like as after great store of winds, it often happens that a
trembling or quaking of the earth does succeed: so, after a long trembling and
mooving of the earth, it must needs happen that these mountains must of
necessity fall on burning. Now if it be so, that the mountains for the reasons
before alleged, may cast and vomit up flames of fire, why should there be
any difficulty, but that those other fiery flames appearing in the night,
should by the same mean, be evaporated out of the earth? Certain it is, that
Aristotle writes, how in some places the earth in the concavities thereof,
Lib. de Mendo.
is no less replenished with fires and with winds, then it is with water. And
therefore as there are springs of water hidden in the earth, which may even
suddenly and at once, spring up and cast forth water in abundance out of the
earth: so it is not to be doubted, but that the fires, which have been long
hidden in the caverns and hollow places under the ground, may sometimes issue
forth and having found a clear and free passage, may leap up and down and
walk at some times through the region of the air, neither more not less then
does the fire of Mongibel, of Vesuvius, and of Iseland:

Which easting up through the air, great globes of fire flaming, And mounting
to the heavens, do s^o^^ most cloo^^ly blazing. Lib. Aeneid.


That I may speak as does the Poet Vergil, Lib. 3. Ae^eid.
who being profoundly seen and exercised both in Philosophy and in all kind
of learning, was not ignorant, that these fires were of such a nature, as being
cast out of the caverns of the earth, The diffrence betvveene the fires
appearing in the night, and those of mountayns continually burning.
they be carried for a time through the air, and yet some of them more
forcibly and violently then the other. For those fires which are stirred up
within the mountains, as they have more spirits that do animate and give life
unto them: (if I may so speak) so do they issue forth more suddenly, and
wanderlesse in the air, then do those night-flames that do strike up gently
from the earth.

How men are deceived and led to drown themselves by night-flames appearing
unto them.
But (will some say) we see that these night-fiers do oftentimes deceive men,
and will lead them to some rive^ pond, or other water, where they do cause
them sometimes to be drowned.

To this I answer; that they which follow such night-fiers appearing unto them,
either they do it voluntary, or by constraint: If by constraint, then without
doubt they are no night-fiers which they do so follow after; but they are some
devils, or ill spirits metamorphosed into the forms of fires. But if they do
willingly and voluntarily follow them, they cannot excuse themselves of folly
and of ignorance: for it is the nature of such fires, continually to seek
after water, being their contrary element. And this is evident by those flames
of Mongibel, which do draw themselves rather toward the sea, then any other
place, as testifies Pindarus in these words, (...): that is to say, That the
flame of Mongibel, ^d. 1. Olimp.
is carried roling and tumbling even into the maine and deep sea. And in that
this Poet affirms, that the flame roleth and so is carried to the sea. This
may lead us as it were by the hand, to know the nature of those night-fiers,
which (as they that have seen them do say) are round, and do go roling
continually till they come near some river or pond, in the which they do
suddaintly disappeare and vanish away.

Of Night-fires seen and frequenting about gallovvs, and the cause thereof.
But before I leave this discourse of these night-fiers, I will speak of that
which the dommon opinion holds touching them: and that is, how that sometimes
they do appear immovable, near unto gallows and such like places of
execution. If this be true, (as we must needs give credit thereunto, seeing
so many persons do with one consent report it) we may yield yet a farther
natural cause of such Night-flames; and that is, that they are bred and
concreated of the fat and dry exhalation of the bodies there hanged, which
coming to evaporate and strike up into the air, does grow to be enflamed by
the same reason, as the vapors and exhalations dried from the earth, and being
in the middle region of the air, do change themselves into fire, and so do
cause the thunder.

Of flames of fire issuing out of trees and other things, beating one against
another.
But to continue on our purpose touching natural fires, do we not see (and that
without mervailing) that the tops of trees blustering or beating one against
another, do strike out flames of fire, and that not without fear unto such as
travel by night? Certain it is, that Thucidides does esteem this to be
natural; (...)(says he) (...). And Lucretius speaks thereof, as of a thing
which happens usually, and is done by the same reason: as two stones stricken
together each against other, do cause fire, and as two tables of Laurel or any
other hard wood, being rubbed together for a long time one against the other,
will likewise strike out sparckles of fire. Homer writes, that Mercury was
the first that taught this usage of making fire to come forth by the striking
together of two staves or sticks of Laurel wood. In himn^ Mercurii.
And truly it is not unlike, that he learned it by seeing how the woods by
beating each against other through the continual motion and agitation of the
winds, do sparkle out from them flames of fire.

Again, be there not also some precious stones, as the Carnali^e, the Rubie,
the Carbuncle, the Carchedonie, or the Garnet, Of stones and other things
shining like flames of fire in the night.
and other such like precious stones, that do shine in the night like fire. In
Scotland there is a kind of rotten wood, which in the night shines very
clear and bright: and the like do woods that are worm eaten. There be some
creatures, as Woolves and Cats, which have their eyes so fire it and flaming in
the night, that they will make even the most hardy to be afraid. I have heard
of Monsieur de Laundy Gualtier, a Councellor in the Court of Parliament of
Britain, that near unto one of his manours, he had a country house or
farm, within the which, there haunted a Cat so terrible and frightfull, that
such as saw her by night, did fall in a swound for very fear: and some would
have bin of opinion, that it was some Sorcerer metamorphosed, or some wicked
spirit: if the said Lord of Launay (being a gentleman of good spirit, and one
that could not be made believe that it was any other then a natural Cat) had
not found the mean to cause the same Cat to betaken by a ginne: and being so
slain, it was then apparent that the fear conceived thereof, was but merely
vain and without cause. There be certain worms that use to appear in
Autumn, which the Greeks call (...), and the Latins Cicindelas, which do
shine so clearly in the night, that those which know not that there be such
creatures, would be very doubtful what to think, if they should happen to
see them. But these worms are nothing to speak of, in comparison of that
little Fly which is bred in the new world, within the Island of Hispaniola,
appertaining to the Span^ards. This creature is of the bigness of a Beetle or
Horse-flie, and they which have seen of them, do esteem it to be indeed a
kind of Horse-flie. But upon the matter, it does shine by night very clearly
in all parts of her body, but principally in the eyes; the which in regard of
the smalnesse of her body, are very exceeding great: and those her eyes are
so bright-shining, that a man may write and read by their light. The report
is, that the Indians do banquet in the night time by the light thereof: a thing
so strange and admirable, that if the Spanish Historiographers did not report
the same with one general consent, a man would scarcely credit it.

Of natural ayrie things and vapors that seem Phantosmes, or Spectere, and
deceive the sight.
But to come from fiery things, to other natural vapors that come from the
earth: it is very certain that the air does sometimes create those of vapors
forms so mervailous, that any man would take them for Prodigies or Specters.
When Silla entered into Italy with his armed forces, there were seen two
clouds or vapors having the form of Goats fighting one against another,
near unto the Mount Epheum in Campania, Of a strange cloud or vapor appearing
to Silla and the Romans.
the which afterward mounting aloft from the earth, did spread and scatter
themselves into diverse parts, and in the end vanished quite away, not without
the great wonder and astonishment of Silla and all his Armic. And yet Plutarch
says, that this was but a thing merely natural: In vita Sillae.
because that after it became to be scattered abroad in the air, it presently
lost that imaginary form which it before represented. And what shall we say
to those vapors which do naturally happen in the deserts of Libia, Of strange
vapors usual in Barbary and their causes.
near unto one of those great Sands of Barbary, called Syrtis Magna: Those
vapors do make an impression in the air of sundry bodies and forms of many
creatures, which sometimes will seem not to stir a foot from the place
where they are: and sometimes again, will moove themselves very strangely, as
if they were either flying from, or pursuing of some persons. Dio^or^^ Siculus
says; that these impressions of forms are of an infinite greatness, Lib. 3.
Biblioth.
and extending in great length, and that they do bring great fear and
perturbation of mind, to such as are not^sed to the sight of them. For they
pursue men (says he) and after that they have gotten to them, they do
disperse themselves over all their bodies in an extreme cold, which is the
cause that Merchants, strangers, passing by that coast, one in great fear of
them, whereas on the contrary, the^^ h^bitants of that Country, (who do often
see such things) do make small account, or do rather laugh at them.

Some have studied to render a reason of this so strange a marvel, though it
have seemed to be held almost in manner as a fable. And they say, That in this
Region there are stirring few or no winds at all, or if there be any, that
they be very weak and warm: and that the air there is very calm and quiet,
because there are no woods nor shady valleys round about, nor any hills
distant and separated one from another, nor yet any Rivers great or small,
wherewith the plain should be watered and refreshed: nor any fertile lands
nor exhalations nor odours, from all which the winds do take their beginning
and original. So that this whole Country being round about on all sides very
hot and warm: It happens (like as we see it fall out in the hot summer
days, when the warm south wind most reigns,) That in every place there are
bredde and created little clouds, which do take diverse forms, according to
the different Impressions the fire receives. And these clouds being carried
by those slow and weak warm winds do sometimes mount aloft, and sometimes
leap up and down, and sometimes do move themselves by other such like motions
and agitations. When they are not born up by any wind, they do stay near to
the earth, thick, and formed as they were aloft: And having nothing that is
able to seatter and dissolve them, They do of themselves approach and draw
nie to such persons as they first happen to encounter. Not that I infer
hereby, That the air has any election of motion in it self: for that is
impossible in nature; That any thing without a soul should voluntarily, and
of it self, be driven to moove it self: or that it should either pursue or
shun it self; but it is rather the persons that do cause the same to moove.
And so is it of those clouds formed in the air, which do make a show and
countenance as if they did follow or give place to those persons that do come
against them, who do scatter and chase them on all sides with the violence and
motion of their bodies. And on the contrary, they do pursue such as recule and
go from them: And by conversion of the cause, it happens, that being drawn
by the raritie and vacuitie of the precedent motion: They do seem to run
after such as go from them, who staying or returning are incontinently abashed:
when they see themselves touched with the same, and that these clouds (before
they light or fall upon the ground,) do spread themselves very cold over all
their bodies.

Of the Eclipses of the Sun and the Moon and the causes thereof.
But to leave these airie vapors, and to go alittle higher, even to the body of
the Moon: what shall we say to the superstition of the ancient Romans, who
were so abashed and astonished at the eclipse thereof; That we read how
sometimes an whole army was stricken into fear and amazement by the sight of
the same: insomuch as they used to call and ring her with the sound of abason,
until such time as she were returned to her former shape and form, as
witnesses Plutarch, In vita parili Amily.
Corneous Tacitus, and Ovid. And the same Tacitus recounteth, That in the
beginning of the reign of Tiberius, In lib. 1. Amia.
certain garrisons of Roman Soldiers upon the Frontires of Germany, being
revolted; The thing that did most terrify and astonish them, and reduced them
to their former duty and obedience, was an eclipse of the moon, which put them
in a fancy and conceit, that the gods were angry and displeased with them for
that their enterprise. And yet nevertheless, the cause of the Moons eclipse
is known to be mecrely natural, without any prodigiousnes at all in it. For
it is most certain, That the shadow of the earth being opposed against the
moon makes the eclipse thereof, like as the moon being opposed against the
sun, does make the eclipse of the sun. It is not therefore to be thought
any strange matter, if at this day there be many men that take all things
unknown unto them, to be Specters and Prodigies, and (...) they be afraid of
them, without day just occasion

Of strange sights happening in the seas, yet natural. Psalm. 106.
But what will such men say, if they should sail on the seas, where the
wonderful works of God (as David says) are more common and manifest than
on the earth; They would imagine themselves to be in another world, and to hear
and see other things than they are accustomed to do in the earth. Sometimes
they shall see the fire (which the Sailors call Saint Hermes,) to fly upon
their ship, and to alight upon the top of the mast; And sometimes they
shall perceive a wind that stirs up such storms, The wind called Ecnephia.
as will run round about their ship, and play about it in such sort, as by
the hurling and beating of the clouds will raise up a fire that will burn
up the yardes, the sails, and the tacklings of the ship: And of these
winds Saint Luke speaks in the Acts of the Apostles: Acts 27.
Sometimes the billows of the sea will raise them even to the clouds, and in
a moment east them down again to the botome of the sea: sometimes they shall
hear the roaring of the waves beating against the rocks, the banckes, and the
cliffes upon the sea shore; so as they shall be heard far off, not without
great fear and astonishment: as is to be seen by Charibdis and Silla, on the
coast of Sicily: and by that great and terrible noise of the sea-waves, which
beats on a rock lying in the sea a seaventeene or eighteens leagues from
Bordeaux: and by the French^^en is called, Les Asues de Bordeaux. And if a man
should fail into the sea of Amorica: how many sorts of whales shall he see
far differing from those which are in our Ocean? sometimes they will be s^^^e
like unto a round wheel, and fodainely like unto a sharp cutting saw: And
others again may besee^^ to pursue and follow after a ship, without leaving or
forsaking it for a long time. And in the sea of M^^^day, how many whales be
there, and monstrous fishes which may even astonish those that so them* To be
(...) There is nothing but will minister unto them occasion, either of fear,
or of admiration, as by seeing maiters strange and unusual to their sight* so
that a man may say of them as Sinesius say de of the Labians, In Epistolis.
that wondered at the small breasts of the women which were with him in his
ship, whom they never desisted from gazing and looking upon, by way of
admiration. The reason whereof the same Author yields to be this: because the
Libian women have their breasts so huge and great, that they use to give suck
unto their infants over their shoulders: The like would happen, no doubt, unto
these men that do so superstitiously admire and stand in fear of all things
that are strange and unusual unto them: and to whom nothing is natural, but
that which they see to happen and fall out daily, and accustomably in their
sight.

Of natural things that deceive the sense of hearing.
But to come from the sense of seeing, to that of the hearing: how often is that
also deceived in taking things natural for other than they be indeed? The
Echo is a sound proceeding from the voice, rebounding and striking back
again, either in forests, and woods, or valleis, or hollow places, of the
sound of the Echo.
or else by reason of the extreme heat in time of summer: and yet
nevertheless how often, and especially in the night season, has it deceived
such persons as have thought it to be some other thing, rather than an Echo?
The history recorded by Cardan of a friend of his a Counselor of Come, who
thought he should have been drowned, by mistaking on Echo in steed of a man,
is sufficiently well known. Lib. 18. de subtilitate.
Howbeit Cardan had reason to esteem that his friend for a very simple and
senseless man: for if he had considered never so little with advisement the
voice of the Echo, he might easily have discovered that which deceived him.
And that it was no difficult matter to be discovered, it is manifest in this,
That the Echo answered him in the same terms, and in the same accent that
he demanded, namely, by way of Interrogation and Demand, saying, Shall I
pass here! Whereas if it had been a man, he would have answered without
demanding, Pass here. Now upon this discourse of that Echo. Cardan tells
how in the great church of Pavis there is an Echo that yields diverse
voices, ever decreasing and lessening till that the last voice thereof shall be
heard without being distinctly and certainly discerned: being much like unto
the voice or groaning of one that is a dying: in such sort (says Cardan) as a
man would scarce believe that it were an Echo. In li. de varieta. rerum.
But if he that has traveled throughout all France (as himself writes)
would have taken the pains as to have gone to see the Echo of Charenton
near Paris. I do assure my self he would have esteemed that Echo as
admirable as that of Pavy. For it does very perfectly resound the voice that
it has received, and does go continually falling lower and lower, not seven
times only (as did the Heptaphon of Greece) but eight, and most commonly ten
times, not without the great wonder and admiration of them that hear it. Near
to Puzzoli there is an Echo called Virgils Echo at this day, and is very much
admired and held to be supernatural by those that are near dwellers and
inhabitants of that Country. I have heard another Echo at Tholousa in the
suburbs of Saint Roche, which in my conceit is very strange and worthy to be
marvelled at: for that in calm and fair weather, it will repeat a whole
verse entirely and distinctly, as it has been uttered and pronounced. And I
have made experience thereof for my own recreation in this full verse of
Homer: In odiss. ^0.
(...). And in this common verse of Virgil: Arma virumque cano. The which it
resounded after me, without leaving out any one syllable.

Of diverse things which do naturally yield strange sounds.
At Spiga in Nat^ha, of the Ancients called Cyzicum, there were seven Towers
which did redouble seven times any voice that was pronounced near unto them.
And Pliny writes, that this was more by fortune and casualtie, then by any
natural or artificial occasion. But (whatsoever Pliny says) there was. Art
and artificial workmanship in those Towers, besides that they were near
neighboring and adjoining one to the other, as may be gathered out of his own
writing. So likewise was that statue or image of Memnon artificial; the which
having the face thereof turned toward the Sun, did yield a resounding
noise: and (as Pausanias said) the sound that it gave, was like unto the
strings of a Lute when they break asunder. And what shall we say to that
stone which was in the Tower of Megara, the which being stricken on with a
little stone or flint, did give a sound no otherwise, then if it had been an
Harp or a Lute. The same Pausanias (who had travailed throughout all Greece)
and had curiously observed all the singularities that were there worth the
seeing: did mark this amongst the rest: and notwithstanding he could not
find out the reason thereof, but only that it had his ground from a certain
fable, which is: that when Alcathous, king of the Megarians, was purposed to
build the walls of Megara, he had the aid and help of Apollo, who to set
forward the work, and laboring at it, as did other workmen, laid by his
Harp upon a stone, the which ever after did retain the sound of an Harp.
Lib. 8. Metamo,
But Ovid writes, that not one stone only did yield such a sound, but that
all the other stones and walls near unto a certain Tower, did the like, And
these are his verses:

There stands a Tower with haughty walls enclosed,
Within the which, god Phoebus (so it is noysed,)
Did one day lay his Harp, and ever after,
That Harp sweet sound, even in the stones did enter.
But though Pausanias, with Ovid likewise, do take the reason of this marvel
from an old mouldie fable, yet so it is, that (if you take away the fable,)
all the rest is very true and certain. And we may not think, that Pausanias
would have spoken any thing of it, if himself had not seen the proof and
trial of it: For all the ancient Authors are of accord, that he is a very true
and sound Historiographer. And what shall we say of those hollow caves and
caverns of the earth, wherein are heard so many fearful sounds and noises, that
yield fear and astonishment to the hearers; albeit the same be nothing else
but very nature it self that works them? I say Nature: which I cannot
better compare then unto a rich Merchant, who has in his open shop or
warehouse, such wares and marchandises, as are common and usual: and in his
Magazine or Inner storehouse, does keep and lay up his most rare and richest
commodities to make sale of the same to such Merchants as are most precise and
curious. Even so nature does lay open to the world, and set forth many things
upon the earth; whereof she is willing that every man should have the
knowledge: But in her secret and inmost places, she has laid up and hidden so
many rare and strange things, that no person can come to have the knowledge of
them, unless he have diligently seen and observed many and several
countries: and except he have nearly and curiously sounded the secrets of the
same. I have heard, and am in a manner persuaded to believe it, that in the
Mounts Pireney, there is a certain mountain, wherein if one cast a stone, he
shall incontinently hear diverse tremblings and quakings of the earth, and
within a while after, he shall hear thunder sounding add breaking out in
claps, within the lowest and deepest caverns thereof, not without great fear
and terror to sundry persons. This I will not assure to be true, because I have
not seen it: but certainly I have heard the same credibly avowed and assured
by an infinite number of those mountainers there inhabiting, at such time as I
traveled that Country, near the mountains of Tarbes.

Those that have been in Italy, do observe for one notable thing, a certain
hole or cave, the which casts out by diverse and sundry vents or
chi^cke-holes, great store of winds, that are there within hidden and shut up.
And a man may not improperly say; that this was the Cave wherein Aeolus is said
to hold his winds enclosed and shut up, and to let them forth at his pleasure
(as Virgil reports of him.) And yet this cave may very well be artificial
and made by Art, as was that Echo of Spiga, and the Statue or Image of Memnon:
and therefore it is the less admirable. I remember that in Clement of
Alexandria, (who is held to be a very good Author,) I have read how in the
Isle of Great Britain, called England, there is a great Cave, seated at the
foot of a huge mountain, (peradventure it is Saint Patricks hole, This is
said to be in the Peake-hills in Darbie-shire.
whereof are reported such marvells) within the which, when the wind enters
and is once entonneled, a man shall think that he hears a sound of Bells and
Cimballs, the which do sound with often and reiterated strokes in a kind of
measure. Besides, the same Author writrth, how in Persia, near the Region of
the Magi, there are to be seen three mountains orderly distant one from
another, and as if they had been there planted of purpose, in the midst of a
large Champaine. Such as are passengers that way, when they are besides the
first mountain, they hear a confused voice of many thousands of persons, (as
it were of soldiers) giving a charge or onset in battle: And when they are at
the second, they hear yet a far greater noise: And being at the last, then
they hear (as it were) a great rejoicing and showting of men triumphing, as if
the victory had been gotten. This, albeit it be very admirable, yet
nevertheless it is natural And Clement Alexandrine himself does esteem the
cause thereof, to be by reason of the concavitie of the places, which makes
such a noise to be heard.

But we do dwell over long upon these things which be natural, and in some
sort miraculous and admirable, of which, if we should pursue the
particularities such as Pliny, Pausanias, Strabo, Seneca; Elian, Aristotle,
and others, (admirers of the works of Nature) have described and numbered them:
we might make ahuge volume, and yet digress nothing at all from the scope of
our intended purpose. But our intent was only to touch that, which in Nature
is most rare and mavelous, and might be an occasion of fear and terror; and
not that which is usual and commonly known unto the most part of men; or such
as the cause thereof is in it self evident and apparent. We will therefore now
descend unto such things, as being merely artificial, yet do no less then
those which are natural, fear and terrify men, if they be never so little
ignorant of the causes of them.

CHAP. VIII.
That things Artificial, as well as things Natural, may sometimes deceive the
Senses of the Sight, and of the Hearing, and drive men into a passion of fear
and terror.
HAving sufficiently entreated of those things that are bred and produced most
singular in Nature, and such as do in some sort draw near unto a kind of
divinity; It now follows, that we show what the hand, industry, and spirit
of men, does work and effect: and that so ingeniously and subtly, as many
times a man would take it for as great a marvel, as if it were some divine
thing and supernatural. Now as there are manifold and sundry wits and spirits
of men, so do there proceed from them, many and diverse kinds of cunning and
artificial devises. Some have aided themselves only with their own invention,
without any Art at all: Of artificial works done by the Art Antomatique or
having motion in themselves.
and others with their natural invention have joined Art in all perfection.
But what Art is there that does more instruct and teach ingenious and
artificial experiments than does the Mathematiques: of the which both the
Antomates, and the Hydrauliques have drawn their original? And as touching
the Antomates, that is to say, such works as have a motion of themselves: A
man may well say, That this is an Art and Science of excellent and divine
effects. Libr. 1. Polity.
Truly Aristotle does make great esteem and reckoning of the Antomates wroght
by Dedalus, and of the Tripodes of Vulcan: The which (as the Poet said, (...):
that is to say, Did enter by their own proper motion into the assembly of the
gods.

The Scholiast of Euripides testifies the like: In Hecubam.
and so does Plato the Philosopher. And Aristotle says moreover in another
place, citing the authority of Philippe a Comicall Author, Li. x. de Anim.
That ^^^^^us did make a statue or Image of Venus, the which ^^^^e means of
quickesilver artificially enclosed within (...) did moove and stir of it
self. The Philosopher Arc^itas borne at Tarentum in Italy made an artificial
Dove, which did fly in the air as if it had been alive. And Archimedes
composed a Sphere of glass, of such excellent workmanship, that a man might
therein perceive and comprehend the mooving of the Heavens, and of the
wandering planets (as is reported by Claudian, In Epigram. de sphaera Archi.
who was in an extreme admiration of that piece of work.) And certainly
Cassiodorus writes, Aemula natura parva reperta manus. In lib. varior.
that Boethius (of whose writing we have certain books of the Mathematiques)
was so excellently skillful in the working of these Automates: as he had not
the like in his time. Tibi (says he) ardua cognoscere and ^ir acula
monstrare propositum est: tuae artis ingenio ^et alla mugiunt, Diomedes in are
gravius buccinatur. Aeuens anguis insibilat: Aves simulatae sunt: and quae
vocom propriam nesciunt habere: duicedinem cantilenae probantur emittere. Parva
de illo refer^mus cui coelim imitari fa^est. That is, Thy profession is to
know things of an high and profound nature, and even to work miracles. For
by the ingeniousnes of thy Art, the dead mettalls do bellow and mow like
lowing beasts: Diomedes is made in brass to sound a Trumpet: A brazen Serpent
is taught to hiss, and Birds are formed and resembled, as if all of them were
made naturally: And such things as have not any proper voice are p^ooved by
Art to send forth a most sweet and pleasing Music. And yet all these
things whereof we speak, are little or nothing unto him, to whom it is given
to imitate even the very Heavens. But what need we insist upon the examples
of the Ancients: our own Age is not unfurnished of such excellent spirits
comparable to that of Boethius. For in the time of our Fathers every man
knows, that Charles the fifth Emperor of Almaine had an Eagle presented unto
him that was in nothing inferior to Architas his Dove; nor to those Serpents,
Birds and Diomede of Boethius: for this Egle being made of nothing else but of
metal, had diverse little resorts, which playing within it, did make the same
for a certain time to fly of it self in the air. A thing without doubt very
strange and mavelous: and which (being seen by those that knew not the
cunning workmanship contrived within it) made them believe, That there was some
diabolical thing in it, and that it was nothing but mere Magic, and a
bewitching and encha^nting of the eyes. In Paris there was a certain Goldsmith
borne in Aniow, who died but very lately, to whom I will give this honor,
That there was not, either in Almanie, Italy, or any other country, any man
that was able to surmount and excel him in regard of these Amomatique works.
I my self saw a Gaily of silver of his making in such an artificial
fashion, that it would of it self moove and go upon a Table: and a man might
see how the motions within the same, which rowed it up and down when they came
to the tables end, would turn about the Gally, as if they had had life and
understanding. And the same Goldsmiths, before that time, had made a certain
Triton or Seaman, which (when the resorts and motions thereof were bent or wownd
up, and set on going,) would show himself so furious, That any who had seen
it upon the land, how it tormented and vexed it self, durst not have touched
nor handled it.

Of the artificial works done by the Art Hydraulique.
Next to the Antomatiques do come those which are called Hydrauliques, which
are works, that do make any engine or instrument, either of music or of any
other sort to play and moove by the means and help of the water. At Tivoly
(which is the ancient Tibur of the Romans, and is now a place of pleasance
belonging to the Cardinal of Ferrara:) It is well known unto many men, that
there be certain Organs, which do go and play alone of themselves, only by
means of the water: not without the great admiration of such as be ignorant in
the Art Mydraulique. We read in Suetonius, In Nerone c. 41.
that Nero caused certain Hydraulique instruments which were of a new
invention, and never before had been seen at Rome to be showed publicly unto
the Romans. And yet Nero lived in a time wherein there were great store of
excellent wits and good Spirits: And before him also there were others as
notable, and skillful in such ingenious inventions, as namely that man which
lived in the time of Tiberius Caesar, and was so excellently ingenious, that he
offered unto the said Emperor to make any glass so malleable, as it should
endure and abide the hammer, which is a kind of cunning, to us altog^ther
unknown, and is far more difficult than those works that are done by
Hydraulique instruments. Servius, who lived in the time of Vulentiman and
Theodosius was not ignorant of these instruments wrought by the Art
Hydraulique. For in expounding one place of Virgil, he says, that the Organs
were blown, and had wind put into them by means of them. And he renders
the reason thereof, which (as he says) is, that by the mooving of the water
there rises a wind, which entering by the hollow pipes of the Organs does
disperse it self within them; and there remains no more but the fingers of
the Organist to make them sound. But that which makes me most to wonder, is:
That those Organs of Tyvoly have not need of any fingering by the cunning and
industry of any man, but they do found alone of themselves, and have within
them something (I know not what) of the Art Antomatique. For a man needs do
nothing, but only set down certain numbers upon their keys: and they will
suddenly sound any song that a man would have them. And such also is that
Antomatique horologe or clock which the Rochelers did present unto the French
king Henry the third of that name: The which being mounted up, and set upon a
frame did the like as that Hydraulique of Tywoly. Clandian (who was near about
one and the same time with Servius) in a certain learned Poem which he
dedicated to Manlius, speaking of these Hydrauliques, says very well: That by
opening the Sluices of water the Organs are made to blow: But heerewithall
(says he) there needed both hands, and an engine of wood, which with the
help of the feet at each stroke might lift up the waters as we see is usual
in Pumpes that draw up water: But that you may the better perceive the meaning
of Clandian I will set down his two last verses touching this matter: the same
being corrected by me otherwise than they were heretofore;

Intonat erranti digito pedibusque trabali,
Vecte, laborantes in Carmina concitat vndas.
Those learned Authors which heretofore corrected this Poet, after the manner
of the ancient reading, did let still remain the word penitus, insteede
whereof I do read pedibus. For Clandianus meaning was to say, That the
Organist played with his fingers upon the Organs, and with his feet moved a
flat beam or planke, by the means whereof, as by a Pumpe, he lifted and drew
up the waters. This correction, whether it be well or ill done, I refer to
the judgment of the learned. But in my conceit, that seems to be the true
and proper sense of the Poet. But touching the Art Antomatique and Hydraulique
Eron has made two Treatises thereof, not yet Imprinted, which I have seen in
the Library of the most high and worthy Queen and Princess Katherine de
Medicis the Queen mother: and they do well deserve to be brought to light, or
to be translated either into our common and vulgar language, or into the Latin
tongue: Howbeit that some of my friends have assured me: That that learned man
Adrian Turnebus has translated certain pages thereof before his death: of the
which his heirs made no reckoning, because they were imperfect, and not well
reviewed.

But over and above the Arts of the Mathematiques, men of themselves may find
out and invent a thousand subtle devises far estranged and remooved from the
common invention of man. Of artificial Specters.
Cardan (whom we have so often alleged,) tells how it is possible by
subtlety and artificial skill, to make that a man shall walk in the midst
of the water upon the very top thereof without sincking to the bottom, by
means of cork tied to the soales of his feet. For my part I think well,
That Cardan would not have delivered this subtilty, except he had seen the
proof and trial thereof. But if it be so, that this befeisible: then I may
say, that those men whom any shall see to walk upon the water in that manner,
will strike no less fear and terror into the Beholders, than Lucian and his
companions did conceive (as himself writes) by the sight of those Phellopodes
or Corkefooted persons that walked upon the waves of the sea, Libr. 2. verar.
narrat. vbi nihil vericontin.
without sinking, having their feet of Cork. The same Cardan does furthermore
set down and teach, In lib. de varietat. rerum.
how a man may feign artificially false Specters, and he gives many instances
and experiments thereof, needles here to express.

But to continue on our purposed Discourse: There are some of these Tumblers
and Vawters so expert in their A^t, Of acts done by Tumblers. V vvters, and
Iuglers.
that partly by the subtlety and nimblenes of their hands, and partly by the
agilitie, strength and dexterity of their body, and the quicknes and vivacitie
of their spirit, they will do things passing admirable. And as touching the
fine convaying and nimblenesse of the hands, can we give any better example
then some Iuglers, who in playing their tricks only by mere industry, and
without any Magic, will so charm and blind the eyes of the beholders, that
they will make them b^leeve even what they list. And as for the agilitie of the
body, I will allege no other then those Tumblers of Italy: whose perilous
leaps and vawtings (which they call the Forces of Hercules) do make the simple
and ignorant people to be of an opinion, that they do them by Art Magic and
Enchauntment: although it be very evident that there is no such matter. But on
the contrary rather, there is nothing strange nor admirable in those their
actions, if a man do consider how even from their youth and tender years, they
do continually exercise themselves in such leapings and vawtings. The report
is, that the Turkish Tumblers are far more subtle and artificial therein
then the Italians. For be it either to tumble, to dance upon a cord, or by
force and strength of the arms, to bear and lift up things of huge weight,
such as the Italians are not able so much as to lift from the ground, they are
held to be most expert and excellent. And I have read, that in Turkey there are
Tumblers which will enclose and bury themselves in the ground, and have
nothing but a little tunnell or pipe of wood, by which they will breathe and
speak out of the earth. Assuredly these men may very well by this devise
deceive many persons, and especially if they should be heard speak in the night
time, from under the ground. For what other thing could any man conjecture of
them, but that they should be spirits? It is a thing sufficiently known, that
the ancient Greeks, and after them the Romans, had amongst them such kind of
Tumblers: and especially, the rich men of Greece did use seldom or never to
make any solemn banquet: but they had of these Tumblers, who after their
feasts, might recreate their guests with their vawting and tumbling. And this
does Xenophon testify, and after him Atheneus, In Simp^sio. In Dypnosoph.
who makes special recital of many such Vawters that were so excellent in
that Art, that men were of opinion, they used Ligierdemaine, or Art Magic.
And that those of that age were more excellent then ours, it appears in this:
that by their vawtes and devises in leaping, they would express even the veric
passions of men, as is most largely recounted by Lucian. Sometimes they will
leap like Hercules, when he was furious: sometimes as an Orestes, as an
Alemeon, an Athamas, a Poliphemus, a Silenus: (...).
sometimes they would act their tricks more temperately and moderately, as if
they did represent upon a Stage, some Agamemnon in a Dream, or a Menelaus, or
some Sage Ulysses. Sometimes again, they would express the rages and extreme
passions of love, in some Dido, in a Medea, in a Phillis, and a thousand
others. And amongst the Romans, for this Art were most famous, Esope, Pylades,
Hylas, Pantonimus, Mnestor, and he whom for his excellency in that skill, Nero
the Emperor gave unto Tiridates, king of Armenia: who is reported to have
expressed by his skillful feats in vawting, and by the motion and nimble
turning of his body and of his members. all things that were possible to be
expressed by the speech.

Of illusions offered unto men by feined voices.
But what shall we say of those men, who without any skill in the Art of
Tumbling, are notwithstanding even by natural disposition so subtle and
ingenious, as they will be able to delude and deceive even the best advised?
There be some men who have their voice so subtle and so diverse, that they will
imitate all sorts of birds so naturally, that if a man did not see them, he
would constantly affirm, that he heard the true melody of birds singing
naturally. Others again have the Organ of their voice and their throat,
sometimes so fine and small, that being very near unto a man, they will call
him, and yet it will s^eme to the party called, that he should be far off
from them.

To this purpose, I will recount unto you, a thing as strange and admirable, as
I ever read in any history whatsoever: and it was to^de me by a President, at
such time as I was a Student in Tholousa. And I do assure my self, that if
the same had not been very true, that learned and grave Personage (who was a
man very wary of believing such strange things reported unto him) would never
have told it me in such sort as he did: for he named unto me the man that was
so deceived: And that was a certain Merchant of Lions, whose name for this
time I will conceal, who being exceeding rich both in banque and in other
goods and possessions, and being above all noted for a great and notable
usurer: he went one day walking into the Country, accompanied only with one
man that was his servant. And as both of them together, were entering into a
great laund, or an open and large Champion, (...) hold the servant began to
speak unto him and to tell him; That he was an Angel which came unto him
purposely as a messenger sent to tell him by commandment from God, that he
should give and distribute part of his goods ill gotten, unto the poor, and
that he should liberally recompense his servant that had of a long time served
him, without any reward or preferment at all received from him. The Merchant
being abashed and astonished at the voice, demanded of his servant if he heard
nothing, and repeated unto him what himself had heard. The servant
counterfaiting a kind of wonder and astonishment, did deny that he heard any
thing: and immediately with a voice far more strange and subtle then the
former, he repeated the same words again, and that with such admiration of the
Merchant, that he was brought into a full belief, that it was an Angel from
heaven that spoke unto him: Insomuch, as being arrived into his lodging, he
gave unto his servant a good and large recompense. As touching his life
afterward, whether he amended it or no, I know not: But his servant (who
within a small time after lest his service,) did noise abroad and make known,
by what a wile and devise he had served his turn of his Master, to wring
money from him. The same President did furthermore show unto me, that himself
was once bidden to a banquet, whereunto the late deceased Monsieur de la
Cazedien had invited many learned men, the most excellent spirits that were
then living in Paris. During this banquet, it happened that a merry companion,
(whom the said Signeur had caused to be present of purpose, for the more
pleasure and variety of mirth at his banquet, in immitation of that of
Xenophon, In Simposio.
or of the Emperor Julian: wherein there was a Silenus that kept company with
the gods, In convivi. Caes.
and brake a jest upon every one of the Caesar's,) called one of the company
by name: a man well known for his doctrine and eloquence, whom I will not now
name, because he is living. This party hearing himself called, arose
immediately from the Table, supposing that some one without the doors had
called him: albeit in very deed, it was no other then that same pleasant
companion that was set at table with him. You may see then, how that they that
have their voice fine and subtle, may easily deceive men of the best spirit
and understanding.

Hereunto we may also add and refer in a sort, the subtilty and fraud of
some men, who heretofore (ayding themselves with the benefit of the night and
darkness) by means of a voice entonneled in a long cane or reed, have
deceived and seduced such as have been scant well advised: insomuch, as they
have caused them to do things they would never have done, if it had not been
by means of such abuse and illusion. It is reported, that Boniface the eight
did use this suttlety as a mean to climb unto the Papacy: and faining
himself to be an Angel, he extorted the dignity of the sovereign
Bishoppricke out of the hands of Celestine a simple holy man, and more worthy
to live in an Hermitage, than to have that charge wherein he had been placed
and invested. It is a matter also very famous and notorious, how that in times
past there was in the Town of Angiers, one that was servant unto a rich and
wealthy widow, who to come to the top of his desires, (which was to get his
mistress in marriage by any practice whatsoever,) and that by means thereof he
might get an interest in the great wealth and goods which she possessed: he
fained himself to be the spirit of her late deceased husband. And breaking a
wall or terrasse that was near adjoining to his mistress bed side: he put a
reed through the same, thorough the which speaking in the night season, so as
his Mistress might hear him, he oftentimes repeated these or the like words
in effect: My sweet love, I am the soul of thy deceased husband, who do
counsel thee for thy profit, that thou take such a one thy servant in
marriage. This deceitful illusion was of that force and efficacy, that it
fell out according as her servant had fore thought. And indeed it was not ill
for her: for he became so good a husband, that he died one of the richest and
wealthiest persons of the town: insomuch as his riches is grown into a
Proverb at this day throughout all Aniow.

Now there be some some persons, Of diverse artificial devises used to make a
show of Spirits and Specters.
that together with some artificial and coined voice do also join things
natural, which at the first show do seem very strange unto the eyes of the
Beholders. As for example, They do clothe themselves in the skins of
Sea-calves, or Seals, which naturally are of a glistering and shining color:
and so do they present themselves unto those whom they have a purpose to
deceive, persuading them with a faint and fained voice whatsoever they do
think good. Sometimes they take a winding sheet, or some white linen
clothes, and doeaffirme themselves to be the souls and spirits of the dead.
And of these we can yield? plentiful examples. First of all here we may
allege an history recited by Hector Boethius in his Annals of Scotland. A
certain Scottish King, having lost the battle against the Pictes, found his
people so discoraged, that they were all out of love with the wars. The King
being much aggreeved therewithal, did suborne certain persons, who being
apparelled with bright shining scales, and having in their hands, truncheons
of rotten wood (which in Scotland is very common, and does shine by night, as
we have before said) did appear unto the Princes and Chiefetaines of the
Scottish army being in their dead sleep: and awaking them, did admonish them
to fight afresh against the Pictes, the ancient enemies of the Scots: And that
they should not be afraid to assail and set upon them, for that they were
sent from God, to tell them. that they should undoubtedly obtain the victory.
This devise wrought so well and effectually, that the Princes and Chiefetaines
(being of opinion that they had seen the Angels of heaven in their dream,)
did believe that God would fight for them: and in this conceit and imagination
they charged upon the Pictes so lively and courageously, as they both defeated
and utterly rooted them out of their coun trey. Thus did these truncheons of
rotten wood, and these scales of fishes, or rather, Seale-skins, give a notable
occasion to this king of Scots to add an artificia^ devise of man's invention
to the presence of men, whose lively voice joined to a thing m^erly natural
(yet strange at the first show) did cause the^ that they which could not
discern neither the Nature of the one, nor the Art of the other, did take both
the one and the other to be a very vision and true Specter. That which makes
me most to marvel at these Princes and Chiefetaines, is: That though each of
them severally and asunder by his own bed side, did see this natural and
artificial vision: none of them nevertheless could discover this deceit: but
that all in general did believe, that what was presented unto them, was
surpassing and beyond nature. But howsoever, this was well carri^d without
being discovered, I suppose at this present the like would hardely and ill be
done: but that it would rather fall out contrary to the intention and meaning
of the Deceiver, so as himself would be deceived. Erasmus in one of his
Epistles which he wrote unto a certain Bishop, showing: That it is not
always sure nor expedient to give faith and credit unto Specters, the which
are said, by some, to appear unto them: amongst other Histories does bring
in this that happened in his time. There was, (says he,) a certain person with
whom a niece of his did dwell and soiourned, being a woman rich, and well
monied, and withal, very covetous. He counterfeiting himself to be a Ghost
and a Spirit, did often use to come in the night time into the chamber of
his said niece: and being covered with a white sheet, did feign himself to
be a soul departed. He would use also to utter some doubtful and ambiguous
words, and would make certain rumblings and noyses in the air, hoping that
she would have sent for some Exorcist, to come unto her, or that she her self
would have coniured it. But as she had the courage more than of a woman, so did
she advise her self accordingly: and caused a certain friend of hers to come
secretly into her chamber, that should entertain the spirit: And having made
him to drink well (because he should stand the less in fear of the Spirit)
and arming him with a good great cudgel, as much as he could well gripe in
his hand, that he might therewithal serve himself; in steed of exorcismes,
she caused him to be hidden in a corner by her bed side till such time as the
supposed spirit should make his repair thither; who at his accustomed hour
failed not to come, and to make his wonted stirs and noyses, bellowing and
crying (I know not in what) sad and sorrowful sort. Upon the heating of
these stirs the good drunkard that wa^ to play the Coniurer, began to rowze
himself half overcome as he was with wine and sleep. The spirit seeing him
draw toward him, endeavored with more strange voices and gestures as well as
he could to repulse and terrify him. But this gallant (who by reason of his
wine, that had warmed his brains, was the more hardy and adventurous) began
to rush upon Monsieur the spirit, saying unto him: Sir, if you be the Devil,
I am his damme: And therewithal he curried him so lustily with sound blows of
his cudgel, that the spirit (which was of no other substance than flesh and
bone) did so well feel his Bastanadoes as he cried out for pardon: and said
he was Master John. At this word his niece leapt out of her bed, and stayed
herfriend from dealing with him any further. And this shall suffice to speak
of artificial devises which do in a sort seem very cunning and subtle, and
do pass withal so cunningly, as the most crafty are overtaken and abvsed by
them. We will now proceed to speak of other artificial prankes more gross
and not so fine: and such as are played and used upon sottish and simple witted
persons.

Of jests where by simple persons are deceved and deluded. lib. 2. of the
Courtier.
It is a thing very ordinary and usual with common Iesters, to be always
deluding of simple and credulous folks: And you may well think how easy a
matter it was to make that man believe any thing whatsoever (of whom Balthazar
Castilion speaks,) who was easily persuaded and drawn to believe, that he
was stark blind. The history is thus. Two Bouffons or pleasant companions,
after they had long played and jested with a poor simple fellow, made him in
the end to lay him down: And within a while after, they having put out the
candle, made a show as if they had been still playing at the cards, and did
persuade him who was laid, that there was light still burning in the chamber,
and that they did still hold on play: Insomuch as at last this poor man began
to cry out unto them, saying, Oh sirs, I am blinds. The others replying unto
him, and making show as if they did come near him with the candle, said that
he was deceived, and that it was nothing but a fantasy that was come into his
head: for that his eyes were still very fair and goodly to look unto: Aim
(quoth he) this is no fantasy, nor I see no more, than as if I never had had
eyes in my head. This poor sotte (say I) would have easily been made believe
all manner of false visions that any man could have presented unto his sight:
And if his companions had withal made a noise and rumbling in the Chamber, it
had been enough to have scared and frayed him, as if the Fairies and Spirits
had already taken him by the shinnes.

Besides, it is a common trick of unhappy boys to make especial choice of
Churchyardes, there to terrify others: Churchyards places most suspected for
spirits to walk in.
because those are held to be places most suspected for Ghostes and Spirits
to haunt in and inhabit. In those places they will sometimes set Crevises
alive or Tortoyses, and put a burning candle on their backs: and after will
let them to go, to the intent those that shall see them slowly marching or
creeping near about the sepulchers, may suppose them to be the souls of dead
men. In himno Mercurii.
And truly Homer says, That the Tortoise is armed with deceit and imposture:
or that I may use his own word) (...). Meaning in my conceit, That by her,
simple persons are deceived in the night season. More than that, there be of
those Streete-walkers and idle companions which will apparel themselves like
warre-woolves, and take unto them the habit of some supposed spirit or
Devil: and so keeping near unto the sepulchers of the dead, they will
counterfeit themselves all the night to be ghosts and spirits. Lavater
recounteth how it happened one day in a Town of Switzerland named Zurich,
Libr. 1. de Spectris.
that certain young lusty Gallants and careless youths having changed their
apparel, did dance all night long, and within a certain churchyard: and it
happened that one of them more pleasantly disposed than she rest, taking up the
bone of a dead man, did play therewithal upon a beer of wood that was near,
by, and was used for the carriage of the dead corpse: and he made it to sound
as if he had been playing on a Tabor. Some there were that happened to
perceive it, who (as it seems) being none of the wisest, did presently
spread abroad throughout all the town, and reported, that they had seen a
dance of dead men: and that it was greatly to be doubted, that some plague and
mortality would follow after it. Certain it is, that it is much the worse
when as such fools do find others as very fools as themselves. For else it
might happen, that their trumperies and deceiptfull illusions which they
prepare to abuse others, would fall upon their own heads; and they might
chance, at some time or other, to be so well marked for their labor, as they
would remember it all their lives after. But if these master fools do gain
little or nothing in playing the divelles toward such as are more divelles
than themselves: So do they as little advantage themselves when they think to
terrify and make afraid such men as are wise, and of a mind settled and
assured, and who do not easily, or without good proof and trial, believe all
things to be Spirits, which do appear hideous and strange unto them.

To this purpose there is a very notable Historic recited by Lucian of
Democritus an excellent Philosopher in his time. In Dialogo (...).
Democritus being willing to withdraw himself into a solitary place, that he
might the more at his ease intend the study of Philosophy without being
troubled by any body, made choice of a sepulcher that was large and deep in
the ground and seated without the city of Abdera; within the which enclosing
and shutting himself up, he began to write and compose many things
containing matter of notable and great learning: The young youths of Abdera
(who esteemed him little better than a fool,) being advertised hereof,
apparelled themselves in the habit and show of spirits: and taking unto them
blackeroabes, and certain hideous visardes made like in shape unto dead men,
having their sculles bare and naked: they did environ the sepulcher round
about, da^cing, leaping* and fetching their gambolds in a round, never ceasing
still to intermingle strange cries and voices in their dancing. Democritus
for all this mummery, would not so much as lift up his eyes from his Book,
but continued still writing of something all that time. But in the end, being
weary of their cries and noise, he said unto them, Cease, cease, my friends to
play the fools thus as you do, and use your fooleries to some others, for I
know you well enough. Nevertheless, Guido Cavalcanti did in another forte
answer certain young Gentlemen of Florence that came to fear and terrify
him within a Churchyard, where he was very busy and intentive in
coutemplating certain ancient Toombes and Sepulchers: For (as Boccace
affirms) having of a long time forborne them, and endured all the bravadoes
and inventions that they could devise; when at the last they used unto him this
speech, Guido tu rifiuti desser di nostra brigata, ma ecco quando in aurai
trouvato que Iddio non sia, che aurai fatto.

Whereupon, he retyring himself from them, made them this answer: Signori: voi
mipotet^ dire a casa vostra, cio che vipiace: that is, my Masters, you may say
unto me being at your own home, what you please: meaning by that gentle
frumpe, that the sepulchers and churchyardes, were the dwelling houses of such
as they who molested him: that is, that they were little better then as dead
men, because they were ignorant and enemies to the learned. Such an answer as
this you shall hardly find amongst all the Greeks: and Democritus might well
have spoken it to them that went about to make him afraid. Notwithstanding,
the answer that he gave them did so touch them, that knowing thereby his great
constancy and assurance, they left him in his sepulcher without counterfaiting
themselves any more for spirits to molest or trouble him.

Common places of execution suspected for spirits to walk in.
Next after Sepulchers and Churchyardes, the Gibets or common places of
executions, are greatly feared of the vulgar sort, who do think, that spirits
do haunt and frequent there also. And for that cause, such fools do never
cease haunting those places, of purpose to fear and terrify such as pass
near unto the same. To make short, those places are so frightfull in the night
time, to some fearful and timorous persons, that if they hear the voice of
any person near the place where any be hanging, they will think it is their
spirits or ghosts that do walk thereabouts, I remember me of a good jest
which was once told me; how in the Country of Main, there was a fellow, a
notorious thief and murderer, well known unto all his neighbors, who by the
sentence of the Lieutenant for criminal causes he committed in Mauns, was
condemned to be hanged and strangled, and was sent from thence back to his
own Village wherein he dwelled to be executed, and there to be set on a
Gibbet, standing upon the high way from Mauns. Some few days after his
execution, a certain man traveling that way, where his body hanged, found
himself very sore wearied, and laid him down to rest under a tree not far
from the Gibbet. But he was scarce well settled to his ease, when suddenly
behold there comes by, another passenger that was going toward Mauns, and as
he was right over against the gallows where the dead body hanged, (whom the
party knew well when he was alive,) he called him by his name, and demanded of
him, with an high and loud voice, (as jesting at him) if he would go with him
to Mauns. The man that lay under the tree to rest himself, being to go to
Mauns likewise, was very glad that he had found company, and said unto the
other; Stay for me a little, and I will go with you. The other to whom he
spoke, thinking it was the thief that spoke unto him, hasted him away as fast
as he could possible. The man under the tree arising up, ran after him as
fast, with a desire to overtake him, and still he cried, Stay for me, stay for
me: but the other had not the leisure. For his fear had set him in such a
heat, thinking still that the dead thief, followed him at the heels, that he
never left posting, till he was quite out of breath. Then was he forced to stay
whether he would or no, and to abide till the other that followed did overtake
him, who by his presence, brought him to be again of good courage, when he saw
that his fear was merely vain and senseless.

Now although (as I have said) Churchyardes Sepulchers and Gibbets, be common
and usual places where unhappy youths do make their resort to play the
spirits: yet so it is, that sometimes their audaciousnesse passes further, Of
counterfeit spirits that use to haunt men's houses for good cheer or
lasciviousnes.
even to the dwellings and houses of men, where they have a hope, either to
carowse the good wine, or to enjoy their lascivious loves. And thereof comes
the old French proverb: On sont filettes et bon vin
Cest la ou haute le lutin.
That is, Where pretty wenches be, and store of good wine,
There do the night-sprights haunt from time to time.


The tales of the Queen of Navarre, and of Boccace, are full of these
dissembled spirits, such as in the end have been discovered, not without
receiving the due chastisement of their deserts. And it is not to be doubted,
that if the true meaning of our laws were pursued and duly followed:
Directarios qui in aliena caenacula furandi animo se conferunt. Li. Sacularis
D. de extraord: crimimbus.
such lewd persons should be as grievously punished; yea, and more severely
then simple thieves. For I know not better how to term them, than plain and
manifest Burglarers, who do enter violently into other men's dwelling houses,
with an intent of stealing, little other then felonious: to whom our Civil
Lawyers have appointed this punishment, that either they should be sent to
dig in the Mines of mettalls, or at least to suffer the Bastinado. But that
pain is too easy and gentle for them; and I may well say, that their
behavior does deserve to be punished with death, as all privy and secret
the^ves are, according to the quantity of the sum, the quality of the
persons, and the circumstances of the places. For their Act is far more
heinous then simple theft or fellow: Forasmuch as besides that they go with an
intent to rob and spoil, they do endeavor also to solicit and overthrow
the honor and honest reputation of women: of the which, both the one and the
other is punishable, and especially, if there happen any adultery, for that
alone deserves pains of death. It is not once, nor seldom that such sort of
spirits have been discovered by the Magistrate, and sharply punished according
to the exigence of the cause, either with death or perpetual infamy. But it
is not in our age and days only, that these pranckes have been used, but
even almost two thousand years ago, or thereabouts. Plautus in his Comedy
entitled Mostelaria, faineth, how by a cunning slight and devise of a
servant, an old man his master, was made believe, as he came home from out
of the Country, that the spirits did haunt his house: and that therefore, both
his son and he had forsaken and abandoned the same in his absence. And this
the servant did, that he might the better cover and conceal the loose and
dissolute behavior of the son from the father, and the better to color the
sale which be had made of the house.

Of counterfeit spirits affrighting folks, causing the death of persons by
their illusions.
And what shall we say of those, who counterfaiting themselves to be spirits
in an house (where themselves are domestically dwelling,) do thereby cause the
death of some other, by their lascivious and lewd behavior. For my own part
I do hold, that they ought worthily to be punished with some arbitrarie pains
and torments. And I can give you an argument or experiment of the like deed in
a manner, whereof our Civillians do make mention. Licinius Ruffinus
incomparatione legum Mosis and Iurisconsult.
Certain foolish young men did so rudely cast or tosle up one of their
companions, that being thrown somewhat higher into the air then was
reasonable, he fell down so unhappily, as his whole body was bruised and
crushed together, in such sort, that he died very shortly after. Vlplanus li.
4. cum quidam D. ad leg: Cornel: de sicar. Iurisconsult. A. in Furti cum eo D.
de furtis. Lusus pernitiosus imprimitus esse non debei. Glos. in l. si quis
aliquid D. de poenis. Arg. l. penult. vlt. D de extraordin. criminib. and l.
vlt. D. eodem in verbo. pro mode admissi actio dabitur and ibi Paulus de Circ:
latoribus qui serpents circumf erunt: loquitur.
The Lawyer Vlpian says in this case, that those gallants which thus caused
the death of this their companion by their foolish wantonness, were punishable
as homicides and murderers by the law Cornelia. As also they in like case,
which do engender such fear in the hearts of men, being given to be
superstitious and fearful, so as they die thereof, ought to be punished by
the same reason. And Accursius says, that they which do in this manner fear
and fright folks, ought (according to the laws) to be exiled and banished,
although the death of the parties do not happen thereupon. But if so be any do
die thereof, he gathers by diverse laws, that then they which were the
causers of such death, should be punished extraordinarily. But all this
Discourse of Accursius, is upon the exposition of a certain law of Paulus the
Civilian, who says: Whosoever shall do any thing whereby the simple spirits
and minds of men shall be frighted and terrified through over great
superstition: The Emperor Marcus willed and ordained, that such a one should be
banished into some Island. And yet for all that, did not Accursius either more
or less, understand the meaning of the law which he took upon him to expound.
The French word is, Sarlatans, whereby is meant a kind of men, who in Arabia,
Siria, and other The East countries do usually, by a kind of charm, take
vipers, scorpions, and other serpe^ts in their bare hands, and so carrying them
about, do sell them.
For even those very laws which he alleged by way of argument: to what
purpose do they serve, as touching his explication? Their scope is not to
entreat of any other thing, then of the Arrabian Scopelisme, or of those
mountybanckes the which did use to carry about Serpents: and not of any manner
of fear conceived or apprehended through superstition. But this is in some
sort pardonable in Accursius, who had not thoroughly searched nor turned over
the good books of the ancient Writers. And therefore he could not so well
expound any of those laws that were drawn from the ancient histories. For the
truth is; that the ordinance of Mark Antonyne the Emperor, specified and
declared in this law, does lead us as it were by the hand, to the
interpretation and understanding thereof; if we regard by the history it
self, the true motive that caused that Emperor to make this Ordinance. Now
the history may well be gathered out of Julius Capitolinus, who says; that a
certain Impostor or cosening Deceiver, making a speech in the field of Mars,
In vita Marci Anto-philoso.
upon a wild Fig Tree, took upon him to foretell and prophecy, that the
end of the world would be very shortly after, if that he at such time as he
came down out of that tree, were changed into a Storke. And within a while
after, he descending them, let fly from his girdle, a Storke that he had
hanging thereat, thinking by that devise, to have deluded and blinded the
people: but he did it not so secretly, but he was discovered and apprehended
and led before the Emperor Mark, who pardoned him: Howbeit he made an
ordinance, by the which he defended all men, of what condition and quality
soever, not to fear and terrify any man through superstition, and under
pretense of religion, upon pain to be banished, as we have said before. So
that you may see the true sense of the law, drawn from this history: albeit
the punishment which Antonyne ordained, were less rigorous then it ought to
be. For considering the greevousnes of the offense, (namely, to engender and
breed a fear in a whole people, under pretense of a false miracle:) death it
self was but a just and due reward for the same. Of Impostors and deceivers
taking upon them to be adored as gods or deceiving men under a color of
religion.


Under the like pains also ought they to pass, who do give themselves out to
the simple and credulous people, to be adored and worshipped as gods, and under
the veil and color of religion, do deceive and delude men: faining themselves
to be the souls of holy persons, or such like spirits, with an intent to
cause themselves to be respected and honored, and that thereby they may
attain to the top of their desires, be they good or bad. Hann^ the
Carthaginian and Psappho, did nourish birds in a cage, learning them this
lesson to say; That Hann^ and Psappho were gods. Lucian recounteth a notable
Imposture of one Alexander, (...).
who nourishing in private a certain gentle Serpent, (whereof there are many
the like in Macedonie,) made the people of Pontus, (inhabiting about the Euxine
Sea, men of a gross and sensual understanding) to believe that it was the god
Esculapius. And by that means he plumed and fleeced them of their money,
giving them nothing but fables and false oracles in payment. This false Prophet
lived even in that very time wherein Lucian and Athenagoras lived, who made
mention of him in some of their works: And these two persons were living under
the reign of Antonyne the Philosopher, and before him, under Antonius Pius.
Before their time lived Simon Magus, who did so cunningly charm and enchaunt
the eyes of Nero, by his false miracles, and did so feign himself to be a god,
that Nero insteede of punishing him severely, (as he ought) was persuaded to
erect an Image unto him, set aloft on an high pillar, whereupon was written;
n="a)" The writing was in Latin Simoni Deo sancto: But the Ecclesiastical
Historians, who have written this history of Simon, have bin deceived in the
name of Semo Fidius sanctus: a god which the romans worshipped, whom they took
for Simon.
To Simon the holy god. That great and notable Magician Empedocles; and before
him Pithagoras, by their impostures, would have made the world believe, that
there was in them a kind of divinity, I know not what. For the same
Pithagoras fained, that he had been in hell, and was come from thence: and he
took upon him to recite unto the people of Crotona, all whatsoever had
happened unto any of them particularly: so that he was generally esteemed for
ever after, as a man highly beloved of the gods, as n="b)" Li. 5. de vita
philosophorum. (...).
Diogenes reports of him. And as touching Empedocles, we have yet extant
certain verses of his, which he made before his death: and by them he chanted
and gave it forth unto the people of Agrigentum, his fellow Citizens, that he
was no mortal man, but a god immortal: and a benign and favorable god that
soiourned at that present amongst them, to the intent he might aid and succor
them that did invocate and call upon him. And in truth, after he had made those
verses, a humor took him to cast himself into the midst of the flaming fire
of Mount Mongibel, to the end, (that disappearing on a sudden from the sight
of men, and so being no more seen,) it might have been imagined, that he was
flowne into heaven. But the flame more just then he, discovered his imposture;
for it cast up again from below, one of his slippers or pantables: and so it
was known, that this poor and wretched brain sick Philosopher, was there
burnt and consumed to ashes. Nevertheless, such impostures and illusions as
these, have gone farther then to mean and small persons: For even the greatest
have sometimes helped themselves by them, to insinuate themselves by little and
little, into the minds and affections of men under the covert and color of
religion. The king Minos, the lawmakers of Candye, at such time as he had a
purpose to bring in, and establishe laws in his realm, fained, that Jupiter
did daily speak unto him face to face: and that he was (as Homer says) his
(...); that is, his familiar: and one with whom, he had private and special
conference. The which got him such favor with the people: that his name
growing thereupon to be famous, and of great credit, he gave such a
countenance and authority to his laws, that they were kept and observed
longer then were any other amongst the Greeks. In Politicis.
And Lycurgus also (as Aristotle writes) did serve himself of this devise,
for the establishing of those laws which he instituted and made in his
Commonwealth. Numa Pompi^ius, king of the Romans, did likewise feign, that the
Numph Egeria, had familiarity and acquaintance with him, and did inform him
of those laws which he prescribed unto the people of Rome; a nation at that
time very unapt to be taught and instructed, and which could very hardly (by
r^ason of their fierceness and martial courage) be tamed and brought to
civiline, had it not been by the only means and color of religion. The
Roman Chieftaine Sertorius, did help himself by the means of a white Hind, to
stay his soldiers from revolting: whereas otherwise, they being weary of the
wars, had a determination to yield or reconcile themselves to their
adversaries. And Mahomet, his Dove (which he had taught to take corn out of
his ear) was a principal help and instrument unto him to make the Ismaclites
or Arabians believe, that it was the holie-Ghost, that came to inspire him with
that pernicious and detestable law, which he invented and instituted by the
aid; not of the holy ghost (as he vannted) but of the Jew Abdala, and of
Sergius an Apostata, and monk renied.

To be short, even in the time of our fathers, the Cheriffe and the Sophy of
Persia, two notable hypocrites, insinuating themselves by degrees into the
hearts of the people, under a pretense of religion, have gained so great
authority and pre-eminence, that either of them seizing of that province where
they inhabited, have dispossessed the rightful and ancient possessours of the
same, and have set their crowns upon their own heads. And why should we
forget that superstition, which was observed at the enterrement of the Roman
Emperors; which was as plain an imposture, and full of deceit and illusion
as was any of those whereof we have before spoken? Every man knows, that when
the dead bodies of these Roman Emperors were to be burned, there was a living
Eagle set upon an engine made of purpose: And as soon as the fire was kindled,
the Eagle was suffered to fly away: and therevppon the common saying was: That
it was the soul of the deceased Emperor which mounted from thence up into
Heaven (as Herodian witnesses. Libr. 4. histor. Caesarum. In Apollogia ad
Divesfrat.
) And Iustine Martyr affirms, that there was always one deputed and ordained
by the successor of the dead emperor, who should upon his oath aver, That
he had seen the soul of the emperor (which was said to be deified) to issue
out from the pile of fire and to fly directly up into heaven. The words of
Iustine are these; (...). In vita Aug. sub finem.
The same also does Dion write, who says, that Livia the wife of Augustus did
give ten thousand crowns unto Numerus Atticus Praetor to have an Affidavit
made, that he saw Caesar Augustus mount up into heaven. In lud. de morte
Claud. Neronis.
And Seneca recites how Drusilla being deified by Caligula (who was both her
brother, and her husband) he found out a fellow that swear he had seen
Drusilla mount up into heaven: whereat when all men mocked and jeasted at him
in good earnest, every body on all sides hissing at him, he protested in the
open Senate; That if from thencefoorth he should at any time after in the
open street, and at midday see any man slain whomsoever, he would never more
be drawn to bear witness of it.

But before we give over this our Discourse of impostures and delusions: I
hold it not amiss to set down three Histories of this subject the most
notable and famous, that were ever read or observed in any Authors whatsoever.
For by the same it is to be scene, how three several lewd and ungracious
youths for the enjoying of their amorous and lustful desires, have aided
themselves with the cloak of religion, and have fained themselves to be gods.

Eschines that great and famous Orator writing to a friend of his touching the
variable and sundry traverses, Epist. 10.
troubles, and dangers which he had passed in the time of his travells and
voyages abroad during his exile: amongst many others recounteth how he came
to lie at road in the haven of Tr^ada, before that great and famous town of
Troy, where he went ashoare, to the intent he might refresh himself and his
company from the travel of the Sea: and that he might the more at his
pleasure contemplate and satisfy himself with the Spectacle and fight of the
Antiquities of Pergamus: and in reading the verses of Homers Iliads, he might
mark out (as it were) by the finger, and with the eye, these famous places and
the rivers, and the situation of the camp of the Greeks and other ancient
monuments: and so confer them with the Text of the Poet. Now in his company
there was one named Cimon a young man light headed, lascivious, and woonderfully
addicted to his pleasures, and to the haunting and courting of women. It so
happened that there was a great and solemn feast day to be celebrated, wherein
all the Virgins of the country were to be espoused; such as by law, and for
their age were fit to be married. The number of these Damselles was very great:
and such was the use and custom in Treada, that they which were then to be
married, must first go unto the river of Scamandra, there to wash themselves.
And having bathed themselves therein, they must by an ancient sacred ceremony
pronounce these words: Take O Scamandra my maydenhead. Amongst all these young
spouses there was one young maiden named Callirhoe, a very fair and beautiful
Virgin, and of a goodly tall and comely stature, and descended of noble and
worthy parents, and she came to the river to wash her self. We (says
Eschines) who were strangers stood afar off, beholding all this mystery of
their bathing, as much as we might be suffered, and we were mighled amongst a
great troop of people being cosins and kinsfolks to the espouses. In this
mean time Cimon had closely withdrawn himself out of the prease, and was
gotten to hide himself within a little bushie place or thicket near to the
river, and had gotten upon his head a garland of Roses. Now so it was, that
before that day he had laid a plot to play an unhappy pranke with Callirhoe,
such as we will presently show you. For the Maiden had no sooner done washing
of her self, and had scarcely made a^end of pronouncing these words; Take O
Scamandra my maydenhead: but instantly Cimon issued forth out of the brake or
thicket where he was hidden, and be ganne to say: Yea with all my heart, I will
receive thy maydenhead: I am the river Scamandra. If I do enjoy thy love, I
will make thee happy during all thy life after. Having so said, he soon
embraced the Maiden about the midst of her body, and so taking her up he
carried her to the place where he lay hidden, and there took his pleasure of
her. But nevertheless this act could not long be concealed: for the fourth day
after, at a certain Procession that was to be celebrated in the honor of
Venus, and whereat all the new married folks must be present: Cimon would
needs be there with Eschines, as having quite forgoten the lewd part he had
played with Callirhoe? the which in reason ought to have restrained him from
being seen to be there. The young married wife Callirhoe having gotten a sight
of Cimon, did show him great courtefie and reverence; and withal, said unto
her Nurse, (pointing at him, and showing him unto her with her finger;) See,
yonder is the river Scamandra to whom I gave my maidenhead. The Nurse hearing
her say so, could not forbear from making a sudden and great exclamation; and
she sharply began to reproove Callirhoe: which was the occasion, that it
was soon divulged and published abroad: and it bred such a general offense,
as both Eschines and all his company, for fear of being punished for the fault
of one only man, were constrained to get them away, and to set sail: and
Cimon hied him away with them. And albeit he for his part was not punished as
he did well deserve: yet those others of whom we are next to speak, were
rigorously and severely chastized for the like.

Joseph. libr. 18. cap. 4. Antiquitat. Iudaie.
Josephus the Historiographer writes how in the time of Tiberius the Emperor
such an other scandalous act happened at Rome, under the veil and coverture
of the Sacrifices made to the goddess Isis: There was at that time in Rome a
noble woman named Paulina, no less famous renowned for her honesty and good
behavior, than notable for the nobility of her birth and parentage. This Lady
was married unto a Roman Gentleman called Saturnine, a man well worthy of a
wife so sage and honest. With her there fell enamored one Decius Mondus a young
Gentleman that was of good rank and reckoning, amongst those whom they
called the Roman Knights. Now although it were so, that this Lady was of so
honorable an house, and so rich withal, that to imagine to be able to corrupt
her, there was neither course nor mean to be hoped for: yet was this poor and
wretched lover so besotted and bewitched with his love, that he would needs
offer to give her two hundred thousand Drachmes (which by our estimate may
amount to five thousand two hundredth pounds Turnois) upon this condition, that
he might enjoy her company, but one night, and no more. But she flatly
refusing and denying him: and the young man seeing that he could not by any
manner of means nor devise win her to his desire, he resolved with himself
to famish himself to death, and so to end both his love and his life together.
His determination was not so secret, but a freewoman of his fathers, (who had
to name Ida) did discover it: and as she was a woman naturally wicked and evil
disposed, and withal, of a quick invention, and one that was expert in a
thousand suttleties and cunning sleights, none of the best: so did she cheer
him up, and willed him to be of good hope, for the attaining of his love: And
that she would so work the matter by her plottes and devises, as she would
bring his beloved Paulina to cast her self into his arms. These speeches
awakened the young man, as if he had been drawn out of a long and deep
trance; and he prayed Ida to bestirre her self, and to put in execution what
she had promised: protesting that he would be so much, and so everlastingly
beholding unto her, that she should for ever after dispose both of him and of
all his goods at her own discretion. Ida yielded him many thanks, only
she demanded of him fif^ie thousand drachmes, wherewith to perform her
enterprise, and to make a conquest of the chasti^ie of Paulina: Mondus being no
niggard of his money, but like a right amorous man, (who is always ready to
open his purse strings which are never tied (as the Greek Proverb is) but
with a string of rush, did presently furnish Ida with this silver, who having
received it, began to fall to her work: And knowing that it was but lost
labor to secke by gifts and presents to allure Paulina to any folly; she
bethought her self of a most cunning and subtle policy. Paulina was much
addicted to the superstitions and idolatries of the goddess Isis: Ida
therefore found the means to become familiar with certain of the Priests that
used to offer the sacrifices to this goddess: And having first taken an oath
of them, to keep secret that which she should imparte unto them, she presently
presented them with five and twenty thousand drachmes, promising them as much
more, on condition they would so handle the matter as Mondus might attain to
enjoy his desire of his love Paulina. These Priests being glad to see
themselves possessed of so great a sum of money, and being as greedy to be
fingering of the rest, if the business might be brought to good success, did
promise, that for their parts, they would so indevoure and plie themselves,
that Mondus should be well and fully satisfied and contented. Heerevppon one
of the eldest Priests amongst them (who, for his age, had gotten the
reputation of a sage and devout person with all the people) went forthwith
toward Paulina, and having obtained liberty of access to her presence, so
as he might freely imparte his mind unto her all alone, without any
Arbitrers: he told her, that he was come unto her by the express
commandment of the God Anuhis (which was a god, having the face of a dog,
and was adored and worshipped together with the goddess Isis) to let her
understand, that the god ravished and surprised with the love of her beauty,
did both pity and command her to repair unto him in his T^^ple^, (...)
^^^ssage very gladdely, and did afterward make her vauntes and bragges
amongst other Ladies her friends and familiars, how much she was honored and
esteemed by the god Anubis, as to be his love and favorite: And she revealed
it also unto her husband, how Anubis had invited her to suppe and lie with him:
the which her husband (being no less superstitious than she) did soon and
easily believe: Besides that on the other side, he knew his wife to be so sage
and so chaste, that hardely would she be drawn to embrace the love of any
other mortal creature, but of her husband. She went therefore to the Temple,
and after supper (which was prepared for her with the Idol Anubis) she was
led unto a bed by the great* or chief Priest of the godd^sse Isis, where
Mondus did now attend her disguised like unto Anubis: And you may imagine
whether that he (having her now laid by his side) did not attempt more than
once to reap that pleasure which had been so long denied unto him. On the
other side she that believed it was the god Anubis that embraced her, did
entertain him with all the pleasure and delights that she could devise,
supposing that she did gratify a god. Before the dawning of the day Mondus
arose and gate him home to his own* house. Paulina on the other port returned
very well apayde and contented unto her husband, recounting unto him what
acquaintance she had had with the god Anubis, and did not only in par^e the
same her contentment unto her husband, but (as the fashion of women is, not to
conceal that which they li^^e in their hearts) she began to make known
unto her friends and familiars (not without some touch of prow^^^ speeches,
and arguing a kind of di^intie, which she presu^^^d to be in her). How her
beauty was so excellent, as even the god Anubis had loved and desired it, and
not only desired it, but that it had pleased him to en^oy and take the
possession of it. The which they could hardely be brought to believe,
considering with themselves wh^^^al strange kind of acquaintance and
familiarity that was: And yet on the other side, they knew not what to think
of it, seeing they were so well assured of this Ladies chastity. Now the third
day after the adultery committed, Mondus meeting, by chance, with Paulina in
the open street, said unto her: O Madam Paulina, what a goodly thing was it
of you to spare and save me two hundredth thousand drachmes, which you might
have put into your coffers, and have increased your revenews therewith all? and
yet nevertheless you have yielded unto my amorous desires and affection. It
cannot but greeve me, that thou should despise thine own Mondus, and yet
after, under the mask and veil of a God he should have his pleasure of thy
beauty, having more justly deserved it than any other whosoever. And when he
had thus spoken unto her, he passed on to the other side of the street, and so
went on his way. Paulina suddenly became pale and red, still changing her
countenance, according as shame and despite did diversely transporte her; and
in an extreme rage and anger she began to tear and rend her garments, and
to pluck her fair hairs, and to wring her hands most pitteously. And being
come to her own house, she discovered unto her husband particularly, the
villainous and dissolute part that Mondus had played her, entreating him, of
all love, and by the affection of an husband which he bore unto her, that he
would not permit the same to remain unpunished. Her husband incensed with
wrath and choler beyond all measure, complained him of this villainous abuse
unto the Emperor Tiberius, who commanded that informations should be
preferred of this crime and offense: by means whereof the whole practice was
discovered, as we have described it. For amends and recompense whereof
Tiberius condemned the Priests of Isis and Ida the freewoman (who had been
Mondus his bawd) to be crucified to death: And for a more notable token of his
indignation he commanded the Temple of Isis to be overthrown and destroyed,
and both her image, as also that of Anubis to bedrowned in the river Tiber. And
as for Mondus, he was contented that he should only be banished into
perpetual exile, in regard of the ardent love and affection wherewith he was
transported and carried beyond the bounds of reason, which did in some forte
excuse him: Howbeit notwithstanding that he deserved some civil death for the
just punishment of his lewdness. For howsoever Oldradus one of our doctors of
the Civil Law does in his Counselles excuse a certain amorous person, who
was accused, for that in the rage and fury of his love he had used Images of
wax made by Art Magic, Oldrad. consil. 101. col. 2. verse. tertia
consideratio.
and (that which is more abominable) had invocated the Divelles: yet Oldradus
(by his leave, saving his better judgment) had no occasion so far forth to
excuse his amorous Client, but that he deserved some severe punishment: were
it only but for this, because he had used Sorcerie, which is forbidden, both
by the Civil and Cannon Laws. And be it that the rage of love is as great as
he would seem to make it: L. multi. C. de venef. and mathem. cap. 2. de
Sortileg.
yet so it is, that Sorcery is an Election and voluntary Deliberation of the
mind: and therefore in the will of him that uses it; the which can not be so
excused, but that it is an act and crime punishable and worthy of death. So
that it is not the love that is to be punished as a passion of rage and fury,
but it is the Sorcerie that is to be chastised as a crime most heinous. But let
us now come to the third and last imposture, being far more hateful and
detestable than any of the two former. It is recounted by Ruffine a Priest of
Aquileia in his Ecclesiastical History: Lib. 11. cap. 25.
and thus it is.

There was (says he) in Alexandria a City of Egypt, a certain Priest a
Pagan, one of them that used to offer sacrifices unto Saturn. This Priest was
named both by his deeds and by his proper name, Tyrannus. Whenever he fell
to beinamored of any woman, either simple, Citizens wife, or any noble Lady,
and that he had a desire to have his pleasure of her: for the satisfying of his
disordinate and luxurious appetites, he would not stick to come unto their
husbands, how great and noble soever they were, (who came usually to present
their vows and orisons within the Temple of Saturn) and would tell them
freely, that the god Saturn was inamord of their wives; and that they must not
fail to send them in the evening to lie with him. Then he (whosoever it was
that receved this commandment) became wonderfully glad and iocund, that his
wife should be held worthy of the love of the greatest of the gods that were
in heaven, and was reputed to be father of all the other gods. Wherefore,
having trimmed and adorned her to the utmost of his power, with the best
vestments, jewels, and trinckets that she had, he would also give her many
goodly presents to bestow upon the god; to the intent she might not be rejected
and refused if she should come empty handed. This done, he sent her away to the
Temple, where Tyrannus received and welcomed her in the name of Saturn, and in
the presence of an infinite number of persons there assembled. And then
shutting her up within the Temple, he gave the keys to a third person to be
kept, and within a while after himself departed and went away. Thus, when
every body was gone and withdrawn to their own home, and that the night was
shut in, he would then hide himself (I know not how) in some hollow place
made in the wall of the Temple, and there would enter into the image or idol
of Saturn, which was made in that fashion, that behind it there was a great
cleft or opening, by the which a man might well enter at his full length: and
yet in all other parts it was so cimented and joined close to the wall, that no
man could perceive the cleft opening on the other side. On all sides of the
Temple, were lamps and tapers burning: and whilst the dame was busy praying
unto Saturn, presently would Tyrannus sound forth a voice out of the
concavitie and hollownes of this idol, (being made of brass) and so would
speak unto the dame, who it is not to be doubted, whether she were not at the
instant surprised both with fear and joy: with fear in hearing, (as she
imagined) a god speak unto her: and with joy, because a god would vouchsafe to
speak unto her so familiarly, and to court her. So (not knowing or conceiving
any thing of the fraud that was in the mean while intended to her dis^onour)
she would with great ardour and attention, give ear unto that which Tyrannus
(hidden within the image of Saturn) did speak unto her: which was, to incite
and allure her to the mutual pleasures of love, and to bring her into a
passion of amorous desires. After he had thus preached unto her sufficiently in
his own fancy: suddenly (I know not by what Art) he would make the l^mps
and tapers throughout all the Temple, to be exting^ished; and then emboldening
himself upon the darkness of the night, he would descend from the idol, and
so fall to accomplish with the woman his accursed and abominable villainy.
Having by this means and devise, abused many chaste and honest women. It
happened that one Lady of rare chastity and pudicitie, was to follow the same
dance and being shut up within the Temple as she was one that did abhor the
crime of adultery, (with whatsoever title it were covered or colored) so did
she begin to give attentive ear to the voice that sounded from the idol:
and having at length conceived and observed that it should be the voice of
Tyrannus, she arose much troubled and disquieted out of bed where she lay, and
repelled Tyrannus from her, to the uttermost of her power: Afterward, the day
light appearing, she returned exceeding angry to her house, where she
recounted to her husband, the wickedness of the adulterer. The husband incensed
with the indignity of the injury offered unto his wife, (which he held as
being done to himself) did not fail to frame an accusation against Tyrannus,
and followed the same so roundly against him, pressing him so hard with the
lewdnes of the deed, that in the end, he confessed all the good pranckes and
pageants which he had played, in violating and abusing the honor of the best
and fairest women of the Town: Whereof, being duly attained and convicted, he
was condemned to suffer a shameful and deserved death. The Painims that dwelt
in the Cit^ie, being a great number, seeing the crime so manifestly discovered,
as there was not almost any house amongst them, that had not received some
scorn of indignity; and where this public plague of Tyrannus had not given
some mortal attaint touching the honor of the husbands, in the reputation of
their wives, whom they saw to be made adulteresses, and their daughters
ravished and defloured, and their children basterdized: All of them incensed
with an extreme rage and choler, rushed violently to assail the Temple of
Saturn, and breaking his idol in pieces, they pilled and spoiled the gifts
and offerings that had been presented unto him: and pulling down the Temple,
they utterly razed it and laid it even with the ground.

This history is not mentioned by Ruffin only: Lib. 7. cont. Inlianu.
but I remember that Saint Cirill, writing against Julian the Apostata; does
set it down in this sort. In the Temples of Saturn (says he) the Ministers
and Priests themselves, have been discovered to be thieves and vio^^^ters of
holy marriage, ayding themselves therein with their idol, to whom they
sacrificed day by day. Oh how many and how great were the lamentations of those
that found themselves abused? A certain grave Matron of honest birth and
education, was called from the bed of her husband, to enter into the open house
of whoredom, under the pretense that it was for the use and service of god:
whose name they abused to cover their adu^^eries. And (that which was most
vntol^^able, and of all other villa^^ies, the greatest;) by long ^^stow and
continuance, the crime of these pr^ests had taken on such sooting, that it was
reputed an happy deed: and by an unbridled lycenceit came to be set to sale
for gain and profit: And even those which had been drawn to commit
adultery, could not conceal their voluptuous and unlawful copulations. In
his Deca.


I could add unto those three Impostures, that same whereof Boccace makes
mention, of the Monk. Albert, who counterfaited himself to be the Angel
Gab^^el; to the intent he might enjoy his lascivious desires of a certain Lady
in Venice. Lib. 1. Titide Simul: Relligi.
And Baptista Eguatius delivers it for a true history: and he maint^yneth,
that it happened in the city of Venice, and that the Monk was punished. For
my part, I will not assure the same to be true, no more then I will assure many
things to this purpose, which Sleydan, Lavater, and other Protestants have set
down in their writings; the which ought so much the more to be suspected,
because their intention is always to oppose themselves against the honor of
the Clergy, Pardon him in saying this, for ill will, never said well.
and to spare nothing, (be it by right, or by wrong) that they think may
bring them into the scandal and dislike of the world. But this shall suffice
to be spoken touching things both natural and artificial, by which the senses
of the fight and of the hearing, may be deceived, be they never so found and
entyre. It is now meet and necessary that we come to the Senses, and to the
Fantasy, the which being corrupted, either accidentally or naturally, it is
not to be doubted but they may be deceived and abused in mistaking one thing
for another.

CHAP. IX.
That the Senses being altered and corrupted, may easily be deceived.
IT the S^ept^eq^^es had not so earnestly defended and maintained the
falsenesse and vncertainie of out knowledge, by mean of the senses. Which they
affirmed to be deceiveab^^^ ^h^^ opinion had ^ot him hested at, and rejected by
all learned men, as it has bin: neither had they bin so hardy as to conclude,
that nothing could be comprehended or known in certain. For howsoever the
senses may sometimes be deceived, (as we must needs confess) yet ought not
therefore to be inferred any general conclusion; that our senses being sound
and entyre, may be deceived; or if the senses be deceived, That therefore the
fantasy of a wise man being sound and entire, should be violated and corrupted.

And as touching the Fantasy of one that is wise and discreet, Spherus, the
disciple of Lenon, How the Fantasy and Senses may be deceived, and how not.
does seem (in my judgment) very aptly and properly to distinguish between
that which in the Fantasy, is probable, or seeming to be true; and that which
is comprehensible in very deed, certainly and truly. For one day, being
invited by the king of Egypt Ptolomeus Philopater to a banquet; and a
disputation being begun at his table, touching the opinion of a wise man,
Spherus denied that a wise man did hold any opinion. The king purposing
presently to disprove his saying, and to argue it to be false, caused certain
fishes made of wax and cunningly painted, (as if they had been lively and
natural fishes,) to be brought and set upon the table before him. And Spherus
being deceived in them, the king began to tell him out alowd, that he had
consented to a false opinion. Whereunto, Spherus gave a prompt and ready
answer, saying; That in a probable kind of conjecture he did take them to be
fishes, but that his fantasy did not therefore consent unto it. For there is
(quoth he) a great difference between the fantasy that judges of a thing
probably, and that which comprehends or knows it in certainety. So then, if
a man be sometimes deceived, as touching things natural or artificial, (of
which, we have formerly spoken and entreated at large) in taking them at the
first sight for things supernatural and predigious: or if one do mistake
things artificial insteede of natural, yet nevertheles that makes not, that
his fantasy should therefore be deceived, or that his senses must needs be
troubled and altered. That artificial Cow which Miron made, was so cunningly
wrought, that money men seeing it afar off, did take the same to be a natural
Cow. In Eliacis.
The Grapes painted by Zeuxis; and that Mare which was at Elide, (of both
which, Pausanias speaks) were so well and artificially made, that the very
birds and horses were deceived in them. Of this veil, and of the grapes,
Pliny speaks in his 30. book and 10. chap. of his natural hist. and Seneca
in his 10. book of Contro: in the 5. controversy.
I could speak also of that painted Veil, and of the Prometheus, of
Parrhasius, and of the Venus of Praxiteles, or of Apelles, all which, were
pieces of excellent workmanshippe, and did so well represent the lively
natural, as they were taken by many for true and natural. And yet
nevertheless, according to the speech of the Philosopher Spharus, albeit a man
might say, that the eyes being abused in them, did create a false fantasy: yet
was it but a probable fantasy which would soon vanish away, by the
contradiction which the true and entire fantasy of a wise and discreet man
would conceive thereof, and yield unto in himself.

How, and in what case the Senses and the fantasy may be held to be indeed
corrupted, both jointly und severally.
But what shall we say when the Senses and the Fantasy be indeed corrupted
and altered? Herein it is needful to consider, whether both of them together
be corrupted; or whether the senses only be so. For if the Senses and the
Fantasy be both violated and wounded, it is to be taken for an infallible
truth, that then there is some Madness or Frenzy: and such a man can comprehend
nor understand nothing soundly and truly. And if the senses only be altered; it
follows not that the fancy (which remains sound) should (after Spherus
opinion) imagine things otherwise then according to the truth of them: And if
it do sometime imagine them, according as the senses deceived will make it to
believe; yet so it is, that either by considering thereof in and of it self,
or by the help of such discourses and reasons, is it shall receive from
others: it will in the end come to raise and revive it self, and to take a
full and certain notice of that which the senses wandering and straying, had in
some sort taken and detained from it. Sometimes also (I will not deny) that the
senses offended and corrupted, may draw the fantasy, (though sound and
entire) to their false persuasion: But when the fantasy is thus deceived, it
is by reason, that the senses are for a season so obfuscated or invenomed with
certain vapors arising into the brain, that the contagion passes from thence
into the fantasy, and makes it to imagine all things false and absurd, as
long as those vaporous fumes do continue turning within the brain: but
afterward, they being extinct or vanished, it will come again unto it self,
and will soon discern, that that which it erst saw, was merely false and
untrue.

Of false visions seen by drunkards, and the cause thereof.
Hereof we may have a lively example in common drunkards, who having drunk
wine immoderately, by means of the fumes mounting up into their brains in
great abundance, do see and imagine a thousand things, all of them merely
false and untrue. They do think that they see mountains move, and trees
walk: and (that I may speak as does the Satyrist:) Invenal in Satyr.


Cum bibitur Concha: hinc iam vertigine Coelum.
Ambulat, and geminis exurgit mensalucernis..i.
They suppose the heavens to run round; and that there is two candles at the
table when there is but one. And the reason is, because their spirits being
stirred by the force of the heat, do moove and run round about within their
heads, and so doc make things to appear unto them mooving or double. But Saint
Ambrose, in my judgment, Lib. d. Helia and I^^unioc. 16
does most lively and naturally express drunkenness, and the effects which it
engenders, and especially those false visions which (...) persuades. For
having largely inveighed against it, he thus speaks; ^inc clium vanae
imagines chrijs, incerti visus, vnstabi^^^ greffus ^^bras transilium sape sicut
foveas. Nutanhis came fatle t^^^a su^ito erigi and inclimari videtur and
quafivertatu^. Tu^entes in famous ruunt, and solum ^^^nibus apprahendunte aut
concurrantibus moutib^^ sib^ videntur includi. Murmur in auribus ta^quam maris
flustuantis Frugor and resonantia fluctu littora. Canes sividerent leones
arbitrantur and fugiunt. Alij risu solvun^ur incondito: Alij in consolabilt
moer^re deploriant: Alij cer^unt irrationabiles pavores, vigilantes somniunt,
Dormientes litigant, that is, Of drunkenness comes false imagnations,
uncertain sights, and vnstedie steps. Drunken men do use to start and leap
at shadows, as if it were over ditches. They imagine, that as their faces, so
the earth does moove and reele under them; that it stirs now up, now down,
and that it rolesh and turns round about. Fear causes them to tumble to the
ground, and to claspe the earth with their hands: and they think themselves on
all sides environed and shut up within mountains. They have a noise sounding
in their ears, as if it were the waves of the sea beating and rebounding
against the shore. If they see dogs, they suppose them to be Lions, and she
from them. Some of them do even burst with immoderote laughter: others do
weep without admitting of any consolation or comfort: others do see fearful
sights, and are wonderfully astonished at them: and to make short, they dream
waking, and wrangle sleeping. The like did Plenie write before, that to the
same purpose; to wit. Lib. 14. cap. 21.
that drunken men are frighted with such horrible and featefull visions, that
the same are unto them, as a beginning of hell torments, for so are his proper
words. Lauater, in expounding a place of Solomon touching drunkenness, where
he says; Ocul chriorum vidobunt a^^^ ^^^as: Prover: 23.
understood by the word Straungors, strange visions and me^vellous
apparitions, whereof drunken men are falsely persuaded. But under his
correction, I say that this place ought to be understood otherwise: Your eyes
shall see strangers: that is, Strange women, or women of a strange nation: of
whom you shall desire to have the company: which by the law of Moses, was
expressly forbidden: lest that the Israelites falling to commit who ordome with
strange women, should worship also their strange gods, and so become
idolatours. In the Hebrew text of Solomon, there is plainly in the Feminine
Gender, Zaroth, which is ever taken throughout all the Bible, for strange
women, and not for strange things. And truly experience teaches us, that
drunken men do licentiously run on to all kind of looseness, whoring and
riotousnesse: And (that I may speak as Seneca does) Libidinosus chrius ne
cubiculum quidem expectat: Li. 12. epi. sam. Epist. 84.
sed cupiditatibus suis quantum petierint sine dilatione permittit tunc
impudicus morbum profitetur and publicat. i. The lustful Drunkard never
stays for a Chamber to satisfy his luxurious desires, but yields unto his
lusts whatsoever they covet, without any delay: And then, shameless as he is,
he both boasts and publishes his corruption and lewdness. In brief, wine
taken without measure, is the firebrand and bayte, not only of licentiousness
and whoredom, but of all crucltie, as appeared in Antony: who as Pliny says,
Ebrius ad evert ^ndaw rempublicam accessit: So is it also of temeritie and
audacitie, as may be seen in Tullius Cimber, who (as Seneca writes) being
demanded, wherefore he became one of the murderers of Julius Caesar,
answered, Ego quenquam feram qui vinum far non possum? That is, Should I
bear or suffer any man, that cannot bear or carry wine? Surely, a proper
reason of a murderer, to say, That he could not endure with patience the power
and greatness of a man, seeing he could not carry the wine that he had
drunken. But this shall suffice to be spoken of drunkenness: of the vices and
effects whereof, both the Poets, Philosophers, and Orators are full; whom we
need not here to allege, much less to seen down particularly, that which
might be written thereof; seeing the scope of this Treatise is not to speak of
any other thing than of false visions.

We will now come to the Senses, which being altered and offended, Of diverse
means whereby the senses are corrupted and deceived, and first of the sight.
do not for all that darken nor wound the fantasy and mind of man, but that
the same does always take their impressions for vain and false, as knowing
well, that they do proceed of the alteration and malady of them, Of
suffusions or running of the eyes, and other malladies whereby the sight is
deceived.
either natural or accidental. And first of all we will set down the
suffusions of the eyes which do possess the organ or instrument of the sight.
They which are seized with this malady, do sometimes (to their thinking) see
flying before them little gnattes: and sometimes little atoms, both blew,
green, yellow, and of diverse other colors: and sometimes a kind of
darkesome and obscure things (I know not what:) and sometimes little buttons of
wool, and of a spiders web: and if they be near unto a candle burning, they
will imagine that they see a circle round about it. Jerome Cardan writes thus,
in his youth and tender years, he had a custom every morning to see before
him a thousand figures that leapt and danced round about his bed: and he held,
that they were properly Specters: at least, we may conjecture so much, by the
discourse which he makes of them. But (good man) he did not consider first of
all, that he was then in the age of infancy: The which (by the authority of
Aristotle, and daily experience) is most subject to perceive false visions:
Besides, he did not remember, that he had (perhaps) some suffusion of the
eyes, or some mist and dimnesse that remained in his sight after sl^epe, at
such time as he supposed himself to see so many ^igures. And I marvel much
how such a dream or error could continue and dwell with him, even in his
riper y^eres: And that his judgment and fantasy being made sage by
continuance of time, had not persuaded him the company of that which his
senses seemed to have received. But seeing it was his custom to make men
believe whatsoever came of his own faucie, and to mock at that which others
affirmed: we will leaved h^^ to his own hum^^rs and complexions, and proceed
on to other maladies, wherewith the sight being touched, is commonly deceived
and abused.

It is a thing very sure and certain, Of a disease causing darkness or dimnesse
of the sight, and making it to see two things for one.
that when any thick and gross matter is fastened or gathered to the fleshy
sinew of the eye; and that the patient is of a gross, fat, and corpulent
complexion, there ingendereth a disease of the sight which the Arabians do
call Halahol, a name, in my opinion, that comes (as do most of the Arabian
words) of the Hebrew, Halaila: which signifies Night and Darkness: for they
which are taken with this infirmity, have their sight, in some sort, darkened
and obscured, and they do see (as Abenzoar says) two things for one. Lib. 1.
cap. 1. Tractat. 8.
Those also which be goggle eyed, which do cast and roll their eyes
overthwait or acrosse, do endure the like, so as for one head of a man they
do imagine they see two at once; Of swellings in the eyes.
when there is any swelling in the eyes, all things do appear and seem to be
red: And when a man is sick of the yellow Iaundise, whatsoever he sees about
him on every side, will appear to be yellow, and of the color of saffron: Of
the yelow Iaundise.
by reason of the choleric humor which lies like saffron in the eyes. And
to make short, Aristotle tells us, that there be some men, who by some
accident have their eyes so depressed and darkened, that they do imagine
themselves to see in the air neerevnto them as in aglasse, their own proper
and bodily figures, which does astonish and amaze them so much, or more, then
as if they had seen their own proper shadows, or their spir^tes abstracted
from their bodies.

Next to these are such as are squint or bleere-eied: Of squint eyes or bleere
eyes.
for they have their sight very weak; and they can not well see or discern
any thing, except it be near at hand: or else they must help to strengthen
their sight with spectacles. The Latins (as Festus writes) did name them
Lusciosos, and the Greeks (...), as if a man should say, The eyes of a fly.
And this malady or infirmity may very well come by accident: And it is
principally incident to them that do use night and day to handle Books, and
such as be studious. For these persons afar off will take many times, white
for black, and black for white: And they will be sometimes so deceived, that
themselves will be ashamed to tell what they imagined themselves to have seen.

And what shall we say to those men, who casting their eyes a long time upon
some sensible things that are excellent, will have their sense so dimmed and
confounded, Of the senses hurt by the excellency of the subject. Sensibile
excellens laedit sensum.
as they will see nothing truly. It is a thing most certain, and a maxim in
natural philosophy, That any sensible object which is exceedingly excellent,
does destroy, dull, and hurt the sense being less excellent. And for
experience touching the sense of Hearing. Those which do inhabit at the Head
or Saults of the river Nylus, do become deaf, by reason of the great noise
which the water makes in descending from the steep rocks and high
mountains: Of the hearing.
so the music of the Lute is less understood and perceived by the ear,
when the strings are stricken with a rude, rather than with a tender and gentle
stroke. The sound of a Bell, or some other such violent and loud sound carried
through the concavitie and hollownesse of the ear, destroys the melodious
sound of the Lute or of the Harp, so as it shall be less discerned and
understood. The like may we say of the Touch and of the sight; the which if
they be opposed and presented to any sensible object that excels, will loose
their proper and natural functions. And as concerning the sense of Touching.
Of the touching. Haemodia Torpor sluper, tactui of ficiunt quiae excellunt
Galeunus libr. 1. de sumptorum ^^ufis.
It is soon hurt and corrupted, either by an outward and external stupidity
and senslesnesse of the members, or by some great and extreme benumming, or by
exceeding distemperature of heat or cold. Thence it proceeds, that those
which be very hot will esteem cold things to be hot: And they which are
attainted with the cold, will deem all things to be cold, for that generally
throughout all the parts of their body their Feeling is corrupted by a more
strong and violent object: And so for the sight; Of the sight.
It is manifest, that long looking upon a white, or a bright green shining
color, we will imagine afterward, that all we see is white, or green. And
the white has this property, that it scatters and dissipateth the sight:
insomuch, that those who travel over the high mountains, will perceive their
sight to be dimmed and weakened by reason of the snow which they see
continually before them. Moreover, Aristotle says, that they which do look
steadfastly upon the sun, De somno and vigil.
or any other clear thing that is lively and bright-shining, and do afterward
turn their eyes apart to any other thing, they will think all things which
do first present themselves before their eyes, to be yellow: and those which
they see next after them they think to be red: And last of all, others they
dee^^ to be of a black and dark color, till such time as they be vanished
quite out of their sight. And if they have continued any long time opposed
against the Sun, so much the longer will the dimnesse and darkness of their
sight continue; because the same has been touched more lively and forcibly
with the brightness of the Sunne-beames, then otherwise it would have been. And
there have been many, who by holding their eyes too too ardently fixed upon
the Sun in his brightness, have had their sight exceedingly seattered and
troubled. To some also it has bin enjoined for a punishment and torment (as
namely to Regulus the Roman) to gaze upon the glorious light of the Sun,
Baptista Egnatius. Contarenus, Sabellicus, Bembus de hist. Venetorum.
without being suffered to wincke and shut his eyes. And we read moreover in
the history of the Greek Emperors, that the cruel and inhumane Emperor
Ema^well, did cause the Venetian A^bassadour Henry Da^d^lo, to loose the use of
his sight by setting ^^cere unto his eyes, a brazen basin burning hot and
sparkling with fire: the which did so d^rl^^n and blind his sight, that he
could never after see clearly, but became squint eyed, and to look clean away.

Of the natural causes corrupting the hearing, and causing deafnes.
And to come from the sight to the sense of hearing: It is most sure, that
besides that, the excellency of the object may impair and hurt it: it may
also be corrupted and altered by sickness, when the Cartilage (which is very
tender, and whereof the principal cause of the hearing does depend) shall be
hindered and stopped with any slymie and thick clammie humor; the which does
sometimes so stick and cleave together therein, and that in such abundance,
as it brings and causes an entyre and absolute deafenes. And sometimes, when
this humor does not so exceedingly abound, then it makes men deaf, only so
as they cannot understand, except a man do speak unto them with a very loud
and high voice, with his mouth put close unto their ears. And such may (by
reason of their hearing violated and corrupted) oftentimes think, that they
hear a buzzing or whistling wind, a trembling and shaking of flaming fire, a
trilling noise of some running fountains, and the roaring of some violent
watercourse: At other times they suppose that they hear the sound of some
melodious instruments of music; and at other times the sound and ringing of
bells, although indeed they hear no such matter. So likewise, when the
exterior object of the sense of hearing does excel, then also without all
doubt, for the reasons before alleged, is the hearing thereby offended no
less then is the sight by any exceeding lively and bright shining cleerenesse.
Whereof we have before yielded an example in those that inhabit at the head or
saults of Nilus; who became deaf by hearing continually and without ceasing,
the noise of the water falling from the mountains. And this is yet more
manifest, in that if a man do cause any violent or cracking noise to found
near unto ones ears: Or if we do go into a Steeple or Tower to hear the
sounding and ringing of any great bells, our ear will have a kind of tingling
or ringing in it a long time after, and the hearing for a time, will thereby
become as if it were deaf.

Of the ^^^gling and ri^ging in the ears, and the causes the^^^.
But as touching the tingling of the ears; it is oftentimes caused without any
exterior found offending the hearing: For sometimes it proceeds of a
certain boiling up, or overflowing of the blood, which strikes and rises up
into the face, and by an excessive shame-fastnes seazing on the party, does
empurpure, and die, or color the face blood red. The which thing the learned
Sappho, did not forget in saying; (...). That is, Suddenly a subtle fire did
mount and run round about my flesh. And afterward he adds (...). That is,
I see nothing with my eyes, and yet mine ears do ^^^gle. And Catullus has the
same in these verses of his: Lingua sed Torpet: tenues sub artus,
Flamma Demanat, sonito suopte
Tiniunt aures, gemina and teguntur
Lumina nocte.


And it seems in my opinion (saving the better judgment of men more learned
then myself) that this Poet did not well understand the meaning of Sappho, who
did not intend any amorous flame, but the subtle and warm blood that does die
the countenance and makes it so red, that the sight has thereby a suffusion
for a while, and the ears do tingle with it. And this is very ordinary and
natural in shame-facde persons, and to such, as being in the presence of their
mistrisses, dare not speak unto them; but do stand as having lost their
senses, and do blush all over as red as fire. There is also another tingling of
the ear, whereof because there can be no reason yielded, (as there is of the
former,) it is therefore esteemed to be ominous. And the Ancients did imagine
(as we do yet at this day) that when the ear tingleth or burns, and no
natural cause appears why it should so do, that then some body is talking
of us in our absence. In Cata: Lect: Virgil.
And so much testifies that Epiramme whichg the learned Joseph Scaliger has
taken out of the ancient Relques, and old hand-written books.

Garrula quid^totis resonas mihi noctibus Auris?
Neseio quem dicis, nunc meminisse mei.
Now as the Hearing and the Sight may be corrupted and depraved, Of the Taste
corrupted by sundry infirmities.
so may the Tastebe also. For as we see, that there be in the tongue two
veins, which do continually engender and beget a kind of humiditie and
moisture, whereof proceeds the taste: So, when this moisture is corrupted in
the mouth of such as labor or be sick of a Fover, or any other disease, the
savor and taste of their meats will never taste aright unto them. For if you
should give unto some sick persons, the most pleasant and sweetest wine that a
man could choose; yet it would be as bitter and unsavory unto them as Rubarbe.
And let them sup or take a taste of an excellent Cullisse or of a Gelley, or of
any good broth; it will seem unto them to be very unpleasing and unsavory.
Nevertheless, that proceeds either of the wine, or of the default of the
Cook, in not well feasoning and preparing the Cullisse, the Gelloy, or the
broth; but only it comes of the palate and taste alrered by reason of the
sickness. And whereof (now ye) does it come that the taste has of it self
sometimes a feeling of a favor which is not, but only by means of the evil
complexion of the sick parti^, who savoureth things like unto the sickness
wherewith he is possessed? If it be a choleric humor that abounds and over
rules in him, he will feelenothing but bitterness in his palace: if it be
any sharp humor, all things will taste in his mouth sharp and biting: if the
humor be sweet, his taste will relish all things sweet: and so of all other
savour^ it will be the like And if it happen that this evil complexion in the
diseased, do grow to be any thing strong upon him; then, whatsoever he shall
eat and take into his mouth, will be like in taste, to the savor that is
inwards and within him. And we see, that the. Physicians do sometimes judge of
the ^^aladies to come, by the savours which they do smell to proceed from the
interior or inward parts unto the palate of such persons as are full and
repleate with evil and undigested humors: And according to these savours,
they will know what humor does most offend and abound; and thereafter will
they ordain and compound their medicines, to take away that humor which is
disposed and ready prepared (as it were) to show forth it mali^ious effects
outwardly.

Of the Smell corrupted by diverse maladies.
To make short, the smell is also corrupted when any rheum distilling from the
brain, does stop and stuff up the nose; so as both the mouth and the nose,
are sometimes therewithal infected: and the two Almonds within the mouth, and
the uvula are altered. The English, the hea vinesse of the head.
This malady the Greeks call (...), the Latins Gravedo. And they which are
attainted therewithal, have not their smelling sound nor perfect, no more then
as if they had the disease in the nosthrills called Polipe, The Poets do many
times take the disease Polipus, for the stench or corruption of the nosthrils,
as Horace in many places.
by which the smelling is altogether hindered. For it is most certain, that
let any man present unto them the best odors and perfumes that may be; yet will
they never pierce sensibly into the inner part of the brain: neither do they
take any more pleasure in them, then as if they smelt nothing at all: And
(which is more) all things seem to scent i.l unto them, both external and
internally, albeit no sensible object be presented unto them.

Of the disease called Coqueluche or the Hicke-vppe.
To this Heaviness, or Stuffing in the Head, (for so is this disease called) I
will add the Hick-vppe, a kind of disease that reigned not long since, not
only in this realm of France, but almost throughout all Europe, as in Italy,
in Flaunders, in Almaigne, and other Countries farther off. For the Hickevppe
has in a manner all the effects that the former disease has which we called
the Heaviness or Siuffing of the head: And the Symptoms there of are so
strange and wonderful, that Fernelius a most excellent Physician (who saw
this m^ladie to reign in his time,) has put it amongst those diseases that
have their causes secret and concealed, and which God has sent for a mark and
token of his wrath and indignation. Howbeit that very few have died of this
malady, notwithstanding that it was infectious. But that which did most
manifestly discover the malignitie thereof, was, that there was no part of the
body whereinto it pierced not: nor no sense which it did not possess: insomuch
that the sight, the hearing, the taste, and the smelling did feel the force
thereof. The eyes and the hearing, by means of the rheum that distilled upon
their Organs: And the smelling and taste, for that the Hickevppe, participating
of the nature of the heaviness or stuffing of the head, did infect the tongue,
and the Almondes and stopped the nosthrilles. And because this malady did reach
unto the throat also, and did make the voice hoarse and distempered, I do
imagine that the name thereof was not newly given it, but was invented long
before the same came to be so evidently seen and tried both in Fernetius his
time, as also in ours. For I suppose the name thereof to be derived from the
Greek (...), The word Coqueluc^e whence derived.
that is, The fear of the Woolfe. The common opinion is, that when a Woolfe
first sees a man, before the man see him, he does draw from him such an
exhalation, and sends forth, I know not what, infection from his eyes that
pierces even to the throat of the man, and does make him hoarse in such
sort, that the voice cannot issue from him, but with an exceeding, shortness
of wind, as if the fear and terror of the Woolf had bin the cause thereof And
hereof does Theocritus speak, (...); that is to say, Have thou seen the
Woolfe that thou speak not? And Virgil says, Lupi Moerim videre priores.

Of diseases in servantes or flaves bought and sold, which shall make the sale
void, and which not.
But to draw to an end of this discourse of the senses corrupted. I may not by
the way let pass that which the Civilians have affirmed upon this subject
touching the corporal maladies of servantes and slaves which are redhibitory
by the Edict of the Roman Magistrates called Ediles Curules. And first of all
concerning the sight; They say, that he which sees more, L. Idem Officilius
D. de Edilibus Edict.
or better in the night than in the open daylight (whom the Greeks call (...),
and whereof we have before spoken) is to be reputed maladiffe and diseased, and
may therefore be rendered and restored back again to the seller, and that the
contract or sale of him formerly made shall remain void, disanulled and
annihilated. And he also which is squint eyed or bleere eyed, and such a one as
sees little or nothing, the light being set before him; or he which cannot
see perfectly and clearly, as well in the evening as in the plain and open
daylight (which malady the Greeks call (...)) is within the compass of the
same consideration. As concerning the sense of hearing there is no redhibition:
but a man may have his remedy according to the authority of the same Civilians,
by an Action of Achest or Sale, which they call Action empti. Libr. 3: and 4.
D. eodem.
But touching the sense of smelling, the case is otherwise. For if within the
nose there do grow any carnositie or lump of flesh, which the Greeks do
call (...), Li. quiclavum habet D. eodem.
whereby the functions and actions of the sense of smelling shall be hindered and
impeached, they hold for a most certain ground in Law, that this is a
corporal malady, which may break off and annihilate the contract of the sale
before concluded. And that this is a very disease and malady Cornelius Celsus
does show most plainly by the description thereof in this manner. The
description of the disease Polipus. In libr. de Medicinis.
The disease Polipus (says he) is a carnositie, sometimes white, sometimes
red, the which sticks unto the nosthrilles, and does sometimes hang upon the
upper lip, and both fills and stops the nose, and sometimes it does
fall down by the passages where a man has his breathing and respiration:
sometimes it does grow and increase in such sort as it breeds and
ingendreth a great bunch or lump of flesh, which does strangle and choke the
party: especially when the Southern and Eastern winds do reign: And such
a lump of flesh is most commonly sofie and tender, but very rarely and seldom
is it hard. But I may not forget this one thing, The sense of smelling
corrupted and destroyed by the stuffing of the head. The sense of touching
corrupted and destroyed by the Palsy.
that the sense of smelling is sometimes corrupted and perished by an ^^treame
Stuffing of the Heart; like as the sense of touching is corrupted by the
Palsy. The which does make a kind of insensibilitie in the sinews, and in
the other members, wherein the touching consists, and does disperse and
intermingle it throughout all the pa^tes of the body. But we will now
proceed to speak of the fantasy corrupted by diverse Accidents both of severs
and other diseases, as also by melancholy and other kinds of frenzy.

That the fantasy corrupted does receive many false Impressious and Specters,
aswe^l as the senses.
Chap. 10.
LIke as the fantasy being sound and entire does voluntarily f^tte and
accommodate her self, in following her own natural, to work and imprint in
the mind of man by way of impression a thousand cogitations of diverse and
sundry sorts, and to tickle and delight it self with such idle conceits as
shall be most pleasing and agreeable unto it self. So likewise does it imprint
in it self many things by reason of Maladies, Fevers, Melancholies, Doatings,
and Frensies, and then it communicates them unto the mind, though they be
nothing else but mecrely false imaginations, and foolish and vnne apprehensions
of sickely, Of the sundry sorts of distractions of the mind. Lib. 3. cap. 18.
melancholic and frantike persons. That this may the better be perceived, it
is to be noted, that them be three sorts of distractions of the mind
according to Celsus. The first comes of the (...) Inflammation of the brain,
having a great and strong sever always joined with it, and is called by the
Greeks Phrenetis. The second has a light kind of fever, coming by distance
of the times, and proceeds of the abo^ndaunce and ill Corruption of the
blood. And the third is without any fever, but of long continuance as is the
frenzy and melancholy, which the Physicians Aetius, Alexander, Trallianus,
Paulus and Rasis do write to be continually without any fever.

Those persons which have their minds alienated and distempered by reason of
that phleugme or Inflammation of the Brain, according to the disposition of the
diverse membranes and ventricles of the brain, where the naughty and corrupt
blood does stay and abide; so do they also find diversity of Symptoms and
accidents. Of the senses distracted, and not the fantasy.
When the ventricle before is offended, then are the senses hurt and offended,
but yet the fantasy does remain sound and untainted: And upon this point
does Galen recount an history of a certain Physician named Theophilus, Ded.
fferentia Symptomatum.
who in his sickness was very wise and discreet as touching all other matters,
saving one only hereafter mentioned. And he did very well know and discern
his friends, and all other sorts of persons that came to visit him:
nevertheless he was held with such a fond and idle conceit, that he
imagined, that certain players on Flutes and Cornets had taken up a place in
his chamber near unto the bed where he lay, and that they did daily and
hourcly continue playing and sounding into his ears: And which is more
mavelous, he imagined that he saw some of them sitting, and others
standing: And so strongly was this Physician settled in this strange agrave;nd
fond imagination, that he never ceased day nor night to cry out, and to
command that those Minstrells should be driven forth of his lodging. And the
same man, after he came to be perfectly cured and healed of his malady, did
well remember what his friend had both said and done unto him during his
sickness, and could relate late all unto them, without failing in any one
word thereof: And yet for all that did he continually and constantly persist in
affirming that he had both seen and heard those Minstrelles; and would show
how troublesome they were unto him, though the same were a mere and false
imagination.

Of the fantasy distracted, and not the senses. Lib^de^atura hom^^.
Now when the membrane in the midst of the brain is offended: then is the
fantasy stricken and wounded, but the senses do remain sound and entire. Of
this does Nemesis a Bishop yield us an example, in a certain fellow that
dwelt and wrought with a Clothworker. The foolish fellow one day leaping from
his work, came to a window that looked out into the street: and taking
certain glasses into his hand, he demanded of them that passed by, if he
should cast them down, or no? and said, Shall I cast them here, or there? The
passengers answered him presently, and bade him that he should cast them
down, which he did: Afterward he asked them, if he should cast the
Clothworker down also? They thinking that he had meant some jest or
merriment, said; That they were contented: Immediately this frantic fellow
began to take the good man of the house by the middle of the body, and so
cast him out of the window down into the street. Now he had his senses
perfect and sound: for he knew well that the glasses which he cast down,
were glasses; and that the Clothworker was a Clothworker: nevertheless he
had not his reason and understanding sound and perfect.

Of the memory distracted, and not the senses nor the fantasy. M^ss^la and
Trapezuntius by long fickenes lost the remembrance of all things.
But now, if the hindermost ventricle of the brain be offended, then only is
the memory lost and perished, but neither the senses nor the fantasy are
altered. But if both the forepart, the middle, and the hinder part of the
brain be hurt and offended with any frantique humor; then is both the memory,
the sense, and the fantasy perished and exempted. The most memorable history
that can be recounted touching this point, is that which I remember I have read
in certain Gr^eke Authors, who for the testifying thereof, do cite the
Historiographer Timeus, who does assure it for a certainty, Of the senses,
fantasy, and memory altogether corrupted and distracted.
that in Agrigentum, a Town of Sici^ia, there was a house which was called the
Galley, by reason of this accident that happened in it. Certain young men
foolishly disposed, went into this house, and commanded that their dinner
should there be provided and made ready for them: and as they were in the
midst of their dinner, and each inviting and egging one another to carowse
and drink freely, they became to be so warmed and chafed in then harness of
liquor, that they fell suddenly into such a frenzy, as they imagined
themselves to be upon the sea in a Galley: and that the sea being enraged with
the winds, and the waves thereof swelling most violently, did carry their
Galley floting to and fro, hither and thither. For this cause, as they began
to conceive a fear of suffering shipwreck, so did they labor and bestirre
themselves to cast out into the street, (as if it had been into the sea)
whatsoever came to their hands, table, tressells, stools, pots, trenchers,
bed-steedes, cups, glasses, and such like, making thereby great sport and
pastime to such as being below, came running thither of all sides, as unto
common largess to take that which they threw down into the street. The next
day, the Magistrates of the Town assembled together, and entered into the house
where this good busbandrie had been showed, and did very sharply reproove
these young gallants: but they being not as yet thoroughly wakened out of their
frannke fit, answered; that they would sooner make choice to cast away any
thing into the sea, even all that they had in their Galley, rather than they
would perish and be cast away themselves by shipwreck. Now as every man began
to wonder at this their blockish senselessness, and to se^ both their memory
and fantasy so far out of frame: The greatest part of these frantique
youths began to speak severally unto the magistrates, and said You my
Masters the Tritons, when the tempest was most violent and extreme, do you
know what I did the whilst? I (quoth one of them) for fear did get me under
the hatches: and I (said another) did hide my self close in a corner of the
ship: upon these and such like speeches they seemed to the whole company to be
out of their wits, which made the Magistrates (as they were ready to leave
them and to depart away,) only to give them a gentle admonition, that they did
not any more commit such follies. But they, as if they would have yielded them
thanks for their good counsel, answered the Magistrates as they were going
away: you my masters the Tritons, if we can possibly get into any good haven
or harbor after this tempest is once past, we will promise unto you
faithfully, and do make a solemn vow, that when we come into our own
Country, we will erect statues unto you, as unto the gods of the sea, that
have helped and succored us. Without all doubt, these foolish young men were
not only deprived of their natural and common sense: but they were also
wounded in their imaginative power, and in their memory likewise, neither
knowing who themselves were, nor what they did.

The especial and chief mark of the Frenzy. Lib. 5. de locis effect: cap.
3.
Now the principal ma^ke of the Frenzy, is, that in the declining and
departing of the Fever, (as Galen writes) the dotage and idle conceit, is not
any thing the more taken away, but does still persever and continue: because
that the brain being once hurt and offended, does not easily come again to it
former estate and temper. Of the difference beetweene the Frenzy proceeding
from the brain, and that which comes from the lower part of the breast.
And this is the cause why some, both of the ancient and modern Physicians,
have confounded with that frenzy which proceeds from the brain, that also
which has it original from the lower part of the breast, which the Latins
call Septum* Transversale; and the Greeks (as Homer amongst others) do name
(...). Sure it is that Plato does put this lower part of the breast, as a bound
between the part Irascible, and the Appetitive part in man, in such sort, as
the same should participate both of the one and the other: And that therefore,
when it does once by any hot and distempered humor, send up her fumes into the
brain, it does never fail to trouble and confound the imagination; or (that I
may speak as Aristotle does) (...). De partibus Animal.
And surely there is not any great difference between that and the Frenzy,
that comes from the brain: for both of them are of long continuance, neither
does any of them end with the ending and departure of the Fever. Now this is
not so in those idle conceits and apprehensions that proceed from any vicious
or corrupted humor, settled in the mouth or entry of the Ventricle, or of any
hot Fevers: or by reason of some Pleuresie, or such like infirmity, because
those do grow to be mitigated and assuaged as soon as the malady is appeased.
But as touching that Frenzy that proceeds from the lower part of the
breast, (or Sept Transversall) the which receives a hot and distempered
humor, and so troubles the mind. There is an history in Lucian, which
relates, how that the inhabitants of Abdera, Quom^do seribenda historia.
in a certain time of extreme and fervent heat, being assembled to have a
tragedy acted by Players on a Theater, and having stayed to hear it longer,
then willingly they would have done, they fell all of them into a hot burning
Fever, which declined into a very Frenzy, such as made them to do nothing
all day long, but sing and chaunt tragical verses, as if they themselves had
been playing upon the Theater. Assuredly this folly of the Abderitanes,
proceeded not so much of the brain, as from the Transversall parts of the
breast: to the which, some extreme hot humor once cleaving and adhering, did
cause and engender a frantic Fever; the which though it were assuaged and
appeased, yet for all that did not the malign effects thereof cease, but
endured a long time after the Fever. Whereas, if such an idle and foolish
conceit had proceeded only of some hot Fever, or other such like accidents
of sickness (whereof we have before spoken) then would it have ceased and
discontinued, as the Fever did decline and decease: and it would not have
remained any longer in the brain, then as a cause of the infirmity and
disease. But this shall suffice to be spoken as concerning the Frenzy, and
such foolish conceits as are incident to them that are troubled with the
Fever. We will now come to entreat of the furious Melancholy or Madness, and
of the causes thereof.

Of the Melancholic Fury or Madness, and the original causes thereof.
To say the truth, the fury Melancholy, does take his original principally
of a black cholerike humor, which is exceeding sharp and biting: or rather
of a kind of black corrupt blood, like (as Galen says) to that pitch or
Bitumme which is bred in Judea, and is much more bright and shining then the
pure blood. The words of Galen are, (...), (...) Lib. 4. Aphr: 23
(...). And in another place he says farther: That this black and choleric
blood is so cold and liquid, that it can never settle nor fasten together: and
it is so sharp and biting, as any viniger. De atra Bile.
And like as (so says Calen in another place) in the dead sea of Judea, where
that Bitumen grows, no creature can live: So this blood is so sharp and
biting, that no man can suffer and endure it, but that his brain will be
altered and distempered with it. And commonly the accidents do follow the
nature of such a blood. For like as by the blacknes thereof, it does symbolize
and in a sort resemble the darkness (so says Hypocrates:) In like sort,
neither more nor less do melancholique persons love solitariness and horror,
De Insania.
as Belephoron: who (as Homer writes) had been so stirred with melancholy,
Iliad: 3.
as he fled and abandoned the company of men, wandering up and down through the
fields and deserts. And as the darkness of the night, does yield fear and
terror, not only to children, but even to them which are of ripe and elder
years: So does the humor of Melancho^y, fright and terrify men without any
occasion: and it engenders a thousand false imagitions in the brain, no less
troubling and obscuring it with foolish visions, then the night does deceive
the eyes of men, who in the darkness thereof, do mistake one thing for
another. And for this cause, men that are melancholicke, are called of the
Latins Imaginosi: that is to say, Phantastike. The which I have observed in
Catullus, who speaks of a certain foolish and phantastike maiden, says; Non
est sana puella: nec rogate qualis sit: solet haec imaginosum. I know that some
learned Civillians of our time, have corrected this word Imaginosum otherwise:
but I am of the opinion of Joseph Scaliger, who has not altered the ancient
word, but has so left it, as of the best correction in his first lesson.

But to return unto Melancholic persons: although fear and sadness does
seldom or never forsake the most part of them: so it is notwithstanding, Of
the diverse and sundry sorts of melancholic persons.
that they are not all of one kind. For some there have been (as Galen says)
who have imagined themselves to be an earthen pot, and for that cause, have
drawn back and out of the company of men, for fear of being broken. Others
have been in a fear lest the Mountain of Atlas, (which is said to sustain
and bear up the whole world) should fall upon them and over-whelme them.
Others again, have imagined themselves to be Cocks, and have imitated them in
their voice, their crowing, and the clapping of their wings: some of them
desire death, and yet fly from it: others have slain and tumbled themselves
desperately headlong into some deep pits or wells, as did Peter Teon the
Physician, upon a melancholic humor, because he could not cure Laurence de
Medicis, (as both Paulus Iovius, and Sannazar do testify.) Besides, some
there have been, who have imagined that they have had no head: (as Hypocrates
writes he knew such a one,) to whom for a remedy, he applied and fastened a
heavy piece of lead upon his head, because he should thereby feel that he
had a head. Others again have shunned and abhorred all sorts of liquor; as
water, wine, oil, and such like things. They which are bitten with a mad
dog, do endure such a kind of passion; and the Greeks call it Hydrophobie,
in regard they fear the water. And Ruffus the Physician alleged by Paulus
Egineta writes, Lib. 5. cap. 3.
that the cause why they (which are bitten with a mad-dogge) do fear the
water, is, because they imagine, Men bitten with a mad dog, why they shun
the water.
that they do see in the water, the specter and image of that dog which has
bitten them. And Averrois tells one thing that is very strange and
admirable, (if so be it be true:) that in the urine of such a one, in the
bubbles thereof are to be seen, as if there were little dogs: so great force
and puissance (says he) has the imagination upon the humors of the body. And
as touching the specter and image of a dog which they see, who grew mad by
being so bitten, I remember that a certain Greek Poet also makes mention
thereof, the which in my younger years I indevoured my self to translate,
Lib. 7. Epigra: Graecor.
and I inserted it in my poetical works that are printed: the French verses
are to this effect: A man that is bitten by a dog mad enraged,
As soon as he feels the worm stinging him in the head,
Men say, that he sees within the water formed,
A beast, whose fear pricks him, and makes him wholly altered.


To make short, others there be that imagine themselves to be Woolves, and
they will leap out of their beds in the night time, and run out of their
houses howling as Woolves, (and even till the day begin to appear) they will
remain in the Church-yardes, and about the graves and sepulchers of the dead,
as the same Egineta writes of them. And this affection or malady the Greeks
call Lycantropie, Lib. 3. cap. 16.
whereof we will speak more largely hereafter.

The furious Melancholy, whence it is engendered.
And to draw to an end of this Discourse of Melancholy, it is to be
understood, that sometimes it is engendered in the brain, by means that the
veins are polluted and defiled with a kind of black cholerike blood: The
furious melancholy, whence it is engendered.
And sometimes it grows in the brain of it self, though the blood be not
universally touched therewithal: and this is done when by reason of the heat
of the brain, the blood becomes more thick and black then is usual: And
sometimes it comes also of the stomach. Now the perturbation of the
intellectual part coming from the stomach; either it proceeds of that
which the Latins call Abdomen, Tract. 9. cap. 9. l. br. 1.
and the Arabians and Abenzoar do call Mirach: or else from some strong and
violent heat, exhalated from some principal member, or from some impostume or
inflammation, made within that part of the entrails which lies near unto the
stomach, and by the Greeks is named (...). The which is confirmed also by
Galen, who writes that, Lib. 3. de locis Affect. cap. 4.
(...). Or else it proceeds of the immoderate heat of the veins, called
Meseraiques, by reason of the obstruction wroght in them by some thick and
gross blood. Now (as Abenzoar says) this heat is external, Tract. 9.
and hinders and impeacheth the operations of the natural heat; by reason
that the natural heat makes the concoction and digestion of the meat: but
that which is external and accidental does burn and convert it into ill
Fumes. And of those vapors and fumosities does ensue a troubling and
distraction of the mind diversely, according to the diversities of the fumes
and winds that do arise; and according to the differences of their kinds each
in several, as they are more or less either gross or subtle, or hot, or
warm between hot and cold. And the same Abenzoar shows, how he cured one
that was sick of melancholy, through the causes above mentioned, who one day
would have made or baked a batch of bread within a pit, and had caused a
quantity of meal to be bought and provided to that effect, and commanded
his servants to cast it into the pit: which they refusing to do, he bear them
with a cudgel, and constrained them to do it, and then himself went down
into the pit and baked or kneaded his meal: and calling unto him his nearest
and most familiar friends, he prayed them to eat of the bread which he had
baked. But they fearing that in thend he would kill himself, caused him to be
bound, and so led him to Abenzear, who restored him to his former health.
This sort of vaporous and windy melancholy is called by the Greeks, Galen,
and Hippocrates, Lib. 3 de locis Affect. De Insania.
(...), that is, a third kind of melancholy. And with this disease does
something participate that which is called Ephialte, or Incubus, whereof Paulus
Egineta (whom we before cited) does write in this manner; Lib. 3 cap. 15. Of
the disease called Incubus or the Night Mare, and the cause thereof, and that
it something participateth with the former kind of melancholy.
The Ephialte or Incubus is so named (as some suppose) of a certain man that
had that name; or else, for that they which are taken with that disease, do
imagine themselves to be assailed and invaded by some spirit. Nevertheless
Themison in the twelfth book of his Epistles does name it (...), because it
stops and choketh up the stomach and the speech. This disease is bredde and
engendered by overmuch excess of drinking, and by a continual and long
cruditie or rawenesse of the stomach. A great difficulty of breathing does
always attend and accompany them which are surprised therewith: and they have
their senses wholly as it were confounded and besotted. In their sleep they
have an imagination that they are even strangled or choked; and that they
feel a kind of malady suddenly coming and seizing upon them. And more than
so, their voice for the time is suppressed and taken away, and they can not be
understood plainly or distinctly, but as if they stammered; by reason that to
their seeming they imagine some man or woman of an exceeding great and
wonderful stature does stop their mouth for fear they should cry. They moove
their arms and their legs to and fro in their bed, thinking so to chase
and drive them away, but all in vain. And especially they persuade themselves,
that they hear them speak unto them: and that they are enticed and solicited
by them to the act of venery: that they mount and climb up upon their bed
very softly, and as though they were laying an ambuscado for them: and that
then by little and little they come to fall and descend upon them, at such time
as these patients have closed their hands, not able any longer to resist them.
This kind of malady or mischief (says Egineta) ought to have remedy
provided for it at the very beginning: for if it once take footing, and do
continue so to suffocate and choke the party in the night: It betokens some
great and notable evil to ensue, as an Apoplexy, and Epilepsi^; or the
disease called Saint John's Evil.

Of madness, and the causes thereof.
Next after melancholy comes to be considered, Madness and Frantike Fury,
which sometimes is engendered of an exceeding great abundance of blood
uncorrupted, which piercing and entering into the brain, does trouble and
disturb it, as the vapors of wine intemperately taken do trouble the
understanding. Sometimes also it comes of the choler mingled with the blood.
Those mad men, Of madness growing thorough abundance of blood troubling the
brain.
by reason of the abundance of their blood, do laugh continually, and are in
a very pleasant and merry vain: and they have a thousand Images and ridiculous
phantosmes that do incessantly present themselves unto their mind: most
commonly they will be singing of songs which they have formerly learned: which
shows that their memory is not altered within them. And sometimes by reason
of the vapors that do mount and strike up into their brain: they imagine that
they do hear some playing on flutes, or acting of Tragedies, as did that
fellow of Abydos (of whom Aristotle speaks) who would continue and abide all
day sitting at the Theater, where the public plays were showed and acted:
notwithstanding that the Theater was empty, and the Players did not then play
at all. And yet would he testify the great pleasure and delight which he took
by the clapping of his hands, (...).
and by showtings and other signs of joy, no less than as if the best and
most excellent Tragedy or Comedy had bin in playing. Lib. 2. Epis^ol.
The same does the Poet Horace write of one that was borne at Argos, who did
the like: And when his parents and nearest friends and kinsfolks, who were
careful of his health, had gotten him recovered and cured by means of some
medicaments, and by the help of Helleborus ordained and prepared for him by the
Physicians: he took it very grievously when he saw himself so returned
unto himself: and no body could hinder him from exclaiming and crying out
against them, saying, Alas, my friends, you have in saving me,
Destroyed and undone me utterly;
In forcing me to leave that pleasing error,
Wherein my mind did take delight and pleasure.


Atheneus writes of one Thrasylas, Lib. 12. Dipnos.
who had his mind so depraved and disturbed, that he imagined all the ships
which arrived at the haven of Pireum in Athens to be his own; and he would be
continually counting and numbering of them, and would give commandment to pay
the Sailers and Victuallers: And when they returned from any long voyage, he
was no less glad and joyful of their arrival; than as if he had been the
true lord and owner of all the goods and merchandises within them. And the
same party did continually afterward affirm, that during all the time that
he was taken and possessed with that folly, he did live the sweetest and most
pleasant life of the world, even till the Physicians had cured and delivered
him from the same. I have heard it told by a Gentleman of good credit, who
affirmed that himself knew one that was Gentleman or Yeoman of the horse to a
great lord, who (although in all other his actions, he was reputed a man very
discreet and well advised for one of his quality) yet had he his mad and
frantike humor; that in a certain hour of the day he would with draw
himself into a secret wardrobe, and there sitting him down in a chair, he
would dispose in order round about him a great number of Staves or Truncheons,
which he called his Cardinals, and himself he affirmed to be Pope. Of some
of those Staves he would ask counsel and advise touching that which he was
to do: to others he would deliver certain papers which he called his
Bulls: some of them he would depute for his Legates to princes and great
estates: others he would send upon other Commissions: and he was so ravished in
this frantique contemplation, that he would not have left that his pleasure for
any thing. And yet nevertheless, when this his fantasy was gone and overpast,
he would betake himself to his charge, and look to his horses, so as his
Master was nothing the worse served or attended by him, by reason of that
fit of his frenzy. But he continued so long this his manner and fashion,
that his master in the end had espied it: and having discovered the same, God
knows what delight and pleasure he took at it: and what sport he made
when he would tell and declare it unto others. This poor Horse-keeper seeing
himself and his humor discovered, would not abide any longer with his Master
(who knew him to be a very good servant) for any promise or reward that he
made or offered unto him, because he saw himself to be deprived of his
pleasant folly and idle fancy.

Of madness growing through choler and blood mingled, and disturbing the
brain.
As touching those madmen, in whom choler is mingled with blood; they are of a
quite different disposition from the former: for they are furious, hardy,
injurious, insolent, and ready to strike, hurt and wound men. And the more
that choler does abound in their brain, the more dangerous and mischeevous
they are. And especially when the choler does boil and burn in the brain,
and comes to be adust, thick, and clammie, adhering and sticking to the ryme
or skin of the brain: then they grow so furious, that they differ little or
nothing from wild and mad beasts, in such sort that a man shall see some of them
to wound, beat, and outrage themselves, to eat their own flesh, to pursue
even their near kinsfolks, friends, and familiars, as if they were their
greatest enemies. These kind of furious madmen, are very frequent and common
in the Southern Countries; yea, even in Italy, toward Abruzza, Apulia,
Calabria, and Naples, where the air is more hot then elsewhere. There are to
be seen, monasteries, wherein such frantike mad folks, (whom they call men
fe^tred; or Mati de Cadena,) are shut up and enclosed. In France, which is a
Region very temperate, you shall seldom see this kind of madmen, who are to
be kept up tied and bound, as they use them in Italy, Mar^cco, Fez, Tremisan,
and other countries toward the South.

Of lumatikes or madness growing by fits at several times.
Finally, there be yet besides the former, another sort of madmen, which have
intermissions and times of vacancie from their fits or malady of madness:
some of which, have them only two or three times in the year, and others more
often, according to the Moons: whom the Greeks, Mat. 4.17.
as also the Evangelist Saint Matthew call (...): that is to say, Lunatiques.
These, for that they are but seldom and at times taken with their fits of
madness, are called Enthusiastiques; that is, Full of divine Fury or Fanaticall:
in whom the cause of their malady proceeds, because they abound in heat
near about the Intellectual part, In Problem.
as Aristo^le writes. Such were the Sibills, and the Bacchantes, or
Mimallonides: the Galls and Coribants, who were said to receive some god into
their breasts. And those Galls and Corybantes, did at times, and by fits, grow
so furious and frantike, as in their fury, they would cut off their own
genitalls, which Ovid, Catullus, and others do testify: like as also the
Priests of Baal, and of Isis, would cut, lance, and wound their own arms
legs with knives, 3. Reg. 18. De Asin^ Aur.
as is to be see one in the books of Kings, and in Apuleius. The like at this
day do the Dervises, in Turkey. Of the Corybantes are come these Greek words,
testifying and discovering their passion, (...): that is to say, To
Corybantise, to make the leap parillous, to shake the hair^ or locks, and (as
the common speech is) to nodde or cast the head to the dogs. Of these kinds
of persons does Vlpian speak, where he decideth it; that those servants which
have at any time been possessed with any furious humor of folly, and have used
to yield aunswers near unto any Temples, in shaking and nodding their heads
as fools, they are not to be held faulty: and being once bought and sold,
they are not subject to redhibition by the law of the Roman Magistrates Ediles
Curules. And this shall suffice to be spoken, both as touching the external
senses corrupted, as also concerning the fantasy altered and offended, or
perished by diverse accidents of any malady, either corporal or spiritual. It
is now requisite that we join together the senses, both external and
internal, which is the fantasy and imagination: And that we show what
persons are subject most commonly, to receive as well in their corporal senses,
as in their spiritual, false imaginations and vain phantosmes, and to have
their minds troubled with madness, melancholy, and frenzy.

CHAP. XI.
What persons are most commonly subject to receive false Imaginations and
Phantosmes, and to have the Brain troubled and distracted.
IT is commonly seen, that fear does engender in the hearts of such men as
are subject to fearful impressions, many false persuasions and wrong
imaginations. And for this cause, fearful persons do show themselves to be
trobled in their minds with fear and terror; Two sorts of fearful persons.
for that which has no appearance of truth and verity. Now there be two sorts
of fearful persons: the one of them are so naturally, by reason of the
imbecilitie of their age, or of their sex: The others are accidentally, and by
some outward cause; whereof, in part some reason may be yielded, and yet partly
also the same is unknown and secret, as being reserved in the cabinet of the
secrets of God himself.

Of persons naturally fearful.
Amongst those that are by nature fearful, I may in the first place, put those
that are given to be superstitious: notwithstanding, that at the first show it
may be said, that superstition is rather an accidental kind of fear. Of
such as are given to be superstitious.
But yet if we regard it more nearly and advisedly, and do consider that
those weaker sorts of persons are easily given to be superstitious, (which the
Philosophers also do hold and maintain:) I doubt not but in the end it will be
accorded, that they are to be deemed superstitious, by reason of the
imbecillitie of their nature. And therefore we see that women and old men, are
more addicted to superstition then any other, because their natural is more
weak, and their forces are less assured. I will not say, but that sometimes
superstition comes also by means of some external cause of malady and
sickness, or some other such like accident; as that of Bion Boristenites,
Plinius Junior li. 7. Epistolarum. Epist. 26. Tum demum (inquit) sumus optimi
dum infirmi sumus: beatumque in posterum and innoxium destinamus vitam.
who coming to be sick, did so change his opinion even at an instant, that of
a mere Atheist, and most profane wicked person as he was, he became so
superstitious, as he would make many vows far unworthy and unbeseeming a
Philosopher, and tied bills and scroles about his neck, in hope to find, by
them, recoverie of his health. Now, as the wicked man and Atheist, does in no
sort believe, that there are either good or evil spirits, nor does apprehend
those things that are supernatural: So the superstitious person is (...) too
soon drawn into lightness of belief, and by reason of the fear which he
has of evil spirits. He faineth unto himself a thousand foolish and idle
fancies and toys in his brain. And therefore, not without good cause, is
superstition named by the Greeks, (...), because of the fear of devils,
which both Proclus, Plato, Porphirye, Iamblicus, Dion, Lucian, Zeleucus apu^
stobaeum: sermon de legibus. Mali Genii (in quit) a superstitiosis metuuntur.
and other Ancients do call (...)or (...). Also those which are attached with
this fault and imperfection, do make themselves believe that they have seen
visions, which indeed they have not seen: And sometimes an excessive fear of
spirits, will seize and take hold upon them, in such a manner, that in the dead
and dark horror of the night, they will cross and mark themselves a thousand
times, as if they did see some strange and fearful sight; and they will
abhor to hear any talk of Divelles, and do never sleep nor rest in quiet,
still imagining that a thousand Phantosmes do fly up and down round about them.

Of young children. De somn^ and vigilia.
Next after those that be superstitious, come young children, who (as Aristotle
says) are subject to this humor, that they persuade themselves they see
visions of Specters and Apparitions in the night, though indeed they see
nothing. And most commonly they will be so afraid when they awake out of their
sleep, by means of the sudden emotion of the humors, and of the blood
descending into the sensitive organs, that (neither more nor less than as if
they had some suffusion of their eyes,) they will think they have seen some
Specters or strange sights presented to them, which for very fear will make
them to cover and hide themselves close under the cloths of their bed. And how
can it be but that children should persuade themselves of such foolish
imaginations and apprehensions in the night, seeing that even in the very day
time a man may make them to believe things merely false as if they were true
and certain? Again we see, that sometimes they will fall into such a fear,
as they will be ready to swound, and will cry out in their sleep by night,
when they do but call to their remembrance the fear which they have had in
the day time: and (which is more) they will grow to have the Falling Sickness,
as I have noted in Hippocrates. I have read in Lavater, how in his Country of
Switzerland, De sacro morb^. De Spectris.
at a c^rtaine time of the year, there were some that used to disguise and
mask themselves in horrible vizards, like unto devils, only with an
intention to terrify the little children that were given to be fearfully
conceited: and they do make them believe, that they had seen some
warre-woolves, fayries, or night-spirits, and such like. And the same which
Lavater says was usual in his Country, is no more then is seen in France,
where mummeries are very common and usual in diverse Towns, in the form and
habit of spirits and devils. As touching such mummeries, I cannot observe any
one more ridiculous, then that mask o^ monstrous image, which in a certain
Town of this Realm, (which here shall be namelesse,) is every year carried
about, with great solemnity upon their festival days. It has a great face
and vifage, infinitely broad and large, with long and sharp teeth, and is for
that cause called (The old woman with the great teeth:) But in my judgment,
this is a mere idolatry taken from the Paynims and Gentiles, who had also
their Mandur^^s; which (as ^ostus says,) was a great mask or monstrous
picture, usually carried about in the Procession of their gods, and left not to
moove the chaps, and grind the teeth. But either of those were in vented (as I
take it) to give cause of laughter to such as were sad and pensive, and to
terrify little children. At Lions also in France, they have their
Macheoronste, little or nothing differiug from the Mandurus, of the Gentiles,
which they use likewise to carry about the City in great pomp and triumph.
The Ancients, (as I have observed out of Ausonim,) had certain such maskes or
ugly pictures with three or four squares; which, on what side soever they were
changed and turned, had the figure of a man; not without great admiration to
the most advised and assured, and no less to the fearing and terrifying of
little children. Those maskes in Latin are called Oscilla, and in Greek
(...); as if a man should say little mouthed images, Os^illa, signifies faces
moving the chaps or mouth in deformed manner, like vizards in a mummery.
and they were purposely borne hanging in little streamers or banne^s, which
they used to shake and moove to and fro: and they might plainly be discerned,
in the end, to have the humane shape and form, though in the agitation and
stirring of them, a man would have judged that they had a thousand faces and
countenances. I have seen such kinds of maskes or pictures in the possession
of Master Gaiffier, an advocate in the Court of Parliament, who was a great
lover of Antiquities, and one of my very good and dear friends.

Of aged persons, and that they are much subject to fear, etc.
Next after infants and little children, come the aged and decrepite old
persons, of whom the natural humor and moisture is well-neere spent and
consumed, and their brain is become to be in a manner wasted and dried up, by
reason of their years. To these kind of folks it is, naturally proper to
doat and to be idly conceited, (and as Aristophanes says) (...), which
signifies, (...).
to divine and prophecy after the manner of the Sibills, and as being bereaved
of their wits and senses. Moreover, old age is very apt to feign unto it
self, specters and apparitions, either by reason that the brain is offended,
or through the weakness and imbecillitie of the senses; or by means of some
other such discommodities and inconveniences, as old age usually brings with
it: And God he knows, that when old folks, men or women, do grow to be (as
it were) children again, which the Latins do^ term Repuerascere; they be^
more childish then very children, according to the Greek proverb, (...):
insomuch, as they will not stick to affi^me, with all the oaths of the world,
things that never were, and which they never knew. And if you would assay to
pluck out of their heads, the opinion which they have once conceived of
specters and visions, you should but loose your labor, as in attempting a
thing impossible. Jerome Cardan rehearses, Lib de subtilit.
how he knew an old man, which was so frighted and terrified with the conceit
of a false vision, that he could not be made believe, but that he had seen
aspecter, and he died through the fear of that conceit.

Of women, that they are naturally subject to fears.
After children and old folks, next do succeed women of all sorts, whom
Saint Peter in his Canonical epistle, terms frail and weak vessels, well
knowing the defect and imbecilitie of their courage, and that the same is
capable of all manner of fear and perturbation. That was the cause (as
Harpocration writes) that the Greeks had a law, Cap. 3.
by the which (for the considerations above expressed) there were perpetual
tutors and overseers ordained and appointed to their women. And in imagination
of the same law, was the Customarie law of France, which decrees, that the
wives should be in perpetual tutelage of their husbands, and that they may not
be called into judgment, nor make contracts, nor govern or dispose of their
goods, without leave and authority of their husbands. And the law of the
Romans, in regard of their imbecillitie and natural frailty, did make them
incapable to execute any places of charge, either public, or civil, and
excluded them from being Magistrates and Judges, and from all manner of plaints,
procurations, and intercessions for any other persons, and from accusing and
libelling against all such like actions, as also from being arbitrers and
vmpiers in any causes. Lib. 2. D. de Regul: Iuris L. cum praetor penult: D. de
iualic. l. 2. D. de re Iudicat. l. neque D. de procu. l. D. de crimine C. qui
accusat. In Apolog. ad DD. fratres. In historia ecclesiasti.
And I have read in Justin Martyr, and E^sebius, one thing that was worthy the
observation amongst the Ancient Romans; and which is very well agreeing and
consenting with our vsages, manners and customs. For though at this day the
written laws do conclude, the woman to be under the power and command of her
husband; yet so it is, that the Emperor Mark Antonyne, did authorize and
privilege a certain married woman that was a christian, by his writing, to have
the government and administration of her own goods, because her husband,
being a heathen Paynim, did misuse and entreat her evil: which shows very
evidently, that she was under the power and government of her husband, till
such time as the grant and letters patents of the Prince, did make frustrate
his power and authority over her. Wherefore seeing it is most certain, that
women are naturally so frail and weak; it must needs be, that fear is
naturally attending upon them, and does ever accompany them: and it does
easily imprint sundry imaginations in their minds, like as a man would make in
wax, an impression of some character with a Ring or Signet. And it must needs
be, that their fear and apprehension is very great, seeing their imagination
does engender so mervellous effects in nature, as nothing more. And letting
pass whatsoever is written hereof in ancient histories, I will only in this
place, recite a certain accident which befell of late, even in our time; the
same being a thing as mavelous as any one thing that you shall observe in any
Authors whatsoever. There was a certain gentleman in a village near the Town
of Argenton in Normandy, Of a gentleman borne in Normandy.
which complotted with some of the inhabitants of that Village to play certain
plays, wherein should be acted certain devils, to the intent the pleasure
and pastime of their Pageant might be the greater. Of humane parts in form of
a monster.
And this Gentleman would needs himself be apparrelled and attired in the
habit of a devil, and did play the part of a devil: insomuch, as after the
plays were ended, he resting in a heat and chafed in his furniture, went
home to his wife, lay with her, and had her company clad in the same attire
wherein he had played the devil: By means whereof, it happened that his wife
(were it either by some vehement imagination that surprised her, or else (which
I rather believe) through a very fear which seized upon her, and is naturally
in the hearts of all women) she was delivered at the nine months end, of a
son so monstrous, as in his countenance, his head, his face, and all the
other parts of his body, especially in his feet, he resembled and was more
like unto a Satyr, such as the Poets have described, then unto an ordinary
and natural man. After this, she had other children by her husband, all
which, (together with their brother the monster) did survive both their father
and their mother. Upon whose decease, there grew a contention and variance
between them, touching the succession of his inheritance. All of them
endeavoring to exclude this monster their elder brother, not only from the
birthright of being heir and eldest son, but even from the total
succession of any thing that he should claim, or that might in right
appertain unto him. Heerevpon was the process sued, and the matter proceeded
in suite between them, before a ludge of an inferior Court; by whom it was
ordered, that they should make their entry upon the inheritance, and that the
eldest brother* should inherit, as next heir unto his father and mother,
according to the custom of Normandy. From this sentence the younger brethren
brought their appeal, Of a process or suit in an appeal brought against the
said monster by his brethren upon claim of inheritance.
and remooved it into the Court of Parliament of Roan, where the cause was
pleaded: And the younger brethren being Appellants did aleadge; That they had
great and just cause to complain upon the wrong done them, not only, in that
their brother was admitted to the birthright of being heir and eldest son
to their father: but also that he should be adjudged to, have any part in
the succession of that living, which neither did, nor could in any sort fall or
appertain unto him, by any Laws, either divine or humane. For, besides that
he was a very monster borne, and even against the ordinary course of nature:
And therefore was to be excluded for that only cause from all natural rights
and privileges, as well of any legitimate and lawful portion, as of the
birthright and privilege of the first borne. There was not also any reason
why he should be either termed or accounted for a man, seeing he was formed
and created far unlike other men, and did more resemble a Savage and a
Satyr, than a reasonable man. That by the public laws of the Romans (which
concerned their religion and ceremonies) the monster ought to be put to death
as soon as it was borne, and then was to be thrown into the sea, or into the
next river; or else was to be burned with fire made of those woods which are
accounted unfortunate, as namely thorns, hawthornes, briars, and such other
like barren, vnfertile, and savage shrubbes; the cinders whereof were cast into
the river: which done, the books of the Sibils were looked, to enquire, what
gods they should seek to appease: and what solemn games and processions they
should celebrate: neither was there any thing done, either in public, or in
particular, until such time as they were thoroughly expiated and purged. And
hereof we have abundant examples in Titus Livius, Dion, Phlegon, Julius
Obsequens, Animi^nus Marcellinus, and other Roman Authors. And as touching the
Greeks, their religion in this point, was like unto the Romans: For they burnt
their monsters and threw their ashes into the sea, as Theocritus affirms. And
it is not to be thought any strange matter, that the religion both of the
Romans and the Greeks did so abhor and detest monsters; seeing that amongst
those peoples, and especially amongst the Romans, all men that were in any
sort deformed, or in any part monstrous, were killed, and reputed so
unfortunate and unlucky in the encountering of them, that (as we may read
both in their Poets and Historians) there was none but held that journey most
unfortunate and unlucky, wherein he did happen to meet, or to have a fight,
either of any Negro or Ethiopian, or any man that was deformed or monstrous in
any part of his body. Yea whenever their camp was (...) o^ to give battle
unto their enemies (...) with any such hide (...) would instantly upon the
place, massacre and hew them (...) pieces, so greatly did they ^bho^re all
deformity, reck^ing the same an enemy to nature; which of it self does never
love not desire to produce or bring forth any thing that should be either
counterfeit, or strange from the humane shape and form. And if monsters have
bin so hated and abhorred of the Romans and Greeks being Paynims: so have they
been no less detested and abhorred of us Christians. Cap. qui in aliquo did.
51.
For by the right of our laws public which are the Canons of our Church, it
is forbidden and defended, that any monsters should be preferred to the orders
of Priesthood. Accursius and Doctores in l. ownes popule D. de Just. and Iure.
l. non sunt liberi D. de flat, house.
And Accursius, as also after him, the most part of the Doctors in the Civil
law do hold, That monsters may freely and safely be put to death and slain:
and they gave an example thereof in a savage and wild man, whom (as they
affirm) it is lawful to kill. And to dispute according to the Civil laws
touching the matter now in question: I find, that by the same, all monsters
borne against the order and common course of Nature, are to be held for
illegitimate: and by consequence, are therefore to be excluded from that
lawful portion which may seem to appertain unto them, out of the
inheritance of their parents, as if they had not been horn at all: L. quod
ceriatum. D. de post haered. instit. cap. vus. An n^^tus vel alias imperfectus
feudum retineat.
neither is that Testament to be broken or disallowed, wherein the Testator
does forget and neglect them. What shall I say more? Even by the laws Feodall
they cannot be allowed for Tenants, or to hold by any noble Fee or Tenure: And
the reason thereof is very plain and peremptory; because they have not the
power and faculty to perform those services and homages which are due unto
the Lords of the Fee: And therefore, for these reasons before alleged the
Appellants did conclude, That the judgment given, was erroneous. But the
eldest brother being def^^dant in the appeal, did affirm and maintain, that
the inferi^^ir Judge had well and rightly ordained; That he (as the eldest and
right heir legitimate) ought to have such part and portion in the succession,
as by the custom of the Country might appertain and belong unto him; That
albeit he had his visage and some parts of his body in some sort deformed: yet
that was no reason that he should be held and reputed as a monster, seeing
he had the use of reason and humane discurse: That it was to be seen in
ancient Authors, how sundry women, by means of their forcible and vehement
imagination, had ingendered and brough? forth children much more monstrous
than he was: who nevertheless were not declared nor adjudged to be
illegitimate or abortive in nature: That it was a thing ordinary and proper to
the imagination, to produce mavelous effects in women at the time of their
conception: The which is testified by Saint Jerome, Question 1 (...) Genesim.
speaking of a certain woman which engendered an infant so deformed, that in,
and throughout all parts, as well of his body, as of his visage, he was far
unlike both to his father and mother: And nevertheless, Hippocrates the great
and most famous Physician of that time did declare and pronounce his opinion,
that this infant, (notwithstanding he was so deformed) did appertain to the
mother, and that she had not bred and brought him forth* but only through
the force and vehemency of her imagination. That the divines also do hold and
affirm, and namely Saint Augustine, Lib. 11. de civitat. Dei.
that those monsters which are borne through the imagination of their mothers,
are not properly monsters: Nay they go yet further, not alowing them in any
sort to be called monsters, who be borne of mankind, and be capable of reason,
and of the future resurrection. That they only are to be termed and called
monsters which are borne of some beast, and not of any man, and have
notwithstanding the face, body, and members of a man: as that monster which was
borne in Britain of a Cow, in the time of King Jews the twelfth; the face,
body, and members whereof, were wholly, and in all parts, as of a man, save
that, one of the ^^^^e thereof did resemble, and was like to the feet of the
Damme thereof. Upon the birth of which monster there was nevertheless great
disputation, whether the same ought to be baptized, or no: as is reported by
Monsieur Boyer President at Bordeaux, who touching that matter, Boerius Cons.
301. Zarabell. in Clem.. ad haec quaest. 2. de sum. Trinit.
aleadged the authorities of the Doctors which debated that question and
controversio. Now although it be granted, that such monsters, bred and borne
of a beast, may lawfully be slain: Yet is it not to be yielded in any sort,
that those monsters that are borne of any man, should be slain, as the
Appellants do seem to affirm; whether they have the use of reason (which is
the opinion both of Baldus, Aretin, Immola, Bald. Aretin. and Immola in l. quod
dicitur D. de liberis and posthu. Angel. in tract. de maleficiis gl. and ex
intervallo verse. quid au temsi hominem. Felinus cap. fin: de homic. In repe.
cap. Rainutius de testam. in verbo, Et soboles quam gestabat in vtero.
Accursius in l. quaeret D. de verb. sign. facit l. inter caetera de liber. and
post. Quaeritur Hermaphrodit. D. de statu hom. Hostien. in sum. de corpore
vitlatis fin. Baldus l. fin. C. de suis and legit. and lib. 1. Consslior. cons.
436. Rebuffus in l. oftentum D. de verb. signif.
and Angelus:) or whether they have not the use of reason, but be so monstrous,
as they have not so much as the face of a man, but rather of some beast: which
is the doctrine of Felinus, of whose opinion also is Benedictus. And therefore
to small purpose are all those histories alleged by the Appellants out of
Titus Livius, and others, and out of the public laws of the Romans. And as
touching the Civill-Lawe, so far as concerns the matter in question; much
less to the purpose is that which the Appellants affirm: That in times past
any infant monstrous borne, and forgotten or omitted in the testament of the
Parents, could not therefore break or disan^ll the testament: For this is to
be understood (as Accursius says) when such an infant had not any shape or
form of man: and when it was destitute of the use of reason; and did the deed^
and actions of a beast, as if it bellowed like an ox: or fed upon grass as
a sheep. That our laws do admit an identitie of reason, and one self same
and the like consideration betwixt such as are borne monstrous as th^se which
are Hermaphrodites. For like as the Hermaphrodites are reputed to be of that
s^^ wherein they do most excel, (according to the Civillians) So the Defendant
in this appeal, ought to be accounted and held of that kind wherein he
excels, and that is, in the nature and kind of man, as being both borne of
a man, and having the reason of a man. And that as the Hermaphrodites may be
instituted heirs to succeed to any Inheritance, and are capable of Benefices
without dispensation, and may be promoted to holy Orders; so the monstrous
borne which is partaking of mankind, and has the benefit and help of
reason, may very well be admitted to succeed to his parents dying intestate,
according to the general custom of France, which wills, that The dead
should give seizin to the living. And therefore the Defendant concluded, That
the Judgment had been well and rightly yielded. And thereupon the Court by a
solemn Arrest did confirm the same Judgment, and did pronounce the appeal
to be brought without any just cause of grief; and that therefore the sentence
from which they had appealed, should be fully and wholly executed.

But to return to our Discourse touching women; I say, That very Fear does
cause a thousand imaginations to come into their minds, the which being
carried and conveyed thence even to their corporal eyes, do bring them into
foolish and fond conceiptes, that they have seen some spirits. Besides, there
be some particular maladies proper to women which be barren, and to maidens
likewise; when their terms do come and descend, and that the blood of their
monthly disease being stopped from his course, through the ordinary passages
and by the matrix does redound and beat back again by the heart, or by the
pastes near about the breast. Then the same blood, not finding any passage, De
Virginum not.
troubles the brain in such sort, that (as Hippocrates says) it causes
many of them to have idle fancies and fond conceits, and tormenteth them with
diverse imaginations of horrible specters, and fearful sights to their
seeming; with which being so afflicted, some of them do seek to throw and
cast themselves into wells or pittes, and others to destroy themselves by
hanging, or some such miserable end. And it may be that the Milesian Virgins
(of whom Plutarch writes) were surprised with this malady, which constrained
them to hang themselves: Defoemin. illustr.
and yet the citizens of Miletum could never discover not find out, what
should be the occasion, that should make them to execute that cruelty upon
their own persons. But this shall suffice to be spoken touching the natural
fear of infants, old men, and women. We will now come to entreat of that
fear which is accidental, and is much more piercing into the minds of men
than that which is natural; and especially when God does cooperate and work
together with the same: and that no other reason can be yielded for the same,
but such as God has reserved to his own secret and unsearchable counsel.

Of fear caused in persons by accidental causes.
The first accidental fear we may term and reckon to be that which does
happen and befall unto a whole camp, even in the open and plain day light:
which usually does take hold upon the most stowt and hardy, they not
knowing, Of fears surprising a whole camp in the day time.
nor being able to yield any reason of their fear; and yet may a man see them
to scatter them selves here and there on all sides, as if they were sheep
dispersed without a shepherd. If any man should allege that it were
cowardice, or lack of courage that should make even the most hardy and valiant
thus to fly and run away: I cannot conceive that there is any appearance of
truth in that opinion. It must needs be then that the cause thereof is in
the power and pleasure of God, who is the only prince and lord that has the
sovereign command of all armies: and who long since did threaten even his own
people the children of Israel; that if they would not observe his commandments
nor walk in the ways of their Forefathers, that he would send them such, and
so great fears and terrors, as they should without any cause fly before the
face of their enemies. Now this fear (as we have erst said) is called
Panicus Terror, a Panique Fear, or, Of the Panique fear wrought in men by a
divine and supernatural power. In Maedea. Lib. 1. Stratag.
the Terrors and Furies of Pan, as Euripides calls them; because the
invention thereof proceeded from Pan, who in the war of Bacchus against the
Indians, being one of the Chieftaines and principal Captains of the said
Bacchus (as Polienus writes) used a thousand stratagems and politic
inventions that were called (...); and by this means got Bacchus the upper
hand of his enemies, they being surprised with an exceeding great fear and
astonishment. Of fear conceived upon the defeat and overthrow of a Camp.
But the case were otherwise if such a fear be taken either upon the desrout
or defait of a camp, or by reason of the darkness of the night: for then the
reason thereof is evident and apparent. And certainly in the disorder or
desrout of a whole camp, where the enemy has them in chase upon the spur,
and near at hand, it is commonly seen, that the fear and terror of men is
so great, that many times those which are of the same party with them, and
their friends, are mistaken for their enemies. As that Gentleman of France, who
in the battle of S. Quintines, flying from the fury of the Spaniards, as fast
as his horse could galloppe: If a man should have demanded of him, what he
dreamed of; when as his servant following him close at the heels, told him
that his dagger (being excellent fair, and of good workmanship) did fall from
him, and he answered him; I am all made of daggers: Sure I am, he would have
said; that he knew not his servant at that instant: but imagined that the
Spaniards did follow him even at his back. And as touching a fear conceived
by reason of the night, Of fear conceived by night.
there is g^^^t appearance of reason, why the same should happen at that time,
rather then in the day: because the night is more apt and proper to receive all
terrors and apprehensions, then the day is: And the imbecillitie of the sight,
(which in the night time is very great) does make a man to imagine many things,
which he would not so much as think upon in the day time. But hereof we have
spoken sufficiently at large, when we were in discourse of the senses, and of
the opinion of the Sceptiques. Let us now therefore pass forwards and continue
on our purpose, touching those persons that become fearful and timorous by
accident, and whereof no reason can readily be yielded.

First we will speak of such, as being guilty of some notable and notorious
crime, Of the fears of notorious malefactors, terrified by the guiltiness of
their own consciences.
are scene to have such a biting and remorce of conscience within their
breasts, that they suppose all persons whom they see to approach and come
near them, to be Sergeants and officers coming to arrest them, and to make
them prisoners. To this purpose, Plutarch records a mavelous strange and
admirable history of one named Bessus. This unhappy youth having most
wretchedly and wickedly murdered his own father, In l. de sera numinis
vindicta.
and the murder being long concealed, without coming to the knowledge of any
man; on a time, as he went to suppe with some company, he threw down with the
point of an holberd, a Swallows nest, and treading upon the young ones, he
crushed them with his feet. The which being perceived by those that supped
with him, they did sharply and vehemently reprove him, for that unmerciful
and inhumane act of cruelitie, (as it is usual with men to abhor such as
do mischief to such little creatures:) unto whom he made this answer: Do you
not see (quoth he) how these baggage little birds do continually yield false
witness against me, crying and chattering in their language, that I have
slain my father. The company marvelling at this speech* and that not without
cause, made report unto the King what they had heard. And the King caused him
to be a^^^^sted and committed to prison: whereupon, being brought in question
upon that fact, he confessed the truth of all the matter, and (being thereof
duly attainted and convicted,) he was condemned to suffer the pains and
torments of death due to Pa^^acides, and such as were murderers of their
parents. Now amongst the manifold numbers of those that have their consciences
troubled, Of the fears and terrors of tyrants and usurpers of estates.
by reason of they wicked and l^v^d lives, and are perplexed and terrified with
a million of fears; we may well account those tyrants, who by unlawful and
indirect means, have usurped a tyrannical authority over their own native
countries or in some strange estate; and have changed a good form of
commonwealth and government, into an unjust and tyrannical power; putting to
death thousands of persons, whom they suspected to be men of noted virtue and
honesty, and who might be able to resist their damnable attempts and
usurpations. How often have we seen, that these men have bin troubled and
tormented with most horrible phantosmes and imaginations, which do com into
their heads both sleeping and waking. How many apprehensions and terrors had
Phalaris, Dionysius, Agathocles, P^reand^r, Hipparchus, Alexander de Ph^ra,
Clearchus, Apollodorus, and such like butchers of mankind: and how were their
fantasies and imaginations distracted with fear of their subjects? How often is
it to be thought they forsook their natural sleeps, and leapt suddenly out
of their beds upon a fear and imagined conceit, that some came to cut their
throats: and therewithal, how often have they supposed and imagined, that
they have seen sundry visions and apparitions of those whom they have
murdered, or of some others whom they have feared? De sera num^nis vindicta.
Hipparchus (by the report of Plutarch) dreamed that Venus appeared unto him,
and sprinkled his face all over with blood. Apollodorus also in a dream
seemed to see how the Scithians fleaed him alive and hewed him in pieces, and
that his heart being then thrown by them into a caldron, said unto him; I am
the cause of all this mischief which thou endurest. The Emperor Caligula,
having caused a great number of Senators and Gentlemen of Rome to be put to
death, did never sleep but a very small part of the night; or (if he did
happen to sleep) his sleep was interrupted and insturbed with a million of
strange figures and images, which he shaped unto himself in his brain. In
vita Caligu.
Sometimes (as Suetonius reports) he should see the sea as though it were
talking unto him. Sometimes he would seem as though he had a will to climb up
into heaven, and there Jupiter taking him by the feet, would cast him down
again to the ground. So Nero, after the murder of his mother, was frighted
with most horrible visions; for it seemed unto him, that he saw before him all
the furies, with their whips and burning firebrands to torment him. And
Antonyne Caracalla, did imagine that the ghost of his father Severus, (whom he
had offended by the murder of his brother Geta,) was ready to run upon him,
and by plain force to mischief and kill him. And upon the declining of the
Roman Empire, Thierry king of Italy, (being a Gothe by nation) after he had
slain Simmachus and Boethius his son in law, two Roman Senators, borne of a
most noble family in Rome, and who had been in former times Consulls: on an
evening as he sat at supper, (as Procopius rehearses it) it seemed unto him,
that he saw in the head of a fish served in upon the table, the face of
Simmachus in a most horrible shape and fashion, with great mustachoes, knitting
his brows, frowning with his eyes, biting his lips for very anger, and
looking awry upon him: the conceit whereof, struck the king into such a fear,
as he fell sick and died thereof soon after. Behold then the strange effects
of fear, which are always, and infallibly exceeding great in those who are
immoderately surprised therewithal, be the same in them either natural or
accidental.

Of fears proceeding of some passion, and causing madness and strange
imaginations.
We will now proceed on to entreat of another sort of persons, who by reason
of some affection or passion that does rule and predominate in them, are so
estraunged from their own natural, as they do fall into madness, and in
that fit, do imagine things most absurd and far from reason. The first in
this rank, are amorous persons and foolish lovers, who (as Aristotle writes)
have their desires and passions so great and violent, Of amorous persons
growing mad for love.
that in some of them, they do both make a change and alteration of their
bodies, and do engender most strange furies. And I have noted in Saint
Augustine, a history of a certain amorous person, Lib. 7. Ethic. cap. 2.
who was so ravished in his amorous and fond contemplations, and had the image
of his mistrisse so imprinted in his mind and thoughts: that he imagined
himself to see her always before him, and that he dwelled and conversed with
her, and did perform with her, all those actions which lovers usually commit
in embraeing of their loves. But it shall not be amiss to set down the very
words which Saint Augustine uses. Lib. 11. de Trinitat. cap. 4.
Memini, (says he) me audisse a quodam quod tam impressam and quasi solidam
speciem faeminei corporis in cogita^do cernere soleret, vt ei quasi se misceri
sentiens etiam genitalibus flueret. Truly he that shall nearly and advisedly
regard and consider the original of love, shall find that the same proceeds
of the sensual and brutish part which the Hebrews call Behemith, of the word
Behemoth; which signifies foure-footed beasts, as Mares, and other such like
creatures. And this is the cause why the Greeks named it (...), not as Plato
says, (...), In Cratil^.
(...): or (...): but rather; (...), of the Earth, which also in Hebrew is
called Erets. For as the reasonable part of man is wholly celestial, so the
sensitive part is altogether brutall, earthly, and of a base constitution, of
the which proceeds the passion of love. Now the most furious kind of love
which the Physicians do acknowledge, is that which they call the Heroical
love; because most commonly it takes hold and seizes upon men of a noble and
heroique courage, and such as are valorous; in whom the sensitive part does
much more abound and excel then in others, as having many of their spirits
merely terrestrial, their courage being replenished with a note and manlike
blood. And although it be so, that we must needs acknowledge in man three
parts, and all of them proceeding of diverse fountains, and well springs,
which the Greeks name (...): that is to say, the Intellectual part, the
Irascible or Cholerique part, and the Concupiscible or coveting part. And that
the Intellectual does proceed from the Soul and the Brain, the Irascible
from the Heart, and the Concupiscible from the Liver: yet this is a thing most
certain and assured, that the Intellectual part is little or nothing at all
in heroical persons that are given to be amorous: For were it so, then would
their reason retire it self from the filth and puddle of their amorous desires
as easily, as they entered into the same inconsiderately. It rests therefore
that the Irascible and Concupiscible powers, The cause of brutish and sensual
passions and desires in amorous persons.
do remain in them: each of which, are both merely terrestiall, and do
engender so diverse and exorbitant passions, that it is not to be held
altogether for fabulous, which is recorded of Hercules, who in his fury, slew
his own wife and childreen imagining it had been Licus the Tyrant of Thebes,
(as both Euripides and Seneca do testify,) and that he loved Omphale and Iob^
so extremely, as forgetting h^s due devoyne and all regard of his estate, he
apparelled himself in the habit of a woman, and served them as their Chamber,
maid. And for a more sure and evident sign, that heroical persons (in whom
the Irascible and Concupiscible parts are most predominant,) be not well
advised nor of any great subtlety, but do slide easily into amorous passions:
It appears by Marks A^to^ie and Demetri^^, both which were good plain
meaning men, yet nevertheless exceeding furious and of a martial and
courageous spirit, and easy to be entangled in the s^ares of amorous desires.
And it is well worth the marking which Aristotle says when he yields, Lib.
2. Politice.
reason why the Lacedomoni^ns were governed by their wi^^^: and that is,
because martial men and such as are of a hardy and courageous stomach, do
willingly suffer themselves to be hold under the yoke and power of love; And
he is of opinion, that thereof proceeded that fable of the loves of Mars and
Venus.

But to proceed, albeit I could recite an infinite number of histories out of
Parthenius, Pansanias, Atheneus, Apollodorus, and Plutarch, touching this
heroical passion of love, and that very seldom or never it admits any
cure, but does in the end make men so melancholic, that in process of time
they become furious: as Rouland is represented in the Italian Poet Aristo: yet
I will content my self with alleging this one only that happened in Italy,
about forty years ^ithence: wherein is to be observed as strange and furious
a passion of amorous love, as ever was any. The history has been recired
unto me by Monsieure Minut Lord of Caster, a Gentleman of rare and singular
learning, and the worthy son of that great Minut late Potestate of My^an,
and afterward chief President of Tholous^. At what time the learned Alciat
lived and was reader in Pudna: he had many scholars that resorted thither out
of France, and passed over the Alps, of purpose to be his Auditors. Amongst
others, one Gentleman of an ancient and honorable house, (who shall be here
namelesse, because he is yet living, if he be not deceased since my coming
from Tholouza) would needs make one of that company. And having well profited
in the study of the laws, he would go to Venice; where he was no sooner
arrived, but he was entrapped in the snares of love. Whereupon he often
frequented the door of his Mistress house, and made many signs and tokens of
the great love and affection which he bare unto her: he assayed by presents and
by the help of Panders to corrupt her: and in the end himself hardily
discovered his love unto her, and prayed her to have pity and compassion upon
him. The Lady did rudely repulse him with threatenings and menaces: all which
notwithstanding, could never make him leave to be importunate. But in the end,
seeing himself altogether hopeless to gain her to his desire, and being
flatly rejected, he fell into a frenzy our night amongst others, and coming
the next morning to find a companion and friend of his, he told him that he
had a quarrel in hand, and prayed him to second him in the same. So they went
both together to the Church of Saint Mark, where at that time the Duke of
Venyse was present: whom as soon as this amorous fool saw, he cried out
alowde presently unto his companion: See, there is he with whom I have the
quarrel; go, let us set upon him. His companion stirred not, but only
shaking his head, smiled at him, imagining that the other did but jest with
him; for he did not think that he was turned fool. But a sudden admiration
and astonishment took him as soon as he saw this amorous madman to cast
himself through the Duke his guarde, and that drawing his sword, he strived
with the utmost of his strength and endeavors to kill him: which he had also
done, if the guard of the Duke had not restrained and hindered him, by whom
also he was bounden and led away to prison. The matter being yet hot, he was
examined what should moove him to this desperate action: But he answered
nothing but fooleries and idle ieasts and toys. By chance there was then
residing in Venice, that great and renowned Physician Fracastor, who was sent
for, and this amorous Gentleman was showed unto him: who after he had long
regarded and beheld him, and questioned with him upon many points and
occurrences: And perceiving that his answers did tend to nothing else but to
menaces, and to discourses of women and wenches, he knew immediately that some
amorous conceit was the cause of his outrage, and affirmed as much at that
instant to the Magistrate; promising, that if he might be delivered into his
hands, he would cure and recover him of this frenzy. The Magistrate made some
difficulty to grant that unto him; yet, partly upon the intrety of a great
lady, being at that time in Italy, and partly upon the persuasions of Alciat,
who concurred also in the suit, and (like a learned Civilian as he was) showed
unto them, L. divus Marcus D. de offici^ ^raes.
that they ought not to inflict a double punishment upon a Fool, or a Madman,
who was sufficiently punished and chastised with his own folly: the matter was
so handled, that this young gallant was committed to the keeping and custody
of Fracastor. After that Fracastor had gotten him into his hands, he suborned
or disguised a Curtisan, whom he commanded to pleasure the Gentleman, and to
permit him to remain and converse with her even until he was weary, and that
afterward she should cause him to be well covered with clothes till he fell
into a sweat. This first cure being tried, he proceeded on to others, and did
so well purge this gentleman, that he made him perfitly sound: wherein he
confuted all the Poets, who affirm, that the disease of Love is incurable,
without the enjoying of that person, with whose love the party has been once
surprised and enamoured. I will not here dispute of this cure of Fracastor,
Amatus Lufitanus in suis centuriis and alii.
as knowing full well that there were other Physicians of his time, and before;
who attempting such a like cure as this was, did accomplish it to their great
honor and commendation. The books of our modern Authors are full of these
examples: so as it (...) ^^^delesse here to allege them, it being no part of
our purpose, to entreat of the malladie of Love. It shall suffice therefore
for me to say thus much: that this sort of Love is a kind of melancholy: for
the curing whereof many learned and expert Physicians do prescribe the remedy
to be carnal copulation with a woman. For by this means (say they) those
vaporous fumes of the seed are discharged and taken away from the patient,
which do trouble and corrupt the brain, and do principally offend such
amorous persons: because, by how much the more and longer they do continue in
the body, so much the more do they engender and accumulate cares and pensive
thoughts, which in the end do turn into a rage and very madness.

Of persons, who by grief and coffeehouse of mind, and such like passions
do fall mad and frantique.
Next after amorous persons seized with an heroical and so door passion of
Love, there do offer themselves to be considered of, all such persons as by
some sudden g^^^er or by a burning and into^^erable ^ealou^ie; or by thought
and discomentment of mind, for having lost their goods; or in seeing
themselves disappoynted of some row ard (which in their imagination they had
worthily deserved for their virtues and good deeds) do fall into f^en^ie and
madness. These men (it is not to be doubted) but they do see many false
Specters, and do entertain a thousand ^urious imaginations, according as their
cholet adost does more or less domineere and rule in them. We read in the
Fables of the Greeks and of Sophocles, that when A^ax had lost the Arms of
Achilles, In A^ace (...)
by the judgment which Agamemnon pronounced against him in the favor of
Ulysses his Competitor, he grew into so extree me an anger, that his wrath
being changed into fury, he began to tun mad through the fields, and
to draw his sword against a hie^d of Swine, whom he imagined to be Greeks.
And taking out of the whole number only two of the greatest he could choose,
he hanged them up upon a limme of a tree, and began to whippe and scourge
them, vpbraiding them with a thousand opprobrious and injurious speeches;
firmly believing that these two hogs were Agamemnon and Ulysses, upon
whom he resolved to revenge himself by their slaughter: on the one, for
being Judge against him; and on the other, as his enemy that had prevailed
against him. In the end, being returned to his right senses, for very shame of
his forepassed actions, he sheathed his sword into his own throat, and so
^lew himself.

Of madness growing in sudden passion of choler.
Sometimes such surie is engendered in persons by a certain choler and ^nimosity
of courage, which they do suddenly and at unawares fall into: And they will be
so far beside themselves (by reason their senses are troubled) that they will
differ nothing at all from mad men. This is usually feene in ba^^el^et and
martial combats of gen^^^^ persons, where it oftentimes happens, that the
Sould^^ (...) tushing with a rage and fur^^ upon their enemies, do neither
know their own colors, nor their friends and fellowe^: from whom in the
end their Arms are to be taken out of their hands, because they will fall
as well upon their own people, as upon their enemies. Such sharpness and
violence is common and usual in Lions, who having a fire brand fastened to
their toil, and being fleshed against some Bull or Bear do quite forget
their keeper and governor. And in the times of the Auntients it oftentimes
fell out, that the Stage players who acted some furious person as an Her^^let,
an Ath^ma^, a Thies^es, an Orestes, an Aleme^n, or an Ajax, they have so acted
the well representing and acting of their parts, as themselves in the midst of
their sport, have become truly and indeed furious, and have done acts of
outrage and fury, even such as the parties did whom they represent. The
history of Aesope the Stage player is well known, who playing the p^^te of
Thi^stes, did with his Scepter kill one of his own boys. This Aesope was a
great friend of Cicero; and H^r^c^ gave him the epythe^ and title of a grave
man. Lucian writes of a certain Actor or Stage player, who playing the part
of Ajax, in a fury became in the midst of his part so troubled and
distracted in his senses, that he did not any more feign himself to be
furious, but he grow so truly, and indeed. From some he ^ore off their
clothes; From the Musitions he snatched away their flutes and cornets: To him
that acted Ulysses, if his coppe or bonnet wherewith he was covered, had not
guarded him, he had made his head a drinking place for the fl^es In the end not
content with these fooleries, he descended from two Stage and placed himself
in the midst between the Roman Senators; who having been in times past,
Consulles, were not without some fear lest this gallant would have mistaken
them for Ulysses and Agamemnon, and so have whipped them as if they had been
some curtall curre. This history makes me to remember Vibius Gallus a Roman
Orator (of whom Seneca speaks) how he became (as a man would say) a very
fool and distracted of his wits, only through the voluntary merrinesse, and
pleasant conceitednesse of his own mind. For he using to immitate too too
much the veins of foolish persons, and counterfaiting them to his utmost: This
immitation so changed him in nature, that he became a mere fool and natural
indeed.

But to give an end to this Discourse of furious and mad men: I may not forget
what Tertullian says, That those who be furious, do imagine that they fee
other men or beasts in those whom they behold, as Orestes saw his mother in
his sister Electra and Ajax imagined Ulysses and Agam^^non to be amongst a
heird of beasts: And (to make short) Agave and Athamas pursued and slew their
own children, supposing they had killed savage and wild beasts.

This shall suffice to be spoken touching the senses, and the fantasy, and
concerning such, who oftentimes, by reason of the organs sensitive ill
disposed, or by means of their fantasy corrupted by sickness, madness,
melancholy, love, excessive fury, and other accidents have, either externally
or internally felt their natural powers to be altered and changed, and have
deceived themselves by false visions and phantosmes. It is now time that we
come to another question which arises out of this Discourse, and can not well
be separated from it: to wit: If the devil can at any time convey or mingle
himself with the senses, either being sound or corrupted; or with the humors
and fantasy being offended; ori^ it be only the power and faculty of
Nature, or of the Stars, which do work those mavelous effects upon our
bodies, as is affirmed by Ave^reis, Pomponatius, and other Physicians, who do
ordinarily attribute all things unto Nature.

CHAP. XII.
That the Divoll does sometimes convey and mingle himself in the Senses being
corrupted, and in the Fantasy affended, contrary to the opinion of the
natural Philosophers.
WE have heretofore showed, that ofttimes the Senses, by reason of their
imbecility and depravation, and the Fantasy by means of diverse maladies,
both corporal and spiritual, do feel in themselves an alteration from their
proper and particular faculties as the eyes from seeing perfectly, the ears
from hearing, the nose from smelling, the mind and the fantasy from reasoning
and discoursing, and from discerning things by the use of reason. All which, is
so manifest and evidently true, as to doubt thereof would be too too gross a
folly and ignorance, because we see that the same daily happens: and there
are very few men, who in their habitude or custom of life, do not receive and
admit, through access of years, some change and alteration of their natural
senses, and some dimination of their spirits. And as touching those, who in
truth are wholly troubled and distracted from their sense or understanding; the
examples thereof are so frequent, and the multitude of them is so great and
copions that no man can be ignorant of the same. Yet this is not the point
wherein any difficulty rests; or wherein should ^^nsist the sum^^ of this
dispu^e: But it is sufficient, plainly and simply to affirm, that the nature
of man may receive in it self changes; may err by the senses, may be
perverted in her discourse, and may loose the use of reason, of prudence, and
of understanding. To be brief, in things which receive no contradiction, (as
this same it should be but a vain and lost labor to enter into any subtle
discourse, and to seek out any great reasons and arguments In heaping up of
the which, a man shall be sooner reprooved of too much curiosity, then
commended for his learning For this cause also, have not I dwelt much in
playing the Philosopher, and dilating upon that which is easy for every man to
know and see of himself? And if I have alleged and cited both some reasons
of physic, and some histories which made to my purpose, the same has been
done rather by form and way of discourse, touching things whereof the notion
is common, then of any intention or purpose to enter into the depth and secrets
of Philosophy, especially in that which does in no sort require the knowledge
of a Philosopher. But now, as it is commonly seen, that in the pursuit of any
discourse, which is easy in the first beginnings thereof, it is vsuali to
meet with some difficulties arising out of the principal matter a So does it
now fall out, that in speaking of the senses and the fantasy, I am fallen (I
know not how) into an high and difficult question proceeding of that matter:
and that is, Whether in the Senses* being either sounder corrupteds or (...)
able Phaneasin, being wounded and offended; the Div^ll can possibly mingle and
convey himself, and there exercise his fury; or if it be Nature only that
works therein al aloue: as is held by Pomponatius and Avenr^is, according as
I have formerly alleged.

That nature is not the cause of any mavelous effects by working upon the
Senses, or the fantasy corrupted or offended.
A special thing that makes me firmly to believe, that it is a kind of
mockery to say, that Nature does work in the Senses corrupted, or in the
Phantafie offended; is this, that then is must needs be infer^ed, that the
nature of man is more st^d^g and puissant when if is corrupted and depraved,
then when it is in it formd and entire estate. Which indeed is nothing else but
to err in all true natural Philosophy, which does ever prefer the habit
before the privation of depravation of any thing. Besides, that the peccant and
faulty humors should work more in humane bodres, then those can do which are
natural and do entertain the harmony of the body: I cannot conceive how it
may be done, but we must seek out some other reason thereof, then that which
is yielded by Pomponatius or Avenrois, or any other natural Philosophers,
whose reasons I hold it convenient in this place to set down, and to see what
they aleadge, to make us believe: that there is no other cause but Nature
only, which does work in and upon our bodies, our senses, and our humors,
whatsoever is seen to happen unto them supernaturally.

The argument of Avicen and other Philosophers touching the power of nature
producing supernatural effects. Lib. 4. nature. cap. vltimo. Lib. 5. Phisic^.
cap. 9. Lib. 3 de Trins.
First they affirm touching the bewitching and enchanting of the eyes, that
oftentimes the soul of many persons does work upon the body of another, as
upon their own proper person. And therefore they infer, that the soul by
her own natural virtue and power, is able at it own will and pleasure, to
alter and change the senses of persons, and to bewitch their eyes. And of this
opinion are Avicen and Algazel. But long time before them Saint Augustine was
of a contrary opinion: For he saw little or no reason, how it could be, that
men should have any such power or puissance one upon another, unless it were
only by the operation of the devil. And although it may be objected, that the
eye of a sick body, may naturally wound and offend the sound eyes of another,
that shall regard and look upon the sick party; yet so it is, that a
natural reason may be yielded for that; as being caused either by means of
the air infected, and directed from the eye of the patient toward the eyes
of the sound person: or else, by reason of some secret Sympathy, which some
men have with others. And sometimes also by a kind of Antypathie, a man may
receive a kind of natural Fascination or Enchantment by the eyes; as little
children in looking upon a Toade, and that little bird which the French name
Rubie^^^, and the Greeks call (...), of the which Elian and Snyd^s do write,
Lib. 17. cap. 13. In verbo. (...).
how it has this property, that it heals the malady or disease called the
Purples, by looking upon the patient, from whom it takes by the eyes the
infection and venom thereof: And for this cause, in times past they did use in
selling this bird, to carry him close covered with a linen cloth, for fear
lest the party so diseased, should have served his turn by it, Of diverse
kinds of charms and enchantments which being supernatural, the natural
Philosophers attributed to nature.
in looking on the same before he had bought it. I know that Pliny recounteth,
how amongst the Bulgarians, and in Ilbrium, there are certain whole families
of Witches (which they of Avergne do call Fascignaires) or rather Sorcerers,
which with their very look do kill those whom they look on with a cross or
felonous eye or aspect. This makes me to remember that which Aulus Gelliu^
spenketh of in his Treatise entitled, Noctas Atticae, how there be some
families in Africa, Lib. 9. ca 4.
who on the contrary: do use to bewitch and for speak foldoes with their
tongue and voice: and in giving out praises and speeches of commendation, do
work the death and destruction both of trees, of brute creatures, and of
children. Now the Philosophers do think to yield a natural reason hereof
saying; That those praises and commend at ory speeches do engender in the
heart a kind of joy and gladness, and in the vaporous spirits, which the
natural hea^e does open, and cause to rebound, as it were, pel mell, or
confusedly by the face, and eyes, through which the venom and poison of the
enchauntment: does strike into the eyes of others. And this is the cause why
Arist^tle writes, Sect 20. proble. 24.
That there was a custom, that when one would praise any body, they would use
to say, and wish that Much good might do him, the praisas which were given him.

But whatsoever the Philosophers do allege touching this enchaunting or
witch craft wrought with the speech yet the truth is, Answer to the former
argument.
that no man has any such power to kill another, except it proceed of the
Devil by the permission of God: much loss has (...) the power to cast or
send forth by his eyes into the eyes of another man, any infection that should
be able to change and alter the habit or state of the body so readily: as is
used to be done by diabolicali enchantments, with the which, such as come to
be stricken and: attainted, are commonly surprised in amoment. And the very
Ancients themselves (in my opinion) seemed not to be ignorant; that such kind
of enchantments, That all enchantments wrought by speeches or looks, do
happen only extraordinarily, and beyond the course of nature. In Epodis.
Minusive lanquet Fascinum. Of diverse superstirious devises used by the
Ancients against vvitcherafts and enchantments.
done either by the voice, or by the eyes, did never happen but extraordinarily
and beyond the course of nature. And that was the cause that in such cases they
aided themselves with their superstitions, to drive and chase them far away
from them, that they might not be stricken nor attached by them. Some of them
used to carry tied about their neekes a certain kind of image or figure, made
in form of a man's member, thinking that by virtue of the same, no Sorcerers
should be able to hurt them. And such figure a they called Fascinum, like as
Horac^ also names it; because it hindered Fascinations or Enchaumments. Others
again used to wear upon their soreheads, in form of a Garland, the flower
called, Our Ladies Gloves; and in Latin named Bacchar, even for the same
occasion, and for fear lest some ill tongue should charm or c^chanut them,
which Virgil affirms in theseverses, -- Bacchare frontem,
Cingite nevati noceat ^^ala lingua future.
Which may be thus englished, About his brows let be a wreathe of Bacchar knit,
That by an evil talking tongue our Poet be not bit.


And others there were that did use to spit in their own besomes or breasts,
as Theocritus testifies, saying; (...).

The signification whereof in english is thus: (...) might (...) that (...) ^as,
Upon my breast I follow spetting thrice.


The same also is to be seen amongst the Greek Epigrammes; Libus 4. Epigr.
(...).
And likewise in Tib^lus in this verse;
Despart in ^^olles and sibi quisque sins.
Upon hsi own most tender breast,
Each man to spy does hold it best.


But Theophrastus speaking of superstitious persons, does witness the same
yet much more, saying; (...). that is to say, And if the superstitious person
do happen to so a madd^ man, or any other person taken with the falling
sickness, he^ will sp^t in his bosom quaking for very fear. And it is well
worthy the marking which Theophrastus writes: For the Annents (as Hippocrates
reports) thought all those which were taken with the Epilepsie or falling
sickness, De morbo sacro and de morbis Virginum.
and such also as were furious or fallen mad, to be seized and possessed with
devils and evil spirits which diddo torment them. And that was the cause
that such as saw them in that passion or distemper, did spet upon their
breasts or bosoms, for fear lest some inconvenience might befall to them by
means thereof. There were moreover other kinds of charms and enchaun^^ents
of the eyes, Of charms called Prestigies.
which the Latins called Prestigies, the which also are no more natural than
those former. For these Prestigies do so charm and bewitch our eyes, that it
seems unto us we see mavelous things, and which do exceed beyond all
nature: Howbeit in very deed the same be nothing else but a mere trumpery and
deceit of the devil; by the which notwithstanding we do not perceive our
selves to be any otherwise offended, but in this only, that our sight is
thereby somewhat altered and charmed. And in this sort Apuleius writes, that
himself fawe a Iuggler, Lib. 1. de Asino cor^^.
who by Art Magic did seem to eat and swallow up a sword and to thrust it
through his own body. Lib. 34. histor.
And the like as Di^dorus Si^^^^ reports) did the slave E^^^ in the country
of Sicil^^s at such (...) surped a tyrannical power over that Island, by the
means and help of his Prestigies. For the other slaves whom he endeavored
to draw in his line, to make a partic with him, and to rebel against their
masters, did hold and esteem him to be more than a mortal man, because, as
often as him listed, he would cast forth of his mouth flames of fire, and
would do many other such like mavelous deeds, and that altogether and only
by Art magic. So do Atheneus and Eustatius recount how Cratistenes was so
excellent a Magitian, that he could not only charm the eyes, Libr. 8.
Dipnos. In lib. 4. Odyss.
but that he could also alter and change the very fantasy of men. And to that
purpose I could here allege and cite the histories of many others the like
Impostors and Deceivers; as namely Simon Magus, Apollonius, Iamblicus, Maximus,
Sopater, Sosipatra, and infinite other, whom I will reserve to another place to
be spoken of more and better to the purpose.

Of the representation of persons showed by Magicians to boys in a glass,
whether they be ilusions, or not. Prestigies, what they are.
But what shall we say to that which little children or boys use to see within
the mirrours or glasses showed unto them by Magicians? shall we call them also
Prestigies. I^ seems not: For the Prestigies are only phantos^ce and images
of things which are not: and howsoever it be, they are true and entire deceipts
or illusions, leasings and impostures of the devil, who by the subtlety of
his nature causes the sight of things mavelous and supernatural. And for
this cause those common Iug^^ers and Impostors, of whom he serves himself
to (...) ^^use his sportes of Pass and Repasse, are named in proper word by
the He brewes, Chartumim, that is, Prestigi^tors or Deceivers, who do make
strange wonders ^n^ ^i^ocles to appear in sight to the eyes of men, only by
their subtilue or by the craft and subti^^ of the devil, for so does Rabbs
Levi affirm of them, now the Magitians boys do see lively and naturally
represented senced (...) the^^ the figure of some thi^f^; and they do ma^^e
him distanctly, within the glass of the ^i^tor, so that to call this a
Prestigie or Imposture, would seem at the first show to have no show not
appearance of reason. Notwithstanding, seeing that all this proceeds of the
devil; and seeing it is impossible that the s^^ide and absent body of the
thief them appearing should be abiding in the glass: That the sight shevved
unto children by Magicians in a glass, are mere illusions and diabolical
impostures.
I may well say, That the same is nothing else but a mere witchcraft or
imposture of the Devil which charmeth by his illusions the eyes of the nails,
the picture and image of the thief. And nevertheless, though this be but a
work of the Devil, and does altogether exceed the power and course of
nature, yet there have bi^ some Philosophers who have revoked the same unto the
effects of nature, Opinions of Philosophers, that such sights are natural.
Apollog. 1.
and have attributed it unto the impollution and pureness of the soul of the
child that sees the figure of the thief so represented. For Apuleius, (who
was one of the greatest Magicians of his time,) after he had spoken in his
Apology of many children, who had seen, and prophened, or foretold wonders;
in the end h^^ adds, He and ali^ de pueris logo equidem, sed dub^us
sententiae sum, di^^^ fieri, an posse negem. Quanquam Platoni crod^^m, inter
d^^^ at que homines natura and ^o^ ma^as quasdom. Di^^^^ potestates intersitas,
^asphs di^in ati^es cunct^s and u^r^oula Magorum gubernare. Quin and ^hod (...)
posse (...) bummum and p^^erilem presartim su^plin^^qur. se^ (...), sive adorum
delini^^to saperur^. and ad oblivionem prasentinmax^^rnari, and (...)
^^pari^^^^ movis redigi^c redere ad (...) immortulis scilicet ac divine,
a^^p^^^ (...) quod^^^ supo^^ f^^^ a ^^^rum prosagi^^. Of this a man may gather.
That Ap^leius was in doubt, whether the nature of the child had the power to
prophecy and sor^ show things; (...) whether the devil did suggest and
ministen unto him that which it tol^^e and prophesied. But (...) Christian
Philosopher, and one that lived but a little in a manner, before our time,
Opinion and reason of Pomponatius. De Inean^a^^^nibus.
does go a great deal further, and makes not any doubt at all (as did
Apuleins) but he freely leapeth forth, and (as a hardy Atheist) he says
roundly, that this proceeds of nothing else but nature alone, and his words
are these: So great and powerful (says he) is the strength and virtue of the
Inchaunter, that it passes into the soul of the child being unpolluted, as
does the virtue of the adamant pierce into the Iron. For children are naturally
prepared to receive impressions: and the soul of the child being once moved
or set in motion, does move his sensitive Spirits as they are moved in a
dream, and so by means of their subtilty, they see many more things than
others do. And therefore the child may see the thief naturally, by reason of
the purity, force, subtlety, and agilitie of his spirits: And seeing it is to
be presupposed that the soul is immortal: this is not more strange or
miraculous, then the experience which we have of the Adamant, which draws the
Iron unto it.

Here you see the very proper words of Pomponatius, Answer to the reason of
Pomponatius.
who deceives himself in saying, that the enchantment which the eyes of the
child do receive, is derived from him that is the enchanter. For then it
should follow, that the Enchanter ought first of all to have a sight of the
thing represented, and then afterward should communicate the same to the
child. For otherwise, how is it possible he should give that force unto the
boy, which he himself has not at all. And as touching the comparison between
the Adamant and the Iron, that cannot any way serve to make for Pomponatius:
for between the Adamant and the Iron, there is a kind of Sympathy. And what
Sympathy (I pray you) can there be conceived between the soul of the child,
and that of the enchanter, the one being unpolluted, and the other polluted? It
were more fit therefore and convenient to affirm rather, that this is a very
work of the devil, of the which the enchanter serves himself to know by the
sight of the child unpolluted, that which is secret and hidden from him. And
in my opinion Fernelius the Physician seems to have been much more religious
herein, then Pomponatius. For he freely confesses, that this is but a mere
imposture and diabolical deceit, which comes not of the effects of nature,
but by force of the charms. And you shall see his very own words which he
uses in Latin, being very elegant and in good terms: Fernelius lib. 1. cap.
11. de Abditis rerum cau sis.
Vidi quendam vi verborum spectra varia in speculum derivare, quae illic
quaecunque imperaret, mox aut scripto, aut veris imaginibus ita dilucide
exprimerent, vt prompte and facile ab assidentibus omnia internoscerentur.
Audiebantur quidem verba sacra, sed obscoenis nominibus spurce contaminata,
cuiusmodi sunt Elementorum potestates, horrenda quaedam and inaudita principum
nomina qui Orientis, Occidentis, Austri, Aquilonisque regionibus imperant. That
is to say, I have seen a man, who by the force of charms and certain words,
has made diverse specters and images, to come within a mirror or
looking-glass, the which have there expressed either by writing, or by some
other demonstrations and true figures, whatsoever he would command them; and
they have done it so clearly and manifestly, as it was most easy for the
assistants and bystanders to know and discern them. There you should hear
certain sacred and holy words pronounced, but altogether polluted with most
filthy and vile barbarous names, as of certain powers of the Elements, and
with certain horrible and unknown names of the Princes and chief of devils,
having a command over the Orient, the Occident, the South, and North Regions of
the world. So that Fernelius attributes these kind of enchantments and
fascinations, or the binding and bewitching of the eyes of children or boys,
not unto the faculties and powers of nature pure and unpolluted: but only to
the working of the devil, which does work and show forth his effects, being
called up by the charms and enchantments of the Magitian: with whom he has a
certain strict confederation and near aliance. And this ought to be received
and admitted before all the reasons of Pomponatius, and others of that sect,
who take upon them in matters merely Metaphisicall and supernatural, to
dispute as if they were simply Physical and Naturail.

I know well, that Avicen besides all this, The opinion of Avicen, attributing
enchantments to the vehemensy of the imagination. Lib. 8. de Animalie 7. in Fine
affirms, that the cause of enchantments and charms, comes of the vehement
imagination of the soul: And he yields an example thereof in the Hen,
which having beaten the Cock in fight, will stretch herself up upon her feet,
and beat with her wings, and set up her train, as if she were a Cock
indeed: and sometimes may be seen a little horn growing out of her leg,
such as has the Cock. And hereof (says he) it may be known and
comprehended, the obeisance which nature bears and yields to the
imaginative conceits and cogitations of the soul. And by this would Avicen
infer, that the cogitations sometimes are such, as they have power to alter
and change both the sensitive Organs, and the internal or interior part, in
such sort, that a man should find himself (as it were) altogether transformed
in himself. Which serves well to confirm the opinion of Avenr^is, who said;
that the imagination of them which are bitten by a mad dog, is so great and
violent, that even in their urine (as we have erst said) a man shall see as it
were the figures of little dogs.

But this which Avicen affirms, cannot stand in regard of the transmutation
of the common sense, The opinion of Avicen refuted.
or of the phantafie and apprehension: And it does extend too far also the
imaginative powers of the soul: the which, howsoever they do work in us
marvelous and strange things; yet nevertheless, the same is only by anaturall
apprehension and commotion, which mooveth and stirs up in us, and in our
body a certain heat and cold, as we see in them that are grown into a
sudden choler, or into a fear: And it does sometimes so change our health,
that it is the cause either of death, or of some extr^ame gre^fe or sickness.
And to little purpose is that comparison of the Hen, or of the party bitten
with a mad dog, set down by Avenrois and Avicen: forasmuch as the same is
beyond all experience: and it is very hard to be believed, especially that same
touching the party so bitten by a mad dog For as touching that of the hen,
it is no new nor strange matter, if having beaten the Cock, she do imagine
herself to be a Cock, seeing that the Cock himself, which makes the Hen
(as the saying is) will sometimes endure other Cocks to mount upon him, and
to tread him, as if he were a Hen. Neither is this any thing abhorring from
nature, nor is it any other thing, but such as daily happens, and that even
by the virtue imaginative of natural creatures. But that the imagination can
engender in us such mavelous effects, as the bewitching and blinding of the
eyes, and the enchantment of the senses uses to produce and bring forth: that
is an heresy in nature, which ought to be hiss^d at, and utterly re^ected, if
there be no better reasons to be yielded for it.

Objection of Pomponatius, touching specters, the sights appearing to Dion, and
the noise heard by Antonie, and that such are no natural impressions in the
soul. Apud plutarchum in vita Antonii and Dionis.
To make short, no less false and untrue also, is that which the same
Pomponatius speaks; inferring that that which Dion is reported to have seen,
and that which Antonie is written to have heard, was but an impression in the
soul, of some signs and tokens which did foreshew and prognosticate some
future evils, which should afterward befall and happen unto them. For even as
(says he) it happens in sleeping, that a man takes an impression in his
mind, of strange things that shall befall unto him: So in waking, if a man be
in a deep muse and profound imagination, he shall take an impression into his
soul, by the force of the heavens, of that which shall betide and fall unto him.
And a man shall imagine, that he sees and hears (as in a dream) that which
does presage some future mishap and disaster to come.

Notwithstanding, as we have before said, following the authority of
Aristotle, Answer to the former objection.
there is not any imagination so strong and forcible, that can so pervert the
senses, that they will suffer themselves to be guided or mis^led thereby: And
(as he says) well it may be, that there may be an exceeding great passion,
and such as is that, De somno and vigilia.
wherewith persons (afflicted with an extreme fever) use to be touched; who
commonly do imagine, that they see images and figures in a wall; albeit in
truth and very deed, they see nothing at all. But that such men as are sound
and well disposed, should suffer themselves to be abused by the force of their
imagination, (unless it were by the Prestigies and illusions of Satan) or
that they can possibly see whatsoever they do profoundly imagine, is too too
abhorring from any reason to be affirmed: Or to make the heaven the cause
thereof, seems to proceed only for default of a more apparent or better
reason to confirm it. Better it were therefore (as has been said) to refer
the cause of all this, Of the means how the imaginative power and senses may be
deceived in specters and phantosmes by the illusion of the devil. Tome 2.
Sum Sa^rae Theolog. quest: 80. Arti. 2.
to the working of the devils: who (as Saint Thomas of Aquin says) may cause
the same to proceed by the local motion, as well of the humane inferior
bodies, as of the spirits and powers sensitive, if they be not repressed by the
divine powers and puissance. For so it is, that by the local motion of the
humors, in sleep, there do present themselves diverse sensible forms and
figures, (as Aristotle says) caused through the abundance of the blood, that
descends to the sensitive principles, and there do leave diverse impressions
of sensible motions, the which do confer and keep themselves in the sensible
Species or shapes, and do move the apprehension in such sort, that they do
appear, as if the senses outwardly did moove themselves: So that it is not
strange, that the devil having power permitted him (as is said) to moove the
humors, may also make and cause them waking to receive by the eyes, or other
senses, diverse imaginations, figures, voices, sounds and other things that see
me very strange and mavelous. And this is the cause, (as Saint Angustine
says) That there is not any of the corporal senses, but the devil may
possess the same, and use it at his pleasure, if God do so permit him: Serpit
hoc malum Diaboli (says this Doctor) per omnes aditus sensuales, dat se
figuris, accommodat se coloribus, Lib. 18. Quest.
adharet sonis odoribus se subijcit, infundit se saporibus and quibusdam
nebulis implet omnes meatus intelligentiae. That is to say, So mischievous is
the devil, that he creeps throughout all the passages of the senses. He
adhereth unto soundes, he subiecteth and insinuates himself into smelles and
odours, he powers himself into savours, and he fills all the passages of
the intelligence with certain mistes and clouds. And by the same reason it
happens also, That the devil does cast himself also into the inward and
interior senses, and into the fantasy of men, and mooveth them in the same
sort as he does the external: and by a certain ecstasy and alienation of
their spirits which he causes; he makes diverse forms, specters, and
phantosmes to appear in their imaginations: the which at such times as they
awake from sleep, will so lively represent themselves to the external senses,
that a man cannot be otherwise persuaded, but that he has truly and indeed
seen them: albeit the same were but a pure illusion of the devil.

Of diabolical ecstasies happening to witches and sorcerers, that they be not by
the departing of the soul from the body for a season, but only by illusion
of the devil.
Now this does lead us, as it were by the hand, to those discourses and
reports of Witches and Sorcerers: In whose fantasies and internal senses the
devil does so well and cunningly imprint and fasten certain Images and
figures of things: that the same do afterward convey themselves to their
outward senses, howbeit that they have neither seen nor heard the same, but
only in a kind of dream, and diabolical ecstasy. For that the soul of the
Sorcerer should issue forth and departs out of the body (as some persons of
this age have imagined) is a thing that cannot in any sort be appreoved, and
we will easly refute and disproove the same by sufficient reason and
authorities, when time shall serve, and that we come to speak of prodigious
dreams. But upon the matter it shall now suffice, 26 Quest. ^. cap. Epis^op.
that the Council of Ancyra, according as is to be read in the Cannon Law,
has determined; that whatsoever the divelles do instill into the spirits and
minds of Sorcerers and Sorceresses, is not by any abstraction made of the
soul out or from the body, but only by true and pure illusions, fantosmes,
and deceptions, making them believe that they ride, I know not on what kind
of beasts with Dian^ the goddess of the Paynims, and with Herodiade. It
appears also by the determination of the same Council, that the Sorcerers
which see such things are seduced by the devil, and through their infidelity
do deserve to be misled by those diabolical illusions. And this shows
apparently, that the Sorcerers and Sorceresses do never enter and fall into
such kinds of ecstasies, in the which they see diverse phantosmes that do
convey themselves to the external senses at the time of their awaking; except
they have intelligence and confederation with the devil. For otherwise the
devil could never fasten his illusions so deeply in their imagination, to
make them believe, that they had seen that in their body which they do not see
indeed, but only in spirit and imagination of the mind. And I say this
expressly to refute the opinion of some Physicians of our time, as namely,
Baptista de Porta a Neapolitane, Opinion of Baptista de Porta and other
Physicians refuted, a tributing the ecstasies of Sor cerers to oynt ments, etc.
who do affirm and maintain that the sleeps of Sorcerers replenished with
such vain imaginations in dreaming, do proceed of no other cause than of a
sleepy kind of ointment, wherewith they do use to annoint themselves before
they come to be ravished in those their ecstasies. But the truth is, there is
not any kind of oil, ointment, perfume, or any other such like drugge, that
has any such power or virtue to make men to fall asleep, and to dream in
that manner as Sorcerers use to do: who at the time of their awaking do
sometimes ^^^ke report^ of things which fall ou^ to be true indeed, which can
be by no other mean, than the ministry of devils, which do show unto them
in their sleep and dreams, the images of things that are true and certain,
and do withal persuade them, when they awake, that they have seen them
sensibly and indeed^: Now these kinds of Sorcerers that do thus imaginarily
enter into their Sabbaoths, are no less worthy of punishment, than those that
use to be carried thither by corporal transportation, of whom we shall
speak hereafter, when we come to intre^^e of Specters, fully, and at large.

Opinion of Alciat touching transportation of witches.
This being not well considered of, by the great and learned Alciat, who cast
his mind too too much upon the reasons of Nature, which have no place in
things that are supernatural, it made him undertake the defense of such
Sorcerers and Sorceresses as use to be transported to their Sabbaths by
imagination: insomuch as in his Book entitled Parerges, Libr. 8.
he reprooveth a certain Inquisitour of Piemont that caused a great number of
those Sorcerers, both men and women, to be put to death, condemning them to
be burnt with fire. In whose defense, A discourse of Alciat in defense of
witches transported by imagination.
mark what he writes; After that he has reprooved the cruelty of that
Inquisitour, who he says, was chased out of that Country by the Inhabitants
upon that oceasion: Albeit (says he) some of the husbands of those that
were accused of witchcraft and Sorcery, being men of credit and honest
reputation, did constantly affirm and protest, that even at that very instant,
wherein those witches their wives were accused to be dancing under a certain
great vine, themselves were laid close by their sides, and did speak unto
them; yea, and some had their secret company: yet answer thereunto was made,
that those were not their wives themselves, that did so lie and had the company
of their husbands: but that they were devils that took upon them a
resemblance of their form, and a kind of fantastical body like unto theirs,
and so with an illusion did abuse their husbands. Whereunto I forthwith
replied (says Alciat) And why do you not rather presume, that that was the
devil which was seen dancing under the tree, together with his companions in
the form and habit of those women, and so discharge them upon the testimony
of their husbands, who were laid in bed with them at that very time; wherein
you accuse them to be thus revelling and dancing? Why should you feign or
invent this Assertion, to say that the true body was in a fained and false
dance. and that that which was but a fantastical body should belayde, resting
quietly in bed? What need was there heerem to augment the miracles and power
of the devil by increasing it, and leaving the profession of a religious
divine, to execute the office of a severe and cruel Judge: which turns and
construeth all things to the worst against the party accused, without
permitting any purgation or justification made in his behalf? It was
sufficiently prooved (says the same Alciat) by diverse Informations, that all
that assembly of devils which was intended to be no other than of witches,
was suddenly chased away, and made to vanish out of sight, by a simple woman,
who (passing by where this Sabbath was kept) did nothing but call upon and
pronounce the name of Jesus: and suddenly upon the very sound and hearing of
that name, all the Dauncers did suddenly make away: and no man could tell what
was become of them, even in a moment. Now if those were true bodies, how is it
possible they could so soon be gone and vanish? It must needs be therefore,
that they were but mere phantosmes, and as the Gardens of Tantalus, In vita
Apollo.
according to that saying and proverb of Philostratus. Yea but say they, The
women themselves did confess that they were there dancing, and did yield
unto all that which was brought in evidence against them. But to this the
answer is easy (says Al^^at) namely, that the imagination of those women was
^aultie and corrupted by melancholy, or some other maladies, which Pliny in
one place calls the illusions and mock cries of the Fannes or Fairies, which
did require rather the help and cure of a Physician, then of an Inquisitour,
and might well have been healed, if the most part of them had not bin very
poor, and without means to defray the charge of it. In the end, not knowing
how to resolve him self, he comes to the Counsel of Ancyra, which makes
altogether against him, and marks those Sorcerers with the touch of impiety
and infidelity, who do receive in their inward senses, those diabolical
phantosmes and illusions, and do imagine themselves to be in the company of
Diana or of Herodiada notwithstanding, that in very deed, they be lying still
in their beds, by a certain ravishment and in an ecstasy. Thus thinking to
defend those who are altogether unworthy to be defended, he falls upon that
which does utterly condemn them. For what greater sin can any man allege
to be raiguing in the world, then this impiety, to have association with the
devil, of the which all Sorcerers are undoubtedly partakers, at such time as
they do fall into any such ecstasy, and do see such divelish visions,
according as the counsel of Ancyra has determined of them?

Now as touching that melancholy which Alciat does attribute to the ecstasy of
Sorcerers, Answer to the opinion of Alciat touching Sorcerers, their being in
an ecstasy, and that it comes not of melancholy, but by the cunning of the
devil.
it is a thing merely ridiculous, and deserves no answer, because it is not
credible, that those, which confessed themselves to have been in the company
of the devil, should all of the^^ be stricken with one and the same malady and
infirmity of mind, and should acknowledge themselves to have seen the very
same things so consonant and agreeable each to other, but that there must
needs be some cunning of the devil in causing it. And as little to purpose is
that which he alleged, that those who were accused to be Sorcerers, should be
laid in bed by their husbands, at such time as they were accused to be at their
Sabbath. For Spranger tells us, that even in the company of the husbands
themselves, the devils have had carnal copulation with Sorceresses, and that
even in a visible form. Much more therefore may it stand with reason, that the
Sorceresses even in the company of their husbands, may be ravished and grow
into an ecstasy, and see in their imagination such divelish visions, even as
they be laid by the sides of their hushauds. Now of these kinds of ravishment
by way of ecstasy, I can allege unto you an infinite number of histories; but
it shall suffice that I recire two or three only, which I have read in
Caietan, named de Vio, an interpreter upon S. Thomas of Aquine: and in Nider,
from whom both Silvester Prieras, Spranger, Henry Institoris, and others,
having made that book, entitled Mullens maleficarum; and Ghirlandus also have
collected the better part of their Treatise. Now, De Vie shows how himself
did know a certain woman a Sorceresse, In quast. 106. secunda secunda arti. 3.
which was exceedingly enamored of a young man, and whom the devil did anoint
all naked with a certain ointment, persuading her, that he would bring her
into the house of her beloved. This woman having been of a long time in an
ecstasy, and coming again to her self, affirmed, that she had bin and lain
with her friend, and no man could persuade her to the contrary;
notwithstanding that in very deed, she was found laid all naked in her bed,
and there had been so exceedingly wearied and toyled, that being taken with an
hoarsenesse by reason of the extreme cold which she had endured, she was
driven to keep her bed, till she was thoroughly eased and refreshed. And
Caiet^^ had not afterward showed and made it manifest unto her, that this
which she had seen, was nothing else but an imagination, she would never have
conceived the truth thereof; so greatly was she deceived and abused by the
devil. And he tells farther, how he knew an old woman, who had reported
and given out, that she would not fail to be at the Sabbath, and that she
should be transported thither from her chamber: howbeit for all this, she was
found stark naked in the same chamber, altogether senseless and in an
ecstasy: insomuch, as the illusion and deceit of the devil, being made
manifest and apparent unto her, she was converted and brought to be of another
mind. And Nider alleges also an example of another old woman, who being by
no means to be converted or persuaded by her Inquisitour, she did, in the
end, betake her self to enter into her chamber, at such time as she vaunted
that she would go to her Sabbath: and there was she seen, how at the first
she began to sleep sitting, and then to grow into a great sweat, holding a
basin in her hand; the which falling down, she also fell upon the ground all
at her length, and there discovering her secret parts, she was afterward
awakened, not without being greatly ashamed and confounded.

That Witches and Sorcerers have sometimes carnal copulation with the devil,
and be in outward appearances changed into the shapes of beasts.
But, that we may not fall away too soon from our purpose touching Sorcerers
and others, who have sworn alliance and confederacy with the devil. Besides
that, they be ravished in an ecstasy, they have sometime also carnal
copulation with him, and may be changed in the form and shape of diverse
beasts. And albeit the Physicians will come upon us with their disease called
Ephialte or the Falling Sickness, the which we have formerly described, and
with their Licantropie, with which diseases they that be taken and surprised do
imagine themselves to have carnal company with spirits, or do think
themselves to be changed into Woolves: yet in very truth, so it is, that there
be some men and women, which in very deed have had copulation as Incubi or
Sutcubi with the devils, and have been changed into Woolves so far forth,
as the outward sight and sense was able to discern and have had the same
affection as Woolves have, and (which is more) have been coupled with the
females of Woolves. This is a thing in some fort very difficult and hard to be
believed, esperially of such as (...) naturallists, and do attribute most
things to the work and power of nature: and I know that Pliny does make a
mock and jest at it, and especially at that which is called Lycantropi^,
which he accompteth but a mere fable. And yet nevertheless himself
alleges Evanthes a Greek Author, who says; that there is in Arcadia, a
certain lineage of men, Lib. 8. cap. 22
who passing over a certain flood or river, do become woolves, and repassing
the same, do return into their humane shape again. So that he is doubtful of
that which he ought to believe in that point: And being ignorant of the power
of devils, he r^steth himself upon the power of nature, which is in some
sort excusable in him, being but a Pagan.

But it is a question worthy the handling, to know whether the devils have
the power to change in very deed, Question, whether the devil can change the
bodies of men indeed, or not.
the substance of man's body; or whether it be in 07 show and appearance only;
deceiving not only the fantasy of the Sorcerer, or of the party which shall
be bewitched or enchanted, but also the external senses of those that shall
behold them.

The truth is, this question has been handled by Saint Augustine, who
holds, Answer. Lid. 18. de civi. dei.
that the true bodies of men cannot in any sort be changed by the Art of the
devil; but that he may well be in such a body as is fantastical, and which
either in dreaming or in imagination does diversely alter and change it self by
many sorts and kinds of things that do present themselves unto the mind: And
albeit the same be not indeed a true body, yet may it take the forms and shape
of a body, suppressing and keeping (as it were) asleep the outward senses of
men, in such sort, as their true bodies may in the mean while repose
themselves, and be at rest in some other place surprised and overcome with a
deep and profound sleep. And the same Saint Angustine goes yet further and
says, how himself knew the father of one named Presta^^tius, who was changed
into a Muse: and being thus metamorphosed, did carry upon his back certain
cariages and baggage of soldiers. And this learned Doctor does set down: his
resolution. That this was nothing else but a mere illusion of the devil: and
that the father of Prostantius was not changed into a Mule; and much less did
he carry any bag or baggage, but that these were the devils which did
charm and enchant the eyes of the beholders, making them believe, that the
father of Prostantius was a Mole, and carried those burdens and baggage:
notwithstanding that it was they themselves which carried them. And agreeable
to this resolution of Saint Augustine, Gulielmus Parisiensis does recount a
certain history which is worthy the marking, Vltima part de universe.
because in things of like sort (besides the conclusion of Saint Augustine
being somewhat too spare in this point) it may be gathered, that the devils
do seize themselves of natural beasts, as mules, horses, woolves, and such
like creatures* and the mean while do possess the fantasy of Sorcerers, or
of persons enchanted by them, and do make them believe, that they are changed
into beasts, bringing withal into their fantasy, that which themselves do
work in the mean season, by the ministry of those beasts. The history of
William of Paris, is this, he says; how he himself know a man, who thought
himself to be changed into a wolf, and at a certain hour did withdraw and
retire himself into a hollow cave, far retired within a thick and shadie
wood, where he fell asleep, and in sleeping, dreamed, that he was become a
wolf indeed, howbeit that in very truth, the devil did only possess a
natural wolf, which he made to run up and down that wood, whilst this man
lay there sleeping. And in the end this was discovered, the man being there
found in a deep sleep, and lying ravished in an ecstasy within the cave.

Objection against the former answer.
Contrary nevertheless and repugnant to this (which both Saint Augustine and
William of Paris do affirm) are many and diverse histories, which may be read
in sundry Authors concerning such persons or have bin changed into beasts: For
(besides the Hermit of Dole,) who in our time was found to be changed into a
wolf, and taking with his paws a little child which he was going to devour,
if he had not been surprised and discovered, and having in part the figure
and shape of a man, and partly of a wolf. Most notorious also are those
histories in Spranger, touching three Damsells, Mallei ^^^lificarum.
who in form of a Cat, did assault and set upon a poor laboring man, who did
hurt them all three, and they were so found hurt and wounded in their bed: And
that of a young Merchant, who was changed into an Ass by a Sorceresse of
Cyprus, who nevertheless, did always esteem himself to be a man, albeit his
companions did believe him to be an Ass, and did chase and expel him out of
their ship, as being such a one indeed. And it is a thing worthy to be
considered in this latter, that although he were taken and reputed of all
others for an Ass, yet the Sorceresse her self, that had enchanted him, and
other Sorcerers her neighbors did use and entertain him still, as a man,
especially being in the house and within the doors: for abroad he was
constrained by the Sorceresse, to carry upon his back burdens of corn and
of wood.

Solution of the former question. That the devil does not change the bodies of
men In 2. Sentent. did. 8. An Demones possunt imprimere in sensus corporales
praectigus illudendo.
Now even this same serves to show, that the devil does not change the bodies
of men, but only in show and appearance does abuse and deceive the fantasy of
men, which do imagine and think those to be beasts, who indeed are no other
then reasonable men. And of the same opinion is Thomas Aqui^as, howsoever there
be some in our time, who would have made men believe, that he affirmed purely
and simply, that the devils and Angels have the power by their natural
virtue, to change our bodies. But under their correction, they did ill
understand the word Transmutation, as it is in that Doctor. For the same is
to be understood passively as concerning those, who in appearance have their
senses, and the fantasy changed by the devil, and by consequent are easy to
be abused and deceived by that immutation and alteration which they find in
themselves, far from that which is natural and familiar to them. And we have
already, How, and in what manner the devil does work his illusions, in seeming
to change the bodies of me^ into other forms which truly and indeed they are
not.
and shall again in other places show, how that the devil working upon the
fantasy, does moove and stir the humors, and does in some sort, cause a
transmutation of them by a local motion: And this transmutation of the
humors, being internal or inwards, does communicate it self, not only to
the external senses of the party which is charmed and enchanted, but to those
also of the beholders, as we have before declared, if God do not impeach and
hinder it. As we read that saint Macarius, having a young maiden brought unto
him, which was reported to have been changed into a Mare, did nevertheless
for his part alone well see and perceive, that she was not a Mare, but a
natural woman: And it was, by reason that he was a godly and holy man, and the
devil had not the power to use his Prestigies and illusions toward him. For
if this young maiden had in very deed and truth, be^ene changed into a Mare,
she had not been taken at the first sight by Macarius for a maiden, as indeed
she was, and by him was cured from the illusion of the devil.

To be brief, we may conclude with Saint Augustine, The resolution of the
former question. Lib. 18. de civitate dei and 3. de Trinit.
Non esse credendum daemonu^ art vel potestate hominis corpus in bestialia
lineamenta posse-converti, and transgressoribus Angelis ad nutum servere hanc
rerum visibilium materiam sed soli De^. That it is not a thing to be believed,
that the devils have any Art or power, to change and convert the body of a
man, into the lineaments or members of bruit beasts, or that this matter and
substance of visible creatures, should be obedient to the beck and command of
those wicked Angels, but that this is a power proper to God alone. And this
reckoning are we to make of that fable of Circus, who was said to have changed
the companions of V^ysse^ into very natural swine; which is not to be
accounted other then such as it is, to wit, merely fabulous, unless a man
will say (as the same Saint Augustine does) that these were illusions and
Prestigies wrought by Art Magic, such as the ancient Poet Propertius, does
attribute to another Magitian, a notorious woman witch; whom he celebrateth in
his Poemes, to have been so famous and powerful in her charms, that she
could have changed her self into a woolfe at her pleasure, as is to be seen
in those his verses;

Andax cantata leges imponere Lunae,
Et sua nocturno fallere terga lupo.
The Moon she durst command by her enchanted power
And falsed shape of Woolfe, by night to take upon her. Eclog.

Or as Virgil affirms of the shepherd Maeris, who by virtue of herbs
brought from Pontus, did change her self into a woolfe, and did range the
woods.

But it may be objected, that Nebuchodonoxer was changed into a beast:
Objection of the change of Nebuchadnezzer into an Ox. Solution.
and wherefore then should it not be credible, that men may in very deed be
changed into woolves? First I deny, that the Scripture does precisely affirm,
that Nabuchodoneser was changed into a beast, but that he did eat hay as a
beast, and that the nails of his fingers and his feet, did grow as the claws
of an Eagle. The which is a thing worthy to be marked, and does evidently show
unto all such indiscreet persons, as would have men to be transformed into
woolves, how much their minds and understanding are subject to inconstancy
and indiscretion, that they cannot make any profit, but do wrest to their
ownesense, that which being well examined, does make altogether against them.
For in that the Scripture says, the nails of Nabuchodonozer did grow in such
a manner, and that he did eat hay as an Ox: it gives us to understand, that
his form or shape was not changed, but that he had so lost the use of reason
and his understanding, that he thought and imagined himself to: be a beast,
and he did therefore eat hay as a beast; not that he was really and
indeed a beast. For seeing his essential form was not changed, (as
themselves do confess) and the corporal and reasonable parts of man are two
essences so lincked and conjoined together, that before the day of death, they
can never be separated: how can it be, that the reasonable part being not
possible to be changed, because it is essential to man; (as themselves
allege) yet the body which is united, and tied unto the reason and
understanding, should, and may notwithstanding be changed and transformed?
Certainly the body of man and the soul are Relatives: and a man cannot
presuppose a humane body to be living and walking, but he must give unto it a
reasonable soul: and so likewise on the contrary part, we cannot take any
consideration here below of a living soul using reason, but we must give it a
body proportioned with all the draughts, features and lineaments of a man. This
being a thing so true and certain, as to make a doubt thereof, would be a
manifest error, and against the principles of natural Philosophy: How can it
then be, that the soul being not to be changed by their own confession, our
bodies nevertheless should be changed and take the body of a beast?

But they infer yet further and say, men have the power to make a cherry-tree
or such like plant, Objection by sundry examples.
to bear and bring forth roses or apples, and they can change iron into
steel, and the form of silver into gold: wherefore then should it be thought
so strange a matter, that the devil should change the figure of a body, into
some other shape, seeing his power does by far exceed that of men? Solution
and answer to the first example.
Goodly comparisons no doubt: as though the man (which does graft in a tree a
rose or any other graft) be he, that does cause to grow within or upon the
tree, or the wild stock, that which is so strange and different from the
proper substance of the tree; and not rather nature it self, which by means
of the sap of the tree mounting to the graft, does make it to be incorporated
and united to the bark and body of the same tree, and (as Virgil says) Vdo
facit in elescere libro. Certain it is, that he which does graft it, does
nothing else but lend his hands to Nature, the which, (as touching the rest)
according to the power that God has given it, does work and bring it forth,
causing it to come to these effects as we see. The which, howsoever they may
seem marvelous, yet are they notwithstanding merely natural and easy to be
comprehended, as proceeding from that which does delight in the diversity of
her work: and as Petronius Arbiter says;

Non vno contenta valet natura tenore
Sed commutatas gaudet habere vices.
Great is the force of nature, her course often changing,
Never contented with one kind of working.
Now God has not given such power unto the devil, so to transform any body
into another, and to alter and change the substance thereof in any sort;
neither is there any likeness or identity of reason, between the grafting of
a tree, and the transmutation of an entire and solid substance into another
body. And more then that, howsoevering grafting of any thing, a man do cut away
even half the stock to incorporate the graft, yet does the stock still
remain the same, and the graft takes it noriture of the sap of the stock,
and does retain the nature thereof: and that this is so, it is apparent, for
that in the grafting of roses upon an hawthorne, or other wilding, or an oak,
they will grow to be green, by reason of the sap of the wilding, or of the
oak. And therefore the nature of the tree is not so changed by the new grafting
of it, but that a man may easily take knowledge of the first substance thereof,
the which is far otherwise in the substance of any man, that is said to be
changed and transformed by the devil: for that therein cannot be discerned the
tract or show of any humane shape. So that then the devil must be
acknowledged to be of more might and puissance then Nature it self, the which
the Hebrews did esteem in a manner as a god.

Answer to the 2. example.
Now as touching that they allege, that man does change iron into steel, and
silver into gold; they do not see how therein they do most grosely and
absurdly speak against themselves. For I will use no other then their own
comparison to refell all those that shall maintain the transmutation of any
true substance. For as it is most certain, that iron does easily refine it
self into that which in nature is next and nearest unto it, that is, steel:
nevertheless it is always iron, and is easy to be discerned from that steel
which is fine and natural. And as silver (being molten and dissolved with
matters of another nature) may easily take the color of gold, and come to
counterfeit and adulterate the same, and yet is not able to change it, but that
it will be discovered for such as it is, being tried either with the graver,
the touchstone, the hammer, or some such means: In like manner, the devil
(howsoever by charming the eyes and sight of the beholders, he do seem in
some sort to adulterate and falsify the substance of man, in making it appear
other then it is indeed: yet nevertheless does not the humane substance
suffer any change or alteration. So that we may briefly resolve and conclude
this point with Saint Thomas of Aquine: that the devil deceiving and deluding
both the inward and outward senses, In 2. sententia distinct. 8
and consequently the judgment of men, does represent unto them, things diverse
and far different from their natural substances, neither is the same a thing
more new or strange unto him, then it is unto some men, who by very Ar^ and
cunning, and by means of certain candles and fumigations, will cause (as has
been before touched) that a chamber shall seem to be full of serpents, albeit
in very truth, there be nothing less then serpents in the chamber, and only
the eyes are deceived and deluded. In the same sort, howsoever the devil does
represent under the true form of a man, some woolfe, horse, mule, or some such
other beast: yet nevertheless the man does still abide and remain the same
that he was, and he is not either changed or transformed in any fashion
whatsoever, but only in the imagination of the fantasy, which is possessed
and troubled by the devil. And this both all the ancient Doctors of the
Church, and all the general Counsels have determined and agreed upon. And
therefore I cannot but marvel, that there should be any men so obstinately
addicted and wilfully wedded to their opinions, as to bring in and maintain
against all antiquity, and contrary to the Canons, a new kind of heresy,
the which they go about to prove, only by such authorities and examples, as
they do wrest and pervert to their own sense and meaning: wherein they do
something savor of the error of Manes, the father of the Manichees; Qui
aliquid divinitatis aut numinis extra vnum Deum arbitrabatur: who did hold,
that there was a kind of divine power, besides that of the one only God. For
he said, that there were two creators, the one of things earthly and material;
the other of things celestial, which does even iumpe with the opinion of those
men. For to make the devil to have such power, as to change the body of man
into another form; what other thing is it, then to give and attribute unto him
that power and puissance, as to create a new form, and thereinto give him a
kind of prerogative over the body of man, which is a thing only reserved unto
God alone, the creator of all things, both visible and invisible, corporal and
incorporall.

But this shall suffice as touching Sorcerers, and that transmutation which
they do maintain of humane bodies into the body; of some other creature: The
which in very deed, neither is, nor can be done, but only in appearance (as
we have oftentimes formerly repeated) and only by the fantasy and
imagination corrupted and deluded by the prestigious deceipts and illusions of
the devil.

How, and in what sort the fantasy of me^ is possessed and deluded by the
Devil.
Now, that we may not wander from that which we have in hand, we will here
show, how, and in what sort the fantasy also is possessed by the devil,
either at such time as the humors of the body are disposed and fit for it; or
when the person has bin bewitched and enchanted: or else, by reason of some
other secret unknown to men, and reserved to the knowledge of God alone. For
(as it is most certain and assured) that the brain of man is the ^ea^e of the
imagination and the phant^sie; and that by the same (by means of the organs
and instruments proper and fitted thereunto) the conceptions of the soul are
uttered and brought forth: So, if the Devil do once perceive that the brain
is troubled or oftended by any maladies or infirmities which are particularly
incident thereunto: as the Epilepsie, or Falling evil, Madness, Melancholy,
Lunatique fittes, and other such like passions: He presently takes occasion to
torment and trouble it the more: And (by the permission of God,) seizing
himself of the same, he does trouble the humors, amaze and confound the
senses, captivateth the understanding, possesses the fantasy, darkneth and
blinds the powers of the soul; and speaking through the organs of the body
(being then fitted and made apt to bring to light his own conceits and
devises) he then comes to show himself in his kind, speaks strange
languages, tells of things that are chanced and come to pass in diverse
parts of the world; prophecieth of things to come (although for the most part
he be found a liar;) and in brief, he works such ma^vells and wonders, as no
man can believe are possibly able to proceed from any body of a humane nature.

Opinion and reasons of Levinus Lemnius, and other Physicians, who do
attribute to Nature the strange effects of persons possessed with Devils.
Levinus Lemnius his opinion of men possessed with spirits. Lib. 2. cap. 2.
collect. de occult. not. miraculis, cui add Cornelium Gemmam qui de miraculis
naturae itidem librum composuit.
This notwithstanding, some Physicians there be in our time, who will needs
reduce this (as also all other things which be supernatural) to the ordinary
course and working of nature: and they imagine that they can yield a reason for
the same: which being well searched, does discover it self to be most vain
and frivolous, and cannot any way in the world be maintained. Amongst others.
Levimus Lem^^us discoursing of the secrets of Nature: and being to handle this
point, does marvellously stick upon the contemplation of humane nature, and
of the force of the natural humors. For these are his words: There is (says
he) a certain wonderful force and virtue which does stir up the humors, and
a certain vehement heat does disturb and moove the imaginative power, at
such time as the sick persons in the extreme and burning heat of their
fevers do speak and utter forth sometimes openly and with a kind of
eloquence, and sometimes confusedly, and (as it w^r) stuttering and stammering,
such languages as they never knew nor learned: And it is most sure that there
be some humors so sharp and violent, that when they come to be enflamed or
corrupted, so as their fuliginous excrements do strike up to the brain,
they will make those that are surprised therewithal, to stagger and stuner in
their speech, not unlike those that are overcome with wine; and will make them
to cha^ter and talk in a strange language. Now if this didd proceed of any
evil spirits, then would not the infirmity cease by the Art of the
Physician, and by purgative medicines or other drugges applied to the patients,
causing them to sleep: For we see that ordinarily, by such ^edicines, they do
return into their right minds, and into their accustomed manner of speaking.
And for proof hereof Levinus does add, That himself has healed some sick
persons, who in the fit of their fever have bin very eloquent, even so far,
as they have pronounced a speech as if i^ had been an Oration deeply studied,
and most accomplished in all respects: and yet the parties in the time of their
health were very rude persons, and little better than idiots. After all this he
goes forward, and beginning to ground himself upon on certain reasons, he
says: As it is most certain, that the boiling and arising of the humors is
mavelous and exceeding hot and ardent, and the stirring and agitation of the
sensitive spirits is very vehement: and above all this, the troubling and
mooving of the soul, being quick and sudden: we may not marvel nor think
it strange, if (as by the beating and striking together of the flint and the
steel, there are forced out sparkle of fire:) so also by the agitation of the
spirits, the arising and boiling of the humors, and the mooving of the soul
of man, he may, by the organs, fit and proper thereunto, utter forth speeches
never heard before, and some strange language, til then unknown. Now the
faculty of the soul is very apt and readily disposed to perceive and
apprehend the knowledge of things, and to be embewed with their principles even
before such time as it comes to use them: in such sort as the opinion of
Plato seems to have some likelihoode of truth: that our knowledge and
understanding is no other thing than a kind of remembering: For even so the
soul (which is the principal and most divine part of man) at such time as it
is stirred and moved against the natural motion thereof, and begins to be
troubled with corporal maladies, it does then also happen to utter and put
forth that which lay before hidden and concealed in the most profound and
inward parts thereof a (to wit) such faculties and forces as be even divine
and celestial. And like as there be some trees and plants which do not cast
forth from themselves any good seent or odor, but only when they are rubbed
and chafed with the hand: even so the faculties and powers of the soul
do^never so show themselves, as when they come to be stirred and moved. And by
the same reason the jeate and the amber will not be made to draw up to them
the straw or the rush, till such time as they be first rubbed, and a long time
chafed between the hands. And whereof comm^th i^ (says ^^^inus further) that
they which be near to the point of death, do commonly prophecy (the which
Homer also witnesses in diverse books of his I^iads) except it be because an
vnaccustomd force, A^iad. (...).
exciting and stirring up it self within them before death, does as it were,
ravish them in a kind of divine inspiration, in such sort, as they be besides
themselves, and do suffer themselves to be carried away with the power of the
spirit or soul, which is then set on discoursing, uttering by their mouths,
such things as are afterward to ensue and come to pass.

But let Levinus say what he list, as a Physician: he cannot for all that
persuade me, Levinus L^mnius opinion confuted.
that men do naturally speak diverse languages, unless it be, either by
miracle, and by the power of the holy spirit of God, as did the Apostles; or
else by the aid and help of the devil, as did they whom the ancient
Christians of the Primitive Church called Energomenous; and whom we call
Demoniaques, or persons possessed. Yea but (says he) the agitation of the
humors by sickness, and the mooving of the soul, (both which do cooperate
and work together) may work wonders, and make them to speak diverse
languages. To this I answer; that it is not either the humors or the soul,
which do cause a man in his sickness or fever to speak diverse languages; but
it is the devil, who does (as we have said) mingle himself in the humors
being corrupted. And so is the resolution upon this point of Saint Thomas
Aquinas, who speaking of lunaticall persons vexed by the devil, according to
the increase and decrease of the Moon, says, that the devils do considder
how the humors of the body, are disposed to their effects, and accordingly,
they do follow the course of the Moon, which has a certain commanding power
over the brain and the humors, in such sort, as man shall see more lunatike
persons tormented by the devil, then of any other sorts whatsoever. The words
of that Doctor are these: The reasons why the devils do the more exercise
their rage, according to the increase of the Moon, is for two respects. First,
because that thereby they may make the creature of God; to wit, the Moon the
more infamous, as says both Saint Jerome and Saint John Chrysostom. In cap.
4. super Mathe. Homil. 54 in Mathe.
Secondly, for that they do usually work according to the natural virtues
and faculties, and in their workings and effects do consider the aptness and
disposition of the body. Now it is manifest, that the brain, of al other parts
of the body, Lib. de somno and vigilia.
is the most moist; (as Aristotle affirms) and for that cause, it is
principally subject under the domination and power of the Moon, the which by
her particular property, has the power to moove the humors, and they
troubling the brain, do give occasion to the devil, to mix and convey
himself into and amongst them, and so to trouble the fantasy of the party.

Thus you see the very words used by this Doctor, Questione 115. Tim. 1.
sacrae Theologiae Art. 5.
which may serve also against Hippocrates, who derided some in his time, that
thought the Falling-evill to be caused, only by the wrath and anger of the
gods, and not of any disturbance or depravation of the brain. And for that
cause, Lib. de sacro morb^. Hypocrates, his opinion touching the Falling-evill.
(as he says) they used then expiations and charms, to chase and drive away
this sacred evil or disease: the which he denied to be a thing that ought in
any sort to be believed, that the gods did in any sort cause it; because the
body of man could not be any ways polluted or defiled by the gods, they being
pure and chaste: And by the using of expiations and purgations, it must be
inferred, that they touching our bodies do pollute and defile them, the which
to believe of the divine powers, could not but be blasphemous and wicked.

Hypocrates, his opinion confuted.
But this Physician did not consider, that there were many sorts of gods amongst
the P^yni^s, and that those which they held to be terrestrial and infernal they
called numina lava: that is, Hurtful gods, or evil spirits, such as used to
possess the bodies and to hurt them. And for this cause did they use to make
their supplications unto them, for fear lest they should do them some harm:
And if they did find themselves to have any evil and unquiet nights, and ill
dreams by them, then did they use to purge and cleanse themselves, as we shall
hereafter show in another place fit for that purpose. This shows plainly,
that Hippocrates knew not well what to think: whether the gods did inwardly
possess and seize upon the body of the party troubled with the Epilepsie, or
surprised with the Falling-evill, seeing he alleges no other reason then
this, (I know not how) taken from his Paganism, which we have showed to be
very vain, and of no moment, even by the opinion of those of his own religion.

I do not in any sort reproove those good reasons which he afterward
yields, in showing, That the devil does serve himself of the humors or
brain in men corrupted, and so seizing on the same, does enter into the bodies
of such distempered persons in the tiem of their fittes.
that from the brain troubled and offended, does proceed this disease of the
Epilepsie or the Falling-evill: But I say, (according to the resolution of
Saint Thomas Aquine,) that the devil may possess the humors being corrupted,
or the brain being so troubled and offended of the pa^tie so diseased, and
that this is a thing that does happen usually and commonly. And I wot well, that
the ancient Magitians, to call up their devils or spirits, and to know of them
such things as were to come, did help themselves with the bodies of
Epileptiques and persons troubled with that disease: Into the which, the
devils did easily enter, at such time as the evil or fit took them, and did
speak by their mouths unto the Magitians, or by some other external signs,
did declare unto them what was to come. And I remember that I have read in
Apuleius, that he was accused before the Proconsull of Affricke, Apologia. 1.
Apuleius servum suum Thallum rem^tis arbitris secreto loco, arula, and lucerna
and paucis consciis carmin^ cantatum corruere fecit, deinde nescium sui
excit^vit. Objection touching strange languages and prophecies, etc. uttered by
persons distempered, that it should be by nature corrupted.
how that he aided himself with his servant Thallus, being surprised with the
Falling Sickness, at such time as he performed his magic sacrifices. And he
defended or excused himself of this crime so coldely, that he seems to
consent thereunto: And it is well known, that next to Apollonius Thianeus, he
was one of the greatest Magitians that can be remembered.

But (says yet Levinus,) those medecines that do purge Melancholy, Madness,
Burning-fevers, the Epilepsie, and such like; do cause all those things to
cease, which we affirm to be caused in such bodies by the devils; namely, to
speak strange languages, to prophecy and foretell things to come, to tell
wonders of things past, and to do that which is not possible for man to do by
nature: Therefore it may be concluded, that it is not the devil, but rather
Nature corrupted, which so moves the humors and stirs up and troubles the
soul in that manner.

But I do utterly deny, that the devils by medecines can be driven or cast
out of such bodies, neither can he prove it unto me by any example. I am not
ignorant that Pomponatius writes, Answer to the former Objection, and that the
devil cannot be cast out of bodies possessed by medecines. De precantat. But it
appears not that those purges did ex pell the devil. In oration: de laudibus
medecinae.
that the ancient Exorcists or Coniurers did purge with helleborus, the bodies
of such as were beset with devils, before they made their coniurations:
howbeit he cannot allege or bring me any good and sound history to prove
his saying. And though he affirm, that the wife of Frauncis Maigret Savetier
of Mantua, (who spoke diverse languages) was healed by Calceran, a famous
Physician of his time, who did minister unto her a potion of helleborus: And
that Erasmus agreeing with him, does write, how he himself saw a man of
Spoleta in Italy, that spoke the Almaine tongue very well, albeit he had never
been in Almaine, and that (after a medecin had been given unto him) he did
avoid by the fundament, a great number of worms, and so was healed, and did
never after speak the Almaine tongue any more: yet do I hold the truth of
this very suspicious; It might be rather, that the devils left these presently
upon the medecines given them, only because he would have men believe and
wickedly attribute this power to be in physic, rather then to any work of
God, though it were not indeed by any virtue of the physic. Lib. 2. cap. 16.
de abdit. rer. causis.
and do rather give credit to Fernelius, one of the greatest Physicians of our
age, who does utterly deny, that there is any such power in physic: And he
recites a history of a young Gentleman the son of a Knight of the Order,
who being possessed by the devil, could not in any sort be healed by any
potions, medicines, or diet ministered unto him, Nor by that neither. You may
as soon believe the one as the other: for all physic, all superstitions, and
Coniurations are of like efficacy in this case. Opinion of the Astrologers
confuted. That the speaking of strange languages etc. by persons distempered in
their bodies, proceeds of the influence of the Stars.
but only by Coniurations and Exorcismes. And even in our time there was
better trial made hereof in that woman or Demoniaqne of Vervin, who for all
the medicaments that were given unto her, by those of the pretended reformed
religion, could never be healed, but only by the virtue and efficacy of the
holy Sacrament of the Altar.

But to come to other matters of this kind: As little reason also have the
Astrologers to attribute unto their Stars such force and influence, as to
say, That they do infuse and instill into humane bodies certain admirable
faculties, and so do cause them to speak diverse and strange languages: for
their opinion is as far from the truth, and to be abhorred, as that of the
Physicians, neither can they find any reasons, whereby they are able, or ought
to persuade, that the Stars are the cause of any such miracle chauncing in
the bodies of men. And howsoever for proof of their Assertion they do urge,
That the Moon, according to the increasing and decreasing thereof does
produce very terrible effects in the bodies of Lunatique persons: and that
according to certain constellations of the Stars the corporal matter is
disposed more or less to receive the celestial Impressions: yet does it not
follow for all that, That the Lunatiques in speaking and uttering diverse
languages, are not surprised and possessed by the Devil, but that the same
their diversity of tongues should proceed from the Stars. For what should I
say more? But that the ancient Paynims themselves were not ignorant, but did
acknowledge, that both Melancholique persons, Madmen, and Lunatiques, speaking
diverse and sundry languages and prophecyings, were men possessed with
Divelles: And therefore they did use to call them Fanaticos, and sometimes
Ceritos, Ceritus quasi Cereristus gracis (...). Pl^utu^ in Poe nulo, neque nos
populus pro Ceritis insectabit lapidibus. De sacro morbo 1. Reg.
as if they should say; Persons stricken by Ceres, sometimes Demetrioleptous,
and Numpholeptons, and Daimonountas, as Lucian witnesses, and sometimes
persons possessed by Hecate, which was an infernal devil, or by Heroes, as
says Hippocrates. And in the Bible, in the books of Kings, we see that Saul
being in a melancholique passion was assailed and vexed with an evil spirit,
and had no other remedy to drive away this evil but the Harp of David. To
make short, Levinus himself is constrained to confess. That the humors are
the principal cause of all maladies partaking of melancholy, Lib. 2. cap. 1.
de occult. not. miraculis.
or of any fever: But that the Devils, the Stars, the Quality of the air
adjoining, and other things external do accompany them as accidents. And
therefore away with all these reasons of the Naturalists, who because they will
deny that there be any Devils, do attribute and yield more power unto humane
nature, and to the Stars, than to the Spirits that are supernatural, and
above nature: the which they can not comprehend to be by any means in essence,
because they do too too much ground themselves upon nature, and do not
acknowledge any thing above or beyond it.

Opinion of those that do attribute all charms and enchantments unto the
virtue of herbs etc.
But some of them there be, who pass yet further on, and do affirm, that the
charms and enchauntments wherewith they do enchaunt and constrain men, (be it
either to the loving of some woman, or to hate her, so as they cannot endure to
dwell and abide with her) do proceed from the virtue of herbs, or the
stars, or from the imagination troubled and corrupted, rather than of any
working or power of the Devil. And they do allege for their authority the
Physician Avicen, Opinion of Avicen touching enchauntments.
who says, that Enchantments have not any effect or force in nature, nor any
virtue or power to change the health of any man, or the state of his welfare
into sickness or infirmities. And that they (which are of opinion, that there
be any enchaunted) do enchaunt themselves by the vehemency of their
imagination. And these men do allege that also which he afterward recites
vaunting of himself: For my part, (says he) I make no account of any
Sorcerer whatsoever: neither do I know any Enchaunter, be he never so
cunning and expert in his Art, that can constrain me against my will, to lift
up, or to moove so much as my little finger. And more than so, I never knew
any that has himself to be enchaunted, but I have healed and delivered him
from that imagination, that he has been enchaunted. Upon this authority do
they rely, utterly rejecting and disallowing any Enchauntments to be wrought
by means of Devils, and consequently, denying their essence and being.

Avicen his opinion confuted.
Nevertheless, for any thing said by Avicen, there are so many experiences to
the contrary of such as have been inchaunted and bewitched, that it were a
point of too too great incredulity to doubt of it. And as touching that they
say; That charms and enchantments do not proceed of the vertne of herbs,
etc.
That if there be any charms and enchauntments in Nature, the same proceeds
of the force of herbs, and of the influence of the stars, rather than of
any spirits: Therein is no great appearance of any truth or verity: For if it
were so, it must needs follow, that the words and speeches which Enchaunters
and Sorcerers do utter, should not have any force nor efficacy. But it has
been a thing approoved by all Antiquity, that diverse have been enchaunted by
words and speeches uttered, which Lucan a very learned Poet and great
Philosopher does testify, saying;

Men's hausti nulla sanie polluta veneni
Excantata perit.
A man inchaunted runs mad,
That never any poison had.
I confess indeed, that God has given many properties unto herbs, and unto
simples, yea and those so admirable, that they have the power and virtue, not
only to preserve our humane bodies in health, but also utterly to overthrow
and to bring it to confusion, in such sort as if the same were enchanted.
Nevertheles, that they should so work upon the body, that the soul inwardly
should feel the force and effect thereof, it is not possible, not to be
believed, except that together with the herbs there be intermingled some
charms or words of enchantment. And of this was not Ovid ignorant, as
appears by that which her speaks of Medea, saying;

Protinus horrendis infamia pabula succis, Lib. 9. M^tamory.

Conterit and tritis Hecaetei a carmina miscet.
Then horride herbs and hateful drugs together she does bruise,
And in the bruising, damned spells and hellish charms does use.
And that of the learned Poet Virgil; Miscueruntque herbas and non innoxia
verba. Lib. 3. Georgic.



which is

And therewithal they mingle sundria herbs
Ever and among using not harmless words.


But more plainly and manifestly does Propertius recount, how the Sorcerers
do give a force and power unto their herbs, thereby to enchant and charm
persons, did use to stir and moove them in some ditch, into the which they
made some flood of rain or water to come:

Quippe and Collinas ad fossam moverit herbas
Stantia currenti diluerentur aqua. Lib. 5. Elegiarum.

Within some ditch she stirs her herbs which she had placed
There, with the running water to be washed.
Now Apuleius and other ancient Authors have written, that Sorcerers did use to
work and do their charms in some ditch or pit: And therefore Propertius in
those verses bringing in a Sorceresse mooving and stirring her herbs in a
ditch, what other thing does he intend to show, but that together with the
herbs, there were mingled also certain charms, the which did give a force
and vigor to the herbs to work wonders by the cooperation of the devil.

Furthermore Virgil does recite yet other ceremonies which the Sorcerers used
in gathering of their herbs, Lib. 4. Aeneid. Falcibus and lunae ad lumen
quaeruntur adhenis Pubentes herbae nigri cum lacte veneni.
all which were nothing else but damnable, superstitious and divelish
inventions: as to cut them in the night time by the light of the Moone-shine
with a hook of brass, which makes me also to remember certain observations
of the Magitians and Sorcerers in times past, in cutting of their herb
Elleborus, Mandragoras, and the herb Panaceum, whereof Theophrastus speaks,
and derideth it as a foolish and vain superstition: Lib. 9. de historia
herbarum cap. 9
and those also of the Druides, amongst the ancient Gauls, who used, without
any knife or iron, to pluck the herb which they called Selago, and in
gathering thereof, they went always clothed or apparrelled with a kind of
white surplisse, with their feet bare and naked, very clean and well washed:
and before that they gathered it, their fashion was to consecrate bread and
wine, and after they had gathered it, Lib. 24. cap. 11.
to put the same into a fair white napkin, as Pliny writes of them.

That neither the virtue of herbs, nor the influence of the stars can work
or rule the affections of men to love or hatred.
Moreover, it is a most gross absurdity to affirm, that the herbs being
gathered at such time as certain stars do reign, should in some point
participate of the power and virtue of those same stars; and that they should
sometimes have such a power over and upon the hearts of men, as to make them to
hate and to love, or to cause them to be hated or loved, and to bring them into
favor and credit with Lords and great personages, or to cause their disgrace
and disfavour with them. For this is but an idle invention of the Astrologers,
sufficiently heretofore refuted by Picus Mirandola, and condemned also by the
daily experience which we have thereof to the contrary. And if there have
been happily some few which have made proof, (according to their desire,) of
that which the Astrologers have professed and undertaken; yet this makes not,
that therefore their Art should be any thing the more esteemed or set by, no
more then dreams are esteemed or held in any reckoning; albeit many have found
the effects of them as they have dreamed. Nay, more then so, I dare say thus
much; that if such herbs, gathered under the influence of the stars, do
happen to work and to fall out in proof, according to the will of the party
that gathers them: it is the devil that does so cooperate and work with it,
rather then any power or virtue of the stars; because thereby he intends to
bring men into an error, and to think that there is a certain kind of
divinity or divine power in the stars: Question 115. Tomo. 1. summae sacrae
Theol^g.
and (according as Thomas of Aquine affirms,) to imprint in their minds, a
certain terror and fear of the puissance and power of the stars: Cap. 20.
the which is a thing whereof the Prophet Ieremi^ willed the Jews to take
heed of, Vmeothoth hashamains al-theh-hathu ci ichhathu hag oim mehemma: that
is to say; Fear ye not the signs of heaven: for of them do the Gentiles stand
in fear. And therefore they who have used to attribute such power unto
herbs, cut or gathered under the influence of the stars, are utterly to be
rejected: as the Philosophers Thebanus, Alexander, Trallian, Albertus surnamed
Magnus, Eudemus, Necepsus, Andreas, and Pamphilus, Physicians, of whom we have
before spoken, and those persons also which were called Herescopes, whom
likewise the Divines do utterly reproove and condemn in this behalf.

But before we will shut up this Discourse of witchcraft and enchantments, The
history of a young man that soght to win the love of a maid by charms, and
was therefore sued and condemned by the law.
and that which may be said touching the same, I hold it not amiss, (and it
will be very little from the matter which we have in hand,) to set down here
in this place, the report of a certain accident that came to be in
controversy, and was debated and decided in the court of Parliament of Paris:
The question was touching a process made extraordinarily against a young man,
in a cause wherein he was charged, that by certain scroles or papers, and such
like charms, he attempted the honor and chastity of one whom he loved:
whether the same process ought to be admitted and received. The cause was
pleaded as a verbal appellation in the Court Criminal, This cause was
pleaded, and the arest or judgment affirmed by Monsieure Pilcar the 16 of
April. 1580.
by two famous advocates of the palace, and it seems that it was upon an
appeal, first brought from the Judge of Lavall. The sum of the process was
thus: A certain young man being exceedingly enamored on a young gentlewoman
descended of a great house, and desiring to purch^se her in marriage, yet seeing
his own means and ability to be so small, as he found little hope to get
the consent of her parents thereunto, and by that mean to attain to the top
of his desires: Besides, perceiving that she was solicited, by diverse persons
of great calling and good reputation, he bethought himself of a shorter
course, as he imagined, and that was, to gain the love of the maiden by any
means whatsoever. To this effect he continually haunted and frequented the
house where she was: and courting her with all kinds of submissive and humble
entreaties, and with proffers of all his best services, (which he supposed
might be most agreeable, and to her contentment) he endeavored to gain her
love, and to win her affections. In the end, seeing himself scorned, and in
a manner, clean out of hope of that which he most desired, he determined to
make trial of an extreme remedy: And thereupon going to a certain Priest
(who was a notorious Sorcerer, and did use to give out little scroles or
billets to procure love:) he took of him one of those papers, and finding his
mistrisse in a place fit for the purpose, he conveyed the paper into her
bosom, whilst himself made semblance that he was but playing and ^easting
with her. But it happened far otherwise then he imagined: for thinking to
gain her love, he cast such drugges, or (whether it were) such charms into
her bosom, that they brought the maiden near to the point of death. Her
father and mother being marvelously sad and sorrowful for her sickness,
were certified in the end, what was the cause thereof: And therefore causing an
information to be drawn and preferred against the young man, they got a decree
against him to have his body apprehended, the which was executed accordingly:
And afterward the Judge gave sentence, that the law should proceed
peremptorily upon the hearing of the witnesses, personally brought against
him. From this sentence, as also from the decree touching his apprehension was
the appeal brought, and the pleading thereof was offered to a present hearing.
The Appellant said, that he had been offered great and evident wrong, in that
the inferior Judge had not only decreed a Capias against his body, but had
also adjudged that the law should proceed upon the evidence of the witnesses
personally brought against him. That it was very true, and he did acknowledge
that which was laid in the information: and that he did put into the bosom
of the Complainants daughter a little scroll of paper written; but that there
was not therein, either any drugges or poison, nor any other such thing as
might work an alteration in the health of the maiden. That if he had
conveyed any poison into it, there was no doubt, but he had been worthy of
capital punishment, according to the fifth chapter of the Law Cornelia; Si
quis venenum necandi hominis causa habuerit. L. 3. D. ad l. Cornelia de
Sicariis.
That the said scroll of paper could not be any poison, for to empoison any
body, neither had it any such force or virtue, but that it was only a writing
which he had cast into the bosom of the maid, not thinking any evil or hurt
to her: And that therefore there was no cause why any such extraordinary process
should be made and granted against him; That it was a thing never heard of in
that palace, that an extraordinary criminal accusation should be laid
against any man, that in a foolish wantonness and youthful oversight only,
without any will or intent to do evil, had adventured to do that toward a
maiden, which in very truth did not deserve so much as the name of a simple
injury. For howsoever he did fondly in casting this paper into the bosom of
the maid; yet did he not attempt to wrong her honor or chastity: neither
did he pursue or solicit her in any shameless manner: neither did he use
any dishonest or unseemly speeches unto her, that might cause her so much as
to blush at them: And in brief, that he had not offered her any such foul or
bitter injury, for the which he had deserved, by the Law, either reproof or
any extraordinary punishment. L. vlt. D. de Iniur.
And if it did so happen and fall out by chance afterward, that the maid
became sick; yet it was no consequent, that he should be the cause of her
sickness. Not without reason was that saying of the Greek Poet Euripides, That
all those things which happened casually, were very diverse: and that the gods,
contrary to humane exspectation, did take a pleasure to change things here
below, (...). There is not any man so sound and healthful, that can assure
himself of his health, not so much as a day: and who knows what the evening
or the morning may cause to betide unto him, either prosperous, or unfortunate:
many things do happen (as the old saying is) between the cup and the
lip. Yea but the Complainant says and averreth, That in the scroll of paper
there were certain words charmed, by force whereof their daughter fell sick:
Certainly their speech is grounded upon a very vain and frail foundation;
and the same utterly overthrowes and destroys al their accusation. For what man
is there so little seen, or so unskillful in the course and causes of nature,
that will believe that charms and enchauntments can have any power upon men:
and that a figure, a writing, a line, or a word, bredde only by the refraction
of the air, should work above and beyond nature, and should have power to
alter or change it in any sort whatsoever. Every man knows sufficiently how
that the Caball of the Jews (which does attribute so great force to writings,
and to the speaking, and pronounciation of certain words) has been
reprooved and hissed out of the Schools by all learned Divines: and that
Reuclin the Almaine and others, who have allowed and consented to the fond
dotages and follies of the Caballists and Jewish Rabbines have been censured
and condemned by the Masters of Sorbonne, who did hold, that all those
enchauntments, charms, and words which the Cabal uses, are nothing but
mere Magic; and therefore without any efficacy, as coming from the devil,
who lost all his power at the coming of our Savior Christ into the world: as
he himself has confessed, even by his Oracles, upon inquiry and demand
made to them by the Gentiles that lived after Christ. Yea, the Paynimes
themselves (which were guided and misled by the Devil, did ever esteem the
Art Magic, and all sorts of charms to be nothing else but deceiptes and
illusions. And Pliny recites how the Emperor Ner^ after he had searched
into all the secrets of Magic, and had spared no pains to sound the deapth
thereof; in the end he found, that it was but a mere abuse: neither could
Tyridates nor Simon Magus perform any thing, although they had promised to
acquaint him with the full knowledge and science of the same. Besides, it
cannot any where be found, that any person whatsoever, was ever accused of
being a Magician, under the good and wise Emperors of Rome: For they knew
well, that all accusation is to be held and accounted vain, where there is no
lawful color of trespass committed. And it is most certain, that Apulcius
(who lived under those good Princes Antoninus Philosophus, L. Gracchus C. ^d
legem Iul: d^ adult.
and P^rtin^x, being accused before Claudius Maxi^^^ the Governor of Affricke,
That he had allured and gained to his love one Pudentilla, and had so bewitched
her, that he had wrought her to marry him:) was fully acquitted from that
accusation, as being frivolous, vain, and calumnious. On the contrary, those
Emperors which were held wicked and cruel Princes, did find a fair color
and pretense by the Art Magic, and the Mathematiques, to bring such under
danger of torment and punishment, against whom they bear any malice and hatred
when they were not able to accuse and calumniate them of any other fault or
offense. How many noble and honorable Romans both men and women did the
Emperor Tiberius cause to be put to death, only under color that they had
consulted with the Chaldeans? The Emperor Claudius, of whom Ausonius
speaks, That, Non faciendo nocens sed patiendo fuit. That is, The hurt he
did, was not in doing ill,
But, in the patient suffering thereof still.


Did condemn to die (as being a Sorcerer) a poor Knight of Rome, because he
bare about him the egg of a Serpent; being persuaded that the same was good
to cause his suite in law to go on his side. In vita Carac.
And Antoniue Caracalla (as says Spartian) did likewise condemn those that
used to carry any tickets or writings tied about their necks, for a remedy
against the Tertian and Quartane fevers. The history is well known of
Apollonius Thianeus, whom Domitian a wicked Prince did cause to be tormented
for his Art Magic: albeit those that came and succeeded after him, to wit,
Alexander the son of Mammea and Aurelianus did honor him during his life,
and after his death did consecrate Altares and Oratories unto him. And in
brief, all the world knows, how that Valen and Valen^i^ian (for causing so
many famous and learned Philosophers, and so many noble and worthy Senators
and Roman Knights to be punished for the science of Magic, have been
reprooved and blamed by many Historiographers, as namely, Eunapius, Zosymus,
Ammian Marcellin, and others, who in that regard only have over-ranged them
in the rank and number of evil Emperors: And they do marvellously blame
those Commissaries to whom the trial and enquiry of this crime was committed;
if that may and ought to be called a crime, which is rather a vain persuasion
or inveterate superstition, bred and ingraffed in the hearts of men. And
therefore the Appellant concluded, That both the Decree, the Ordinance, and the
Execution was ill and unjust; and that the Judgment ought to be corrected and
amended, and the party to be clearly dismissed, absolved, and acquitted.

On the contrary part, the Defendaunt in the appeal said and affirmed; That
the cause was rightly adjudged by the inferior Judge: And that it was well and
justly ordered, that extraordinary process should be made and awarded against
the Appellant: That not only the Law Cornelia, did punish those which should
bruise and temper any noisome poisons, to the hurt of an other, but those
also, Qui mala sacrificia fecerant; habuerant: Which had or made any ill
sacrifices. Meaning undoubtedly by ill sactifices, the practice of Magic. And
this did the Roman Emperors interpreate more plainly, saying; Eorum scientiam
esse puniendam and saverissimis merito legibus vindicandam, qui Magicis
accincti artibus aut contra salutem hominun mollits aut pudicos animos ad
libidinem deflexisse detegentur. That their skill and science was worthy to be
punished and chasticed with severe laws, who by Art Magike should either
contrive to impair the health of people, or should be detected to allure unto
lust and lewdnes, such as were honestly and chastely addicted. Now as touching
the Appellant, it appeared by the Information brought against him, that he
had cast into the bosom of a young maiden a small scroll, not of paper (as
he alleged) but of Virgin parchmin, such as Magicians, Sorcerers, and
Enchaunters do use; and thereby did think to have attempted her chastity:
the proof whereof did plainly appear, in that he had before solicited her,
and sought to have her in marriage. And for that cause, having used sinister
and wicked unlawful means; as namely, by Magic and Witchcraft, to come to
his intended purpose, he was worthy to be punished; and process
extraordinarily ought to be granted and awarded against him: That the law
Cornelia did put little or no difference between poisons and amorous drinckes,
and between charms and enchauntments: all which in the Greek tongue were
called and named by one, and the same word (...), which appears also by that
Treatise of Theocritus called Pharmacentria; wherein he introduces a
Sorceresse, who by force, not only of her Bird named (...), which as Langius
the Physician says, the Almaines do call Windals, or Wassero^hss, or
Rhuerdrommel: and the Latins Frutilla, but also by means of herbs, holy
words, and other such like charms would draw and allure her love unto her.
And true it is; That Empedocles having made a book of Sorcery or Magic,
does show the same much more clearly and manifestly, confounding by this
word (...)(wherewith he begins his Book) both charmed herbs, and
enchaunted words, and the very skill and art of Sorcerie; (...)says he;
(...), etc.

And as touching those that do use to give either any kind of poison, or any
amorous love drinks: the pains ordained for them by the ancient Roman laws
were manifest. For the vile, baser, and meanest sort of persons, (as the
^i^^^^^ speak;) Dob out subijci bestijs, L. 3. legis Corneliae D. ad legem
Cornel. de sicc.
honestiore loco positi capite puniri, alliore, deportari: ought to be cast to
wild beasts to be devoured: such as are of a more honest and better calling,
were to be beheaded, and those of the best and highest degree, were adjudged to
be banished. The Persians (as Plutarch reports) did cause the heads of such
persons to be crushed in pieces between two stones. In vita Artaxerxis.
And as for Apuleius, he was accused before Claudius Maximus of three things,
all comprised under one and the same term of Magike or Sorcerie; to wit, that
he had given an amorous potion or love-drinke unto his wife: that he had used
both herbs and certain poisons for the working of his enchauntments: and
last of all, that he did use certain charms and sacred magical words: And if
he had not had the favor and friendship of Lollianus Avitus, and of Claudius
the friend of Lollianus, it had gone hard with him. But in the time of
Valentinian, the great Philosopher Maximus, the disciple of Iambsicus* sped
nothing so well; for being accused of the same crime, he was justly condemned
to die, neither could the favor which the Emperor Julian bare him, in any sort
save and preserve him. To make short, the Greeks, and namely the Athenians,
did so exceedingly hate und abhor this detestable crime, that they would
never ad^itte nor frame any for me of process against those that were
attainted therewithal, but they did presently and immediately cause them to be
slaime; as appears by Lemnia a Sorceresse, who (as Demosthenes affi^^^ieth)
was put to death for this offense, after she was bewraied and discovered by her
chambermaid. The Romans also did burn all the books of their king Numa,
Decad. 4. li. 10.
which did contain matter of Magic, as both Titus Livius and Pl^^ie do
repore. Lib. 13. cap. 13.
And our Civil Lawyers do will, that all Judges in their judgments concerning
the division of families, (which they call Tamilin ^rciscunda,) should burn
all book us discovered to be magical. L. 4. 1. D. famil. ^^is.
Ta^tund^m (say they) debe^unt fac^re and in libris improbata de^ti^nis Magicis
forte and his similibus: hac e^i^^^mnia protinus corrumpenda sunt. Wherefore
look how much the Authors of such books are to be hated: so much, or more, do
they greevously adiudge them to be punished, whenever they find any
attainted and convicted, either to have made, or to have used them in any sort
whatsoever. Besides, the virgin Parchmin (which the Appellant used) is one of
the precepts of Magic, which cannot be fitted nor used to any other effect
then to an^ll end: and this Parchmin is usually made by enchantment of the
skin of infants dead borne: and it is intended, that the same is done with an
express or secret confederation made with the devil: insomuch, as Agrippa,
Petrus de Albano, Picatrix, and other the like detestable and wicked Magitians,
do no less praise and commend Virgin Parchmin, then the Magitians of old
times, In lib. de lapidibus.
as Orpheus did commend the stone called an Agate, which they said, was able
to do all things that a man would desire.

(...)
(...)
(...)
To be brief, to as great effect does the Virgin Parchmin serve, as does the
amorous potion or lovedrinke, of which (as the saying is) Lucretius the Poet
died; Invenal. saty. 6 Cui tot em tremuli frontem Ceronia pulli Infudit.
and Caligula the Emperor became with such another to be enraged, and in a
sort, distracted, and out of his wits: his wife Ceronia having given him such a
kind of drink; who for that cause was also slain by the soldiers that had
before killed her husband, as Tosephus reports. And more then so, Lib. 19.
cap. 2. Antiquitatum.
this seems to be that Hippomanes, which is apt to stir and procure love,
no less then the true Hippomanes plucked from the forehead of a horse-col^e,
whereof Virgil, Propertius, and other Poets do speak much* Lib. 4. Acneid. and
3. Georg. Lib. 4. Elegiavum. In Pharmacent. Lib. 2 de histor. animal. ca. 14.
Lib. 9. cap. 17. de histor. anim In Pharmacent.
o^ that Hipp^^^^^^ which (as (...) reports) was planted amongst the (...):
-- (...)
(...)


Or that fish called R^mora, which (as Aristotle says) was good for love, and
for happy success in suites of law: Or the bird called Sippo, spoken of by
the same Aristotle, or the Lezart bruized and infused in wine, according as
Theocritus prescribes: or that Hair which is found in the end of a Wool^^^
tail; or else the bone of a Frogge or Toade* Lib. 18. cap. 2. and lib. 32. ca.
4.
which has been cast into a nest of Ants, by whom the flesh thereof has
been gnawne away, as Pliny affirms.

Besides all this, in this scrole of Virgin parchmine, now in question, there
were written certain barbarous and unknown words; which does sufficiently
show, that this was a very true magical charm and enchantment. And whereas
it is said, that charms or enchantments, have no power or efficacy to work
any thing: and that therefore any accusation which shall be framed or intended
against those that use them, is to be held vain and frivolous: what other
thing is this then to reproove all antiquity, and all those ancient
lawe-makers, and the Roman Decemvi^i, who did all of them ever acknowledge,
that there were charms and enchantments. For in the Laws of the Twelve Tables
it is expressly forbidden; Ne quis fruges excantet and aliena^^ segete^^
pelli^^at. That no man should use any charms or excantations upon the corn
and grain of another man. Lib. 17. cap. 25.
And the learned Plini^ in his natural histostorie gives us a certain
experiment of such as drew the fruits of another man out of the owners ground,
into another field: For he says, that in the territory of the Marrutines,
which is in Abruzzo, a garden of Olive Trees belonging to Vectius Marcollus, a
famous knight of Rome, was carried away and transported whole even as it
stood, to the other side of the high way: and contrariwise, all that other
land which was on that other side of the way, was transported, as it had been
in manner of an Exchange, into that very place where the garden stood: so
great force was there in charms and enchantments. Od^ss. v.
And surely Homer tells us, that Ulysses did staunch the blood that ran
down from his leg, being hurt by a wilde-boare, not by any herbs, but by
charms.

(...), etc. And this agrees well with that saying of the Interpreter of
Pindarus and Sophocles; who affirms, that the Ancients did think, that by
charms a man might sometimes recover his health; (...). This was the cause
that Theophrastus has written, that those which are troubled with the disease
called Ischiatica, are healed by charms and spells: And the like says Varro,
of such as are diseased with the gowt: And Cato the Cens^r, touching ca^^ell or
oxen that have their legs broken or maimed. First for gowtie persons, Lib. 1.
de re Rust.
the manner to cure them, he teaches to be by uttering these words;
Terrapestem teneto, salvo maneto hic in meis pedibus: and repeating the same
nine ti^es, In lib. de Agri.
and kissing of the earth, and spetting upon it; and that all this most be done
fasting. And for curing of oxen or cat^ell; if you take a roode or green cane,
and cut it asunder in the midst, and so bind it on both sides to the hippe or
hudde bone of the said cattle or oxen, and singing these words; Danat a
Dari^s Astaries; or otherwise this: Haut, haut, haut Istagis, turgis Ardannabon
Dama^^^ra, he says it will cure them. And even Ca^stantine the Emperor does
cite a verse in Homer; which being pronounced, should hinder and keep a man
from being drunken. And the ancient Myrhalogiques, In Geoponic^^.
and Orph^^^^^ist^ did attribute such a force to the verses of O^phens: That
they held the pronouncing of them to have as much power, (...).
as the Jews did imagine to be in their Caball; which howsoever it was very
superstitious; yet was not the same without his effects. Now if we should
come to the bands of love, caused and procured by charms, we shall find in
Authors sufficient s^ore of examples to that effect. And Virgil reports and
set^^th down the very words which were usually spoken to entangle and
entrappe in the snares of love, In Eclogis. Necte tribus nodis ternos Amarylli
colores necte Amarylli nodo and veneris, dic, Vincula necto.
such as are obstinate and intractable. Which words joined and used with a
ceremony of certain knows made in a riband or lane of three several colors,
were held to have such power, that they in whose name they were pronounced,
should presently feel themselves stricken in love. And to this purpose does
Saint Jerome rehearse an history of a certain young man of Ga^^ in Siria, who
being amorous, and falling in love with a young maiden his neighbor, In vita
Hilarionis.
and being not able to win her to his desire, he went to the Priests of
Esculapius at Memphis; who gave unto him I know not what charms and strange
figures written within a plate of copper which he dug and conveyed,
together with a lace or ribband, under the groundsell of the house where the
maid dwelt. Presently heereuppon the Devil seized upon her: And she casting
away her head-tyre from off her head, began to call upon the name of the
young man, and did desire and endeavor by all means she could, that she
might be led to the place where he was. But her Parents having a great care
of her health and well doing, led her to the Hermit Hila^ion, who
notwithstanding she alleged that she was inchaunted and bound by charms; yet
for all that, did perfectly h^^le her, and in the name of God, destroyed all
the charms and enchantments of the Devil. What shall I say more? All Authors
both ancient and modeme, are of one mind, and do accord in this; That charms
have the power, not only to work and procure love, to alter health, and to
transport the fruits of the ground from one field or place to another; but to
do also things far more mavelous and wonderful than these. The Magitians
of Pharao (by their charms) thought to make themselves equal with Moses the
messenger of God. The Ephesians had certain marks and magike words (I know
not what) of enchantment, by which any thing whatsoever they did once attempt
and enterprise, did succeed well and answerable to their desire. And such
marks or characters (as Eustathius the Interpreter of Homer writes) did
Croesus use at such time as he was upon the pile of wood ready to be burned
by the commandment of Cyrus. The Brachmans (as Strabo says) did not use so
much to heal and cure diseases by herbs and simples, as they did by charms:
And John Leo the Affricane writes, that in the high mountains of Marocco
there be three Apples of Gold of an inestimable price and value, the which are
so well and surely guarded by enchantments, that the kings of Fez, could never
get to come near them, albeit they have many and sundty times attempted the
same. And that (which does yet more show the force and power of words) may be
seen in Galen, how that a certain Enchaunter did kill a Scorpion by the
pronouncing of one only word. And although that Galen himself as a
Naturalist, does think to salve the matter by saying; that the enchanter did
first spet, before he pronounced any thing, and that all the force was in his
spettle, and not in his words: yet cannot he make any man believe, that the
spettle or any exerement of a man, has so much power, as to kill one so
readily. Moreover, the Conciliator named Peter de Albano a physician tells a
great deal more than ever Galon knew, to wit, that he himself faw a certain
enchantet, Different. 156
who by murmuring certain words (...) in the ear of a bull, did make him fall
to the ground suddenly, as if he had been dead: and afterward, with
repeating the very same words, did cause him to rise again. And this may
very well confirm that ^^^ch is reported of Pithag^ras, how by virtue of his
charms, he had the power to make tame and gentle, both woolves and other
beasts, which by nature were most fierce and cruel. But now, because
peradventere the Appellant, for fault of better defense, will excuse himself,
and impute it to the force of Love, and will perhaps pleasantly oite certain
Doctors of our time, Piraquelluc de poenis.
who do hold it as a common and received opinion, that amorous persons allured
and provoked by love, are excused from the ordinary punishment of the crimes
and offenses by them committed: And it may be also, they will allege, that
judgment given by the Ar^^pagites, Lib. 1. Magno. moralium. c. 17
who (as Arist^tle reports) did acquit and set free from an accusation, a
certain woman that was convicted, that in her passion of love, she had given
an amorous potion to her beloved, of the which he died with in a short time
after: yet thus much I must and will tell him, that how greas and furious
soever the love be, yet for all that, it ought not to excuse any person that
shall upon premeditation and advisedly, commit any public cri^^e worthy of
exemplarie punishment: whatsoever the Doctors of, latter times have ^^d to the
contr^rie: and not withstanding that sentence of the Ar^^pagites, the which
ought not to be accounted or reckoned of, L. Si quis aliquid aborh^nis. D. de
poen. d. l. little. Damhouder in tract. similum iuris. In Oratiou^ ^^^tra
Aris^^g. l. 2. D. de legib.
as our own laws; which do punish with like and equal punishment those that
are Sorcerers, and them that in an amorous passion do attempt the^^o^o (...)
and chastity of women* and do temper amorous potions, whereby they cause the
sickness or death of any persons. And admit their intentions be not to destroy
and kill them; yet so it is, that the law which (as D^me sth^^^s says) (...)
Does correct alike all crimes that are committed, though unvoluntarily, as well
as those that are voluntary: does likewise punish such persons as much, as if
they had committed voluntary and wilful murder. Besides, the very Arts which
they use, are prohibited and forbidden, as being of themselves and in their
own nature evil; and are therefore punishable by death and other means, by
which they may be restrained. And to this purpose, we have the ordinance of
King Charles the 8. recorded in Latin, This ordinance was in the year 1490.
which wills, that all persons using any such Arts as are disallowed, and
condemned by the Church and by the world universally, should be punished no
less then Sorcerers, Diviners and Enchanters, and the same to be done by such
ordinary Judges, as to whom the knowledge and determination thereof, does
directly appertain. Upon these reasons, the party defendant in this Appeal
concluded, that the cause had been fully, rightly, and in all points well
adjudged. And according to these and the like conclusions, the Court gave their
judgment, and ordained, that extraordinary process should be made and
perfected against the Appellant.

But I suppose, that this Discourse hitherto concerning charms and
enchauntments, and touching the devils mingling themselves with the external
or internal senses, has been extended sufficiently. It is now requisite that
we go on to the matter itself of Specters and Apparitions, seeing we have to
the uttermost of our endeavors, remooved and taken away the principal
difficulties, and the most pregnant arguments that seemed to any hinderance or
impediment, why faith or credit should not be yielded unto them.

FINIS.
A Table of the Contents of the several Chapters.
THe definition of a Specter or Apparition: and of the imagination, together
with the several kinds thereof. Cap. 1. Of the diverse names and terms which
are often used in the matter of Specters. Cap. 2. Of the opinions and Arguments
of the Sadducees, and Epicures, by which they would prove, that the Angels and
Devils do not appear unto us. Cap. 3. Of the opinions and Arguments of the
Perrpatetiques, by which they would impugn the Aparition^ (...) Spirits. Cap.
4. Of the Arguments of those which deny that the Angels and Devils can take
unto them a body. Cap. 5. Of the opinions of the followers of Pirron: the
Sceptiques, and the Aporretiques: and what they alleged to show: that the
humane senses, and the imaginative power of man are false. Cap. 6. That many
things being merely natural, are taken by the sight or hearing being
deceyved, for Specters and things prodigious. Cap. 7. That things artificial,
as well as things natural may sometimes deceyve the senses of the sight, and
of the hearing, and drive men into a passion of fear and terror. Cap. 8. That
the Senses being altered and corrupted may easily be deceyved. Cap. 9. That
the Fantasy corrupted does receyve many false Impressions, and Specters,
as well as the senses. Cap. 10. What persons are most commonly subject to
receyve false imaginations and Phantosmes, and to have the brain troubled and
distracted. Cap. 11. That the Devil does sometimes convey and mingle himself
in the Senses being corrupted, and in the fantasy offended, contrary to the
opinion of the natural Philosophers, Cap. 12.
Errata.
Fol. 13, Lin. 4: For plunge, read plague. ibid. lin. 6, for a read or. fol
15, lin. 3, for first, read French fol. 16, l 1.2, for strinae, read stripes.
fol. 27, lin. 19. for to, read so. fol. 28, lin. 16, for descend, read defend.
fol. 29, lin. 9, for keeps sight, read keeps the sight. fol, 36, lin. 16.
for hereby shows, read hereby he shows. fol. 37, lin. 16, for their, read
there. fol. 45, lin. 33, for metaphonall, read metaphorical fol. 46, lin. 27,
for but cannot, read but it cannot. fol. 47, lin. 3, for purefaction, read
rarefaction. fol. 47, lin. 33, for cannot, read they cannot. fol, 48, lin. 19,
for difference that, read difference of that. fol. 51, lin. 8, for siste, read
soft. fol. 51. lin. 9, for doubt, read doubtful.


