A TREATISE TOVVCHING THE RIGHT, TITLE, AND INTEREST OF THE MOST excellent
Princess Marie, Queen of Scotland, And of the most noble king James, her
Graces son, to the succession of the Croune of England.

Wherein is contained asvvell a Genealogy of the Competitors pretending title
to the same Croune: as a resolution of their objections.

Compiled and published before in latin, and after in English, by the right
reverend father in God, John Lesley, Bishop of Rosse.

With an exhortation to the English and Scottish nations, for uniting of them
selves in a true league of Amity.

An 1584.

All Britain Isle (dissentions over past)
In peace and faith, will grow to one at last.
Increase of bless expected long
In Britain was begone:
When such a mother did bring forth
With so good hap a son.
MARIA SCOTORVM REGINA

IACOBVS VI SCOTORVM REX



Through princely grace and piety
Great is the mothers fame,
The king her son does yield much hope
To imitate the same.
TO THE SACRED AND MOST MIGHTY EMPEROVR: AND TO THE MOST HIGH AND PVISSANT
kings and Sovereign Princes of Christendom, John Lesley, Bishop of Rosse
wysheth peace and perpetual felicity.
SACRED AND MOST MIGHTY Emperor, and ye most puyssant kings and Princes
Christian, if you call to mind and memory all forms of common wealths,
wherein diverse people in times past (as well heathen as Christians) have been
preserved: you shall find none, either for peace and tranquyllitie more
established, or for Majesty more gloriouse, than that, where one has
governed, which laufullie entered, as right heyr in succession: and moderated
all things with sincere indifferencio, as a Just and upright Judge. And, to
omit, that this form of Government resembles that regiment, wherewith God
rules the whole world, and how therefore it is the best: to omit also that the
leagues of foreign Princes, with their marriages, and mutual agreementes in
love and amity are herein also included, and how therefore it is profitable:
Likewise to let pass the general peace, quiett, and tranquillity which
this assures to all men, and how therefore it is amiable, the truth of this
matter will more euidentlye appear, if you deeply consider what injuries and
calamities the people of that country is forced to endure, where an usurping
Tyra^ne, not by right of succession, as laufull heir unto his auncestor, but by
ambition and stronghand violently intrudeth him self upon an other man's right
and possession. For such a one, (by vexing his subjects with continual fear,
and oppressing them with wicked exactions, and more wicked morders) sticks
not to subvert all laws of God and man, to the end that he may rule all
alone. Thus whiles he most cruelly tirannizeth over his subjects, and they most
mortally do hate him: what mischiefs and miseries do not burst in upon any
nation by such a desperate head and such discord of members? Vherupon it
follows well in my Judgment, that the good will of Princes toward their
subjects, and the love of Subjects toward their Princes is the surest means
to keep and preserve the public weal of any Country: In somuche as, what
Region so ever wants this, must either be divided in it self, and torn in
pieces with domestical troubles: or fall in to the hands of strangers.
Therefore of all nations that have been in any age, I find none, that by this
conjunction of mutual amity has not been advanced with great felicitye:
and none on the other side, that by want thereof has not, either like a sore
diseased or wounded body languished miserablye: or utterly deuolued in to
extreme ruin and destruction. Yea, such misruled nations have not alone
tasted the calamities of their enormityes: but have wickedlye also casten out
their vonim upon others: and with such contagious poison, have infected their
neighbors rownd about them. So as all Princes Christian, that desire long to
Reign, have hereby to note and learn, how it behooves them, not only to rule
their own Countries without all manner of Tirannie: but also to provide (so
much as in them lies) that their neighbors be not oppressed by Tyrannes. For
such neyghborhoode can not be but contagiouse: because it is the nature of
Tyrannes, first to ransake and spoil their own people, and afterward to break
out upon others, and to ruin them, all manner of ways. And this I write, to
the end, that all Christian Princes, as well for their own sake, as for
Charity also toward their Christian neighbors, should have some special care
to help, that my Sovereign Lady Marye, Queen of Scotland, and the most
noble King her son be not excluded, and barred from their right of
inheritance and succession to the Croune of England, after the laufull yssues
of King Henrye the eight be all deceassed: Least that, by unjust intrusion and
invasion of unlawful usurpers, the true heyr be defeated, that flourishing
Kyngedome by tyranny ruyned, and the neighbors adjoining contagiouslye
annoyed. Fort sith it is evidently known, that all those commodities and
riches wherewith England has plentifully furnished, not only it self, but
other countries also, have grown specially by this occasion, that it has
been hitherto sweetlye and peaceablye governed by the true and laufull heyrs,
to the great honor of the Governors, and commodity of the Subjects: and
seeing it is also manifest, that after the deceases of all the yssues laufullie
descended from King Henry the eight (as I said before) the Kingdom of England
by right every way belongs unto Marye the Queen of Scotland: who sees not,
that if the same Lady be excluded from her right: then not only that Realm
shall be spoiled of their own commodities, and their neighbors want those
helps which they have long enjoyed: but also, that Region will be a neast of
Tyrannes, where every family shall rob it self, and as mere strangers
spoil and morder one an other?

Now then, because some unjust Competitors incensed with desire of rule, do
cover their ambition by pretending a title to the Croune of England: I thought
it to be a part of my duty, to infringe their untrue surmises: and by strong
and weighty arguments to prove, and ratify the laufull title and right of
the Queen and King my Sovereign Princes. For so, I hope it will fall out,
that all Christian Kings and Potentates will more reddelye perform such
honorable offices of Courtesy and Charity, as all Princes owe one to an
other: and that specially, when they shall see the verity, integrity, and
justice of this cause so expresselie declared, as no scruple thereof can stick
in the heart of any indifferent person. For though generally all Christian
Kings are (as it were) so lynked to gether, as they should aid and defend
each others honor and dignity in respect that they are Kings: Yet every one
of them in some one or other particulrr respect is so allied unto the Queen
and King of Scotland, as they owght to take her part, and to join with her
against her enemies. And (to surcease from speaking any more of the common bond
of love among all Princes generallye) I may not herein over pass that godly
father which sittethe in the holy Seat, and (as it is well known) like a
second Samuel will not anoint with holy oil, (that is to say, confirm by his
authority) any other to be rulers over Christians, than such Princes as might
well seem to be Saul's and David's, which represented the persons of all
laufull Kings. For beside her undoubted right of Succession (which is
accounted a kind of divine calling and choice to a Kingdom) this may
specially persuade him to defend her as his daughter, which neither by
straitness of prison, nor by any kind of affliction could be hitherto seduced
from honoring him as her father. What need is there to call upon the most
sacred Emperor, and other Kings and Princes in particular, since they are all
allied unto the said noble Queen, either by a sure knot of amity, and
friendship, or by a most fast bond of consanguinitie and kynred? Neither is it
necessary to prove this by genealogies and pedegrues, seeing the world allredye
knows that she is descended, both by father and mother, from the most noble
Princes, Kings, and Emperors of the whole Christian world.

As for the nobility and Commons of England, this should move them to love
her, that she is come so many ways of English blood, and had her great
Grandmother out of the Princely house of Somerset, and had for her Grandmother
the Lady Margaret, eldest daughter to King Henrye the seventh. And is not this
much to move them further, that she was by this means so much affected
toward the English Nation, as in her troubles and afflictions at home, she
rather hoped for relefe at their hands, and therefore trusted the now Queen of
England, upon her, promises, so far, as she made her choice, rather to come
for succoure to the English (where now she lives in prison) than to other
Princes her special friends: of whom she was assured to have found relefe and
succor? Add this withal, that before all other Christian Princes, she choase
an English man to be her husband, and by him brought forth a son, heyr to
the same Kingdom. What should I report of the signs and tokens of her piety
wiche now she shows in England, or of her Courtesy, good will and love
toward the English Nation: how freendlye she thinks of them, how honorably
she speaks of them, and how nobly she writes of them, yea how that by long
conuersing with them, she has now so perfectly learned their manners, their
language, and their customs, as having almost forgot all other fashions, she
seems to be brought in to this world, by the providence of God, justly to
govern the people of England? Wherefore, sith this our Queen is the
worthy heir, and the righteous heir of the English Croune: it stands
agreablie with your charity, which you, as Kings, are wont to use toward
Queens, and vith those offices of courtesy and kyndenesse which you owe, as
Allies, to your friends, or as Cosaines to your kynsewomen, to provide (by all
possible means) that she be not defeated of her right: nor barred from that
dignity, which by many titles is due unto her: lest that the harms which
fall upon her by such losses, do procure great perilles to you and your
posterity. And the better to avoid all stoppes which might bread in you by
any obscure or brief relation, I here present unto your Majesty's with all
humility this book, containing a full discourse of the whole cause, which
during my abode in England, about the affairs of my said Sovereign, I caused
to be published in English, to the use of English men: and have now
augmented it, with a Genealogy of the Competitors, which by descent from two
Princely families in that Realm, to wit, York and Lancastre, pretend title
to the Croune. And herein the cauilles and surmises of the adversaries are so
refuted, their sleightes so discovered and avoided, and their arguments which
they lean upon so overthrown, as the scruples and dowbtes (which before
nevertheless to men of equal and indifferent judgments were plain
enoughe) may well seem to be removed and pulled out of the hearts and minds of
the adversaries. I humbly therefore beseech your Majesty's, to accept that
freendly which I present unto you: to mark that attentively which in writing
I set down before you: and to perform that Justly which best beseems
you. So fare ye well: and favor the cause of a most laufull Queen.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT, AND MOST GRACIOVSE QVENE MARIE, AND TO THE MOST noble
king James her son, Queen and king of Scotland, his undoubted Souereignes,
John Lesley, Bishop of Rosse wishes all true felicity.
O FALL the most excellent guyftes and benefits, which God of his goodness
has bestowed upon mankind, I know not whether there be any one, for profit,
more fruitful, or in estimation more excellinge, than is the inclination among
men to mutual love and amity. For such is the force thereof in matters of
great importance, as the person in whom it is once well establyshed can not
be at any time, either by counseil seduced, by iniquity of time imbased, by
fortunes frowning disquyeted, nor by any violence shaken, much less
overthrown or destroyed: In somuche as, I must needs say that, whosoever
wanteh this guyft of nature: he is not only far from all commendation of
constancy and wisdom in great affairs: but also puts of all humanity,
and is become impious, wild, and savage. And this sense or feling of love and
amity, although it be naturally planted in every man and woman: yet is it most
especially in them, that are by blood and kynred most nearly conjoined
together. Wherefore, so often as I consider the tender love of parents toward
their children, and the piety of children toward their parents: I always
acknowleige this natural inclination to love and amity (without which no
common wealth can endure, nor any famylie stand) to be a special benefit of
God, bestowed upon mankind. And so often also (most graciouse Princes) I find
just cause to move me in the behalfes of your Majesty's, and of your subjects,
to rejoice, and to give God thanks, for that these laws of nature and guyftes
of grace in you by God singularlye planted, you have reserved and kept whole
and inuiolate, from the injury of the time, and from the malytiouse stinges of
perverse detractours: in such sort as, you could not, by any other occasion,
have given a better testimony of honorable courtesy and virtue: nor have
raised in the hearts of your subjects a more assured hope of the best mean to
preserve, yea and to enlarge also, and amplyfie your kingdom. For to me, and
to all your louinge subjects nothing can be more grateful, than this firm and
fast love and agreement between you: nothing that ought to be more acceptable to
your selves: nothing more agreeable to the general welfare of all men.
Earnestly therefore, and in the most deutifull manner that I can devise, I
humbly beseech your Majesty's, at no time to suffer the accustomed heat of
your mutual love, in any one point, to cool: but that it take such deep
hold, and daily increase so much within your graciouse breasts, as it never
be extinguished, either by treason of false detractors, by the cruel
fickleness of fortune, or by any flagitiouse means that the malice of this
world may procure. So use the matter, as this louying conjunction of your two
hearts may be unto you a brazen wall: defend you this wall stoutlye, that
double tongued Sycophantes may dreed it: let this work such an effect in
you, as all those be out of your favors which carry in their mouth a
flatteringe word, and in their hand a cruel weapon: such as pretend peace by
word, and practice war by deed: such as in peace use deceit, and in war
outragiouse violence: and so by deceit kill men's souls: and by violence
destroy their bodies.

Now, as touching the exceeding tender love and zeal of mothers toward their
children: it is of such force, as has wrought very much profitt, not only to
private families, but also to whole common wealths, yea and to the greatest
Empyres. Herevpo^ arose the honorable fame of Eurydice of Dalmatia, for that
being a banished woman in Illyria, and well stricken in aige, she applied her
mind wholly to learning: to the end she might better instruct her own
children. But, (to come somewhat nearer to your Majesty, my dear Sovereign
lady) if the care of this woman over her children, and of all other mothers
whosouer, be compared whith your woonted singular love toward your son: so
much further shall you exceed them all, as it has been harder in this iron
age, constantlye to hold that course of vertueouse love, which your Grace,
with continual care, and great fortitude, has kept and performed toward his
Majesty. But how careful you have been for his safety (being your only
son, well beseemyng such a mother as your self, and right worthy to be
your best beloved) your motherly affection has been declared many ways in
your own person: As your great instancie, and earnest trauaill in commendinge
him to the tuition of such as were thought most faithful, has given good
proof thereof. Even so when those horrible broils were begone in your
Country, all things by seditiouse tumultes ouerturned, and the face of your
common wealth with the administration thereof (by violent expulsion of a
laufull authority, and by iniuriouse intrusion of others) transeformed and
deformed: then (alas) what fear and dreed possessed your tender heart, what
anguishe and vexation your careful mind endured for his sake, that is to you
most dear: all the world may easily judge: and they best of all, that know
what it is to be a mother of an infant, being under the ward of his mortal
enemies. But with what faithful diligence your Grace dealt for his safety,
as well with the nobility, as with those which had the custodye of him, (not
by letters only but by messengers also: and by great rewards as well as by
other gentle intreatye) I my self, am a present witness, and (as I think) no
man either can better testify, or ought more plainly to manifest the same.
For, at that time I was by your Majesty's appointment made privy to all those
matters: and in the execution of my commission they passed through my hands:
yea I have oftentimes with great compassion and pity beholden your Grace
shed abundance of devout tears, kneeling upon your knees in devout prayer to
God for his welfare. And afterward, when the matter came to this issue, that
you might have been delivered upon certain conditions: you preferred the honor
of your son, and the advancement of his Royal dignity before all worldly
things, and (as I may well say) before your own life: In so much as even
then you did most constantly affirm, that you would never give your consent to
any thing that might be hurtful, or prejudicial unto him: albeyt you had
been oftentimes solicited, and sore urged to the contrary: An honorable saying
(truly) well beseemyng your motherlye piety, and Royal descent: and a
special good proof of your singular good will toward your son.

And as to your majesty (most noble king, of whom the world conceyueth so
great hope, and whose judgment surmounteth your age) when you shall well wegh
these and many other great arguments of this your mothers natural love and
pure good will (whereof you should have been aduertysed long before this time,
by most trusty messengers and many letters, if opportunity had served) you
shall find good cause to say to your self: Does neither Mothers love, nor
virtue of thy kind
Force thy desire to tread her steps aright,
To bear like love, like faith, like piety in mind,
And trust her best above each mortal vvyght?


But at the least, considering your self to be so infortunately bereft of so
good a mother, you may apply unto your self (as a doleful Swannes song) that
distiche which Homer very fitly uses in the person of Thelemachus bewaling
the loss of his brother, as a great calamity, in this sort.

And me poor youth has Jove so left alone,
That of my stock there now remains but one?
Yea more occasion you have thus to complayn than Thelemachus had: For the
nearer in blood a man's mother is than a brother, somuche dearer ought she to
be unto him.

Therefore (to the end you may more reddelye perform such offices as are
expected in you) ponder with your self (I humbly beseech you) beside her
piety and natural kyndenesse toward you, what mighty kingdoms, what ample
Regions, what populous provinces may by right of succession fall unto you from
her only, and under her title, if God grant you that happy long life which
we dailye pray for. And to make a plain demonstration hereof (omitting to
speak of your right to the Croune of Scotland, whereof no man at home or
abroad puts any doubt at all) I thought it mete (and that not without good
cause) to set down in writing what may (without cause of offense, iustlye,
and laufully) be hoped touching your right and interest to some other kingdoms
and provinces.

Now therefore, because some men perchance (both forrayners and inhabitants
of the same Countries) are kept in suspense and dowbt what to think touching
the succession of so great dominions, and to the end that none may be Ignorant
of the right, title, and interest, which your noble mother before all others,
and your self, her Graces only son, and heyr, (after her) has to the
inheritance and succession of the Croune of England: and of all the dominions
thereunto annexed or belonginge, upon the decease of the now Queen thereof
without laufull issue of her body: I present unto your two Majesty's this
Treatise: wherein is set down the state of the whole cause, and the right,
Title, due order, course, and process of that succession, with a plain
confutation of all those objections which your adversaries pretend to the
contrary. And this trauaille long ago whiles I was Ambassador in England I
did willynglye take in hand: as well, thereby to win the good wills of many
unto you, as for the honor and general commodity of your Country: Wherein
at that time I had much conference with some of the most expert and
skillfullest Judges and best practiced counseilers toward the laws of that
land: and after many discourses and much debatinge, I clearly sifted out their
opinions, and Judgments, touching this matter. And not long after upon
mature deliberation: when I had well reuolued these things in my mind: I
thought it every way agreeable to my deutie toward your Majesty's and your
Country, to contriue in some little volume what I had learned in so long time:
being also hereunto induced by the persuasion of diverse Christian Princes:
whom, after my departure out of England, coming to visit them, I had made
acquainted with this matter: which they were glad to hear, and for their
better instruction desirous to be infourmed thereof at more length by writing.
Whereupon, first to satisfy the honorable meaning of those noble personages,
I compiled and published a Treatise of this matter in latin. And now further to
accomplish my deutie in defense of your Royal Dignities, and to setle the
minds of the wavering communaltie, and for the general commodity of all
such as have any interest in this matter, I have set forth this Treatise in
English. And I verilye hope (such is your princely good meaning, my most
undoubted Sovereigns) that you will accept in good part this my travail, as
a testimony of my duetifull good will, reverence, and service to your
Majesty's: and that you will construe my intention and advise to this attempt,
as (in your judgment) agreeable to the weight of so great a cause: and allow
thereof, for the manyfold commodities that therehence may arise.

Now then, as a right and laufull combination of many Regions by just title of
succession belongyng to you, most manifestly argues and conuinceth a Regal
Sovereignty, derived unto you by many famous kings, your Majesty's
Ancestors: so does the same require and exact of you an union and conjunction
of minds, and a full consent in the virtue and religion of your forefathers.
For nothing can be more agreeable with the name and title of a king, and with
the honor and renoume of so noble a succession, as so fortunatly proceeds
from such a mother to such a son, than that with such an undoubted title
and right to rule a kingdom, there be annexed an uniform profession in
sincere Religion. To which end, as the mother hitherto most religiously
foloweinge the virtue, faith, and piety of her noble progenitoures has
evermore showed such constancy, as that Sex scarsely bears: so the young
king her son in succession goeng with her, must diligently foresee, that in a
sincere profession of one self same Catholic religion, he be not behynd her:
but that, as he has truly imitated all her other virtues, wherein she
woonderfully excels her own self: so he resemble her in true faith and in
uniformity of the Catholic Religion. And thus the mother can have no
occasion offered her to remitt any part of her true love, and affection
toward her son: but by daily increase of natural affections between them,
she will so answer him in courteouse kyndnesse: as, though she be forestalled
of his presence, yet shall she enjoy great comfort of him in his absence: in
so much as, all the world at home and abroad shall admire and wonder at their
laudable emulation in offices of natural zeal and piety: Yea, thus it will
fall out, that your own people (moved by your example) will induce one an other
to peace and amity: and freely of their own accord, without any contention,
will offer up unto you, such kingdoms, regions, and provinces, as are, or
shall be due unto you by right: and desire nothing more than to be under the
dominion of them, whom they see in one mind, faith, and religion, with good
laws and true Justice moderate their common wealth. Which kingdoms and the
Subjects thereof, God the king of all kings which rules the hearts of all
Princes grant you grace well to govern, to the glory of his, holy name, to
the propagation of his holy church, and to the maintenance of common peace and
tranquillity. Amen.

A PREFACE CONTAINING THE ARGUMENT OF THIS TREATISE, WITH THE CAUSES mouyng
the Author to write the same.
THE deep providence of Almighty God, who of nothing created all things,
most evidently in this point shows it self, that by his power ineffable he
has not only created all things, but by the same power, has also endewed
every living creature, with a special guyft and grace to continue, to renew,
and to preserve; each his own kind. But in this consideration, the condition
of man kind, among and above all earthly things, has a pearlesse
prerogative of wit and reason: wherewith he only is of God graciously endued
and adourned. Man by the guyft of wit and reason has a great fresight of
things to come.
For by these excellent guiftes and graces of wit and reason, he does not
only provide for his present necessity and sauegarde (as do naturally, after
their sort, all brute beasts, and every other thing void of reason) but
also, pregnantlie discoursinge from cause to cause, and prudentlie applyeng
their several courses and euentes, he gayneth a great foresight of the
dangers and perilles that many years after may happen, either to him self, or
to his Country: and then by diligence and careful provision does invent some
apt and meet remedies, for the eschewinge of such mischiefs, as might
outragyously afterward occur. And the greater the fear is of more imminent
mischief: so much more care, and speedier diligence is used to prevent and
cut of the same.

And it is most certain, by the confession of all the world, that this care
(which I speak of) ought principally to be employed of every man (as
opportunity serves) to this end, that thereby the Authority of the Prince may
be kept whole and sound: the publik weal of his country assured: and the
common peace and tranquillity of both preserved. Subjects ought to love their
king, and to know the heyr apparent to the Croune.
For the obteining whereof, as there are many branches of policy to be
desired: so one special part is for subjects, louinglye and reuerentlye to
honor, and obedientlie to serve their Sovereign, which for the time has the
rule and government: the next, to foreknowe to whom they owe their
alleagea^ce, after the deceasse of their present prince and Governor. Which
being once certain, and assuredly known, procures (when time does come)
ready and serviceable obedience, with great comfort in the mean while, and
afterward universal reast and quietness of all good Subjects: as on the
contrary part, through discord, variance, and diversity of minds and
opinions, about a Successor, the matter grows to faction: and from faction
bursteth out to plain and open hostility: wherevpo^ follows passing great
perilles, and oftentimes detestable alterations and subuersions of the plublick
state.

For the better avoiding of such and like inconveniences (albeit at the
beginning Princes reigned, not by descent of blood and succession, Why all the
world, almost, embraces succession of princes, rather than election.
but by choice and election of the worthiest) the world was for the most part
constreyned to reject and abandon election: and so oftentimes in stead of a
better and woorthier, to take for their Governor, some certain issue and
offspring of one family, though otherwise perhaps not so mete. Which defecte
is so supplied, partly by the great benefit of the good reast and quietness
that the people universally enjoy by this course of succession: and partly by
the industry and trauail of grave and sage personages, whose counseil Princes
do use in their affairs: that the whole world, in a manner, these many
thousand years, has embrased succession by blood, rather than by election.

And all politic Princes wanting issue of their own bodies to succeed them,
have ever had a special care and foresight (for avoiding of civil dissension)
that the people always might know the true and certain heyr apparent of the
Croune: specially, when there appeared any lykelyhode of varitie of opinions,
or factions to ensue, about the true and laufull succession in government.

The care of English kings to have the successor to be known.
This care and foresight does manifestly appear to have been not only in many
Princes of forain Countries, but also in the kings of England, as well before,
as after the Conquest: namely in S. Edward, king of England, that holy
Confessor, by declaring and appoynting Edgar Atheling, his nephews fonne,
Flores hist. anno 1057
to be his heir: as also in king Richard the first: who, before he
interprised his Journey to Jerusalem, Richard Chanon of the Trinity i^ London
assembled his Nobility and Commons together, and by their consentes declared
Arthure, son of his brother, Duke of Britain, to be his next heir and
Successor of the Croune. Of which Arthure, flores hist. anno 1190 Poli. l. 14.
as also of the said Edgar Atheling, we will speak more hereafter.

This care also had king Richard the second, what time by authority of
Parliament he declared for heir apparent of the Croune, the Lord Edmond
Mortymer, that Married Philip daughter and heyr of his uncle Leonell, Polid. l.
20.
duke of Clarence. And (to descend to later times) the late king Henry the
eight showed (as it is known) his prudence and zealous care in this behalf,
before his last voyage in to France.

And now, if almighty God should (as we be all, both prince and others,
subject to mortal chances) once bereave the Realm of England of their
present Queen: the hearts and minds of men being no better, nor more firmly
settled and stayed toward the expectation of a certain succession, than they
seem now to be: then woe and alas, it wounds my very heart, even once to
think upon the imminent, and almost inevitable perilles of that noble Realm,
being like to be overwhelmed with the raiging, and roaring waves, and storms
of mutual discord, and to be consumed with the terrible fire of civil
dissension.

The fear whereof is the more, by reason that already in these later years,
some flames of this horrible fire have sparkled and flushed abroad: and some
part of the rage of those fluddes have beaten upon the English shores: I mean
the hot contention that has there been sturred in so many places, and among
so many persons: Of books also dispersed abroode, so many ways fashioned and
framed, as either depraved affection peruersely lusted, or zealous defense of
truth sincerely moved men.

Seeing therefore, that there is just cause of fear, and of great danger lykely
to happen, by this variety of men's minds and opinions, so diuersely
affected, as well of the meaner sort of men, as of great personages: I take
it to be the part of every natural English man, and of such as favor
them, to labor and travail (each man for his possibility, and for such
talent as God has given him) that this so imminent a mischief may be in
convenient time prevented.

We see what, wit, policye, pains, and charges men employe, with dammes,
wears, and all kind of ingenious devises, to provide, that the sea or other
rivers do not ouerflowe or burst the banks, in such places, as are most
subject to such danger. We know also, what politic provision is made, in
many good Cities and towns, that no dangerous fires do arise through
negligence: and that the fury thereof (if any happen) may speedilye be
repressed with diligence. Wherein Augustus the Emperor, among other his
famours acts, is woorthely commended and honored, for appointing in Rome an
ordinary wache of seven companies in several places, to prevent such
mischiefs, as come by fire: being hereunto induced, by reason that the City
was set on fire in seven several places in one day. And shall not then every
man, for his part and vocation, have a vigilant care and respect to extinguishe
and quench fuche a fire already bursten out, as may (if the matter be not
wyselye looked unto) subvert, distroy and consume, not one City only, but
also a whole Realm and Country?

Which to suppress, one ready and commodiouse way (as I think) is, that
the Country men and people of that nation may thoroughly understand and know,
from time to time, in what person the right of succession of the Croune of
that Realm does stand and remain. For now, many men, partly through
ignorance of the said right and title, and partly through sinister persuasion
of some lewd pamphlets (whereunto they have too lightly given credit) are
seduced and carried away quite from the right opinion and good meaning, which
once they had conceived, and from the reverence and duty, that they other
wise would, and should have.

Which corruption of Judgment and opinion, I do heartily wish to be plucked
out of the hearts and minds of men: and shall in this Treatise, do my best
endeavor, with most strong reasons and prooses, to remove the same: not
presuminge upon my self, that I am better able than all others this to do:
but upon duty and zeal to open a way fot the knoulege of truth, which by so
many indirect means is restreined, obscured, and persecutde: after reading and
vewing of such books, and the arguments thereof, as have been set forth by
the aduersaires to the contrary, (whiles I was in England, Ambassador for my
most gratiouse Sovereign lady, the Queen of Scotland) I attempted this woork,
not unrequested of some noble personages, then of great account: nor without
the advice, counsel, and Judgment of some, very skillfull in the customs,
laws, and statutes of that Realm. Wherein I verily hope to show such good
matter, for evident demo^stration of the truth, as seems to me sufficient to
satisfy every honest and indifferent person: and able to persuade all such as
are not obstinatly bent to their own partial affections, or not given over to
some sinister meaning, and factiouse dealing.

TO THE NOBILITY AND people of England and Scotland, A Poesy made by T. V.
Englishman.
Dravve near, with heedfull eyes this book peruse:
Who that desires assuredly to know
Those just decrees, that English people use,
For rightful heirs, to whom the Croune does grovve:
With gloriouse Rases of so rich a soil,
And golden bonds of most assured peace,
Which (after vvarres and many a bloody broyle)
Has long time lasted, and does still increase,
By Henry's wife, whom Stories seventh do name:
From whose renoumed stock and princely strain,
Marie now present Queen of Scotland came,
And James her son, as king to rule and reign,
Under that Pole, which we the Northern call.
This lady by her predecessors right
Does look the English Croune to her shall fall,
Virtue to defend, and people (by her Might)
To guide in peace, when Henry's heirs are dead:
Which was the eight, in great renoume of late.
For then, with right pretense, who can proceed
To gayn say her, and spoil her of her state,
And right, to bear the svvaye in English land?
But lest the simple man should grovve in doubt,
What law allovves her, for their heyr to stand,
Lesley well knovveing all the cause throughout,
As one that loves his Queen, and common peace,
By busy toil, has brought this thing about,
And does his best to make false practice cease.
You Britains therefore, with attentive heed,
Dravve near, and reap the croppe of this his seed.
Esteem his work, and vveighe his vvarninges wise,
That tells the truth, still one in word and mind:
Regard the right of her, who once may rise
And rule in state: your Queen to heavens resigned.
"That only Realm is in most happy state,
"Which bears no Tyrannes rule, nor blody band:
"And whose renowned Prince does evil hate,
"And rules in peace the people of her land.
A TREATISE TOVVCHING THE RIGHT, TITLE, AND interest asvvell of the most
excellent Princess, Marye, Queen of Scotland, as of the most noble King
James, her Graces son, to the succession of the Croune of England.

And first, touching the Genealogy, or pedegrue of such Competitors, as
pretend title to the same Croune.

A DECLARATION OF THE TABLE folovveing, touching the raze and progeny of such
persons as, desce^ding from the Princely families of York and Lacastre, do
either Iustlye clame, or unjustly aspire unto the Croune of England: set
forth for this special intent, that all men may clearlye see (as by a plain
demonstration, and by the best proof that can be of a true and laufull
succession) how the most Graciouse Princess, Marye Queen of Scotland, and
from and by her, the most noble King James, the sixth of that name, her Graces
son, ought Iustlye to bar all others, contending to intrude them selves
into the Royal Throne of the Realm of England, before their time.
CERTAIN IT IS, Queen of Scots right heir apparent of the Croune of England.
and assuredly tried and known to all men, that (after the decease of
Elizabeth, now Queen of England, without laufull issue of her body) the
Sovereign Government of that Realm (by right and just title of a laufull
succession) is to remayn and come to Marie, the most noble Queen of Scotland,
and from her to the said King James. And this is such an undoubted truth, as
the Adversaries them selves are not able to deny it, if they will cast away
all partial affection of private quarrelles, and sincerely discover their own
consciences. For, A vvoma^ may have the kingdom of England.
(to let pass as sufficiently by others answered and clearly confuted, that
absurd paradox, and heretical assertion blown abroad, by indiscreet and
seditiouse libells, against the regiment of women) I make this full accoumpt
and reckening, as of a thing most clearly known, and confessed in the hearts
and minds of every true English man, and as agreeable with the laws of God and
nature: that for default of heyr male, inheritable to the Croune of England,
the next heir female in an ordinary course of inheritance and succession, is to
be invited and called to the laufull possession of the Croune: And that, as well
by the ancient common law and custom of England, yet in force: as also by
the Statutes and acts of Parliaments of that Realm, and by the usual
construction and continual practice of the same.

In like manner it is evident and plain, that the right noblye renoumed
Princess, of famous memory, Lady Margaret, some time Queen of Scotland, and
eldest daughter of the seventh Henry, King of England, and of his most noble
wife, Queen Elizabeth, the undoubted heir of the house of York, was married to
James, King of Scotland, the fowerth of that name: by whom she had one only
son called king James the fifth: and that the said most excellent Princess,
Marye, now Queen of Scotland, is the sole daughter of the same King James the
fifth. Whereupon it falls out, that after the decesses of the heirs males of
the bodies of the said king Henry the seventh and Queen Elizabeth his said
wife, whithout laufull issue of their bodies, then the right, title, and
interest to the Croune of England ought to descend, Margaret King Henry the
seventh his eldest daughter, graundmother to the Scottish Queen.
and come, by a laufull course of inheritance and succession, first and before
all others, to the said most gracious Lady, Marie Queen of Scotland, as next
heir, in a laufull descent, from her said graundmother, the said Queen
Margaret, eldest daughter of the said King Henry the seventh, and of Queen
Elizabeth his said wife.

Now, this is a brief narration of such an undoubted truth, as should need
no further explication, if men were deuoutlye inclined to credit a truth. But
because some men are by ambition so blinded, and carried away with their own
fantasies, as they mind nothing more, than with co^tentiouse quarrelles, to
obscure and deface this matter: I must fet a further course: and though the
thing be plain enough of it self: yet must it be delated with a larger
discourse of many proofs, experimentes and examples: to the intent that all
those Competitors and Chalengers, which oppose them selves against her
Majesty's right (albeit of them selves they will not yield to reason) may
nevertheless be so convinced, and daunted, as they shall have nothing left to
gaynsaye, when the truth of the cause shall be clearlye revealed, and sincerely
laid open, to the vewe of Princes, and people of all nations.

First therefore, I will set down a Genealogy, The argument of this work.
and Pedegrue of the Kings of England: And I will derive the same from king
Edward the third: And so from the most noble houses of York and Lancastre,
in manner of an history, until these our days. Then will I duly examine
such arguments, as the Competitours do alleige for their proof, to the end
that by such discourse on both parties, the truth may better appear.

King Henry the seventh, The process of the descent of the houses of York and
Lancastre, and their diuersites in Armurye.
being descended of the house of Lancastre, had for his wife, Elizabeth eldest
daughter of king Edward the fowrth, and right heyr of the house of York, By
which marieage, the bloodye broils and cruel factions of those two noble
howses, which so many years had miserably afflicted the state of England (being
called the factions of the white Rose and the read: meaning by the white Rose,
the house of York, and by the read Rose, the house of Lancastre: upon that
diversity in Armurie) were by the merciful providence of God broken and
ended, For those two mighty families (descending, the one from John of Gaunt
Duke of Lancastre, the other from Edmond Duke of York, two of the sons of
king Edward the third) striuyng for the kingdom, did draw after them, in
contrary parties, all the nobles and Commons of that Realm. And no end nor
measure of civil dissentions, slaughters, and morders could be found, until
such time as the titles and interests of those two houses, were by the said
marriage co^byned in one, and closed together: and thereby all factions, and
domestical dissentions ceased and determined. The original cause of those
dissentions was, as here after follows.

The cause of debate, between the houses of York and Lancastre.
King Edward of England the third had four sons, of whom there was issue: to
wit, Edward Prince of wales, which was the eldest son: Lionell duke of
Clarence, the next: John of Gaunt duke of Lancastre, the third: And Edmund of
Langley, Duke of York the fowerth son.

Edward Prince of wales dyed before his father and left a son which succeeded
his Graund father, and was called king Richard the second. This Richard was, by
his cousin germain, Henry (son of the said John of Gaunt by Blanch his wife)
deposed from his kyndome, and dyed in prison, without issue. And then the
kingdom was translated to the heirs of the third brother: and so to the house
of Lancastre* by this means.

Lionell, the second of the said four brothers, Duke of Clarence, had one
only daughter, and heir, called Philippe: she was Married to Edmund Mortimer
Earl of March: and by him had a son called Roger Mortimer Earl of March:
whose daughter and sole heir, called Anne, was the wife of Richard Earl of
Cambringe: And by him had issue, Richard Plantagenet. Duke of York, heyr in
descent to Edmund of Langley, the fowerth brother before named. Thus the house
of york, by marriage of the said Anne, heir of the house of Clarence, gained a
nearer title to the Croune of England. And thereupon followed privy grudge,
malice, and hatred: and afterward horrible wars between those two families.

The third brother, John of Gaunt had to his first wife, the Lady Blanch
daughter and sole heir of Henry Duke of Lancaster, descended of Edmond Earl of
Lancastre, called Edmonde crowcheback, son of king Henry the third. Polidor
li. 16 (...).
Some there were (as Polidor writes) which afterward reported that this Edmond
crowchebacke was the eldest son of the said king Henry the third, and
therefore his heir, but by reason of his deformity his brother Edward was
perferred to the Croune: In so much as under pretense hereof the before named
Henry, son of John of Gaunt by the said Blanch (which deposed king Richard
the second) as is before mensioned, to show some color of good title to the
Croune, and for to avoid suspicion of iniuriouse intrusion, was advised by his
friends at the time of his coronation to clame that kingdom in the right of
his mother, the said Lady Blanch. But because that pretense was misliked, the
same king Henry the fowerth devised other matter* of title, and published the
same by proclamation, Polidor li. 21. in initio.
as Polidor also writes: and under pretense thereof clamed the kingdom, and
called him self king Henry the fowerth. After him succeeded his son, king
Henry the fyft: married the Lady Catharin, the only daughter of the sixth king
Charles of France: and by her had a son called Henry the sixth: whom king
Edward the fourth, descended of the house of York, did cast into prison (where
he dyed) recovered the kingdom to him self: and after the battle of
Teukesbury, caused Edward, son of the same king Henry the sixth, priuilye to
be put to death.

Yet nevertheless, the house of Lancastre did stand. For John of Gaunt before
named, by his third and last wife, had a son, called John Earl of Somerset,
and Marquis of Dorcestre. And this John had a son, named John Duke of
Somerset, and Earl of Montague: and a daughter called Joan: she was married to
the first James king of Scotland, the third of the house of Stewards, after the
two Roberts, the second and third. This James the first was father to James the
second, father of James the third, father of James the fowerth, kings of
Scotland. Which James the fowerth married the said Queen Margaret, eldest
sister to king Henry of England the eight: and by her had James the fyft,
father of Marie now Queen of Scotland.

The said John Duke of Somerset and Earl of Montague had one only Daughter
called Margaret, Duchess of Somerset: which was married to Edmond, afterward
Earl of Richemond brother, of the half blood, to king Henry the sixth, by one
and the same mother, the said Queen Catharin: for his fathers name was Owen
Teuther, the second husband of the same Queen Catharin. This Edmond had, by
the said Lady Margaret, Duchess of Somerset, a son called Henry, who upon
the death of that Tyranne, the third king Richard, obtained the kyndome of
England, and was named king Henry the seventh.

But (to come to the house of york, descended of the fowerth son of king
Edward the third) so it is that Richard the before named Earl of Cambridge, by
his said wife the Lady Anne mortimer before named the only heir of the house of
Clarence, had (as is before said) a son called Richard Duke of York. This
Richard, (the principal person of the faction which did bear the white Rose)
after great wars with king Henry the sixth) the chief of that side which did
bear the read Rose (was slain in the battle of VVakefeild: And had three
sons) Edward Duke of York, George Duke of Clarence: and Richard Duke of
Glocestre. This Edward Duke of York (as is before mentioned) put the sixth king
Henry in prison, obtained the kingdom, and so brought the Croune to the house
of York, and was called king Edward the fowerth. He had a son which succeeded
him, and was called king Edward the fyft: and a Daughter, the Lady Elizabeth,
afterward wife to king Henry the seventh. The second brother George Duke of
Clarence was by his brother king Edward the fowerth put to death: he had a
daughter, the Lady Margaret, Countess of Sarisburie, afterward married to Pole.
The third brother, Richard duke of Glocestre, after the deceasse of his brother
King Edward the fowerth, caused the young king, Edward the fyft, his said
brothers son, traitorously to be mordered: and like a Tyranne usurped the
Croune, and called him self king Richard the third: but (as he justly
deserved) he dyed dishonorably, and was slain in the battle beside Bosseworth,
by king Henry the seventh, and so dyed without issue. This seventh king Henry,
descended of the house of Lancastre, was then the principal person of the
other party against the house of York. But (to take away the matter of that
contention) he married the said Elizabeth daughter to the said King Edward the
fouerth, The union of the houses of York and Lancastre.
then right heir of the house of York: and so by uniting those two houses, he
did cut of all those long and perniciouse broils: Thus I have brieflye: set
down the original cause, and the final end also, of that so great and
troublessome faction.

Yet to proceed further touching the said king The issue of King Henry the
seventh.
Henry the seventh: he had by his said wife, Queen Elizabeth, a son called
king Henry the eight (for his other sons I omit, because they died in the
life time of their father, and without issue.) And he had also two daughters,
Margaret, wife of the fowerth king James of Scotland, and Marie* the wife of
the twelueth king Jews of France. This king Henry the eight had for his first
wife, Catharin daughter to Ferdinando king of Spayn: and by her he had a
daughter, the Lady Marye, afterward Queen of England. But under a pretense
that the said Catharin was the wife of his deceassed brother Arthur, he putt
her away, and brought in Anne Bolleine, daughter of Sir Thomas Bolleine
knight: and by her he had a daughter the most renowned Lady, Elizabeth, now
Queen of England: And afterward he stroke of the head of the said Anne, and
Married the Lady Jane Semer, a knights daughter: by whom he had his son
Edward: which afterward was King Edward the sixth, and dyed without issue.
Then were called to the crown by succession, first the said Lady Marie: and
after her, the said Lady Elizabeth now Queen. After whose deceasses, without
any laufull issue of their bodies, the next place in succession ought of right
to remayn to the said most noble Lady Marye, now Queen of Scotland,

But before I enter into the explication of this matter, it shall not be far
from the purpose, somewhat to speak of these other persons that challenge the
right of fuccession, as properly to them selves belonging.

King Henry therefore the seventh, by the said Queen Elizabeth daughter to king
Edward the fowerth had (as you have heard) his said son king Henry the eight,
and his said two daughters, the Lady Margaret, wife to king James of Scotland
the fowerth, and the said Lady Mary, wife to the said king Jews of France the
twelueth: by whom she had no issue. The issue of Queen Margaret of Scotland.
And the said king Henry the eight had (as I have said) by diverse venters his
said three children, king Edward, Queen Marie, and Queen Elizabeth. Of the
said Queen Margaret, eldest daughter to the seventh king Henry of England, was
by the said King James the fowerth, her first busband, begotten and borne, the
fifth king James of Scotland, father to the said most noble Lady, Marie, now
Queen of Scotland. And after the decease of the said king James the fowerth,
the same Queen Margaret was married to Archebald Earl of Anguish, and by him
had a daughter, called the Lady Margaret Duglasse, sometime the wife of Matthew
Steward, Earl of Leneux, by whom she had two sons, Henry and Charles, of whom
I will speak here after.

Mary the younger daughter of king Henry the seventh after the decease of her
first husband the twelueth, king Jews of France, The issue of Marye the
French Queen.
by whom she had no issue, was married to Charles Brandon, Duke of Sulffolk: by
whom she had two daughters: Fra^cise and Eleonor. For of her sons I omit to
speak, because they died without issue. The said Lady Francise was married to
Henry Gray Marquess of Dorcestre, afterward Duke of Suffolk. This Henry Gray
begat of her, three daughters, to wit, Jane, Catharin, and Mary. The same Lady
Jane eldest of those three, was married to Gilford Dudley, the son of John duke
of Northumberland: a marriage begun in an unfortunate hour: for it brought
with it destruction as well to them both, as to their parents, and many others.
The said Lady Catharin was espoused to Henry Harbert eldest son of William
Earl of Pembroche. And the Lady Marye youngest of the said three, was betrothed
to Arthur Gray, son of William Gray: But both those contractes afterward,
by the procurement and special labor of the parents, rather than upon good
matter (as I have heard) were in open court dissolved, and pronounced to be of
no validity in law. The like happened touching a privy contract made between
the same Lady Chatharin and the Earl of Hartforde, by whom she had two sons
yet living. Of whom I will speak hereafter. And thus far touching the issue
of the Lady Francise, the one of the said two daughters of Charles Brandon by
Mary the French Queen.

Now let us come to the said Lady Eleonor, the other daughter of the said Mary.
This Eleonor was married to George Clyfford, Earl of Cumberland: who had by her
a daughter, the Lady Margaret, now wife to the Earl of Darby: which two have
issue between them yet living. And this is the true genealogy and pedegrue
(for so much as I could ever learn) of all such issue and offspring descended of
king Henry the seventh, and Queen Elizabeth his wife, as at this day can
claim any right title, or interest in the Croune of England. The remayn is to
add hereunto somewhat touching the progeny of the before named king Edward
the fowerth.

The issue of King Edward the fouerth
This king Edward the fowerth, the principal person of the faction of the
white Rose, had two sons: whom his brother Richard, aspiring to the Croune (a
pattern of the worst mark that ever was in the memory of man) caused to be
mordred: And he had also four daughters: the eldest was Queen Elizabeth the
before named wife of King Henry the seventh, the chief of the faction of the
read Rose, as is before mentioned. An other of the daughters was the Lady
Catharin, wife to VVillia^ Courtney, Earl of Devonshire. Of the other two
daughters, there is left no issue, and therefore I omit them. This Lady
Catharin had by the said Earl of devonshire, a son called Henry Courtney,
whom his Cousin germain, king Henry the eight caused to be beheaded upon a
pretense of treason. This Henry Courtney left one only son called Edward
Courtney, whom in his tender years king Henry the eight imprisoned in the Tower
of london, (where he remained many years) till the death of king Edward the
sixth: At which time that pattern of singular clemency Queen Marie did not
only deliver him, but also restored him to his ancient estate of blood and
dignity. This young noble man afterward dyed without issue at Padua in Italy:
but if he had lived: he might with best right have claimed the Croune of
England, after the issues of king Henry the seventh, and Queen Elizabeth his
wife had been extinguishhed.

In this Courtney now deceased, the progeny of King Edward the fowerth had
been determined, as concerning the straight line, if the offspring of king Henry
the seventh, and Queen. Elizabeth his wife, were not yet living. But if that
(at any time) fail: then must they seek for an heyr in the collateral line.

Therefore it is to be noted, The collateral line of the succession.
that the before mentioned Richard Plantagenet Duke of York (which was slain by
Henry the sixth in the battle of wakefeild, and of whose progeny we now
speak,) had three sons: to wit, king Edward the fowerth: George Duke of
Clarence, and Richard Duke of Glocestre. Now then, for default of issue in
lineal descent from Edward the eldest brother, we must have recourse (as is
before said) unto the collateral descent, that is, to George Duke of Clarenee,
the second brother, and to his succession. For to speak any more of Richard the
youngest brother, which dyed without issue, it were superfluouse.

George then, duke of Clare^ce (,younger brother to Edward the fowerth) had by
his vyfe, Isabell (Countess of VVarwik and Sarisbury) two children, to wit,
Edward and Margaret. This George upon suspicion of treason to affect the
kingdom, was by king Edward his brother priuilye put to death: And his son
Edward being but a child emprisoned in the Tower of land, where he was detained
until at last, upon like surmise, king Henry the seventh stroke of his head
But the said Lady Margaret, Countess of Sarisburie, was married to Sir Richard
pole knight, by whom she had diverse sons: to wytt, Henry, Arthur, Geffray,
and Reinald, the same, which afterward for his rare virtues and singular
wisdom and learning, was advanced to the dignity of a Cardinal, Cardinal
Pole.
and called Cardinal Pole. Henry the eldest brother (to omit the rest) had two
daughters: Catharin Pole the elder sister, which was married to Francise
Hastinges, Earl of Huntingdon: and VVenefride the younger sister. Of which
VVenefride there is no need to speak any more: because there is yet living,
descended of the said Lady Catharin, a plentiful generation. Thus it is
evident and very plain that when the lineal descent in blood from king Henry
the seventh and Queen Elizabeth, his wife shall fail: then must the right of
the white Rose, that is to say, of the house of York, which did spring of
king Edward the fowerth be transplanted, and be derived by a collateral line
from George Duke of Clarence unto the house of the Poles, and so unto the house
of haftings or Hu^tingdon.

Yet is there an other branch sprung out of the same stock, The now Emperor
and King Philip are descended from King Edward the third.
I mean from Edward the third in a long course of descent. And that is Philip
the king Catholic of Spayn descended from John of Gaunt Duke of Lancastre,
third son of king Edward the third. For the said John of Gaunt had two
daughters: Philipp and Catharin. This Lady Philipp was mother to Edward king
of Portugal: of whom all other the kings of Portugal, sithince that time till
this day, are descended. This Edward king of Portugal was father to Eleonor the
Emperesse, which was mother to Maximilian, the Emperor: father to Philipp king
of Castil, father to that most victoriouse Emperor Charles the fifth, father to
the most prudent Prince, Philipp, the King Catholic of Spayn, now reigning, and
to the most graciouse Lady Marie, mother to Rudolphus now Emperor.

But (no to omit any thing which apperteyneth to the Royal succession) I
think it good to add a word or two touching the Lady Margaret Duglasse, Aunt
(that is to say, sister to the father) of my Soueraign Lady, now Queen of
Scotland: her mean which was married to the Earl of Leneux: a marriage very
plausible to king Henrye the eight, or he endued her with great possessions in
England: this Lady Margaret had by the said Earl two sons, Henry and
Charles. Atferward the same Henry went in to Scotland to visit his father: and
sing in the Court there, a comely young gentleman, very personable, and of
great expectation, fownd such favor in the sight of that most Gratiouse
Queen of Scotland, as her Majesty created him Duke of Albanie and Earl of
Rosse: And there withal she made a special choice of him to be her husband:
thynking thereby, that (because he was born and brought up in England) her right
and title might be more fortifyed, and all surmised defectes supplied, if any
thing there were that could be objected against her Majesty.

After this Marriage between that most noble Queen and the said Henry was
solemnized and consummate: her Grace had by him a son, my said Soueraign now
king of Scotland, called James the sixth: A noble Prince, of heroical
towardness, and of the best hope: the undoubted laufull heir of that most
gratiouse Queen: representing always from his infancy a lively Image of his
mother and of her beauty, virtues and graces.

Thus much in few words concerning the succession of the Croune of England,
and of those persons which clame any interest therein. But (to the end that
all things may be more perfectlye discerned) I have caused to be set down,
in a table hereunto annexed, all the degrees of descents, both lineal and
collateral from king Edward the third, from whom either of those two families
of York and Lancastre do take their beginning: In which table, the whole
order and process of that noble stock, hanging together in a continual
course of succession, may most easily appear at the first sight.

Here is to follow a Table of the said Genealogy.
A table of the Raze and progenye of such persons as descending from the
princely families of York and Lancaster, do either justly clame, or
ambytiously covet the title of succession to the Croune of England. Where by
all men may see by what right, and in what course each of the yssues of King
Henry the seventh and Queen Elizabeth his wife: are to be orderly called to
the Croune of that Realm.

A genealogy of the Kings of England from William Duke of Normandy called
William the co^querour until this present year of our Lord. 1584.

Whereas some persons ambitiouslie coveting the Croune of England do
practice sinisterly to discredit the right title of the laufull heirs, and
seek priu ilye to advance I know not what new titles of their own creation:
Therefore to remove all scruples that hereupon may grow, this table is set
forth: Wherein it may appearo at first sight, how by the Marriage of King
Henry the seventh and Queen Elizabeth his wife, the undoubted title of that
Croune was shut up in them two, and in their issue: How they lost but three
children having issue: to wit, King Henry the Eight: Margaret their eldest
daughter, wife of James the.4. King of Scot. And mary wife of Charles Duke of
Suffolk. And that after the decesses of K. Henry the.8. and of his issue, the
right of succession of the said Croune is to remayn to the issue of the said
Margaret before all others. And that is to the most gracious Lady Mary now
Queen of Scotland: and from and by her to the sixth King James of Scotland, her
Graces most noble son.

To the wellwilling Reder.
Here thou haist (wellwilling Reder) the continual Raze and process of
Succession of the triumpha^t Croune of England: set forth before thy eyes, not
so much thereby to gratifye my undoubted Sovereigns, as to dissolve all
doubts touching the laufull succession of that Croune: and to show some advise
for the dignity, peace, and weal public of the whole isle of Britain: to
the end that all matter of sedition may be extinguished. Farewell: and take in
good part this my trauail.

JOHN LESLEY Bishop of Rosse.


William Duke of Normandy subdued and slew in battle at hay stinges Herold
the vsurpor, in the year of our lord. 1066. and obtained the kingdom to him
self, whose posteritye has enjoyed the same till this day.

1. King William Conqueror. 2. King William Rufus. 3. King Henry 1. Married
to. Maude daughter of Malcom. 3. K. of Scot.
Maude daughter of Henry.1. married to. Henry.5. Emperor first husband of Maude
Geoffrey Pla^tagenet second Husband of maude.
5 King Henry 2. son of maude by G. Pl. 6. King Richard 1. Called cuer de
Lion.
7. King John. Joan wife of Alexander.2. King of Scotland. Alexander 2. King of
Scotland. Alexander 3. King of Scotland.

8. King Henry the third. The house of Lancastre.
Edmond Earl of Lancastre. Henry Earl of Lancastre. Henry Duke of Lancastre.
Bla^che heir of Henry D. of Lancastre, wife of John of Gaunt.


Margaret wife of Alexander.3. King of Scotland.
9. King Eddward the first. 10. King Edward the second married to. Isabel
daughter of Philip le beau King of France. Joan wife of David de bruise king of
Scotland. David de bruise King of Scotland.


11. King Edward the third. John of Gaunt D. of Ia^c. in right of his wife
Philip wife of John 1. King of Portugal. Edward King of Portugal. The line of
Poratugl.
Ferdinand. Emanuel King of Portugal. Isabel the eldest daughter of Emanuel,
and wife of Charles 5 Emper. Philip King of Spayn. D. James. D. Philip.




Eleonor wife of Frederik Emperor. Maximilian.1. Emperor. Philip king of
Castill in right of his wife.



Catharin wife of Henry.3. King of Castil. The line of Castil.
John King of Castil. Elizabeth heyr of Castil wife to the King of Aragon.
John Queen and heir of Castil, wife of Philip. Charles.5. Emperor and king of
Spayn. Ferdimand Emperor, and Archeduke of Austriche. Maximilian Emperor
Archeduke of Austriche. Mary daughter of Charles, and wife of Maximillam
Emperor. Rudolphe Emperor, and archeduke of Austriche. Anne wife of Philip
king of Spayn.





13. King Henry the foworth. 14. King Henry the fifth. 15. King Henry the sixth.
Edward.


John Earl of Somerset. Joan wife of James.1. king of Scotland. James.1. King
of Scotland. The line.
James.2. King of Scotland. James.3. King of Scotland James.4. king of Scotland
married to.



John Duke of Somerset. Margaret married to Edmond Earl of Richemo^d 19. King
Henry the seventh married to. Margaret first married to King James: 4. and after
to Of Scotland.
James.5. King of Scotland. Marye Queen of Scotland married to.

Archebald Earl of Angus second husband to Queen Margaret. Margaret wife of
Matthew Earl of Leneux. Henry Stuart second husband of Mary Queen of Scotland.
James.6. King of Scotland.

Matthew Stuart Earl of leneux. Charles Stuart married to Elizabeth Canendish.
Arbella.


20. King Henry the eight. 21. king Edward the sixth. 23. Queen. Elizabeth 22.
Queen Marye.





Edward called the black prince. 12. King Richard the second.
Lionel Duke of Glarence. Philip married to Edmond mortimer Earl of march.
The house.
Edmond of langley Duke of York.
Richard Earl of Cambridge married to Anne mortimer. Anne mortimer married to
Richard Earl of cambringe. Roger mortimer, and Eleonor his sister died without
issue. Rogermor timer.4. Earl of march Edmond mortimer.5. Earl of march died
without isse.


of York.
Richard Plantagonet Duke of York. 18. King Richard the third. Edward dyed
without issue.

George Duke of Glarence. Margaret Countise of Sarisbury married to R. Pole.
Reinald Pole Cardinal and Geffrey Pole. Henry Pole Baron of Montague. The house
of huntingdon.
VVenefride wife of Barington knight. Catharin married to Francis Earl of
hu^tingdon. Henry Earl of huntingdon. George hastings and others.

Arthur Pole. Mary wife of John Stannay. Margaret wife of tho fitzherbert.



16. king Edward the fowerth. Elizabeth married to king Henry the seventh. The
house of Suffolk.
Mary daughter of K. Henry. 7 married to Charles Duk of Suffolk Francise wife of
marquis dorcet. 1. Jane wife of Guilford dudley. 2. Catharin. Henry son of
Catharin by the Earl of hereford. Edward.
3. Mary.
Eleonor married to George Earl of cu^berla^d. Margaret married to the Earl of
darby. Ferdinand. William. Francis.



17. King Edward the fyft.
Adela wife of Stephan Earl of Bloys. 4. King Stephan.



A FVRTHER PROOF OF THE SAID TITLE OF SVCCESSION, WITH A RESOLVTION OF the
objections of the Adversaries.
WE SAY THEN and affirm, that the next right Heir and Successor apparent
unto the Croune of the Realm of England, is at this time such a one, as for
the excellent guiftes of God and nature in her most princely appearing, is
worthy to inherit either that noble Realm, or any other, be it of much more
dignity and worthiness.

But now I clame nothing, for the worthiness of the person, which God forbid
should be any thing prejudicial to the just title of others. If most open and
manifest right, justice and title do not concur with the woorthines of the
person: then let the praise and woorthines remain where it is, and the right
where God and the law has placed it.

But seeing God, Nature and the law does call the person to this expectation,
whose interest and clame I do now prosequute (I mean my undoubted sovereign
Lady, Marye Queen of Scotland) I hope, that when her right and just title
shall be thoroughly heard and considered by the indifferent Reader, if he be
persuaded already for her right, he shall be more firmelye settled in his true and
good opinion: and that the other parties, being of a contrary mind, shall
find good causes and grounds, to remove them from the same, and to give over
and yield to the truth.

Her Graces Title then, as it is most open and euidente, so it is most
conformable to the law of God, of Nature, and of that Realm: And
consequentlye, in a manner, of all other Realms in the world, as growing by
the nearest proximitie of the Royal blood. She is a Kings and a Queens
daughter, her self a Queen, daughter (as is before declared) to the late King
James of Scotland son to Lady Margarete the eldest Sister to the late King
Henry the eight. Whose daughter also the late Lady Lenoux was, by a later
husband. But Lady Frauncis, late wife to Henry Marquis Dorsette, afterward
Duke of Suffolk: and the Lady Eleonour, late wife to the Earl of
Cumberlande, and their Progeny proceed from the Lady Marie, Dowager of
France, youngest Sister of the said King Henrye, late wife to Charles Brandon
Duke of Suffolk as is before declared.

I might here fetch forth old farne days. I might reach back to the noble
and worthy Kings long before the Conquest, of whose Royal blood she is
descended. Which I Intend not to treat upon at this time. And though
perhaps it might seem not much to enforce her title: yet may it serve to
prove her no stranger to England, being of so long continuance, and so many
ways descended of the kings, and Royal blood of that Realm. But the
Arguments and prouffes, which we mean to allege and bring forth for the
confirmation of her right and title in Succession (as Heir apparent) to the
Croune of England, are gathered and grounded upon the laws of God and nature:
and not only received in the Civil policies of other nations, but also in the
old laws and Customs of the Realm of England, by reason approved, and by
usage and long continuance of time observed, from the first constitution of
that Realm in political order, unto this present day.

And yet for all that, has it been, and yet is, by some men attempted,
artificiallye to obiecte and cast many mystie dark clouds before men's
eyes, to keep from them (if it may be) the clear light of the said just title,
the which they would extinguish, or at the least blemish with some obscure
shadow of law, but in deed against the law: and with the shadow of
Parlamentes, but in deed against the true meaning of the Parlamentes.

And though it were enough for us (our cause being so firmly and suerly
established upon all good reason and law) to stand at defense: and only to
avoid (as easily we may) their objections, which principally and chiefly are
grounded upon the common laws and Statutes of that Realm: yet, for the
bettering and strengthening of the same, we shall Lay forth sundry great and
invincible reasons, conjoined with good and sufficient authority of the law,
so approved and confirmed, that the Adversaries shall never be able justly to
impugn them: And so, as we trust, after the reading of this Treatise, and the
effects of the same well digested, no manner of scruple ought to remain in any
indifferent man's heart, concerning her right and title.

Whose expectation and conscience allthough we trust fully in this Discourse
to satisfy, and doubt nothing of the righteousness of our cause: yet must we
needs confess, the manner and form to entreat thereof to be full of
difficulty and perplexity. For such causes of Princes, as they be seldom and
rare, so is it more rare and strange, to find them discoursed, discussed and
determined by any law or statute: albeit now and then some statutes tend
that way. Inst. de just and iure ^ fin.
Neither do the laws of England, nor the Corpse of the Roman and Civil laws
meddle so much with the direction of the right, L. princeps ^ de leg. l. dignu^
v^x. C. eodem.
and titles of kings, as with private men's causes.

And yet, this notwithstanding, for the better justification of our cause,
albeit it, I deny not but that by the common law it must be known, who ought
to have the Croune: and that the common law must discern the right, as well of
the Croune, as of subjects: yet I say, that there is a great difference
between the Kings right, and the right of others: The common law of England
is rather grounded upon a general custom, than upon any law written.
And that the title of the Croune of that Realm of England is not subject to
the rules and principles of the common law of that Realm, as to be ruled and
tried after such order and course, as the inheritance of private persons is
by the same. For the proof whereof let us consider, what the common law of
that Realm is, and how the rules thereof be grounded and do take place. It is
very manifest and plain, In Prologo suo eiusde^. li. fo. 1. and 2. De dict.
Ranulpho Glanuilla. vide Giraldum Cambren. in topogra. de VVallia.
that the common law of the Realm of England is no law written, but is
grounded only upon a common and general custom throughout the whole Realm,
as appears by the Treatise of the ancient and famous Writer of the laws of
the Realm named Ranulphus de Glanuilla, who wrote (in the time of the noble
King Henry the second) of the law and Custom of the Realm of England: being
then, and also in the time of the reign of King Richard the first, the
chief Counsailour and Justice of the same king: and also by the famous
Justice, Fortescue, in his book which he wrote (being Chancellor of
England) De laudibus Legum Angliae. Fortescue de lau. Leg. Angl. c. 17. 8. E.
4. 19. 33. H. 6. 51. Pinsons prime.
And by 33. H. 6. 51. and by E. 4. 19. Which Custom by usage and continual
practice heretofore had in the kings Courts within that Realm is only known
and maintained: wherein the English nation seem much agreeable to the old
Lacedaemonians, who, many hundred years past, Inst. de in re natura. gent. and
civil.. ex non script.
most politikely and famously gouuerned their common Wealth with law
unwritten: whereas among the Athenians the written laws bare all the sway.

This thing being so true, as with any reason or good authority it can not be
denied: then we are further to consider, whether the kings title to the Croune
can be examined, tried and ordered by this common Custom, or no. If it may:
then must yt be proved by some record, that it has been so used: otherwise
the adversaries only say it, and nothing at all prove it. For nothing can be
said by law to be subject to any custom, unless the same has been used
accordingly, and by force of the same custom. But I am well assured, The
Adversaries have shevved no rule of the common law that binds the Croune.
that the adversaries are not able to prove the usage and practice thereof, by
any record in any of the Kings courts. Yea I will further say, and also prove,
that they neither have showed, nor can show any one rule, general or special,
of the common law of that realm, that has been taken, by any just
co^struction, to extend unto, or bind the King or his Croune. I will not
deny, but that (to declare and set forth the prerogative and Jurisdiction of
the King) they may show many rules of the law: but to bind him (as I have
said) they can show none.

The objections of the adversaries touching Aliens borne are clearlie avoided.
OUR adversaries, in a book given out by them touching this succession, do
alleige for a Maxim in law most manifest, that who so ever is borne out of
England, and of father and mother, not being under obedience of the King of
England, can not be capable to inherit any thing in England. Which rule
being general, without any words of exception, they also say, must needs
extend unto the Croune. What they mean by law, I know not. But if they
mean (as I think they do) the common law of England: I answer, there is no
such Maxim in the common law of the Realm of England as hereafter I shall
manifestly prove.

But if it were (for arguments sake) admitted for this time, that it be a
Maxim or general rule of the common law of England: yet to say, that it is
so general, as that no exception can be taken against the same rule, they show
them selves either ignorant, 25. E. 3.
or else very careless of their credit. For it does plainly appear by the
Statute of 25. E. 3. (being a declaration of that rule of the law, which I
suppose they mean in terminge it a Maxim) that this rule extends not unto
the Kings children. Whereby it most euindently appears, that it extends
not generally to all. And if it extend not to bind the Kings children in
respect of any inheritance descended unto them from any of their Ancestors:
it is an Argument a for^iori, that it does not extend to bind the king or his
Croune. And for a full and short answer to their Authorities set forth in
their marginall Notes, as 5. Edward. 3. tt. Ayl^ 1^. Edvva. 3. tt. Bref. 31.
Edvva 3. tt. Cosen. 42 Ed. 3 fol. 2 22 Henric. 6 fol. 42. 11. Henric. 4. 23.
and 24. Litleton. ca. vile^age: it may plainly appear unto all, that will
read and peruse those Books, that there is none of them all, that does so
much as with a piece of a word, or by any color or shadow seem to intend,
that the title of the Croune is bound by this their supposed general rule or
Maxim. For every one of the said Cases argued and noted in the said Book are
only concerning the dishabilitie of an Alien borne, and not Denizon, to
demand any lands by the laws of the Realm by suite and action only, as a
subject under the King: The adversaries case pertains to subjects only.
and nothing touching any dishabilitie to be laid to the King himself, or to
his subjects. Is there any controversy about the title of the Croune, by
reason of any such dishabilitie touched in any of these Books? No verily, not
one word, I dare boldly say: As it may most manifestly appear to them, that
will read and pervse those books. And yet the adversaries are not ashamed, to
note them as sufficient authorities for the maintenance of their evil purpose
and intent. But as they would seem to understand, that their rule of
dishabilitie is a general Maxim of the law: so me thinks they should not
be ignorant, that it is also as general, No Maxim of the law binds the
Croune, unless the Croune specially be named.
yea a more general rule and Maxim of the law, that no Maxim or rule of the
law can extend, to bind the king or the Croune, unless the same be
specially mentioned therein, as may appear by diverse principles and rules of
the law, which be as general, as is their said supposed Maxim: and yet
neither the king, nor the Croune is by any of them bound. As for example: it is
very plain, 1. Of Tenant by the curtesy.
that the rule of Tenante by the Courtesy is general without any exception at
all. And yet the same binds not the Croune, neither does extend to give any
benefit to him that shall Marie the Queen of England. As it was plainly
agreed by all the lawiers of that Realm, when king Philip was married unto
Queen Marie: although (for the more suertie and plain declaration of the
intentes of King Philip and Queen Marie, and of all the states of that Realm)
it was enacted, 2. Nor that the lands shall be divided among the daughters.
that king Philip should not clame any title to be Tenant by the Courtesy. It
is also a general rule, that if a man dye seysed of any lands in Fee simple
without issue male, having diverse daughters: the land shall be equally divided
among the daughters: Which rule the learned men in the laws of that Realm
agreed (in the life of the late noble Prince Edward) and also every reasonable
man knows (by usage) to take no place in the succession of the Croune. For,
there the eldest enjoys all, 3. Nor the wife shall have the third part.
as though she were issue male. Likewise it is a general rule, that the wife
after the decease of her husband, shall be endowed and have the third part of
the best possessions of her husband. And yet it is very clear, 5. E. 3. Tit.
praeroga. 21. E. 3. 9. and 28. H. 6.
that a Queen shall not have the third part of the lands belonging to the
Croune, as appears in 5. E. 3. Tit. praerogat. 21. E. 3. 9. and 28. H. 6. and
diverse other books. Bysides this, the rule of Possessio fratris, 4. Nor the
rule of Possessio fratris, etc.
being general, neither has been, or can be stretched to the inheritance of
the Croune. For the brother of the half blood shall succeed, and not the sister
of the whole blood, as may appear by Justice Moile: and may be proved by King
Etheldred, brother and successor to king Edward the Martyr: and by king Edward
the Confessor, brother to king Edmunde: and by diverse other, who succeeded in
the Croune of England, being but of the half blood: As was also the late
Queen Marie: and is at this present her sister. Who both, in all records of
the law, wherein their several rightes and titles to the Croune are pleaded
(as by daily experience, in the Exchequer, and in all other Courts is
manifest) do make their conueiance as heirs in blood the one to the other:
which, if they were common or private persons, they could not be allowed in
law: they (as is well known) being of the half blood one to the other: that
is to wit, begotten of one father, 5. Nor that the executour shall have the
goods and Chattles of the testatour. 7. H. 4. fol. 42.
but borne of sundry mothers. It is also a general rule in the law, that the
executour shall have the goods and Chattles of the testatour, and not the
heir. And yet is it other wise in the case of the Croune. For there the
successor shall have them, and not the executour, as appears in 7. H. 4. by
Gascoine. It is likewise a general rule, that a man attainted of felony or
treason, his heir through the corruption of blood (without pardon and
restitution of blood) is unable to take any lands by discente. 6.
Which rule (although it be general) yet it extends not to the descente or
succession of the Croune: Nor that a traitor is unable to take lands by
disce^te, and without pardon.
although the same Attainder were by act of Parlamente: as may appear by the
Attainder of Ricarde Duke of York, and king Edward his son, and also of king
Henry the seventh: who were attainted by act of Parliament, and never restored:
and yet no dishabilitie thereby unto any of them, to receive the Croune by
lawful succession.

But to this the adversaries would seem to answer in their said book,
sayeing, that Henry the seventh, not with standing his attainder, came to the
Croune, as cast upon him by the order of the law: for so much as when the
Croune was cast upon him, that dishabilitie ceased. Wherein they confess
directly, that the Attainder is no dishabilitie at all to the succession of the
Croune. For although no dishabilitie can be alleged in him, that has the
Croune in possession: yet if there were any dishabilitie in him before to
receue and take the same by lawful succession: then must they say, that he was
not lawful King, but an vsurpet. And therefore in confessing Henry the seventh
to be a lawful king, and that the Croune was lawfully cast upon him, they
confess directly thereby, that before he was king in possession, there was no
dishabilitie in him to take the Croune by lawful succession, his said Attainder
not withstanding, which is as much as I would wish them to grant.

But in conclusion, understanding them selves that this their reason can not
maintain their intent: An aunsvvere to the adversary making a difference
between attainder and the birth out of the allegiance.
they go about an other way to help them selves, making a difference in the
law between the case of Attainder, and the case of foraine birth out of the
kings allegiance: sayeinge, that in the case of the Attainder necessity does
enforce the succession of the Croune upon the party attaynted. For otherwise,
they say, the Croune shall not desce^de to any. But upon the birth out of the
kings allegea^ce they say, it is otherwise. And for proof thereof they put a
case of I. S. being seized of lands, and having issue A. and B. A. is
attainted in the life of I. S. his father: and after I. S. dies, A. living
vnrestored. Now the land shall not descend either to A. or B. but shall go to
the Lord of the Fee by way of eschete. Otherwise it had been (they say) if A.
had been borne beyond the sea, I. S. breaking his allegiance to the king, and
after I. S. comes again into the Realm, and has issue B. and dies: for now
(they say) B. shall inherit his fathers Lands.

If the Croune had been holden of any person, to whom it might have escheted,
as in their case of I. S. the land did: then peradventure there had been some
affinity between their said case, and the case of the Croune. But there is no
such matter. Bysides that they must consider, that the king comes to the
Croune, not only by descent, but also and chiefly by succession, as unto a
corporation. And therefore they might easily have seen a difference in their
cases between the kings Majesty, and I. S. a subject: And also between
lands holden of a Lord above, and the Croune holden of no earthly Lord, but
of God almighty only.

But yet for arguments sake I would feign know, where they find their
difference, and what authority they can show for the proof thereof? They have
made no marginal note of any authority: and therefore unless they also say,
that they are Pythagoras, I will not believe their difference. Well, I am
assured, that I can show good outhoritie to the contrary, and that there is no
difference in their cases. If they peruse. 22. H. 6: 22. H. 6. fol. 43.
there may they see the opinion of Justice Newton, that there is no difference
in their cases: but that in both their cases the land shall eschete unto the
Lord. And Prisote, being then of Counsel with the party that clamed lands by
a descent, where the eldest son was borne beyond the seas, durst not abide in
law upon the title. This authority is against their difference, and this
authority I am well asseured is better, then any that they have showed to
prove their difference. But if we shall admit their difference to be according
to the law: yet their cases, where unto they apply their difference, are
nothing like, as I have said before. Now then, to proceed on in the proof of
our purpose, as it does appear, that neither the King, nor his Croune is bound
by these general rules, which before I have showed: so do I likewise say of
all the residue of the general rules and Maxims of the law, being in a manner
infinite. The supposed Maxim of the adversaries touches not Kings borne
beyond the sea, as appears by King Stephen and King H. 2.
But to return again unto their only supposed Maxim, which they make so
general, concerning the dishabilitie of persons borne beyond the seas: it is
very plain, that it was never taken, to extend unto the Croune of the Realm
of England, as it may appear by king Stephen, and by king Henry the second,
who were both strangers and Frenchemen, borne out of the kings allegiance,
and neither were they kings children immediate, nor their parents of the
allegiance: and yet they have been always accounted lawful kings of England:
nor their title was by any man at any time defaced or comptrolled for any such
consideration or exception of foraine birth.

The aduersaris objection touching King H. 2. avoided.
And it is a world to see, how the adversaries would shifte their hands from
the said king Henry the second. They say, he came not to the Croune by order of
the law, but by capitulation, for as much as his mother, by whom he conveyed
his Title, was then living. Well, admit that he came to the Croune by
capitulation, during his mothers life: yet this does not prove, that he was
dishabled to receive the Croune, but rather proves his abylitie. And although
I did also admit, that he had not the Croune by order of the law during his
mothers life: yet after his mothers death, no man has hitherto doubted, but
that he was king by lawful succession, and not against the laws and Customs
of that Realm. For so might they put a doubt in all the Kings of that Realm,
that ever governed since. Which thing we suppose they are over wise to go
about.

Bysides this, I have hard some of the adversaries for further help of their
intention in this matter say, that king Henry the second was a Queens child,
and so king by the rule of the common law. Truly I know, he was an Emperesse
child, but no Queen of Englandes child. For although Maude the Emperesse,
his mother, had a right and a good title to the Croune, and to be Queen of
England, yet was she never in possession, but kept from the possession, by
king Stephen. And therefore king Henry the second can not justly be said, to
be a Queen of Englandes child, nor yet any kings child, unless ye would
intend the kings children, by the words of Infantes de Roy etc, to be
children of further degree, and descended from the right line of the king: for
so ye might say truly, that he was the child of king Henry the first, being in
deed the son and heir of Maude the Emperesse, As touching Arthur King
Richardes nephevve. Vt autem pax ista, and su^ma dilectio, tam multiplici, quam
arctiori vinculo connectatur: praedictis curiae vestrae magnatius id ex part
vestra tractantibus Domino dispone^te condiximus, inter Arthuru^ egregium Duce^
Britanniae nepote^ nostru^ and haerede^ si forte sine prole obire nos
co^tigerit, and filia^ vestra^ matrimonium coatrahendum etc. In trastatu pacis
inter Richa. 1. and Tancredu^ Rege^ Siciliae. Vide Reg. Houeden. and Richardum
Canonicum S. Trinitatis Londiu.
daughter and heir of king Henry the first* Whereby the said rule of the
adversaries is here fowly foiled.

And therefore they would (for the maintenance of their pretensed Maxim)
catch some hold upon Arthur the son of Ieffrey, one of the sons of the
said Henry the second. They say then, like good and ioly Antyquaries, that he
was rejected from the Croune, because he was borne out of the Realm. That he
was borne out of the Realm, it is very true: but that he was rejected from the
Croune for that cause, it is very false. Neither have they any authority to
prove their vain opinion in this point. For it is to be proved by the
Cronicles of that Realm, that king Richard the first, uncle unto the said
Arthur, taking his journey toward Jerusalem, declared the said Arthur (as we
have declared before) to be heir apparent unto the Croune: which would not
have been if he had been taken to be unable to receive the Croune by reason of
foraine birth.

And although king John did usurp, as well upon the said king Richard the
first, his eldest brother, as also upon the said Arthur his nephewe: yet that
is no proof, that he was rejected, because he was borne out of the Realm. If
these men could prove that, then had they showed some reason and president to
prove their intent, whereas hitherto they have showed none at all, nor, I am
well assured, shall ever be able to show.

Thus may ye see, gentle Reader, that neither this pretensed Maxim of the law
set forth by the Adversaries, nor a great number more, as general as this is
(which before I have showed) can by any reasonable means be stretched, to
bind the Croune of England. These reasons and authorities may for this time
suffice, to prove, that the Croune of that Realm is not subject to the rules
and the Principles of the common law, neither can be ruled and tried by the
same. Which thing being true, all the objections of the Adversaries made
against the title of Marie the Queen of Scotland to the succession of the
Croune of that Realm, are fully answered, and thereby clearly wiped away. Yet
for further arguments sake, and to the end we might have all matters sifted to
the uttermost, and thereby all things made plain: let us, for this time,
somewhat yield unto the Adversaries, admitting; that the Title of the Croune
of that Realm were to be examined and tried by the rules and principles of the
common law: and then let us consider and examine further, whether there be any
rule of the common law, or else any statute, that by good and just construction
can seem to impugn the said title of Marie the Queen of Scotland, or no. For
touching her lineal descente from king Henry the seventh, and by his eldest
daughter (as we have showed) there is no man so impudent to deny. What is
there then to be objected among all the rules, Maxims, and iugements of the
common law of that Realm? Only one rule, as a general Maxim, is objected
against her. And yet the same rule is so untruly set forth, that I can not
well agree, that it is any rule or Maxim of the common law of the Realm of
England. Their pretensed Maxim is, whosoever is borne out of the realm of
England, and of father and mother, not being under the obedience of the king of
England, A false Maxim set forth by the adversaries. 7. E. 4. fol. 28. 9. E. 4
fol. 5. 11. H. 4. fol. 25. 14. H. 4. fol. 10.
cannot be capable to inherit any thing in England. Which rule is nothing
true, but altogether false. For every stranger and Alien is hable to purchase
the inheritance of lands within that Realm, as it may appear in 7. and 9. of
king Edward the fourth, and also in 11. and 14. of king Henry the fourth. And
although the same purchasse is of some men accounted to be to the use of the
king: yet until such time as the king be entitled there unto by matter of
Record, the inheritance remains in the Alien by the opinion of all men. And
so is a very Alien capable of inheritance within that Realm. And then it must
needs fall out very plainlye, that this general Maxim, where upon the
adversaries have talked and bragged so much, is now become no rule of the
common law of that Realm. And if it be so: then have they vtered very many
words to small purpose.

But yet let us see further, whether there be any rule or Maxim in the common
law, that may seem any thing like to that rule, whereupon any matter may be
gathered against the title of the said Marie Queen of Scotland. There is one
rule of the common law, in words some what like unto that, which has been
alleged by the adversaries. Which rule is set forth and declared by a statute
made anno 25. of king Edward the third. Which statute reciting the doubt that
then was, whether infants borne out of the allegiance of England, should be
hable to demand any heritage within the same allegiance, or no: it was by the
same statute ordained, that all infantes inheritours, which after that time
should be borne out of the allegea^ce of the king, whose father and mother at
the time of their birth, were of the faith and allegiance of the king of
England, should enjoy the same benefittes and advantages, to have and hold
heritage within the said allegiance, as other heirs should. Whereupon it is to
be gathered by dew and just co^struction of the same statute, and has been
heretofore commonly taken, that the common law always was, and yet is, that
no person born out of the allegea^ce of the king of England, whose father and
mother were not of the same allegiance, should be able to have or demand any
heritage within the same algeance, as heir to any person. Which rule I take
to be the same supposed Maxim, that the adversaries do mean. But to stretche
it generally to all inherita^ces (as the adversaries would seem to do) by any
reasonable means can not be. The statute of Edw. 3. An. 25. touchetb
inberitance, not purchase. 11. H. 4. fol. 25.
For (as I have said before) every stranger and Alien borne, may have and take
inheritance, as a purchaser. And if an Alien do Marie a woman inheritable, the
inheritance thereby is both in the Alien, and also in his wife, and the Alien
thereby a purchaser. No man doubts, but that a Denizon may purchase lands
to his own use: but to inherit lands, as heir to any person within the
allegiance of England, he can not by any means. So that it seems very
plain, that the said rule binds also Denyzons, and does only extend to
Descentes of inheritance, and not to the having of any land by purchse.

Now will we then consider, whether this rule by any reasonable co^struction
can extend unto the Lady Marie the Queen of Scotland, for and concerning her
title to the Croune of England. It has been said by the Adversaries that she
was borne in Scotland, which realm is out of the allegiance of England, her
father and mother not being of the same allegea^ce: and therefore by the said
rule, she is not inheritable to the Croune of England. Though. I might at the
beginning very well and orderly deny the consequent of this argument: yet I will
first examine the Antecedent, even by the common opinion and sentence of English
men: then will I consider upon the consequent. And this I intend, of purpose
only to discover the improuidence of the adversaries, which in a matter, where
they covet most to look unto them selves, there they least of all provide for
the warrantize of their cause by their own pretensed laws of the Realm of
England. But I mind not hereupon so to over rule the matter, as any prejudice
may thereby be created against the Kings of Scotland: who have always kept,
and still do keep and enjoy, with a plain profession and most just clame in
their own right, over their subjects a supreme authority, and power, not
depending by any law right or custom upon any other Prince or potentate in
the world. Well then (to come to the Antecedent) so it is, that the Queen of
Scotland was borne in Scotland, it must needs be granted: but that Scotland is
out of the allegiance of England, though the said Queen, and all her
subjects do iustlye affirm the same, yet there is a very great number of
men in England, both learned and others, which are not of that opinion, but
earnestly auouche the contrary, being led and persuaded thereunto (as they say)
by diverse Histories, Registers, Records, and Instruments, remayninge in the
Treasury of that Realm: wherein is mentioned (as they also say) that the
Kings of Scotland have acknouleged the King of England to be the superior
Lord over the Realm of Scotland, and have done homage and fealty for the
same. Which being true, though all Scotsmen deny it, as Justly they may: for
the homage and fealty which those men speak of was not exhibited nor done in
any such respect as they surmise, but in consideration of the tenures of
certain Segnories, Lands, tenements, and hereditaments lyeing in
Northumberland, Cumberland, and other Shyres of England, which now the Kings
of Scotland want, and then did enjoy and hold of the King of England: As
co^monlie it is seen in sondrie parts of Christindome Kings and Princes having
distinct and absolute regiments, not depending of any other potentate, to hold
nevertheless one of an other diverse lands towns and countries lyeing within
the marches of the one or the others dominions. But admit it to be true which
these men do so auouche: then Scotland must needs be accounted within the
allegiance of England, even by their own laws of the same Realm, and by the
common opinion of their own nation. And although sins the time of King Henry
the sixth, none of the Kings of Scotland have done the said service unto the
Kings of England: yet that is no reason in the law of England to say, that
therefore the Realm of Scotland at the time of the birth of the said Lady
Marie Queen of Scotland, being in the thirty and fourth year of the reign
of the late King Henry the eight, was out of the allegiance of the Kings of
England. For the law of that Realm is very plain, that though the Tenant do
not his service unto the Lord, yet has not the Lord thereby lost his
Seignorie. The Lord loses not his seignorie, though the tenante does not his
service.
For the land still remains within his Fee and Seignorie, that
notwithstanding.

But peradventure some will obiecte and say, that by this reason, France
should likewise be said to be within the allegiance of England: forasmuch as
the possession of the Croune of France has been within a little more then the
space of one hundred years now last past, laufully vested in the Kings of
England, whose right and title still remains.

To that objection it may be answered, that there is a great difference between
the right and title, which the kings of England clame to the Realm of France,
and the right and title which they clame to the Realm of Scotland. For
although it be true, that the kings of England have been lawfully possessed of
the Croune of France: yet during such time, as they by usurpation of others,
are dispossessed of the said Realm of France: the same Realm by no means
can be said to be within their allegiance: especially considering, how that
syns the time of usurpation, the people of France have wholly forsaken their
allegiance and subjection, which they did owe unto the kings of England, and
have given and submitted them selves under the obedience and allegea^ce of the
fre^sh. But as for the Realm of Scotland, it is otherwise.

For the Title, which the Kings of England (by the opinion of these men) may
clame to the Realm of Scotland, is not in the possession of the land and
Croune of Scotland: but only in the service of homage and fealty for the
same: And though the Kings of Scotland, many years, have intermitted to do
the said homage and fealty unto the Kings of England: yet for all that the
Kings of Scotland can not by any reason or law be called usurpers, and unjust
possessors.

And thus all indifferente men, not ledd by affections may well see, by the
records and testimonies of England, that the Realm of Scotland, is within
the allegiance of England. And so is the Antecede^t or first proposition false.
And yet that makes no proof, that the Realm of France likewise should now
be said to be within the allegiance of the Kings of England, by reason of the
manifest and apparent difference before showed.

But what if the antecedent were true? (as the adversaries say it is, and all
Scotsmen constantly affirm it to be.) Yet it is very plain, that the said
consequent and conclusion can not by any means be true: The causes why the
Croune cannot be comprised within the pretended Maxim.
and that principallye, for three causes: whereof one is, for that neither the
King, nor the Croune (not being specially mentioned in the said rule or
pretended Maxim) can be intended to be within the meaning of the same Maxim,
as we have before sufficently proved by a great number of other such like
general rules and Maxims of the laws. An other cause is, for that the Croune
can not be taken to be within the words of the said supposed Maxim: and that
for two respects: one is, because the rule does only dishable Aliens to
demand any heritage within the allegiance of England. Which rule can not be
stretched to the demand of the Croune of England, which is not with in the
allegiance of England: but is the very allegiance it self. As for a like
example: it is true, that all the lands within the Kings dominion are holden
of the King, either mediatly, or immediately: and yet it is not true, that the
Croune (by which only the King has his Dominion) can be said to be holden
of the King. Without the Croune there can neither be King nor allegiance.
For without the Croune there can be neither King, nor allegiance. And so long
as the Croune rests only in demand, not being vested in any person, there
is no allegiance at all. So that the Croune can not be said by any means to
be within the allegiance of England: and therefore not within the words of the
said rule or Maxim. The title of the Croune is also out of the words and
meaning of the same rule in an other respect: and that is, because that rule
does only dishable an Alien to demand lands by descent as heir. For it does
not extend unto lands purchased by an Alien, as we have before sufficiently
proved. And then can not that rule extend unto the Croune being a thing
incorporate: the right whereof does not descend according to the common course
of private inheritance, but goes by succession, 40. E. 3. fol. 10. 13. E. 3.
Ti^. Bref. 264. 16. E. 3. iurans de. sait. 166. 17. E. 3. Tit. s^i^e sac 7. A
Deane, a Person. a Priour being an Alien may demand land in the right of his
corporation. An 3. R. 2. 6. C. 3. fo. 21. tit. droit. 26. lib. Ass. p. 34. 1^.
li. Ass. tit. enfant. 13. H. 8. fo. 14. 7. E. 4. fol. 10. 16. E. 3. iurans. de
^ait. 9. H. 6. fol. 33. 35. H. 6. fol. 35. 5. E. 4 fol. 70. 49. li. Ass. A. 88.
22. H. 6. fol. 31. 13. H. 8. fol. 14.
as other corporations do.

No man doubts, but that a Prior Alien being no denizon, might always in
time of peace demand land in the right of his corporation. And so likewise a
Deane or a Person being Aliens, and no denizons, might demand land, in
respect of their corporations, not withstanding the said supposed rule or
Maxim, as may appear by diverse book cases, as also by the statute made in
the time of king Richard the second. And although the Croune has always gone
according to the common course of a Descent: yeth does it not properly
descend, but succeed. And that is the reason of the law, that, although the
King be more favored in all his doings, then any common person shall be: yet
can not the King by law avoid his grauntes and Letters Patentes by reason of
his Nonage, as other infantes may do, but shall always be said to be of full
age in respect of his Croune: even as a Person, Vicare or Deane, or any other
person incorporate shall be. Which can not by any means be said in law, to be
within age in respect of their corporations, although the corporation be but
one year old.

Bysides that, the King can not by the law avoid the Letters Patentes made
by any usurper of the Croune (unless it be by act of Parliament) no more then
other persons incorporate shall avoid the grauntes made by one that was
before wrongfullye in their places and romes: whereas in Descentes of
inheritance the law is otherwise. For there the heir may avoid all estates
made by the disseasour, or abatour, or any other person, whose estate is by
law defeated. Whereby it does plainly appear, that the King is incorporate
unto the Croune, The King is alvvaies at full age in respect of his Croune.
and has the same properly by succession and not by Descent only. And that is
likewise an other reason, to prove, that the King and the Croune can neither
be said to be within the words, nor yet with in the meaning of the said
general rule or Maxim.

The third and most principal cause of all is, for that in the said statute,
whereupon the said supposed rule or Maxim is gathered, The Kings children are
expressly excepted from the surmised Maxim.
the children descendantes and descended of the blood royal by the words of
Infantes de Roy are expressly excepted out of the said supposed rule or Maxim.
Which words the adversaries do much abuse, in restraining and construing
them, to extend but to the first degree only: whereas the same words may
very well bear a more large and ample interpretation: And that for three
causes and co^sideratio^s.

Libe roru^ ff. de verborum signific.
First by the Civil law this word Liberi (which the word Infantes, being the
usual and original word of the statute written in the French tongue,
counteruaileth) does comprehend by proper and peculiar signification not only
the children of the first degree, L. Sed and si de i^ ius voca^ doinstit. de
haere. ab intist.
but other descendants also in the law. As for example, where the law says:
That he who is manumissed or made free, shall not commence any Action against
the children of the Patron or manumissour without license: L. Lucius ff. de
haere. instit. L. Iusta. and L. Natoru^. and L. Liberoru^ de uerb. signi. L. 2.
si matter al S.C. Tertul.
there not only the first degree, but the other also are contained. The like
is, where the law of the twelve Tables says: The first place and room of
succession, after the death of the parents that die intestate, is due to the
children: there the succession apperteineth as well to degrees removed, as to
the first. Yea in all causes favorable (as ours is) this word Filius, (a
son) conteinethe the word nepos ( A nephew, that is to say, a sons son
or daughters son:) though not by the property of the voice or speech, L.
Filius de S.C. Maced. L. Senatus de ritu nupt. L. quod si nepo tes. ff. test.
cu^ notatis ibid. Infantes in French cou^tervaileth this word liberi in lat.
yet by interpretation admittable in all such things, as the law disposes
of. And as touching this word Infants, in French we say, that it reaches to
other desce^dantes, as well as to the first degree. Wherein I do refer me to
such as be expert in the said tongue. There is no word in English (for the
barennes of that tongue) to cou^terpaise the said French word Infantes, or the
Latin word Liberi. Therefore do they supply it, as well as they may, by this
word (Children.) The Spaniardes also use this word (Infantes) in this ample
sense, when they call the next heir to the heir apparent, Infant of Spain:
even as the late deceased Lord Charles of Austrich was called, his father and
grandfather then living.

If then then the original word of the statute, declaring the said rule, may
naturally and properly apperteine to all the Descendants: why should we strain
and bind it to the first degree only, otherwise than the nature of the word
or reason will bear? For I suppose verily, The grand fathers call their
nephues, sons. L. Gallus. Instituens. ff. de liber. Et post. I. ff. C. de
impub. Aliis substan. c. 1. q. 4. Father and son co^pted in person, and flesh
in manner one
that it will be very hard for the Adversary, to give any good and substantial
reason, why to make a diversity in the cases. But touching the contrary,
there are good and probable considerations, which shall serve us for the second
cause. As, for that the grandfathers call their nephews, as by a more pleasant
and plausible name, not only their children, but their sons also: and for
that the son being deceased (the grandfather suruiuing) not only the
gra^dfathers affection, but also such right, title and interest, as the son
has by the law, and by proximitie of blood, grow and draw al to the nephew,
who represents and supplieth the fathers place, the father and the son
being compted in person and in flesh in manet but as one. Why shall then the
bare and naked consideration of the external and accidental place of the birth
only sever and sunder such an entier, inward and natural conjunction? Add
there unto, the many and great absurdities, that may hereof spring and ensue.

Diverse of the kings of the Realm of England, as well before the time of
King Edward the third (in whose time this statute was made) as after him, gave
their daughters out to foraine, and sometimes to mean Princes in marriage.
Great absurdity, in excluding the true and right successor, for the place of
his birth only.
Which they would never so often times have done, if they had thought, that
while they went about to set fotth and advance their issue: their doings
should have tended to the disheriting of them from so great, large and noble a
Realm, as that is: which might have chanced, if the daughter having a son
or daughter, had died, her father living. For there should this supposed Maxim
have been a bar to the children, to succeed their grandfather.

This absurdity would have been more notable, if it had chanced about the
time of King Henry the second, or this King Edward, or King Henry the first
and sixte, when the possessions of the Croune of that Realm were so amply
enlargid in other Countries beyond the seas. And yet never so notable, as it
might have been hereafter in our fresh memory and remembrance, if any such
thing had chanced (as by possibility it might have chanced) by the late
marriage of King Philippe and Queen Marie.

For, admitting their daughter married to a foraine Prince, should have dyed
before them, she leaving a son furuiuing his father and grandmother, they
having none other issue so nigh in degree: then would this late framed Maxim
have excluded the same son lamentably and unnaturally from the succession of
the Croune of England: and also the same Croune from the inheritance of the
Realms of Spain, of both Sicilies, with their appurtenances, of the Dukedom of
Milan, and other lands and Dominions in Lumbardy and Italy: as also from the
Dukedomes of Brabant, Luxemburg, Geldres, Zutphan, Burgundy, Friseland: from
the Countreies of Fla^dres, Artois, Holland, Zealand and Namurs, and from the
new found lands, parcel of the said kingdom of Spain. Which are (unless I
be deceived) more ample by dubble or treble, than all the Countreies now
rehearsed. All the which Countreies by the foresaid Marriage should have been by all right deuolued to the said son, if any such child had been borne.

If either the same by the force of this iolie new found Maxim had been
excluded from the Croune of England, or the said Croune from the inheritance
of the foresaid Countreies: were there any reason to be yielded, for the
maintenance of this supposed rule or Maxim in that case? Or might there
possibly rise any commodity to the Realm, by obseruinge there in this
rigourous pretensed rule, that should by one hundred part counteruaile this
importable loss and spoil of the Croune, and of the lawful inheritour of the
same?

But percha^ce for the avoiding of this exception limited unto the blood roial,
some will say, An evasion avoided, pretending the privilege of the Ki^gs
children not to be in respect of the Croune, but of other lands.
that the same was but a privilege granted to the kings children, not in
respect of the succession of the Croune, but of other lands descending to them
from their Ancestors. Which although we might very well admit and allow:
yet can it not be denied, but that the same privilege was granted unto the
Kings children and other descendantes of the Blood royal, by reason of the
dignity and worthiness of the Croune, which the King their father did enjoy,
and the great reverence, which the law gives of dewtie thereunto. And
therefore if the adversaries would go about, to restrain and withdraw from the
Croune that privilege, which the law gives to the kings children for the
Crounes sake: they should do therein contarie to al reason, and against the
rules of the Art of Reasoning, which says, that: Propter quod vnumquodque and
illud magis.

Beside that, I would feign know, by what reason might a man say, that they
of the Kings Blood born out of the allegiance of England, may inherit lands
within that Realm, as heirs unto their Ancestors, and yet not to be able to
inherit the Croune. Truly in mine opinion it were against all reason. But on
the contrary side, the very force of reason must drive us to grant the like,
The royal blood bears his honor with it, vvhereso ever it be.
Yea more great and ample privilege and benefit of the law in the succession
of the Croune. For the Roial blood, where so ever it be found, will be taken as
a precious and singular Jewel, and will carry with it his worthy estimation
and honor with the people, and, where it is dew, his right withal.

Vide Anto. Corsetu^ de potest. et excel. regi. q. 100.
By the Civil law the right of the inheritance of private persons is hemmed
and inched within the bands of the tenth degree. The Blood Roial runs a
farther race, and so far as it may be found: therefore the great and mighty
Conquerors are glad and feign to join in affinity with the blood Roial:
Oo^querors glad to join with the royal blood. Henry the first.
ever fearing the weakness of their own bloddie sword, in respect of the
great force and strength of the other. For this cause was Henry the first,
(called for his learning and wisdom Beauclerke.) glad to consociate and
couple him self with the ancient Roial blood of the Saxons, which
continueing in the Princely succession from worthy king Alured, was cut of
by the death of the good king Edward: and by the mariyng of Mathildis, being in
the fourth degree in lineal descent to the said king Edward, was revived and
reunited. From this Edward my said souueraine lady the Queen of Scotland
takes her noble ancient Pedegrue. These then, and diverse other reasons and
causes mo, may be alleged for the weighing and setting forth of the true
meaning and intent of the said law.

Now, in case these two causes and consideratio^s will not satisfy the
adversaries: we will adioine there unto an other which they shall never by any
good and honest shift avoid. And that is the use and practice of the Realm as
well in the time foregoing the said statute, as afterward.

We stand upon the interpretation of the common law recited and declared by
the said statute, L. fin. ff. de legibus.
and how shall we better understand, what the law is therein, then by the use
and practice of the said law? For the best interpretation of the law, is
custom. Common use and practice the best interpretation of the law. Eode^
anno Rex cu^ in diebus suis processisset Aeldredu^ Vigornense^ Episcopu^ ad
Rege^ Hungariae transmittens, reuocauit inde filium fratris sui Edmundi
Eduardum cu^ tota familia sua vt vel ipse. ver filii eius sibi succederent in
regnum. Flor. histo. 1057.
But the Realm before the statute, admitted to the Croune not only kings
children and others of the first degree, but also of a farther degree, and such
as were plainly borne out of the kings allegiance. The foresaid use and
practice appears as well before, as since the time of the Conquest. Among
other, king Eduard the Confessor, being destitute of a lawful Heir whithin
the Realm, sent into Hungary for Edward his Nephew surnamed Out law, son to
king Edmu^d called Ironside, after many years of his exile, to return into
England, to the intent the said Outlaw should inherit that Realm which
nevertheless came not to effect, by reason the said outlaw died before the
said king Edward, his Uncle.

After whose death the said king appointed Eadgar Adeling son of the said
Outlaw, (being his next cosen) to be his heir, (as he was of right) to the
Croune of England. And for that the said Eadgar was but of young and tender
years, and not able to take upon him so great a government: the said king
committed the protection, as well of the young Prince, as also of the Realm, to
Harold, Earl of Kent, until such time, as the said Eadgar had obtained perfect
age to be hable to welde the state of a king. Flor. bislo. 1066. Aelredus
Regional le^f. de reg. Angloru^ ad Regem Henr. ^.
Which Harold nevertheless contrary to the trust, supplanted the said young
Prince of the kingdom* and put the Croune upon his own head.

By this it is apparent, that foraine birth was not accounted, before the time
of the Conquest, to be a just cause to repel and reject any man, being of the
next proximitie in blood from the Title of the Croune. And though the said king
Edward the Confessors will and purpose took no such force and effect, King
Stephen. and King. H. 2.
as he desired, and the law craved: yet the like succession took place
effectuouslye in king Stephen and king Henry the second, as we have already
declared. Neither will the Adversaries shift of forainers borne of father and
mother, which be not of the kings allegiance, The adversaries fond imagination,
that H. 2. should come to the Croune by compositio^: not by proximitie of
blood. Rex Stephanus omni haerede viduatus, praeter solu^ modo Duce^ Henricum,
recognouit in conue^tu Episcoporu^ and aliorum de regno Optimatum quod Dux
Henr. ius haereditariu^ i^ regnu^ Angliae habebat. Et Dux benign concessit, vt
Rex Stephanus tota vita sua suu^ Regnu^ pacifice possideret. Ita tamen
confirmatu^ est pactu^, quod ipse Rex, and ipsi tunc praesentes cu^ caeteris
regni optimatibus iurare^t, quod Dux Henr. post morte^ Regis (si illum
super^iueret) regnum sine aliqua co^ntradictione obtineret. Flor. histo. An.
1153 The like fond imagination touching King Richardes nephew. Diversity of
opinions touching the uncle and nephue vvhetherof them ought to be preferred in
the royal gouuernement.
help them: forasmuch as this clause of the said statute is not to be applied
to the kings children, but to others, as appears in the same statute. And
these two kings, Stephen and Henry the.2. as they were borne in a forain
place: so their fathers and mothers were not of the kings allegiance, but mere
Aliens and strangers. And how notorious a vain thing it is, that the
Adversaries would persuade us, that the said King Henry the second rather came
in by force of a composition, then by the proximitie and nearenes of blood: I
leave it to every man to consider, that has any manner of feling in the
discourse of the stories of that realm. The composition did procure him quietness
and rest for the time, with a good and sure hope of quiet and peaceable
entrance also after the death of King Stephen. and so it followed in deed: but
there grew to him no more right thereby, than was due to him before. For he was
the true heir to the Croune, as appears by Stephen his Adversaries own
confession. Henry the first married his daughter Mathildis to Henry the
Emperor, by whom he had no children. And no dout in case she had had any
children by the Emperor, they should have been heirs by succession to the
Croune of England. After whose death she returned to her father: yet did king
Henry cause all the Nobility by an express oath, to embrace her after his
death as Queen, and afrer her, her children.

Not long after, she was married to Ieffrey Plantagenet a Frenchman borne, Earl
of Aniowe, who begat of her this Henry the second, being in France. Whereupon
the said king did revive and renew the like oath of allegiance, as well to her,
as to her son after her. With the like false persuasion the Adversaries
abuse them selves, and their Readers, touching Arthur Duke of Britanie,
Nephewe to king Richard the first. As though forsooth he were justly excluded
by king John his uncle, because he was a forainer borne. If they had said,
that he was excluded, by reason the uncle ought to be preferred before the
Nephewe, though it should have been a false allegation, and plain against the
rules of the laws of that Realm: (as may well appear, among other things by
king Richard the second who succeeded his grand father king Edward the third,
which Richard had diverse worthy and noble uncles, who neither for lack of
knowledge, could be ignorant of the right, neither for lack of friends,
courage and power, be enforced to forbear to chaleng their title and interest)
then should they have had some countenance of reason and probability, because
many arguments and the authority of many learned and notable Ciuilians do
concur for the uncles right, before the Nephewe.

But to make the place of the nativity of an inheritour to a kingdom, a
sufficient bar against the right of his blood, it seems to have but a weak
and slender hold and ground. And in our case it is a most unsure and false
ground, seeing it is most true, that King Richard the first (as we have
said) declared the said Arthur (borne in Britanie, and not son of a King, but
his brother Geffreys son, Duke of Britanie) to be heir apparent, his uncle
John yet living. And for such a one is he taken in all our stories. And for
such a one did all the world take him, after the said King Richard his death:
neither was King John taken for other, than for an usurper by excluding him:
and afterward for a murderer, for imprisoning him, and privily making him
away. The possessions of the Croune of England that were beyond the seas,
seized into the French kings hands for the murder of Arthur
For the which fact the French king seized upon all the goodly Countries in
France belonging to the king of England, as forfeited to him being the chief
Lord. By this outrageous deed of king John the kings of England lost
Normandy withal, and their possibility to the inheritance of all Britanie:
for the right and Title to the said Britanie was dew to the said Arthur and
his heirs by the right of his mother Consta^ce. And though the said king John,
by the practice and ambition of Queen Eleonour his mother, and by the special
procurement of Hubert then Archbishop of Caunterburie, and of some other
factious persons in England, prevented the said Arthur his nephew (as it was
easy for him to do) having gotten into his hands all his brother Richardes
treasures, besides many other rentes then in England: and the said Arthour
being an infant, and remaining beyond the sea in the custody of the said
Constance: yet of this fact, being against all Justice, as well the said
Archbishop, as also many of the other, did after most earnestly repent,
considering the cruel and the unjust putting to death of the said Arthur
procured and (after some Authors) committed by the said John himself. Polid
15. Flor histo. An. 1208
Which most foul and shameful act the said John neded not to have committed,
if by foraine birth the said Arthur had been barred to inherit the Croune of
England. And much less to have imprisoned that most innocent Lady Eleonour,
sister to the said Arthur, in Bristow Castle where she miserably ended her life:
if that gay Maxim would have served, to have excluded these two children,
because they were strangers borne in the parts beyond the seas. Yea, it
appears in other doings also of the said time, and by the story of the said
John, that the birth out of the allegiance of England, by father and mother
forain, was not taken for a sufficient repulse and reiection to the right and
title of the Croune. For the Barons of England, being then at dissension with
the said king John, and renouncing their allegiance to him, received Lewis the
eldest son of Philip the French king, to be their king, in the right of
Blanch his wife, which was a stranger borne, all be it the lawful Niece of the
said Richard, and daughter to Alpho^se king of Castil, begotten on the body of
Eleonour his wife, Lewis the French Kings son claimed the Croune of that
Realm in the title of his vvyf. Pro hereditate vxoris meae, scilicet neptis
Regis Ioanusque ad mortem si necessitas exigere, decertabo. Flor histo. Anno.
1216. Haroldus muneribus and genere fretus, regni diadema inuasiit. H. Hunte.
hist. Angli. lib. 6. Cui regnum iure hereditario debebatur Ealredus Rhiual in
histo. R. Angliae ad H. 2. Cui de iure debebatur regnu^ anglorum Io. Land. in
Chro. Angliae. Eade^ verba sunt in Math. VVestmon. in flor. hist. a. 1066.
What calamities fell to the Realm by the usurping of King Harolde, King
Stephen, and John. Rex Edwardus misit etc. vt vel ipse Eduardus filius ieus
sibi succedere^t etc. Rich. Cicest. vid. VVil. Malmest. de reg. Angl. E. 2 c.
4^. lib. 3. c. 5.
one of the daughters of king Henry the second, and sister to the said king
Richard and king John. Which story I allege only to this purpose, thereby to
gather the opinion of the time, that so rain birth was then thought no bar
in the Title of the Croune. For ortherwise, how could Lewis of France pretend
title to the Croune in the right of the said Blanch his wife borne in Spain?

These examples are sufficient, I suppose, to satisfy and content any man
(that is not obstinatly wedded to his own fond fantasies, and froward friuolus
imaginations, or otherwise worse depraved) for a good sure and substantial
interpretation of the common law. And it were not altogether from the purpose,
here to consider and weigh, with what and how grievous plagues that Realm has
been often afflicted and scourged, by reason of wrongful and usurped titles. I
will not revive by odious rehearsal the greatenes and number of the same
plagues, as well otherwise, as especially by the contention of the noble houses
and families of York and Lancaster: seeing it is so fortunately, and almost
within man's remembrance extinct and buried.

I will now put the gentle Reader in remembrance of those only, with whose
usurping Titles we are now presently in hand. And to begin with the most
ancient: what became, I pray you, of Harold, that by briberie and help of his
kindred, usurped the Croune against the foresaid young Eadgar, who (as I have
said, and as the old monuments of Historiographers do plainly testify) was the
true and lawful Heir? Could he, think you, enjoy his ambitious and naughty
usurping on whole entier year? No surely: ere the first year of his usurped
reign turned about, he was spoiled and turned out of both Croune, and his life
withal. Yea his vsurpatio^ occasioned the conquest of the whole realm by
VVillia^ Duke of Normandy, bastard son to Robert the sixth Duke of the same.
And may you think al safe and sound now from like danger, if you should tread
the said wrong steps with Harolde, forsaking the right and high way of law
and justice?

What shall I now speak of the cruel civil wars between king Stephen and
king Henry the second, which wars rose, by reason that the said Henry was
unjustly kept from the Croune, dew to his mother Maude, and to him afterward?
The pitiful reign of the said John who does not lament with the lamentable
loss of Normandy, Aquitaine, and the possibility of the Dukedom of
Britanie, and with the loss of other goodly possessions in France, whereof the
Croune of England was robbed and spoiled by the unlawful usurping of him
against his nephew Arthur? Well, let us leave these greuouse and loathsome
remembrances, and let us yet seek, if we may find any later interpretation,
either of the said statute, or rather of the common law for our purpose. And
lo, the great goodness and providence of God, who has (if the foresaid examples
would not serve) provided a later: but so good, so sure, apt and mete
interpretation for our cause, as any reasonable heart may desire. The
interpretation directly touches our case: I mean by the marriage of the Lady
Margaret (eldest daughter to King Henry the vij.) unto the fourth king James of
Scotland: and by the opinion of the same most prudent Prince in bestowing his
said daughter into Scotland: a matter sufficient enough, to overthrow all those
cauilling inue^tio^s of the adversaries. For what time King James the fourth
sent his Ambassador to King Henry the seventh to obtain his good will to
espouse the said Lady Margaret, Polid. 26.
there were of his Counsel, not ignorant of the laws and Customs of the
Realm, that did not well like upon the said Marriage, saying, it might so fall
out, that the right and title of the Croune might be deuolued to the Lady
Margaret and her children, and the Realm thereby might be subject to Scotland.
To the which the prudent and wise king answered, King. H. 7. with his
Counsel is a good interpretor of our present cause.
that in case any such deuolution should happen, it would be nothing
prejudicial to England. For England, as the chief, and principal, and
worthiest part of the I Will, should draw Scotland to it, as it did Normandy
from the time of the Conquest. Which answer was wonderfully well liked of all
the Counsel. And so consequently the Marriage took effect, as appears by
Polydor, the Historiographer of that Realm, and such a one, as wrote the
Acts of that time by the instruction of the king him self.

I say then, the worthy wise Solomon foreseeing that such deuolution might
happen, was an interpretour with his prudente and sage Counsel for our cause.
For else, they neaded not to reason of any such subjection to Scotland, if the
children of the Lady Margaret might not lawfully inherit the Croune of
England. For, as to her husband England could not be subject, having him self
no right by this marriage to the Title of the Croune of that Realm. Whereupon
I may well infer, that the said new Maxim of these men (whereby they would
rule, and over rule the succession of Princes) was not known to the said wise
king, neither to any of his Counsel: Or if it were, yet was it taken not to
reach to his blood royal borne in Scotland. And so on every side the Title
of my Sovereign Lady Queen Marie is assured. So that now by this that we have
said, it may easily be seen, by what light and slender consideration the
adversaries have gone about to strain the word Infantes or children to the
first degree only. Of the like weight is their other consideration imagining
and surmising, this statute to be made, because the king had so many occasions
to be so often over the sea with his spouse the Queen. As though diverse kings
before him used not often, to pass over the seas: As though this were a
personal statute made of a special purpose, and not to be taken as a
declaration of the common law. Which to say, is most directely repugnant and
contrary to the letter of the said statute: Or as though his children also did
not very often repair to outward Countries: The marriages of King E. 3. sons.
as John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancastre, that Married Peter's the king of Castiles
eldest daughter, by whose right he clamed the Croune of Castile: as his brother
Edmund Earl of Camhridge, that married the youngest daughter: as Lionell Duke of
Clarence, that married at Milaine Violant daughter and heir to Galeatius Duke of
Milan: But especialy Prince Edward, which most victoriously took in battle
John the French King, and brought him into England his prisoner, to the great
triumph and rejoicing of the realm, whose eldest son Edward (that died in
short time after,) was borne beyond the seas in Gascoine, and his other son
Richard (that succeeded his grandfather) was borne at Bordeaux. And as these
noble King Edwardes sons married with forainers: so did they give out their
daughters in marriage to foraine Princes, as the Duke of Lancaster, his daughter
Philip to the King of Portugal: and his daughter Catherin to the king of
Spain: and his Niece Johan, daughter to his son Earl of Somerset, was joined
in marriage to the king of Scotts: Johan, daughter to his brother Thomas of
wodstocke Duke of Gloucester was Queen of Spain: and his other daughter,
Marie, Duchess of Brita^nie.

Now by these men's interpretation, none of the issue of all these noble women
could have enjoyed the Croune of England, when it had fallen to them (though
they had been of the nearest roial blood) after the death of their Au^cestours.
Which surely had been against the ancient presidentes and examples that we
have declared, and against the common Law (the which must not be thought by
this Statute any thing taken away, but only declared) and against all good
reason also. For as the kings of England would have thought that Realm greatly
iniuried, if it had been defrauded of Spain or any of the foresaid countreies,
being deuolued to the same by the foresaid Marriages: so the issue of the
foresaid noble women might and would have thought them hardly and injuriously
handled, if any such case had happened. Neither such frivolous interpretations
and gloses, as these men now frame, and make upon the statute, would then
have served, nor now will serve.

A fond imagination of the Adversaries of the statute of 25. E. 3.
But of all other their frivolous and folish ghessing upon the clause of the
statute for Infantes de Roy, there is one most fond of all. For they would make
us believe, (such is their skill,) that this statute touching Infantes de Roy,
was made for the great doubt (more in them, than in other persons) touching
their inheritance to their Ancestors. For being then a Maxim (say they) in
the law, that none could inherit to his Ancestors being not of father and
mother under the obedience of the king: seeing the king him self could not be
under obedience: it plainly seemed, that the kings children were of far
worse condition, than others, and quite excluded. And therefore they say that
this statute was not to give them any other privilege, but to make them equal
with other. And that therefore this statute, touching the Kings children,
stands rather in the superficial part of the word, than in any effect.

Now, among other things they say (as we have showed before) that this word
Infantes de Roy in this statute mentioned, There was no doubt made of the
Kings children borne beyond the seas.
must be taken for the children of the first degree, which they seem to prove
by a note taken out of M. Rastal. But to this we answer, that these men swetely
dreamed when they imagined this fond and fantastical exposition: And that
they showed them selves very infants, in law and reason. For this was no
Maxim, or at least not so certain, before the making of this statute: which
gives no new right to the kings children, nor answers any doubt touching
them, and their inheritance: but this it says, that the law of the Croune of
England is, and always has been (which law, says the king, say the Lords,
say the Commons, we allow and affirm for ever) that the kings children
shall be hable to inherit the lands of their Auncesters, wheresoever they be
borne.

All the doubt was for other persons* (as appears evidently by the tenor of
the statute) whether by the common law they being born out of the allegiance of
the king, were heritable to their Ancestors. And it appears, that the
adversaries are driven to the hard wall, when they are feign to catch hold
upon a selie poor marginal note of M. Rastal, of the kings children, and not
of the kings childrens children. Which yet nothing at al serves their purpose
touching this statute. But they, or the Printer, or whosoever he be* as they
draw out of the text many other notes of the matter therein comprised: so upon
these French words, Les enfants de Roy, they note in the Margent, The Kings
Children: but how far that word reaches, they say neither more, nor less.

Neither it is any thing prejudicial to the said Queens right or Title,
whether the said words Infants, ought to be taken strictly for the first
degree, or farther enlarged. For if this statute touches only the succession
of the Kings children to their Ancestors for other inheritance, and not for
the Croune, as most men take it, and as it may be (as we have said) very well
taken and allowed: then does this supposed Maxim of forain borne, that
seems to be gathered out of this statute, nothing anoy or hinder the Queen
of Scotlandes Title to the Croune, as not thereto apperteining* On the other
side, if by the inheritance of the Kings children, the Croune also is meant:
yet neither may we enforce the rule of foraine borne upon the kings children,
which are by the express words of the statute excepted, neither enforce the
word Infants to the first degree only, for such reasons presidents, and
examples, and other proouffes largely by us before set forth to the contrary:
seeing that the right of the Croune falling upon the^, they may well be called
the kings Children, or at the lest the children of the Croune. There is also one
other cause why though this statute reach to the Croune, This statute touches
not the Q. of Scotland, as one not borne beyond the seas.
and may, and ought to be expounded of the same: the said Queen is out of the
reach and compass of the said statute. For the said statute can not be
understood of any persons borne in Scotland or wales, but only of persons
borne beyond the sea, out of the allegiance of the king of England: that is to
wit, France, Fla^dres, and such like For England, Scotland and wales be all
within one Territory, and not divided by any sea. And all old Records of the
law, concerning service to be done in those two Countries, have these words
Infra quatuor Maria within the four seas, which must needs be understand, in
Scotland and wales, as well as in England, because they be all within one
continent, compassed with four seas. And likewise be many ancient statutes of
that Realm written in the Normane French, which have these words, deins les
quatre mers, that is, within the four seas. Now concerning the statute, the
title of the same is, of those that are born beyond the sea: the doubt moved in
the corpse of the said statute, is also of children borne beyond the sea out of
the allegiance, Vide statuta VValliae in magna Charta. Wales was under the
allegiance of England before it was united to the Croune.
with diverse other branches of the statute tending that way. VVherby it
seems, that no part of the statute touches these that are born in Wales or
Scotland. And albeit at this time, and before in the reign of Edward the
first, Wales was fully reduced, annexed and united to the proper Dominion of
England: yet was it before subjected to the Croune and King of England, as to
the Lord and Seigniour. Wherefore if this statute had been made before the
time of the said Edward the first: it seems, that it could not have been
stretched to Wales, no more then it can now to Scotland. I do not therefore a
little marvel, that ever these men, for pure shame, could find in their
hearts so childishly to wrangle upon this word Infants, and so openly to
detort, deprave, and corrupt the common law, and the Acts of Parliament.

And thus may you see, gentle Reader, that nothing can be gathered, either out
of the said supposed general rule or Maxim, or of any other rule or
Principle of the law, that by any good and reasonable construction can seem
to impugn the title of my said soueraign Lady Mary now Queen of Scotland, of,
and to the Croune of the Realm of England, as is aforesaid.

We are therefore now last of all to consider, whether there be any statute or
act of Parliament, that does seem, either to take away, or prejudice the title
of the said Queen. And because touching the foresaid mentioned statute of the
25. year of King Edward the third, being only a declaration of the common
law, we have already sufficiently answered: we will pass it over, and
consider upon the statute of 28 and 35. of King Henrye the eight, being the
only shoteanker of all the Adversaries, whether there be any matter therein
contained or depending upon the same, that can by any means destroy or hurt
the title of the said Queen of Scotland to the succession of the Croune of
England.

The objections of the adversaries touching the pretensed will of King Henry
the eight are clearlie avoided.
The statutes of King H. 8. touching the succession of the Croune.
IT does appear by the said statute of.28. of king Henry the eight, that there
was authority given him by the same, to declare, limite, appoint, and assign
the succession of the Croune by his Letters Patentes, or by his last Will
signed with his own hand. It appears also by the foresaid statute made.35.
of the said King, that it was by the same enacted, that the Croune of that
Realm of England should go and be to the said King, and to the heirs of his
body lawfully begotten: that is to say, unto his Highness first son of his
body between him and the Lady Jane then his wife, begotten: and for default of
such issue, then unto the Lady Marie his daughter, and to the heirs of her
body lawfully begotten: and for defaut of such issue, then unto the Lady
Elizabeth his daughter, and to the heirs of her body laufully begotten: and
for defaut of such issue, unto such person or persons in remainder or
reuersion, as should please the said king Henry the eight, and according to
such estate, and after such manner, order and condition, as should be
expressed, declared, named and limited in his Letters Patentes, or by his last
Will in writing, signed with his own hand.

By virtue of which said Act of Parliament the Adversaries do allege, that
the said late King Henry the eight afterward by his last Will in writing
signed with his own hand, did ordeine and appoint, that if it happen, the said
Prince Edward, Lady Marie, and Lady Elizabethe to dye without issue of their
bodies lawfully begotten: then the Croune of that Realm of England should go
and remain unto the heirs of the body of the Lady Francis, his Niece, and
the eldest daughter of the French Queen: And for the defaulte of such issue,
to the heirs of the body of the Lady Eleonour, his Niece, second daughter to
the French Queen, lawfully begotten: And if it happened, the said Lady
Eleonour to dye without issue of her body lawfully begotten, to remain and
come to the next rightful heirs. Whereupon the adversaries do infer, that
the succession of the Croune ought to go to the children of the said Lady
Francis, and to their heirs, according to the said supposed will of the said
king Henry the eight: and not unto Lady Marie Queen of Scotland that now is.

To this it is, An answer to the foresaid statute.
on the behalf of my said soueraign Lady, Marie, Queen of Scotland, among
other things, answered, that King Henry the eight never signed the pretensed
will with his own hand: and that therefore the said will can not be any whit
prejudicial to the said Queen. The effect of the adversaries arguments for the
exclusion of the Queen of Scotland by a prete^sed vvil of King H. 8.
Against which answer for the defense and upholding of the said will, it is
replied by the Adversaries: first, that there were diverse copies of his will
found, signed with his own hand, or at the least wise enterlined, and some for
the most part written with his own hand: out of the which it is likely, that
the original will, commonly called King Henry the eightes will, was taken and
fayer drawn out. Then, that there be great and vehement presumptions, that,
for the fatherly love that he bare to the common wealth, and for the avoiding
of the uncertainty of the succession, he well liked upon and accepted the
authority given him by Parliament, and signed with his own hand the said
original will, which had the said limitation and assignation of the Croune.

And these presumptio^s are the more enforced, for that he had no cause, why he
should bear any affection either to the said Queen of Scotland, or to the
Lady Leneux: and having withal no cause to be grieved or offended with his
sisters, the French Queens children: but to put the matter quite out of all
ambiguitie and doubt, it appears (they say) that there were eleven witnesses
purposely called by the King, who were present at the signing of the said
Will, and subscribed their names to the same: Yea that the chief Lords of the
Counsel were made and appointed executours of the said Will, and that they
and other had great Legacies given them in the said Will, which were paid,
and other things, comprised in the Will, accomplished accordingly.

There passed also purchases, and Letters Patentes between King Edward, and the
executors of the said Will, and others, for the execution and performance of
the same. Finally the said Testament was recorded in the Chancerie. Wherefore
they affirm, that there ought no manner of doubt move any man to the
contrary, and that either we must grant this Will to be signed with his
hand, or that he made no Will at all: both must be granted, or both denied.
If any will deny it, in case he be one of the witnesses, he shall impugn his
own testimony: if he be one of the executours, he shall overthrow the
foundation of all his doings, in procuring the said will to be enrolled, and
set forth under the great Seal. And so by their dublenes they shall make them
selves no mete witnesses.

Now a man can not lightly imagine, how any other, bysids these two kind of
witnesses (for some of them, and of the executors, were such, as were
continually waiting upon the kings person) may impugn this will, and prove,
that the king did not sign the same. But if any such impugn the will, it
would be considered, how many they are, and what they are: and it will be very
hard to prove negatiuam facti. But it is euide^te, say they, that there was
never any such lawful proof against the said will producted. For if it had been, it would have been published in the Starrechamber, preached at Poules
Cross, declared by Act of Parlame^t, proclaimed in every quarter of the
Realm. Yea, admitting, say they, that it were proved, that the said pretensed
will lacked the kings hand: yet nevertheless (say they) the very copies we
have spoken of, being written and signed, or at least interlined with his own
hand, may be said a sufficient signing with his own hand.

For seeing the scope and final purpose of the statute was, to have the
succession provided for, and asserteined, which is sufficiently done in the
said will: and seeing his own hand was required but only for eschewing evil
and sinister dealing, whereof there is no suspicion in this will to be
gathered: what matter in the world, or what difference is there, when the king
fulfilled and accomplished this gratiouse Act, that was looked for at his
hands, whether he signed the will with is own hand, or no?

If it be objected, that the king was obliged and bound to a certain precise
order and form, which he could in no wise shift, but that the Act without it
must perish, and be of no valewe: then, say they, we undo whole Parlamentes,
as well in Queen Mary's time, as in kings Henry the eightes time. In Queen
Mary's time, because she omitted the Style appointed by Parlamente, Anno
Henrici octaui tricesimo quinto: An. H. 8.35. An. H. 8.33. and 21.
In king Henry's time, by reason there was a statute, that the kings royal
assent may be given to an Act of Parlamente by his Letters Patentes signed
with his hand, though he be not there personally. And yet did the said king
supply full often his consent by the stamp only. This yet notwithstanding,
the said Parlamentes for the omission of these forms so exactely and precisely
appointed, are not destroyed and disannulled.

An answer by the way of reioinder to the same.
After this sort in effect have the Adversaries replied for the defense of the
said pretensed will. To this we will make our reioynder, and say: First, that
our principal matter is not to join an issewe, whether the said king made
and ordained any sufficient will, or no. We leave that to an other time. But,
whether he made any Testament, in such order and form, as the statute
requires. Wherefore if it be defective in the said form, as we affirm it
to be, were it otherwise never so good and perfect, though it were exemplified
by the great Seal, and recorded in Chancerie, and taken commonly for his VVil,
and so accomplished: it is nothing to the principal question. It rests then
for us to consider the weight of the adversaries presumptions whereby they
would enforce a probability that the Testament had the foresaid requisite
form. Yet first, it is to be considered, what presumptions, and of what force
and number, do occur to avoid and frustrate the Adversaries presumptions,
and all other like.

Diverse presumptions and reasons against this supposed will.
We say then, there occur many likelyhoddes many presumptions, many great and
weighty reasons, to make us to think, that as the king never had good and
just cause, to mind and enterprise such an Act, as is pretended: so
likewise he did enterprise no such Act in deed. I deny not, but that there was
such authority given him: neither I deny, but that he might also in some
honorable sort have practiced the same, to the honor and wealth of the
Realm, and to the good contentation of the same Realm. But that he had either
cause, or did exercise the said authority in such strange and dishonorable
sort, as is pretended: I plainly deny. For being at the time of this
prete^sed will furnished and adorned with issue, the late king Edward, and the
Ladies Marie, and Elizabeth, their state and succession being also lately by
Act of Parliament established: what need or likelyhod was there, for the king
then to practice such new devises, as never did, I suppose, any King in that
Realm before, and few in any other byside? And where they were practiced,
commonly had unfortunate and lamentable success.

What likelyhode was there, for him to practice such devises, especially in
his later days (when wisdom, the love of God, and his Realm should have been
most ripe in him) that were likely to stir up a greater fire of greeuouse
contention and woeful destruction in England, then ever did the deadly faction
of the read Rose and the white, lately by the incorporation and union of the
house of York and Lancastre, in the person of his father through the marriage
of Lady Elizabeth, eldest daughter of King Edward the fourth, most happily
extinguished and buried? And though it might be thought or said, that there
vould be no such cause of fear, by reason the matter passed by Parliament: yet
could not he be ignorant, that neither Parlame^ts made for Henry the fourth, or
continuance of two Descentes (which took no place in giving any Title touching
the Croune) in King Henry the sixth: nor Parlamentes made for King Richard the
third, nor Parlaments of attainder made against his father, could either
prejudice his fathers right, or releaue other against such, as pretended just
right and title.

And as he could not be ignorant thereof: so it is not to be thought, that he
would abuse the great confidence put upon him by the Parliament, and disherite
without any apparent cause the next roial blood, and think all things sure by
the color of Parlame^t: The little force whereof against the right inheritour,
he had (to his fathers and his own so ample benefit) so lately and so largely
seen and felt. And yet if he minded at any time, to prejudice the said Lady
Marie Queen of Scotland, of all times he would not have done it then, when all
his care was, by all possible means to contriue and compass a marriage,
between his son Edward, and the said Lady and Queen. Surely he was to wise
of him self, and was furnished with to wise Counsailours, to take such an
homely way, to procure and purchase the said marriage by.

And least of all can we say he attempted that dishonorable disherison for any
special inclination or favor he bare to the French Queen, his sisters
children. For there have been of his near and privy Counsel, that have
reported, that the King never had any great liking of the marriage of his sister
with the Duke of Suffolk, who married her first privily in France, and
afterward openly in England: And, as it is said, had his pardon for the said
privy marriage in writing. Howesoeuer this matter goes, certain it is, that if
this pretensed will be true, he transferred and transposed the reuersion of the
Croune, not only from the Queen of Scotland, from the Lady Leneux and their
issue, but even from the Lady Francis, and the Lady Eleonour also, daughters
to the French Queen, which is a thing in a manner incredible, and therefore
nothing likely.

I must now, gentle Reader, put thee in remembrance of two other most pregnant
and notable co^iectures and presumptions. For among all other inconveniences,
and absurdities, that do, and may accompany this rash and unadvised act by
this pretensed will inconsiderately maintained: it is principally to be noted,
The supposed will is prejudicial to the Croune of England for the clame of the
Croune of France.
that this Act gives apparent and just occasion of perpetual disherison of
the Style and Title of France incorporated and united to the Croune of England.
For whereby do or have the Frenchemen hitherto excluded the kings of that
Realm, claming the Croune of France by the title of Edward the third, fallen
upon him by the right of his mother, other than by a politic and civil law of
their own, that barreth the female from the right of the Croune? And what
does this pretensed Act of king Henry, but justify and strengthen their
quarrel, and overthrow the foundation and bulworke, whereby the kings of England
maintene their foresaid title and clame? For if they may by their municipial
law of England exclude the said Queen of Scotland, being called to the Croune
by the Title of general heritage: then is the municipial law of France
likewise good and effectual: and consequently the kings of England have made
all this while an unjust and wrongful clame to the Croune of France.

But now to go somewhat further in the matter, or rather to come nearer home,
and to touch the quick, we say: as there was some apparent and good cause,
why the king should the twenty and eight year of his reign think upon some
limitation and appointement of the Croune (king Edward as yet unborn:) so
after he was borne, and that the Title and interest of the reuersion of the
Croune after him was the thirty and fifte year by Parliament confirmed to the
late Queen Marie and her sister Queen Elizabeth: it is not to be thought,
that he would afterward ieoparde so great a matter by a Testament and will,
which may easily be altered and counterfeyted: and least of all make such
assignation of the Croune, as is now pretended.

For being a Prince of such wisdom and experience, he could not be ignorant,
that this was the next and rediest way, to put the state at least of both his
daughters to great peril and utter disherison. This supposed will gives
occasion of ambitious aspiring.
For the Kings example and boldness in interrupting and cutting away so many
branches of the nearest side and line, might soon breed in aspiring and
ambitious hearts a bold and wicked attempt, the way being so far brought in
and prepared to their hands by the King him self: and their natures so
ready and prone to follow evil presidents, and to clime high by some
colorable means or other, to spoil and deprive the said daughters of their
right of the Croune, that should descend and fall upon them, and to convey the
same to the heirs of the said Lady Francis. And did not, I pray you, this
drift and devise fall out even so, tending to the utter exclusion of the late
Queen Marie, and her Sister Queen Elizabeth: if God had not repressed and
overthrown the same?

These reasones then and presumptions may seem well able and sufficient, to
bear down, to break down and overthrow the weak and slender presumptions
of the Adversaries, grounded upon uncertain and mere surmises, ghesses and
co^iectures: as among other that the king was offended with the Queen of
Scotland, and with the Lady Leneux. Which is not true. And as for the Lady
Leneux, it has no manner of probability: as it has not in deed in the said
Queen. And if it had: yet it is as probable, and much more probable, that the
king would have especially at that time (for such cause, as we have declared)
suppressed the same displeasure. Granting now, that there were some such
displeasure: was it honorable, either for the King, or the Realm: or was it,
think ye, ever thought by the Parliament, that the king should disherite them
for every light displeasure? And if (as the Adversaries confess) the king had
no cause to be offended with the French Queens children: why did he disherite
the Lady Francis, and the Lady Eleonor also?

Their other presumption, which they ground, upon the avoiding of the
uncertainty of the succession, by reason of his will, is of small force and
rather turns against them. For it is so far of, that by this means the
succession is made more certain and sure: as contrariwise it is subject to
more uncertainty, and to less suertie, than before. Succession to the Croune
more uncertain by the supposed will, than before.
For whereas before, the right and clame to the Croune hong upon an ordinary
and certain course of the common law, upon the certain and assured right of
the royal and unspotted blood, yea upon the very law of nature, whereby many
inconveniences, many troubles, dangers and seditions are in all Countries
politikely avoided: so now depending upon the statute only, it is as easy by
an other statute to be infringed and overthrown: and depending upon a
Testament, it is subject to many corruptions, sinister dealinges, cauillations,
yea and just overthrows, by the dishabilitie of the Testatours witnesses, or
the Legatorie himself, or for lack of dew order to be observed, or by the
death of the witnesses unexamined, and for many other like co^sideratio^s. The
Monuments of all antiquity, Much forgerie and counterfeyting of Testame^ts.
the memory of al ages, and of our own age, and daily experience can tell and
show us many lamentable examples of many a good and lawful Testament, by
undue and crafty means, by false and suborned witnesses, by the covetous
bearing and maintenance of such as be in authority, quite undone and
overthrown. Wherefore Valerius Maximus cries out against M. Crassus,
Valerius Maximus dict. et fa. lib. 9. 6. 4.
and Q Horiensius: Lumina Curiae, ornamenta Fori, quod ^celus vindicare
debebant, inhonesti lucri captura inuitati, authoritatibus suis texerunt. This
presu^ption then of the Adversaries rather makes for us, and ministers to us
good occasion, to think, that the king would not hasard the weight and
importance of such a matter, to rest upon the validity or inualiditie of a
bare Testament only.

By this that we have said we may probably gather, that the King had no cause
to adventure so great an interprise by a bare will and Testament. Ye shall now
hear also, why we think he did never attempt or enterprise any such thing. It
is well known, the King was not wont lightly to ouerslippe the occasion of
any great commodity presently offered. And yet this notwithstanding, having
given to him by Act of Parliament the ordering and disposition of all Chantries
and Colleges, he did never or very little practice and execute this authority.
And shall we think, unless full and sufficient proof necessarily enforce
creditte, that the King, to his no present commodity and advantage, but yet to
his great dishonor, and to the great obloquie of his subjects and other
Countries, to the notable disherison of so may the next royal blood, did use
any such authority, as is surmised?

Again, if he had made any such assignation: who doubts, but that as he
co^ditioned in the said pretensed will with his noble daughters, In this
supposed will is no condition for the marriage of the heirs of the L. Francis,
as is for the Kings own daughters.
to marie with his Counsels advise, either else not to enjoy the benefitte of
the succession: he would have tied the said Lady Francis and Lady Eleonours
heirs to the same condition.

Further more, I am driven to think, that there passed no such limitation by
the said king Henry's will, by reason there is not, nor was these many years
any original copy thereof, nor any authentical Record in the Cha^cerie, or else
where to be showed in all England, as the Adversaries them selves confess: And
in the copies that be spread abroad, the witnesses pretended to be present at
the signing of the said will, be such, for the meanness of their state on the
one side, and for the greatness and weight of the cause on the other side, as
seem not sufficient in such a case.

The importance of the cause, being no less than the disherison of so many
heirs of the Croune (as well from the one sister, as from the other) required
and craved some one or other of the privy Caunsaile, or some one honorable and
notable person to have been present at the said signing: or that some
notificatio^ should have been made afterward to such persons by the King him
self, or at least before some Notarie and authe^tical person for the better
strengthening of the said will.

Here is now further to be considered, that (seeing the interest to the Croune
is become a plain testamentarie matter and clame, and depends upon a last
will) when, and before what Ordinary this will was exhibited, allowed and
proved? Where, and of whom took the Executours their oath for the true
performance of the will? No order taken for the probate of the supposed will.
Who committed to them the administration of the kings goods and chattles?
When, and to whom have they brought in the Inuentory of the same? Who
examined the witnesses upon their oath, for the tenor and truth of the said
Testament? Namely upon the signement of the kings hand, wherein only
consists the weight of no less, then of the Croune it self: where, or in
what spiritual or temporal Court may one find their depositions? But it were a
very hard thing to find that, that (as far as men can learn) never was.

And yet if the matter were so plain, so good and so sound, as these men bear
us in hand: if the original Testement had been such, as might have bidden the
touchstone, the trial, the light and the sight of the world: why did not
they, that enjoyed most commodity thereby (and, for the sway and authority
they bare, might and ought best to have done it) take convenient and sure
order, that the original might have been duly and safely preserved: or at
least, the ordinary Probate (which is in every poor man's Testament diligently
observed) might have been procured or seen, by one or other authentical
Instrument thereof reserved? The Adversaries them selves see well enough, yea and
are feign to confess these defectes. The enrolement in the chancerie is not a
probate.
But to help this mischief, they would feign have the Enrolment in the
Chancerie to be taken for a sufficient Probate, because (as they say) both the
spiritual and temporal authority did co^curre in the kings person.

Yet do they know well enough, that this plaster will not cure the sore, and
that this is but a poor help and a shift. For neither the Letters Patents,
nor the Enrolment may in any wise be counted a sufficient Probate. The
Chancerie is not the Court or ordinary place for the probate of wills, nor
the Rolls for recording the same. Both must be done in the Spiritual Courts:
where the executours also must be impleaded, and give their account: where the
weakness or strengh of the will must be tried, the witnesses examined, finally
the probate, and al other things thereto requisite, dispatched. Or if it may
be done by any other person: yet must his authority be showed. The probate
and all things must be done accordinglye. And among other things the usual
clause of Saluo iure cuiuscu^que, must not be omitted. Which things, I am
assured, the recording in the Chancerie cannot import.

But this caution and prouiso of Saluo iure cuiuscunque (which is most
conformable to all law and reason) did little serve some men's turn. And
therefore there was one other caution and prouiso: that though the poorest man's
Testament in all England has this prouiso at the probate of the same: yet for
this Testament, the weightiest, I trow, that ever was made in England, no such
probate or clause can be found, either in the one, or the other Court. Yet we
needs must, all this notwithstanding, be borne in hand, and borne down, that
there was a Testament and will, formably framed, according to the purpose and
effect of the statute: yet must the right of the imperial Croune of England be
conveyed and carried away with the color and shadow only of a will. I say, the
shadow only, by reason of an other conjecture and presumption, which I shall
tell you of. Which is so lively and effectual, that I verily suppose, it will
be very hard for any man, by any good and probable reason, to answer and
avoid the same: And is so important and vehement, that this only might seem,
utterly to destroy all the Adversaries coniectural prooffes, concerning the
maintenance of this supposed will.

We say therefore and affirm, that in case there had been any good and sure
help and handfast, to take and hold the Croune for the heirs of Lady Francis
by the said will: that the faction, that unjustly intruded the Lady Jane,
eldest daughter to the said Lady Francis to the possession of the Croune, would
never have omitted to take, receive and embrace the occasion and benefit thereof
to them presently offered. They neither would, nor could have been driven, to
so hard and bare a shifte, as to color their usurpation against the Late
Queen Marie only, and her Sister Queen Elizabeth, with the Letters Patents of
King Edward the sixth, and with the consent of such as they had procured. A
great presu^ption against the supposed will, for that the late pretensed Q.
Jane did not use the benefit of the same against the Q. of Scotland and others.
Which king by law had no authority (as it is notorious) to make any
limitation and assignation of the Croune otherwise than the common law does
dispose it. It was need for them, I say, as they procured such Letters
Patentes, so to have set forth also the said pretensed will, if there had been
then any such will in deed sufficiently and dewly to be proved, as is now
surmised there was. The Record of the said surmised will was in the Chancerie,
which they might have used with the pretensed witnesses, and with the original
prete^sed will, and with all other things thereto belonging, to their best
advantage. It can not be thought, that either they were ignorant of it, or that
they would forbear and forgo so great a commodity offered, and such a
plausible pretext of their pretensed usurpation, bearing the countenance and
authority of the kings will, and of the whole Parliament, for the exclusion of
the Queen of Scotland and others of the nerer royal blood. Neither can it be
said, that the Letters Pate^tes were made, as it were for a stronger
corroboration and confirmation only of the said pretensed will: See the
proclamation made the x. of Iulie the first year of her pretensed reign.
for that there is not so much as one word in their whole pretensed letters
patents for the supposed right of the said Lady Ian, by the force of that
surmised will: whereby it might any thing appear, that king Henry the eight
made any manner of limitation or assignatio^ of the Croune to the heirs of the
Lady Francis. Whereupon it may well be gathered, that either they knew of no
such limitation to the children of the Lady Francis by the said supposed will:
or took it to be such, as could give no good and lawful force and strength,
to aid and maintain their usurpation for the manifest forgerye of the same.
And therefore they purposely (for, ignorance can not be pretended in them) kept
back and suppressed in the said Letters Patentes this pretensed limitation
surmised to be made for the children of the said Lady Francis. Which
neuethelesse the Adversaries do now with so great and vehement asseueration
blow into al men's ears: yet is it utterly rejected and overthrown, if it
were by nothing else than by these letters pate^ts for the pretensed title of
the said Lady Jane. So that we need to travail no further for any more proof
against the said asseueration.

But yet in case any man do look for any other and more persuasion and proof,
which, as I said, need not: o the great providence of God, o his great favor
and goodness to that Realm, of the which it has been said: Polid. li. 8
Regnum Angliae, est regnum, Dei, and that God has ever had a special care of
it: o his great goodness, I say, to this Realm even in this case also. For he
has opened and brought to light the very truth of the matter, which is burst
out, though never so craftily supressed and kept under. We say then, that the
King never signed the pretensed will with his own hand: neither do we say it
by bare hearsay, or gather it by our former conjectures and presumptions only,
though very effectual and probable: but by good and hable witnesses, that
auouche and justify, of their own certain knowledge, that the Stamp only
was put to the said will, and that even when the King him self was now dead, or
dyeing and past all remembrance.

The forgerie of this supposed will disclosed before the Parliament by the L.
Paget.
The Lord Paget being one of the privy Counsel with Queen Marie, of his
own free will and godly motion, for the honor of the Realm, for reverence of
truth and justice (though in the fact him self perhaps culpable, but
thereto by great authority forced,) did first of all men disclose the matter,
first to the said Counsel, and then before the whole Parliament. Sir Edward
Mountegue also the chief Justice, that was privy and present at the said
doings, did confess the same, as well before the Counsel, as before the
Parliament. Yea, William Clarke, (ascribed among other pretensed witnesses)
confessed the premises to be true. And that him self put the stamp to the
said will, and afterward purchased his Charter of pardon for the said fact.

Upon the which depositions well and advisedly weighed and pondered, Queen
Marie with the advice of her Counsel, to the honor of God, and that Realm,
to the maintenance of truth and justice, and the rightful succession of the
Croune, for the eschewing of many foul mischieffes, that might upon that
forgerie ensue, A worthy deed for a Prince to cancel false Records.
caused the Record of the said forged will remaining in the Chancerie, to be
cancelled, defaced and abolished, as not worthy to remain among the true and
sincere Records of that noble Realm. Which her noble fact deserves
immortality of eternal praise and fame, no less, than the fact of the
Romans that abolished the name and memory of the Tarquinians, for the foul
act of Sextus Tarquinius in defiling Lucretia: No less, than the fact of the
Ephesians, Cicero. 3. offic.
who made a law, that the name of the wicked Herostratus should never be
recorded in the books of any their Historiographers: Sueton. de viris
illustrib.
No less tha^ the fact of the family of the Manlians at Rome, taking a
solemn oath, that none among them should ever be called Capitolinus, because
M. Manlius Capitolinus had sought to oppress his Country with tyranny. And
to come nerer home, no less than in England their forefathers deserved, Bed.
lib. 3. histor. Ecclesiast. c. i.
which quite rased out of the years and times the memory and name of the
wicked Apostates Osricus and Eanfridus, numbering their time under the reign of
the good King Oswald.

The adversaries therefore are much to be blamed, going about to stain and
blotte the memory of the said Queen and Magistrates, as though they had done
this thing disorderly, and as though there had been some special commodity
therein to them: which is apparently falfe. For as the said abolition was
nothing beneficial to other Magistrates: so if it had been a true and an
undoubted will, the said Queen vould never have caused it to be cancelled, as
well for her honor and conscience sake, as for private respect, seeing her
own royal estate was by the same set forth and confirmed. Yet would they
feign blemish and disgrace the testimony of the said Lord Paget, and S.
Edward Mountague. They set against them eleven witnesses, thinking to match
and ouermatche them with the number.

But here it must be remembered, that though they be eleven, yet they are too
slender and weak for the weight and importance of the matter. It is again to
be remembered, that often times the law does as well weigh the credit, as
number the persons of the witnesses. Alias (says Calistratus) numerus, alias
dignitas and authoritas confirmat rei, L. testiu^. ff. de testibus. L. Ob
carmen ibid.
de qua agitur, fidem. According to this, says also Archadius: Confirmabit
Iudex motum animi sui ex argumentis and testimoniis, quae rei aptiora, and vero
proximiora esse compererit. Non enim ad multitudinem respicere oportet, sed ad
sinceram testimoniorum fidem and testimonia, quibus potius lux veritatis
assistit.

It has not lightly been heard or seen, that men of such state and vocation
in so great and weighty a cause would incur first the displeasure of God,
then of their Prince, and of some other of the best sort, if their depositions
were untrue: and would purchase them selves dishonor, slander and infamy:
yea disclose their own shame to their own no manner of way hoped commodity,
nor to the commodity of other their friends, No just cause to repel the
testimony of the L. Paget and ohers.
or discommoditie and hurt of their enemies. This sufficently does purge them
from all sinister suspicion for this their deposition and testimony: their
deposition proceeding, as it plainly seems, from no affection, corruption or
partiality, but from a zeal to the truth, and to the honor of the Realm.
And though perchance, if they had been thereof iudicialy convicted and
condemned, and had not by dew penance themselves reformed: some exceptions
might have been laid against them by any party iudiciallye conuented for his
better advantage: yet as the case stands now, L. Famosi ff. and l. Tul.
maies. l. muliere. ff. de accusat.
there is no cause in the world, to discredit their testimony: yea and by the
way of accusation also, such persons, as be otherwise dishabled, are in
treason and other public matters, touching the state, enhabled both to accuse,
and testify.

As for the eleven witnesses, the best of them Sir John Gates, we know, by what
means he is departed out of this life. One other, the said William Clarke is
so gone from them, that he gives good cause, to misdeeme and mistrust the
whole matter. How many of the residue live, I know not. To whom perchance
some thing might be said, if we once know, what them selves say. Which seeing
it does not by authentical record appear, bare names of dumme witnesses can
in no wise hinder and deface so solemn a testimony of the foresaid L. Paget
and Sir Edward Mountague. Neither is the difficulty so great, as the
Adversaries pretend, How a negative may be proved.
in proving Negatiuam facti. Which as we grant it to be true, when it
stands within the limits of a mere negative: so being restraigned and
referred to time and place, may be as well proved, as the affirmative. It
appears now then by the premises: Gloss. and Doct. c. bona de elect.
that the Adversaries arguments, whereby they would weaken and discredit the
testimony, either of the witnesses, or of the executours, that have or may
come in against the said pretensed will, are but of small force and strength.
And especially their sle^der exaggeration by a superficial Rhetorike enforced.
Whereby they would abuse the ignorance of the people, and make them believe,
that there was no good and substa^tial prooffe brought forth against the
forgerie of this supposed will, because the untruth of the same was not
preached at Poules Cross, and declared in all open places and assembles through
the Realm: when they know well enough, that there was no necessity so to do.
And that it was notoriously known, by reason it was disclosed by the said
Lord Paget, as well to the Counsel, as to the higher and lower house of the
Parliament. And the foresaid forged Record in the Chancerie thereupon worthily
defaced, and abolished. The disclosing whereof, seeing it came forth by such,
and in such sort and order, as we have specified: as it does nothing deface or
blemish the testimony given against the said supposed will, whether it were of
any of the witnesses, or executours: so is there no need at all, why any other
witnesses, bysides those that have already impugned the same, should be now
farther producted.

How and when the later testimony is to be accepted before the former.
I deny not, but that if any such witness or executour had upon his oath
before a lawful Judge, deposed of his own certain notice and knoweledge,
that the said will was signed with the Kings own hand: in case he should
afterward co^tratrie and revoke this his solemn deposition, it ought not
lightly to be discredited for any such contradiction afterward happening. But,
as I have said, such authentical and ordinary examinatio^s and depositio^s we
find not, nor yet hear of any such so passed. Now contrariwise if any of the
said witnesses or executours have or shall before a competent Judge, especially
not producted of any party, or against any party for any private suit
comme^ced, but, as I have said, moved of conscience only, and of a zeal to
truth, and to the honor of God and the Realm, freely and voluntarily
discover and detecte such forgerie (although perchance it touches them selves
for some thing done or said of them to the contrary,) or being called by the
said co^petent Judge, have or shall declare and testify any thing against the
same: this later testimony may be well credited by good reason and law.

Whereas they would now infer, that either this pretensed will was King
Henry's will, or that he made none at all: I do not (as I have said) entende,
nor need not curiously to examine and discuss this thing, as a matter not
apperteining to our principal purpose. And well it may be, that he made a will
containing the whole tenor of this pretensed will (saving for the limitation
of the Croune) and that these supposed witnesses were present, either when he
subscribed the same with his own hand, or when by his commandment the Stamp
(of which and of his own hand, the common sort of men make no difference, as
in deed in diverse other cases there is no difference, which these witnesses
might take to be as it were his own hand) was set to the will.

This, I say, might after some sort so be. And yet this notwithstanding there
might be (as there was in deed) an other will touching the pretensed
limitation of the Croune by the Kings own hand counterfeyted and suborned
after his death falsely and colourably, bearing the countenance of his own
hand, and of the pretensed witnesses names. How so ever it be, it is but to
small purpose, to go about any full and exquisite answer touching this point,
seeing that neither the original surmised will, whereof these witnesses are
supposed to be privy is extant: nor their depositions any where appear: nor
yet that it appears, that ever they were (as we have said) iudicially
examined.

Seeing now then, that if it so falls out, that the principal will, and that
which was by the great Seal exemplified, and in the Chancery recorded, had
not (at least touching the clause of limitation and assignement of the Croune)
the Kings hand to it: we need not, nor will not tarry about certain scrolles
and copies of the said will, that the Adversaries pretend to have been either
written, or signed with his hand. A kingdom is to heavy to be so easily carried
away by such scrolles and copies. When all this fails, the Adversaries have
yet one shift left for the last cast. They urge the equity of the matter and
the mind of the Parliament. Which is, they say, accomplished and satisfied, by
making this assignatio^ for the establishing of the succession, and providing,
that the Realm should not be left void of a Governor. And therefore we must
not subvert the statute, in cauilling for the defect of the Kings hand:
forasmuch as the Parliament might have had authorized his consent only, without
any hand writing. Which as I do not deny, so in these great affairs and so
ample a commission, in such absolute authority given to him, it was
prouidently and necessarily foresene, to bind the Act to the Kings own hand,
for avoiding al sinister and evil dealing, the which the Adversaries would
have us in no case to misdoubt or mistrust in this will. Whereas the
notoriousnes of the fact, and the lamentable eue^t of things do openly declare
the same, and pitifully cries out against it.

Neither will we grant to them, that the mind and purpose of the Parliament is
satisfied, for such causes, as we have and shall hereafter more largely
declare. And if it were otherwise true: yet does this only defect of the Kings
hand break and infringe the whole Act. Why the stamp can not counteruaile
the Kings hand in this case.
For this is a statute correctorie, and derogatorie to the common course of the
law, as cutting away the succession of the lawful and true inheritours. It is
also, as appears by the tenor of the same, a most greuouse penal law, and
therefore we may not shift or alter the words of the law, Neither may we
supply the manner and doing of the act prescribed, by any other act
equivalent. So that albeit in some other thing the Stamp or the Kings
certain and known consent may counterpaise his hand: yet, as the case
stands here, it will not serve the turn, by reason there is a precise order
and form prescribed and appointed. VVerfore if by a statue of a City, Joan
Andr. in adit. specul tit. derequisit consul ad finem.
there be certain persons appointed to do a certain act, and the whole
people do the same act in the presence of the said persons: the act by the
judgment of learned Ciuilians is vicious, and of no valewe: yea though the
reason of the law cease, yet must the form be observed. For it is a rule and
a maxim, that where the law appoints and prescribes a certain platform,
L. Si fundus ff. de rebus eorum: c. de rebus Ecclesiae in 6.
whereby the Act must be bound and tied: in that case though the reason of the
law cease, yet is the act void and naught.

And whereas the Adversaries obiecte against this rule, the Parlamentes made by
Queen Marie, An answer to the adversaries, touching Acts of Parliament
alleged to prove, that the Kings own hand was not necessary to the
supposed vvil.
without the usual style called and somoned: this objection may sone be
answered. For it may sone appear to all them, that read and pervse the said
statute of Anno 35. Henrici octaui, containing the said style, that by any
especial words therein mentioned, it is not there limited and appointed, that
the form of the style therein set forth should be observed in every writ.
And therefore not to be compared unto the said statutes of 28. and 35. Henrici
octaui, wherein by special words one express form and order for the limiting
of the succession of the Croune by the King, is declared and set forth.

Bysides that, the said writtes being made both according to the ancient form
of the Regester, and also by express commandment of the Prince, utterly
refusing the said style, could neither be derogatorie to the said Queens
Majesty and her Croune, nor meaning of the said statute. Concerning the said
style, and for a final and full answer unto this matter: it is to be noted,
that the writtes being the Acts of the Court, though they want the prescript
form set forth either by the common law, or statute: yet are not they, nor
the judgments subsequent there upon abated or void, but only abatable and
voidable by exception of the party by iudgeme^te of the the Court. 18. E. 3.
fo 30. 3. H. 4 fol. 3. and 11. 11. H. 4. fol. 67. 9. H. 6. fol. 6. 19. H. 6 fo.
7. and 10 35. H. 6. fo. 12. 10. H. 6. fol. 16. 3. H. 6 fo. 8. 33. E. 3. fo. 13.
Vide Prisot. 33. H. 6. fol. 35.
For if the party without any exception do admit the form of the said
VVritte, and plead unto the matter, whereupon the Court does proceed: then does
the VVritte, and the judgment there upon following remanine good and effectual
in law. And therefore admiting, that the said statute of 35. H. 8. had by
special words appointed the said style to be put in every VVritte, and that
for that cause the said VVritts of Somons were vicious, wanting their prescript
form: yet when the parties unto the said VVrittes had admitted them for good,
both by their election, and also by their appearence upon the same: the law
does admit the said VVrittes, and al acts subsequent upon the same, to be good
and effectual. And yet this makes no prooffe, that therefore the said supposed
will, wanting the prescript order and form, should likewise be good and
effectual in law.

For as touching specialties, estates and conueiances, or any other external
act to be done or made by any person, whose form and order is prescribed,
either by the common law, or by statute: 9. H. 6. fol. 35. 35. H. 6. fo. 34.
40. E. 3. fol. 2.
if they want any part of their prescript form, they are accounted in law to
be of no validity or effect. As for example: the law does appoint every
Specialtie or Deed to be made, either in the first person, or in the third
person. Therefore if part of a Deed be made in the first person, and the
residue in the third person: that Deed is not effectual, but void in the Law.
Bysides that, the law has appointed, 40. E. 3. fol. 35. 21. E. 4. fo. 97 7.
H. 7. fo. 15.
that in every Deed mentioned should be made, that the party has put to his
Seal to the same. If therefore any Deed does want that special clause and
mention, although the party in deed has put his Seal unto the same: yet is
that Deed or Specialtie void in law.

So likewise the law gives authority to the Lord, to distraine upon the land
holden of him for his rentes and services due for the same. And farther does
appoint, to carry or drive the same distress unto the pound, there to remain
as a gage in law for his said rentes and services. 9. E. 4. fol. 2. 22. E. 4
fo. 47. 29. H. 6. fo. 6. 29. lib. Assis. P. 64.
If the Lord shall either distraine his Tenant out of his Fee or Seignory, or if
he shall labor and occupy the Chatles distrained: the distress so taken by
him is injurious and wro^gful in law, forasmuch as he has not done according
to the prescribed order of the law. The statute made An. 32. H. 8. gives
authority unto Tenant in tail and to others being seized of land in the right
of their wives or Churches, to make leases of the same: VVherin also a
prescript order and form for the same is set forth, If any of the said
persons shall make any Lease, wherein he does not observe the same prescribed
order in all points, the same lease is not warranted in any point by the said
statute.

Likewise the statute made in Anno 27. 27. H. 8. 6. 10.
Henrici octaui, of Bargains and sales of land appoints a form and order
for the same, that they must be by writing indented, sealed and enrolled within
six months next after the dates of the same writings. If any bargain and
sale of land be made, wherein any of the things appointed by the said statute
are omitted, the same is vicious and void in the law. So likewise the statute
made in Anno 32. 32. H. 8. 6. 1.
H. 8. gives authority, to dispose lands and Testamentes by last VVil and
Testement in writing. If a man do devise his land by his last VVil and
Testament nuncupatiue without writing, this devise is insufficie^t in law, and
not warra^ted by the said statute.

We leave of a number of like cases, that we might multiply in the prooff of
this matter wherein we have tarried the longer, because the Adversaries make so
great a countenance thereupon: and because all under one, it may serve for the
answer also touching the Kings royal assente to be given to Parlamentes by
his Letters Patentes signed with his hand: which is nothing else but a
declaration and affirmance of the common law, and no new authority given to
him, to do that he could not do before, or any form prescribed to bind him
unto. Bisides that, in this case there is no fear in the world of forging and
counterfeyting the Kings hand: whereas in the Testame^tarie cause it is far
otherwise, as the world knows, and daily experience teaches. And so withal
do we conclude, that by reason this surmised will was not signed with the
Kings hand: it can not any way hurt or hinder the just right and clame of the
Queen of Scotland, to the succession of the Croune of England.

Now supposing, that neither the L. Paget, nor Sir Edward Montague, and
William Clarke had testified or plublished any thing to the infringing and
overthrowing of the Adversaries assertion, touching the signing of the said
will: yet is not thereby the Queen of Scotlandes title altogether hindered. For
she yet has her just and lawful defense for the oppugning of the said
assertion, as well against the persons and sayings of the witnesses, if any
shall come forth, as otherwise she may justly require the said will to be
brought forth to light, and especially the signing of the same with the Kings
hand, to be duly and consideratly pondered, weighed and conferred. She has
her just defense and exeptions and must have. And it were against al laws, and
the law of nature it self, to spoil her of the same. And all good reason
gives, that the said original will standing upon the trial of the Kings
hand, be exhibited: that it may be compared with his other certain and well
known hand writing. And that other things may be done that are requisite in
this behalf.

But yet all this notwithstanding, let us now imagine and suppose, that the
King him self, whose heart and hand were doubtless far from any such doings:
let us yet, I say, admit, that he had signed the said will with his own
hand. Yet for all that, the Adversaries perchance shall not find, no not in
this case, that the Queens just Title, right and interest does any thing
fail or quayle. The supposed will can not prejudice the Queen of Scotland,
though it had been signed wi h the Kings ovv e hand.
Or rather let us without any perchance say, the justice and equity of her
cause, and the invincible force of truth to be such, that neither the Stamp,
nor the Kings own hand can bear and beat it down. Which thing we speak
not without good probable and weighty reasons.

Neither do we at this time mind, to debate and discourse, what power and
authority, and how far the Parliament has to do, in this and like cases.
Which perchance some other would here do. We will only intermedle with other
things, that reach not so far, nor so high, and seem in this our present
question worthy and necessary to be considered.

And first, before we enter into other matters, we ask this reasonable and
necessary question, whether these general words, whereby this large and ample
authority is co^ueied to king Henry, must be as generally, and as amply taken,
or be restrained by some manner of limitation and restriction agreeable to such
mind and purpose of the Parliament, as must of very necessity or great
likelihod be construed, to be the very mind and purpose of the said Parliament
Ye will say perchance, that the power and authority of assignation must be
taken generally and absolutely, without exception, saving for the outward
signing of the will. Truth it is, there is nothing else expressed: but yet was
there some things else principally intended, and yet for all that, needed not
to be specified.

The outward manner was so specially and precisely appointed and specified, to
avoid suspicious dealing, to avoid corruption and forgery. And yet was the
will good and effectual, without the Kings hand. There must needs be some
qualification and restraint of the general words of the statute.
Yea and the assignation to had been good, had not that restrainte of the Kings
hand been added by the Parliament. But for the qualification of the person to
be limited and assigned, and so for the necessary restriction and limitation
of the words, were they never so large and ample: there is (though nothing
were spoken thereof) an ordinary help and remedy. Otherwise, if the Realm
had been set over to a furious or a mad man, or to an idiote, or to some
foraine and Mahometical Prince (and to such a one as stories testify that King
John would have submitted him self and his Realm) or to any other notorious
incapable or unable person: Matthaeus Parisieusis in Johan.
the generality of the words seem to bear it, but the good mind and
purpose of the Parliament, and man's reason do in no wise bear it. If ye
grant, that these words must needs have some good and honest construction and
interpretation, as reason does force you to grant it: yet will I ask further,
whether as the King cut of in this pretensed will the whole noble race of the
eldest sister, and the first issue of the youngest sister: so if he had cut of
also all the ofspringes as well of the said youngest sister, as of the remnante of
the royal blood, and placed some, being not of the said blood, and percha^ce
otherwise unable: this assignation had been good and vailable in law, as
conformable to reason, and to the mind and purpose of the Parlame^t? It were
surely to great an absurdity, to grant it.

There must be therefore in this matter some reasonable moderation and
interpretation, as well touching the persons comprehended within this
assignation, and their qualities, and for the persons also having right, and
yet excluded, as for the manner of the doing of the act, and signing the will.
For the king as King, could not dispose the Croune by his will: and was in this
behalf but an Arbiter and Co^missioner. Wherefore his doings must be
directed and ruled by the law, and according to the good mind and meaning of
those, that gave the authority. And what their mind was, it will appear well
enough, even in the statute it self. It was for the avoiding of all
ambiguities, doubts and divisions, touching the Succession. They put their
whole trust upon the King, as one, whom they thought most earnestly to mind
the wealth of the Realm: as one that would, and could best and most prudently
consider and weigh the matter of the Succession, and provide for the same
accordingly.

If the doings of the King do not plainly and evidently tend to this end
and scope: if a Zealous mind to the common wealth, if prudence and wisdom did
not rule and measure all these doings: but contrariewise partial affection and
displeasure: if this arbitrament puts not away all contentions and striffes:
if the mind and purpose of the honorable Parliament be not satisfied: if there
be dishonorable devises and assignements of the Croune in this will and
Testament, L. 1. ff. qui Testame^ta fac^re.
if there be a new Succession unnaturally devised: finally if this be not a
Testament and last will, such as Modestinus defines: Testamentum est iusta
voluntatis nostrae sententia de eo, The definition of a Testament.
quod quis post mortem sua^ fieri velit: then though the Kings hand were put
to it, the matter goes not altogether so well and so smothe. But that there is
good and great cause further to consider and debate upon it, whether it be so,
or no: let the indifferent, when they have well thought upon it, judge
accordingly.

The Adversaries them selves can not altogether deny, but that this Testament
is not corresponde^t to such expectation, as men worthily should have of it.
Which thing they do plainly confess. For in urging their presumptions,
whereof we have spoken and minding to prove, that this will, which they say is
commonly called King Henry's Will, was no new VVil devised in his sickness but
even the very same, whereof (as they say) were diverse old copies: they infer
these words, saying thus.

For if it be a nevve will then devised, who could think, that either h m
self would, or any man durst have moved him, to put therein so many things
contrary to his honor? Much less durst they them selves devise any new
succession, or move him to alter it, otherwise then they found it, when they
savv, that naturally it could not be otherwise disposed. Wherein they say
very truly. For it is certain, that not only the common law of that Realm,
but nature it self tells us, that the Queen of Scotland (after the said
Kings children) is the next and rightful Heir of the Croune. Wherefore the
King, if he had excluded her, he had done an unnatural act Ye will say, he had
some cause to do this, by reason she was a forainer, and borne out of the
Realm. Yet this notwithstanding he did very unnaturally, yea unadvisedly,
inconsideratly and wrongfully, and to the great prejudice and danger of his
own Title to the Croune of France* as we have already declared.

And moreover it is well to be weighed, that reason, and equity, and Ius
Gentium, does require and crave, that as the kings of that Realm would think
them selves to be injuriously handled and openly wronged, if they mariyng with
the heirs of Spain, Scotland, or any other Country (where the sucession of
the Croune deuolueth to the woman) were shut out, and barred from their said
right due to them by the wives (as we have said:) so likewise they ought to
think of women of their royal blood, that marie in Scotland, that they may well
judge and take them selves much iniuried, unnaturally and wrongfully dealt
withal, to be thruste from the succession of that Croune, being thereto called
by the next proximitie of the royal blood. And such deuolutions of other
Kingdoms to the Croune of England by foraine marriage, might by possibility
often times have chanced, and was even now in this our time very like to have
chanced for Scotland, if the intended marriage with the Queen of Scotland that
now is, and the late King Edward the sixth with his longer life, and some issue
had taken place.

But now, that she is no such forainer, as is not capable of the Croune, we
have at large already discussed. Yea I will now say farther, that supposing the
Parliament minded to exclude her, and might rightfuly so do, and that the King
by virtue of this statute did exclude her in his supposed will: yet is she not
a plain forainer, and incapable of the Croune. For if the lawful heirs of
the said Lady Francis, and of the Lady Eleonour should happen to fail
(which seem now to fail, at the least in the Lady Katherin and her issue,
for whose title, great stir has lately ben made, by reason of a late
sentence definitive, given against her pretensed marriage with the Earl of
Herford) then is there no stay or stop, either by the Parliament, or by the
supposed Will, but that she the said Queen of Scotland, and her Heirs, may
have and obtain their just Title and clame. For by the said pretensed will it
is limited, that for default of the lawful Heirs of the said Lady Francis
and Elenour, the Croune shall remain and come to the next rightful Heirs.

But if she shall be said to be a forainer for the time, for the induction of
farther argument: then what say the Adversaries to the Lady Leneux, borne at
Herbottel in England, and from thirtene years of age brought up also in
England, and commonly taken and reputed as well of the King and Nobility, as
of other, the lawefull Niece of the said king? Yea to turn now to the other
sister of the King married to Charles Bra^don Duke of Suffolk, and her
children, the Lady Francis, and the Lady Eleonour: why are they also
disherited? Surely, if there be no just cause, neither in the Lady Leneux, nor
in the other: it seems the King has made a plain Donatiue of the Croune.
Which thing whether he could do, or whether it be conformable to the
expectation of the Parliament, or for the Kings honor, or for the honor of
the Realm, I leave it to the further consideration of other.

Now, what causes should move the King, to shut them out by his pretensed
will from the Title of the Croune: I mind not, nor need not (especially
seeing I take no notice of any such will, touching the limitation of the said
Croune) here to prosecute or examine.

Yet am I not ignorant, what impedimentes many do talk of, and some as well
by printed, as unprinted Books, do writ of. Wherein I will not take upon
me any asseueration, any resolution or judgment.

This only will I propound, as it were by the way of consideration, duly and
depely to be wayghed and thought upon: that is, for as much as the benefitte
of this surmised will tends to the extrusion of the Queen of Scotland, and
others altogether, and to the issue of the French Queen: whether in case the
King had no cause to be offended with his sisters the French Queens Children
(as the Adversaries them selves confess he had not, and that there was no
lawful impediment in them, to take the succession of the Croune) it were any
thing reasonable, or ever was once meant of the Parlame^t, that the King
without cause should disherite and exclude them from the title of the Croune.
On the other side, if there were any such impediment (whereof this surmised will
gives out a great suspicion) it is to be considered, whether it stands with
reason and justice, with the honor of the king, and the whole Realm, or with
the mind, purpose and intent of the said Parliament, that the King should not
only frustrate and exclude such, whose right by the common law is most
euidente and notoriouse, but call and substitute such other, L. si pater. ff.
Quae in frau credit. L. fili. fami. ff. de D^rat. L. 1. 6. quae res pign. l.
obligation. ff. de pigno. c. in gener. de Regum iuris in 6. L. quida^. ff. de
ver. sig. L. vt grad.. 1. de uumer. and hono. L. permitte^do cu^ notatis. ff.
de iure dotiu^. In giving general authority, that seems not to be
comprised, that the party would not have granted, being specially demanded.
General words must be referted to hable persons. L. 2. c. de Nopall. L.
sin.. in computatione. De iure deliber. and ibi notat Alciat. in l. 1. de ver.
significat.
as by the same law are plainly excluded. In consideration whereof many
notable Rules of the Civil law do concur.

First, that who soever gives any man a general authority, to do any thing,
seems not to give him authority, to do that thing, which he would not have
granted, if his mind therein had been severally and specially asked and
required. Again, general words either of the Testatours, or of such as make
any contract, and especially of statutes, touching any persons, to do or enjoy
any thing, ought to be restrained and referred to hable, mete, and capable
persons only.

It is furthermore a rule and a Principle, that statutes must be ruled,
measured and interpreted, according to the mind and direction of the general
and common law. Wherefore the King in limiting the succession of the Croune
in this sort, as is pretended, seems not to answer and satisfy the
expectation of the Parliament: putting the case there were any such surmised
impediment, as also on the other side likewise, if there were no such supposed
impediment.

For here an other rule must be regarded: which is, that in Testaments,
Contractes, and namely in statutes, the generality of words must be gently
and ciuily moderated, and measured by the common law, and restrained, when so
ever any man should by that generality take any damage and hurt
undeservedly. Yea, the Statute shall rather in that casse cease and quail,
and be taken as void. As for example, it appe eth by the Civil law, that if
it be enacted by statute in some Cities, that noman shall plead against an
Instrument, no not the Executour: yet this notwithstanding, if the Executour
make a true and perfect Inventory of the goods of the Testatour, if he deal
faithfully and truly, rather than he should wrongfully and without cause pay
the Testatours debt of his own, he may come and plead against the Instrument.
Wherefore the kings doings seem either much defective in the said Lady
Francis, and Lady Elenour, or much excessive in their children. And so though
he had signed the said will with his hand: yet the said doings seem not
conformable to the mind and purpose of the Parliament.

We will now go forward, and propound other great and grave considerations
serving our said purpose and intent. Whereof one is that in limiting the
Croune unto the heirs of the body of the Lady Francis, the same Lady then,
and so long after living, the said King did not appoint the Succession of the
Croune, according to the order and meaning of he honorable Parliament: forasmuch
as the said Act of Parliament gave to him authority, to limite and appoint the
Croune to such person, or persons in reuersio^ or remainder, as should please
his Highness. Meaning thereby some person certain, of whom the people might
have certain knowledge and understanding, after the death of king Henry the
eight. Which persons certain the heirs of the Lady Francis could not by
any means be intended: 11. H. 4. fo 72. 9. H. 6 fo. 24. 11. H. 6. fol. 15.
forasmuch as the said Lady Francis was then living, and therefore could then
have no heirs at al. By reason whereof the people of that Realm could not
have cettaine knowledge and perfect understanding of the Succession, according
to the true meaning and intent of the said Act of parlame^t.

But to this matter some peradventure would seem to answer and say, that
although at the time of the said King Henry's death, the Heirs of the body of
the said Lady Francis begotten, were uncertain: yet at such time, as the
said remainder should happen to fall, the said heirs might then certainly be
known. In deed I will not deny, but that peradventure they might be then
certainly known. But what great mischieffes and inco^uenie^ces might have
ensued, and yet may, if the will take place upon that peradventure and
uncertain limitation: I would wish all men well to note and consider.

It is not to be doubted, but that it might have fortuned, at such time as the
remainder should happen to fall to the said heirs of the Lady Francis, the
same Lady Francis should then be also living: who, I pray you, then should
have had the Croune? Paraduenture ye would say, the heirs of the body of the
Lady Eleonour, to whom the next remainder was appointed. Undoubtedly that
were contrary to the meaning of the said supposed will: for so much as the
remainder is thereby limited unto the heirs of the body of the Lady Eleonour
only for default of issue of the Lady Francis. VVherby it may be very plainly
gathered upon the said supposed will, that the meaning thereof was not, that the
children of the Lady Eleonour should enjoy the Croune, before the children of
the Lady Francis. But what if the said Lady Eleonour had been then also living
(which might have happened, forasmuch as both the said Lady Francis and Lady
Eleonour, by common course of nature, might have lived longer, then until this
day) who then should have had the Croune? Truly the right Heir (whom this
supposed will meante to exclude) so long as there should remain any issue,
either of the body of the said Lady Francis, or of the body of the said Lady
Eleonour lawfully begotten. And therefore quite contrary to the meaning of the
said supposed will, wherefore I do verily think, that it would hardly sink
into any reasonable man's head, that had any experience of the great wisdom and
advised doings of King Henry the eight about other matters being of nothing
like weight, that he would so slenderly and so unadvisedly dispose the
successione of the Croune (whereupon the whole estate of that Realm does
depend) in such wise, that they, to whom he meant to give the same by his
will, could not enjoy it by the law. Whereupon ye may plainly see, not only
the great vnlikelihod, that King Henry the eight would make, any such will with
such slender advise, but also, that by the limitation of the said will, the
succcession of the Croune is made more uncertain and doubtful, then it was
before the making of the said Acts of Parliament. Which is contrary to the
meaning and intent of the said Acts, and therefore without any sufficient
warrant in law.

But peradventure some here will say, that although these dangers and
uncertainties might have ensewed upon the limitation of the said will: yet
forasmuch as they have not happened, neither be like to happen, they are
therefore not to be spoken of. Ye as verily, it was not to be omitted. For
although these things have not happened, and therefore the more tolerable: yet
for as much as they might have happened, by the limitation of the said supposed
will, contrary to the meaning of the said Acts, the will can not by any means
be said to be made according to the meaning and intent of the makers of the
said statutes. And therefore in that respect the said will is insufficient in
law. And to aggrauate the matter farther, ye shall understand of great
inconveniences and imminent dangers, which as yet are likely to ensue, if that
supposed will should take place.

It is not unknown, but that at the time of the making of the said will, the
said Lady Francis had no issue male, but only three daughters between her, and
Henry Duke of Suffolk. Afterward in the time of the late sovereign Lady
Queen Marie, the said Duke of Suffolk was attainted, and suffered
accordingly. After whose death the said Lady Francis, to her great dishonor
and abasing of her self, took to husband one Adrian Stokes, who was before
her servant, a man of very mean estate and vocation, and had issue by him.
Which issue (if it were a son, and be also yet living) by the words of the
said supposed will, is to inherit the Croune of that Realm, before the
daughters between her and the said late Duke of Suffolk begotten, which thing
was neither intended, nor meant by the makers of the said Acts. Who can with
any reason or common sense think, that all the states of the Realm assembled
together at the said Parliament, did mean, to give authority to King Henry the
eight, by his letters Patents or last will to disherit the Queen of Scotland
linially descended of the blood royal of that Realm, and to appoint the son
of Adrian Stokes, then a mean serving man of the Duke of Suffolks, to be King
and Governor over that noble Realm of England. The inconveniences whereof, as
also of the like that might have followed of the pretensed Marriage of M. Keys
the late Sergeante Porter, I refer to the grave considerations and
judgments of the honorable and worshipful of that Realm.

Some peradventure will say, that King Henry the eight meant by his will, to
dispose the Croune unto the Heirs of the body of the said Lady Francis by the
said Duke lawfully begotten, and not unto the heirs by any other person to be
begotten. Which meaning although it might very hardly be gathered upon the
said supposed will: yet can not the same be without as great inconveniences, as
the other. For if the Croune should now remain unto the heirs of the body of
the said Lady Francis by the said Duke begotten then should it remain unto
two daughters jointly, they both being termed and certainly accounted in law
but one heir. And by that means the state and government of that Realm
should be changed from the ancient Monarchy, into the government of many.
For the Title of the Lady Francis being by way of remainder, which is co^pted
in law a joint purchase, does make all the issue female inheritable a like, and
can not go according to the ancient law of a descent to the Croune: which is,
that the Croune by descent must go to the eldest daughter only, as is
aforesaid. For great differences be in law, where one comes to any Title by
descent, and where, as a purchassor. And also if the one of those issues female
dye, then were her heir in the Title, as a several tenant in tail. And so
there should follow, that so many daughters, so many general Governors, and so
might their issue, being heirs femals, make the government grow infinite.
Which thing was most far from the meaning of the makers of that Act of
Parliament.

What if the said King had by his last will disposed that realm into two or
three parts, dividing the government thereof to three persons, to rule as
several Kings: as for example, wales unto one, the North parts unto an
other, the South parts unto the third, and by that means had miserably rent
that Realm into parts? Had this been according to the intent and meaning of
the said Act of Parliament? Or had it been a good and sufficient limitation in
law? No verily, I think no man of any reasonable understanding will so say. And
no more can he either say, or think of the remainder limited unto the heirs
of the body of the said Lady Francis by the said supposed will.

Now to complete and finish this our Treatise touching the Queen of Scotla^ds
Title to the succession of the Croune: as we have done, so let us freely and
liberally grant the Adversaries that, which is not true, that is, that the
said supposed will was signed with the kings own hand. Let the heirs of the
Lady Francis come forth in Gods name, and lay forth to the world their demand
and supposed right against the said Q. of Scotla^ds interest. The Queen on the
other side, to fortify and stre^ghten her clame, lays forth to the open
sight of all the world her just title and interest, signed, and always a fore
this time allowed, not only as with the Seals, but with the oaths also of all the kings, that ever were in England, taken at the time of their Coronation,
for the continuance of the laws of that noble Realm of England, signed and
allowed, I say, almost of all the world by sides: yea signed with God and
natures own fingers. Her right is as open, and as clear, as the bright Son.
Now, to darken and shadow this glorious light: what do the heirs of the said
Lady Francis, or others bring forth, to ground their just clame and demand
upon? When all is done, they are feign to run and catch hold upon king
Henry the eightes written will, signed with his own hand. Well, let them take
as good handfast thereon, as they can: but yet let them show the said Queen
the said original will. It is well known, that they themselves have said, that
that to do they can not: Yet let them at least lay forth some authentical
record of the same. It is also notorious, that they can not. If then the
foundation of their clame, being the will of such a Prince, and of so late and
fresh memory made, neither the original, nor yet any good and worthy Record
sufficiently authorized, remain of the same: by what color will they exclude
the said Queen? They must clame either by proximitie of blood, or by Charter.
For the first, nature has excluded the^: Charter they have none to show.

They will perchance cry out, and co^plain of the loss and imbeaseling of the
same, and say, that such a casualtie should not destroy and extinguish their
right. This were some thing perchance, if it were in a private man's case. It
were somewhat, if their demand did not destroy the common law, and the law of
nature also. It were somewhat, if their supposed Charter were perished, or by
any fraudulent means intercepted by the said Queen. Upon whom, in this
point, it is not possible to fasten any the very least sinister suspicion. It
were somewhat, if they did not aspire to take gain and lucre, or if the Queen
sought not to avoid damage. For damage it is, when any person is spoiled of
any right due to him by law and reason. And there is a great odds in the
consideration of the law and reason, between advancing our gain (and gain
we do that, that does grow and accrue unto us by more gift or legacy, as
does the Croune, Non est par^^^io lu^ra non capere, and damna sentire L. fin
C^de odi^il and. I. Pr^^ui^^ ff. de da^no inject. Inst de legate. Si re^.
to these competitours and Heirs of the Lady Francis) and eschewing damage
and loss. And loss the law accompteth to be, when we are defeated of our
Ancestors inheritance. So that both being put in the indifferent balance of
reason, law and conscience: the damage shall ouerweigh the mere lucre and
gain. Yea, I will say more, that in case either the said Queen of Scotland,
or any other were in possession of the Croune, having no right to the same: yet
if the issue of the Lady Francis had no further, nor better right, than these
pretended writings, the defendants cleaving to the only possession, were false
and sure, and were not bound to show to them their Title. For it is a rule of
the law, Liqui accusare C. de edendo Accommodum^inst. de indict.
that if the Plaintiff fail in his prooffe, the Defendant shall be discharged:
yea, though he have no better right, than bare and naked possession. Neither
could they any thing be relieved, though the pretensed Record of the Cha^cerie
were yet extant, not for such cause only, as we have specified, but for diverse
other. For it may well be doubted, though the said Record might bear a
sufficient credit among the subjects of that Realm, whether it may bear the
same against one that is no subject.

L. si quis in aliquo documento C. de edendo.
Again it is a rule, that the public Instrument, making mention of an other,
does nothing prove against the party, in respect of any thing so mentioned,
unless the original it self be produced. If therefore these competitours have
lost their instruments and Evidences, where upon they must of necessity build
their demand and Clame, to the exclusion of an other notorious right and
Title: they must bear the discommoditie thereof, that sought thereby their
lucratiue advancement and commodity: and not the person, that demands
nothing else, but that to him lawfully and orderly is due.

Yea, they, and we to, have good cause to think, that this thing (in case any
such will were) is wonderfully wrought by Gods permission and providence. For
it is almost incredible, to hear and believe, such kind of writtings (and in
so great and weighty a matter, as this pretensed will co^priseth) to be so
sone extinguished, and perished, as it were, for special purpose, to preserve
to that noble Realm the true and sincere succession of the next royal blood.
Which if it should, by certain (I can not tell what) interlined papers and
scrolles be derived and transferred to any other wrongful heirs: it would be
a wonderful and strange thing to the world to hear, and too importable to
that nation of England and their posterity, to bear it. It will then be so
far of, that that thing which the Parliament most regarded in this
Commission, shall by this pretensed will be procured and purchased to that
Realm, as to have a certain known undoubted lawful Governor and King: to
have striffe, contention and divisions for the Croune cut away: that even the
very thing that the Parliament most feared, is most unfortunately and most
lamentably like soonest to chance. He that reme^breth the tragical procedings
of the last (by name, and not by right) King Richard: needs not greatly to
doubt: but that as he could find in his heart, to bastard his eldest brother
and lawful king, and to defame his own natural mother as an harlot: even so
now there will some be found, that will easily be enduced, for advancing and
setting forth of their supposed right and Title to the Croune, to seek means,
to wring them out that shall justly sit in the royal Throne, and to seek to
extort the Croune from their possession.

Which unhappy day, if it should once chance (as God forbid) then may the
English nation cri out, and sing a woeful and doleful song: then may the (not
without cause) look for the botomelesse Ocean sea of infinite troubles,
miseries and mischieffes to ouerwhelme that Realm. The which my mind and
heart abhors to think upon, and my pen in my hand trembles to write
thereof.

Finis.
AN EXHORTATION TO THE ENGLISH AND SCOTTISHE NATIONS, THAT AFTER SO LONG
wars, they would now at last agree, and Join together in one true league of
fast frendshippe and amity.
IF WE WELL REMEMBER the manifold hurtes, and old calamities of this our
Ylande Britain: we shall find that nothing therein has brought forth more
harms than has discord: And on the other side, all ancient histories
testify that by concord Cities have been builded: many wars extincte, and
most inviolable frendeshippes establyshed. For such is the force of Concord,
as all things in the world thereby do (as it were) join hands to gether
with love and lykinge among them selves. Concord did associate mankind
together, which before were dispersed and scattered: So did she teach them to
use fidelity one to an other, and to live under a form of policy and
Government. In like manner, Concord keepith in a league of love and amity
all nations, as Frensh, Spanishe, Duche, and the rest: appointing to every one
(according to the diversities of matter and place) a several Prince, to
maynteane among them one form of a public weal, and to Govern the same in
peace and tranquillity. Therefore that wise man Lycurgus being demanded of his
countriemen the Lacedaemonians by what means they might expel the violent
invasions and inrodes of their enemies: answered very discreetlie: if you will
live (said he) in amity among your selves: and avoid all mutual strife and
contention. Like answer was made to Scipio surnamed Aphricanus: who, having by
many conflictes daunted the Numantines, and broken their great forces, asked of
Tyresius Prince of the Celtanes, how it happened that Numantia which so long
time before had been invincible, was at the last overthrown because (said
Tyresius) the amitye and concord of the Citizens before made them victorious,
and now their discord has brought their destruction. For as there is nothing
so weak, and slender, which by concord may not be strengthened: so nothing
is so strong, but discord can ouerturne it. And it is manifestlye known what
famous common welthes have been defaced and ruyned by discord and sedition:
and that no Empire is so well fortified, no City so surely established, nor
house so firmelye builded, but that by hatred and dissension it may be
ouerturned, pulled in pieces, disme^bred, and destroyed For discord (as Liuie
says) makes two Cities of one. We see how the controversy bettwene the two
brothers Aristobulus and Hircanus brought the kingedome of Jews in subjection
to the Romans: whiles the one called in Pompey for aid against the other.
Euenso the dissension of Christian Princes translated the Empire of
Constantinople to the Tira^ny of turks. Yea all Syria was by the noble Duke
Godfrey of Bullon recovered, and had been submitted to Christianes, if a
sudden discord had not frustrated their victory. Sithe then unanimity in
love and frendshippe is of such importance, as thereupon the safety of a
common wealth depends: we must endeavor our selfs with all industry and
travail to cherishe, defend, and reteyn concord among us.

Now therefore when I deeply consider with how many and how great benefits
and singular guiftes almighty God has endewed your Yland Britain above
many other Countries: I can not but greatly marvel, what should be the cause
why you are not more careful to confirm a perpetual peace and amity among
your selves. For you want but this one thing to make you seem the most happy
people in the world. This Yland is so full fraught with all things necessary
to man's use, as nothing is there wanting, which a man may well wish for.
First, it is furnished with great store of all things needful, either for
man's profit, or for his pleasure: in so much as not only it has no need of
help of other Countries, but it is also able to supply the wantes, and to
serve the turn of forreyners. And all this fertility and welthe (as in a
strong Yland environed every way by sea) is sufficiently fenced and fortified,
by the natural situation, from all foraine incursions and inrodes. Bysyde all
this, the commodity of soil and eyr (be it spoken without offense of other
nations) brings forth men and women, either in respect of comeliness of
personage, strength of body, or excellency of wit, so perfect, as else
where in any place are hardly to be found. Britain therefore may well be
accounted an Yland framed by nature and fashioned not only to defend itself,
but also to bear a great swaye in the world: And not without cause: for the
Isle Crete was (in ancient men's opinion) esteemed to be conveniently situated
to get and gain the Empire of Greece, by cause it was every way enclosed by
sea, being not far distant from Peloponese of one side, and very near to
Triopio, on an other side. And by that opportunity Minos King of Crete became
Lord and Soueraign of those seas: invaded the yles adjoining: placed in them
new inhabita^tes, and if he had not dyed (as Aristotle says) when he went
about to conquerre Sicilia: he was like to have greatly enlarged the kyndome
and dominions of Crete. But in how many degrees does your Isle excel Crete? It
is not to be doubted, but that your ancestors had achiued famous interprises,
with great honor, if their natural helps, and valiant attemptes had not been
frustrated by their Civil dissentions.

Well, reason persuadeth me that a special occasion of all your dissentions
proceeds from the multitude of Governors, and from diversity of opinions,
and parties among the communaltye: for the regiment of many is very much
subject to strife and dissension. Therefore Aristotle, regarding that consonant
and uniform agreement of all things which appears in the whole frame of the
world, settyth down this, for a conclusion, the world was made by one God.
And Homere poetically imagining that there were many Gods contendyng among
them selves about the welfare, and wrecke of Troy, whiles some were of
opinion to destroy the City, and some to save it at last he breaks out into
this exclamation: The regiment of many is not profitable, let one Govern. For
where the state is such as many may bear the swaye: there oftentimes many
controversies do grow, and very hard it is for a society to stand fast and
continue: because the more a man excedeth in haughtiness (or fierceness
rather) of mind, less able he is to endure a compere: according to that
sayeing of the Poet. There is no faith in peers of Royal state,
For none that rules can friendlye brook a mate:
Neither can Caesar yield to any one,
Nor Pompey like, but aye to rule alone.
These and such like contentions among your Princes have much hindered and
disturbed your peace more than two thousand years. In so much as their
inordinate desire to rule (which is the very seminary and sede plott of all
wars) is by your Riches nourished, and with your great travails, pains, and
bloodeshed fostered and maynteyned. Oh miserable people: Oh wreched and
unfortunate state, which never could brook good fortune, never would be
reformed by any necessity, nor was bredde by good destinye, but by self will
and blyndenesse always ouerruled. Of truth, it is mere madness to prefer
the lust and gredynesse of a few Tyrannes before a man's self, and all that is
his: and before the safetye and liberty of his Country: As they of Sychem
did, which upon the dishonest motion of Abimelech submitted them selves unto
his government. Iudic. 9.
Methinkes that I hear his troublesome and sediouse speech. I am your mouth
(said he,) and of your flesh and blood: better therefore it were for you to
take me as your king than my brothers, which are foreyners. Whereupon that
fond people leaned to him and to his rule and government, and said, he is
our brother. Then Abimelech cruellye did fall upon the fiftye laufully borne
brothers and mordered them, that he himself, a basterd, might reign alone.
Yet God afterward punished that foul fact in Abimelech him self, and requited
them of Sichem as they had deserved: for the curse of Ioathan fell upon them.
The like wickedness was in England committed by that mischeuouse parricide,
the Tyranne Richard: who (to gain the kingdom) neither regarded the honor of
his brother, then lately deceassed: the lives of his noble Country men: the
blood of his nephews, the right heirs of the Croune: nor yet the Chastity of
their mother the Queen: so great and so impatient desire to rule and Reign
carried away the cruel mind of an outragiouse Tyranne.

But I woote well that none of you at this day do favor such aspirynge
minds and ambitiouse desirers of Souereintye, except those which seek their
own private gain, by the general disco^moditie of the whole Isle: and prefer
the doctrine of Machiauel before the institution of a Christian. I hope
therefore now that the old reproach that was wont to be objected against the
English, will be quite forgotten. It is a common proverb (says Polidor) that
English men, by an old custom, have least regard of all other nations to
the common wealth of their own Country, ever inclined to factions, and by
that means have laid their country open to the spoil and pray of their
enemies. And this to have happened to that nation, experience teaches us. For in
the beginning of that kingdom (as Polidor in his first book reports) when
every mighty manne sought to be a king, great civil wars continued there so
long, till at the last the whole Soueraingntie came into the hands of five
Tyrannes. Therefore through domestical trouble and sedition it was then a
barbarous cruel age. For these, inflamed with ambition to rule, and incensed
with mutual hatred among them selves, afflicted the inhabitants of that
country miserablye. But at last when they had destroyed one an other, the
whole government of the common wealth was referred to one of the same
country, and by him all things were reduced to unity: and after long wars,
peace was established. Cornelius Tacitus making mention of the factions of
those rulers, says, that the Britains were so diuersely minded, and
distracted in such and so many parties, as scarsely any two Cities would join
together against a common peril: and thus, whiles one did strive against an
other, they went all to wrecke.

Beside all this, the like dissension falling among your Ancestors, the
Britains of the South and the Britains of the North (now called Scotts)
brought the kingdom of the one side unto the English Saxones. For these being
called in by the Southern Britains to aid the^ against the Scottish, turned
their weapons against the Southern, and spoiled them of their kingdom. Thus
by experience the Britains found these words to be true (which Vigetius
says) civil hatred makes men rash to annoy their enemy, and heedlesse
to defend them selves. But those English Saxones (when they had gotten the
kingdom) were by discord and factions very sone divided: in so much as of
one kingdom there did seven arise, and so many kings withal: by whose
dissentions the public weal was a long while dismembered, till at last after
many years the Sovereignty of all came to Egbert alone. He was the first that
called the Southeparte of Britain by the name of England. Now then the
English Saxones recovered a force and waxed strong. Vherevpon the Scottyshe
Britains under the government of king Achaius (doubting that the Saxones would
seek to tyrannize over them, as they had over the others) entered in to a firm
and perpetual league of alliance and amity with Charles the great, called
Charlemain King of France: to the end that those two nations, Frenshe and
Scottishe, should from time to time for ever, aid and succor, one an other,
against their common enemy. By occasion of a like dissension that fell among
these English Saxones, the Danes, under conduct of king Swayn, bereft the
Saxones of the kingdom of England. And at last the Normannes under the leading
of Duke William the Bastard, conquered the Realm of England. And since that
time hitherto the whole Yland has remained under the government only of two
kings. Who nevertheless, being so few, could not yet keep peace and
concord among them selves.

But if a man will seek to know a reason why Britain can not brook the
regiment of many Sovereigns, as Germany, Italy, and the famous state of
venice do: he shall find (even among them) that there is but one which is
the head. For though the Princes of Germany Live in great Liberty: yet are
they nevertheless all subject to the authority of one Emperor: a thing very
commodious for preservation of peace and concord among them. And (for truth)
in Italy, there is no stayed form of Government, sithe it is subject to the
rule and dominion, not of one, but of many: in respect whereof some writers
are of opinion that it is less fortunate, if not miserable. As for the state
of Venice, Conteranus has in effect witten thus: For so much (says he) as
every City by peace and union in mind and consent, is compact and buylt: and
that this uniformity in consent and will can not be retained except some one
person have a preeminence over all other, as well magistrates as Commons:
which may, as it were, of many several dispersed members, fashion and frame
one entyre body: It was therefore most wisely provided and ordained by our
predecessors that in our City there should be a certain Royal power, and
that one should be chosen, which should be called Prince or Soueraign. Hereupon
I thynk it clear and manifest, that the Sovereignty of one only person is of
all other most necessary for a common wealth. And this plainly maybe
perceived not only in civil policy, but in other matters also. For by the
providence of one God the whole world is ruled: so is the body of man by one
soul governed: a ship by one master is guyded: and one howsehold or familye
is directed by one father: whereupon it follows, that your Isle of Britain can
not commodiouslye be governed by many Sovereigns. This affection therefore to
faction and co^tentiouse parttaking is to be of all men eschewed and abhorred,
specially of those which are brought up in the house of God. For it is their
part and duty (all partiality and private quarrels set a side) to move and
exhort others (as Saint Augustine did) to all things that among christians
serve for the abolishing of strife, and establyshing of concord: which is
nothing else but a quyetuesse and peace of mind, fastened and fortifyed with
the bond of love and Charity: and such a one as hates all enmity, and
priuye grudge, and loves all alyke. For Charity (as Saint Paul says) is
patient, 1 Cor. 13.
benign: Charity enuyeth not, deals not peruersely, is not puffed up, is
not ambitiouse: thinks not evil: reioyseth not upon iniquity: but reioyseth
with truth: suffers all things: believes all things: hops all things:
bears all things. If you embrace this sentence: you will sone lay aside all
hatred: disbourden your minds of all disdeyn and arrogance: and cast away your
mad armure, wherewith hitherto you have vainly contended: and without all
fraud and guyle you will establyshe a perpetual, Christian, profitable and
assured peace, under the quiet and steadfast government of one Prince. For so
does both honesty and profitt admonish us to do: all our own, as well
private as public affayre require and exact the same: and (which is more)
almighty God does so charge and command us all to do.

Now then, who so ever repyneth against these things, is not to be called the
child of God: for he loves not peace: neither ought good men to accompany
any such persons, but rather to banishe them and all their Scholemasters, as
most cruel enemies to the City of God. For their doctrine destroys the
foundations of the society of mankind, and aduaunceth Tyranny. Among these
men there is no regard to the safetye of Citezens, nor love to their native
country: no care of religion, nor of true service and obedience to God: but
such an in ordinate desire to rule and reign they have; as will usurp all
things, take away the Lives of honest Citizens: destroy their Country, and
contemn all Religion: As that foul monstrer Caesar Borgias did, whom a
certain Atheist greatly extolleth as a most perfect pattern for Princes to
follow. But for the avoiding of these enemies to God and man, we have a very
wise admonition of the Christian philosophor Saint Bernard. Fear not (says
he) that it is against Charity, if by offending one thou cannest make peace
for many. And Tullie gives a good lesson for all true Princes to take hold of:
That Loftiness of couraige (says he) which is tried in perils, and hard
adventures, if it want Justice, and feighte not for the public commodity,
but for private gain, is not only no virtue, but rather a beastly furye,
raging against all humanity. We will therefore (says he) account them only
to be stout and valiant men: which are good men, friends to truth, not
deceytfull but plain dealers. Of which opinion Edward king of England seemed
to be. For in his banishement he used oftentimes to say, that he had rather
always live a private life, than to recover his kingdom by the slaughter of
men: A very excellent sayeing truellye and well beseming so noble a King. Let
us therefore root out of our public weall these disturbers of common peace,
that it may more easily be conjoined and fastened in an assured amity and
agreement. Which thing the better to obtain, we must use the advice and
counsel of a certain philosophor. We affirm (says he) that, Cities are in
peace and good concord, when in public and necessary affairs they are all
of one mind, take all one advise, and execute that which by common consent is
allowed and agreed upon: As for example, when it pleases the Citizens to
appoint certain officers, or only Pittacus to have the rule over all: but
when both covet to enjoy the Government (as Oteocles and Polynices did in
Phaenicia) then arises sedition. For that civil concord is in deed termed
freendshipe, which can not be retained but only among honest men. Because
such as are honest are at peace within them selves and with others also, by
reason that their wills abide always firm and steadfast, not ebbyng and
flowenig like the river Euripus. It happens otherwise among the wicked: for
they can not long agree together: because in their manner of governing the
common welthe, they seek all their own Private commodity, and bestow as little
pains expenses and charges as they can: whereupon follows privy grudges and
seditions, whiles they endomage and hurt one an other: and every man neglects
his own duty: and so the common state perishes when none goes about to
protecte it. Thus much the Philosopher. But touching the friendship which we
speak of, it is much more easelye to be procured, compact, and ratyfied among
you, because all those things concur in you that are requisitie and
commodions to the union of men's minds and consent in firm love and amity.
For there is among you one stock and kynred, one alliance, and affinity: one
language: and almost one and the same course in manners, co^ditio^s, customs
and laws: one and the same favor in countenance, like attire, like behavior
in body, and likeness in personage. Yea all things else what soever, tending
to the creation and preservation of a perpetual peace and concord, concur
and mete together among you, more fitlye than among other nations, which in
old time differed much among them selfs as well in their native soil
customs and laws, as in their language, affinity, and alliance, and yet at
this day nevertheless are reconciled, accorded, and united in a civil consent
and agreement, under the regiment of one Prince. Yet some of you perchance will
think it impossible for that people long to continue in perfect amity, which
in so many years and aiges have practiced them selves one against an other,
with fire and sword, turning the world vpside down in trouble and confusion
by mutual wars, spoils, malice, deadly feed, morders, and all Kinds of
hostility: sith generally man's nature can not suffer so great injuries to
be forgotten: and sith the natural conditions of both those nations seem to
be such, as either of them had rather suffer ten thousand deaths than to be
subject to a Prince borne in the others province: because they would not
seem to be under subjection of their ancient enemy, after so long contention
for the Sovereignty: and so therefore, the English nation will by no means be
subject to a Scottishe Prince: nor yet the Scottishe nation to an English. And
it may be that some wicked Atheist, preferring his vain glory, ambition, and
proud haughty mind before the good state, and safetye of a public weaie,
would subscribe, perhapes, and Yield to this opinion: and yet is it a very
absurd opinion and contrary to all wit and reason: even as if one of your
mariners in a great stormye tempest would say that he had rather be drowned
with the ship, than suffer it to be governed by any of his mates. But
perhaps this fellow will urge further, and ask how it can be that the
English and Scottishe will agree together sith the Scottish have ever
preferred their league of alliance with the french nation before the
neyghbourhoode and frendshipp of the English? For in despite of the English
they entered in a league of frendshipp with the French, seven hundred years a
go and more, which they have kept inviolable to this day. And in our days
when there was great hope that the whole Yland would have been induced to the
regiment of one Prince by the marriage of king Edward the sixth and the now
Queen Marie of Scotland: The Scotts, though they had before assured her to
King Edward by a common promise, delivered her over nevertheless to the King
of France. Therefore it was their fault and not the fault of the English, that
the amity so much expected between them was hymdred. But touching that league
which was made with the french, it was greatly desired both by the french
and by the Scottish (as I said before) not in despite of the English, but for
their own safetye. For if they had not done so: the Scotts, as well as the
other Britains, had been driven out of their country, by that foreign and
Barbarous nation, the Englysh Saxons. And the let of that Marriage proceeded of
the English: whose use is to seek to win that of the Scotts by manacing
words and force of arms, which they should desire by fair means, and terms
of freendlye good will. And there wants not occasion to suspecte that they
did it of purpose, to the end that by breakyng of that marriage, some of them
might have a more reddye access to the usurpation of the Croune of England.
How soever it was, the Scottysh Nation was not minded to yield by force, and
yet scarce able to forbear, were constreyned to crave aid of the Frenshe:
which they could not obtain, unless they sent their Queen into France as
an hostage for their fidelity. But there was nothing that the Scottish nation
more esteemed and desired at that day, than the union of those two regions by
that marriage, as may well be proved by the common opinion and sayeing of the
people there, before the matter was attempted by way of force and arms: we
understand the English man's language (said the people) and they ours: we
inhabit all one Yland: and almost in nothing do we differ, but that we
are governed by two several Princes. And in deed it is evidently known that
the Scottishe Nation many years before did greatly desire and wyshe this
manner of conjunction in amitye: and namely at such time as they married the
noble Lady, Margaret, (the only heir of the croune of Scotland, daughter of
Alexander their King,) to the first King Edward of England. By which marriage
those two kingdoms had been united, had not that noble virgin deceassed before
she came to the fight of her husband. Seeing then the case thus stands: there
is no cause why either the Englysh or Scottishe should vpbraide or reprove one
an other: but they ought rather to agree all together in one voice and consent,
that (if there were none alive, to whom the Sovereignty of the whole Yland by
right could belonged) one general Prince over all might be elected by voice or
lot: So as at last the whole weal publicque and people might enjoy
perpetual peace, and be no more with partial parttakinge, sects, and
factions, disturbed: Even as we read that the Persians in old time very
prouidently in a like case used them selves. For (as Iustine reports) when
they had slain their Mages: great was their glory and renown for the
recouerye of their Kingdom, but much greater, for that in contendyng about
the government they could agree among them selves. There was among them many
equal in virtue and nobility, as it was hard for the people to make an
election of a governor. Therefore their nobility devised among them selves an
indifferent mean whereby to commit the judgment of their worthiness to their
gods. They agreed among them selves on a day appointed, to lead all their
horses before the Palace earlye in the morning: and that he whose horse first
did neyghe before the rising of the sun, should be king. The next day after,
when all were assembled at the hour appointed, the horse of Darius son of
Hydaspes did first neygh, and gave that happy sign of good fortune to his
master. Immediatlye the modestye of all the rest was such, as upon the first
heearing of the good notice so given they all leapt from their horses, and did
their homage to Darius as to their King: and all the commons foloweing the
judgment of the nobles willyngly confirmed the election, and accepted him for
their Soueraign. Thus the kingdom of Persians (whereof at one time there was
seven noble competitors) was in a moment reduced to the regiment of one. And
this they did with such incredible zeal and piety toward their Country,
as for the delyuerey thereof from trouble and miserye, they could have been
content every one to have lost his life. Thus far Justin.

Immortal is the honor and renoume of those noble men, which willingly
preferred the welfare of their country before their private ambition. But
almighty God has eased you well of this doubt. For he has Laid it open
before your eyes, what person it is, to whom the Sovereignty of the whole
Yland, even by the laws of the realm, after the decease of the now Queen of
England, without laufull issue of her body ought to descend and come: I mean
the most noble Lady Marye, the worthy Queen of Scotland: whose appare^t
piety and invincible constancy in adversity, universally well known and
talked of through the whole, world does give a plain demonstration, how vain
and frivolous the Judgment of those men is, which repress and reject the
Regiment of women. To this Lady therefore may the regiment of the whole Yland
at length descend, according as it was once before to her adiuged by the
sentence of her great graundfather King Henry the seventh, and of his
Counseill, as Polydor reports. King James of Scotland the third (says he)
did honorably intertein Richard Fox Bishop of durisme, Ambassador sent to him
by King Henry the seventh: and at their first meting, he showed him self much
grieved for the late slaughter of his subjects, but easily he remitted the
injury. Afterward when they were together alone, the King told him how
ancient and just causes of frendshipp had been between King Henry and him:
and how greatly he desired the assurance thereof, that they two might be tied
together in a more fast knot of love and amity: which out of doubt will follow
(said the King) if King Henry would bestow on him his eldest daughter, the
Lady Margaret in Marriage. To this the Amhassadour answered coldlie, but yet
promised his help and furtherance: and put the King in good hope of the matter
if he would send an Ambassador directly to that end. The Ambassador upon his
return home reported to King Henry the whole matter, which pleased King
Henrye wondrous well, as one which delyted much in peace. Within few days
after this, the Ambassadors of King James came to request the Lady Margaret
in Marriage. King Henrye after audience referred the matter to his Counseil:
among whom, some there were which suppected that the kingdom might in
process of time be deuolued to the same Lady Margaret: and therefore thought
it not good to marie her to a forain Prince: whereunto the King made answer,
and said, what then? If any such thing happen (which God forbid) yet I see,
our kingdom should take no harm thereby: for England should not be added to
Scotland, but Scotland unto England: as to the far most noble head of the
whole Yland: for we see it so fallen out in all things, that the less is for
honor sake ever adjoined to that which is far greater: as Normandy in time
past came to be under the dominion and power of the Kings of England, our
ancestors. The Kings Judgment was greatly commended: the whole Counseil
approved the matter with a full consent: and the said Lady, and virgin,
Margaret was married to King James. Thus far has Polidor. Thees are words
of great importance, and put our matter clear out of doubt: for here it
appears that the case solemnlie in counceil by a wise and prudent King, with
wise, grave, and learned Counseilours was debated and with great wisdom
resolved and concluded: and to this some lawyers of that land give great
authority and credit.

Thus it is evidently declared who are the true heirs of the Crounes of
England and Scotland: and that the said marriage of James the fowerth and the
said Lady Margaret is to be accounted a most fortunate benefit to the whole
Yland. For if it be true (as in deed it is) that the marriage of the seventh
King Henry with the daughter and heir of King Edward the fowerth, was to be
esteemed as a most happy commodity to all England, because it did cut of and
dissolve all those tumultes and seditions between the howses of York and
Lancaster which so many years had miserably afflicted all that nation: I pray
you what reckening is to be made of the matrimony between King James the
fowerth of Scotland and the Lady Margaret daughter to the King of England,
sith now at last by the benefit of this marriage, both England and Scotland
may be quite reskewed and delivered from those most mortal wars, and
intestine dissentions, which for pre-eminence sake have been so long
continewed and maintened? A happy prince therefore to England was King Henry
the seventh, for that by him almighty God abolished all seditions, and united
the two howses of york and Lancastre. But most fortunate and most gratiouse
shall the renowned Queen Mary of Scotland be, and her most noble son king
James also, to the English and Scottishe Nations: if by them two the same God
shall bring the said twoe several kingdoms to a perfect unity: reduce the
whole Isle of Britain to his most ancient estate of dignity, and deliver it
from all civil wars and Barbarous cruelty.

Embrace therefore (ye Britains of all mortal men most fortunat) and take
hold of this singular great benefit, when the same by the grace of the
everliving God shall be bestowed upon you: and in the mean time and ever yield ye
to him most humble and most hearty thanks, for that he of his infinite
clemency and benignity has at last produced out of booth you bloodes, a
Prince, by whose help your domestical troubles and dissentions may be
extinguished: and a place left for this divine law of peace and amity to be
planted, and by the same law a sovereign safetye, and welfare of all the
people establyshed. For the welfare of the people consists (...) in peace
and concord. But perpetual peace and quietness can not be among you, except
these two Realms be combined and made all one. For the force of unity is
such as the preservation thereof is the utter most end that nature intends.
Herehence also grows among men charity, love, and frendshipp, so far, that
many minds are become all as one: first to remember that they must be truly
men in deed: and then that they lead a good and blessed life, which is the
last end and perfection of mankind. Sith therefore the matter goes so: if
you will follow God and the law of nature: if you desire the safety and welfare
of your country: if you will live well and fortunatlie in this world, and at
last enioie the perfect bless of eternal felicity: you must enforce your
selves with all labor, industry and diligence, that this dispersed people may
be called together, under the regiment of one rightful Prince, and Catholic
Religion of their ancestors. This will please almighty God, and bring great
tranquillity, peace, and quiet to your selves, and to all the people of
England, Scotland, and Yreland. And that it may so be, let us all
continually pray to almighty God the supreme governor and ruler of the whole
world.

Amen.

