decorative border

A MEditacion upon the Lords Prayer, made by Thomas ^euer, at Sayncte Mary-Wol
church in London.

Anno. M.D.Li.

To the Christian reader.
PRopter, laborem inopu^, et gemitum pauperum, nunc exurga^ dicit dominus.
Psalm. xii.
Surely even now in great scarsitie lack and dearth of meat, drink,
clothing, and all other necessaries, the sorrowful sighs of the poor and
nedye, must either sink into the rich men's hearts, and from them procure
relyue, and comfort, unto the nedye members of Christ's body: or else
directlye ascend unto the throne of Gods Justice, and from thence bring
down indignacyon and vengeance, to destroy wicked worldelings, which being
the^ selfs in wealth and abundance, feel no gryete of their brothers distress
and misery.

But if any man, every weke will be content, to spare one meal of him self, and
bestow the price of that meal in Charitable Almose to relyue the pore, and
the time of the same in godly meditacion and Prayer, to dispose his own mind
devoutly: then shall al such feel and taste, both of poor men's honger, and
of Godly comfort in abstine^ce and prayer, yea, and many poor be much relyued,
and no rich man any thing charged, and so thereby Gods vengaunce avoided and
Gods grace procured, when as fasting and prayer does pluck out of men's
hearts coueteousnes which is the root of all evil and the cause of all
calamities that now do trouble, grieve, and danger al men: This meditacion
therefore of the Lords prayer, shall be good comfortable spiritual fode, in
that time of bodily abstinence.

typographic decoration

A medytacyon upon the Lords prayer.
OVre father which art in heaven. We (gloriously formed unto the Image of thy
deuyne Majesty, created by the gracyous goodness unto highest honor, howbeit,
by our own sinfulnes disfigured with vileness deserving dampnacion, and yet by
Christ's death restored unto grace, to be citeze^s with saynctes of the family
of God) now all together in Christen unite, as members of one body, with this
one voice, for the manifold miseries of every member, and worthy merits of
Christ our head, pray, desire, and trust, to obtain of the our heavenly
father, according unto thy gracious goodness, mighty power, and faithful
promise, unto us that ask abundance of thy grace.

That thy dyuine power and glorious Majesty, may be certainly known and
reverently honored. That ye hearts of us men, by thy word and prayer, may be
sanctified from worldly vanyties and fleshly lusts, so that we with all that
we have, serving the in holiness and righteousness, may shine so before men
upon the earth, that they thereby may be occasyoned, to honor, and glorify
the, our father in heaven

Thy kingdom come Thy word be so frutefully Preched unto us thy people, that
we may be thoroughly instructed and taught, to bridle our sensual appetyte by
natural reason, and submit our wyttie reason unto a Godly spirit, and try
our spirits by the true Scryptures, so that within us may reygne the Kingdom
of God, which is neither meat nor drink, but righteousness, peace, and
comfort in the holy Ghost, by the which we now tastyng of thy heavenly joys,
may be made from henceforth weary of all worldly vanytyes, continually wishyng
and lokyng for the spedy apperance and coming of thy eternal and everlasting
kingdom.

In heaven the Angels of reverent love, do thy will and commandment, with
comfortable courage, and joyful pleasure: in hell the wicked spirits through
malice and envy, repinyng and grudging, do torment and vex themselves, what
soever they be doing: and upon earth we men being subject unto syn do think
it a labor and pain, to be occupied in any thing that is good and godly.
Wherefore we pray that the grace of thy heavenly Spirit may so work in our
earthlye bodies, that our minds may be delivered from sin and vanity, freely
to delight and take pleasure in Godliness and virtue, so that we with a
comfortable courage, may find delight and pleasure to do thy commandment
and will, being men upon earth, as the glorious company of Angels do which be
in heaven.

Give us this day our We being in great need, and not able of our selfs to
deserve any thing beseech thy Fatherlye goodness of thy bounteous liberalite, to
give freely unto us al in generally, so that none be hurt or hyndered
severally, this day when as we cry, constrained by present need, not craftily
crauyng for vayn care against to morrow, our daily bread, our daily and
necessary food and relyue, both bodily and gostly and especyally the Spiritual
fode of Christ's flesh and his blood, by daily Prechyng of the Gospel, and
ministracion of the Sacraments, to replenyshe, refreshe, and renew our hearts
and minds, with the comfortable remembrance of Christ's death and his passion
daily to be used for necessary and spiritual consolacion.

Give unto us that felyng and knowing our own synfulnes, do need and desire
thy merciful forgeuenes of our trespaces and fautes, which we have committed
against thy divine Majesty, so that we freely forgeuinge other that have
offended us in any thing whatsoever it be, may be sure that mercy spryngynge
in the, has proceeded unto us being graciously offered of the has been
thankfully received of us, and being charitably used of us toward other shall
most certaynlye be confirmed and enlarged of the toward us, and so finally,
by gracious mercy springinge and procedyng from the, all fautes and trespasses
shall be freely forgeuen, even as those which other have committed against us,
so likewise those that we have done against the.

And suffer not the devil, by thabule of thy benefytes, to lead us captive
into deceytefull and dampnable temptacio^, drawing us by deinteth meats unto
gredye glottony, by money and riches unto insatiable covetousness. and by wealth
and prosperytye unto pride and vayneglorye, and by all thy godly gracyous
gifts, unto every dyuelyshe abhomynable sin.

Deliver our gooddes from abuse, our bodies from corrupcion, our Souls from
dampnacion, yea, deliver us by Christ, from the bondage of sin, unto the
liberty of the Gospel, so that without danger of dyuelyshe temptacion driuyng
unto everlasting da^nacion we may serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives, with most certain and comfortable hope, of
everlasting life and salvation, through Christ Jesus in whom our hope and thy
promise is most certain, that is to say. Ame^. SOBEIT.

FINIS
Imprinted at London by Ihon Day, dwelling over Aldersgate beneth Saint
Martins.

These books are to be sold at his shop in Schepesyde, by the Little Counduit
at the sign of the Resurreccion.

typographic decoration

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Per sepe^nium.


