Englandes bright Honor: Shining through the dark disgrace of Spaines
Catholicon.

Serving as a clear Lantherne, to give light to the whole world, to guide them
by; and let them see, the dark and crooked packing, of Spain, and Spanish
practices.

Discoursed in most excellent and learned Satires, or brief and memorable
notes, in form of Chronicle.

Read, but understand; and then judge.

LONDON Printed by John Deane, and are to be sold at his shop at Temple bar.
1602.

A SATYR MENIPPIZED, THAT IS TO SAY, a Poesy, sharply, yet Philosophicallie
and wisely rebuking vices without regard of persons. Touching the virtue of the
Amongst the Physicians it is a name given to medicines, used to purge all
humors, and here applied to the briberie and other corruptions of the Spanyard.
Catholicon of Spain, and concerning the holding and assembly of the States
of Paris. Anno. Dom. 1594. The Printer of the French Copy to the Reader.
THis discourse, touching the assembly of the States of Paris, and touching
the virtue and strength of the Catholicon of Spain, was made and written in
the Italian tongue, by a Gentleman of Florence, which was at Paris, whilst the
Estates were held and assembled there, of purpose (as is to be supposed) to
carry the same to his Master the Duke of Florence, that so he might represent
unto him the wonderful estate of the affairs of France. But it fell out, that
as he did return into his country, and passed by Amiens to go into Flanders,
his horse keeper being a Briton borne, and unwilling to hazard himself in so
long a voyage, and having perceived that his Master was no good Catholic (and
yet he gathered it by nothing but this, that he called that He means the King
now reigning, who has this name of Bearne, a country subject unto him.
Biarnois the King of France) he gently parted from him, without telling him
any thing that grieved him, or that troubled him in his quiet estate: and to
comfort himself for the keeping and feeding of two horses, he carried away the
better of them, together with the cloak bag or maile, in which was the
original of the said discourse. But God would have him taken by certain
religious persons of Chasteauuerd, and brought before the Mayor of Beauuois,
where he had been declared and taken for a good prize, by reason of some booty
or bag of He means as I take it, double pistolets: sure I am it is some
Spanish ^oyne. Gross and palpable superstition, bel^eue it who will.
Doublons found in the maile, but that he showed them an ounce of Catholicon,
which he carried in his purse, with seven hallowed grains, and a shirt of
Chartres, which had remained nine days and nine nights at our Ladies feet
under the ground, being a preservative to hinder the battery of the cannons
and artillery, and to let the taking of the town either by war, or by
justice. In so much that he freely confessed that he had forsaken his Master,
after he knew him to be an heretic by this, that he called the Biarnois, King
of France. Now amongst the instruments or stuff found in the maile, Robbers
pretend right.
(whereof there was a solemn Inventory taken and made, in the presence of the
Mayor, and of Doctor Lucain, the superintendent or ouerseer of the prizals and
pillages) there was found the original or first copy of this Italian
discourse, which the Mayor did not understand, and therefore prayed the
aforesaid Doctor Lucain, to translate it into good French. Of which the said
Doctor excused himself, affirming, that though he had skill well to speak the
language of Rome, Better a bad one then none at all.
yet he was not able, or knew not to appropriate it to the French finenes or
naturalnes of their own tongue. So that indeed they were enforced to give it
to a certain little Monk or Friar called Romipete, who the next day after did
disrobe and vnapparell himself from his usual garments, even for very haste
that he had to be at Paris, at the solemn blessing and general procession,
Devotion good enough ^or to had an action.
which the Legate should make for that same holy and Catholic enterprise, that
Peter Bartiere of Orleans was to do, and had undertaken and sworn it unto
him, namely, to assault and murder his Majesty at Melun Howbeit it so fell
out, that the said poor Monk was taken by certain Gentlemen, and found
charged with the said discourse, which seemed so pleasant unto the^, that
presently one of the^ turned it into French, and so from hand to hand the
translation of it came even unto me, which I have caused to be printed, as well
to relieve from pain such as are curious to behold all news or novelties, as
to provoke the^ that yet la^guish under the yoke of that tyra^nie: for they
must needs be rotten and infected lepers indeed if they feel not this pricking
goade, and do not at the leastwise send forth some groans for their liberty,
that is ready to yield up or dye. Farewell.

THE VIRTVE OR STRENGTH OF THE CATHOLICON.
BEcause that the Catholic States, not long sithence held, and assembled at
Paris, are not States by the douzzen, as we may say, or common and accustomed,
but have something in them very rare and singular above all the rest, which as
yet have ever been held in France, I have thought I shall do a work pleasant
to all good and zealous Catholics, and serving much to the edification of
faith, to set down by writing the sum thereof, which is as it were some An
Arrabian word, and expounded by that which follows.
elixir, or quintessence abstracted and drawn, not only out of the orations,
but also from the intentions and pretentions of the principal persons, that
plaide their parts upon this scaffolde or stage. But because both the provinces
appointed and summoned long time before, and their assignatio^s also were
sundry times made frustrate by the white scarft soldiers, He means the
Kings forces, who did commonly wear white scarfes. Goodly things to commend
men to the counsel of Estate.
who crossed the ways of the deputies, that they could not pass, nor assemble
themselves at the day set, the assembly indeed was not so great, as some did
hope and desire it might have been. And yet notwithstanding there were found
in it, very notable and famous officers, who nothing at all gave place, for the
length and greatness of their beards, and the burlines of their body or corpse,
to the ancient Peers of France. And among them, there were three at the least,
of very good knowledge and mark, that did wear coyfes, after the catholic
manner, and one that did wear the great hat, and very seldom put it off.
Which things the Politikes (who yet in Paris are more than sixteen,) took in
the worst part, and said, that the three that did wear coyfes, That is bald
as his was, read the history.
were scuruie and scabbed, and he that did wear the great hatte, had a head
like the Poet Aeschilus, in so much as their common speech was, that in the
said Estates, there was none but three scuruie or scalled persons, and one that
was pilled or balde: and if the Inquisition of Spain had been in good time
brought in, A holy house.
I saw more than five hundred of them (what say I five hundred?) yea five
thousand, which by their blasphemies deserved nothing less, then the colling
and embracing of the president Brisson. But the lot fell not upon any of them,
but upon a certain poor miserable man, an Ass leader, who to hasten forward
his miserable dullard altogether wearied and tired, with blows and burdens,
spoke with a very high and vnderstandible voice, these offensive and
blasphemous words, Let us go (gross John) to the Estates: which words being
taken, at the pond head, He means the fauourits of Spain.
as we say, and ere ever they were fully fallen, by one or two of the number
of the four squared Cuba, and brought to two Inquisitors or Promoters of the
faith, namely, Machault, and de Here: this blasphemer was holilie and
Catholikelie condemned to be beaten and scourged naked with rods at his Ass
tail through all the four corners or quarters of Paris: which was an
infallible prognostication, and a very famous and plain prelude, to testify
to all the people that were assembled for that solemn action, that the
proceedings of all the orders and States should be full of justice and equity,
A scabbed horse good enough for a scalde squire.
as the said judgment it self, which was the scantling of the great piece of
the justice of the Estates that were to come.

But whilst men were making preparations and scaffolds in the Louvre, (the
ancient temple and dwelling place of the Kings of France) and while they were
looking for the Deputies of all quarters, Pomp enough for so paltrie a meeting.
who from month to month should come thither, with small noise, and without
pomp or show of train, as men were wont to do in old time, before the pride
and corruption of our fathers had brought in riot and vicious superfluity, The
French word signifies such as play legier de maine, and use sleights to
deceive men's sights, and bringing drugs out of far countries, would persuade
me^ the excellency of them by receiving them themselves.
there were in the Court of the said Louvre, two crafty Iugglers or
Apothecaries, the one a Spanyard, and the other a Lorrain, which it would have
done a man marvelous much good to see them vaunt their drugges, and to play
their iuggling tricks all the live long day before all the^ that would go to
see them, and that without paying any thing. The Spanish Iugler or Apothecarie
was very pleasant, and mounted upon a little scaffold, playing rex, as we say,
or showing his knacks and iugling tricks, and keeping the bancke or seat, much
like to many of those that a man may see at Venice in the place of S. Mark.
Upon his scaffold there was tied or set up a great skin of parchment written
in diverse languages, and sealed with five or six seals, of gold, of lead,
and of wax, He means the Cardinal of Plaisance power Legantine from the
Pope.
with certain titles in letters of gold, having therein these words: Letters
touching the power of a certain Spanyard, and of the marvelous effects of his
drugge called Higuiero of Hell, or a Catholicon compounded. The sum of all
this whole writing was, that this treacle maker, the young son of a certain
Spanyard of Grenado, banished into Afric for Mahometisme, the Physician of
Ceriffa (who made himself King of Marroco, A fit instrument for the Pope and
the Spanyard.
by a certain kind or sort of Higuiero) his father being dead came into
Spain, caused himself to be baptized, and put himself to serve at Tolledo,
in the College of the Jesuits there: who having learned that the simple
Catholicon of Rome had no other effects but to build up souls, and to cause
salvation and blessedness in the other world only, being weary of so long a
term or time, took counsel and was adu^sed by the counsel of his fathers
will or testament, A word much used amongst Physicians, Apothe^aries and
Distillers.
to sophisticate this Catholicon so well, that by means of handling of it, of
removing and stirring of it, drawing it through a Limbecke or Stillatorie, and
bringing it into powder, he made thereof, within that College, That is a
sovereign and choice thing.
such a sovereign electuarie, as surpassed all the Philosophers stones of what
sort soever, the proofs and trial whereof also were diducted and laid out by
fifty articles, such as ensue hereafter.

I.
That which that poor unhappy Emperor Charles the fifth could not do with
all the united forces and all the cannons of Europe, The principal of Dame
Venus Knights.
his brave son Dom Philip, by the mean of this drugge, has been able to
perform it, serving himself therein but with a simple Lieutenant over twelve
or fifteen thousand men at the most.

II.
That if this Lieutenant have of this Catholico^ in his Ensigns and Cornets,
And into what town will not an Ass laden with gold pear^e?
he will enter without giving blow into a kingdom that is enemy unto him, and
the people there will meet him, and will go before him with crosses and
banners, Legates and Primats. And though he destroy, rauine, Witness the West
Indies, and the Low Countries.
usurp, murder, and sack all: yea though he carry away, ravish, burn, and
make all a wilderness, yet the people of the country will say: These are our
people, these are good Catholics: they do this for peace sake, and for our
mother holy Church. The name of his pl^ce or house at Madrill.
Let a King (who is a sluggard and keeps at home) but assay and endeavor to
affine or try this drugge in his Escuriall, and write but one word to father
Ignatius, (the ingrosser and close keeper of this Catholicon) he will find him
out a man who (his conscience kept safe, or as we say, with a safe conscience)
will murder his enemy, whom he was not able by force of arms to vanquish in
twenty years.

III.
If this King purpose to assure his Estates and territories to his children
after his death, and to invade another man's kingdom with small expenses, let
him write but one word thereof to Mendoza his Ambassador, It is against the
order of the Alphabet to set a lier before a Jesuit.
or to father Commolet, and that beneath in his letter he write with Higuiero
of hell, I the King, they will furnish him with some one religious Apostata or
other, who will go under some godly show, as a Judas, to murder and that in
cold blood, a great King of France, He means Henry the 3.
his brother in law, in the midst of his Camp, without any fear of God or
man. Nay they will do more, they will canonize that murderer, and place that
Judas above S. Peter, Worthy fruit^ of a right religion.
and will baptize this prodigious and horrible misdoing or offense with the name
of a blow or a stroke from heaven: and the gossips at this baptism shall be
Cardinals, Legates and Primates.

IIII.
Let a great and a mighty army, of pitiful, and yet feared and renowned
Frenchmen, be prepared and made ready to adventure honorably, or to do well
for the defense of the Crown and country, and to revenge so fearful an
assault and murder, let them cast in the midst of this army but half a
dram of this drugge, A strange metamorphosis, but yet no untrue tale.
it will benumme all the army and strength of these brave and noble warriors.

V.
Serve for a Spy in the Camp, in the trenches, at the cannon, in the Kings
chamber, and in his councels: yea, though men know you for such a one, yet if
you have taken in the morning but one grain of Higuiero, whosoever shall tax,
reprove, or accuse you for it, A sound judgment.
shall be taken for an Huguenot, or a favorer of an Heretic.

VI.
Fight and play on both sides, as we say, be unfaithful and traitorous, yea so
far that you touch and take the kings coin, to make war even against
himself also: be not grieved any whit at all for so ungracious a deed:
practice with the enemy, etc. yet if you glue your sword within your scabberd
with this Catholicon, you shall be taken to be a very good man.

VII.
Will you be an honorable scoffer and newter, cause your house in every part to
be painted, not with the late S. Anthony, but with the cross of Higuiero, and
behold you shall be exempted from armor, proclamation, proscription, etc.

VIII.
Have about you but half an ounce weight of this Catholicon, you need no more
strong or available passeport to procure you as good entertainment, and to be
as well welcome to Tours, These are leaguer towns.
as to Mante, to Orleans, as to Chartres, to Compaigne, as to Paris.

IX.
Be acknowledged and taken for the pensionarie or feed man of Spain, seek
private profit, betray, change, sell, barter, disioyne and set Princes at
jar, so you have one grain of Catholicon in your mouth, Strange (...) cts
they will embrace you, and will enter into as great distrust against very
faithful and ancient seruitors, as against Infidels and Huguenots, how free and
faithful Catholics soever they have always been before.

X.
Though al go from evil to worse, though the enemy advance his purposes and
practices, and departs not from peace, but the better to bring in again and
assault it, considering the goodly shows that men make him: though the
Catholic Church it self run at randon, as we say: though there be
perverting of all order, ecclesiastical or secular, A small matter to move
such stirs.
through default of speaking good French, do but closely and cunningly sow a
little of Higuiero through the world, no man will regard what you say or do,
nay, no man dare speak of it, fearing least he should be accoun^ed a Huguenot.

XI.
Make your selves Cantons, and install your selves tyrannously in the Kings
towns, even from Newhauen to Meziers, and from Nantes even unto Cambray: be a
villain, a runnagate, or traitor: obey neither God nor the King, nor the law,
have notwithstanding thereupo^ in thy hand a little of this Catholicon, and
cause it to be preached or commended in your canton or town, you shall be a
great and catholic man.

XII.
Have a dishonest and shameless face, and a blistered forehead, For evil
example, as we say.
as have the unfaithful Iailors of Pontheau de mer and Vienne: rub your eyes
but a little with this divine or heavenly electuarie, you shall be taken and
reported to be a very honest and rich man.

XIII.
If a Pope, as for example Xistus the fifth, do any thing against you, you
shall be permitted, Papists against the Pope.
and that without hurting the conscience, to execrate, curse, thunder out
against him, yea to blaspheme him, so that there be in your incke never so
little of this Higuiero.

XIIII.
Have no religion, mock in sport and as much as you will the priests and
sacraments of the Church, and all law both Gods and man's: eat flesh in Lent in
despite of the Church, you need no other absolution, nor better pardon, then
half a dram of this Catholicon.

XV.
Would you very quickly become a Cardinal? rub one of the horns of your cap
with Higuiero, An easy stepping stone to promotion.
it will become red, and you shall be made a Cardinal, though you were the
most incestuous and ambitious Primate of the world.

XVI.
Be thou for any thing as guilty of death as Mothe Serrant: be convicted for
coining and counterfeiting money as Mandreuille, be a Sodomite as Senault, A
marvelous change, yea contrary to all reason and religion.
a wicked person as Bussie, an Atheist and ungrateful as the Poet of the
Admiraltie, wash thy self with the water of Higuiero, behold thou art become
an unspotted lamb, and a pillar of the faith.

XVII.
Let any sage Prelate or Counselor of the estate being a true Catholic
Frenchman, thrust in and oppose himself against the woluish or foxish
enterprises of the enemies of the state, so you have a grain of this
Catholicon upon your tongue, God make it to prosper every where, as there, and
there and elsewhere better, as he shall see good. They are good by excellency,
or in the superlatiue degree.
you shall be permitted to accuse them, yea to have a will and desire (so long
as God will let you alone) to let religion perish and decay, as it does in
England.

XVIII.
Though some good preachers, not able to teach children, do go out of the
rebellious towns, to aid the simple people elsewhere to arm themselves, if
he have but a corn of Higuiero in his cowle or hood, he may very well and
safely return back again.

XIX.
Let Spain set his foot upon the throat of the honor of France: let the
Lorraines strive to take or rob rather the lawful inheritance from the
Princes of the blood royal, let them debate and discourse upon their own, no
less furiously then subtly, and affirm that the Crown is their own, use
but thereupon a little of this Catholicon, and you shall perceive that men will
more marvel to see some question out of season moved, concerning a Bishops
cope, or about Plessis monument, then to travail with oars and sails, as
they say, to make sottish and foolish tyrants, that tremble for fear, to
forgo or let loose their pray. This is almost the half of the articles, which
the whole writing of the Iugler or Apothecarie of Spain did contain, time
shall cause you see the residue.

XX.
As concerning the Iugler or Apothecarie of Lorraine, he had but a small or
little stool before him, covered with an old napkin, and above a Larkes voice
or call on the one side, and a box on the other side, full also of Catholicon,
whereof notwithstanding he sold very little, because it began to smell, lacking
the most necessary ingredient, that is to say, gold, and upon the box there
was written, Fine Galamathias, otherwise named Catholicon, compounded or made
for to heal the Kings evils. This poor Iugler or Apothecarie, did not live by
any thing but by this occupation, and he was almost dead for cold, although he
were clothed or covered with a cottage or caban furred all of skin, He
alludeth to both the Cardinals, Cardinal de Plaisance, being for Spain, and
de Pelleue for the Guises. Strange diseases healed by strange medicine.
whereupon the pages called him Monsieur de Pelleue. And because the Iugler or
Apothecarie of Spain was very flatteratiue and pleasant, they called him
Monsieur de Plaisance. Indeed this man's drugge was very sovereign: I have
seen that it has healed Monsieur d'Aumale County of Boulongne, of the yellow
iaundise, whereof he languished. The Poet of the Admiraltie was thereby healed
of the itch, wherewith he was gnawne even unto the bones. The Register Senault
of the bloody flixe: and more then ten thousand zealous or hot Catholics of
the high or great evil of the heart, and a hundred thousand that were ready
to dye in Chartres, and pining away, without this Higuiero. And if the Iailor
of Vernueil had in time and place had of this drugge, he had well passed or
escaped the cruelty of S Romain of Roan. Monsieur du Maine takes of it every
day in a posset of ass milk, to heal the most disloyal and wicked hickcock
of the world. The Duke of Sauoy took also of it, to heal him of his greedy
appetite and yet gluttony therewithal, but he vomited al up again poor man.
There are worse Saints in Bretaigne, If worse can be.
then the Catholic servant of Monsieur de Fontaines governor of S. Malo, who
cut his masters throat in his bed, by means of two thousand crowns, for our
mother holy Church. That is they that dwell in base Bretaigne.
The devout Christian is by the base Bretons esteemed a second S. Yues, because
he is never unfurnished of Higuiero and Catholicon. To be short, all the cases
reserved in the bull, in the Lords Supper, are purely and plainly absolved by
this Catholic, Iesuisticall, and Spanish quintessence.

A SHORT SVMME OF THE ESTATES of Paris, called together the tenth of February
1593. and drawn out of the notes and remembrances of the Lady of la Land,
otherwise called Bayonnoise, and out of the secret talkings and speeches that
passed between her and the father Commelaid.
MOnsieur the Duke of Mayenne, Lieutenant of the estate and Crown of France,
the Duke of Guise, the Constable d'Aumale, the County of Chaligny, Princes of
Lorraine, and the other deputies of Spain, Flanders, Naples, and other towns
of the union, being assembled at Paris, being found amongst the estates called
together thither on the tenth of February 1593. would that before they began
so holy a work, there should be kept a procession, like unto that which was
played in the presence of Monsieur the Cardinal Caietan, which was almost as
soon done as it was said. For Monsieur Roze not long since Bishop of Senlis,
and now the great Master of the College of Navarre, and Rector of the
University, caused the morrow after, and that by his most ancient Bedle, or
staff bearer, both furniture and persons to be prepared therefore. Now the
procession was on this manner. A good proce^sion where the devil bears the
cross
The foresaid Doctor Roze, leaving off his Rectors hood, took his Master of
Arts gown, with a camaile and a linen garment, and a tippet uppermost: his
beard and his head were new shaven, his sword by his side, and a pertisane on
his shoulder. The Curats, Holy men, holy matter.
Amilthon, Boucher, and Lincester being somewhat more strangely armed, made the
first rank, and before them marched three little Monks and nouices, their
gowns or frockes being trussed up, having every one a head-peece on their
heads, under their hoodes or cowles, and a target hanging at their neck, in
which were painted the arms and devises of the said Lords. Master James
Pelletier, curat of S. James, marched on the one side, one while before,
another while behind, clothed with violet, in a soldiers scholasticall
attire, his crown and his beard were new shaven, he had a coat of maile upon
his back, with a rapier and a dagger, and a halberd upon his left shoulder,
after the manner of a Serieant of a band, who did sweat, pant and breathe, to
place every man in his rank and order. Afterward there followed three by
three, some fifty or threescore religious persons, as well Franciscane Friars,
as Iacobins, black Friars, hoodded Friars, Minimes, bon hommes, Feuillants,
and others all covered with their cowles and habits, buckled and armed,
according to the ancient catholic fashion, Much.
and according to the manner of the Epistles of S. Paul. Amongst the rest there
were six Capuchins, or black Iacobine Friars, having every one a morraine on
his head, and upon the same a cocks feather, clothed also with coats of
maile, their sword girt to their side upon their habits, one carrying a spear,
another a cross, the one a sword, the other a harquebuze, and the other a
crossebow, all rusticall and clownish thorough Catholic humility: all the
rest almost had pikes, which they did oftentimes shake, for want of better
pastime, saving a fueillant Friar which was lame, who armed all upon the bare,
assayed to make room with a two handed sword, and a battle axe at his
girdle, his Portuise hanging behind, and he made a goodly show upon one
foot, turning as it were a little mill before the Ladies. And at his tail
there were three Minimes or Friars all in one array or apparel, that is to
say, every one of them having upon their habits a plate or armor of carraies
or proof, and the hinder part discovered or unarmed, a sallet on their head,
and a sword and a pistol at their girdle, and every one a harquebuze a crocke,
without forke or stay for it. Behind was the Prior of the Iacobins, very well
appointed, drawing a bowed or crooked haldberd after him, and armed lightly or
slightly, as one in a dead pay. I could not perceive either Charterhouse
Monks or Celestins that were excused or exempted from this traffic or
business, but all these went forward and marched in much good order, I mean
Catholigue, Apostoligue, and Roman, and they seemed to be the ancient
Cranequiniers of France. They meant as they passed by to salute them with a
volley or peale of shot: Wise enough to look to himself.
but the Legate forbad them that, for fear least some such mischance might
happen to him or some of his, as did to Cardinal Caietan. After these goodly
fathers, there marched the four sorts of begging Friars, Lean like locusts.
which were multiplied and increased to many orders, as well ecclesiastical as
secular: after, Belike some of them were dead, or else they were four more, but
not to the course of their conversation. Such cup, such cover.
the parishes: then the sixteen great persons of Paris four and four
together, reduced to the number of the Apostles, and attyred like them that
play at Corpus Christ-tide. After them marched the Provost of the Merchants,
and Sheriffs or Aldermen, arraied with diversity of colors: afterward the
Court of Parliament, such a one as it was: the Italian, Spanish and Wallon
gards of Monsieur the Lieutenant: afterward a hundred Gentlemen newly advanced
by the holy union: and after them certain old soldiers of the brotherhood of
Saint Eloy. There followed afterward Monsieur the Bishop of Lyo^, and that
very sweetly: the Cardinal of Pelue, very humbly: Great praises.
and after them Monsieur the Popes Legate, a very mirror of perfect beauty,
and before him marched the Deane of Sorbonne, with a Cross, upon which hung
the bulls of his power. Also there came Madam de Nemours, representing the
Queen Mother, or the grandmother (but that is doubtful) of the King that
should be, and there bare up her tail, or (if we should speak courtlike) her
train, Mademoiselle de la rue, the daughter of that noble and discreet person,
Honorable attendance.
Monsieur de la rue, heretofore a cutter of garments, or a tailor, dwelling
upon S. Michaels bridge, and now one of the hundred Gentlemen and Counselors
of the estate of the union: and then followed Madame the Dowagir of Montpensier
with her green scarf, which was very foul with much using of it, and Madame
the Lieutenant of the estate and crown of France, waited upon with the Ladies
of Belin, and of Bussie the Clerk. Then Monsieur the Lieutenant set forward
and caused himself to be seen, and before him two Heraults furred with
Hermines, and at his sides two Wallons carrying coats of arms very black,
all beset with the red crosses of Lorraine, having before and behind, a devise
in imbroiderie, the body whereof represented the history of Phaeton, and the
poesy was this: Phaetons story fit for this procession.
In magnis voluisse sat est: that is, in great matters it is enough to have a
will. As soon as they were come in this apparel and order into the Chapel
of Bourbon, Monsieur the Rector Roze, putting off his half cowle, or tippet,
as also his sword and partisane, went up into the pulpit, As well as he could.
where having proved by good and forcible arguments, that this was the time,
wherein all should go well with them, propounded unto them one godly, expedient
and profitable way, to put an end to the war within six months at the
furthest, reasoning thus. In France there are seventeen hundred thousand
steeples or churches, whereof Paris is accounted but for one alone: Soon said.
now take out of every church one catholic man to be a soldier, and to go to
war at the charges of the parish, and let the moneys be managed by the
Doctors of Divinity, or at the least by certain Graduats to be named, we shall
make twelve hundred thousand fighting men, They need many for so great
underminings.
and five hundred thousand pioners. Then all the assistants or company were
seen to leap for great joy, and to cry, O stroke or blow from heaven.
Afterward he did lively exhort them to war, and to die for the Lorraine
Princes, yea and if need were, and rather then fail, for the most Catholic
King: and this he did with such earnestnes and vehemency, that hardly could
they restrain his regiment of Friars, and tutors, or schoolemasters, that they
had not presently run to take the forts of Gournay, and S. Denis, A strange
power in so simple a mean.
but they were restrained and kept back with a little holy water, as men
quiet and pacify flies and bries with a little dust. After this Monsieur, the
pulpit man ended with this conclusion, But he and they were none of them.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, etc. The sermon being finished, Mass was
sung in a high note, by Monsieur the most reverend Cardinal of Pelue: at the
end whereof the chanters and songs men did thunder out this verse: If a man
knew them.
How beloved are thy tabernacles, etc. Then all those that were to be of the
assembly, accompanied Monsieur the Lieutenant to the Louvre, No marvel where
there was such a co^fused troop.
the rest did confusedly withdraw themselves, some hither, some thither, every
one to himself or his own.

The pieces of the Tapistrie, wherewith the hall for the Estates was hanged.
BEfore I speak unto you, touching the ceremonies, and the order of the seats
of the said Estates, it shall not be besides the purpose, to portraite and
figure out unto you the disposition and order of the hall where the assembly
was to be kept. The carpenters work, and the scaffoldship for the seats, was
altogether like to that of the estates which were held at Troyes, in the time
of Charles the 6. A pretty, though not so right a resemblance.
at the instance and pursuit of the K. of England and the Duke of Burgundy,
when Charles the 7. the Dolphin, and true heir of the Crown of France, was
degraded by the said estates, and declared incapable to succeed in the
kingdom, and he and all his adherents and favorers excommunicated, Or as we
say, with book bell and candle.
aggrauated and reaggrauated, bells sounding, and candles put out, afterward
banished (howbeit but for a season). But the tapistrie wherewith the said hall
was hanged, being twelve pieces or thereabout, seemed to be made in our age,
and plainly wrought, yet richly garnished, in the upper border, and the cloth
or chair of estate, under which Monsieur the Lieutena^t should sit, was of the
same. At one of the sides and parts of the cloth or chair of estate, there
was lively represented one Sertorius, apparelled after the French fashion,
amongst the Spaniards, asking counsel of a hind appointed thereto, from which
he he said, he understood the will of the gods. On the other coast or side
there was the shape of Spartacus, making his oration to an army of slaves,
whom he had caused to be armed and to revolt against the Roman Empire. In the
third there was the portraiture of the foresaid person, having a torch in his
hand, and came to set fire on a temple: and at the nether part of the same
side, there was written, If I cannot by water, by ruin I will quench. The
fourth could not be seen by reason of the obscurity or darkness against the
show of it. On the head and below the said cloth or chair of estate, there
was a crucifix, New things best please.
according to the present sta^pe of Paris, having the left hand tied to the
cross, and the right hand free or unbound, holding in it a naked sword, about
which was written this saying, Upon thee, and upon thy blood. Without the three
coasts or sides, and before, there were the falls of Icarus and of Phaeton,
very well wrought, and it made a goodly show to see the sisters of this young
fellow, by metamorphosis, to be turned into popular trees, one of which, who
had broken her hippe in running to succor her brother, did naturally and
lively resemble the Dowager of Montpensier, all her hair hanging about her
ears.

The first piece of tapistrie nigh to the cloth or chair of estate, was the
history of the golden calfe, as it is described in the 32. chap. of Exodus,
where Moses and Aaron were there represented by King Henry the 3. lately dead,
and Monsieur late Cardinal of Bourbon: Some fitnes in these representations or
expositions.
but the golden calfe was the figure of the late Duke of Guise, lifted up on
high and adored by the people: and the two tables signified the fundamental
law of the Estates of Blois, and the Edict of Iulie made in the year 1587. and
in the lower part of the piece these words are written, In the day of
vengeance I will visit even this their sin.

The second piece was a great country as it were of diverse histories both old
and of this age, distincted and separated one of them from another, and
notwithstanding very wittily referring themselves to the same perspectiue. In
the upper part of it there was to be seen that goodly entrance by night,
which John Duke of Burgundy made into Paris, and when the Parisiens cried
Christmas from the feast of all Saints. At one of the corners was Harelle of
Roan, where a Merchant called le Gras, A good choice and a meet man for that
place.
that is, gross or fat, was chosen King by the common people. At the other
corner were the Jack men of Beuoisin, with their Captain Guillaume Caillet:
at the corner below were the pretty pigges or hogs of the league of Lions:
and at the other corner were the noble acts of the ancient Maillotins, under
these Captains Simonnet Caboche, and Iacques Aubriot, the Kings of Buchers and
Pillars, and the whole in men cut short and serving for nothing but for the
country. But at the bottom and in the midst of the piece there were expressed
by figure and lively set out the barricados of Paris, where men might behold a
King (who was simple, plain, and a good Catholic, and who had done so many
good turns, and given so many privileges to the Parisiens) to be driven out
of his own house, and beset on all sides with tons and barrels to take him.
There were represented also diverse brave stratagems, or warlike devises, Meet
men to manage such matters.
of the Sirs or Knights, who did lead Tremont, Chastigneray, Flauacourt, and
other rammers of the pauement (we call them pauiers) to the place of honor:
and in the lowest part of the said piece were written these four verses:
Jupiter with his tons or fats
Does bring us good and ill also:
But by these new vpstarts he does
The whole cast down and overthrow.


The third piece contained the history of Absalom, that with barricados
distressed his father, and drove him out of the city of Jerusalem, having by
unworthy entertaining and making much of, gained and corrupted the most base
and beggarly porters of the common people. Afterward there was showed the
punishment that he received therefore, and how Achitophel his wicked
counselor, did accursedly finish his days: all the faces and countenances
approached nigh unto, or were like to some of the said Estates: and there were
easily known the President Ianin, Marteau, Ribault, and others, to whom the
late Duke of Guise made so many goodly shows in the assembly of the Estates
at Blois: Fair words make fools feign.
also there were seen Choulier, la Rue, Pocart, Senault, and other butchers,
and horse coursers, even as base and low as dike-clensers, and kennell rakers,
all people and persons of honor in their occupations, which the foresaid dead
martyr did kiss on their mouths for zeal of religion.

The fourth represented in gross the feats of arms of the murders done in
old time and in our age also, otherwise called Bedouins and Arsacides, who
feared not to go and kill, even in the chamber and in the bed, those whom
their imagined Prince Aloadin, It seems to me he means the Pope, or some
that hold that part.
surnamed the old, of six or seven mountains, should command them. Amongst
others there were two very apparent figures, the one of a certain County of
Tripoli, murdered by a Sarazin, zealous of his religion, whilst he kissed his
hands: the other of a King of France and Poland, traitorously stricken with a
knife, by a wicked Monk or Friar, yet pretending zeal upon his knees,
presenting unto him a letter sent him: and upon the forehead of the said Monk
or Friar, there was written in great letters, the transposition of the letters
of his name, Friar James Clement, IT IS HELL THAT HAS CREATED ME.

In the fifth men might behold the battle of Senlis, where Monsieur d'Aumale
was made Constable, and had given him for his labor, the winged and hot
spurs by Monsieur de Longueville, a politic Prince, and an arm of iron by
la Noue^ and Givry his suffragan. About the same were written these verses, by
foures, as we say, or one four after another.

Nature gives to every one
Feet to succor them from fall:
Feet save the man, and he
Needs but to run well withal.
This valiant Prince d'Aumale
Though he run full well in breath,
And though that he did lose his maile,
Yet could he not ouerrunne death.
They that were of his train
Did not sleep in any place,
Saving by their happy flight
Of their doublets the fine case.
When the barricade is open,
For fear of blame to come,
Tarry not, I say, behind:
It needs but well to run.
To run is worth a crown:
Runners, men honest are:
Tremont, Balagny, and Congis
The same can well declare.
To run well is no vice:
Men run to get that is aught:
It is an honest exercise:
A good runner was never caught.
He that runs well is able man,
And has God for his stay:
But Chamois and Meneville
Did not run enough away.
Often he that does abide
Is cause of his own pain:
But he that flees in good tide
Perhaps may fight again.
Its better to fight with feet
To riue the air and wind,
Then to be killed and beaten
For coming slow behind.
He that in life has honor,
Should therefore death sure shun:
When out of life he goes
There needs but well to run.
And at the corner of the said piece, there was to be seen Pigenat in his
bed, sick, enraged, mad, and furious, with this fortune, and waiting for an
answer of the letter, which he had written and sent in post, to Madame Saint
Geneviefue, a very good Frenchwoman, if ever there were any.

In the sixth was painted out the miracle of Arques, where five or six hundred
discomforted and weak men, ready to pass the sea and to swim, nodded their
heads at them, mocked them, and put to flight, by the enchantments of this
Biarnois, He means the Duke du Maynes forces, who bragged as much as ever did
he.
twelve or fifteen thousand Rodomonts, renders of small ships, and eaters of
iron chariots. And which was the goodliest thing that could be to be seen, the
Ladies of Paris were in the windows, and others which had kept place ten
days before in the shops and working houses of S. Anthonies street, to see
this Biarnois brought prisoner in triumph, bound, whereas he came decked with
jewels, and (as he gave it the^) beautiful also, because he came in another
habit or kind of apparel by the suburbs of S. Jacques and S. German.

The seventh contained the batta le of Ivry la Chaussee, where a man might have
seen the Spaniards, Lorrains, and other Romish Catholics in mockery, or
otherwise, to show their bare breech or tail to the Maheustres, Those that
took part with the king.
and the Biarnois altogether heat, who with his bridle abated, carried the
union behind him on horseback. There a man might well have seen Monsieur the
Lieutena^t cursing the hindermost, and leaving the County d'Aiguemo^t for
pledges, and being deceived with more then the moitie of the just prise, to run
away upon a Turkey horse, and to get Mante by a wicket or posterne gate, and to
say to the inhabitants in a very low note or voice, My friends, save me and my
people: all is lost, but the Biarnois is dead. Above all it was a wonderful
pleasure, there to see them wisely to make an Inventory of his coffers and
chests, and to see them also religiously to reach out of his coffer and to
spread abroad the standard of the faith, wherein was painted a Crucifix upon
black taffeta, with this inscription, Christ being guide, such a one as a man
may see hanging in the Church of Mante. This, good Christian people, is that
standard which should have served for a golden flank, for the Kings successors
in time to come, if the cord had not broken. At the corner of the said
tapistrie, there was a dance of shepherds and peasants, and behind or near
unto them, as it were a table, in which was written this song following.

Let us begin the dance,
Let us go, its very well:
Spring time begins in France,
The Kings are passed we can tell.
Let us take a little truce:
For we are full weary:
By Kings chosen by bean
Still vexed and tired are we.
One King alone remains:
The sots are chaste away:
Fortune even at this time
With broken pots does play.
You must yield all again
I say, ye hindered Kings,
That would take what you can,
And yet possess no things.
A captain great and stout
Has brought you down I say:
Let us go Ieane du Main,
The Kings are past away.
The eight was a representation of the Paradise (or rather Paradises in the
plural number) of Paris, within which, and over the holy Pixe, were the
images of three Saints, newly printed since Pope Gregory his calender,
bringing with them double fasts. James Clement.
One of them was clothed with black and with white, having a pricking or
sharp foot, and a little knife in his hand, Fit resemblances.
as it were a cut purse, far different from that of S. Bartholomew. The
second was clothed with a red gown, The Popes Legate.
and a curate or breast plate upon it, and a hat of the same color with long
cords or strings to it, having in his hand also a cup full of blood, whereof he
made semblance as though he would drink, and out of his mouth came forth a
writing, in these terms: Stand with your head-peeces, polish your spears,
and put on your coats of maile. The third was a Saint on horseback, as it had
been S. George, The Cardinal Pelue.
having at his feet a great many Ladies and Damsels, to whom he reached out
his hand, and showed them a crown in the air, toward which in sighing he
aspired with this devise or saying: The things that are fair are hard. The
people brought them store of candles, and said new Suffrages and Letanies,
seeing that they did miracles: but the wind carried away and blew out all. The
borders of the said piece were of white processions, and of sermons, and Te
Deums strengthened again, where men might see in a small volume the faces of
Boucher, Lincestre, and the little Fuillant friar, exhorting the people to
peace, by a figure named Antiphrasis. That is contrary meaning.


The ninth set out to be seen, as it were naturally, a great giantesse lying
upon the ground, which brought forth an infinite number of vipers and monsters
of diverse sorts: some called Gualtiers, other some Catillo^nois, Lipans,
Leaguers, zealous Catholics, and Chasteauverds: and upon the forehead of the
said giantesse there was written: This is that goodly Lutetia or Paris, who
that she might commit whoredom with her minions and darlings, has caused her
father and his wife to be slain. Madame of Spain served her in stead of a
Midwife, and a nurse, to receive and to nourish her fruit, or to give it suck.

In the tenth there was very well described the history of the taking of the
town of S. Denis, by that worthy Knight d'Aumale, and there appeared the Lord
of Viq, and the holy Apostle of France, who did strengthen his leg or thigh of
wood: and S. Anthony of the fields, who put fire to the powder to make the
Parisiens afraid. Above upon the same piece was a writing containing these
words: Saint Anthony being robbed by a head of the leaguers conioynd,
Went (as to one more strong) to S. Denis to lay open his mind,
Who to revenge this wrong, has given him sure promise.
Some little while after, this great robber did assay
To take S. Denis, but S. Denis took him by the way,
And revenged upon him both the one and the other enterprise.


That needs not, for it is here mentioned.
And below was the epitaph of the said Knight d'Aumale, even as it follows,
saving that it makes no mention that he was eaten with rats and mice: He that
lies here a taker was
Right bold and hardy sure,
Against S. Denis who a fine
Enterprise did procure.
But yet S. Denis more subtle
Then this taker of renown,
Did take him, and both slay him eeke
Within his taken town.


In the eleventh there was to be seen, and that nigh at hand, the piteous
countenance of poor president Brisson, as also of his Deacon and Subdeacon,
when one spoke unto them of confession: in giving them the order of the union,
also their elevation and lifting up in charge. And because that the aforesaid
piece was not large enough to cover the door of the entry or coming in,
there was tacked unto it half a piece of the Apotheosis, or canonization of
the four Evangelists and Martyrs, Saints, Louchard, Ameline, Anroux, and
Aymonnot, making a long letter or writing, and at their feet was written these
4. verses.

You crack ropes lewd and wicked me^, that Judges hang on hie,
Impunitie unto your selves you do pretend thereby:
But you ought clean the contrary atte^d and wait again,
A wicked wretch never yet could put his righteous Judge to pain.
The twelfth and the last near unto the windows did contain at length, and
that very well drawn, the portraiture of Monsieur the Lieutenant, attired as
Hercules Gallicus, holding in his hand innumerable bridles, wherewith also there
were haltered and mousled calves and colts without number. Over his head, as if
it had bin a clowd, there was a nymph, which had a writing co^taining these
words: Look that you play the calfe. A goodly poesy and promise.
And from the mouth of the said Lord Lieutenant, there issued another, wherein
were written these proper terms, I will do it. And this is that as near as I
was able to observe and mark it, which was in the said tapistrie.

As concerning the benches and seats, where Messieurs or my Lords the Estates
should sit, they were covered al with tapistrie, be sprinkled with little
crosses of the Lorraines, some black and some red, and with arms parted in
two, of true and false argent, the whole being more empty then full for the
honor of the feast.

Touching the order held and observed for their seats or places.
AFter that the assembly was entered somewhat forward within the great hall,
drawing near unto the steps, where the cloth or chair of estate was exalted,
and the chaires were prepared, there was place assigned to every one by a
Herault of arms, entitled Court joy, A fine fiction for the same.
or as we say, short joy S. Denis, who called them very loud three times
together after this manner: Monsieur the Lieutenant, Monsieur the Lieutenant,
Monsieur the Lieutenant, of the estate and Crown of France, come up on high
into this kingly throane, in the place of your master. Monsieur the Legate,
place your self at his side. Madame, representing the Queen Mother, or the
grandmother, set your self on the other side. Monsieur the Duke of Guise,
Peer of the Lieutenancie of the estate and Crown of France, place your self
very finely the first for this time) without prejudice or damage of your right
to come: It may be it shall never be so again.
Monsieur the most reverend Cardinal of Pelue, Peer (though but for a while)
of the Lieutenancie, place your self right over against him, but at no hand
forget your Calepin or Dictionarie: Madame the Dowager of Montpensier, as a
Princess of your estate, seat your self under your nephew. Madame the
Lieutenant of the Lieutenancie of the estate, without prejudice of your
pretenses and claims, set your self over against her. Monsieur d'Aumale,
Constable and Peer of the Lieutenancie, advanced into Peereship by reason of
your County of Boulongne, place your self side to side by the most reverend
Cardinal, but beware that you rend not his cope with your great spurs. High
and mighty County of Chaligny, that have this honor to have Monsieur the
Lieutenant for your younger brother, take your place and fear no more Chiquot
that is dead. Monsieur the Primat of Lions, and without doubt he that shall be
Cardinal of the union, and now is Peer and Chancellor of the Lieutenancie, He
kept her as his concubine.
leave your sister there, and come hither to take your place in order. Monsieur
de Bussie the Clerk, heretofore the great penitentiarie of the Parliament, and
now the great Steward spiritual of the town and castle of Paris, set your
self at the feet of Monsieur that Lieutenant, as the great Chamberlain of
the Lieutenancie. Monsieur de Saulsay, Peer and great Master of the
Lieutenancie, Yea of a better.
for default of another, take this staff, and go very gently to sit in this
soft seat prepared for you. And you Messieurs, the Marshals of the
Lieutenancie de Rosne, Dom Diego, Bois-daulphin, and Seignior Cornelio, lo
here is a bench for you four, saving that you may be augmented or diminished,
if the case so fall out and require the same. Messieurs the Secretaries of the
Estate, Marteau, Pericard, de Pottes, and Nicolas, A tall man belike.
this form below is for you four, if Monsieur Nicolas buttocks or breech can
reach so high. Monsieur de S. Paul, County of Rethelois, but yet under the
title of hiring it, and having it at a price, come not so nigh Monsieur de
Guise, least you ouerheate him, but keep your self nigh to the Lord de Rieux.
Messieurs the Ambassadors of Spain, Naples, Lorraine, and County of
Bourgongne, this bench on the left hand is for you, and the bench on the right
hand appointed for the Ambassadors of England, Portugal, Venice, the Lords,
Counties and Princes of Germany, Suisserland and Italy, and are absent or
appear not, shall be for the Ladies and Damsels, according to the date of
their impression. Furthermore, let all the deputies take place according to
their pensions. And this was almost the sitting of Messieurs the Estates, all
without disputation or debating, by reason of the great presences, Churchmen
strive for high places.
saving that the warden of the Franciscane Friars, and the Prior of the
Iacobins, made some small protestation which of them should go foremost: but
Madame de Montpensier rising up, A goodly drudge, and a worthy reason of
conclusion.
gave the first place to the Prior of the Iacobins, for remembrance, as she
said, of S. Jacques Clement. There was also a little garboyle between my Ladies
of Belin and of Bussie, by reason that the one of them having let go a
certain evil pseudcatholike wind, Madame de Belin spoke very loudly and
loftily to Lady Bussie, Let us go Mistress Proctoresse, the tail does befume
us: you come hither belike to perfume the crosses of Lorraine. But Monsieur the
great Master of Saulsay, hearing this noise, and knowing the cause thereof,
cried unto them holding his staff in his hand, Good words Mes dames, ye come
not hither to trouble and disquiet our estates, It is an evil bird that
defiles his own neast.
as mine own sister not long time since, daunced the galliard of the late king
in this very hall it self. The noise being pacified, and the ill sent or
savor past, Monsieur the Lieutenant began to speak after this manner, with
the great silence and attention of Messieurs the Estates.

The speech of Monsieur the Lieutenant.
MEssieurs, you shall all be witnesses, that since I have taken arms for the
holy League, I have always had mine own preservation in such great
recommendation and respect, No lie.
that I have with a very good heart and courage, continually preferred mine
own particular interest, before the cause of God, who knows well enough to
keep himself and it without me, and to revenge him of all his enemies. Yea I
can say further, and that in truth, that the death of my brethren has not so
far caused my passions to break forth (whatsoever goodly show I made
thereof) as the desire I have to walk in the ways and paths that my father
and my good uncle the Cardinal had traced out before me, and which my brother
the Balafre was happily entered. You know that upon my return from my
expeditio^ of Guyenne, which the politikes call up and down, up and down, I
did not effect in this city that which I thought, by reason of the traitors,
The Duke de Maynne was none.
who advertised the tyrant their master: and I received no other fruit by my
voyage, but the taking of the inheritresse of Caumont, whom I did appoint for
wife unto my son: but the changing of my affairs have made me at this
present, to dispose otherwise thereof. Moreover, you are not ignorant, that I
would not engage mine army to any great exployte, or hard siege, (wherein
notwithstanding Castillon deceived me, which I thought to take and carry away
in three days) to the end that I might keep my self more whole and sound,
and the better able to execute my Catholic purposes. Concerning mine army in
Daulphin, I caused it always to stop and stay, and I kept me on my skoutes to
attend and wait, whether in the Estates of Blois ye should have need of me.
But the matters there having taken the left foot, and falling out cross to
our wishes and attempts, you saw with what great diligence I came to find you
in this city, and with what dexterity my cousin, the Constable d'Aumale here
present, So holy a man could not but give so holy a thing.
caused likewise the holy spirit in haste to come down upon a great part or
company of my Masters of Sorbonne. For as soon as it was said, it was as
soon done. And from thence have proceeded all our goodly exployts of war:
from that have taken their first original these hundred thousands of holy
French Martyrs, which are dead by the sword, by famine, by fire, by rage, by
desperation, and other violence, for the cause of the holy union: from thence
has come the correction of so many braggers and boasters, which would play the
galants, and compare themselves with Princes: from thence has proceeded the
ruin and overthrow of so many Churches and Monasteries, which hurt the safety
of our good towns: from this has flowen such great sack and pillage, as our
good soldiers, free archers and nouices have committed in many cities, towns
and villages, who also have served in stead of a Curat for the faith, to the
devout children of the Mass at midnight: yea from hence has it been that so
many fair daughters and women without marriage and against their wills, have
been filled with that, which in marriage they love best of all. And God
knows, whether these young Monks and Friars, A great doubt, their chastity
considered.
newly turned out of their frocks or gowns, and these disordered priests have
therein devoutly turned the leaves of their portuise, and gotten plenarie
pardons. To be short, Full cups make men of sharp judgment.
this is the only cause of the prompt and zealous decree of my Masters of our
mother Sorbonne, after that they have drunk well, which has caused in the end
many strokes from heaven to clatter and sound. And through our good diligence,
we have brought to pass that this kingdom which was nothing else but a
pleasurefull garden of all pleasure and abundance, A very good change.
is now become a great and large universal burial place, full of all
violences, fair painted crosses, coffins, gallowses and gibbets. As soon then
as I was arrived in this town, after that I had sent to heal the city of
Orleans of too much ease, and to forbid the trade and traffic of the Loire,
The name of a ruin passing by it.
which maintained their delights, I meant to do as much in this town also. And
it fell out well, in which Madame my mother, my sister, my wife, and cousin
d'Aumale (who are here to give me the lie for it, if I do not speak true)
did very catholikely assist me. For they and I had no more great pain and
care, then to lay a ground work for the war, and in so doing to comfort and
discharge all the devout habitants good Catholics, of the weight of their
purses, and to give them leave curiously to roue up and down, with their feet
and their hands, to seek and to seize for us the rich jewels of the Crown,
belonging unto us in the collateral line, and by the forfeiture of Lord of the
fee. We found much unprofitable treasure: we discovered with a little expense,
by the revelation of a catholic mason, and the holy innocence of Monsieur
Machaut (whom I name here for honors sake) the goodly and large muguot of
Molan, Because he served your turn
notwithstanding his devils and familiar spirits that kept it, whom the said
Machaut knew powerfullie and skilfully to conjure, secretly filling the bottom
or souls of his host with crowns of the sum. And without this divine
succor, Messieurs, you know that we knew not yet of what wood to make arrows:
for which the holy union is greatly indebted to the painful labor and great
good husbandry of the said Molan, who did so honestly refuse his master and
all his friends to aid them with money, and to preserve it for us, A right
recompense of treason, namely, idolatrous services. Add drunke^nes unto
thirst, and glory in your own shame.
so fitly for our purpose. And forget him not, to cause to be sung to him a
salve or good morrow, whatsoever it be, forget not to promise him a Mass to be
sung with holding up of hands, when he shall be constrained to make his will
quite and clean contrary. I will not forget the costly moueables of gold,
silver, tapistrie and other riches, which we made to be taken, sold, yea to
make port sale of them, appertaining to these wicked politikes favoring the
King, wherein my cousin d'Aumale did her duty very well, foyling her self in
the coffers and caskets, yea stouping so low, that she went to the ditches and
holes, where she knew that there was vessel of silver hidden. In so much that
afterward our dearly beloved cousin her husband, she her self and her chief
page, did greatly perform their businesses, and were healed of their catholic
iaundise, wherewith they were made yellow from the time of the wars that they
had for their County of Boulongne, catholikely and lawfully deuolued unto
them, by the merit of their Paternosters and devout processions, and not by
usurpation, or domestical the every, as these relapsed heretics say. This
being done to declare my liberality and magnificence, after that I was assured
of sundry towns, castles and churches, which easily suffered themselves to be
persuaded by good preachers, upon whom I bestowed part of my booty, I prepared
this puissant and glorious army of old soldiers used to the wars, all
freshly furbished; which I brought in a very good order and discipline,
directly to Tours, where I thought to say as a catholic Caesar, I came, I
saw, I overcame. But that favorer of heretics caused to come in post this
Biarnois, who^ I would not attend over nigh, nor see him in the face, For
coming to nigh an heretic, or joining battle with him.
lest I might be excommunicate: and further you know, that the leuying of the
siege of Se^lis, where my cousin here present, has done well (to speak of
him) joined to the discomfiture of Saveuse, gave me color to turn my
countenance: which also I did as willingly, as you Messieurs of Paris would
desire it, and ardently request it of me. Besides, you know to what point we
were brought, when that tyrant fortified with the heretics, came to beard us,
and to take Estampes and Pontoise: but by the good and devout prayers of the
fathers Jesuits, and the intercession of Madame my sister, and the intercession
of diverse holy and religious confessors, we found out that holy martyr, which
caused to sound that blow from heaven, and delivered us out of the misery and
captivity, into which we were ready and like within few days to fall. In so
much, that having taken breath, and made new attempts, and new bargains with
our good most Catholic King and nursing father, I lifted my horns on high,
and with a gallant army divided into two parts, I went to hasten to go against
the Maheutres, who following the good advise, which my said Lady and sister
had received concerning the same, would have fled beyond the seas with a small
train: but because they found not their vessels ready at Diepe, where I was
to visit them, I put my self in endeavor to bring them all prisoners to you
in this city, and you do well remember, with what assurance I promised it to
you, But not performed, the greater shame.
and with what preparations you looked for it. Notwithstanding, when I saw that
these heretics made us beards of dung, and all to berayed us, and that they
would not suffer themselves to be taken without mittons or winter gloves, I
fled into Flanders to seek such things there, and left them in the mean while
to make that pack of stuff in the suburbs of this city, and afterward
suffered them to go and walk all the winter long to Vendosme, to Man's, Laual,
Argentan, Faleze, Alencon, Vernueil, Eurenx and Honfleur, which I let them take
very plainly, certainly assuring my self that shortly after I should have all
their booty in gross, when they should have taken a very great cold, and be
ready to dye therewith. Brauadoes are but simple feare-bugges.
And indeed I did very bravely make them lift up their breech at Dreux, and
they had fled away, if they would have believed me. But you know that this
putting off and on, protracting also the time, cost us well: for these wicked
politikes would have nothing but me, and they would have dishonored me, if they
could have joined with me, from which I knew well how to keep my self, by the
good example of my cousin of Nemours, and of my beloved and trusty cousins
also the Duke d' Aumale, and the Knight his brother, who had not forgotten the
way to Mante. I cannot Messieurs, I cannot speak of this cross blow of
fortune, Patheticall passions.
without sobbes and tears: for I should now be all on doing, you know well
what. In stead that I was to go, to seek, and beg a master in Flanders, and
there it was that I changed my French couerture or cloak into a cape after
the Spanish manner, and gave my soul to the Southern devils, to vngage that,
which I had as most dear within this city. But I tell you plain I would have
as soon become Lucifers servant, as servant to the Duke of Parma, that I might
work despite to the heretics. I will not pass under silence the cunnings,
sleights and inventions, which I used to busy and to retain the people, and
those that thought to escape us, wherein I cannot but acknowledge, that Madame
my sister here present, and Monsieur the Cardinal Caieran have done very
express and notable services to the faith, by subtle news and Te Deums sung
to purpose, and by counterfeited clothes in the street of the Lumbards, who
have given occasion to many to dye cheerfully with the rage of famine, rather
then to speak of peace. And if a man would believe Monsieur Mendoza (a
marvelous zealous man for the faith, He loves it on the ridge.
and a lover of France, if ever there were any) you should never have more this
horror, to see so many dead men's bones, in the churchyards or burial places of
S. Innocent and of the Trinity; and that the devout Catholics would rather
have brought them into powder, drunk them and swallowed them up, and
incorporated them into their own bodies, as the ancient Troglodites did their
f^thers and friends that were dead. Open confession shall one day have open
punishment.
Must I needs recite the vile and slavish submissions that I made to bring our
new friends to our succor? And yet I my self am witness, that I always had
my purposes and practices apart, whatsoever thing I said or offered to that
good Duke, and I always reserved to my self with my straight and secret
counsel, to do some good thing for me and mine, in keeping the pledges if I
could, and come what would, I would not undo it, but by force: and I shall
always find difficulties enowe, to execute that which men demand: neither
will I want bulls and excommunications, thanks to Monsieur the Legate, who
knows all the Tu autems thereof, to deceive and bring into a fools paradise,
they that will believe them. We have already practiced two most famous Legates
to help us to sell our snaile shells: We have had pardons gratis, or of free
cost, without untying our purses, and we know with what bias we must take our
holy father, threatening him a little with making peace, if he yield and grant
us not that which we demand of him. Have we not had from Rome lightenings
and thunderings, by hook and by crook, against our politic enemies? Have not
we caused them to be excommunicate, and to become black as devils? We have
caused Paradises to be continued to our purposes and attempts: He means the
city and university of Paris.
we have before hand instructed the preachers, that are faithful, and such as
have learned to lay pawnes to gage, under good title. We have caused the
brotherhoods of S. Francis, and of the name of Jesus, to renew their oaths: we
have had ordinarily incomparable processions, who have obscured the glittering
and glory of the goodliest mummeries that ever were seen. We have caused to
be sown under hand, and that throughout all France, the Catholicon of Spain,
yea some such Doublons, or double Ducats, as have had marvelous effects, even
to the blew politic cords. What could I have done more, but to give my self
to the devils for the pledge and advancement of Hyrie, as I have done? Read
Josephus books, touching the wars of the Jews, for that is as it were such
another fact as ours is, and judge whether those hot fellows, Simon and John,
have had more inventions and disguisements of their matters, to make stiff and
obstinate the poor people of Jerusalem, to dye through the rage of famine,
then I have had, to cause to dye with the same death, a hundred thousand souls
within this city of Paris: yea to proceed so far, that the mothers should
eat their own children, as they did in that holy city. Read this history
I pray you, and for the cause above specified, and ye shall find that I have
not spared any more then they did the most holy relics and things of
greatest use in the Church, that I could cause to be molten for my affairs. I
have a hundred times broken my faith, particularly sworn to my friends and
kindred, that I might come to that which I desired, without making show of it:
and my cousin the Duke of Lorraine, and the Duke of Sauoy, know well what to
say concerning this point, whose affairs I have always set behind the cause
of the French Church, and mine own matters. And as touching public faith, I
have always supposed that the rank or degree which I hold, did sufficiently
dispense with me therefore: and the prisoners which I have held with me, or
caused to pay ransom against my promise, or against their composition that I
made with them, cannot any whit at all upbraid me, because I have absolution
for it from my great amner and confessor. I will not speak of the voyages
which I have caused to me made against the Biarnois, to astonish and at once to
amaze him, where I never thought it. The cunningest on my side have been
imbarqued therein, and have felt nothing thereof, but the freshnes of the
rasor. Neither should this displease Ville-roy, who went not thereto, but in
good faith, as you may believe, I have indeed allured others, that brag not
of it neither, and who have treated for me to two diverse ends or purposes, as
well to hasten forward our friends to succor us, as to astonish and amaze our
enemies with mustard. And if the Biarnois would have believed some one or other
of his Council, who have a grain of this Catholicon upon their tongue, and
who have always cried out, that they must make nothing more sharp, for fear
of making all desperate, we should now have fair play, in stead that we see
the people, even of themselves disposed to wish and demand peace, a thing that
we ought all of us to fear, more then death: and I for my part would love a
hundred times better to become a Turk or a Jew, with the good grace and leave
of our holy father, then to see these same relapsed heretics to return and to
enjoy their goods, Long prescription.
which you and I now enjoy, and that by just title, and good faith, a year and
a day, and above to. O God, my friends, what will become of us if we must
render all back again? If I must return to my old condition, how shall I
maintain my plate and my gards? Must I pass through the Secretaries and
treasurers of the Exchequer, and warriors, altogether new fellows, whereas ours
pass through mine own hands? Let us dye, yea let us dye, rather then come
there. It is a brave burial, even the ruin and destruction of so great a
kingdom as this is, under which it is better for us to be buried, if we be not
able to graspe or catch that which is above. There was never man that ascended
so high as I am, that would come down but by hie force. There are many gates
to enter into the power which I have, but there is but one only issue to get
out of it, and that is death. This is the cause why I (seeing that a heap of
politikes that are amongst us would offer unto us the head of their peace, and
of their French monarchy) have advised my self to present unto them a mask
and mummerie of the Estates, and after that I had differred it, as long as I
could, to illude, and make to wax cold the present pursuites of their
deputies, and I have called you here together with you to give order thereto,
and to turn over together their quiers, that so I may know where the disease
holds them, and who are our friends, and who are our enemies. But yet not to
lie unto you herein, A man of good conscience.
I do it for no other purpose then to shut up their beakes and bills, and to
make them believe that we travail very much for the public good, and mind
very willingly to make an agreement for the good people (notwithstanding all
this) shall not piss much better contented. I know there are none here but our
friends, no more the^ there was in the Estates at Blois: and by co^sequent I
assure my self, that al of you would do as much for me, as for every one of
you namely that I, or some one Prince of our house might be King, If you be not
deceived.
and you shall find that the best for you. Yet so it is, that this cannot be
done so soon, and there is yet a Mass to be said, and there must be made a
great breach in the kingdom, because it will be convenient, that we give a
good part of it to them that should help us in this business. On the other
side, you well foresee the dangers and inconveniences of peace, which sets
all things in order, and yields right to whom it appertains: and therefore
it is much better to hinder it, then to think of it. And concerning my self,
I swear unto you, A holy and religious oath.
by the dear and well-beloved head of mine eldest son, that I have no vein
that reaches not thereto, and I am as far from that, as the earth is from
heaven: for although I have made show by my last declaration, and by my
subsequent answer, that I do desire the conversion of the King of Navarre, I
pray you to believe, that I desire nothing less: and that I love rather to see
my wife, my nephew, and all my cousins and kinsfolks dead, then to see this
Biarnois at Mass, that is not the place where I itch. I have not written and
published it, but with a purpose and devise, even no otherwise then Monsieur
the Legate makes his exhortation to the French people. And all those escripts
or writings which Monsieur of Lions has made, and will make concerning that
subject or matter, are not but of an intent to hold the people in waiting for
some good adventure (you understand me well) which the fathers Jesuits will
procure to make a second holy martyr. And from elsewhere, it is as much
division and as great weakening and infeebling to our enemies, and as great
preparatiues for the third side, where we have also a good part, as being a
great mean, if it clatter and make a noise, for us well to perform our
businesses, and for the advancement whereof, I pray you to employ your alliances
and intelligences, as I do mine: not to constrain the heretic to turn his
coat, for I neither desire it nor mean it, and I assure my self that he will
never do nothing that way, he has so great an obstinate heart: which is the
thing I demand, to the end that he may always remain in his skin, which
will get us very many good Catholic, Apostolic and Roman friends, inspired
with the holy spirit, which will much hinder him on their behalf, and will put
him into a great accessorie: and I assure my self, that the King which they
will make, will not counterpoise me in the balance. It were hard, if not
monstrous, that he should
Whatsoever fall out, we have sent thick and threefold our agents to Rome, as
Monsieur the Cardinal of Pelue, my good master, can witness unto you, to
overthrow the negotiation of the Cardinal of Gondy, who will not chafe
therefore more then he ought, and the practices of the Marquis of Pisani, who
is too good a Frenchman for us, who are gone to Rome to seek and find, if
they can, a good way for peace. But we have stirred up our Ambassadors of
Spain, to protest against their audience, and against that that the Pope would
do, concerning the pretended conversion of the Biarnois. Monsieur the Legate
has aided us to make our remembrances and instructions, and for his part will
employ therein all his abilities and strong confederations of the Consistory.
Strong props.
And if his holiness do otherwise, I know well how we must have reason therein
and bring him thereto, namely, by threatening him that we are very well able to
make in this case our own agreement and accord with the politikes, and that
with the losses and disadvantage of the Church of Rome. Also would you not
counsel me that for one Mass, which the King of Navarre should cause to be
sung (which God forbid) I should demise my self from the power that I have,
and of a half King that I am, to become a servant, that so I might cause the
tempest of this war to fall upon the head of these good Catholic Spaniards
our friends, Good teachers for such scholars.
who will teach us to believe in God. It is very true, that if the said
conversion fall out in good earnest, I shall be in great pain and trouble, and
shall hold the woolfe by the ears. Notwithstanding, Monsieur of Lions, and our
good preachers have taught me, that it is not in the power of God to pardon a
relapsed heretic, and that the Pope himself cannot give him absolution, no
not in the very article or point of death, which we ought to hold for the
thirteenth article of our faith, New Creedes joined.
and add it to the Apostles Creed: yea, that if the Pope would intermeddle in
it, we would make him himself to be excommunicate by our mother of Sorbonne,
who knows more Latin then he, Good praise.
and drinks more Catholikely then the Consistory of Rome. This then is the
point, upon which we must principally insist, by what means we shall hinder
the peace, and shall make immortal war in France. Monsieur of Lions knows
very well that the King of Spain and I, have promised him upon our honor, a
red hat, if he can do so much by his rhetorike, to come to that end; and his
sister has already received for pledges a carcan or little chest of three
thousand Ducats, and a chain of Catholic pearls, with a hundred thousand
Doublons, or double Ducats. We have also certain politikes in the
conuenticle and simple Senate of the enemies, who spinne already some cords
or strings of the said red hat, and if we send them but a little crimosin
silk, to make the reins of their mule, they will aid us well, and much
hinder that these wicked Huguenots our of their wits, shall not enter into the
Estates, and that nothing shall be done or passed there, to the hurt and
dishonor of our holy father, and the holy Apostolic sea, no though that the
privileges of the French Church should be lost therefore. I conjure then all
this holy assembly to hold their hand, and to employ wet and dry even all
that they have, that the Parisiens and other towns come not upon us, to break
the head of their peace, but that they take death in good part, and suffer
their utter ruin, rather then to think of it, or to open their mouth for it.
We must raze out of the Church prayers, these grievous words (Give peace, O
Lord) as Monsieur the Legate will by and by give you to understand, that they
are not of the essence of the Mass, nor words appertaining to the Sacraments:
only let us make color and good show. No scarsitie of bad men.
If Ville-roy be weary of it, we have Zamet, who for the pleasure that my good
cousin the Duke of Elbeuf has done to him, will not complain of his pains and
voyages, and will easily suffer himself to be abused, upon the hope of his
salt lofts. Whatsoever it be, yea fall out what can, if we understand our
selves well, and continue our intellgences, with this happy third side, we
shall so well iumble together the affairs, that they of Bourbon shall not see
themselves these thirty years, where they think to be: for I will never make
any more account of them, The Cardinal of Bourbon.
then I made of their uncle, whom I let dye in prison and in necessity,
without remembering or caring any whit at all for him, after he had served us
for a pretext, and a planke (whom these Huguenots called a rotten planke) to
mount to the place where I am: for I know very well, that so long as there
shall be of this race of Bourbon (that makes better proof, then my self, of
the descent from S. Jews) never, neither I nor any of mine shall reign
without quarrel. This is the cause why you ought not to doubt, that I will do
all that I am able, to rid my self of them. At the least one thing
comfort me, which is, that if the enemies hold Saint Denis, where the
ancient Kings are buried, we possess the jewels, relics, and kingly
ornaments thereof, which are freed from them, by the holy devotion of my
brother of Nemours, who caused the Crown to be molten. But which is more,
Confess and be ^^nged, as they say.
the holy Ampoule or viole of Reims, is in our power, if we had any thing to
do with it: without which you understand me well. This is a great blow from
heaven. Therefore we pray all good Confessors, Preachers, Curats, and other
devout pensionaries, to be outrageous about this subject and matter, to the
end that God may do that therein that likes us. For mine own regard, I will
keep as much as I can the matters in a balance and appearance, as I have
always done in the government of this city, not suffering that the party of
the politikes should be too much taken down, nor that of the sixteen too
much lifted up and insolent, for fear least the one of them, making it self
the more strong, would not also make it a law to me: which thing my cousin the
Duke of Lorraine vpbraided me withal, which also I have learned of the Queen
Mother, A catholic man's prayer for a catholic woman.
whom God have mercy upon. Furthermore, I believe that there is not one of
you, that does not remember the death of Sacremore, after that he had done me^
many good services: I have hope that I and my nephew shall do many other to
the honor of this good God, because that you the rest Messieurs, serve us with
the like affection, and wait for the like recompense in this world or in
another. Concerning the pill or poison that certain politikes have a mind to
hit me in the teeth with, accusing me that Saint Cere, A foul fault easily
wiped and washed away.
or la Love (I know not whether of the two) had given him, they lie in it,
wicked men as they are, I never so much as dreamed of it: and indeed it is
nothing but a certain heat of the liver, which the Physicians call falling
off of the hair, and Monsieur of Lions knows that gowtes come very often
without that: and if it be othewise, A great execration.
I would to God the wolves might eat up my thighs, praying you for the honor
of the holy union, to believe nothing of that matter, and to regard your
affairs, for we have an enemy that sleeps not, and who uses more boots
then shoes. You will, I hope, give order for it, and will keep your selves
from the kings evil, and from falling from the highest evil, if you can. I
have said.

Monsieur the Lieutenant having finished his speech, with the great applaude of
the assistants or company, (where the president de Nully, and Acharie the
lackie of the League were seen to weep for joy) the Deane of Sorbonne, the
great Datarie of the Legate rose up and cried with a loud voice, Humiliate vos,
etc. Humble your selves to the blessing, and afterward ye shall have an
oration. Then Monsieur the Legate, three deep and bountiful blessings being
first made, began to speak after this manner following.

The Oration of Monsieur the Legate.
IN the name of the Father,. I take great joy, and am almost out of my self (O
Lords, and people, more Catholic then even the Romans themselves) to see
that you are here gathered, for a matter so great and Catholic. But on the
other side, I find my self much amazed, to perceive so many gross opinions
amongst you which are the Catholic leaguers, Such as were sometimes in Italy.
and it seems unto me that those ancient factions of black and white are
revived, for as much as some demand white, and other some black. But one
only thing seems to me needful, for the health and salvation of your
souls, that is, not to speak at any time of peace, and much less to labor
and procure it, before that first, all the Frenchmen be dead after the manner
of the Macchabees, and that also so valiantly, as Sampson was, slain and
buried amongst the ruins of this captiuated earthly Paradise of France, Paris
he means.
that so you may the better enjoy the immortal quietness of the heavenly
Paradise. War then, war, O valiant and magnificall Frenchmen: for it
seems unto me, that when men discourse and reason of peace, and that they
speak of truce, with these heretic rascal knaves, Hot burning charity.
that there is offered unto me a glister of ink, considering that it is a
great deal better for the quietness of Italy, and for the security of the
holy Apostolic sea, that the Frenchmen and the Spaniards should war one of
them with another in France, or else certainly in Flanders for the religion, or
for the Crown, then in Italy for Naples or Millan. Wherefore to tell you the
truth, the most holy father does not care for all your affairs further, A
good shepherd.
but so far as it touches him not to be spoiled of the Annates and
commendanes, and other expeditions and dispatches which be made in Rome with
your gold and silver. Give your souls as much as you will to the devil of
hell, it is a small matter to him, provided that that which issues unto him
out of Bretaigne, The crown and the belly wholly respected.
and the ancient reverence due unto his holiness, do not fail him. So much
more great and reverend shall be his holiness, by how much you other little
mannikiens shall become little and very little ones. And speak not any more of
so great good turns and such excellent favors, as your predecessors have done
to the holy Apostolic sea, and much less of the riches and countries, that
the Popes hold by the benefit of Charles the great, and of his successors
Kings of France, that is a thing done already. The Pardons that you have
received a few years since, Or else.
with the few Indulgences or forgiveness, and the Jubilees are of a much
greater price. It is enough that the Crowns and Scepters of the world, be at
the disposition of his holiness, and so may be changed, iested withal,
translated and taken and given, after his own manner: for it is written, Well
said devil, speaking his words, and in his spirit.
I will give thee all these things. And that I may proceed to speak unto you
in the Latin tongue, lest happily some did not sufficiently understand the
Italiana^, I will tell you the sum of my legation, which is taken out of the
tenth chapter of Matthew. Think you not, I pray you, that I have come to send
peace into this land: I came not to send peace but a sword, for I have nothing
more in charge and secret instruction, then that I may continually exhort you
to battle and fighting, and with all my strength may let, that you should not
at any hand treat, touching reconciliation and peace amongst your selves:
which verily should be a great crime and unworthy Christian and Catholic
persons. And another point that I have to do with you, is touching the
election of some good Catholic Prince to be your King, shaking off utterly
this family of the Bourbonia^s, which is wholly heretical, or a fautrix and
favorer of heretics. But I know that ye shall do a most grateful and gracious
thing to our Lord the Pope, and to the holy Apostolic sea, and also to my most
christian benefactor, and most Catholic King of Spain, and of so many other
kingdoms, if you conserve the Duchy of Britannia Armorica, to his most
famous daughter the infant, and bestow the kingdom upon some Prince of his
family, whom she will choose for her husband, and will vouchsafe worthy of
the dowry Crown of France wholly to either of the competitors. But of this
point, that most reverend Cardinal of Pelue, Elegantly spoken.
shall dispute unto you, and for the residue shall supply it, for he knows
better then me my self your businesses, which for twenty years space, as
well Lotharingically as Spanishly he has handled at Rome, and that so subtly
and faithfully, that he has brought your matters to that point, into which you
see them now reduced. Ask my fellow and I be a thief.
Wherefore when this godly Prelate and citizen did believe, that his mother
France was in the agony of death, and did draw the last breath, he came lately
to visit her, as a good and a devout confessor, and the best co^patriot, to
help you in the funeral, or rather vulnerall pomp and exequies thereof. But
if you would choose some one seeking out of his benefactors of Lotharingie, and
Guisie, surely you should do to him according to his heart, and he would
cheerfully annoint and consecrate him with the oil of the holy pot, crewse
or crewet, which he has at Reims expressly reserved, and very well kept under
the custody of S. Paul, Duke of Campania and Rotelia: look you to it. I by
the express mandate of our Lord, if you shall do any thing in this matter
against the laws and manners of this kingdom, or against the Councels of the
Church, And not?
or against the Gospel and Decalogue (specially according to the impression of
heretics) do promise you full absolution and indulgence, and that freely for
ever and ever, Amen. Alas for me, I did not remember to cause you to
understand a much and merueilous good news, which I have received in haste
from Rome, by means of Zametto, that is, that his holiness does excommunicate,
charge, accurse all Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priests and Friars
which are politikes royal, or favoring the King, how much Catholic soever
they be. And for to take away all differences and iealousnes betwixt the
Spaniards and French, the most holy father shall make, But yet the Spaniards
had it first.
that the French shall have the kings evil, as well as the Spaniards, and shall
become also as great brauaders or bragging fellows, and bouggerers as they.
Moreover he gives full indulgence and pardon to all, how great good Catholics
soever they be, be they Lorraines, or Spaniards, or French men, the which shall
murder their fathers, brethren, cousins, neighbors, superiors, royal
Princes, politic heretics in this most christian war, during three hundred
thousand years of true pardon. A very good reason.
And doubt ye not that the holy spirit shall be wanting unto you, for the
holy Consistory will cause it to come down from the arms of God the father,
at their pleasure or commandment, as ye know that he has denied these many
years to create any Pope, that has not been an Italian or a Spanyard. In
fine, I pray you for my sake make a King: and I do not care whosoever he be,
although he were the devil, so that he be a servant and a feudatarie of his
holiness, and of the Catholic King, by whose means I stand, and have been
made a Cardinal, thanks to the good Duke of Parma for it. This I will tell
you, that my voice of choice, shall willingly be for the infant or daughter of
Spain, More (it is said) the^ she should
for she is a valiant and worthy Lady, and much beloved of her father.
Nevertheless, do you that which shall please the Lord the Duke of Feria, and
Monsieur the Lieutenant. But take you heed in the mean time, how you open your
mouth to speak or reason of peace or of truce: otherwise the holy College
will deny Christ himself. I commend my self heartily unto you. Again I say
unto you farewell.

These words being finished, little Launay, heretofore made minister in the
university of Geneue, and at this present the basest person of Sorbonne, after
that he had eaten up the great breuiaries and heures of the late king, to make
banquets to Monsieur the Lieutenant, fell upon his knees with Garinus the
Franciscan Friar, and apostle apostata, and assisted with Cuilly the Curat of
S. Germain Lauxerrois, and with Aubry the Curat of S. Andrew des Arts, coming
back from shriuing Peter Barriere, thundered out with a loud voice, before
Monsieur the Legates cross, O cross all hail, our only hope in this time of
the passion.

Some of the assembly thought not well of it, notwithstanding every one
followed them, singing the same song, and the stir being ended, the lot fell
to Monsieur the Cardinal of Pelue to speak, who lifting himself up upon his
two feet like a goose, after that he had made very deep reverence before
Monsieur the Lieutenants seat, he having put off his red had into his hood
behind, and afterward making such another before Monsieur the Legate, Great
preparation to hear a goose hiss.
and last of all one most low of all the rest before the Dames or Ladies, did
in fine sit himself down again, and having coughed or sneezed three good
times together, and that not without avoiding of some phlegmatike matter, which
also provoked every one to do the like, he began to speak after this manner,
directing his words to Monsieur the Lieutenant, who three times said unto him,
Cover a thousand, or put on my master.

The Oration of Monsieur the Cardinal of Pelue.
MOnsieur Lieutenant, you shall excuse me, if to content this learned
assembly, and to keep decorum, and the dignity of the rank or place that I
hold in the Church, by the providence of you and yours, Man sets up such
mates.
I make some discourse in the Latin tongue, in which you know that I have a
long time studied, and know almost as much thereof as my grandfather, A
learned race.
who was a good soldier and a good farmor, and that under Charles the eight.
But when I shall have spoken three words, I will then come to you and your
affairs. Wherefore I will now direct my self to you famous men, Never word of
this kind more true.
and the most picked out of all the filth and stinking dirt of France, that I
may make you to understand many things, which cannot sufficiently enough be
expressed in the French language. For it is most fit, that we chiefly that
have studied in the most famous university of Paris, and are more witty then
the tagge ragge of the people, High points doubtless.
should have some secret matters in us that women should not understand. I will
therefore that you know (and yet let these things be spoken to godly ears
alone) that there has gone out an edict, or if you will rather, a rescript,
from our Lord the Pope, by which it is permitted us to choose, create, sacrate,
and annoint a new King, what a one shall please you, so that he be of the
stock of Austria or Guise. A shrewd limitation.
You have therefore to provide a Prince of whether nation you will, for of
these Bourbonians there are no speeches nor words, how much less of this
heretic relapsed, whom the same our Lord the Pope, by the foresaid rescript
affirms, to be even now damned in hell, and that his soul shall shortly
serve Lucifer for an afternoones beuer. A sober judgment. So it appears.
Indeed I am a Frenchman, neither will I deny my country: but if this choice
might go according to my liking: verily for my good, and the good of mine, yea
and for your good to, I would willingly pray you, that you would give your
voices to some of the Lotharen family, whom you know to have done so well in
the Catholic commonwealth and Church of Rome. But peradventure my Lord Legate
has another intent, Who doubte^h of that.
to please the Spaniards: but he speaks not all the things he has in the
ambrey or chest of his breast. In the mean while hold you this firm, An egg
not (...) an (...), then this le^^ fellow like the Legate.
that you must at no hand speak or hear concerning making of peace with these
damned politikes: but rather arm your selves; and prepare your self to suffer
all extremities, yea even death, famine, sire, and the ruin of the whole city
or kingdom. For ye can do nothing more grateful and acceptable to God, and
to Philip our most Catholic King. I know well enough that Luxenburgh, and
Cardinal Gondiu, and the Marquis Pisantis, are gone to Rome to prepare the
mind of our Lord the Pope, to hear the legation of this Biarnois, treating of
his conversion. But look how safe the Moon is from the monkies or woolues,
Speak again, and speak better if can be
so much auerse is the heart of our Lord the Pope, from such businesses. Be
strong and secure even as I, so I be within the Parisiens walls. Verily I had
prepared some good thing to say unto you, concerning the blessed Paul, whose
conversion was yesterday celebrated, because I did hope that yesterday it
should be my good hap to speak in my order. But the over long oration of my
Lord de Mania, A right name, ^^t be well understood.
deceived me* and therefore I am constrained to put up the sword of my good
Latin, into the sheath or scabberd which I would have whet and sharpened
against this conversion, concerning which sundry politicians, sow I cannot
tell what into the common people, which notwithstanding I neither believe nor
desire. For blessed Paul did much differ from this Navarre: for he was noble
and a citizen of Rome: and that he was noble, and descended of a noble race,
appears by this, that at Rome he had his head cut off. Belike none be
beheaded but noble personages.
But this fellow is infamous for heresy, and all the family of the
Bourbonians does descend from a poultrer, or if you had rather have it so, from
a butcher, that sold flesh in the butcherie of Parisijs, as affirms a
certain Poet, greatly a friend of the holy Apostolic sea, and therefore
because he would not lie. Thou art judged by thine own mouth unthrifty
servant.
Paul also was converted with a miracle, but this not, unless some would say,
that he did by besieging enclose this city about some four months with six
thousand men, whilst there were within more then a hundred thousand: and that
this is a miracle, that he took so many cities and strong holds, without the
subversion of walls, but by place without ways, by holes and straight caves,
that could scarcely be pierced by one only soldier. Add ye: that Paul
feared, and was affected with great fear by lightning from heaven: but this
man is feareles, neither is afraid of any thing, neither thunder, nor
lightning, nor flashings, nor showers, nor winter and ice, or heat, no not our
set battles nor our armies, so well furnished and ordered as they are, More
miracles yet.
which he dare expect and come before with a handful and small force, and
either overthrow them, or put them to flight. Let this swift and vnsleeping
devil perish ill, which does so labouriously weary us, and lets us from
sleeping as much as we list. But this much concerning Paul, least Policarpus,
whose feast is kept this day, may perhaps envy, whom yet I will pretermit,
Unskillful in vitas patrum.
because I have foreseen or premeditated nothing concerning him. I remember
indeed when I was at Rome in the time of Pope Gregory, that I propounded in
the Consistory five protests or problemes to be disputed of, which all
respected this most holy congregation, concerning the choosing of a King of
France. For from that time, wherein this dead Henry the fau^or of heretics
spoiled me of my Bishopric of Senon, and put my rents and benefices, which I
had in his kingdom, in in his own hand and purse, I always had a mind and
intention of revenging my self, A holy prelate overcome evil with well doing.
and did all that I could, and will do for ever, though I should give my soul
to the devil, that this most notable injury might fall upon the head of all
the French, that suffered it, neither did oppose themselves against my shame
and opprobrie: which when I had often protested, I did at the last effectual,
and you knew well what to say. But these men Princes, and these women, A
notable beholder of forms, and a singular flatterer.
the famous pearls and marvelous gems of all the world, call me else whether,
to whom both men and women now the matter requires that I should speak, as
also to the rest of the troop of deputies and deputing, for whom it is
behouefull that they should understand me disputing and reasoning in the
French tongue, which I have almost unlearned to speak, I have so greatly
forgotten mine own country. Then I will return to you Monsieur the
Lieutenant, and I will tell you, that if I had found in France the affairs to
have passed, according to the practices and intellige^ces, which I have
managed, for these five and twenty years space, with the Spaniards at Rome, A
good French man.
I should now see the late Monsieur your brother, in this royal throane, and
we might have occasion to sing with that good Patriarch, Nunc dimittis. But
since that this was not the will of God that it should be so, patience perforce:
he goes far enough that passes beyond fortune. Yet by the way I will tell
you, Fie for shame that you will swear by such great and holy things.
that of my faith, credit and honesty, it is a pleasant sight for you, yea
Monsieur Lieutenant, it is a pleasant sight for you to be seen sit there
where you are, and ye have a goodly show, ye fit your place well, and it will
not be evil for you to be made the King, and you lack nothing but a good
pegge or pin to hold you well therein. You have even the very self same
fashion and manner (I always reserve and except the honor which I owe to the
Church) that some Saint Nicolas of a country town or village has. By the
faith that I owe to God, me thinks that we celebrate here the feast of
Innocents, or else the day of the three Kings of Colen. If you had now a full
glass of good wine, and that it would please the majesty of your
Lieutenantship to drink to all the company, we would all cry the King
drinks, The^ he might be Hugo bon compaignion.
even as well that it is not long sithence that the He means the twelfth day
Kings are passed where we did very much let, that they should not make a king
of the bean, for fear of inconvenience, and of evil presage or prediction:
but if ye were here, in the midst of this Lent coming, we would ride all with
you about the streets, and would keep there midde Lent on horseback, if we
could retain until then all this Catholigue assembly, to which I will now
address my speech in general, and that all the world may understand me.
Messieurs, A sore protestation, and a great loss if he should forgo it.
hold me not for an honest man and a good Catholic, if the malady of France
(I mind not to speak of the French disease) I would say your miseries and
pouerties, have not caused me to come this far, where I have carried my self,
as a very hypocrite, Correct it not, for it is no lie.
I would have said Hypocrate, but my tongue has made me to trippe. This great
Physician, seeing his country afflicted with a certain epidemicall disease
and cruel pestilence, that did root out all the people, counseled them to
cause to be lighted great store of fires throughout all the countries, to purge
and drive away the evil air. And me, altogether of the same manner, A
medicine to expel poison.
to the end I might come to the butte of all my Catholigue devises and
purposes, and for an antidote to our holy union, which is smitten with the
plague, I have been one of the principal authors (I speak it without
vaunting) of all these fires and flames, Neither need you boast of that.
that break forth and burn now all France, and which have even already
brought and consumed into ashes, the brauest and best that the Goths and
Visigoths left therein. If the late Cardinal of Lorraine, my good master, were
alive, he would give you a good testimony thereof, for having drawn me from
the great pot of the hooded Friars of Montague, and afterward placed me in the
Court of Parliament, where I well discovered the college, or told tales out
of the school, where he made me Bishop, afterward Archbishop, and in the end
Cardinal, and this was always upon this express and plain condition, that I
should bring this business to his perfection, and should obliege my self and my
soul for the advancement of the greatness of Lorraine, and the detriment of the
house of the Valois, and of the Bourbons, whereunto I have not been wanting in
all that was possible to me, and that my brain or skonse could stretch unto.
And in these latter days, the presidents Vetus and Ianin have aided me with
notes, Like will to like quoth the devil to the collier.
remembrances and practices, and have as it were vpheld my credit with their
foot, and somewhat before them my colleagues David and Piles, could not have
done any great matter without me, He means their practices.
nor I without them. Poor Salcede knew somewhat of our secrets, but not all,
and he had not a good bill or beak, for he discovered the pot with the roses,
whereupon he missed but a little to destroy us together with himself,
notwithstanding we have well had reason from all these Valesiens, and shall
have (God helping us) from these Bourbonists, if every one of you will play the
gallant man. As for me, Messieurs, behold me at your commandment, to set and
to sell, to spend and dispend, so that as good zealous Catholics, you subject
your selves to the Archcatholikes Princes Lorraines, This eloquence almost
passes intelligence.
and to the supercatholikes the Spaniards, who do so greatly love France, and
do so much desire your souls health, that even of catholic charity, they
would therefore lose their own, whereof there is great pity, and I pray you
in good time to advise, lest this Biarnois do not play us, or give us a trick
or a badge of his occupation. For if he should go to convert himself, and
hear a wicked Mass only (ah ha, ah ha) we should be stricken down, and we
should even at one blow have lost all, both our double Ducats, and our pains
or travail also. But though these honest people of Luxenburgh and Pisani, do
promise it to our holy father, it may be that there will no such thing fall
out. This is the reason wherefore in doubt, He would or should have said without
doubt.
ye ought to make haste to put your selves into the hands of Physicians, these
good Christians of Castile, who are skilled in your sickness, and know the cause
thereof, and by consequent, are so much the more proper, to heal it if you
will believe them: for they which say, Physicians dealing by practice rather
then skill.
that the Spaniards are dangerous empirikes, and do as the wolf that promised
the sheep to heal her of her cough, that is false, they are all heretics
that say it, and every good Catholic ought to believe under pain of
excommunication, and the censure of the Church, that the faithful and valiant
King of Spain, would have lost his kingdoms of Naples, Portugal, and
Navarre, And why not the Indies and all as well as these?
yea his Duchy of Millan, and the County of Roussillon, and all the rights
and titles that he has in the Low Countries, which the Estates keep for him,
and that all the Frenchmen should be good Catholics, and would willingly and
in haste receive his garrisons, together with the holy Inquisition, which is
the true and only touchstone to know the good Christians and zealous
Catholics, children of humility and obedience. Believe not then that this
good King sends you so many Ambassadors, and causes to be sent unto you
these good persons, the Legates of the holy father, of any other intention but
to make you to believe that he loves you above all nothings. As right as can
be.
Can you think rightly, that he that is the Lord of so many kingdoms, that he
cannot count them nor call them by the letters of the cross to we, and so
rich, that he cannot tell what to do with his treasures, would so much as take
pain only to wish so small a thing as the signeurie of France? The fox says
he will eat no grapes.
All Europe, by a manner of speech, is not so much as one country, in
comparison of the new Islands conquered against the savages: when he sweateth,
these are his Diadems: when he wipeth his nose or face, these are his Crowns:
when he tosteth himself, these are his Scepters: when he goes about his
affairs, these are nothing but Counties and Dukedomes that come out of his
body, he is so well stuffed and replenished therewith. It should be then to
very great purpose to suspect that he would be King of France. But what, what?
I say not therefore to heal the kings evil or great pox (wherewith his
Southerly countries are very sore infected) he makes not any reckoning of the
prayers of the devout inhabitants of his good town of Paris, who have besought
him by plain letters signed with their hands, to receive them as his good
subjects and servants, and to accept the weighty burden of the Crown of
France: or if his back were so bowed, and charged with other Crowns more
precious, that that of France could not find place, that yet at the least he
would recompense therewith one of his Nobles or Princes, who should do him
fealty, hommage and reverence for it. Marry otherwise, I beseech you for the
honor of God, A reasonable request.
think not that he thinks thereof. His behauiours in the Low Countries, and
in the new found lands, should assure you that he thinks of no evil, no more
then an old ape. And though it were so, Begin Cardinal with thy self and thy
friends, and then it may be thou shall the better persuade.
that he had caused you all to kill one another, and to perish by fire, sword,
and famine, should not you be very happy to be placed on high in Paradise,
above Confessors and Patriarchs, and to mock at these Maheutres, which you
should see underneath you to roste and boil in Lucifers fires? Dye when you
will, we have Moors, Africans, Wallons and Foruscites to set in your place:
kill, murder, and burn hardly all: Monsieur the Legate will pardon all:
Monsieur the Lieutenant will aduow all: Monsieur d'Aumale will adiudge all:
Monsieur of Lions will seal all, and Monsieur Marteau will sign all: I my
self will serve you for a father confessor, and all France also, if it have
the heart or spirit to suffer it self to dye a good Catholic, and to make the
Lorraines and Spaniards her heirs, as I beseech you all in general and
particular, assuring you next after Monsieur the Legate, that your souls shall
not pass through the fire of purgatory, A gracious grant
having been already sufficiently purged by the fires which we have inkindled
in the four rivers, and in the midst of this Realm, for the holy League, and
by the penance, fastings, and abstinence which we would make you do in
devotion. As touching the election of a King, I give my voice to the Marquis of
Chaussons, Quaint qualities for such a place.
he is neither thick lipped, nor flat nosed, but a good Catholic, Apostolic,
and Roman. I recommend him unto you and me for my self: In the name of the
father, the son, and the spirit, Amen. These words being finished, all the
Doctors of Sorbonne, and masters of Arts there present, struck the palms of
their hands together, and cried, Viuat, that is, let him live, sundry times
together, so mightily, that all the hall sounded with it: and after that the
noise was a little ceased, the Prior of the black Monks rose up out of his
place, and mounted upon his bench or seat, from whence he pronounced very
loudly, and that with good grace also, these four little verses, as if he had
composed them ex tempore. Or ex trumperie rather.


His eloquence he was not able to cause to be seen,
For fault of one book, in which all his knowledges been:
My Lords the Estates, this very good man excuse,
His Calepin at Rome he left and could it not use.
And even presently after, a little master of Arts, stood out on his feet, and
turning his visage toward Monsieur the Cardinal of Pelue, replied upon the
same point in so many carmes or verses. Add but h^ and it will be charms.


The ignorant Friars had very good reason
To make you their head, Monsieur most grand:
For they that have heard your goodly oraison,
Have be known you to be of other the most ignorant.
All the world thought this rhyme very pleasant, and after they had made a
second clapping of the hands, and yet not so long as the first was, Monsieur of
Lions rose up, and made a sign with his hand that he would speak. Great
preparations to hear a goose hiss.
Wherefore after that all the world had sonorously and theologically coughed,
hauked, spit, and respitted, that they might the more attentively hear him, by
reason of the reputation of his eloquence, he discoursed thus or thereabout.

The Oration of Monsieur of Lions.
MEssieurs, I will begin my speech by a patheticall exclamation of the royal
Prophet David: Quam terribilia iudicia tua, etc. O God, how terrible and
admirable are thy judgments? They that will very narrowly look or take heed
to the beginnings and proceedings of our holy union, shall have very good
occasion, with their hands joined together, Ah mannerly Prelate.
and lifted up into heaven to cry: O God, if your judgments be
incomprehensible, how much your graces are they more admirable, and to say with
the Apostle, Where sin abou^ded, there superabounded grace also. Is not this a
very strange thing, Messieurs, yea zealous Catholics, to see our union now, so
holy, so zealous, and so devout, that was almost in all the parts of it
composed of people that before the holy barricades, were all beiewelled and
enriched with some note ill folfaied, War works wonders.
and also ill agreeing with justice? And as it were by a miraculous
metamorphosis, to see suddenly and at one blow, Or rather ordure.
atheism converted into ardure and feruencie of devotion: ignorance into
science of all novelties, and curiosity of news: concussion and extortion,
into fastings: robbery, into generositie and valiantnes: to be short, vice and
crime transmutated into glory and honor? These are the strokes from heaven,
as Monsieur the Lieutenant has said, even from God himself: I say so fair
and beautiful, that Frenchmen ought to open the eyes of their understanding
profoundly for to consider these miracles, and thereupon ought the good people
of this Realm, and those that enjoy goods to, to be red with shame, with
almost all the Nobility, the more sound part of the Prelates, and of the
Magistrates, yea the most clear sighted, who make show to have in horror, As
they should indeed.
this holy and miraculous change. For what is there in the world more
admirable? And what can God himself do more strange, then to see all turned
vpside down in a moment, valets and varlets to become masters: small ones made
great ones: the poor, rich: the humble, insolent and proud: to see them that
obeyed, to command: those that borrowed, to lend to usury: those that judged,
to be judged: those that imprisoned, to be imprisoned: and those that were
feign to stand, to sit. O marvelous case! O great mysteries! What man? wither
will thou?
O the secrets of the profound casket of God, unknown to mortal caytifes. The
yards and else of shoppes are turned into partisanes: the penners into
muskets: the breuiaries or portuises into targets: the copes into corselets,
and the hoods into beuers and salades? Is it not another great and admirable
conversion of the greatest part of you, Messieurs, the zealous Catholics,
(among whom I will name for honors sake, the Lords de Rosne, de Mandreville,
la mothe Serand, the cheualier Breton, Mo then a good many.
and five hundred others of the most famous of our side, which would make me
make a hyperbaton and over long parenthesis, and that they whom I name not,
would not take it well at my hands?) Is not this I say a great matter, that you
were all not long sithence in Flaunders, bearing arms politikely, and
employing your persons and goods against the archicatholike Spaniards, in the
favor of the heretics of the Low Countries, and that you are now so
catholikely ranged, even all at once into the lap of the holy Roman league,
Fit fellows for such service.
and that so many good sots or fools, banquerouts, saffron sellers, desperate
persons, hault-gourdiers, forgers, or counterfeiters, all people given to the
spoil, and worthy of the rope, should so courageously set themselves forward,
and be of the first in this holy part, to do their affairs, and should
become Catholics with double ears, very long before others? Very passionate
exclamations.
O very patterns of the prodigal child, whereof the Gospel speaks: O
devout children of the Mass at midnight: O holy catholicon of Spain, that
art the cause that the price of Masses is redoubled, the holy candles and
lights cherished again, and made more dead offerings augmented, and saluez
multiplied, that art the cause that there are no more traitors, robbers,
burners, falsifiers, cutthroates and thieves, since that by this holy
conversion, they have changed their name, and have taken this honorable title
of zealous Catholigues, Quid non morta^ia pectora cogis, auri sacra fames?
and of soldiers of the Church militant. O deified double Ducats of Spain,
that have had this efficacy to make us all young again, and to renew us into
another better life: this is that which our good God speaking unto his father
says, in S. Matthew the 11. Thou have hid them from the prudent and wise, and
have revealed them to babes. Certainly, Messieurs, me thinks I see again that
good time, in which the Christians to expiate and satisfy for their offenses,
crossed themselves, and went to make war beyond the sea as pilgrims, against
the miscreants and infidels. O holy pilgrims, thou of Lansac, and thy good
brother the bastard Bishop of Comminges, who have caused to be enrolled by
throngs and troops in your quarters, so many honest people, who being like
unto minstrels, had nothing in so great hate as their house. I will not here
comprehend many Gentlemen and others, who are of the wood, whereof some have
made them whatsoever it be, and have the show of it, and show themselves
valiant cockscombes upon the pauement of Paris, who having been pages on foot,
or serving the Catholic princes, or their adherents, have bound themselves in
liuelines of heart, If this be not good, tell us what is?
to follow their part, yea if they should become Turks: liking better to be
traitors to their King and country; then to fail of their word, to a master,
who is himself a servant and subject of a King. In truth we are greatly
obliged to these people, lo, as well as to those, who having received some
storm or damage, of the tyrant or his followers, have thorough indignation,
and a spirit of revenge, turned toward us, and have preferred their
particular wrong, to all other duty: and we ought also as much to thank
them, who having committed some murder, or notable wickedness, and robbery on
the enemies side, have catholikely cast themselves into our arms, to escape
the punishment of justice, and to find amongst us all freedom and impiety,
He would have said impunitie.
for these more than none other, are bound to hold good, and that even unto
death for the holy union. And this is the cause why you must not distrust the
baron d'Alegree, nor of Hacqui ville, gardien of Ponteau on the sea, nor of the
Iailor of Vienne, and others who have given so fair blows and strokes, to
gain paradise, with the dispensation of their oath: nor likewise those, which
have courageously put their hand to blood, and to the imprisonment of politic
magistrates: in which Monsieur the Lieutenant has a great deal of dexterity,
to engage them, and to cause them to do things irremissible, and which deserve
not ever to have any pardon, no more than that which he has done. Cursed
counsel.
But let us take heed of those nobles, that say they are good Frenchmen, and
that refuse, to take pensions and double ducketts of Spain, and have
conscience to make war, against merchants and laborers: these are dangerous
people (I cannot tell you) and are able to make us false sleuces. For they brag
that if the Biarnois would go to Mass, their swords should never cut against
him or his. Remember you the enteruiewes and parlements, which some make so
often at Saint Denis, and of the passeports that they receive, and that they
send so easily on the one side, and on the other. These people, Messieures,
hear not mass but on one knee, A heinous offense.
neither take they holy water in entering into the church, but in their body
forbidding it. O, would to God, that they were all like to that holy pilgrim,
confessor, and catholic zealous martyr, Monsieur de la Mothe Serrand, who
being in the prisons at Tours, for yielding testimony to his faith, refused to
dine, and take his refection of porridge upon a friday, fearing least they had
put some fat in his soppe: and this champion of the faith, Stumble at a
straw, and leap over a block.
this Macabee, this devout martyr, protested to suffer death rather, than to
eat any other soppe, than that which was catholic. O famous assistants,
chosen and tried at all adventures, for the dignity of this notable assembly,
the very pure cream of our provinces, the very wine lees of our government, A
country metaphor.
which are come hither with so many travails, some on foot, some alone, other
some in the night, and the greatest part at your own costs and charges. Do
not you wonder at the heroical acts of our Louchards, Gentlemen of the new
stamp.
Bussis, Senaulds, Oudineaux, Morreliers, Crucez, Goudards, and Drouarts, who
have so well come by the feather? What think you of so many Caboches as are
found, and God has raised up at Paris, Roan, Lions, Orleans, Troyes, Toulouze,
Amiens, where you see butchers, tailors, fillipers, iuglers, tumblers, cutlers,
and other sorts of persons of the very dross and scumme of the people, to
have the first voice in council and assemblies of the estate, and to give law
to them, that before were great of race, of riches, and of quality, who now
dare not cough nor mutter before them. Scripture rightly applied.
Is it not in this, that the prophecy is accomplished, which says, he
raises the poor out of the dungehil? Should not this be a crime to pass over
under silence, that holy martyr friar James Clement, who having been the most
unorderly and wicked of all his covent (as all the Iacobins of this city know
well enough) and having many times had the chapter, and the diffamatorie whip,
for his thieueries and wickednesses, is notwithstanding sanctified at this
day, and now is alofte to debate and dispute with S. Iago of Compostella,
Affections fit enough for such a fact and fellow.
who shall have the first seat? O blessed confessor and martyr of God. How
gladly would I be the paranimph and encomiast of thy praises, if my eloquence
could at^aine to thy merits? But I love better to hold my peace therein, than
to speak too little thereof. And continuing my discourse, I will speak of the
strange conversion of mine own proper person: although that Cato says, Nec te
laudaris, nec te culpaueris ipse, A great clarke, good latinist and singular
versifier.
thou shall neither praise thy self, neither shall thou blame thy self, yet I
will freely confess unto you, that before this holy enterprise of the union, I
was no great deuourer of the crucifix, and some very near about me, and that
haunted me most familiarly, have had in opinion, that I did a little smell of
the faggot, because that being a young scholar, I took pleasure in reading the
books of Calvin, and being at Tolouze, I had mingled my self to preach and
teach in the night with the new Lutherans, and afterward made no great
conscience nor difficulty, to eat flesh in Lent, nor to lie with my sister, A
beast: for abusing thy sister and Gods word also.
following the examples of the holy patriarchs of the Bible. But since that I
had signed the holy league, and the fundamental law of this estate,
accompanied with double ducats, and of the hope that I had of a red batte,
no man has doubted touching my belief, neither has there any further
inquiry been made, touching either my conscience, or my cariages. Verily I
confess, that I owe this grace of my conversion next after God, to Monsieur
the Duke d'Espernon, who (having vpbraided me in the Council with that,
whereof none doubted in Lions touching my sister in law) was the cause, that
of a great politic, and a very slender Caluinist that I was, From evil to
worse.
I became a great and coniured leaguer, as I am at this present the director
and ordainor of secret affairs, and such as importe the estate of the holy
union, neither more nor less, than blessed Saint Paul, who of a persecutor of
christians, was made the vessel of election. This is the cause wherefore he
says: where sin has abounded, there shall grace also abound. Doubt not
then any more to continue firm and constant in this holy party, full of so
many miracles, and of strokes from heaven, of which you must needs make a
fundamental law. As touching the necessities and oppressions of the clergy,
you shall or may advise thereof, if it please you, for for my regard, I will
put pain that my great pot be not overthrown, and I shall always have
credit with Roland and Ribault, that will not fail to pay me my pensions,
from whatsoever part silver come. Every one will advise to provide for
himself, if he think it so good, and for my part I desire not peace, unless
first I may be a Cardinal, as they have promised me, and as I my self have
well deserved. If thou may be judge.
For without me Monsieur the Lieutenant could not be in the degree where he
is, because it was me my self, that retained the late Duke of Guise his
brother, who would willingly have gone from the estates of Bloys, distrusting
of some deaf devise and ambushment of the tirant: but I caused him to remain,
and to wait for a dispatch from Rome, which should be brought me within three
days, and that was the cause, why Madame his mother here present, has many
times reproached me, that I was the cause of his death: whereof Monsieur the
Lieutenant and all his, ought to yield me thanks, because that upon this
pretext, and to revenge this goodly death of his, Whot passions and bad
persuasions.
we have stirred up the people, and taken occasion to make another King.
Courage therefore, courage I say my friends: fear not to expose your lives,
and that which remains of your goods for Monsieur the Lieutenant, and for
them of his house. These are good princes and good Catholics who love you to
the full and on the ridge. Speak not here of abrogating from him his power,
which some murmur and mutter, that it was not given him but until some next
holding or assembly of the Estates: but these are the accountes of the Storke.
They that have tasted this morsel, they will never bite. Would you demand a
more goodly and brave king, and one that is more gross, and more grass or
fattie than he is? Good parts to commend to a kingdom.
He is (by S. James) a fair piece of flesh, and I think you cannot find one
that ouerweigheth him. Messieurs, of the nobility, that keep the towns and
castles, in the name of the holy union, are you not very glad to levy and
gather up all the taxes, tenths, aids, shoppes, fortifications, watches,
imposts, and that which is given for all wares, as well by water as by land,
and to take your rights and customs upon all prices, ransomes, and pillages,
without being bound to make an account thereof to any man? Under what King
would you find a better condition? You are Barons: you are Counties and Dukes
in the propriety of all the places and provinces which you hold. You command
absolutely therein, Right as can be, of clubbes, spades and all save the hearts.
and as it were kings of the cards. What would you have better? Leave and
forget these glorious names of French monarchy, and remember no more your
ancestors, nor them who have enriched and inobled you. To be brief, he that
stands well, let him not remove himself. As touching you, Messieurs, the
ecclesiastical persons, of a truth I loose my Latin in speaking to you, and I
see very well that if the war last, there will be a shameful number of poor
priests: but also hope not you for your recompense in this brittle and frail
world, but in heaven where the crown of eternal glory waits for them that
shall suffer and dye for the holy League. What text shows that?
Let him save himself that can. As concerning my self, I am capable enough to
bear and wear a red hat, but to remedy and meet with the necessities and
oppressions of the Clergy, it is not in my power, neither indeed will my
gowtes give me leave or leisure to think thereupon. Notwithstanding, I fear
one thing, that is, that if the King of Navarre revoke the passeports and
striuings for benefices, which he has given to the Monasteries and Chapiters,
Prayer for their patrons.
there will be danger lest ye all cry to the murder, after the holy father,
and Monsieur the Legate, and the most reverend Cardinal here present, that
might well leave the boots in France, if they did not in good time save
themselves beyond the mountains. I leave it to my masters the preachers, to
hold always in breath their devout parishioners, and to repress the
insolency of these demanders of bread or of peace. They know the passages of
scripture, to accommodate them to their purpose, and to turn them and to use
them to the occasions as they shall have need. For it was never said for
naught, that the Gospel is, A homely resemblance, and a foul abusing of
scripture following.
a tripe wifes knife, that cutteth on both sides: according to that, And out of
his mouth there went a sword sharpened on either side: And as the Apostle S.
Paul says: The word of God is lively and effectual, and more pearcing then a
two edged sword. Now that which for the present most imports our affairs, is
to build and set up a fundamental law, by which the French people shall be
kept and held to suffer themselves to be coyffed, biggened, haltred, and lead
at the appetite of my masters that sit in chaires and pulpits: yea they shall
suffer themselves to be barked and pilled to the very bones, and their purses
to be cleansed even unto the bottom, without speaking a word, or asking any
cause why. For you Messieurs know, that we have to do with our pensions. But
above all, cause oftentimes to be renewed the oaths touching the union, upon
the precious body of our Lord, and continue the brotherhoods of the name of
Jesus, and of blessed S. Francis: for these are good collers for the rascal
people, with which matter we charge the honor and conscience of our good
fathers the Jesuits, and we recommend also unto them our spies, to the end
that they continue to cause to be held surely our news in Spain, and receive
also secret mandates from his Catholic majesty, for to cause them to be kept
for Ambassadors, Agents, Curats, Conuents, Churchwardens, and Masters of
brotherhoods: and that in their particular confessions, they do not forget to
forbid under pain of eternal damnation to desire peace, Counsel fit for one
that should be a Cardinal to give.
and much more to speak of it, but to instubborne and make stiff the devout
Christians, to sacking, to blood, and to fire, rather then to submit themselves
to the Biarnois, though indeed he should go to Mass, as he has given in
charge to his Ambassadors thereof to assure the Pope. But we know well enough
the counterpoyson, if this should fall out, and we would give good order, that
his holiness should believe nothing of it, and though he should believe, yet he
should do nothing, and though he should do, The end of all.
that we would receive nothing of it, if I be not Cardinal. And why should not
I be, seeing Master Piere de Frontac, Better a bad example then none.
being but a simple advocate of Paris, of the time of King John, was so well,
for having diligently defended the causes of the Church? And me that have
forsaken my master, and betrayed my country, to uphold the greatness of the
holy Apostolic sea, should not I be so? And I will be so: yea I assure you I
will be so, or my friends shall fail me. I have spoken.

After that the said Lord Archbishop had finished his Epiphonema, It was fit it
should be so.
with great moving of the body and contention of voice, he did very basely
demand permission of Madame de Montpensier, to withdraw himself to change
his shirt, because he had ouerheate himself in his harness. The beadle of
Monsieur the Rector, which was at his feet, caused the prease to be reffed
into two: afterward sliding down by the seats of the deputies, my said Lord
the Rector Roze, clothed with his Rectorall habit above his rochet and
portable camail of a Bishop, putting off his cap diverse times, began thus.

The Oration of Monsieur the Rector Roze, heretofore Bishop of Senlis.
MOst famous, most noble, As right as can be.
and most Catholic Synagogue: even as the virtue of Themistocles waxed hot, by
the consideration of the triumphs and trophies of Miltiades: so do I feel my
self to have my courage inwarmed, in the contemplation of the brave
discourses, of this river of rhetorike and flood of eloquence, I mean Monsieur
the Chancellor of the Lieutenancie, who comes to triumph in speech. And after
his example, Oh what force thete is in eluish examples.
I am moved with an intolerable ardure, to set out my rhetorike, and to set
upon a stall my merchandise in this place, where oftentimes I have made
preachments, that by the means of the late King, have made me of a miller to
become a Bishop, Great preferments.
as by your means, I am of a Bishop become a miller. But I think that I have
sufficiently declared by my passed actions, that I am not ingrate, and that I
have not done any thing, but that which I have seen to be done, by diverse
others of this noble assistance, who yet have received more benefits then me
of the dead King, and have notwithstanding bravely chased him out of his
kingdom, and caused him to be murdered, for the good of the Catholic faith,
under hope to have much more, as we were gently promised. Now I will not here
rub again the things passed, It needs not.
nor catch your benevolence by a long exordium or entrance, but summarily I will
tell you, Messieurs, that the eldest daughter of the King, I say not of the King
of Navarre, but of the King that we shall choose here, if God be pleased, and
waiting for that I will say, the eldest daughter of Monsieur the Lieutenant of
the Estate and crown of France, the university of Paris does declare unto you
in all observance, that from her very swaddling cloutes, and first beginnings,
she has not been so well nurtured, mannered, modest and peaceable, as she is
now, by the grace and favor of you the rest Messieurs. For in steed that we
were wont to see so many men and women sellers of old apparel, sellers also of
old mantles, pattins, great pots, and other sorts of wicked people to run up
and down the streets, to haunt brothell houses, to draw wool, and to braule
with the cooks of the little bridge, Notable orders.
you see no more a man of such people throughout all the colleges: All the
supposts of the faculties and nations, that made hurly burly for the suites
of licenses, appear no more: they play no more these scandalous plays, and
biting satyrs upon the scaffolds of colleges, and ye see there a goodly
reformation, all these same young regents being retired, that in disdain would
show it, that they knew more Greek and Latin then other men. These factions
amongst the master of arts, wherein they did beat one another with the blows
of their cappes and their hoods, are ceased: all these scholars of great or
good house, little and great have given us the slip. The book sellers,
printers, binders, guilders, and other people of paper and parchment, to the
number of more than 30000. have charitably divided the wind, in a 100.
quarters, to live thereof, and have yet left sufficient for them that have
remained behind them. The public professors, who were all royal and
politikes, come not any more to break our heads, and trouble our brains with
their orations, and with their congregations in the three Bishops, Spoken
cunningly, and like an Alchymist.
they have put themselves to do Alchymie, every one by himself. Briefly,
all is quiet and peaceful: and I will say much more unto you. Heretofore in
the time of the politikes and heretics Ramus, Galandius and Turnebus, no man
made profession of letters, unless he had with a long hand and great charges
studied, and gotten arts and sciences in our colleges, and passed thorough
all the degrees of the scholasticall discipline. But now by the mean of you
the rest Messieurs, and the virtue of the holy union, and principally, by your
blows from heaven, Monsieur the Lieutenant, the butter men and butter wives of
Vanues, the ruffians of Mont-rouge, and of Vaugirard, the vine dressers of
Saint Cloud, cobblers of Villejuifue, A monstrous change.
and other catholic cantons, are become Masters in arts, bachelors,
principals, presidents, and bousiers of colleges, regents of classes, and so
sharp, subtle and argute Philosophers, that better than Cicero, now they
dispute de inuentione, that is of invention, and learn every day to be
aftodidactos, Or rather Assodidactos.
that is teachers of themselves, without any other Master than you, Monsieur
the Lieutenant, they learn I say, to dye of famine, per regulas, that is to
say, by rules. Also now you hear no more in the classes that clamorment and
brawling of latin, amongst the regents, that did batter and beat the ears of
all the world: in steed of this bablerie and pedlers French, you hear every
hour of the day the Argentine harmony, Marvelous Metaphors.
and the very idiome and proper speech of kine, and weaned calves, and the
sweet singing of asses, and of swine, as if it were of the nightingales, that
stand us in steed of clockes or belles, for the first, second, and third.
Sometimes heretofore we were wondrous desirous, to learn and to have the
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin tongues, but at this present we have more need of
an ox or neats tongue salted and poudred, that would be a good commentary, I
can tell you, after our oaten bread. But le Mains and Laual, and these
infallible weigh Masters of Angers, with their Capons of high grease, and their
wonderful fat hens, have deceived us as well as the tongues, and we have
no more but a sower and bitter remembrie of these same academicall messengers,
that came down or lighted at the cross, and other famous Innes, in the harp
street, and that at the day and very point of time named, to the great
contentment of the scholars waiting for them, and of their regents selling
old garments. You Monsieur Lieutenant, are the cause of all this: and all
these miracles and monstrous things are the works of your hands: and yet it is
true that our predications, A high commendation.
preachments and decrees, have not hurt or hindered them: but yet for all that,
you were the principal motive and instrument thereof: and to speak to you in
one word, you have undone us, and more than undone us: Excuse me if I speak
so, I will say with the Prophet David, Loquebar in conspectu regum, Such as you
Monsieur are.
and non confundebar. I did speak in the sight of Kings, and I was not
confounded, nay I did not blush, no more than a black dog. You have I say so
defiled and defamed this fair eldest daughter, Whether will thou Rector.
this shamefaste virgin, this flourishing damsel, the only pearl of the
world, the diamond of this France, the carbuncle of the Kingdom, and one of
the most white flower deluces of Paris, that foreign and strange universities
make Greek and Latin sonnets thereof, Et versa est in opprobrium gentium, And
it is turned into the shame of the nations. In the mean while my masters our
doctors, find nothing therein but to laugh: for they have not the
quodlibetarie questions so frequent: He would have said proceed.
there pass out no more Bachelors, Licenciats, nor Doctors, where they were
wont to have their banquets, drinkings one to another and feasts, and did
crambe themselves up to the throat: the wine of Orleans comes no more here,
much less that of Gascoigne, so that all ergoes are ceased and laid aside. And
though some one of these that are most Spaniolized by means of some double
Ducats, and do receive some pension of the Legate closely or secretly, yet
that is not as much to say that the others feel it. Moreover, Monsieur the
Lieutenant, you have caused Louchard, And why not? for of like there should be
the like consideration.
your steward or pursebearer, and a very zealous man, to be hanged, and have by
conseque^t declared to be hangable, all they that have been present at the
ceremony of the order of the union, which has been given to the president
Brisson. Now so it is, that all the young Curats, Priests and Friars of our
university, and our other Doctors for the most part, That is, we are caught in
the lime twigge.
we have all been promoters of this tragedy, therefore gluc. And I tell you,
that if you had not hasted your self to come, we had indeed served our
turns with others, and we had not remained in so fair a way, and such speech
at this day is very high to them, whose teeth could have done no evil, if you
had yet lingered but three days to come. But to come back to my first theme,
I argument thus: Louchard and his companions were justly hanged, Doctorly done
because they were gallowclappers and deserved hanging. Atqui, but the more
part of our other Doctors were consorts and adherents, and counselors of the
aforesaid hanged one: therefore crackropes, gallowclappers, are pendable, or
worthy to be hanged. And it serves to no purpose to allege the abolition
that was granted unto us, touching the Catholic murder, for the maxim of
the law will be strong, Remissio non dicitur nisi ratione criminis: that is,
remission is not said to be, but as in regard of a crime, the aforesaid
abolition not being able to abolish the merited pain, no though you should
mollify or soake it a hundred times in the Catholicon of Spain, which is a
soap that scoureth, and that clean away, every thing. And therefore we must
necessarily argument thus in Baroquo. Whosoever causes zealous Catholics to
be hanged, He concludes in mood and figure full finely.
is a tyrant, and favorer of heretics: but Monsieur the Lieutenant has
caused Louchard to be hanged and his companions, the most Catholic Catholics,
and zealous zealous above all: therefore Monsieur the Lieutenant is a tyrant,
and favorer of heretics, worse then Henry of Valois, who pardoned Louchard,
and la Morliere, worthy of the gibbet, three years before the barricadoes.
And that it is not so, I prove the minor, a maiori ad minus: that is, from the
greater to the less. That Biarnois held in his hands prisoners, the principal
heads of the League, as Boisdaulphin, Pescher, Fontaine, Martel, Flavacourt,
Tramblecourt, the Cluzeaux, and many other, that owe me thanks, if I name them
not, whom he caused not to be hanged, though he were able and might have done
it before: Well spoken, and like a Divine.
Quia non vult mortem peccatoris, sed vt resipiscat: that is, because he will
not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent, as some have done:
and notwithstanding he is an heretic, or accounted for such a one: Ergo,
Monsieur the Lieutenant is worse then an heretic, because he has caused to
be hanged his best friends, who put the bread into his hands To say that this
was done, ad maiorem cautelam: that is, for better heed and greater subtlety,
or to bring down the pride and insolency of the sixteen, that is good:
notwithstanding in the mean while they were hanged. And this saying cannot
hinder, that we be not always judged and reputed great dolts and blockheads,
that is in Latin and French sots, for that we have endured him so long: and
which is worse, that the politikes may conclude in mood and figure, that
Sorbonne can err: a matter I tell you, that would make me once again to become
mad, and run up and down the streets. For if this one should have place,
we should never be able to prove, by all the flowers of our rhetorike, nor by
all the fundamental laws of the kingdom, on which Monsieur of Lions has
relied so much, and made so great reckoning, that so many ten thousands of
poor christians, as we have made, and daily do make to dye, with sword,
Death for treason, counted martyrdom, with these reverend doctors.
with famine, with fire, by our headlong decree, should be judged true martyrs,
if it be so that our foresaid decree be not able to absolve them from the oath
of fidelity and natural obedience, that subjects owe unto their Prince.
Wherefore Messieurs, I supplicate you, in the name of our Academie, to cover
with a cloak this worthy fact here, the most catholikely that you can, as
Monsieur the Legate does the intentions of Pope Sixtus, who loved not the
League so dearly as some said he did. Furthermore, I will furnish you with so
many places and passages of scripture, as you would have, for I have of them
even to sell again. But above all things, I recommend unto you, The belly has
no ears, though it have a mouth to speak.
Messieurs, our pensions, and of my masters or fellow Doctors of the holy
faculty of theology, as also of my masters the Curats and Preachers for whom
I speak. For you have to do with us, and you are not able to pass these
things. And Madame of Montpensier knows well enough to say, that she gained
more towns, and dispatched more work with a very few double Ducats, which she
distributed to the preachers and Doctors, then the King of Navarre did with all
his taxes and armies. I do in good time advertise you, that if you furnish and
fit not the appointment, there is danger, least we give our selves wholly
over to prove, He means their rents and revenues, ordinary or extraordinary.
that it is best to have a lawful King, though wayward and wicked, seeing he
will leave unto us the bread of the chapter, and purgatory, without
innouating any thing till the Council that shall be. But in expecting that,
advise ye whether we shall make a King or no. I know that Monsieur the
Lieutenant would gladly be he: so also would his nephew be: and likewise his
brother the Duke of Nemours: and I doubt not, but that the Dukes of Sauoy and
of Lorraine have as great desire of it: for of a truth they have as much right
to it one as another. Now concerning Duke Mercury, his agents will do as much
for it as he himself. If he had taken in good faith and earnest Don Anthonio
the King of Portugal, Practice to apprehend Don Anthonio.
and had delivered him to his very good friend, the most Catholic King, as he
promised him, I believe that he would have been content with the rights and
claims that he has to the Duchy of Bretaigne, like unto those which his
grandfather John had by his wife. But here, he that is not he, takes not he.
First of all, I counsel you not to stay your selves upon the Duke of Sauoy, or
upon the Duke of Lorraine: for they are not (in speaking with reverence) but
cods or bladders that have enough to do in their own house: and I assure my
self that they will be content with very little. If you will leave to the
Savoyard, Daulphin and Prouence, with some little part of Lionnois and of
Languedoc (yet so that you make him to take Geneua also) I would engage my life
that he will demand no more of you, If you can, or be able.
but the confiscation of Esdiguieres. The name of a worthy man that holds
him touch.
As touching the Duke of Lorraine, take from him the Dukedom of Bouillon, and
give him Sedan, Mets, all Champagne, and part of Bourgongne, which is for the
good seating of him, you shall appease him afterward for a morsel of bread,
though it be but brown. I come now unto you Monsieur of Guise, the son of a
good father and of a good mother, one whom the prophecies have of long time
destined to kingdoms and empires, and have surnamed you Pepin the short, or
curtalled. You, behold you, upon the point to be another great Charles the
great, your great great grandfather, if the fair or market hold. But regard, I
pray you, that you suffer not your self to be deceived. These Messieurs of
Spain, Spaniards painted out.
although they be our very good friends and good Catholics, be not merchants
at one word, and buy and sell with no more: and that is found true in them, not
at this time only, for there are almost two thousand years since that they
have meddled with more matters then they should, and that men have given them
this name to be fine and cunning in doubling of points. They promise you this
divine damosel or daughter in marriage, to make her a Queen in solidum, that
is, altogether and wholly with you: but take you heed that the Duke de Feria
have not filled his seats signed without charge. He has a box full of such
things, wherewith he serves himself upon all occurrences, as of a last for
every shoe, and as one saddle for all horses: he dates them, or he antedates
them with his chamber pot when pleases him. I have fear, something that he
has propounded unto us, that this is nothing but art and subtlety to amaze
us withal, when he has seen that we will not understand, or be of mind to
break the law Salick. If you have but never so little nose, you shall smell
it. For we know in good part, that the marriage is already accorded of her
and of her cousin the Archduke Ernest. Add, that is, join hereunto, that
those of the house of Austrich do as the Jews do, that do not marry but in
their tribe or family, and hold one another by the tail as hannekins and
hannetons do.

Leave of therefore this vain hope of Gynecocratie, That is government of
women together.
and believe that little children mock at it, and go from it to mustard. I
heard the other day one, that coming very bravely from the tavern, did sing
these four verses.

The League finding it self flat nosed,
And the Leaguers much without repose,
Advised themselves of a fetch, which is
To make a King without a nose.
But if I had been able to have made him to have been caught by the commissarie
Bazin, who ran after him, he had had no less then the miller that mocked our
Estates. What will you say to these impudent politikes, that have put you in a
shape in a fair leaf of paper, A pretty devise.
already crowned as a king of the cards, by anticipation, and in the same
leaf have also put the figure of the said infant or daughter, crowned for
Queen of France as you, you regarding huze a huze one the other? And in the
nether part of the said painture, have placed these verses, which I have kept
by heart, because that therein it goes as on your side.

The French Spanalized have made a King of France,
To the daughter of Spain they promised have this King:
A royalty very small, and of slender importance:
For their France is comprised within Paris, a strange thing.
O Hymen marriage god, for this cold marriage
Thy quiet torch, I pray at this time do not bring:
Of these disioyned corpse, men set out the image,
That make the love of eyes both two within one thing.
It is a royalty only in show most sure:
Deceit and not true love hatched has this marriage:
Good cause that being King of France in portraiture,
They cause him to espouse of a Queen the image.
If Monsieur of Orleans in the quality of Advocate general, would cause to be
searched out these same wicked politic Printers, it is his charge, and they
might be known by their caracters, and his good gossips Bichon, N. Niuelle,
Chaudiere, Morel, and Thiere, will discover the matrice. Touching my self, I
willingly forbear it, for these heretics are evil speakers as devils, and I
should fear they would make some book against me, as they did against the
Catholic Doctor and Lawyer Chopin, under the name of Turlupin. And never mend
it is like lie.
Messieurs of the hall, or place of hearing, will therein do their duty,
more and loco solitis, after their wonted manner and place. I will hold my
self content to preach the word of God, to maintain my Beadles, and carefully
to solicit my pensions. Let all this be spoken by a parenthesis. But Monsieur
de Guise, my good child, believe me, and you shall believe a very fool: stay
no more upon that, Never better spoken.
it is not food for our fowls or birds. Lift not up your train for all this:
we do not enlarge or make longer your table by reason of this. There is hay:
there are none but beasts that delight in it: but do better: obtain of the
holy father a croisade, or an expedition and voyage against the Turks, and
go and reconquer that goodly kingdom of Jerusalem, which appertains to you
by reason of Godfrey, your great uncle, even as well as that of Sicilie and the
kingdom of Naples. How many scepters and crowns are prepared for you, if your
horoscopus lie not, as you your self are wont to say, that you have not a
limited fortune. Leave this same wretched and miserable kingdom of France to
him that will vouchsafe to take the burden of it. It is not fit that your
spirit borne for Empires, and the universal monarchy of the habitable world,
should stoop to so small morsels or matters, and unworthy of you and of your
late father, A careful caution.
whom God absolve, if it be permitted to speak so of Saints. And you Monsier
the Lieutenant, to whom I must needs now speak. What think you to do? you
are gross and fully panched: you are heavy and deformed: you have head big
enough in deed to bear a crown. But what? you say you will none of it, and
that it would too much over burden you. The politikes say, that the fox said
so touching mulberies which he would feign have had. The fox will eat no
grapes.
You hinder under hand that your nephew should not be chose^: you forbid the
deputies, that none of them be so bold as to touch this great string of the
royalty or kingdom. What shall we do then? We must have a King: who as the
politic doctors say, is better taken the^ sought. You make the K. of Spain
believe, that you keep the kingdom of France for him, and for his daughter: and
under this hope, you suck and draw from the honest man all that that the
Indies and Peru can send him, he maintains unto you your plate, he sends
you armor and armies, but not at your devotion or disposition. For he looks
to himself for all you, and he distrusteth you both one and other, as though
ye were blind, A just judgment.
and takes you as thieves. In the mean while, ye have provoked the sixteen,
who accuse you to be a merchant of crowns, and have offered this of France
to him that would give most. They make books of this to your prejudice, wherein
they discipher all your actions. They say that you have close practices with
the Biarnois, and cause words and messages to be carried unto him by Villeroy
and Zamet, to lull him a sleep, and to cause him to understand that you are a
good Frenchman, and will never be a Spaniard, and that you can give him Paris
back again, and make peaceable unto him all his kingdom, when he shall have
been at Mass, and acknowledged our holy father, and under this bait and
deceit, you have drawn or gotten forty thousand politic crowns for three
months, which indeed should be rated for four, A good arithmetician.
every one ten thousand crowns a piece, making you to understand that the
Spanish King would pare and clip your distributions, if he knew that you
treated concerning accord and agreement with heretics. But it is discovered
that secretly you send your agents to Rome and into Spain, to let that the
Pope should not give him absolution, if he demand it, and to stir up the
King of Spain, to send new forces toward the frontiers, you think you are
very subtle: but your subtleties and fetches are sown together with white
thread: And therefore easily discovered.
in fine, all the world sees them. For these politikes have dragons in the
fields, that take all your packets, and by devilish art divine and decipher
al your ciphers, as also those of the King of Spain and of the Pope, though
they be never so subtle and crafty, so well that they know all your
affairs, both at Rome, and at Madrill, and in Sauoy and in Germany. You
iuggle and deal craftily with all the world, and all the world does deal so
with you likewise. Danger there is that you become not that, that the County
Saint Pol constable of France, in the time of King Lewis the eleventh was: who
after that he had abused his master, and the Duke of Bourgongne, That is, lost
his head in the place of execution, as we would say at Tiburne, or the tower
hill.
and the King of England all at one time, in the end was made Cardinal in
Grieve. As for being King of your head, look not for it: your part is
perished, frozen, or run into the fire: all your elders set themselves
against it Your cousines competitors, would rather go and depart to the other
sides, than to endure it, the sixteen make no more account of you, for they
say that they have made you that that you are, and you hang them up and
diminish their number as much as you can, the people had hope upon your word,
that you would unlock and open the river, and make the wares and trade free:
but they see to the contrary, that they are more locked up and straightened than
before, and that the bread and the small good they have to live of, comes not
through your well doing nor by your valor, but of the liberality of the
Biarnois, and of his good nature, or of the covetousness of the getters of it,
which draw out of it all the profit. Briefly, the greater part believes
that you will prolong as long as you can, the Lieutenancie, in the which men
have placed you, and live always in war and in trouble, and yet well to your
ease, well served, well entreated, well guarded of the Swissers and of the
Archers, that there lacks nothing, but the coats of arms, and the applause
of the people to be King, whilst all the rest of the people dies stark mad
through famine. You will keep the pledges, and be the perpetual person, who
will have the charge of, and look well to the goods that are vacant, which
hinders and prolongeth, as much as he can the deliverance of the things
cried, least he should render an account. Mo^sieur Lieutenants lets.
Besides you cannot be King by the marriage of the infant or daughter of Spain,
you are married already, and would you put your finger in the hole? For you
have ridden the old one, that keeps hirselfe well from the he Goat: and
besides there must be another more lusty fellow than your self, for this
girl of thirty years, black as pepper, and of an oken appetite. Moreover
though we should have chosen you King, yet you should have to do with the
Biarnois, who knows a thousand feats or prankes of Basque, and who sleeps
not but as much as he will, and at the hour that he will, who making himself
a catholic, as he threatens you he will do, will draw on his side all the
potentates of Italy, and of Almaine, and withal, the heart of all the French
gentry, or gentlemen of France: of which you see already the greatest part,
with so many poor afflicted towns, weary of their war and of their
poverty, part to shake in the haft, and to make a writing of their retraict,
that demand nothing else but that color and good occasion, to withdraw
themselves from the couple, and therewith to cover or color their repentance.
Do you dream thereof, Monsieur the Lieutenant for the like you have
counterfeited the King, and ye have farted against, or like the Biarnois, in
edicts and declarations, in seals, in guardes, and great prouosts, and masters
of requests of your house. Though you would burst, and would blow up your
self, great as an ox, as does the female frogge, yet shall you never be so
great a Lord as he, although some say, that he has not so much fat upon all
his body, as is able to feed a lark. But do you know what you do? I would
counsel you, but that you have been Bigamus, or have had two wives, to make
your self an Abbot: A good preferment for so great a service.
whosoever shall be King, he will not refuse to bestow upon you the Abbey of
Clugny, which is of your house: you love a fat soppe or brewis as we say,
and you thrust your self willingly into the kitchen: you have a very ample and
spacious belly, and so you shall be crowned, I say crowned with the same
crown, and your crown made with the same cissers, It needs not: an honest
man may be taken upon his word.
that Madam your sister said hung at her girdle, to make the monkelike or
frierlie crown of the late Henry of Valois. You will not demand of me
neither fidelity nor oath for this matter, but I am of this advise. I will not
speak here of Monsieur of Nemours, your vterin (but the politikes say
adulterin) brother: Speak cleanly for shame.
he has done his caca or needs in our little chests: he has his purposes and
attemptes by himself, and is like to Picrocolus, that by discourses well
reasoned of, made himself Monarch of the world, foot by foot. If he can
govern the King of beasts, as he has done the ship of Paris, I will say
that he has skill to do more, than Master Mousche, or fly. These beasts
forget some times their governors, specially if they change their habit or
attire: he shall not be ill parted with, if he come to his pretentions,
whereto you Monsieur the Lieutenant, and Monsieur of Lions will do him, I
believe, very good offices. The whole sum, Messieurs, you are too many dogs
to gnawe one boane: you are jealous and envious one of another, and you can
never tell how to agree, or live without war, that would put us into worse
estate than before. But I will tell you: let us do, Deep counsel.
as they have done in the consistory, for the election or choice of a holy
father: when two Cardinals sued and labored for the popedom, the other
Cardinals, for fear they should incur the hatred of the one or of the other,
chose one amongst themselves, the weakest backed of them all, and made him
Pope. Let us do so, you are four or five robbers in the realm, all great
Princes, and such as have no want of appetite and stomach. I am of advise,
that not one of you should be king: wherefore I give my voice to Guillot
Fagotin, the keeper of Gentilly, a good vine dresser, and an honest man, who
sings well at the deske, and knows all his office or service book by
heart. A worthy example.
This will not be found without example, in such times as this is: witness the
Harelle of Roane, where they made king one named le Grass, or the fat, one
as we would say, who was much worse advised than Guillot. And thus you see
whereupon I found and ground mine advise. I have read sometimes the great and
divine Philosopher Plato, who says, that those realms are happy, where
Philosophers are kings, and where kings are Philosophers. Now I know that it is
little more than three years since that this good guardian of Gentilly and his
family, together with his kine meditated day and night Philosophy, in a hall
of our college, in which there is more than two hundred good years, that men
have read and treated, and disputed publicly, philosophy, and all Aristotle,
The place sanctifies the person with these men, in all matters.
and all sorts of good moral books. It is not possible that this good man
having raued, slumbred and slept, so many days and nights, within these
philosophical walls, where there have been made so many skillfull lessons and
disputes, and so many goodly words uttered, that there should not something
thereof abide, that has entered, pierced and penetrated into his brain, as it
did to the poet Hesiodus, when he had slept upon mount Parnassus. And this is
the cause why I persist and mean, that he may as well be king as another.

Now as Monsieur Roze ended these words, there sprung out a great murmuring
amongst the deputies, some approving, other some reproving his opinion, and the
princes and the princesses were seen, to whisper in the ear one of another:
yea it was hard that Monsieur the Lieutenant said very basely to the Legate,
this fool here will mar all our mystery. A prophecy and no lie.
Notwithstanding, the foresaid Roze would have continued his speech: but when
he saw the noise to begin again, with a certain general clacking of hands,
he rose up in choler, and cried with a very loud and outstretched voice. How
now, Messieurs? Is it permitted here to speak what one thinks? Have not I
liberty to speak and conclude my arguments, as Monsieur of Lion has done? I
know well that if I had been a courtier as he, I should not have named a
person: for he has charge from the clergy, to name County du Bouchage, Friar
Angel, for the hope that this Prince loving change, would change also our
miseries, into strokes or blows from heaven. But I pray you keep him to
bear the golden torch in the battles: for it ought to be enough for him,
that he has quite forsaken the bag and the wallet. At these words every one
began again to cry, to whistle, to hiss: and though the heralds, the
vshers, porters and all cried aloude, Hush and be still: the word peace is a
bull-begger.
let every man hold his tongue (not dating to speak the word peace there)
and that Monsieur the Lieutenant sundry times commanded them to make silence,
yet it was not possible to appease the brute and noise, in so much that the
said Lord Rector, sweat, fret, fomed, and stroke with his foot, and seeing
that there was no more mean to take his theme again, cried as loud as he
could, Messieurs, Messieurs, I see well that you are in the Court of King
Petault, where eueryone is master. I leave it to you, and you to your selves:
let another speak: I have spoken.

And thereupon he set himself down again, mumbling very much, and wiping the
sweat from his forehead; and there escaped from him, as some say, certain
odoriferant belchings of the stomach, that smelled of the perfume of his
choler, with certain words in a low note, complaining that they had defrauded
the assignation sent out of Spain, for my masters the Doctors, Good stuff:
but there can come nothing else from thence.
and that others had made their profit of it, but that this was the gold of
Tholouze, which should cost them very dearly. At the last, the rumor
beginning a little to be reappeased, Monsieur du Rieu the younger, County and
gardien or keeper of Pierre-font, deputy for the Nobility of France,
apparrelled with a little cape, after the Spanish fashion, and a certain high
coppin tancked hat, lifted up himself to speak, and having twice or thrice
put his hand to his throat, which did itch, he began in form following.

Or Roration rather, as you shall perceive by the things contained herein, and
the manner of the handling thereof.
The Oration of the Lord of Rieu, Lord of Perrierefont, for the nobility of the
union.
MEssieurs, I know no cause why they have deputed me, to bear the word in so
good a company, for all the Nobility on our side. I must needs say, that
there is some divine thing or matter in the holy union, seeing that by the
means thereof, of a commissarie of the artillery, poor and miserable enough,
I am become a gentleman, and the governor of a very fair fortress, yea that
I may equal my self to the greatest, and am one day to mount very high,
either backward or otherwise. I have good occasion to follow you, Monsieur the
Lieutenant, and to do service to this noble assembly, by black or by white,
He dwells by evil neighbors.
by wrong or by right, seeing that all the pour Priests, Friars, and good
people, devout Catholics, I assure you, do bring me candles, and adore me,
as a S. Maccabee of times passed. This is the cause wherefore I give my self
to the liueliest and quickest of the devils, that if any of my government
thrust in himself to speak of peace, I run upon him as a gray or russet
woolfe. Let war live: there is nothing but to have it, of what part soever it
befall. I see I cannot tell, what nicenes of our nobility, that speak of
preserving religion and the estate altogether: and that the Spaniards shall
lose in the end the one and the other, if we suffer them to do it. Touching
my self, I mean nothing of all this, provided that I levy taxes daily, and
that they pay me my appointme^ts, I care not what betide the Pope, or the
pretty wench his wife. Well and wisely added.
I am after my intelligences to take Noyon: if I can bring it about, and to
effect, I shall be Bishop of the town, and of the fields to, and shall make a
mouth at them of Compeigne. In the mean while I chase the cow, and the
inhabitant also, as much as I can, and there shall not be peasant, husbandman,
or merchant round about me, and within ten miles compass, that shall not
pass by my hands, and that shall not pay me custom and ransom. I know
inventions to make them come to reason: I give them whipcordes, or the ends of
cords tied with knots upon them, A right comparison.
after the fashion of the Franciscane Friars girdle: I hang them up by the arm
holes: I heat their feet with a red hot frying pan: I put them in yrons and
in the stocks: I shut them up in an oven: in a chest that is powered full of
water: I hang them as a capon to be roasted: I beat them with stirrup leathers:
I salt them, I make them to fast: I tie the^, being stretched out, within a
fan. Briefly, If cruelty be gentleness.
I have a thousand gentle means to draw out the quintessence of their purses,
and to have their substance, and to make them beggars and vagabonds for ever
they and all their race. What care I for that so I have it? Let no man speak
to me hereupon, touching the point of honor: I know not what it means. There
are that boast they are descended of these old Knights of France that chased
the Sarasins out of Spain, and put King Peter again into his kingdom.
Othersome say, that they are of the race that went to conquer the holy land
with S. Lewis. Others, that they are come down from them that have sundry
times placed the Popes again in their seats, or that have driven the
Englishman out of France, and the Bourguignons out of Picardie, or that have
passed the mountains for the conquests of Naples and of Millan, Out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
which the King of Spain has usurped against us. I care not for all these
titles and goodly conueiances, nor for arms, whether they were timbred or not
timbred. I would be a villain of four descents or races, so that always I
may receive taxes without yielding an account. I have not read, neither the
books, nor the histories and Annals of France: and I have nothing to do with
this, to know whether it be true, that there were Paladins and Knights of the
round table, that made profession of nothing but of honor, and to defend their
King and their country, and would rather be dead then receive a reproach, or
suffer that one should do injury to an other. I have heard reckoned up by my
grandmother, in carrying her butter to market to sell, that there had been
sometimes one Gaston de Fois, one County de Dunois, one la Hire, one Poton,
one captain Bayart, and others who became enraged for this point of honor, and
to get glory to the Frenchmen. But I take my leave of their good graces as in
this regard. An example or description of a lusty cutter, such a one as was
Kain, Lamech, or Nimrod.
I have a good rapier and a good pistolet, and there is neither Sergeant, nor
Provost of merchants, that dare summon or arrest me. Fall out what may, it is
sufficient for me that I am a good Catholic. Justice was never made for
gentlemen, such a one as I my self am. I will take the kine, and the cocks and
hens of my neighbor, when it shall please me: I will raise up the rents of
his lands: I will take them away again, and shut them up with mine own within
my enclosure, and yet he shall not dare to mumble or grumble at it. All shall
be for my good comelines: I will not suffer my subjects to pay taxes or toles,
but to my self, and I counsel you, Messieurs the nobles, to do even so. And
so indeed there shall be no need of treasurers and financiers, or receivers
of revenues, that may make themselves fat with, and use the substance of the
people, as the coleworts of their garden. Ill sworn, and like a new vpstart
gentleman.
By the death of God, if I find either sergeant, or receiver, or man of
justice doing exployt upon my lands, without demanding leave of me therefore,
I will make them eat their parchemine: we have endured enough: are we not free?
Monsieur Lieutenant, have not you given us license to do all things? and
Monsieur the Legate, has not he laid the bridle in our necks, Good counsel of
a ghostly father.
to take all the goods of the politikes, to kill and to murder kinsfolks,
friends, neighbors, father and mother, provided that therein we do our own
businesses, and that we be good Catholics, without ever speaking either of
truce or of peace? I for my part will do so, and I pray you also to do the
like. But I have yet another thing to remonstrate unto you, that is, not to
speak any more of this Salique law. I know not what it is, He means double
ducats.
but Seigneur Diego has given it me by memory, with some round pieces that
will do me great good. This in the whole is the matter, that we must go
sack these same furred hoods of the court of Parliament, that play the
galants, and meddle with the affairs of the estate where they have nothing to
do, but to see and behold. O that you would give them me but a little to
manage: never did Bussie the clerk do his work so well. If Monsieur the
Legate command me only to go to them, and put my hand on their neck or
breast, there is not either square cappe or hood, that I will not make fly
about, if they hear mine ears over much, yea to this Monsieur Maistre, and to
this du Vayr, that set all the rest in train. Monsieur Lieutenant, why give
you not order for it? Know you not well, that the president de Nully has told
you, and named by name and by surname all they that have spoken for this wicked
law? Why do you not send for them, and throw them into the river, as he has
counseled you? And this goodly fellow Marillac, that was so much heat at the
beginning, Cruelty causes it.
and spoke of nothing but fire and blood, I fear at the end he will become
banquerout to the League, if they promise him to be Councellor of Estate to
this Biarnois. Let us take heed of these people that turn their coats so
easily, and follow the wind of fortune, when they see that their side goes
ill. Ha brave Machault: Ha valiant Bourdeaux; O worthy commendation.
you are worthy to be as my self exalted to the highest degree of the honor
of nobility! Amongst the long gowns, I love none save you, and that famous
president, which I will yet name hereby honor, Monsieur de Nully, who besides
the courageous beginning and progress that he has made for the League,
whereof he may be well said to be the putatiue father, Wickedness wrought by
evil means, and therefore a double transgression.
has worthily vouchsafed to expose his daughters, and to prostitute their
reputation to the brothell house, that he might do service to Messieurs the
Princes, and to my masters his Curats and Preachers. Shall I speak of also the
heroical deed of that good man Baston, that so valorously signed the League
with his own very blood, drawn out of his hand, which afterward by miracle
remained maimed and benumbed, so much would this glorious martyr suffer for the
holy union? And thou noble arc boutant of the union, Lewis of Orleans: thy
catholic Englishman, and thy expostulation: and thy oration made in the favor
and for the honor of the Legate, and of the Spaniards, did deserve that they
should have put thee in the place of president Brisson: A good sentence ill
applied.
but men recompense not good people as they should, no more then thy companion
in office, for having written so curiously the laws of the uncle against the
nephew. These are just and virtuous men, and not those dunghill churles, and
beshitten fellows, who seeing that there was nothing more to be grabeled and
sifted in their palace of this town, and that all their sacks were void and
empty, or hung upon the hook, departed from hence and went to Tours, and to
Chalons, where they knew that the manger was full, and the racks garnished. A
ready, it may be a right judgment.
Brief, take away five or six of all this mislead troop, all the rest is
nothing worth, and the best to the devil. I cannot tell what these persons and
people of justice have done unto me: and yet I love them not. I did once show
my hand unto an old Gypsy woman, who told me that I had a round thumb, and
that I should keep my self therefore from the round and half round. I
believe that she meant to say from these people that wear the round cap. In
fine Messieurs, I have charge from the Nobility, to remonstrate unto you that
you must once again abate and take down the insolency of these hochebrides
and swallowers of mysts, and do your affairs whilst the weather is fair: If
the law Salique be maintained and vpheld, I fear least Monsieur the Legate
will be sore troubled therewith, and the infant or daughter of Spain be in
danger to be shaven. But for this matter, I refer my self to Monsieur the
Lieutenant, who has good skill to break the stroke, and to trick his
cousins beard, yea and shave it to, and that without a razor. Furthermore, if
you must needs choose a King, I pray you think upon me and my merits. Some
have made me believe, that there have sometimes been chosen worse then me. If
that can be.
The Lydians (but I know not what kind of people they are) made one, that did
drive or hold the plough. The Flemmings made one their Duke that was a brewer
of beer: the Normanes, a cook: the Parisiens, a pillar of the bark of trees.
I tell you I am more then all these: for my grandfather was a ferrier in
France, or of France: and if he got hell, I shall gain paradise. Consider I
beseech you Monsieur de S. Paul, now County of Rethelois, Mareschall of the
union and Archbishop of Reims, who indeed had his father not long sithence
dwelling in a cave or odd corner covered with straw nigh unto Nangy, A noble
race, and worthy descent.
and who as yet has his sisters married one of them with a tauerner, and the
other with a tysser maker: and yet behold he is Peer and Mareschall of France,
and one that lends money, but yet upon good pledges, to Monsieur de Guise his
master and good benefactor. By this reckoning you may well make me King, and so
you shall do well: for if you do, I will let you do all you would. I will
abolish all these stables of justice, I will suppress all these Sergeants,
Proctors, Pettifoggers, Commissaries, and Counselors, except them that be of
our friends: but there shall be no more speech of summoning nor of seazing,
nor of paying men's debts: ye shall be all as rats in the chafe, and it shall
suffice me, if you call me Sire. And good reason to.
But ye shall advise hereof. For the least, I know well that I am as well
worthy of it as another, and I will say nothing more of it but this, that I am
thrust forward to go and execute mine enterprise upon Noyon, after that I
shall have combated with the governor of this city: and hereupon I kiss the
hands of your mercy.

After that the Lord of Rieu had finished his military or soldier like
sermon, every one of the assistants declared by his countenance, that they had
taken pleasure in his natural eloquence, for a man that had no letters or
learning: and who might make good fruit, if he did so a long time in this
world. Hereupo^ rose up one of the deputies, named the Lord Angouleuent, who
very loudely caused them to understand, that he had a charge from the new
nobility, and on the behalf of the honest men and masters of the union, to
remonstrate unto them some thing of importance, touching this quality, and
that it was reasonable, that he should be heard before the third estate, which
was not composed or made but of town dwellers, requiring Monsieur the
Lieutenant to cause audience to be given unto him, and calling upon the people
of the King of the union, and namely the advocate general of Orleans (who
sometimes before had written in the favor of the said nobility) to cleave
unto his request, and speaking that he rose up, and stood altogether upright,
upon the seat where he was set, and began to say, A very unmannerly
interruption of a wise noble man.
Monsieur the twelfth: but suddenly he was interupted by reason of a great
noise of pesants, that were behind the deputies, which noise being a little
ceased, he began again, Monsieur the twelfth, and by and by the noise arose
more great than before, and yet he ceased not the third time to say, Monsieur
the twelfth of May. And afterward arose up the Lord of Aubray, which had in
charge to speak for the third estate, and contested that it did belong to none
but to him, to speak that day of the barricades, and that they were never
accustomed in France, to make more than three estates, and so he let that the
deputy of the new nobility was heard, as being but a dependence, and a member
of the said third estate. The said Lord of Angouleuent, disputed long time on
his part, saying that every one was there for his money, and began again
sundry times these three words, Monsieur the twelfth, and at every time he was
interrupted. At the last as the rumor increased, and this factions for the one
and the other were already heat, so far as to come for it to the blows of
the fist, the advocate of Orleans remonstrated, that it was no more time now to
rest upon the ancient forms, which were but for shoe makers and cobblers, nor
yet upon the ceremonies of times past, save only in the fact of faith and
religion: A strong exception, or else that will down also.
and that the assembly of the said estates should be unprofitable, if they did
not all things therein after the new manner. And as for him that he had seen
the remembrances and instructions of the new nobility, which deserved very well
to be considered of. Notwithstanding considering now that it was somewhat
late, and that Monsieur the Lieutenant was fresh and fasting, and the hour of
Monsieur the Legates dinner was past, he required, Well added: for it is not
easily done.
that the said Lord of Angouleuent should put his speech in writing, and
deliver it up, and should hold his tongue, if he could: otherwise and for
defaulte thereof, he should be sent to the County de Choysie: which thing
Monsieur the Lieutenant approved with his head: And the rumor being by (...)
and little ceased, and the foresaid d' Angouleuent hardly set down again,
the said Lord d' Aubray, deputy of the third estate, having laid aside his
sword, spoke his oration very nigh after this manner.

The oration of Monsieur d' Aubray for the third Estate.
BY our Lady, Messieurs, A patheticall exordium.
you have given us a goodly speech. There is no need now that our Curats
should preach unto us, that we ought to draw our selves out of the mudde, and
to make our selves clean. As touching that which I see by your discourse, It
is a marvel, if ever they can come out.
the poor Parisiens have enough of it already within their boots and it will
be very hard, to pull them out of the mudde and mire. From henceforth it is
time for us to perceive, that the false Catholicon of Spain, is a drugge that
takes men by the nose: and that it is not without cause, that other nations
call us little quails, because that as poor quails that are hooded, and very
credulous, the preachers and Sorbonists, No unfit resemblance.
by their inchaunting quail pipes, have caused us even to give our selves into
the nets of tyrants, who have afterward put us into a cage, and shut us up
within our walls to teach us to sing: we cannot but confess, that we are at
this time taken and made greater servants and slaves, than the Christians in
Turkey, or the Jews in Auignon. We have no more either will or voice in the
chapter or assembly. We have no more any thing proper, or that we may well
say this is mine. You, Messieurs, that set your foot upon our throat, and
fill our houses with garnisons, have and possess all. Our privileges,
franchises, freedoms and ancient liberties are overthrown, and taken away.
Our town house, which I have seen to be the sure refuge of the succors of
our kings in their urgent and weighty affairs, A sore change.
is become a butcherie: our court of Parliament is none at all: our Sorbonne is
a brothell house, and the university become savage or wild. And yet the
extremity of our miseries is this, that in the midst of so many mischiefs
and needs, it is not permitted us to complain, nor to demand succor, and
having death as it were between our teeth, we must of necessity say, that we
are in good health, A pitiful and just complaint.
and that we are very happy, to be so wretched for so good a cause. O Paris
that art no more Paris, but a den of outrageous beasts, and a citadell of
Spaniards, Wallons and Neapolitanes, a sanctuary and sure retrait of robbers,
murderers and killers. Will thou never think again of thy dignities, and
remember thy self what thou have been, in comparison of that thou art? Will thou never cure thy self of this frenzy, that for a lawful and gracious
king, have begotten unto thy self fifty little kings, or wrens rather, and
yet fifty tyrants? Behold thou art in irons: The spanish Inquisition.
behold thou art in the inquisition of Spain, more intolerable a thousand
fold, and more hard to be borne and endured of spirits, that are borne
liberal and free (as French men are) than the most cruel deaths that
Spaniards can devise. Thou wast not able to bear a small augmentation and
increase of taxes and offices, or some new edicts, The fruits of senseles
treason.
that did not much import thee: and yet now thou indurest men to poll thy
houses, to pill and to sack thee even unto blood, to imprison the Senators to
drive away, and banish thy good citizens, and counselors, yea to hang and to
murder thy principal magistrates. Thou see this, thou indurest this: yea
thou do not only endure it, but thou do approve it and praise it, and
thou dare not, neither can thou tell how to do otherwise. Thou could
not support and bear with thy king, so gracious, so gentle, so easy, so
familiar, that made himself a fellow citizen with thee, and burgess of thy
town, that he enriched thee, that he has garnished thee with glorious and
sumptuous buildings, increased thy forts and stately ramperts, and adorned thee
with honorable privileges and immunities. What say I, could not support and
bear with? It is much worse. Kindenes rendered for good.
Thou have chased him out of his own town, out of his own house, out of his
own bed. What, say I chased him? thou have pursued him: what? pursued? thou
have murdered him, and canonized the murderer for a saint, and made bonfires
for his death. And now thou see how much that death of his has profited
thee. For that is the cause why another is ascended into his place, much more
watchful, much more laborious, and a far better warrior, and that knows
better to keep thee in, somewhat more straitely, as to thy damage and hurt
thou have already proved. I pray you, Messieurs, if it were permitted, to cast
yet these last abois, in liberty, let us a little consider, what good or what
profit has come unto us, by this detestable death, which our preachers did
make us believe, was the sole and the only mean to make us blessed. The great
difference between good government and tyranny.
But I cannot discourse upon this point, but with very great grief to see
things in the estate in which they are, in comparison of that they were then.
At that time, every one had yet corn in his garner, and wine in his seller:
every one had his vessel of silver or plate as we call it, his tapistrie, and
his costly moueables: the women had then their girdles half of silver: the
relics were hole and sound: they had not so much as touched the jewels of the
crown. But now who is there, that can boast that he has whereof to live for
three weeks, unless it be these thieves and robbers, that have made themselves
fat with the wealth of the people, and that have on all hands pilled and polled
the moueables, both of present and absent? Have we not by little and little
consumed all our provisions, sold our moueables, molten our vessel, and
pledged all that we have to the garments on our backs, to live not only
poorly, but very wretchedly and caytife like? Where are our halles and our
chambers so well garnished, and so decked with diaper and tapistrie? Where are
our feasts and bankets, and our licorous and dainty tables? Lo we are
brought to milk and white cheese like the Swissers. Our bankets are of a bitte
of biefe, yea the biefe of a cow, for all the messes and services we were
wont to have: and happy is he that has not eaten the flesh of horses and of
dogs: and happy is he that always has had oaten bread, and could make a
little paste of it, with the broth of brawne sold at the corner of the
streets, in the places where heretofore they did sell the delicious and
dainty tongues, young quails, and legs of mutton. And it has not been long
of Monsieur the Legate, and of the Ambassador Mendoza, that we have not eaten
our fathers bones, as the savage and wild people of new Spain do. If he can,
he is a man of no sense.
Can any man think of, or remember all these things without tears, and
without horror? And they that in their conscience know well enough, that they
are the cause thereof, can they hear speak of these things without blushing
and without apprehending the punishment that God reserueth for them, for so
many evils and mischiefs whereof they are authors? Yea when they shall
represent unto themselves the images of so many poor citizens, as they have
seen fallen in the streets, all stark and stone dead through famine: the
little infants and sucking babes to die at the breasts of their languishing
mothers, drawing the breast for nothing, and not finding what to suck: the
better sort of the inhabitants, and the soldiers to go through the town,
leaning upon a staff pale and feeble, more white and more wanne than images of
stone, resembling rather ghosts than men: If they be so good, how bad are the
rest
and the inhumaine and discourteous answer of some, even of the Ecclesiastical
persons, who accused them, and threatened them, in steed of succouring or
comforting them. Was there ever barbarousnes or cruelty like to that, which we
have seen and endured? Was there ever tyranny and domination matchable to
that, which we see and endure? Where is the honor of our university? Where
are the colleges? Where are the scholars? Where are the public readings and
lectures, to which people did run from all the parts of the world? Books
turned into blades, a good change.
Where be the religious students in the couents? They have all taken arms,
and behold they are become all of them unruly and wicked soldiers? Where are
our chaffes? Where are our precious relics? Some of them are molten and eaten
up: other some are buried in the ground, for fear of robbers and sacreligious
persons. Where is that reverence that men carried once, to the people of the
Church or Clergy, and to the sacred mysteries? The devil a lie it is.
Every one now makes a religion after his own manner, and divine service,
serves for no other use, but to deceive the world through hypocrisy: the
priests and preachers have so set themselves on sale, and made themselves so
contemptible, by their offensive life, that men regard them no more, nor their
sermons neither, but when they are to be used to preach and spread abroad some
false news. Where are the princes of the blood, that have been always sacred
persons, even as the pillars and stays of the crown, and of the French
Monarchy? Where are the Peers of France, that should be the first here to
open to, and to honor the Estates? Al these names, are no more but the names of
porters, whereof some make litter for the horses of the Messieurs of Spain and
of Lorraine. Where is the Majesty and gravity of the Parliament, heretofore
the defender of Kings, and the mediator between the people and the Prince? A
prison, as we would say here, the Fleet or Tower.
You have carried it in triumph to the Bastille: and authority and justice, ye
have led them captive more insolently and more shamelessly, than the Turks
would have done. You have driven away the best sort of people, and retained
none but rascals or of scourings: who are either full of passions or else base
minded. Besides even of them that do remain, ye will not suffer so few as
four or five to say what they think, and you threaten them also, He means
some kind of torture or torment.
to give them a billet, as unto heretics, or politikes. And yet you would make
men believe, that that you do, is for no other respect, but for the
preservation of religion, and of the estate. This is well said: but let us a
little examine your actions, and the carriage or behavior of the King of Spain
toward us: and if I lie one word, A fearful execration.
let Monsieur Saint Denis, and Madame Saint Genuiefue, the great patrons of
France never help me. I studied a little while in the schools, and yet not
so much as I desired: but since I have seen diverse countries, and travailed
into Turkey, and through out all Natolia, and Sclauonia, even unto Archipelagus,
and mare mayor, A good touchstone indeed.
and Tripoli of Syria: where I found the saying of our Savior Christ to be
true: By their fruits ye shall know them. Men know sufficiently enough, what
are the intentions and inventions of men, by their works and by their effects.
First, I will speak it (and yet with an honorable preface) that the King of
Spain, A mannerly man.
is a great prince, wise, subtle, and very advised, the most mighty, and
having the greatest territories of all Christian princes, and that he should be
yet so much the more, if all his lands, countries, and kingdoms were sure and
joined one of them to another. But France which is between Spain and the low
countries, is the cause that his separa^e and disioyned Lordships, cost him
more than they are worth. For above all nations he fears the French, No lie
surely. Bear with bragging and lying a little.
as that which he knows to be most noble, and to have the greatest valor and
impatience against the rest and rule of a strange people. And that is the
cause, why being wise, provident, and well counseled as he is, since that he
was constrained to make that miserable peace which was sealed and signed by the
death of our good King Henry the second, Ah wily fox: but yet well discovered
subtlety.
and not daring either openly to gainesay the same, or begin waire, whilst
that France was flourishing, united, agreed and of the same mind and will
together, he endeavored to sow division and discord amongst us our selves:
and so soon as he saw our princes to be miscontent, or to jar amongst
themselves, he did secretly and closely conueigh himself into the action, and
encouraged the one of the sides, to nourish and foster our divisions, and to
make them immortal, and to busy our selves, to quarrel and fight one with
another, yea to kill one another, that whilst these troubles were amongst us,
he might be left in peace, and so long as we did inweaken our selves, to grow
and increase, without loss and lessening. Plain and pregnant proofs.
This was the course and proceeding that he held, after that he saw the
princes of Vendosme, and of Condie malecontent, who also drew and carried with
them the house of Montmorencie and of Chastillon, and to set themselves against
the aduantageable aduancements and proceedings of your father, and of your
Uncles (Monsieur Lieutenant) who had invaded and usurped all authority and
kingly power, Bleare eyed men and barbers, as it is in the proverb, are
acquainted therewith.
in the time of young King Frauncis their nephew. I speak nothing but that all
France, even to the smallest and basest of them, yea that the whole world
knows. For all the bloody tragedies, which since that time have been played
upon this pitiful scaffold of France, have all of them been borne and
proceeded from these first quarrels, and not from the diversity or difference
of religions, as without reason men do yet to this day, make the simple and
idiots to believe. I am old and have seen the affairs of the world, as much
as another, yea by the grace of God, and the goodness of my friends, I have been
Sheriff, and provost of the merchants also in this city, in the time that men
proceeded thereunto by free election, and that they did not constrain nor use
violence to men, for their suffrages and voices, as you have done, Plain
speech and particular application.
Monsieur Lieutenant, not long sithence minding and purposing to continue
Monsieur Boucher at your devotion. But I remember yet those old times, as if it
were but yesterday past, or this day present. I can remember well from the
beginning of the quarrel, that fell out between Monsieur your late father, and
late Monsieur the Constable, which proceeded from no other cause, but from the
jealousy of one of them over another, both of them being the great minions and
fauourits of Henry the second their master, Figulus figulu^ ^dit, as it is in
the proverb.
as we have seen also Messieurs de Ioyeuse, and d'Esperno^, under King Henry
the third his son. Their first falling out was for the estate of great
Master, which the King had given to Monsieur your father, when he made Monsieur
of Montmorency Constable, who had been great Master before, and who had the
Kings promise, that the said estate should be reserved for his son. Another
cause of their ill husbandry, or bad carriage of themselves, was the County
de Dampmartin, which both of them had gotten after diverse sorts: Sum ego mihi
metipsi proximus: I love my self best.
and being entered into suite about the same, Monsieur the Constable got it by
an arrest or decree. This did so alter and change them, that either of them
endeavored to cast his companion out of the saddle, or as we say, to set him
beside the cushion. And from thence proceeded the voyage, that Monsieur your
father made into Italy, where he did no great matter, because that Monsieur
the Constable (who caused him to be sent thither, that so he might the more
quietly, wholly and alone possess the King) it may be hindered, or slacked the
affairs: but he remained not long unpunished for it: for he was taken
afterward on S. Laurence day, while your father was absent, who being
returned, did by a certain good hap, and the same indeed very wonderful, It
was well done of the Guise to overcome evil with well doing.
take again the towns of Picardie (which we had lost) and Calais besides.
And that he might the better revenge himself of the evil duties that he knew
were done against him in his voyage, caused also the imprisonment of Monsieur
the Constable to be prolonged, and forgot no art that might hinder or delay
his deliverance, which gave an occasion to my Lords of Chastillon, to desire
the aid, and to cast themselves into the arms and protection of the King of
Navarre, this Kings father, and of Monsieur the Prince of Conde his brother,
who had married their niece. Also these two great houses fell into factions and
partakings, which were yet stirred up and incensed by the contention begun
between the Prince of Conde, and Monsieur d'Aumale your uncle, for the office
of the colonel of the light horse: there was as yet no mention of religion or
Huguenots. Hardly did any know what was the doctrine of Calvin and Luther, A
little fire makes a great flame.
but by the death of them that we saw burn stiff in their opinions: and yet
notwithstanding the matter of the wars, and of the enimities that we have
seen, were then in preparing, and has continued until this present time. But
the truth is, that when my Lords of Chastillon, very courageous men, and not
able to endure the injuries offered them, saw that the favor of your house did
ouertoppe theirs, and that they had not any mean to find credit and favor
about the King, by reason of the lets that they of your race and house cast in
the way, they were counseled to withdraw themselves from the Court, and as
they were in their retraite, they showed themselves (but whether it were in
good earnest, or of policy and prudence I know not) to favor the new
Lutherans, who till then preached no where but in caves and dens, and by
little and little joined themselves with them in faction and intelligence, It
is not good to fall into the claws and paws of unreasonable men.
the rather to defend and keep themselves from your father and your uncle,
then to attempt any stirring or bringing in of novelty, except then when the
King, at the provocation of your uncle (who had made the Pope to write unto him
thereabout) did himself take Monsieur d'Andelot at Crecy, and sent him
prisoner to Melun. After this imprisonment, and that also of the Vidame of
Chartres, and of certain counselors of parliament, fell out the violent and
miraculous death of the King, When the wicked rise up, me^ hide themselves.
which exalted your house to the sovereign degree of power, near about the
young King Francis: and on the other side, did abate and almost altogether
beat down the house of Monsieur the Constable, and of all those that did
belong unto him. And this was then when his kindred (void of all hope of
ordinary means, because that all was executed under the favor of your
allies) joined themselves in secret intelligence with the Lutherans here and
there scattered in diverse corners of the kingdom. And though they had as yet
but little credit with them, as who were people unknown unto them, and had not
partaked, neither in the Supper, nor in Synod, or Consistory, notwithstanding
by the means of their agents, well skilled and practiced in secrets, they made
that memorable enterprise of Amboyse, and assembled from all the quarters of
the world, Taciturnitie a good virtue.
and that with marvelous silence, such a great number of people, that they
were ready at the day named, to accomplish a cruel execution upon your side,
under this pretext to deliver the King out of the captivity, A Judas amongst
the twelve.
wherein your fathers and your uncles held him. But these good people could not
keep themselves from traitors, whereupon followed the execution done at
Amboise, which discovered also the authors of the faction. And thereupon insued
the rigorous commandment which they gave to the King of Navarre, and the
imprisonment of Monsieur the Prince of Conde in the estates at Orleans, and
sundry other heavy accidents too long now to recite: Men's malice overthrown
when God will.
which had continued and increased far worse, if the sudden death of the
young King had not altered the course, and broken the blow, which some went
about to cause to light upon these chiefest princes of the blood royal, and
upon the family of Monsieur the Constable, and of the Chastillons. A man may
easily judge, how much your house was shaken and tossed, as it were by this
unlooked for death: and you may believe (Monsieur Lieutenant) that Monsieur
your father, and Messieurs your uncles played all at one time, at one kind of
game or blushing, A fit comparison.
as you might do if a man should bring you news of the death of your two
brethren. But they lost not their courage no more then you do: and had
afterward very good counsels and consolations from the King of Spain (of whom
we will speak by and by) who during these first dissentions was upon the
skoutes, and watched to whom he might offer his favor, and how he might blow
and stir the fire, on the one side and on the other, to make it to increase
to that power and greatness, in which we have seen it, Holy purposes for so
catholic a prince.
and do yet now see it burn and consume all France, which is the final but
of his pretensions. Upon hope then of the support of so great a prince, which
would not spare to promise men and money, your father without being astonished
with so lumpish a fall, perceiving the King of Navarre to be placed in his
rank of the first prince of the blood, for the sauegard of young king Charles,
and Monsieur the Constable put in his charge or office again, knew so well and
rightly to play his ball, that he practiced them both, and drew them to his
lure, against their own brethren, The recovery of Navarre and some such
conceits.
and against their own kinsmen: feeding one of them with a hope that I dare
not speak of, and flattering the other by submissions and honors, that he
bestowed upon him. And this he did so artificially and well, that entering again
into the paths and ways that he had forsaken, and taking his old advantage,
after that Monsieur the Prince of Conde was set at liberty (who had fairly
prevented him but two or three days only) he went with a number of men of
war, and in great troops, to seize the young King and the Queen his mother
at Fountainebleau, and brought them to Melun. And this was then when my said
Lord the Prince, and Messieurs of Chastillon, perceiving themselves, neither by
their head, nor by their houses, strong enough to resist so puissant enemies,
covered with kingly authority and power, became Lutherans at one clap, and
declared themselves to be heads and protectors of the new heretics, whom they
called to their succor, and by their means did in open war seize and take
many great towns of the kingdom, without making yet any mention of their
religion, but only for the defense of the King and of his mother, and to
deliver them out of the captivity and bondage, wherein Monsieur your father
held them. And you Monsieur Lieutenant know, that these people always boasted,
that what they did as in this behalf, it was at the request and commandment
of the Queen Mother, whose letters written and sent by her to them for that
purpose, they have caused to be published and imprinted. You are not ignorant
of that which passed in this war, and how afterward the King of Spain sent
your father succor, but yet the same such, Fit fellows to fight a field.
as I am ashamed to speak of it: al laborers and handicrafts men, gathered
together, who would never fight at the battle of Dreux, but covered
themselves with the wagons and carriages appointed for the baggage.
Notwithstanding, this was a bait to inkindle the courage of the partakers, and
to cause them to hope that they should indeed some other time do some
aduantageable thing, if they would yet once again come to fight together. But
afterward the diverse changings and alterations of our affairs, did indeed
offer unto the Spanyard another sport. For your father being dead, and peace
being made, knowing notwithstanding these mighty families animated and stiffly
set one of them against another, and that without hope of reconciliation, When
a bad cannot prevail, a worse will be provided.
he practiced Monsieur the Cardinal your uncle (which on his behalf did not
sleep) to maintain the troubles and divisions in this realm, under the
beautiful name of religion, of which in former time me^ made little or no
account. Monsieur your uncle, Cardinal of Lorraine commended.
being (as he was indeed) witty, and pleasing whom he would, had skill in such
sort to gain the heart of the Queen Mother, and the Queen Mother the heart
of the King her son, that he persuaded them, specially the Queen mother,
that Messieurs the Princes of Bourbon, aided by them of Montmorency and
Chastillon, sought nothing but her ruin, and would never be quiet or leave
off, till they had driven her out of the realm, and sent her into Italy to
her kinsfolks. God pardon that good Lady. A devout prayer for a holy woman.
But for the apprehension and conceit that she had of these things, I fear
much that she was the cause of many evils, that we saw in her time. For upon
this matter, she did so hate the^, that she never ceased till she had destroyed
them, as she did the one of them in the battle of Iarnac, and the other at
the massacre of S. Bartholomew, where if all they of Montmorency had been
found, they had had no better market of it then the rest. To which point
Messieur your uncle, did very nimbly put his hand, and valiantly pushed or
lifted at the wheel, that so he might put fire in the head of that young King
Charles: without whose death we need not doubt, but that he had had the like
scorn, that Monsieur the Mareschall of Montmorency gave him and Monsieur your
brother in this town, when he made them do all in their breeches, Doubtie
Dukes, and very cleanly.
because they bare weapons and armor forbidden them, without his passeport and
leave. But it seems, that the sudden death of these their Kings one after
another, did always break and set out of square the goodly attempts of your
house, and saved, or at the least prolonged the lives of your principal
enemies. Now let us come to that which fell out afterward, for it is time to
speak of you, and of Monsieur your brother, who began from that time forward to
appear in arms, and to walk in the footsteps and tracts of your
predecessors. A fardle of frumps against Duke du Mayenne.
You have already caused your valors and valiances to appear in the siege of
Poictiers, which you bravely defended, contrary to the advice of the first
husband of Madame la Lieutenant, Monsieur of Montpezat, your predecessor, who
counseled you to forsake all, and to get you packing thence. Afterward you
were at the battle of Montcontour: and after that, at the journey or exployt
done upon S. Bartholomews day: where the companions on the other side were
taken napping, if not on sleep, and provoked to say, whence come you.
Cardinal of Lorraine.
And though Monsieur your uncle at that time was turning over his portuise in
Italy, yet the play was not performed without his intermedling, and seeking to
have the King of Spaynes approbation of it, and the Popes absolution, touching
the marriage, which seemed for a lure, and a trappe also to the Huguenots.
Afterward you continued your blows at the siege of Rochel, where me^ did
perceive, that he that is at this day the King of Navarre, and Monsieur your
brother, were but one heart and one soul: Men may mask, but dissimulation will
break out.
and their great purity and familiarity, engendered jealousy and suspicion in
all the world. But we must come to the matter. When you saw that King Charles
was dead, who otherwise did not love you very much, and had sundry times
repeated the saying of the great King Francis, For he had no cause so to do.
whereof he himself had made these four verses, now very rife and common in
every man's mouth.

King Francis was no whit beguiled,
When he foretold that the Guisian race
Would spoil his sons of all they had,
And leave his subjects in worse case.
A step to the scepter as they thought.
When you saw him, I say dead without children, and the late King his brother
married with your barren and unfruitful cousin, you began (Monsieur your
brother and you I mean) to attempt and assay many practices and plots, which
many people said were the cause of all our miseries. I am not of that number
which believe that Messieurs your father and uncle, had from their time laid
the foundation of the building that your brother and you have builded since,
though there be that speak of the notes of David and of Piles, who have
better then Nostradamus prognosticated and foretold all that which we have
seen since their death: and though some assure us, that Monsieur your uncle,
Cardinal of Lorraine.
had framed a certain form of all the order that was to beheld therein. But I
cannot believe, that he that had as much understanding as a man could have,
could hope to make his nephews kings of France, seeing as yet three brethren,
children of the Kings house in the right line, all of the^ very puissant, and
in the flower of their age, ready to be married; and he could not divine or
guess, that they should dye without issue, as they did afterward. Besides, he
saw a great number of the Princes of the royal blood, that kept not
themselves warm with the robe of heretics; that should have cut off all hope
from his desires. I know very well that in his time, he was the author that
the Archdeacon of Thoul writ this much, that those of the house of Lorraine
were descended from Charles the great, by the males, A pedigree published, but
to small purpose.
that is to say, of Charles Duke of Lorraine, to whom the kingdom appertained,
after the death of Jews the fifth king of France: and that Hugh Capet having
taken him at Laon, and brought him and his wife prisoner to Orleans, he had a
son or male child, of whom he affirmed the Dukes of Lorraine are descended:
this was under hand cast amongst the people, As all did well perceive.
and you were never a whit grieved with it, though that the common and true
histories do plainly enough show and witness, that there was an interruption
and breaking off of males in the race of Lorraine, by two women, and namely in
the wife of Godfrey of Bouillon, named Idain. So the said Archdeacon made an
honorable amends for it, A worthy Archdeacon.
according to the arrest and sentence given against him, and like a lewd
fellow, and sloathfull, or fainthearted man, vnsayd that he had spoken. But in
fine, there was small appearance, that at that time my said Lord your uncle
could aspire to the kingdom, having so many hindrances and heads, either to
fight against, Two worthy ways to work by.
or to cause to dye by the sword, or by poison. It is very true, that even from
his beginning, he was very ambitious and desirous of greatness, and of the
government of the state, more then any other of his age: and I make no doubt of
it, but that he desired to possess the Kings, and to have held them, had he
been able, in tutorship and under government, as in old time the Majors of the
palace did, that so he might dispose of all according to his pleasure, and set
up or pull down those whom he had listed: Wicked men's purposes and practices
are vain.
which is the thing whereto commonly the greatest aspire Notwithstanding, being
almost come thereunto, while he was living, he gathered together and prepared
for you the material stuff, with which you have built this proved attempt,
with your foot to hold the crown of France, having left in your hand, first
great riches, great estates, the chief offices and charges of the kingdom,
great governments, many soldiers bound by good turns done them, many servants
also, great intelligences with the Pope and the King of Spain, and other
Princes your kinsfolks and allies: and which is more, a great opinion amongst
the common people, that you were good Catholics and sworn enemies to the
Huguenots. You knew very well how to make great profit to your selves by these
preparations, and sundry sorts of stuff, which ye found after his death, all
ready to bring unto the work. When I say you, I mean your self brethren and
cousins. After King Charles his death, many things succeeded well to you one
after another, Diverse devises to strengthen the Guisian faction.
and to very good purpose. First the barrennes of the King, or of your cousin
his wife: then the retraite and absence of the King of Navarre, of which you
were in part a cause, for the distrusts into which you brought him: and after
that the division and dissension between the King and Monsieur the Duke his
brother, whereof you were the only authors and promoters, under hand and
closely sharpening the spirits of the one against the other, and secretly
promising them to aid them. Another thing wherewith you thought to strengthen
your selves well, was the assistance that Messieurs the Princes of Conty and of
Soyssons, yielded for a time to the King of Navarre their cousin germane, when
they saw that the things you went about, were directly against all their
family, and that you boasted you would supplant or undermine them: for
thereupon you undertook the matter, which you have never since forsaken or
forgotten, namely, to cause to be comprehended by and under the Popes bull, If
Spain play not a part in this pageant, nothing can be done.
and by oths and protestations of the King of Spain, never to approve
heretical princes, nor the children of heretics, and then ye found out and
first devised these goodly names of adherents and fautors of heretics. After
all this, ye made your practices with the King of Spain more openly, and
assured your conditions, and couenanted then for your pensions, promising him
the kingdom of Navarre and Bern for his share, with the towns that should
serve his turn in Picardie and Champagne, and ye communed with him concerning
the means, that you would use to get hold of the estate. And the pretext that
ye pretended thereto, was the wicked government of the king, Good pretexts to
countenance a bad cause.
the prodigalities which he bestowed upon his two minions, Esperon and
Mercury, whereof you drew one to your own line, which was thought never a
whit the better. You employed all your diligence to make the poor prince
odious to his people: you counseled him to raise the taxes, to invent new
imposts, to create new officers, by which you your selves profited: for some
did maintain to Monsieur your brother at Chartres, after the barricades, that
he had received half the money of three edicts made to fill the purse, and
which also were very pernicious or hurtful, Fine devises to shred him of his
king^ome.
whereof notwithstanding you cast and laid the hatred upon that poor king,
whom you made to muse upon and dwell in ridiculous devotions, whilst you your
selves sued for the good favor of the people, and contrary to his liking,
took upon you the charge and conducting of great armies, drawing unto you the
heads and captains of war, and courting and making much of in words, the
very simple and mean soldiers, that ye might get them to be on your side,
practicing the towns, buying the gouernme^ts, and putting into the best places
governors and folk at your own devotion. And this was then that you
conceived the kingdom present almost (even as the appetite comes many times
by eating) when you saw King Henry without hope of issue, the chief Princes
accounted for heretics, He must needs go that the devil drives.
or fautors of heretics, the Consistory of Rome to lay the raines or bridle
in your neck, and the King of Spain to give you the spur. You had no more
to hinder you, but the late Monsieur, who was a shrewd hollow dreamer, and who
understood well with what wood you warmed your selves. He must be dispatched
out of the way: and Salcede his testament discovered unto us the means of it:
Who can stand against such deadly atte^pts.
but force prevailing not, poison did the deed. All your servants foretold
this his death more then three months before it came to pass. Afterward ye
made no more small mouths, or spoke closely for the dissembling of your
purpose: you went no more creeping as cunnies, nor in secret: but you plainly
laid open your selves. And yet notwithstanding the better to set forward your
affairs, you would make honest people believe, that this was for the public
benefit, and for the defense of the Catholic religion, Catholic religion a
fair pretext.
which is a pretext and cloak that seditious persons and stirrers up of
novelties, have always taken to cover themselves withal. Into this insensible
net you drew that good man Monsieur the Cardinal of Bourbon, a prince without
malice, and ye were able so cunningly to turn and wind him, that ye seized
him with a foolish and indiscreet ambition, that in the end ye might deal with
him, as the cat does with the mouse, that is to say, after ye had played with
him, to eat him up. No unapt comparison. No untrue exposition.
You drew thereunto sundry Lords of the Realm, diverse gentlemen and
captains, many cities, towns, and communalties: and amongst others this
miserable city, which suffered it self to be taken as it were with bird
lime, partly by reason of the hatred that they had against the misdemeanors of
the late King: partly also by reason of the impression, which you put into
them, that the Catholic religion would utterly be overthrown, if the King did
die without children, and the succession of the kingdom should come to the King
of Nauar, who called himself the first prince of the blood. Hereupon you forged
and framed your first declaration or manifestatio^, that had not in it so much
as one only word of religion, but you did indeed demand therein, They will
hardly agree with others that dissent from themselves.
that all the states, and governments of this kingdom, should be taken from them
that possessed them, and were not at your devotion, which escape you amended in
your second declaration, by the counsel of Rosne, who (to the end he might
set al on a fire) said, that there needed nothing else but the setting out of
religion: and then you preached unto us, of a Synod at Montauban, A fine devise
to foster the fire of faction in France.
and of a diet in Germany, where you said that all the Huguenots of the
world had plotted together, to seize the Kingdom of France, and to draw the
priests out of it. Some verily believed you, yea and I my self (who am not of
the craftiest) had some opinion thereof, and thereupon joined my self with
this party, for the fear that I always had, to forgo my religion: many good
people did as my self, that are for all that in no better estate. The others
that demanded nothing but new hurly burlies and stirs, made show as though
they did believe it. Sundry saffron sellers, indebted and bankrouts, A brave
band and a very holy company.
yea stubborn and criminous persons, and such as were worthy of death for the
offenses they had committed, followed you, as people that had need of civil
war. Having thus played your part, and received many doublons or double
ducats out of Spain, you put your selves into the fields, with a very good
and brave army. Whether it were or not the fact was evil.
Some say that this, was not done without the knowledge and consent of Queen
mother, who loved troubles, that she might make her self necessary, and a
person to be employed in doing all things, whereunto she was very apt and
fit. But as much Italicanated and crafty as she was, yet she was deceived
therein For at the first she did not believe, that your desseignes and attempts
did fly so high, and did not discover the lamp or light, which brake out
somewhat late after that you had set your foot so forward, that there was no
more mean for you to retire, this being not very likely, though she had
conceived some coffeehouse against, and mislike of her son, (who indeed
suffered himself to be governed rather by others, than by her) that she would
suffer him to fall, Yet natural people commit unnatural things.
and to see him deprived of the crown, to establish your brother therein, in
whom she trusted not but for fashion sake only. Wherefore the aid that that
good Lady yielded you, was not to destroy her son, but to bring him to
humility and acknowledgment of his fault: which she thinking she had done by
your mean, she caused you afterward to disperse your army, which served you
for no other purpose, but to acquaint you with your forces, and to extort by
violence, Law against law.
this edict of Iulie, which did frustrate and disanull all the other edicts,
made for pacification, and did yet once again renew fire, faggot, slaughter,
and all in France against the Huguenots. But you continued not in so fair and
good a way. For having understood, that the good towns that had promised you
to rise up for you against the King, (when they should see you in the fields
with an army) had failed you and were yet retained, with some fear and
reverence of the name of Kings, and of the ro^all majesty: you practiced
without vnarming your selves, And who will not ^u^h things make almost desperate.
and that within all the cities and towns, you practiced I say, such of the
inhabitants, as you knew had any credit, or dignity above the people. You
corrupted some by money, that came to you in great abundance out of Spain:
other some ye corrupted by promises of riches, offices, benefices: and other
some by impunitie of the faults they had committed, and for which they were
pursued by justice and law: but principally you prepared your engines against
this miserable city, For what will not wicked men do to obtain their purpose?
where you forgot no art or cunning, and that even unto the most abject and
shameful submitting of your selves, that so you might win and obtain the
simple people. Your brother went for that purpose to arm himself in
Champagne, and Bourgongne, that so he might surprise and take the places
appertaining to the King, and not those of the Huguenots, whereof there was no
speech in that country, saving at Sedan, Two armies and never a good or godly
leader.
where he accomplished his businesses very ill. And you Monsieur the
Lieutenant went into Guienne, with a mighty army, to watch the occasion to
play your part: and this in my mind is the reason, that ye performed no
greater matter there, because ye would temporize, and look to give your blow
on the other side, as not long sithence you said. But the heretics of
Xaintongne, ceased not to mock you therefore: for upon your return, they made
a little rhyme in their prittle prattle, which deserves that you should know it,
and lo it is this.

Lift up ye vaults your great gates I say, Fine frumps in verse though not of
the best.

Ye gates of Paris lift up and give way.
For so there shall enter the Duke of glory,
Who a hundred Huguenots to kill,
A thousand papists has slain with good will:
Has he not well gotten thereby?
The quatraine or four verses also that in those quarters were made thereof are
common, touching the towns and places which ye took.

Oronce is a goose, and Theuet a ducke perchance, Two Geographers.

Who in setting out the map or card of France,
Have forgot to put down, or else left out in disdain
The towns and castles, that this great Duke has taine.
I will not speak of the goodly taking that you made, of the castle of
Fronsac, No, but rather he should be arraigned for it, at a better bar.
and of a young Lady that was there, who was the heir of the house of
Caumont. That deserves not to be rehearsed in this good company, though that
that good man de la Vanguyon, died for grief of it, never being able to have
justice against you for it. Neither indeed was this any thing in comparison of
that that you had purposed to do in this town upon your return, whereof you
know that I know some thing, though not all. Who could have known this, and
have been silent.
For I knew not, that at that time you had plotted to take the King in the
Louure, and to kill, or to imprison all his best and chiefest servants, if the
Lieutenant of the Provost Hardy had not revealed it, who discovered all your
assemblies and enterprises by their limits and bounds: and was the cause that
the King well advertised thereof, caused to be taken, both the great and
little castle, the Arsenac, and the town house, and hartened and strengthened
his gards, that he might hinder the execution of your purpose and attempt. You
will confess, A little pity, spilleth a city.
I am sure, that had he done then, that which he should and could, that both
you and all your agents and facients had been cast away, whom they then knew
by their names, and by their surnames, even as well as when they were declared
afterward. But they proceeded therein too gently, and that by the counsel
those, which then said, and yet at this day affirm, that we must not provoke
or sharpen any thing. Afterward you ceased not to practice and solicit all
the world, They will prophecy for old shoes.
even openly, and principally the preachers and curates, upon whom you bestowed
some small part of your double ducats: you sent another army into Guyenne,
whereof you made great account, and which you thought should either have shut
up or taken the King of Navarre. Oh goodly things, you went and thrust
headlong, even into death and destruction, that young Lord, being over
presumptuous of the hopes that you had given him, that he should be the King of
Tholoze. Your brother had other forces on foot, that stood him in good steed,
to bea^e back the Reisters, Pride goet^ before shame.
that came to the succor of the Huguenots of Guyenne: and you Monsieur the
Lieutenant, must needs go thither in person, and yet you were not able to
hinder their passage. And if he had had no more but you and yours, who would
needs meddle therewithal (whatsoever thing ye would make men believe to the
contrary) they had come to drink our wine even at our gates, and you had been
brought to a marvelous exigent. And yet forsooth you would have all the glory
of their overthrow given to you, and rob thereof the King and his good
servants, who temporizing therein, and setting themselves against their passage
over the river Seyne, brought and wrought the greatest effects thereof, Some
grow great by other men's actions.
that indeed got you a great deal of honor and favor amongst the Parisiens,
the greatest part whereof knew not as yet at what you aimed: but they that
were partakers of your secrets, and that then first took the name of zealous
catholics, made already a God of your brother, called upon him in their
affliction, and had recourse unto him, when men did threaten them with the King
and justice. Whereupon he became so proud, rash and headie, that he durst enter
into this city with eight horse only, and that against the very express
forbidding, that the King had given him concerning the same, although we know
well enough, that he had appointed five or six hundred horsemen, No pageant
without the Pope play a part.
that should the same day approach and draw nigh unto him. Pope Xistus the fifth
could well declare what punishment that deserved, when he understood the news
of it, and would not have failed to have done and executed the same, had such a
thing fallen out to him. But the good mother and the counselors made by her
hand, It is unnatural to be for others against her son.
and according to her humor (of whom we have yet too many remaining) were able
so aptly to sta^pe and imprint fear, in the feeble spirit of this poor
prince, that he durst enterprise nothing, lest he should exasperate the
Parisiens, and lest he might yet bring again the troubles and miseries of
war into his kingdom. For albeit he loved not the Huguenots more than you,
yet so it fell out that having a long time tried their self willednes and
stubbornes, and seeing that to no purpose, they went about to overcome them,
and to carry them to reason, by the violence of war, he resolved with
himself, no more to assay or use forcible means or ways, Or rather less
cruelty.
but by a more gracious remedy began to draw them unto his obedience, and to
the acknowledgement of their former faults, depriving them of his court and of
his company, of honors, charges, gouernements, offices, and benefices, from
which the greatest part of them were grieved to see themselves excluded, which
fell out so prosperously, Mischievous policy.
that I cannot but aduow that their forces were less earnest and more
diminished by five or six years of peace, than by ten years of open war.
And there sprung up no new Huguenots, the old waxing cold and weary also of
the length of their troubles, and the greatest number of them permitting their
children to become catholics, that so they might be made partakers of honors,
and benefits, or good turns, as well as others. But you and yours, being
impatient of peace, and having always small regard of religion, so that you
might come to your attempts and purposes, would not suffer this tra^quillitie,
Fit similitude.
which was not healthful or good for you. You had learned that fishing was the
best, when the water was most troubled, so that indeed you never had had rest,
had you not seen borne this goodly day of the barricades, which has ruinated
and overthrown both us to you, and you to us. Albeit it be notorious and
evident enough, and your brother were he living would not deny it, and all they
that were of the enterprise or attempt, and are here present will confess it
with me, that if the King would have used his power and authority, we had
been that day all cast away, he being very certain, that you were prevented
and overtaken three whole days, and that the day of the exploit, which should
have been done, was not appointed but upon the Sunday. So well, that the King,
When men will not take opportunity, and use the means God has given them,
good reason they should smart.
who knew all the enterprise (though those that came nearest unto his person
endeavored to dissuade him, and to turn him away from believing the reports
which we made unto him thereof) had his Swissers, and his gards, and other men
of war all ready before day, who had already taken the places, four corner
streets or ways, and quarters of the city, the morninge before that your
brother or any of his enterprisers or accomplices were awake, who (as you know)
understanding upon his awaking that which was passed, thought himself so
surprised, overtaken and undone, that he expected nothing else, but that they
would come to besiege, and take, or kill him in the house of Guise, where he
was resolute to defend himself, with his sword only, having for that purpose
as yet made no preparation of any armor or weapons, least they should come
thither to search, and to take away al suspicion concerning him. After the same
manner the sixteen, and the most mutinous of the faction, hid themselves in
caves and holes, and in their friends and neighbors houses, looking for
nothing but present death, Every one that evil does, hates the light.
yea there was none of them so hardy, as that he durst be seen or appear in
the street, except it were more than eight or nine of the clock at night. So
that the King was able enough, and that without any resistance, to have seized
upon them, and upon your brother also, and absolutely to have established his
authority again, if he would have suffered his men of war, to have laid
about them with their hands, and to have charged the first, that advanced
themselves to make the barricadoes, and to stop the passages of the streets.
But his fearefulnes, A mitigation but how true, let me^ regard:
or rather his natural goodness, together with the impressions, that his
mother, and his traitorous counselors had wrought in him, hindered him from
using the advantage which he had in his hand or power, causing all his men of
war, to be forbidden to strike or hurt any person, and to keep themselves
quiet, without enterprising any thing, or offering violence to any of the
inhabitants, which was the cause, that the mutinous taking heart and courage
upon the ways of their plotted enterprise, had leisure to arm themselves, and
to shut up as it were between two gulfes or streams those that before they
durst not look in the face. And your brother also, seeing that they were so
slow to come to take him, there came unto him, and that from all quar^ers,
people in arms, whom those of the Kings side did let freely pass, because
they had no charge given them to look to him, and knowing that they of his
part, began to acknowledge him, and to make head in the quarters, A dastard in
the faint hartednes of his foe gathers strength.
according to the order that they had before plotted, of a desperate man that
he was, he became fully assured and resolute, and sent his appointed gentlemen
through the streets and quarters of the city, to assist and encourage the
inhabitants to take the gates and places. For his part, after that he was
hartened by a great number of men of arms, who had their meeting at his
lodging, he went out of his house, about ten or an eleven of the clock, that
he might be seen in the streets, and by his presence give them the sign of a
general revolt, which presently set fire in the head of all the conspirators,
who as mad and furious people, fell upon the Kings Swissers, and cut them all
in pieces, and the other men of war seeing themselves shut up between two
barricadoes, They that spare others are smitten themselves.
before and behind, without daring to defend themselves, because that the King
had forbidden it them, yielded themselves to the mercy of your brother,
Cruelty covered with clemency.
who caused them to be conducted in safety out of the town, which he did
not so much of clemency and gentleness, that was natural in him, as by sleight
and subtlety, the better to come to his last but, which was to seize himself
of the King, whom he saw to be in arms, and upon his guardes in the house of
Louvre, hardly to be forced so readily, without great murder. His cunning
therefore was to spin gently, and to counterfeite a man of poor estate, saying
that he was greatly grieved with that that had fallen out: in the mean season
he visited the streets, to encourage the inhabitants, he assured himself of
the strong places, he made himself master of the arsenac, where he had good
intelligence with Selincourt, Who it should seem, was as it were the master of
the ordinance.
that he might have the Cannon, the powder and bullets at his devotion. He
besotted with fair words, the poor knight that kept the watch, who yielded
him the Bastille, because he lacked good furniture for defense of it. He lacked
nothing but the Louvre. He had the palace: but that was no hard thing, because
it held not the master, who had a back gate, to withdraw himself. And this
was the cause why step by step, they advanced the barricades, that so they
might gain the new gate, and that also of S. Honorus. He was sure in a
pitiful taking
But the poor prince well advertised of that, which they purposed to do, and
that they meant nothing against others but him, neither daring to trust his
mother, neither the governor of Paris that then was, that entertained him with
speech, and with agreement, took a courageous resolution, and such a one as
was approved by many good people, which was to fly away, and to leave the
place and al, with which your brother thought himself much astonished, Some
men's fear, spoils other of their hope.

A vehement exclamation, and worthy wish doubtless.


seeing the pray that he supposed he had in his snares, was escaped from
him. O memorable feast of the barricades. Let thy eeuens, and thy octaues be
long. From that time hitherto, what have we had but wretchedness and poverty?
But anguishes, fears, tremblings, onsets, overthrows, defiances, and all
sorts of miseries? These were nothing else but subtilties, crafts,
dissimulations and counterfeitings, on the one side, and on the other,
practiced and managed by him that could best take it, and that could deceive
his companion: yea, began to go cheek by ^ole with your master, and because
you were not able to take him by open force, you took counsel, to set upon
him by craft and subtlety. You made show, as though you had been heavy and
sad for that which fell out, The Crocodiles tears.
specially to the^ whom you sent unto him, but to strangers you braued it, and
vaunted your selves, Out of ore fountain comes sweet and sour water.
that you were masters of all, and that there was no let but in your selves,
that you were not Kings: and that in that day of the barricadoes, you had
gotten more, then if you had gained three battles or foughten fields.
Concerning which matter, your own letters, and those of your agents, give
large credit. You sent diverse times sundry sorts of Ambassadors to the King,
as well to Roan, as to Chartres, to make him believe that the people of Paris
were then more at his devotion then ever, and that they did desire to see him,
and to welcome him into his good city, and you endeavored nothing but to draw
him thither, that so you might perfect the business begun. But he would do
nothing in that matter, and so he did well. In fine, after manifold
declarations, which you drew from him (whereof he was no niggard) in which was
showed how he did forget and remit all that was past (wherein you would never
suffer to be used the word of pardoning) you went and carried your selves very
churlishly and uncivilly in the promoting of the Estates, The more the wicked
are forborne, the worse they are.
wherein you promised unto your selves, that all should pass at your pleasure,
by the means of your running up and down, and suites that you made in the
election of the deputies of the provinces. In which never did any man see such
shamelesnes as you used, that sent from city to city, and from town to
town, to cause men of your faction to be chosen, Fie upon such free election.
that they might come to the foresaid estates prepared with notes and furnished
with remembrances fit for your purpose: whereof some were chosen by violence,
othersome by corruption of money or briberie, and othersome through fear and
threatenings. Amongst others from this town you sent the president de Nully, la
Chapelle Marteau, Compan, Rowland, and the advocate of Orleans, who were even
in open show the principal authors of the rebellion, and the instruments
which you most used to deceive the people. What need is there to rehearse here
that which passed in the said Estates of Bloys, The Lord is known by executing
judgment: the wicked is snared in the works of his own hands: Mark this,
mark this.
and how God blinded the eyes of them of your family, that they might go and
throw themselves into the ditch or pit which they had prepared for another
man? Then when ye thought to be aloft even above the wind, after that goodly
fundamental law, by which you declared the late Cardinal of Bourbon to be
the first prince of the blood, and the King of Navarre unworthy ever to
succeed to the crown, as also his cousins, adherents, favorers of heretics:
even the^ I say, behold a great storm that took away those two great pillars
of the faith, Messieurs your brethren, the one naming himself Lieutenant
general, great Master and Constable of France, and the other the Patriarch of
the French Church, and cast them into such a deep gulf of the sea, that they
were never seen nor heard of since. Was not this think you, Yes surely was it.
a great stroke or blow from heaven, and a wonderful judgment of God, that
they that thought to hold their master in a chain, and made an account to
lead him within three days, by force or otherwise, into this town, to cause
him to be shaven for a monk, and shut up in a Cloister, should suddenly find
and feel themselves taken and shut up by him, whom they thought to entrap and
take? Some are of this mind, and have not spared to speak it, that you
Monsieur the Lieutenant, being jealous of the greatness and high fortune of
Mo^sieur your brother, If he did so it was well, though that he a, med at
therein was evil.
did advertise the King that dead is, of the enterprise they had in hand, to
lead him away, and that you admonished him to make haste to prevent it.
Whether this be true yea or no, I report me to your self: but this is a
matter very vulgar and common, that Madame d'Aurnale your cousin, was expressly
at Bloys, to discover all the secret to the King: where she lost not her labor
and some say that her husband and she would from thence forward have been
banqueroute to the League, if the King would have given him the government of
Picardie and of Boulongne, A charitable, but whether a true judgment, it is
uncertain.
and have paid his debts. Concerning your self, I think not that you had so
dastardly and wicked a mind to betray your brethren, and men know well enough,
that you were called to come and to be present at the marriage, where they
would have made you of their liuerie. But whether it were that you distrusted
the enclosing, or that you would not hazard all three together, you kept your
self at Lio^s upon the scoutes, to watch the issue and execution of the
enterprise, which was far otherwise then you hoped for, and it missed but a
very little, that you your self had not been of the play, saving that Seigneur
Alphonsus Corse was somewhat before you, or indeed a little too forward. Madame
your sister had the same fear that you had, A shrewd woman's wit.
who knowing the news, thought not her self sure enough in the suburbs, but
got her self into the town. Oh how had we been now at peace and quietness, if
this prince had had the courage to have proceeded further, and to have
continued these blows and strokes? Bitter effects following want of execution
of justice.
Then surely we should not have seen Monsieur of Lions sit so nigh you, and
serving you for a gunner, or instrument, to perform your practices and his
own by at Rome and in Spain, and to hinder by his sermons, and his reasons
colored with religion, that we cannot have peace, which we stand so much in
need of. Then we should not have seen the furious administrations and
governments of Marteau, Nully, Compan, and Rowland, who have brought the people
to desperation, if that justice (the credit and renown whereof we have carried
hitherto) should after their apprehension be executed, as indeed it ought. Then
should we not have seen all the other great cities and towns burn with the
fire of rebellion, as they do, if their deputies had passed by the same order.
But the gentleness of that King (who in no sort was bloody) was content to see
his principal enemy and competitor beaten down and overthrown: A pity
marring all.
and then he rested or stayed when he should most lively and quickly have
pursued his way. Notwithstanding, if the Lord d'Antragues had done that which
he promised for the reducing of Orleans, (which he thought to heal, as he had
indeed spoiled it) and had he not suffered himself to be out run and
prevented by S. Maurice and Rossieux, As haste many times makes waste, so
there is a foreslowing that works great mischief.
matters had not been so far out of square, as they were for want of giving
order to that first tumult: whither you came upon the very beginning of their
first revolt, and encouraged them to rebel, and to be in good earnest
obstinate: and according to their example you caused us to do as much.
Afterward, even as it were very suddenly, this fire inflamed all the great
cities and towns of this kingdom, and there are very few thereof that can
boast they were exempted therefrom, so skillful were you, Wily and wicked
persuasions may do much: men are so inclined to the worst.
nimbly to practice men of all sides. And thereupon to make us without hope of
reconciliation to our Lord and Master, you caused us to make out our process
against him: you caused us to hang and to burn his picture: you forbad us to
speak of him, but in the quality of a tyrant: you caused him to be
excommunicate: you caused him to be execrate, detested, and accursed, by the
Curats, by the Preachers, and by little children in their prayers. And can any
thing so horrible and fearful be spoken or alleged, as that which you caused
to be done to Bussie the Clerk, A fit instrument for such a foul fact.
the petty advocate, accustomed to kneel upon his knees before the court of
parliament, of which he had the hearty affection and love; and the great rage
to go and take him from the venerable seat of sovereign justice, and to
lead him capture and prisoner in triumph through the streets, even unto his
fort and den of the Bastille, from whence he came not out but in pieces, with
a thousand concussions, exactions, and villainies, which he exercised against
honest and good people besides? I cease to speak of the pilling of sundry
rich houses, the selling of precious moueables, the imprisoning and raunsoming
of the inhabitants and gentlemen, that they knew to have money, and to be
furnished with silver, New baptisms in popery, besides them that are done at
the font.
whom they baptized with and called by the names of politikes, or adherents,
and favorers of heretics. And upon this speech, there was made a pleasant
rhyme of that time, which I think worthy to be inserted into the registers
and quiets of our estates.

To know them that are politikes,
Adherents, or favorers of heretics:
Let them be close and hid as you can,
You need little more, but these verses to scan.
He that of times or men does complain,
In this golden world wherein we remain:
He that all his goods will not freely bring
To uphold this cause, is just worth nothing:
He that is slow to the union to swear:
He that his well furred gown daily does wear,
In steed of putting on his harnois:
He that says not the Biarnois,
But says the King, and him does allow,
And at the sixteen does mock and mow:
Thinking them men far from all credit still
That murmureth at them, or of them speaks ill:
That by the forty a fig does not set,
That has not his beard after the League very net:
That has seen letters from the other side of the land,
Trust you not in all this, beware at any hand,
That with the Princes and states does not go,
That at Easter hears Masses two and no more:
That has not his beads about his big neck,
Deserves therefore a halter, rather then a check.
That is greatly grieved when they him call out
To watch at the gate, or by night to be a skout:
To be called to the trenches, or to the rampart,
He is none of the right side, he has no good heart.
He that speaks of peace, or conceiues thereof hope,
Shall be sure to feel the faggot or the rope.
He that much trusts in his odd devotions,
And runs up and down in all processions,
Using many prayers and often pilgrimages,
If therewith he intermingle in his suffrages
A poor sigh and say, Lord some peace do us give,
He is at the least an adherent, not worthy to live.
And though that he make a fair show every hour,
Take heed he white you not with meal or with flower.
He that loves not these men preach to hear
Commelet, Guincestre, and Bouchar the Friar:
Or that willingly does not bid, God speed
To Louchard, Morliere, or la Rue indeed:
He is a Maheutre, and a very sorry man,
Worse by much then a Turk, or a Mohammedan.
He that honors not the Lordship say I
Of Baston, Machault, and of Acarie:
And that has said, at any time or place,
That the law will not go upright in any case,
Who asks at his window by night or day
Of his next neighbors, what this mean may
By so many alarmes, and Toxsains also,
That all the saints does not fear on a row,
That the good and renowned feast pardie
Of Barricades the blessed has not kept holy.
He that reverently has not spoken or meant
Of the bloody knife of Friar James Clement,
Who, then when Bichon, or else Niuell
Some news did print or began to tell,
Doubts thereof and enquireth of the author,
I will pawn my credit he is sure a fautor.
Some others there are that men mark full well
With a more sure mark, then any we do tell,
S. Cosme, Oliuier, and the Clerk Bussy,
Lay hands on these galants and bring them to me,
They are so, and why so? this is most sure,
The money they have in their purse you cannot endure.
I have kept these verses by heart or in memory, because they are so common,
that women and little children have learned them, and because there can be
nothing more naturally put down, to express our proceedings, It comes now
well in to lay open their sin.
and the manner that we have used to find out money and silver. But they had
forgotten to set in order therein the gold of Molan, and the treasure of the
great Prior of Champagne, who help us to set forward your voyage to Tours:
which indeed was neither long, nor of great effect. For after that you had
brought I know not what troop (gathered together of people mislead through
error, and with a love and desire of novelty, that you had put into their
heads) to brave your master, whom you thought to take unprovided, or else in
hope that they of Tours would make some tumult, to deliver him into your hands,
so soon as you saw that they spoke unto you with cannon shot, and that the
King of Navarre was come, to assist and succor his brother, having a notable
interest and care indeed, that he might not fall into your hands, The ungodly
flies, when no man almost pursues.
fear at the show and sight of the white scarfes, did so seize and take hold
of you, that you must needs retire with diligence, and that by wandering ways,
where there were no stones. And this your foul flying you would have covered
with the request, that we made unto you to succor us against the courses of
Messieurs de Longueville, Better a bad excuse, then none at all.
de la Noue, and d'Givry, after the shameful levy of the siege of Senlis. And
being here, you distrusted your self, that they would not long delay to
follow you at your heels, having two so mighty whelps at your tail.
Whereupon you gave some order for the defense of Paris, (...) such Phi^^^ns.
but it was by a medicine against poison, worse (if we had taken it) then the
disease it self would or could have been. And this was then when the Parisiens
began to perceive, and see guests living at their own discretion and pleasure
in their houses, contrary to all the ancient privileges, granted them by the
former Kings: but these were but little fleurets or filips, in comparison of
that which we suffered afterward, and yet notwithstanding you suffered them
to take even before and under your nose Estampes and Pontoise, without
succouring of the^. And you seeing that they returned upon you, minding either
to draw you forth to the field, or to shut you up within our walls, you I say
did then well perceive by the proceeding of the Kings affairs, that yours went
continually to ruin, Need made them monks, or to use mo^ks.
and that there was now no more mean to save and deliver you, but a blow or
stroke from heaven, which was by the death of your master, your benefactor,
your prince, your king. I say your king, for I perceive emphasis or force in
this, word which imports a person, consecrated, anointed, and highly
esteemed of God, as a mean betwixt angels and men, or as a man may say, mingled
or made of the^ both. For how should it be possible, that one man alone, weak,
naked, unarmed, could command so many hundred thousand men, A reasonable good
speech.
and make himself to be feared, followed and obeyed, in all his pleasures, if
he had not, as we may say, some divinity or some part or parcel of the power
of God intermingled therewith? as some say that the spirits intermingle, and
cast the thunder between, and within the clouds, in which they make these
strange and fearful fires, that do very far and much pass the material
and elementarie fire? I will not say, that you were he that chose particularly
that wicked fellow, which hell created, He means Friar James Clement.
to go and give that execrable blow, which the very furies of hell themselves
would have feared to have done. But it is very evident, that before he went
about this accursed enterprise, Sometimes it is not amiss to be a blabbe of a
man's tongue.
you saw him, and I could well tell the places where, and the times when, if I
would. You encouraged him: you promised him Abbeyes, Bishoprics, mountains
and meruailes, and ye left the rest to be done to Madame your sister, to the
Jesuits, and to the Prior of his order, who passed some what further, and
promised him nothing less, the^ a place in paradise above the Apostles, if it
fell out that he were martyred. That it was so, and that ye were very well
advertised of all the mystery or secret, you caused the people, that spoke of
yielding themselves to be preached unto and taught, that they would yet have
patience but seven or eight days, Good reason: all lead by one murdering
spirit.
and that before the end of the week, they should see some great matter, that
should set us in our former rest and quietness. The preachers of Roan, of
Orleans, and of Amiens, preached it at the same time, and in the same terms.
Afterward so soon as your Friar possessed with a devil was departed, you
caused to be arrested and apprehended for prisoners in this city, more than
two hundred of the principal citizens and others, whom ye thought to have
goods and friends, and to be of credit with them of the Kings side, as a
precaution or forewarning, wherewith you purposed to serve your selves, The name
of some devil, signifying thereby the murderer Clement.
to redeem that wicked Astaroth, in case he were either taken before the fact
or after the fact. For having the pledge of so many honest men, you supposed
that they durst never put that murderer to death, because of the threatening
which ye had given out, that ye would cause to die in the way of change for
him, those whom you kept prisoners: who in truth are much bound to them, that
in a headlong heat or choler, slew with the blows of their rapiers that
wicked wretch, after he had given his stroke. And you your self ought not
less to thank them. For had they suffered him to live (as they might have
done) and put him into the hands of justice, It is almost as well discovered now.
we had had the whole thread of the enterprise, naturally and lively deducted,
and you had been there incouched in white clothes, for a mark of your
disloyalty and felony, that never would have been blotted out. But God did
no so permit it, and we know not yet the end whereto he keeps you. For if the
examples of former times do carry with them any consequence, A very large
assertion, but yet for the most part true.
to judge of the affairs of the time present, we never saw yet vassal or
subject, that enterprised to drive his Prince out of his kingdom, to die in
his bed. I will not strengthen this maxim or rule, by many histories, nor
resute those, which our preachers allege, to defend and justify that
horrible act. I will speak of no more but two, the one out of the Bible, and
the other out of the Roman histories. You have heard it may be, some preach,
that those that slew Absalom, though he were up in arms against his father,
his King, and his country, were notwithstanding punished with death, A man
shall hardly see such justice in France or Spain.
by the commandment of David, against whom he made war. If you have read
the conflicts that were made between Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, for the Empire
of Rome, you have read and found that Vitellius put to death, more then six
hundred men, who bragged that they had slain Galba his predecessor, and had
presented a petition to be recompensed therefore: It may be he means Machiuel.
which he did not, as says the author (who at this day serves insteede of an
Evangelist to many) for the friendship that he carried to Galba, nor for the
honor that he meant to do him, but to teach all princes to assure their life
and their present estate, and to cause them, that should dare to attempt any
thing against their persons, to know and understand, that an other prince their
successor (though perhaps their enemy) after some one sort or other would
reueng their death. And this is the cause, wherefore you Monsieur the
Lieutenant had great wrong, to make show of so great joy, Woe to them that
laugh now, for they shall weep.
having known the news of that cruel accident that befell him, by whose death
you should enter into the ways of the kingdom. You made bonfires, or fires of
rejoicing, where you should indeed have observed funerals* you took indeed a
green scarf in token of rejoicing, whereas ye ought to have doubled and
redoubled your blackes in sign of mourning. Good and imitable examples.
You should have imitated David, who caused Saules bones to be gathered
together, and to be honorably buried, although that by the means of his
death, he remained a peaceable King, and lost thereby his greatest enemy. Or
to have done as Alexander the great, who caused sumptuous obsequies to be made
for Darius: or as Julius Caesar, who wept with hot and bitter reares,
understanding of the death of Pompey his competitor, and deadly adversary, and
put them to death that had slain him. What could a man of a base and bad mind
do else?
But you contrary to the practices of these great personages, did laugh, and
make feasts and bonfires, and all fortes of joy, when you understood of the
cruel death of him, from whom you held all that you and your predecessors had
or have, of wealth, of honor, and of authority. And not content with these
common reioycings, which did sufficiently witness, how much you approved this
accursed act, you caused the murderers picture to be made, and showed it
publicly abroad, All this whatsoever, is but the reward of iniquity.
as if it had been of a canonized saint. You caused his mother and kindred to
be sought out, that you might enrich them with public alms, to the end that
this might be a lure, and a bait for others, that would undertake to give yet
such an other blow, to the King of Nauar, under hope and assurance, which they
might receive by the example of this new martyr, that after their death, they
should be so sanctified, and their kindred well reco^pensed. But I will not further
examine your conscience, nor prognosticate unto you, A plain and true speech.
that which may fall out unto you for this fact. But Gods word must needs be
false and full of lying (which it is not nor cannot be) if you do not very
quickly receive the wages and hire that God promises to manquellers and
murderers, as your brother did, for having slain the late Admiral. But I
will leave this matter to the divines to treat hereof, that so I may come to
put you in mind of a great and stale fault, which you committed at the very
same time. For since you feared not in so many places to declare, that your
special mark was to reign and be a King, you had then, and by reason of the
blow, a good occasion offered you to cause your self to be chosen King, and
you might better then have attained thereto, than you can at this present, when
you sue, Many devises are in man's heart: but the Lords purposes shall stand for
ever.
ride, run, corrupt and all to get it. The Cardinal of Bourbon (to whom
unadvisedly you gave the title of the King) was a prisoner. Your nephew (upon
whom they did bestow all the commendations and glory of his father) was so
likewise, and neither the one nor the other could hurt you therein or hinder
you, as your nephew does at this day: you had yet the people harmed, earnest
and running after novelty and change, who had a great opinion of your valor,
from which you are much fallen since, and I make no doubt but that you had
carried it away, through the hatred of the lawful successor, who was
notoriously known to be a Hugue not. And besides, you had diverse preachers,
who had laid out a thousand reasons to persuade the people, that the Crown
did belong rather to you than to him. Nay foul and false.
The occasion for it was fair, namely, the changing of it from one line to
another. And although it be all but one family, and of the same stalk, as we
may say, notwithstanding the distance of more than ten degrees (in which the
doctors say, there cease all the bond and right of consanguinitie) made a
goodly show, although that Doctor Baldus has written, that this rule fails
in the family of the Bourbonians. Whereunto add, that you had the force and
the favor of the time in your hand, wherewith you could not serve your own
turn, or help your self, but rather, thorough a certain fainthartednes, and
very foul and gross cowardice, you would observe forsooth some little
modesty, and form of the civil law, giving the title of the King to a poor
priest that was a prisoner: The Cardinal of Bourbon.
although that in all other things, you did shamelessly violate all the laws
of the realm, and all law besides of God and of man, whether it were natural
or civil. You forgot all the maximaes and rules of our great masters, touching
the matter of enterprise, upon the estates of an other man, even that of Julius
Caesar, which oftentimes for his excuse and defense spoke these verses, out of
a certain Greek Poet.

If that thou must needs wicked be, be so a kingdom to obtain:
But yet in other things be just, and eke the laws maintain.
You were afraid to take the title of a King, Stumble at a straw, and leap
over a block.
and yet you were not afraid to usurp the power of it, which you disguised
and masked, with a quality or estate altogether new, and such a one, as was
never heard spoken of in France? And I know not, who was the author thereof,
yet some attribute it to the president Brisson, or to Ianin. But whosoever
invented this expedient, failed in the terms of Grammar, and of Estate also. A
fit and good reason.
They might have given you the name of Regent, or of Lieutenant general of the
King, as they have done sometimes heretofore, when the Kings were prisoners, or
absent off their kingdom and realm. But Lieutenant of the estate and Crown,
is a title unheard of, and very strange, which also has too long a tail, as
it were a chimer, or mo^ster against nature that makes little children afraid.
Whosoever is a Lieutenant, is Lieutenant to another whose, place he holds,
and who is not able to do his function or office, by reason of his absence, or
some other hinderance or let: and a Lieutenant is the Lieutenant of some other
man: but to say that a man should be the Lieutena^t of a thing without life, as
the estate or crown of a King, is a very absurd thing, and such a one as
cannot be maintained. And it had bin more tolerable to say, Lieutenant in the
estate and crown of France, than Lieutena^t of the estate. But this is but a
small matter to fail in speech or words, A true assertion.
in comparison of failing in deeds. When you were clothed and cloaked with this
goodly quality, you did so rudely and roughly empty our purses, that you had
the mean to raise up a great army, with the which you promised to pursue,
besiege, take and bring prisoner, He that reckons without his host must count
again.
this new successor to the crown, who did not call himself Lieutenant, but in
plain terms King. You had made us then to guard and keep our places, and to
hire shops in S. Anthonies street, that we might see him pass in chains, when
ye brought him prisoner from Diepe, what did ye withal this great army, (very
gross indeed by all your strange succors, of Italy, of Spain, and of
Germany, The horse and man are prepared against the day of battle, but
victory is from the Lord.
) but to lay open and cause to be known your own reachles weakness, and
unorderly government, not so much as once daring with thirty thousand me^, to
set upon five or six thousand, which gave you the head at Arques, and in the
end constrained you, shamefully to turn your backs, and you your selves to
seek surety and safety, in the river of Sum? We were greatly deceived, when
in steed of seeing this new King in the Bastile, we beheld him in our
suburbs, with his army as a certain lightning or clap of war, that
prevented our thoughts, and yours also. But you came and succored us, A
needless work.
then when we were assured, that he would do us no hurt. And we must confess,
that without the resistance that one (who is at this day his servant) made
against him at the gate of Bussy, he had taken us before you arrived. From that
time hitherto, you have done nothing in your Lieutenancy worthy the
remembrance, but the establishment of your council of forty persons, and of
sixteen, If this be his commendation, praise him for tyranny.
which you have since revoked and scattered, as much as you could. And whilst
that you labored the advancement and estate of your own house, and that you
suffered your imagined King to wast and wear away in prison, without
succouring him, either with money or with means, to maintain his royal
estate: he that is King indeed, put himself in possession of Dunoys, of
Vendosmois, of Maine, of Perch, and of the better part of Normandy, in so much
that at the last, when he had in conquering compassed the third part of his
kingdom, you were constrained, partly through shame, Fit motives for such
manner of men.
partly through despair, and partly through men's importunity toward you, to
come before him, or into his sight, then when he besieged Dreux, where he
showed you a trick of an old soldier, that so he might have the better mean
to fight with you. For he raised his siege, and made show to retire into
Perch, to draw you on more forward and to cause you to pass the rivers in
following of him: but so soon as he saw you were over, and encamped in the
plain, he turned his face directly upon you, and gave you the battle, It is
all one with God to overcome by few, or by many.
which you lost more for lack of courage and good guidance, than for want of
me^, the number of those on your side far passing his. And yet in this great
affliction you could not refrain your self from giving us a new devised tale
(which is a common thing with you) you and your sister feeding us with lies and
false news, and the more to comfort us in this loss, you went about to make
us believe that the Biarnois was dead, whose face you durst not look upon,
They were wont to say: a dead man hurts none.
nor attend his recountring of you. But we saw this dead man quickly after,
nigh unto our gates, and you your self were so afraid of his shadow, that you
were not at leisure to repose or rest your self, till you were passed into
Flanders, where you made that goodly market with the Duke of Parma, which
sithence has cost us so dear, and which has so ruinated your reputation, and
overthrown your honor, that I see not any mean at all, able for ever
hereafter to raise you up again. The Spaniards he means, and it is no lie:
as also in particular the Prince of Parma.
For in steed of being a master, you went and made your self a servant and a
slave, of the most insolent and proudest nation under heaven: and you your
self served the most cruel and ambicious man that you were able to choose, as
afterward you proved, when he made you to serve him as a boy does his master
at tennise, yea to lackey after him, and to wait at his gate, before he would
give you an answer, though when it came it was of very small importance also.
Which thing the gentlemen of France that accompanied you, despised and
disdained, and you alone were not ashamed to make your self vile and abject,
dishonouring your lineage, race and nation, so much were you transported with a
desire of revenge and ambition. But in the midst of these indignities, and
dishonest submissions, which you made to the prejudice of the name of France,
and of your quality, Carefulnes and painefulnes, two good virtues.
our new Kings stayed not, nor kept holy day, as we say, for want of work:
for he shut up our river above and below, by taking Mante, Poissy, Corbeil,
Melun, and Montreau: after that he came and took from us the plain of France,
by the taking of S. Denis. That being done, there was no more difficulty to
besiege us, as indeed we were by and by after. What did you to succor us? or
rather what did you not to cast us away, and to make us most miserable? A kind
and careful Captain.
I will not speak that, which some have reported of you, that ye did commonly
say, that the taking of this city should be more hurtful to your enemy than
profitable, and that his army should be destroyed and dispersed in taking of
it. I could never believe, that ye would have taken pleasure to see your wife,
your children, your brother, and your sister, to fall into the enemies hand,
and to stand at their mercy: And yet we must needs say, that the time which
you set to come to succor us was so long, He gives twice that gives in good
season: then what is the contrary.
that it made us ready many times to fall into despair: and I believe, that
if the King had demanded some term or time of you to take us in, he would not
have demanded more, than you would have given him. Oh how happy had we bin, if
we had bin taken the morrow after we were first besieged? Oh how rich should we
have bin now had we made that lost? But we have burned in a small fire: we have
languished and yet we are not healed. A worthy and no unfit comparison.
Then should the valiant and victorious soldier have taken away our moueables,
but we should have had silver to have ransomed and redeemed them again: but
since, we have eaten up our moueables, and our money also. It may be he would
have enforced some women and maids: yet surely he would have spared the most
noble, and the^ that had had any ability to heal or to help their chastity,
by respect or by friends: but sithence they have of themselves put themselves
into the stews, and are yet therein, through the force and power of necessity,
which is much more violent, and of longer infamy and ill name, than the
transitory and short violence of the soldier, which is dissembled, and is
presently buried and forgotten, whereas this is spread abroad, is continued, and
becomes at the last a very shameless custom without returning. Nothing
spared in an anarchie or confusion.
Our relics had been safe and sound: the ancient jewels of the crown of our
Kings had not been molten as they are: our suburbs had been in their former
estate, and inhabited as they were, whereas now they are ruinated, forsaken,
beaten down and spoiled: our city had been rich, wealthy, and well peopled
as it was: our rents due to the town house, should have been paid, whereas you
draw out the marrow thereof, and the last penny: our farms in the country
had been labored and tilled, and we should have received the revenues
thereof, whereas now they are abandoned, forsaken, and unoccupied. We should
not have seen die a hundred thousand men, by famine, A pitiful spectacle, and
yet who had remorse.
sorrow, and poverty, who died within the space of three months in the
streets and in the hospitals, without mercy or succor. We should yet have
seen our university flourishing and frequented, where it is now altogether
solitary and left alone, serving now for no other use, but for peasants, and
for the kine and beasts of the villages nigh thereto. We should have seen our
palace replenished with honorable persons of all qualities and estates, The
difference between good government and tyranny.
and the hall and the gallerie with Mercers, Haberdashers, etc. continually
full of people: whereas now we see none but idle loyterers walking up and down
at large; and green grass grow there, where men had hardly room or space to
stir themselves: the shops of our streets had been garnished with artisans
and handicrafts men, whereas now they are empty and shut up. We should have
had press and multitude of carres, chariots, and coches upon our bridges,
whereas now in eight days space we saw but one only pass, and that was the
Popes Legates. Mischiefs foreseen and not remedied, increase grief.
Our storehouses and market places should have been covered with beasts, full
of corn, of wine, of hay and of wood. Our places appointed for selling of
victuals, and our markets had been thronged with the prease and multitude of
merchants, and of victuals, where now they are all void and empty, and we have
nothing but at the mercy of the soldiers of S. Denis, of the fort de Gournay,
Chevreuse, and Corbeil. Ha Monsieur the Lieutenant, suffer me as in this
regard, to use one exclamation, by the way of some short digression, besides
the course (I confess) and order of my oration, that I may bewail the pitiful
estate of this city the Queen of cities, of this little world, and the
abridgment of the world it self! Ha ye my masters the deputies of Lions,
Happy is he who is warned by other men's harms.
Tholouze, Roa^, Amiens, Troies, and Orleans, look upon us, and take example by
us. Let our miseries make you wise by our losses. You all know well enough what
we have been, and now ye see what we are. All of you know in what a gulf and
bottomless pit of desolation we have been through this long and miserable siege:
and if you do not know it, read the history of Josephus touchi^g the wars of
the Jews, Former examples and ours alike in many things.
and the besieging of Jerusalem by Titus, which does naturally and lively
express this of our city. There is nothing in the world that may be so well
compared one with another as Jerusalem and Paris, excepting the issue and end
of the siege. Jerusalem was the greatest, the richest, and the best peopled
city of the world: so was Paris.

Which did her head lift up as far above all other towns,
As the fur tree above the furze, or briers that use do clownes.
Jerusalem could not endure the holy Prophets, All that have grace may profit
by this comparison as well as Paris.
that laid before them their errors and idolatries: and Paris could not suffer
her Pastors and Curats that blamed and accused her superstitious and foolish
vanities, and the ambition of her princes. We made war against the Curats of
S. Eustachius, and of S. Mederic, because they told us our faults, and did
foretell the miseries and mischief that should come upon us therefore.
Jerusalem put to death her King and her anointed one, of the race and stock of
David, and caused him to be betrayed by one of his disciples, and of his own
nation: Paris has chased and driven away her prince, her king, her natural
anointed one, and afterward caused him to be betrayed and murdered by one of
her Friars. The doctors of Jerusalem gave the people to understand that their
king had a devil within him, God will cut out and destroy lying tongues: but
they regard not that.
in whose name he wrought his miracles: Our preachers and doctors have they not
preached this unto us, that our late king was a sorcerer, and that he
worshipped the devil, in whose name he did al his devotions? Yea some have bin
so impudent and shameless to show in the pulpit publicly to their hearers,
certain shapes or images made according to their own pleasure and fantasy,
which they did swear was the idol of the devil, that that tyrant did worship:
so lewdly did they speak of their master and of their king. These same doctors
of Jerusalem proved by the scriptures, that Jesus Christ deserved to dye, and
cried with a loud voice, We have a law, and according to the law he ought to
dye. And have not our preachers and Sorbonists, proved and approved, The devil
will allege scripture, but yet not rightly.
by their texts applied according to their own fantasy, that it was
permitted, yea praise worthy and meritorious to kill the King? and have they
not yet preached it after his death? Within Jerusalem there were three
factions, which caused themselves to be called by diverse names, but the most
wicked of them, called themselves zealous, and were assisted with the Idumeans
that were strangers. Paris has been tossed and vexed altogether in the self
same sort, with three factions, that is of Lorraine, Spain, and the sixteen,
participating of both the other two, under the same name of zealous, who have
their Eleazars, A pretty allusion, and yet no illusion.
and their Zacharies, and Acaries, and more John's, than there were in
Jerusalem. Jerusalem was besieged by Titus, a Prince of diverse religion from
the Jews, he going at that time to the hazards and dangers of the assault, as
a simple soldier, and yet so gentle and gracious was he, that he procured
himself thereby to be called the delights of mankind. Paris was besieged by a
Prince of a differing religion, but yet more courteous and gentle, more bold
also, and ready to go to the blows, Would to God he had never stre^gthned
your hope or heart that way.
than ever was Titus. Besides, Titus would not innouate or change any thing in
the religion of the Jews, no more does this prince in ours, but contrariwise
gives us hope, that one day he will embrace it and that very shortly.
Jerusalem suffered all extremity, before it would acknowledge a fault, and
acknowledging it, had no more power to redress it, and was hindered from it by
the heads of the faction. How much have we suffered before we would know our
selves? And since our sufferings, how often have we desired, that we might
yield, if we had not been hindered therefrom by them that hold us under the
yoke? Jerusalem had the fort of Anthonia, the temple and the fort of Sion, that
bridled the people, and let them that they could not stir nor complain. We
have the forte of S. Anthony, the temple and the Louvre, as it were the forte
of Sion, Comparisons fit enough.
that serve us for snaffles and for bittes, to hold us in and to bring us to
the appetite of the governors. Josephus, of the same nation and religion that
the Jews were, exhorted them to prevent the wrath of God, and made them
understand, that they themselves destroyed their temples, their sacrifices, and
their religion, for which they said they fought, and yet for it would do
nothing. Good counsel not regarded, brings sundry mischiefs.
We have had in the midst of us many good French citizens, and catholics
even as our selves, that have given us the like exhortations, and declared by
good reasons, that our selfe-willednes, and our civil wars, would overthrow
the Catholic religion, and the Church, and all ecclesiastical order, causing
the priests, religious men and religious women and all, to fall to wicked life,
wasting benefices, and abolishing Gods service, throughout all the plain
country, and notwithstanding we persisted as before, without having any pity
of so many desolate and straying souls, forsaken also of their pastors, which
languished and pined away, without religion, without feeding, and without
administration of any Sacrament. In fine, since we agree together, Like sins,
like punishments.
and are like in so many meetings of things to the city of Jerusalem, what
other thing can we look for, than a whole ruin and utter desolation, as theirs
was, unless God by an extraordinary miracle, give us again our right wit and
sense? For it is impossible that we can any longer time endure thus, being
already so beaten down, fainting and sluggish with long sickness, that the very
sighs and groans which we fetch, are nothing else, but the very hickcockes or
pangs going before death. We are shut up pressed, invaded, And that is not very
good.
compassed in on all sides, and we take not the air, but the stinking air
that is within our walls, from our myres and sinkes, for all the rest of the
air, from the liberty of the fields is withheld from us. Wherefore ye free
cities, learn, learn, I say, by our damage and loss, to govern your selves
from this time forward, after another fashion, and suffer not your selves to be
mislead, and haltred as you have been, by the charms and inchauntments of the
preachers, who are corrupted with money, and with some hope, which some princes
give the^, who aspire nothing but to engage you, and to make you so weak, so
souple, and easy to be bent, that they may play with and enjoy at their own
pleasure, your selves, your riches, your liberty and all. For concerning that
which they would make you believe touching religion, An apt comparision.
it is but a mask or visor, wherewith they busy the simple (as the foxes
cover their footing, with their long tails) that so they might catch them, and
eat them up at their pleasure. A common use indeed.
Have you ever seen any other respects in them that have aspired after
tyrannous government over the people, than this, that they have always made,
taken, and used, some goodly title and show of the common wealth or of
religion? And yet when question has been of coming to some agreement, their
particular interest and profit, has always been in the vantgard, and they
have set the benefit and good of the people behind, as a matter that did not
touch them. Or else if they were victors and did overcome, their end was
always to bring under, and churlishly to use the people, by whom they were
aided and assisted, to come to the very top of their desires. But so are not
they that defend such things.
And I am abashed (seeing that all histories, as well old as new, are full of
such examples) to behold, that yet there are found men so poor in
understanding, as to rush upon, and to fly unto this false lure. The history
of the civil wars, and of the revolt which was made against Lewis the
eleventh, is yet fresh, and as we say, bleeding new. An example.
The Duke of Berry his brother, and certain Princes of France, raised up and
hartened by the King of England, and yet somewhat more encouraged by the
County of Charolois, used no other color for leuying of their armies, than
the benefit and comfort of the people and kingdom. But in the end, when they
were to come to composition or agreement, they entreated of nothing, but to
increase to one his yearly pension, and to give offices and friendly
conditions of agreement to all those, that had assisted them, without any more
mention of the common wealth than of the Turk. If you will wade somewhat
higher in the French Chronicles, you shall see that the factions of Bourgongne,
and of Orleans, were always colored with the comforting or easing of the
taxes, or of the evil government of the affairs: and yet notwithstanding the
intent of the principal heads thereof, was nothing else, but to keep under
the authority of the kingdom, and to give one house advantage against
another, as the issue has always made plain proof of it. Though he should
have done it, and did it indeed sometimes, yet of late you have unjustly
detayned the same.
For in the end the King of England carried always away some part of it for his
share, and the Duke of Bourgongne did never depart, without some city or
country, which he took for his booty. Whosoever will find leisure to read
this history, shall find therein our miserable age naturally and lively set
out unto us. He shall see our preachers the blowfires and bellows of
contention, that ceased not to intermeddle therein, as they do at this day,
though at no hand, there was then question touching religion: they preached
against their King, they caused him to be excommunicated, as they do at this
present. They set up propositions, and used disputations in Sorbonne, against
the good citizens and common wealths men, as they do now. A man might have
beheld then murders and slaughters of innocent people, and of furies and
outrages committed by the people themselves, even as ours do. Our mynion the
late Duke of Guise, is there represented and set out, in the person of the Duke
of Bourgongue, False, and spoken like a Frenchman: for our Kings had and have a
lawful right.
and our good protector the King of Spain, in that of the King of England. You
therein see our easines to believe, and simplicity, accompanied with ruins,
desolations, sackings, burnings of towns and suburbs, such as we have seen,
and see continually upon us, and upon our neighbors. The common good, was the
charm or witcherie that stopped up our predecessors ears: but indeed the
ambition and the reuengement of these two great houses, was the true and first
cause, as the end discovered it. And thus have I deducted and laid out unto
you, that first the jealousy and envy of those two houses, of Bourbon and of
Lorraine, and since the only ambition and covetousness of these of Guyse, have
bin and are the only cause of all our mischiefs and miseries. But as for the
catholic and Roman religion, It is the cup of fornication mentioned in the
Apocalypse.
it is the drink wherewith they have infatuated us, and caused us to fall on
sleep, and a poison well sweetened with sugar, and which serves for an
obs^upatiue, or benumming medicine, to astonish or benumme all our members,
which whilst we are on sleep we feel not, when they cut away now one piece,
then an other, even one after an other, and that which remains be but as a
truncke, which very quickly will leese all the blood and the heat, and the
very life it self, through overmuch euacuation. In the same history do ye
not find also, as it were the very type of our goodly estates here assembled?
That remains yet to be proved.
Those that were held at Troies, in which they disinherited the true and the
lawful heir of the crown, as an excommunicated and reagrauated person, are
they not altogether like these of ours? God knows what manner of people were
in those estates. Doubt ye not that they were all such, as you here my
masters chosen out of the dregs of the people, openly mutinous and
seditious, corrupted by money, and all pretending and aiming at some one
particular profit, by change, and by novelty, as you my masters do. For I
assure my self that there is not one of you, Notable men and very fit for such
an assembly.
that has not herein some special interest, and who desires not, that the
affairs may remain in the same troublous estate, wherein they are. There is
not one of you, but he occupies and enjoys the benefice, or the office, or
the house of his neighbor, or that has not taken their moueables from them,
or raised any revenues thereof, or committed some thieuerie and murder through
reuengment, whereof he is afraid lest he should be tried, if peace were once
made. Notwithstanding at the last after so many murders, and penuries, these
wicked and ill disposed persons, must needs come and acknowledge Charles the
seventh for their King, and throwing themselves down at his feet, demand
pardon for their rebellion, though that before that they had excommunicated
him, and declared him incapable to be their King. A good and right application
as now appears by the success.
As who sees not and may easily judge, by the bad course that we take, that
we even in the same sort must do as much as that comes unto, though it be
foreslowed for a while, and that in short space we shall be constrained
thereto, by fine force of necessity, which has neither law, nor respect,
nor shamefastnes. If I saw here some of the princes of the blood of France,
and of the peers of the crown, who are the principal persons, and without
the which cannot assemble nor hold just and lawful estates. If I saw here
the Constable, the Chancellor, the Mareschals of France, that are the very
officers indeed to authorize the assembly. If I saw here the presidents of
the sovereign courts: the proctors general of the King in his parliament, and
a number of men of quality and reputation, known a long time to have loved
the good of the people, and their own honor: ha, in truth I should hope that
this gathering together and assembly, should bring us much fruit: Good reason,
for there were some probability at the least.
and I would be contented, simply to declare the charge that I have of the
third estate, which is to represent and set out the great desire that every one
has to have peace, and the great benefit or profit that shall come thereby.
But I see here, none but strangers full of passion in thirsting after us, and
altered from our blood, and from our substance. I see here none but ambicious
women, and such as are given to reuengement. A worthy company to b^ the
asse^bly of the estates.
I see none but corrupted and wicked priests, and such as are full of foolish
hopes. All the rest is nothing else, but light chafe full of necessity, that
love war and trouble, because they live of other good men's goods, and know not
how to live of their own, nor to maintain their train in time of peace. All
the gentlemen of noble race and valor, are on the other side near unto their
King, And so would every honest man.
and standing for him and their country. I should be ashamed to speak the
words for them, or in the name of them that are here for the third estate, if I
were not indeed aduowed and allowed by other honest people, that will not
meddle with this rascal sort, that are come scatteringlie out of the
Provinces, as the Franciscane Friars do to a provincial chapter. What does
Monsieur the Legate here, Plain and particular dealing
but to hinder the liberty of our free speech, and to encourage them that have
promised to do marvelous things for the affairs of Rome and of Spain. He
that is an Italian, and the vassal of a strange prince, ought not here to have
either order or place. Here are to be handled the affairs of Frenchmen, yea
such as touch them very nigh, and not those of Italy and of Spain. From
whence should he have this curiosity, if it be not to profit thereby with our
hurt? A Frenchman Italianated, Spaniolized, and Lorainized.
And you Monsieur de Pelue, do not you make a goodly show in this company, to
plead the cause of the King of Spain, and the right or title of Lorraine? You
I say, which are a Frenchman, and who (we know) was borne in France, to have
proceeded so far, as to have renounced your chrisme and your nation, to serve
the idols of Lorraine, Spaniards well set out.
and the southernly devils? you should yet have brought and caused to sit here
even above the flouredeluce, the Duke of Feria and Mendoza, and Don Diego, to
take their counsel, how France ought to be governed, for they have interest in
it, and you have wrong Monsieur the Lieutenant, that have not admitted them
thereto, Spaniards will seek and ask enough.
as they did impudently demand the same. But indeed their presence should
have been unprofitable, seeing that they have here their agents and advocates,
that have spoken so worthily for them, and besides you will not forget to
communicate unto them every thing of the issue of our consultations. But I
would willingly demand of you, Monsieur the Lieutenant, to what end or purpose
have you assembled these good and honest people here? Are these those noble
estates, in which you promised us to give such good order to our affairs, and
to make us all blessed? I cannot much marvel, that you have so much reculed
to be found here, and so long delayed, Meet men to attend such a master.
and made the poor masters of the deputies to trot so much up and down after
you. For you doubted much that here would be found some blunt fellow that would
tell you your own, and would scratch you where you did not itch. You always
had a mind to draw out your Lieutenancie to the length, and to continue this
sovereign power which you have usurped, that so you might also continue the
way, without which you could not be so well entreated, nor so well followed and
obeyed as you are. But now we will put an end thereto; If you do so, it is
well.
and in so doing put an end to our miseries also. We never bestowed upon you
this goodly and new devised quality of the Lieutenant of the Estates (which in
truth sauoureth rather the style of some clerk of the palace, or of some
petty schoolmaster, Things granted for a time are not so easily revoked.
then the gravity or weight of the charge) but for a time, and till such time
as there were other provision made by the Estates and general. In so much that
now it is time that you be put down therefrom and dispossessed thereof, and
that we advise now to take another government, and another governor. You have
lived sufficiently enough in anarchie and disorder. Is it your mind that for
your pleasure, and to make your self and yours great, against all right and
reason, Necessary demands.
we should for ever continue miserable and wretched? Will you proceed to
destroy that little that remains? How long will you be sustained and
nourished with our blood and our bowels? When will you be full with eating us,
and satisfied with seeing us to kill one another, to cause you to live at your
ease? Let not thine own mouth praise thee, but another.
Do ye not suppose that you have to do with Frenchmen, that is to say, with a
warrelike nation, which though it be sometimes easy to be deceived, yet very
quickly returns to their duty, and above all things loves their natural
Kings, and therein cannot be passed? You will be altogether astonished, when
you shall find your self abandoned of all the good cities and towns, who
will make their agreement and composition without you. You shall see ere long,
As fell out in Villeroy, Vitry, and others.
now one, then another, even of them whom you take to be your most familiar
friends, that will treat without you, and will return themselves to the haven
of safety, because they have known you to be an unskillful pilot, that could
not tell how to govern the ship, whereof you had taken charge, and have made
shipwreck of it, or cast it away very far from the port. Have you then the
name of peace so much in horror, that you will not conceive any whit at all
thereof? They that are able to overcome, do yet demand it. To what end then
have served so many voyages, so many goings and commings, which you have caused
Monsieur de Villeroy, and others to make, under this pretext, to speak of
agreement, and to bring the matters to some tranquillity, if it might be? You
are then a cogger, and an abuser, that deceive both your friends and your
enemies, and against the natural disposition of your nature, use nothing but
crafts and deceits, to hold us always under your paws, at your own pleasure.
A politic course to uphold their corruption.
You never yet would have public affairs handled by public persons, but in
corners and secretly, by people of mean place, made by your own hand and
depending upon you, to whom you whispered a word in the ear, altogether
resolute to do nothing of that which should be agreed. By this means you have
lost the credit, and good will of the people (which was the principal stay of
your authority) and have caused to be slandered the proceedings of sundry
notable men that you have employed therein, in manner of purchase, and to
grant some thing unto them that entreated you therefore. You have feared to
offend strangers that assisted you, who yet notwithstanding did not take it
very well at your hand. Ill works deserve ill words at the least.
For if you knew the speeches that they use of you, and in what terms the King
of Spain writes, concerning your deeds and manners, I think you not to have
so slavish and abject an heart to entertain him, and to seek after him as you
do. There have been seen letters surprised and deciphered, in which he names
you hog, and sometimes swelling toade, and in others, L^cho profiado: and
generally their king mocketh you, and plaieth with your nose, and commands
his agents to entertain you with sweet and pleasant words, Fair words make
fools feign.
yet void of effect, and to regard that you take not over sure footing, and too
much authority upon you. Your adversaries on the Kings side believe, that you
demand and seek for truce to no other end, but to wait for your forces, and
the better to prepare your party at Rome and in Spain, and we say that it is
to make the war to continue, and the better to dispatch your private
affairs. This being so, how can you (so feeble and weak as you are) hope to
make men believe that you either would or could save us? It cannot be done but
by a public and authentical negotiation, which justifies, authoriseth, and
gives credit to a right meaning. This is the thing that you might do, under
the good will or pleasure of the Pope, to the end that ye may yield his holiness
the respect which you owe him. Could he take it ill, If he did, he showed not
himself a man of peace.
that you had a mind to hearken unto peace, with your neighbors, with your
King? For though you would not acknowledge him for such a one, yet you cannot
deny, but that he is a prince of the blood of France, and King of Navarre, who
has always held a higher degree and state than you, and has continually gone
before and above you, and all your ancestors. On the other side, A good
persuasion touching a bad person.
we would believe that the holy Father, imitating the example of his
predecessors, would stir you up to that good work, if he saw you inclined
thereto, that so he might quench the fire of civil war, which consumes so
goodly a flower of Christenstome, and overthrows the strongest pillar that
vpholdeth the Christian Church, and the authority of the holy seat, neither
would he stand any longer upon this term heretics. A reason, but Popes may
cross one another persuasion and practice, and yet neither of the^ err any
way.
For Pope John the second went indeed himself to seek the Emperor of
Constantinople, and to entreat him to make peace with the Arrians, worse than
these, and to commit and commend the whole quarrel into the hands of God, who
would accomplish that, that men could not do. For mine own part (Monsieur the
Lieutenant) I believe, that if you would take this way and course, without
cou^terfeiting or dissimulatio^, it could not but be very sure and profitable
to the generality of France, and to you, as in respect of your own particular
very honorable, and to your great vnburthening, and the contentment of your
spirit. Also that this is the one, and the only mean, and that there remains
^r^ other, to stay or uphold the present fall of all our building, I freely
speak unto you after this manner, without fear of the rack or of
proscription: That is great braggers and boasters, as Rodomont was.
neither do I fear these Rodomon^ade Spaniards, nor the sour countenances,
and writings of the mouths of the sixteen, which are but beggarly and needy
fellows, which I will not vouchsafe ever to salute for the sle^der account that
I make of the^. I am a friend to my country, as becomes a good burgess, and
citizen of Paris. I am jealous for the preservation of my religion, and am in
all that I am able, your servant, and the servant of your house. To be short,
every one is weary of war, in which we now very well perceive, there is no
more question touching our religion, but concerning our bondage, and to whom
amongst you the carcases of our bones shall remain. That is the point indeed.
Think not to find in time to come, so many men as you have done, that in
liuelines of heart will cast themselves away, and be troth or marry themselves
to desperation, for the rest of their life, and of their posterity also. We
very well perceive, that you your selves are in the snares of the King of
Spain, and that ye can never come out of them, but wretched, and as it were
forlorn. You have done like the horse, A fable, but yet good in the moral and
meaning of it.
who to defend himself from the heart, who (he perceived) was more lively and
full of strength than he, called for man to his succor. But man put a bridle
in his mouth, sadled him, and betrapped him, afterward he put on his spurs and
backed him, and brought him to the hunting of the heart, and to every other
place, where he thought good, (...) coming on of his back, nor taking off his
bridle and saddle, and by this means made himself subject to the hollie crap,
and to the sput, to serve his turn in every work, in every charge, yea and in
the very cart it self, as the King of Spain has done with you. And doubt ye
not of this, but if by your means he were once made master of the kingdom,
This is no lie, for he has practiced it upon others, as nigh to him as he.
but that he would very quickly be rid of you by poison, by flanders, or
otherwise, for this is the fashion that he uses, and wherewith he commonly
says, he must needs recompense them, that betray their prince and their
country. Let them serve for witnesses and examples, that wickedly delivered
unto him the kingdom of Portugal: who coming unto him to demand the
recompense which he had promised them, before he was in possession of it, sent
them unto that council of his, which is called the council of conscience,
where answer was given them, that if they had brought Portugal into the hands
of the King of Spain, as a thing appertaining unto him, they had done nothing
but that which good and loyal subjects should have done, and they should have
their recompense and hire for it in heaven. But if they delivered it up,
believing that it did not appertain unto him, meaning so to take it from their
master, they deserved to be hanged as traitors. And this is the wages that you
must look for, A good reason: for of like sins, there should be the like
punishment.
after that you shall have delivered us up unto such people: which we for our
parts are not purposed to endure. We know too well, that the Spaniards, and
Castillians, and Bourguignons, are our ancient and deadly enemies, which of
two things demand the one, either to bring us under, Spain has a double
practice and purpose in assaulting France.
and to make us slaves if they can, that so they may join Spain, France, and
the low countries, in one tenure and under one government: or else if they
cannot (as indeed the best advised and most wise amongst them, do not hope for
that) yet they may at the least in weaken us, and bring us so low, that never
or for a long season, we should never be able to relieve our selves, nor
withstand them to the face. For the King of Spain (which is an old for)
knows well the injury that he does us, usurping against all right and
justice, the Kingdom of Naples, the Duchy of Millan, and the County of
Roussillon, which belong unto us: he knows the natural disposition of the
french nation, that knows not how any long season to continue in peace,
without setting upon their neighbors. Whereof the Flemmings have made a
proverb, which says, A witty sentence.
that when the Frenchman sleeps, the devil rocketh the cradle. Besides he
sees his estates and countries divided and almost all of them usurped by
violence, against the good will and liking of the inhabitants, who are ill
affected to him w^rd. He sees himself to be old and brittle, and his eldest
son smally valiant, and of evil health, and the rest of his family, to be
in two daughters, one whereof he has married with the most ambitious, and yet
needy prince of Europe: The Duke of Sauoy.
and the other that makes a party, and cannot fail but find a great one. If
after his death, (which cannot in the very course of nature be very far off)
his estates and countries should be divided, and that one of his sons in law
should set upon his own son, he knows that the Frenchmen would not sleep,
and that they would wake again their old pretenses, titles and claims. Does
he not then herein play the part of a very prudent, and fore seeing prince, to
infeeble us by our selves, and to bring us to so low an estate, that we shall
not be able to hurt him, no not after his death? You see also how he has
carried himself in the succors that he has sent us: All bewraieth the
treachery of Spain.
the greatest part in paper and in hope, the waiting for whereof has wrought
us more evil, then the coming thereof has done us good. His double ducats
and his men came not, but even when we had a long time drawn out breath, and
were not able to do any more, although he might much more soon have
succored and relieved us. He makes us not fat to sell us, as the butchers
do their hogs: but for fear we should die over soon, and minding to
reserve us to a greater destruction, he prolongeth our languishing life, Weigh
these comparisons.
with a little water, brued and tossed with crummes of brown bread, which also
he gives us, with a licked or clean finger, as iaylors nourish and feed
condemned persons, the better to reserve them to the execution of punishment.
What is become of so many millions of double ducats, which he braggeth he has
spent for the safety of our estate? And why should not the people have them,
seeing it is the price of themselves? except you will sell them for nothing.
We see none of them amongst the people, the greatest part thereof are in the
hands of our adversaries, or amongst you Messieurs, the princes, governors,
captains, and preachers, who keep them very fast locked up in your coffers:
there remains to the people nothing but read or copper coin for the
stamping whereof we have employed al our kettles, caldrons, chafers, weights,
chains and copper vessel, and will employ therein our gunnes and our belles,
if our necessity endure yet but a small time longer: for the double ducats,
and the twice double ducats of the fine gold of Peru are vanished away, and
are no more to be seen. And this is the point upon which a Poet of our age,
has made a very pleasant and proper quartain, or four verses in sort as they
follow.

By thee (O thou proud Spain) and by thy double ducats of gold,
Whole poor France, we sots daily vex with troubles manifold,
And yet of all the ducats, that so many troubles do raise
In fine nothing remains to us, but doublings and delays.
Touching the same matter, another honest man has not spoken much amiss, when
though in another time he said, The French that before simple were and kind,
By double ducats are double now become,
And the double duckettes themselves are turned into wind
Or into copper and red doubles, that hardly will ^unne.


To persuade our selves this day, Spanish practices savor not of, or savor
not religion.
that that which this good prince does in this behalf, is for no other
purpose, but the preservation of Catholic religion and nothing else, that
cannot be. We do very well know, and that by his agents, and by his notes of
remembrance or instructions, what is his intent and purpose. We know how he
has lived, and treated heretofore with the Huguenots of the Low Countries. The
articles of their agreement are imprinted and published by his authority, by
which also he permits them the exercise of their religion. And made he no
other reckoning but of this, it is long ago since he offered so much to Duke
Maurice, and to Messieurs the Estates, that so he might have had peace with
them. Father and son both alike affected to the Catholic faith.
He would not do worse then his father, who (as we have heard) yielded unto the
protestants of Germany, and to the Lutherans, that that they desired to have,
so that they would acknowledge him for their prince, and would pay him his
rights and due. If he do so much love the Catholic religion, and hate them
that are not such, how can he suffer the Jews and Moors in his countries? How
can he agree with the Turks and the Mahometists of Afric, from whom he
purchases peace very dearly? It needs not now, Away with such trash.
that his spies the Jesuits Scopetines should come to sell us these snaile
shells or scallope shells of S. James: the sport is already very much
discovered. The Duke of Feria has let us see his remembrances or instructions,
by degrees and piece after piece, as though he had brought out of Afric (a
country fruitful in venims and poisons) by the commandment of his master, a
wooden box full of diverse drugges, of diverse qualities: one that kills
quickly, another that kills somewhat slowly, another more fit in summer,
another that has better operation in winter, Beastly and bad physic.
to serve his own turn therewith and to use them, as in respect of us,
according to occasions and occurrences that may fall out: having in charge to
give us such a one, if he find us disposed to such a humor, and to give us
another, if he find us otherwise affected. Before that we gave out that we
meant to maintain and uphold the law Salick (a law that for these eight hundred
years has maintained the kingdom of France in his force and manly courage)
they did speak unto us of the rare virtues of that divine daughter, To wit, of
the K. of Spain.
that so she might be chosen inheritor of the crown, when they saw that we
meant to hold the ancient custom of the males, they offered us to bestow her
upon some prince that we should choose for King, and thereupon suites were made
for the Archduke Ernestus, Many fetches, and all full of fraud.
to whom she is indeed appointed wife. Afterward, when they perceived that
this Ernestus was not the harness that would fit us, they spoke of some prince
of France, to whom the daughter might be married, and so they would make them
Kings of France wholly and together. And yet for all this there were found
notes of remembrances, instructions, A meet man to promote such a cause.
and mandates very plain, signed also with the proper hand of, I the King:
whereunto Monsieur the Legate served for a broaker, to make the merchandise of
value and prise: for he came not hither for any other end or purpose, as also
he was not made Cardinal, but by the favor of the King of Spain, with
protestation to ruinate France, or to cause it to fall into pieces, in the
hands of them that have made it that it is: and we know that he has a special
brief or direction to be present at the election of the King of France. Ha
Monsieur the Legate, you are discovered, the veil is taken from you, there are
no more enchantments that hinder us from seeing clearly: our necessity has
taken the pearl out of our eyes, as your ambition has put it into your own:
you see clear enough into our destruction, but you see no whit at all into
your own duty, of a pastor of the Church. You come hither to pull away the
fleece from the flock, So do all of his coat and order.
and to take away her fat pastures, and her grasings. Your own private profit
blinds you: think well of this, that we respect our own. The interest,
profit, and purpose of your masters (that set you on work, as a day labourer
to his task, about the pulling down of a house) is to make themselves great
with our morsels, and to hold their own seigneuries and Lordships in quiet.
But it is our part to lay our selves open, and to compound our disagreements by
taking away the foolish vanities, Good words, so they may be well performed.
that ye have put into our head, and by making of peace. We will get out of
this same deadly labyrinth or maze, what price soever it cost us. No paradise,
though never so well hanged with tapistrie and orras, no processions, no
brotherhoods, nor assemblies of forty, nor preachings, whether they be
ordinary or extraordinary, give us any thing to eat. The pardons, stations,
And will not feed the soul, or strengthen the body, but rather destroy both.
indulgences, briefes, and bulls of Rome, are al of them hollow and light meat
that satisfy none but empty brains. Neither the glorious boasting of Spain,
nor the bravery of Naples, nor the mutiny of the Wallons, nor the fort of
Anthony, nor that of the temple or citadel, (wherewith men use to threaten us)
that can hinder us from desiring and demanding of peace. We will have no more
fear that our wives and our daughters should be ravished or defiled by
soldiers, and that such of the^, as need has turned from regard of their
honor and credit, Who could describe them better.
shall return to the right way. We will have no more of these horseleaches,
exacters and greedy guts: we will remove these foul and shameful imposts,
(which they have devised in the town house) set upon the moueables and free
merchandise, that come into the good towns (where there are committed a
thousand abuses and disorders) the profit whereof redoundeth not to the publik
good, but unto them that manage the money, and give it away cheek by iole as we
say, and without discretion. We will have no more of these caterpillars, that
suck and gnaw the fairest flowers of the garden of France, Notable comparisons
and resemblances.
and paint themselves with diverse colors, and become in a moment, of little
worms that creep upon the ground, great butterflies, flying painted with gold
and azure: we will cut off the shameless number of treasurers, that make
their own benefit of the taxes of the people, and turn to their own use the
best and the last penny of the treasure, and with the rest cut and lash out at
their pleasure, to distribute it to them only, from who^ they hope to receive
the like, and invent a thousand elegant and fine terms, to show the need of
the state, It is not alone in France, but it may be found elsewhere.
and to refuse to show courtesy or favor to an honorable person. We will have
no more so many governors, that play the little Kings or wrens rather, and
boast that they are rich enough, when they have a piece of a river of six
foot long and large, at their commandment. We will be exempted from their
tyrannies and exactions, and we will be no more subject to watchings, and
wardings, and night scouts, in which we lose the half of our time, and consume
our best age, and get nothing but catarrhes, reumes, and diseases, that
overthrow our health. Do it, and do well.
We will have a King, who shall give order to all and shall keep all these petty
tyrants in fear and duty: that shall chastise the violent, that shall punish
the stubborn, that shall root out thieues and robbers, that shall cut off the
wings of the ambitious, that shall cause these spunges and thieues of the
common treasures, to cast their gorge; that shall make every one to remain in
the bounds of his office, and shall keep all the world in peace and
tranquillity. To be short, we will have a King, A fable, but yet applied to
good purpose.
that so we may have peace: but yet we will not do as the frogs did, that
waxing weary of their peaceable King, chose the storke who devoured them all.
We demand a King, and a natural head, not an artificial: a King already
made, and not to be made: If you do, woe to you.
and therein we will not take the counsel of the Spaniards, our old and
ancient enemies, who by force would become our tutors, and teach us to believe
in God, and in the christian faith, in which they are not baptized, and have
not known it past three days. We will not have for Counselors and Physicians
those of Lorraine, who of a long time have breathed and thirst after our death.
The King that we demand, is already made by nature, borne in the very plot
of ground, of the flower deluce of France, a right branch and flourishing, and
springing from the right stalk of Saint Jews. They that speak of making an
other deceive themselves, and know not therein how to come to an end. Men may
make scepters and crowns, but not Kings to wear them and bear them. Men may
make an house, but not a tree or a green bough. Nature must needs bring it
forth in time, out of the juice and marrowe of the earth, that maintains the
stalk in her blood and vigor. A man may make a leg of wood, an arm of iron,
a nose of silver, but yet not a head: So we may make Marshals, Peers,
Admirals, Secretaries, and Counselors of estate, and that in gross also, and
many at one time, as we say, but yet not a King. He alone must spring only
from himself, that so he may have life and lustines in him. That one eyed
fellow Bourcher, A familiar example and ^et from a bad person.
the petty schoolmaster of the most wicked and lewd people of this city and
land, will confess unto you, that his eye, enammeled with the gold of Spain,
sees not any thing: Even so an elected and artificial King, should never be
able to see us, and so he should be not only blind in our affairs, but also
deaf, insensible, and immovable in our complaints. And this is the cause why
we will not hear speech neither of the daughter of Spain, whom we leave to
her father: If he can do any thing against them.
nor of the Archduke Ernestus, whom we recommend to the Turks, and to Duke
Maurice: nor of the Duke of Lorraine, or of his eldest son, whom we will
leave to treat of the matter with the Duke of Bouillon, and with them of
Strausbourgh: nor of the Duke of Sauoy, Yea and shame him also in the wars
against him.
who^ we put over to the Lord of Diguieres, that does not much help him. That
fellow should be content with this, that by fraud and treason he has taken
from us the Marquesdome of Saluces, in danger to yield it very quickly and that
twice told, if we may have but a little time to take our breathe in. In the
mean season he shall have this favor, to call himself King of Cypres, and to
draw his antiquity out of Saxony: A fine ^rump.
but France is not a morsel for his mouth: how double footed, and large
mouthed soever he be, no more then Geneua, Genes, Final, Monaco, and the
Figons, which have always given him the fig, or garbumble, as we say.
Besides, he will make a goodly molehill, and a brave show indeed, He means
King Philips daughter.
with the disdainful highness of the daughter he has married, who will serve
rather to overthrow him with expense and sumptuous pride, the^ to make him
wax great. Concerning the Duke de Nemours (for whom the Baron of Tenecay has
remembrances and instructions, by which he minds to make him more worthy to
be preferred, then the Duke of Guise) we would counsel him (for the good he
has done us, by freeing us from war, and for his valiant deeds, Scoff on,
and that drily.
standing I tell you upon very good proof) if he be well there where he is,
that he hold him there, and keep him from the beast. I will say nothing
touching the Duke of Guise. Monsieur the Lieutenant shall speak for himself,
You may trust him therein, but in nothing else.
and he will commend himself to his sister. But so it is that these robbers
and thieves of the kingdom, are neither fit nor sufficient, nor serving for
our taste to command us: besides, we mind to keep our ancient laws and
customs, we will not at any hand have a king by election, nor by lot, as the
zealous and hot men of Jerusalem, that chose for their priest a country man
named Phanias, contrary to the good manners, and contrary to the ancient laws
of Judea. In a word, Plain dealing is best.
we would that Monsieur the Lieutenant should know, that we acknowledge for
our true King and lawful, natural and sovereign Lord, Henry of Bourbon,
heretofore King of Navarre. This is he alone, who for a thousand good reasons,
The person and power of the King commended.
we do acknowledge to be capable of and able to uphold the state of France,
and the greatness of the reputation of Frenchmen: he alone that can relieve and
lift us up from our fall: that is able to put the crown in her first beauty
and honor, and to give us peace. It is he alone and no other, that can (as a
natural Hercules borne in France) discomfite these hideous monsters, that make
all France horrible and fearful to her own children. It is he alone and no
other, that will root out these petty half Kings of Bretaigne, of Languedoc,
of Prouence, of Lyonnois, of Bourgongne, and of Champagne: that will scatter
these Dukes of Normandy, of Berrie, and Solongne, of Reims and of Soissons:
all these vain visions shall vanish away at the glory of his presence, when
he shall be set in the throne of his ancestors, and in his bed of justice,
which waits for him in his kingly palace. You have nothing, To wit either of
truth or of show of truth.
Messieurs, nor you Monsieur the Lieutenant have nothing, that ye can object
against him. The Pretext of the Uncle before the Nephew, is taken from you by
the death of Monsieur the Cardinal his Uncle. I will not speak of him either
by flattery, or in slanderous sort: A very worthy sentence.
the one sauoureth a slavish mind: the other is proper to the seditious. But I
can tell you in truth (which thing also you your selves, and all those that
travail in the world will not deny) that of all the Princes which France has
set before us, marked with the flower deluce, and that appertain to the
crown, yea of all those that desire to come nigh it, there is none deserves
so much as he, nor that has so many royal virtues, nor so many advantages
and prerogatives, above the common sort of men. I will not speak of other men's
wants: A pretty pretetition.
but if they themselves were all set out or written in the table appointed for
election and choice, he should be found by very much the most capable, and the
most worthy to be chosen. One thing indeed he wants, which I could tell
in the ear of some, if I listed. I will not say it is his different religion
from ours, which you so much vpbraide him with: for in some good measure we
know, No, GOD wrought not that work, but his own corruption.
that God has touched his heart, and that he is willing to be taught, and does
already apply himself to instruction, yea that he has caused word to be
sent to the holy father, concerning his very nigh conversion: of which I make
such account, as if I had already seen it, he has always showed himself to
have such regard of his promises, and to be so religious a keeper of his
words. But though it were so that he should continue in his opinion, Put the
hardest the best will save it self, as we say.
must we therefore put him by his lawful right of succession to the crown?
What laws, what councels, what Gospel teaches us to dispossess men of their
goods, Good reasons, why Kings of erroneous and corrupt religions are not to be
deposed.
and Kings of their kingdoms for diversity of their religions?
Excommunication stretches not but unto the souls, and not unto men's bodies
and goods. Innocent the third, exalting the most proudely that possibly he
could his popelike power, said, that as God had made two great lights in the
firmament, to wit the sun for the day, and the moon for the night, so has
he made two in the Church, the one for men's souls, which is the Pope, whom he
compared to the sun, and the other for men's bodies, which is the King. Men's
bodies enjoy outward goods, and not their souls: The right end of
excommunication.
excommunication therefore cannot take them away, for that is but a medicine
for the soul to heal it, and to bring it to health, and not for to kill it,
it is not to condemn it, but to make it afraid of damnation. Some say that
men would not fear it, if it did not take from them some sensible or worldly
commodity touching this life, as for example, their goods, Absurdities ensuing
the abuse of excommunication.
and conversation or company keeping with men: but if that might have place,
they must when they excommunicate a drunkard, forbid him wine and strong
drink, and when they excommunicate whoremongers, they must take from them
their wives, or women, and forbid the leprous to scratch and rub. Saint Paul
to the Corinthians forbids men to eat and drink with fornicators,
backbiters, drunkards, thieves, but yet he says not, that they must take
their goods from them to make them afraid, and to draw them back from their
vices. I would willingly demand when they have taken the kingdom, and the
crown from a King, because he is excommunicate, or an heretic, whether then
they must choose another, and put that other in his place, for it is not
reasonable that the people should remain without a King, as you Messieurs,
would worthily indeed provide for it. A question not ^asie to be absolved.
But if it should so fall out afterward, that this King being excommunicated,
and destituted of his estates, should come to repentance, and be converted to
the true faith, and obtain his absolution either of the same Pope, or of
another succeeding him (as they are very much accustomed to revoke and undo
that, A girde indeed.
which their predecessors have done) how could it be, that that poor King
spoiled of his kingdom, should enter into it again? Those that should be
seized of it, and hold it by just title, as three years possessors thereof,
The Duke de Mayn may speak to this.
would they put themselves from it again think you, and yield him the places,
forts, treasures, arms and ordinances, which they withheld? These are but the
reckonings and accounts of old doting men, neither is there reason nor show of
reason in all of it, or in any part thereof. It is long since this axiom or
sentence general was concluded, that the Popes have not any power, to judge of
or concerning temporal kingdoms. Good authorities.
And it is long ago also since S. Bernard says: I read that the Apostles
stood to be judged, but that they sat and judged others, I never read. The
Apostles appeared very humbly before judges, to be judged by the^, but they
never sat in the chair to judge others: we know also very well, He
reasons from the greater.
that many Arrian Emperors, coming to the empire by succession or by adoption
and choice, were not rejected or repelled, by their right believing people and
subjects, but were received and admitted into the imperial authority and
government, without tumult or sedition. And the christians always had this
maxim or rule, as a perpetual mark or cognizance of their religion, that
they did obey such Kings and Emperors, as it pleased God to give or set over
them, whether they were Arrians or Pagans, Sufficient proofs.
conforming themselves therein to the example of Jesus Christ, that did obey
the laws of Tiberius the Emperor, imitating likewise Saint Paul and Saint
Peter, that obeyed Nero, and have in their epistles expressly commanded, to
obey Kings and Princes, because all sovereign power is of God, Application of
that that was delivered.
and represents the image of God himself. This differs much from the
minds of our mutinous men, that drive them away, and murder them. And it is
contrary to you, Monsieur the Legate, that would have the whole race to be
destroyed. In deed if we had no more of the blood of this noble kingly
family and stock, or that we were in a kingdom that goes by election, as in
Polonia or in Hungary, And yet his devise of destruction full of blood.
I would not much stick to say, that men should hearken unto you. But having
had time out of mind, this worthy law (which also is the first, and the most
ancient law of nature) that the son should succeed the father, and the
nearest kinsmen in degree of consanguinitie, to them that are nearest of the
same line, stock, and family, and having one so brave and noble a prince in
that degree or respect, without controversy or disputation, that he is the
true natural and lawful heir, and most able and fit to succeed to the
crown, there is now no more place for election: and we ought to receive with
joy and gladness, Men must not fight (as it were giants) against God.
this great king that God sends us, who has no need of our aid to make him
to be, but is already without us, and will be still in despite of us, though
we would, what we could, hinder him in it. But I have straied from my
purpose, that so I might say something, concerning that which men object
against him, touching religion, but this is not it that I meant, when I said
that he wanted somewhat, and which much hinders the advancement of his
affairs: neither is this it, that the preachers and praters, do vpbraide him
with touching the love of women. And why not the Clergy men also, then and
there present?

A profane speech, and therefore to be read with judgment.


I am sure of this, that the greatest part of this company, and specially you
Monsieur the Lieutenant, cannot give him that reproach, without blushing. For
indeed, this is not the imperfection that can hinder valiant acts: but
contrariewise there was never brave warrior, that loved not Ladies and women,
and did not delight to get honor, that so he might be the better beloved of
them. This is the reason why Plato wished to have an army or host, wholly
compounded and consisting of amorous people, for they would be invincible,
Grounds good enough for so badde a spee^h.
and would perform a thousand goodly exploytes of arms and deeds of
cheualrie, to please their mistresses. Likewise the poets, good naturalists,
and great masters in the knoweledge of dispositions and manners, always have
made Mars the God of battle, The more, the worse.
the friend of Venus. Consider, if you will, all the great captains, and
monarchs of the world, there shall very few of them be found sober, and stayed
in this matter or business. Titus the Emperor, who is set forth unto us, for the
most virtuous, most wise, and gentle prince, that ever bare scepter, did not
he desperately love the Queen Berenice, yet so notwithstanding, as that his
love never prejudiced himself, nor brought any hinderance or backwardnes to
his affairs? True, but that is not in fleshly filthiness.
Princes must have yielded unto them some refreshings or recreations of their
spirits, after that they have travailed in such serious affairs, as bring with
them our quietness, and after that they have ceased from their great actions of
besiegings, of foughten battles, of pitching their tents, of dispersing and
lodging their armies, etc. It is not possible, that the spirit should be
always (as if it were a bow continually bent) occupied in these grave and
weighty administrations, without some refreshing, and turning aside to other
thoughts, A jolly proof.
more pleasant and comfortable. This is the cause why the wise man himself
has said, Bonum est pauxillum amare sane: insane non est bonum.
To love a little and wisely also, is a very good thing,
But foolishly to love and overmuch too, no goodness does bring.


It has ever bin too rife, that the people have given unjust judgments
concerning their princes actions, A bad collection.
and have always meddled wrongfully to interpret their manners and complexions,
never thinking upon this, that there is not so much as one amongst them, that
judges thereof, but he does worse and has greater imperfections. Kings,
though they be Kings, cease not for all that to be men, subject to the same
passions that their subjects are: and yet we must needs confess, that this man
has fewer faults in him, then any of those that have gone before him. And
though he have an inclination to love fair and goodly things, he loves none
but such as are perfect and excellent, It is a foul fault to mitigate great
sins.
even as he himself is excellent in judgment, and to know the price and the
valor of all things. And yet this little withdrawing play or pastime in
pleasure, is to him as it were an exercise of virtue, instead of hunting and
hauking, without leaving even in the midst of his recreations, to know the
matters that fall out in his army, These things are good, but yet cannot make
vice to be virtue.
or to observe and mark the situation of cities and places, through which he
passes: the nature of me^ with who^ he meets, of places and countries, which
he trauerseth: and he curiously learneth the passages and watches of rivers,
and keeps in memory the distances of cities and towns: marketh in what
quarters it shall be fit and commodious to camp his army, when it shall pass
that way, and always he enquireth and learneth some thing touching his enemies
acts, never having as yet undertaken such voyages, but that he had in hand one
or two enterprises against certain rebellious places. But though it be a
goodly thing to be continent, wise, temperate, austere, And who will deny it,
but Atheists.
grave and withdrawn, as a man may say, from the pleasures of this life, yet
some me^ will have always somewhat to say against it. When men are once set
upon hating of an other man, they interpret in the worst part all that he does,
yea even the very good it self that he does. It were a goodly thing I confess,
to abstain from all pleasures, The power of truth and hon^sty will ^a^s^ you to
con^esse it.
and to do nothing but pray to God, and give alms: and yet some would say,
this were but counterfeiting and hypocrisy. If it be lawful thus to judge of
another man's actions, against the express forbidding that God has made
thereof, why shall it not be lawful for me to believe, yt all these Moors and
Spaniards, that make so many signs of the cross, and strike themselves so
hard, Perhaps you may judge so, and not break ch^^itie.
and with such a noise upon their breasts in mass time, are notwithstanding
Jews and Mahometists, whatsoever goodly show they make? why shall I not say,
that Monsieur of Lions is a Lutherane, as he was sometimes, although he turn
up the white of his eye, and cause it so to appear, in lifting it to the
Church rooses or vaults, Better a bad excuse then none at all.
when he either worshippeth or makes show to worship the crucifix? But it is
not in this age only, that me^ use to speak so of Kings, and there is an old
proverb that says, that Jupiter himself when he raineth, pleases not all
men. Some would have rain for their coleworts: others fear it because of
their haruests. But that which I have deferred hitherto to speak of, and which
as I think, is wanting unto him, it is that for which you and I are most bound
unto him, that is, that he handles us over gently, Commendation of clemency.
and spares us too much. Clemency (in which he is abundant and excessive) is
a very laudable virtue, and which brings in the end very great fruits, and
such as will continue long, though that they be long and slow in coming
Howbeit, it belongs to none but to Conquerours to use it, and to them that
have none to resist them. Difference between cleme^cie and fear,
faintheartednes, etc.
Some attribute it to faintheartednes and fearefulnes, rather then to valiancie
and noblenes. For it seems that such as spare their enemies, desire that
others should practice as much toward them, and that they demand recompense
for their generositie: or else they fear, that if they show themselves severe,
that they can have no reason of their other enemies, that rest yet to be
subdued. Othersome name it very plainly, imbecilitie or weakness of heart,
supposing that he that dare not use his right, is not yet assured of victory,
but rather fears that he should be overcome. But the Philosophers that have
entreated this point to the full or to the bottom and depth of it, have not
ascribed it to virtue, when those that enterprised to trouble an estate, have
showed themselves gentle and courteous in the beginning of their attempts and
executions, A bad example.
as that gentleness that Julius Caesar used toward the soldiers and citizens
of Rome before that he was conqueror, was not clemency but flattery, and
ambitious courtesy, by which he would make himself acceptable to the people, A
good sentence though not well applied.
and draw every one to his side. And this is it that that great master of
Estates says, The fame of clemency is profitable to such as affect
authority, or else usurp rule. For to such as invade a kingdom against right
and law (as you Monsieur Lieutenant do) the account or reputation of being
gentle and gracious, is of very great use. But this rather was Caesar's
clemency, that having overcome Pompey, and discomfited all that might resist
him, he came to Rome without triumph, and pardoned all his deadly enemies,
putting them all in possession of their goods, honors and dignities, of which
notwithstanding there was but a bad issue to himward: for those whom he had
pardoned, A foe well used, will continue a foe still.
and showed most favors unto, were they that betrayed him, and miserably
murdered him. Wherefore there is a difference between clemency and
gentleness. Gentleness ordinarily is to be found in women, and in men of small
courage: but cleme^cie is not in any but in him that is an absolute master, and
that does good, when he is able to do all manner of evil. Wherefore let us
conclude then, that our King ought to have reserved the use of his clemency,
till he had had us all in his power. This is inclemencie, yea cruelty says
Cicero, to pardon them that deserve to dye, A good sentence in reason and
religion both.
and the civil wars shall never have end, if we will hold on to be gracious,
and show favor, where severity of justice is necessary. The malice of
rebels waxes more stiff and hard, by the gentleness that is used toward them,
because they imagine that men dare not provoke them nor put them to do worse.
I make no doubt of this, Nor any man else.
but had he hotly and earnestly corrected all those that fell into his fingers
and hands, since these troubles, we had been all at this present under his
obedience. But since God has been pleased to give him and to work in him a
natural disposition, so sweet, gracious and favorable as we see and feel it
is, let us yet hope much better of him, when he shall see us lie flat at his
feet, A good and strong reas^n.
and to offer unto him our lives and our goods, and to ask him pardon for the
offenses past, seeing that finding us armed to resist and to assault him, he
receives us to mercy, and gives us our life, and all that we demand. Let us
go, let us go therefore my friends, and that all of us with one voice, and
demand peace of him. There is no peace so unjust, which is not much better
then a most just war. A place of scripture* but not so rightly alleged as
should be.
Oh how beautiful are the feet of them that declare peace, that declare good
things and salvation, says Isai? Oh how goodly feet have they that bring
peace, and declare the health and safety of the people? Why stay we to chase
away from us these troublous guests, cruel citizens, proud beasts, who
devour our substance and wealth like grasshoppers? Are we not yet weary in
furnishing, and that to riot and pleasures, these harpies? Monstrous birds
having the faces of women or maids, but claws of marvelous capacity, yea
rapinitie.
Monsieur Legate, let us go: and as for you, return to Rome, and lead away
with you your porter of rogations and pardons, the Cardinal of Pelve: we have
more need of holy bread, then of hallowed beads and grains: let us go
Messieurs, the Agents and Ambassadors of Spain, we are weary with serving
you, as fencers to uphold your pride, and with killing our selves to show you
pleasure. Let us go Messieurs of Lorraine, with your great company of
princes, we hold you but for shadows of protection and defense, the
horseleaches of the blood of the Princes of France, bapelourdes, little ships
or foists without wares, relics of faints, that have neither force nor
virtue. They are but feare-bugges in such men's mouths.
And let not Monsieur the Lieutenant think either to hinder us, or to backward
us by his threats: we tell him aloude and plainly, yea we declare it to all
you Messieurs, his cousins and allies, that we are Frenchmen, and that we will
go with the Frenchmen to hazard our life, and that little that is yet left
unto us, to assist therewith our King, our good King, our rightful King, who
will also very quickly bring you unto the same confession either by force, or
by some good counsel, A necessary addition.
which God will inspire into you, if you be worthy of it. I know very well,
that before I depart from this place, you will either give me some little
pretty pill, or it may be you will send me from hence to the Bastille, where
you will cause me to be murdered, as ye did Sacre-More, S. Maigrin, the
Marquis of Menelay, and diverse others. But I shall account it for a good piece
of favor, if ye will cause me to dye quickly, Fear cannot put out fidelity
to prince, etc.
rather then to let me languish a long while in these anguishing and grievous
miseries. And yet before I dye, I will shut up and finish my very long oration
with a poetical epilogue or conclusion, such as I have made long ago.

Messieurs the princes Lorraines,
You are full weak in your reins:
For the crown thus to quarrel,
You cause your selves to be beat well:
You are valiant and strong amain,
Yet your endeavors are all but vain.
No force can be like in any thing
To the puissance of a King:
And reason this is not indeed,
That on the children which succeed,
The servants base should make war,
Out of their land to drive them far.
Great folly he does perform and make*
That from his master ought does take:
God against rebels and their maine
Kings and their good causes will sustain.
To the Nauarrias then leave and lay down,
Of our mighty Kings the noble crown,
Wrongfully by your selves pretended,
So well have you it molten and ended.
If any right you had had thereto,
You should not have molten it as you do:
Or else you must have for name of renown
The title of Kings without a crown.
Our Kings from God set up renownd,
Are always borne to us well crowned.
The Frenchman true never does range
To King or prince that is but strange.
All the villains, or the greatest part
Have made you their head with all their heart.
They of the nobility that do your part take,
Are such as with haste their own wounds do make.
But the very King of Frenchmen hard,
In steed of his poor and Scottish guard,
Is now assisted with none but great Princes,
Or else with Barons and Lords of Provinces.
Wherefore then my friends let us rise and go
Our blessed S. Denis all unto,
There devoutly to acknowledge and confess
This great King our master, he is no less.
Let us all go together as thick as the rain,
Of him to crave peace, and the same to obtain,
Unto his table without fear we will go,
A prince so familiar he is, and gentle also.
All the princes of the Bourbon race
Have ever had in them this rare and good grace,
Very meek for to be, and gentle also,
And yet courageous in all whereabout they go.
But o you princes that to us are strangers,
And daily us thrust into thousands of dangers,
And with nothing but smoke still do us feed,
Keeping war kindled, and upholding it indeed,
Get you soon packing into your own land,
Very hateful to us, here do you stand:
And reckon your race from Charlemaigne pardie,
Upon the bounds and borders of upper Germany:
Prove thee by your Romans or men of Rome,
That from Charles the great you descend and come,
That good people after the depth of their drink,
Of that mystical matter somewhat may think.
I have said.

Plain speeches has good effects.
This oration being finished (which indeed was heard with great silence and
attention) many people remained very flat nosed and much astonished, and a good
while after there were no coughing, hemming, spitting, nor any noise made, as
if the hearers had bin stricken with a blow from heaven, o^ brought into some
deep dream, or drowsines of their spirit, until a certain Spaniard one of
the mutinous crewe, first rose up and said with a very loud voice, Let all of
us kill these villachoes, Take a Spaniard without pride and mutiny, and the
devil without a lie.
or villains, which when he had said, he departed out of his place, without
showing any reverence to any man. Whereupon every one was willing to arise and
to depart. But the Admiral de Villaris, the present and new King of Iuetot,
did beseech the estates in the name of the catholic cantons, and of the
leaguers of Catillonnois, Lipans, The firebrand of contention.
Gualtiers, and other zealous communalties, not to make peace with the
heretics, unless he might remain admiral of the East, and of the West part,
and were paid his costs, with the detaining of such benefits and favors as
he thought belonged unto him: also that they would not choose a King, but such
a one as should be a good companion, and a friend of the Cantons. Afterward
there rose up Ribault and Roland, and besought the assembly, Two honest men, I
warrant you.
to frustrate and abrogate the law de Repetundis, that is a law made against
such as were accused of extortion, or money unjustly taken, in time of their
office, because this law as they took it, was neither catholic nor
fundame^tall. This being done, every one rose up with a certain marvelous
stilnes: and in going out the herald advertised them at the gate as they went
out to return to the council again, at two of the clock in the after noone.
At which hour I that now speak, meant not to fail, Goodly things to be seen
and heard at Paris garden.
for the great desire that I had to see rare and singular things, and the
ceremonies that should be kept there, to the end I might the better advertise
thereof my master, and the Princes of Italy, which with an earnest desire
wait for the proceeding and issue of these famous estates, held against all
order and manner used and accustomed in France. Wherefore I came again to the
Louvre after dinner, and that in good time also: You might do so, for your fare
was but short.
and offering my self to enter into the uppermost hall, as I had done before
in the morning, the herald or usher put me back, because he saw that I was
not marked with L. and I had no token, as I saw many had that entered in much
worse state, and more ragged and rent then my self, whereupon I conceived some
small displeasure. Honorable persons for so high an assembly.
For amongst others, I saw admitted thereto, of butchers more then three, of
tauerners, brasiers, sergeants, pelt or felmongers, that I knew, and who were
to have a voice in the election. Yet my curiosity made me to pass my
disdaigne: and that I might know whether the princes and princesses without
tail, entered in the same ceremony and order that they did in the morning, I
meant to wait their coming, and in waiting therefore, I gave my self in the
mean while, to behold and consider the tables of open and plain painting,
Neither is that material, but mark the devises.
which were set above the steps of the stairs. I know not whether they were
there placed expressly to deck the place, or to sell. But this I can say, that
I took marvelous great pleasure to behold them one after another, for the
workmans hand in them was excellent, and the work it self was very neat and
natural, full of dark speeches of diverse meanings, which made al to bend their
spirits, that they might divine or guess thereupon.

This was Duke de Maynne.
The first, upon which I cast mine eye, was the figure of a giant, having both
his feet upon a wheel that was ill greased, the spokes whereof were all
writhen and crooked: and below his head, as if it were two soote and a half
off, or therabout, there was figured a crown of fine gold, but yet without
precious stones, because Monsieur of Nemours had eaten them up, and near unto
it was a kingly scepter, A pattern of their presi^encie and government.
somewhat eaten with mice, and a sword of justice, but yet rustie, because it
had not been worn and used: to which the said giant stretched out his arms as
much or as far as he could, and lifted up himself upon his feet, with such
advantage, that he stayed not himself upon the wheel, but upon the nethermost
part of the artels, and yet he could not attain thereto, because it was
altogether full of cities, and of good and great towns between them both. The
King that now reigns.
And on the right hand there was an arm crowned, that as it were with a small
rod of iron did strike him on the fingers: under this wheel, And why might not
these be women of his kindred?
there appeared (as there does above that of Saint Katherine) a mo^ster with
three women's heads, who had their names written coming out of their mouths:
Ambition, rebellion, counterfeited religion. I could not tell at the first
show, what this might signify, but having looked somewhat more warily upon the
visage or face of the giant, it seemed to me that it did resemble that of
Monsieur the Lieutenannt, and had a head and a panch as big as his, with all
the linaments of eyes, of nose, and of beard, saving that he had not the
Pelade of Roane, and above were written these four verses, that made me to
understand the whole mystery.

O giant thou take pleasure thy self up to rear,
And above this wheel thy self to exalt,
But if God will vouchsafe our prayers to hear,
To the crows and ravens a mouth make thou shall.
Next unto this table, there was an other, of no less workmanship and
pleasure, The Cardinal Pelve.
where there was painted a very little man, made and mingled of white and of
red, apparelled after the Spanish fashion, and bearing notwithstanding a french
face, who had also two names. At his right side he had an inckehorne hanging,
and at his left side a sword or rapier, which was fastened below: the pummell
whereof was crowned with a garlande of flowers, such as maids have when they
go to be buried. His countenance was double, and so was his hatte also, If he
had said his heart also, he had not lied.
and his pouch or purse was four fold, and over his head on the side between
the sun in the South and his setting, there showred a very small rain of
gold, that caused him to betray his master. The daughter of Spain.
And he had in his hand a paper crown which he presented to a young Lady,
that was speechless and withered, which made show to take it altogether, with
a very fair little husband of butter, Duke Ernestus belike.
molten against the sun. I could not comprehend what the figure meant, but by
the inscription which I saw beneath in these words. Vendidit hic auro
patriam, dominumque potentem, imposuit: that is in plain english.

This wretch his country for gold did sell,
And his mighty master betrayed, a shame to tell.
And below the same table there was this verse also. Eheu: ne tibi sit priuata
iniuria tanti.

Alas, the private wrong or fear,
Let it not be to thee so dear.
He means the Lieutena^t the legate, and Pelve.
Which made me to doubt, that this was one of the persons of the Trinity,
though indeed he had forsaken and shaken off the holy Ghost.

I saw on the other side of the stairs, another table, that was more great and
large than the first were, and mingled with sundry, diverse and pleasant
inventions, which made me to turn to look upon them, because also that on the
top there was written the description of the Island of Ruach, newly augmented
since the time of Rabelais. In the midst was a certain Lady, hooded or veiled
after the manner of a widow, Belike he means the Duchess of montpensier.
that had many husbands dead and living, and she had her bumme or tail upon
the ground, between two stools, and about her were a great company of
Churchmen, Friars, Iacobins, and Jesuits, some of them bringing her packets
sealed and bridled, Secret mutinous persons and light people easily led.
and unto others she her self delivered the like: the others that were
apparelled like priests, that had fat benefices or parishes, had the bellows
of organs, wherewith they did blow in the breach of many of the inhabitants,
who suffered themselves to be carried away with the wind. Others stood
upright, their throat being wide and open, and the foresaid curats or priests
did blow into their mouths, and nourished them with wind, as if it had been
with some heavenly food, fit to heal the goutie, such as had the stone, or
abundance of corrupt humors, A description of the famine of Paris.
in the whole body. In the nethermost part of the said figure, a man might see
as it had bin a public place, representing hals or markets, or the place
Maubert o^ Paris, where instead of bread and meat, they set out to sale
footbals, the skins wherein rams stones were, and the same skins much
blowed up, and the great bladder of a hog, with which they traffiqued in the
market, and sold it from hand to hand, at a good reckoning. There was also an
other sort of victual in paper, whereof some made great account, so that
every one that would, could not have of it, which the retailers carried up and
down the streets, and they cried news, news, News described.
as men cry, have you any mise or rats to kill. The foresaid Lady furnished
the counter-cariers therewith, for from her, they came out in abundance from
under her coat or gown: and there was great pleasure to behold the diverse
deformed countenances of them, that rooted as hogs do, under her tail, to
taste thereof. The rest of the country of the said table, was full of
windmils, turning empty, and having fanes or weather cocks in the air,
together with sundry cocks of the Church. And at the four corners, It should
seem he means troubles from Spain.
there was the four winds reft into two, whereof it seems, that the
southeast was the greatest, and blowed most mightily, and sent the clouds
toward the North, north East. In the nether part of the said table, there was
written this little quartaine.

Lo here you may see the new found land,
Where the queen feeds her self with wind,
He that gladly would news know or understand,
Let him smell to her forepart and not behind.
Whilst I was ravished in the contemplation of this third table, and before
that I had cast mine eyes upon the other that followed, the princes and
princesses aforesaid passed by, and I must needs run after, A pretty fictio^.
that I might enter as one of their followers: but because that the prease was
not very great, the herald or porter, that had once already put me back,
marked me, and did more roughly and rudely thrust me back, than at the first,
which made me to be fully resolved, to withdraw my self, and to leave there
the Estates, very close and shut up. That was the first session, wherein at the
evening I understood that they were in consultation, with what wood they should
warm themselves the next lent, and upon what foot the union should go. High
points in a low house
I also understood, that the issue of the council was, that men should observe
sundry lents in a year, with often commandings of double fasts, which in
continuance would turn themselves as double tertian agues do. Also they there
forbad to sell speckled eggs after Easter, because that children had played
with the^ before, which was a matter of very ill example. They forbad also the
plays and games of Bourgongne, and the nine pins or nine holes of master John
Roseau. Specially gentles and nobles.
Likewise they enjoined women to wear great bums, and in all safety to
increase under the same, without fearing the babble and vain speech of
midwiues. Some whispered and murmured also, that dauncings should be censured,
and mules banished Paris. It was advised also, to turn the lodging house or
Inn of Bourgongne, into a college for the Jesuits, Jesuits well deciphered.
who had need of recreation, by reason of the great quantity of blood,
wherewith they were swollen and puffed up, as a filled bag, and had need of
a surgeon to let them blood. Sundry other holy and praise worthy ordinances
were made at the beginning of the play, whereof one promised to give me the
list or catalogue. But above all other things, they commended the pains of
Monsieur of Lions, A necessary law among many needeles before.
who framed a fundamental law, by which it should be inacted, that whosoever
within Paris, or within any other town, brideled by the vnio^, should speak
of peace for twenty years space, or should demand for traffic and trade, or
should lament for the good time past, he should be sent into exile to
Soissons, as an heretic, or Maheuter, or should pay to the bag or purse of
the union, a certain quantity of dales, toward the maintenance and
entertaining of the Doctors. For there must always be an opposition, or else
their state cannot stand.
Some also propounded this, that if the King of Navarre became a Catholic,
Monsieur the Lieutenant must needs become a Huguenot, and that his late
brother had indeed a mind to be so, if they would have received him. As
touching the choice of a King altogether new, some say that it was ready to be
adjudged and determined, but yet that it was not without great disputation,
because that some spoke to this purpose, that it was better to have a
Commonwealth, as the ancient French had: That is a confused government by the
people.

A state of government consisting of few.


othersome demanded an anarchicall democratie: othersome would have the
Athenian Oligarchie: othersome spoke of a perpetual Dictator and yearly
Consuls, which was the cause, that by reason of the diversity of opinions,
they could not resolve any thing thereof. Notwithstanding, there was some
appearance that they spoke to have a King. For one named Trepelu the vine
dresser of Suresnes, stoutly and stiffely defended, that the king was the very
star, and the very sun, which so long since had governed and enlightened
the kingdom of France, and with his heat nourished, Necessity of a king
notwithstanding corruption in him that executes the office.
fostered, and sustained the same. And what though sometimes the sun coming
after a frostie night, it caused the vines to freeze, yet it did not thereupon
ensue, that we should spit against it, and not use it any more, nor for all
that to leave the good quaffing of quarts at a time, though that wine were very
dear. And this is almost all that I could learn, and that I can report, of
that which passed in the estates of Paris, from whom notwithstanding men look
that there will come out very fearful clappes and noyses. I would it were so,
that that Babylonian kingdom divided might come to ruin.
For they say that Kings and Popes will intermingle one with another, and that
the Primate of Lions sleeps not day nor night to hatch a writing, that will
make all the world to lay down weapons and armor, and constrain all the
Maheutres to fly from hence into England, or else that way. We shall in short
time see what it will be. God is above all. The rest of the words and
speeches, A pretty jest, though I approve not therein the use of scripture
words.
and all the things that were done there, are they not written in the book of
the words of the days of the Kings, not of Judah, but of Spain.

Whilst these said estates were assembled, there were certain little verses
made both in Latin and in French, which did run up and down the streets,
whereof I have made a collection, that the Italians, who are curious and
desirous of such things, may see them.

AN EPISTLE OF THE LORD OF ENgoulevent, to a certain friend of his, touching
the oration that the Cardinal of Pelve made to the Estates of Paris.
MY great good friend, you shall understand by this rhyme,
That yesterday the estates were opened in good time,
Where there were very many goodly orations made:
But of all them that of tongues had the gift or trade,
That great and grave Prelate of Sens the Cardinal,
By his learned discourse has ravished us of our wits all.
Do you desire to hear it? unstop do your ears then,
(So says the song) and you shall have meruailes amongst me^:
He spoke very largely of one father Pretion,
Of whom that learned Liuie makes the ample mention
In his Decade, where he says, that in his time or age
This worthy Pretion was a very great personage.
He speaks further of this, exiuit edictum:
But I know not whether he were a Greek or a Britton.
He spoke also de Domino, and of the country du Main,
In a very well set countenance and a gravity Roman:
Of S. Paul the convert he spoke much also,
How fearful he was when vpside down he fell tho.
A grave and great proof.
And so he said he was a gentleman brave and bred,
Which appeared by this, that at Rome he lost his head.
He spoke in French also, that was lame and a runnagate,
Of the Spanyard forsooth, and of the bonet of the Legate,
For Gregory: this is eloque^^e passing intelligence.
And of his blessed cross, and of Gringore the Pope,
Of Luxembourgh and Pisani, of who^ they have small hope.
When he spoke of the place that was so fowly araied,
Some thought then how much he was defiled and afraied:
When he daunced la volte, and a very great company say
That this was for K.K. his niece or kinswoman gay. An incestuous Cardinal.

Another added therewithal (howbeit a very good companion)
Fie upon the same said he, it smells much of an onyon.
He bragged that if he might one day in the Consistory spend,
With five protests al controversies he would soon hear and end.
The fencer he played, and to them that heard him he seemed to vaunt,
That Jesus Christ himself had sometime been a protestant.
Some danger there is, They shall have a good catch.
that some one or other will him send
To the protestants in Germany, amongst them his life for to end.
As for that which remains this bearer (that was nie
Heard all the matter, and whom of purpose send I,)
Shall tell it you better: so much write does my pen
That its already reft, and laugheth loud now and then.
Farewell.
An excuse touching the said oration.
His eloquence he could not make seen, yet had he a good will,
For want of a little pretty book, wherein was all his skill. Learning lies
in his book.

My Lords the estates, excuse this man good and kind,
At Rome his learned Calepine he left there behind. A dictionarie.

Another touching the same oration.
The ignorant friars had very great reason Like will to like quoth the devil
to the collier.

To make you their head, Monsieur most grant:
For they that have heard your goodly oraison,
Indeed have confessed you to be most ignorant.
To the Spaniards concerning their double ducats.
Good Lord how yellow and how fair No good using of Gods name.

Do your double ducats appear,
Cause of them to be searched out great store
Spaniards he means.
Ye half Moors and more.
In the midst of your yellow and golden sands,
Or from thence you shall be returned,
all dried up and burned.
Paris, which is not your pray,
sends you cleave away,
That is greatly derided.
With a hundred foot of nose through all lands.
Upon the bruit that ran abroad, that they meant to make a Patriarch in
France: and touching the hanging of four of the sixteen.
Holy father, France to hold you have no hope,
If they there set up against you another Pope,
Sure you will lose it: think well of it yet,
Its no small morsel to lose, when naught you can get.
Reasons why the Pope shall forgo France.
Those mischievous Maheutres, and shred politikes,
Though themselves they do call good Catholics,
Yet surely good Romans they never will be,
And much less the Huguenots of all them three.
Our Paris the poor has so much sustained sure,
As impossible it is any more it should endure.
Think well of it at the least if you will,
A kingdom divided can not long endure.
The zealous Catholics there they hang do and kill:
From sixteen to twelve, the number is decreast,
And so without doubt swept needs must be the rest:
That after the first four brought down from above,
They may be set on perches, as it were a stockdoue.
Touching Mont-falcon, and the sixteen of Paris.
The proportion is good.
That each have his own is justice indeed,
To Paris sixteen, by four quarters agreed,
Mont-falcon must have sixteen pillars hie,
So every one has his own, who can this deny?
Touching a treasurer who has committed prisoner to the Bastille.
What has he done that thus in prison they hold?
In his chest good store had he of angels and gold. Gold many times brings
his grief.

Oh sore wicked man that to prison he goes,
He did lodge too nigh him, his very great foes.
Upon the imprisonment of a foolish advocate.
For my part I know not by what good reason, A dry blow against injustice

That out of the Cannon or Civil law can be had,
They have thus put a sot or fool into prison,
Since through the streets, there run so many mad.
Concerning the bonfires made at Saint Peter's feast. 1592.
The fire at S. John's feast liked me well, Woe be to the^ that laugh, for they
shall weep.

They sing about it, dance roundly and turn:
Concerning S. Peter's, nothing I will tell,
But these fires our France, enkindle and burn.
Whereupon they were called the zealous of the union.
God speed ye Messieurs, ye Catholics,
Without faith in God, or his son and delight:
Greedily have ye devoured up the blessed relikes, What will not these men do
that deface their own religion.

And the Crucifix ye have swallowed up quite.
Some think that for your zeal, and no other things,
Good men you zealous name do and call:
But you have this name indeed of the wings,
Because so well you do fly therewithal.
The wicked spirit that does you inrage,
Under the color of blessed religion,
France has razed and united in this age: Accursed be that union that makes
dissension.

And thereof and not else, it is called the union.
Touching the double crosses of the league.
Tell me, I pray thee, what it does signify,
That the leaguers have a double cross with pain?
An excellent mystery.
Surely that in the league, they mean to crucify
Gods son Christ himself yet once again.
To Monsieur the Lieutenant touching the taking of Pelade.
Mock on hardly, and cloth him with shame.
Pelade, sir, you have taken sure.
By the breach that you do know,
Keep it well I pray you, Monsieur,
It is of good worth, since you have it so.
To Monsieur de la Chapelle in the vrsins.
The advice of all Frenchmen is referred to one thing,
When of you Monsieur de la Chapelle, they have any talk,
Some must rush into their own ruin.
You advise over late, and are not sure of the most cunning,
That enter into the league, when others from it walk.
To Monsieur of Lions.
Monsieur a Cardinal sure you shall be,
Where the disease holds you, know well do we:
But let it not of joy; at all you bereue.
The place of execution, where loosing his head, he will have no pl^ce to set
his hat on.
This unlucky bird see you drive away,
That Master John Rouzeau, as he does say,
Owes you the red hatte in Grieve.
To Boucher the Preacher.
Of civil war, O very flame and fury,
And to the world an ensign sure:
Happy man he, if he might have it.
If thou can not be the Bishop of a city,
Yet of the fields, we will thee it procure.
To the Advocate of Orleans.
If thou would be hanged, that which is good then do,
Seeing that on thee poor wretch, no mercy men can have:
But if some little of thy goody thou would feign spare to, A desperate end
for a desperate person.

The^ go cast thy self into the water, the rope so shall thou save.
Of two horses slain or dying in going to see the Duke of Parma.
A certain president, Triboulet that had to name,
Followed Monsieur Roland, that sheriff of great fame:
The Duke of Parma and Plaisance to greet very sure,
He had two horses, better french then he in that case, Fools must buy their
pleasure dear.

That constrained to go thither, had thereat such disgrace,
That both of them in two days were dead with displeasure.
Touching the same matter.
O coch man thou, when thy horses dyed,
Because too sore they were run and tired,
Thou ought in such a strange accident
To have put in the coch the very president: A more fit place for him.

For as some report in causes of request,
He is worth two great beasts at the lest.
Of two that sue and labor for the Kingdom.
Two unto suite the Kingdom have bread,
But their desire of it they shall lose withal,
The one because he has verily too great a head, The Duke de Main. The Duke
of Guise.

And the other because his nose is too small.
Touching the election of the Duke of Guyse.
The league did it self flat nosed find,
And the leaguers much astonished were sure,
The young Guise still.
Another subtletie they had then in their mind,
A King without a nose to themselves to procure.
An answer for the Duke of Guise.
The little Guisard makes mocks and moes,
At all your verses and sonnets so quick,
Want of sense and shame go together.
For having a strong breath and a flat nose,
He feels not when men do him prick.
Touching the vow of a ship of silver, made to our Lady de Laurelte, by
Ma^teu^ provost of the Merchants. 1590.
In danger of shipwreck, some vow to saints to make,
Fie upon such trumpery.
And when they are on shore; the same from them to shake,
Is a praise worthy thing, neither w^ll^^ it blame:
Beg such a one for a fool.
But who is so foolish, as that he will pay the same,
Being yet on the seas, in the rage of the tempest?
Theuet sure I am, never yet saw so great and gross a beast.
A rebuke touching the same matter.
What have I said? thereof repent do I,
He is not a beast that makes a vow
No more than a Tigre.
And plaieth with our skin in hanging it hi^,
And acquits him with our loss, he cares not how.
Touching the doctors of the union.
The doctors of the counterfeite and dissembled union,
Popery and paltery join always together.
By their foolish doctrine, which they themselves shape,
Suppose of the mantle, of their holy religion,
To make the iolie Spaniard, a new and fresh cape.
The Epitaph of the Cheualier d'Aumale.
Commendation of cowardice.
He sundry times escapes that flies out of war,
But he that stands to it, and puts himself too far,
Is oftentimes cast away, and trussed up into a male,
For the proof hereof, I report me to Cheualier d'Aumale.
Though he had in his hands some good pith and strength,
Yet with his feet had he foughten as well at the length
At S. Denis, as in many encounters he missed the trap,
We should not need here to plain of his grievous mishap.
An other.
He that lies here a taker was, right bold and hardy sure,
Against S. Denis that a fine enterprise did procure:
But yet S. Denis more subtle than this taker of renown,
Did take him and both slay him eke, within his taken town. The pot goes so
often to the water, that at the last it comes broken home.

An other.
S. Anthony being robbed, by a head of the leaguers conioynd,
Went (as to one more strong) to S. Denis to lay open his mind,
Who to revenge this wrong, has given him sure promise:
Some little while after, this great robber did assay
To take S. Denis, but S. Denis took him by the way, He goes far in sin,
that is never punished for it.

And revenged upon him both the one and the other enterprise.
A Sonnet upon this, that the said Cheualier d'Aumale, was slain nere unto the
lodging or inn, that had for sign the Kings sword.
1. As heretofore men saw, Two notable examples alleged by the way of
similitude.
when the great Grecian tempest
Upon the walls of Neptune had his lightening sore expressed,
Polyxene to fall, and Achilles provoked for to be,
And eke upon the Trojan coast, the fall all too bloody:
2. And as Julius Caesar of an ambitious heart and hate
Of the great Roman city, did overthrow the state;
And being foe to Pompey, and the liberty also,
At his image feet fell dead, with a hundred blows and more: The true reddition
of the similitude.

So at S. Denis town, of his kings the bloody foe,
Near to their costly tombs, has had a great overthrow,
A sacrifice very late offered up upon their dust,
Believe let us more than ever, that there is one God just:
The time, the place, the manner of doing and all would be observed, in Gods
judgments. Let popish and atheistical traitors mark this.
Since of this rebel, we saw the pain, the place and all,
Yea that even at the sign of the Kings sword he should fall.
Another concerning the same subject or matter.
There is but one God, who rebels does overthrow
And reuengeth Kings: and their just quarrels also
Takes into his hand, and them sustain he will,
Such did not believe it, as now believes it still.
This knight, that not long since men saw to be so
Of the state and his master a very deadly foe,
(So cruel, so presumptuous, so bold and so hie,
That with his lift up head, he thought to touch the sky)
Is fallen, and that into a grievous ruin and decay,
Whither Gods wrath did carry him, and harry him away:
God is known by executing judgment, the wicked is snared in the works of his
own hands. Higgaion. Selah.
At S. Denis he is found stark and stone dead,
Fallen also into the snares, that for others himself spread:
For his pride there fell upon him this grievous wrath and vengeance,
Near unto the tombs of the ancient Kings of France,
Whose bruised and broken bones in that same place do rest,
And seem Gods justice therein, religiously to have blessed.
Who (for the truth and faith that this wretch did violate)
Would have this sacrifice to the Kings there to be immolate,
As Hatto, the Archbishop of Mentz, was devoured with rattes while he lived.
And that his body with mise eaten up should be,
(As great a wanton of the dames of Paris as was he)
Before that to just burial, men could in season bring
His body full of filth, and rottennes stinking.
To cause the greatest of the leaguers to understand,
That thus doing still, they shall be punished by his hand.
Another touching the same matter, written in Latin, and translated out of the
same.
Two examples as before applied.
As the virgin of Priamus did fall upon the Phrygia^ shore,
And at the marble of her foes tomb, was constrained to dye therefore,
And as Caesar with many wounds, at his son in laws picture,
Having conquered others, for all that fell at the feet of the conquered sure:
So at the tomb of his own Kings, a foe to Kings in breath
Falls dead, and imbloodeth the ground, with a just deserved death.
Wherefore ye godly men even now rejoice, for why this offering odd
Both at kingly tombs is punished, and shows there is a God.
Against the same Cheualier d'Aumale.
This man by mighty guile did take, S. Denis town of fame* Oh how
unsearchable are Gods ways, and his judgments past finding out.

But takes he, in taken town was caught, and perished in the same.
A Sonnet upon the retiring of the Duke of Parma.
But where is now this power so huge, so mighty and so great, An abrupt and
patheticall exordiu^, but fit for the purpose.

That when it came to us it seemed all the Gods themselves to threat?
And that promised to it self to break, and down to the ground to fling
The famous french nobility, with their armed prince or king:
This preparation great and proud, to smoke or wind is turned.
And that great Duke that thought himself, So God confounds pride of heart.
all the world to have burnd,
Without doing ought, constrained is into Flanders to retire,
Having lost his people, his time, his fame, and that he did desire.
Henry our great king as a hunter good, does him pursue and chase,
He presses him, he follows him, and the fox flies apace
With his nose to the ground, ashamd, despised and blamed and brought to danger.
Ye Spaniards proud learn this of me, Spaniards learn in time:
never yet did any stranger
Entrap or take a Frenchman but with loss, danger and shame,
The Frenchman is not vanquished, but by one of the same name.
A Sonnet to all them of the League.
To all French generally.
O ye unnatural Frenchmen, and bastards of this land,
That tamed cannot be, but by your own force and hand:
Now put ye off this courage, inhumane and unnatural,
That pufs you up with pride, and by ignorance destroys you all,
To the Lorrainists. He means the Pope, or the Spanyard, or both. To the
Parisiens.
Ye petty princes of Lorraine, shake off your hope therefore,
The error of that Cumane ass follow ye not any more,
Who clothed with the skin of the Roman lion great,
(Seeing the very lion stout) does heart and hope forget.
And you o ye Parisiens, recourse whither will you have?
You must needs whether you will or no (void of hope your selves to save)
Subject your selves to that duty, to which the laws you bind:
But if against your selves you stir your king that is so kind,
Chastened you shall sure be: for on babes and fools we spend
Some chastisement, or else indeed they will never sure amend.
Touching the Lords of Vitry and of Villeroy, who have acknowledged the King.
The union her self her force does still untie,
Vitry and Villeroy witness do this thing:
To God therefore alone be infinite glory,
Praise unto them, honor to the King.
This Lieutenant in false conceit,
This great pillar sweld with wind and no more,
That thought the King to counterfeit,
The Duke du Main.
Shall be gross John even as before.
The League, it self to destroy goes about,
Wherewith confounded are the wicked race:
A house divided in it self cannot stand.
The seed thereof shall sure be put out
By torture, sharp swords, or some other strange case.
Ye people of blood, of spoil, and the rope,
And still will be named zealous as yet:
The Leaguers.
Cry the King mercy, so may you have hope,
Or else from hence ye shall go to the gibbet.
Ye sixteen, Mount falcon calls for you, The sixteen appointed to govern
Paris.

To morrow the crows will cry very loud:
The sixteen pillars of his chapel new
Shall be your tombs, wherein you shall be shroud.
To the King concerning his very great clemency.
Amongst the goodly virtues, this is one very excellent,
Pitiful to be to the vanquished, and to pardon all:
But take heed of too much, chiefly to rebels impenitent: Too much pity
spoyleth a city, yea a kingdom.

For Caesar as great a prince, as your self, did thereby fall.
Concerning the same matter in Latin, and turned into English.
Pity in a great prince is a great virtue indeed, A good thing can hardly be
too often repeated.

And to be willing always his enemies to spare:
But yet too much pity is not safe, as we may read,
By the bloody death of Caesar, a prince very rare.
Upon the same matter.
Heretofore it was a virtue fit for a courageous king,
To the greatest of his foes, grace and pardon to show:
But since Caesar was murdered, and that for this thing,
From a virtue to a vice, it is become, as many more.
In Latin, but translated out of it.
In former time for captains great pity was a virtuous trade:
But since that Caesar was destroyed, this virtue a vice is made.
To the King.
O thou victorious prince, and now the best of all that live,
God out of his hand into thine, two scepters great does give: France and
Navarre.

And in a throne of long'st endure has placed thee again,
In spite of all the sore attempts of that coniured Spain.
The wishes of all Frenchmen good, are heard yet at the last,
Thou race of Jews S. shall reign, in peace, and sit full fast.
That which the heavens give thee sure, no man can take from thee,
Though void of scepter and of crown, thou should command with glee.
Notwithstanding all this, o King, a King thou shall be sure,
A worthy sentence.
Its virtue that makes kings; their crown, and al for to endure.
In Latin, and translated out of it.
Unconquered prince, and of thine age, the glory eke alone,
True, for kings reign by him.
Even GOD himself does set thee up, upon thy grandsires throne:
And with a happy hand does reach, to thee two scepters brave,
Which taken from the Spanish foe, thou shall uphold and have*
In days past, one of the sisters three did spin this goodly thread
But though they should deny to thee, the gold crown of thy head,
And eke the holy oil that was vouchsafed of France to the King,
Which messenger both swift and fair, from heaven high did bring,
That shall not let, but rule thou may, after thy fathers rate,
Virtue crowns the king, virtue, I say, the king does consecrate.
(...)
T. W.

THE FRENCH PRINTERS DISCOVRSE, TOUCHING THE exposition of these words,
Higuiero of hell, and concerning other matters, which he learned of the Author
himself.
MY masters and good friends, the profit that I have made by the imprinting of
this treaty, and that which I owe to this discourse, have made me very
desirous to know who was the author hereof. For after that the French copy
was first given me at Chartres, at the consecration of the King, by the
gentleman of whom I have heretofore made mention, I did perceive that sundry
learned men, yea and I my self, did very easily judge, by the style and
language of the book, that an Italian was never able to make so good a french
work, and so well polished, as this is, that shows an absolute knowledge of
all the affairs, and of the very natural disposition of all the most famous
men of France. Wherefore we must of necessity conclude, that he was a French
man that made it, yea such a French man, as had good understanding and
intelligence, and was well trained up at court, and that the Florentine which
was about to carry it into his country, from whom his servant stole it together
with the male, had but only turned it out of French into Italian, that so he
might cause it to be seen, and read in Italy. And this was the cause why I my
self travailed with a certain wonderful care, to discover and find out him,
who had made us indebted unto him for this worthy work, that has given so
great pleasure, contentment, and liking, to all good and honest people. But
notwithstanding all the inquiry, that I was able to make thereabout, I could
not find a man, that told me any very certain and assured news, touching
the same, but speaking only by presumptions, suspicions, and conjectures; till
one of these days last past, when I was almost past hope, to know any thing
touching the matter, there did by fortune come unto me in the street, a very
aged man, very lean also, and pale, which since I have heard to be called
Master Polypragmon, That is Master busy body.
who abruptly and upon the sudden demanded of me, if it were not I that had
printed the Catholicon of Spain. At the first I made some difficulty and
doubt, to confess it unto him, fearing that he had bin some one of them, that
had bin named therein, and had felt himself moved therewith, as diverse had
done: no, no, says he, keep not close from me, that that all the world
knows, I was at Yours when you first imprinted it, and know indeed the name
of them, that gave you the original copy thereof: but for all that it may
be, that neither your self, not they which gave you it, knew who was the
author thereof. Perceiving then, that he knew so much of this matter, I could
not but confess, that in truth I had printed it at Tours, but that I was not
able to finish it, but in the very time that I must trust up my baggage to
come into this city, after that the Parisiens were returned to their former
good understanding, and brought into the obedience of the King. That fell out
well for you, said he, for before that you had set it abroad, diverse men had
seen sundry imperfect, and defective copies, which had very much stirred up
their desire, to see the rest well polished and published. But you are much out
of the way, when in your Epistle set before the book, you said that it was an
Italian that made it, at the asse^bly of the Estates of Paris. For I know very
well the name of him that composed it, who also lodges not far from hence.
Whereupon I was very glad of this encountering, and I did very earnestly pray
him to name him unto me, at the least wise, if it were lawful for me to know
him: because that I had very many things of great importance, to tell him for
his benefit and honor. I will said he, tell you his name, and will also show
you his lodging, upon condition, that you will not disclose it to any man, for
he is a person that does not love to be so much visited, as many do now a
days. Those that told you that he was of Italy, were deceived by one letter
only, he is not of Italy, but of Alethie, That is, Truth.
which is far differing from the other: That is, Liberty. That is, Free
speakers. That is, Lovers of money. That is, Desirers of honor. That is,
Unknown. That is, a hater of gardens.
and he was borne in a little town, that men call Eleuthere, inhabited
heretofore and built by the Parresiens, who have continual war against the
Argyrophiles, and Timomanes, a very puissant and populous nation. His name is
the Lord Agnosse, of the family and stock of Misoquenes, a gentleman of good
estate and no deceiuer, which loves the counsel of wine better, than the
council of Trent. You shall know him by this, that he is always attired after
one manner, and never changes his apparel or garments, as if he had nothing
else but to think upon, and to govern Lions. He is a great little man, that
has his nose between both his eyes, his teeth in his mouth, his beard upon his
chinne, and willingly wipeth his mouth, and his nose upon his sleeves. You
shall find him at this present, lodged in the street of Good time, at the
sign of the Rich labourer, and he goes very often to walk in the black
Friars, because he loves them very well. And hereupon I recommend me unto
you, for I have to deal in other places, by reason of certain packets that
are come from Rome, which assure us, that our absolution hangs by no more,
but a twisted thread at this time of the year. As he had very brutishly and
thickly spoken these words, he went his way, and left me yet in suspense,
notwithstanding I was somewhat better satisfied, than I was before, since I
knew the name, and the lodging place of mine author. And at the same time I
went through all the quarters of Paris, and inquired of the street, and the
sign that he had told me, but no news were to be found, neither of Good
time, nor Rich labourer. In the days following I did wear three pair of
shoes, or there about, in running up and down the streets, and could learn
nothing. To be brief, I had bin in the same state still; but yt by hazard, I met
with a certain honest man, who^ I had sometimes heard say, was a Parresie^, of
whom I asked the same question, which I had unprofitably made already ten
thousand times, and that to so many men. He told me that he had heard speech of
a certain gentleman of Eleuthere, and of the family of Misoquenes, but he
knew not whether it were he that I asked for, because that there were diverse of
that name in Alethie. I besought him to guide me to the lodging of him whom he
knew, which thing he did, and at the last, after many turnings and windings,
through sundry and diverse little streets, he showed me a little low door,
into which I entered without knocking, and found in a little high chamber, very
pleasant and well furnished, a man of goodly representation, leaning and
reading upon a book, drawing very nigh to the cut and fa^hion that that man
master Pol had described unto me. I demanded of him (greeting and reverence
being presupposed) whether he were the Lord Agnoste Misoquene: men indeed
(said he) call me Misoquene, but I am not Agnoste. He whom you inquire of, is
indeed my very near kinsman, and we are both two of one country, and of one
town, but it shall be very hard for you at this present to find him: for his
lodging is more hidden and secret, then the neast of a Tortoise.
Notwithstanding, if you would have any thing with him, I can from hence at any
time advertise him thereof. Then said I unto him, Monsieur, I believe that it
is he, that is the author of that little discourse, that is made touching the
holding and assembly of the Estates of Paris, and of the Catholicon of Spain,
which he has entitled, A Satyr Menippized. I have heard him himself thereof
(said he) say so. That is a work (quoth I to him) which has been very much
received, and which I have imprinted (for I am a Printer at your commandment)
without knowing the value thereof. Which may appear by this, that at the
beginning thereof at Tours, I printed but seven or eight hundred copies, but so
soon as it was seen at Paris (whither I brought it with my presses and
moveable goods) the whole world thought it so beautiful and so well done, that
men ran unto it as to a fire, in so much that I printed it four times in
three weeks, and I am ready now to print it the fifth time, if I had conferred
but only one half hour with the author. After this, this honest man said, I
have oftentimes heard my cousin say, that he was very much grieved, that this
treaty came into sight, before he had reuewed the same, and cut off diverse
things, which it may be, he thought easy enough to pass then, when he
composed the same: but in the time wherein we are, it may be they may engender
some scandale, and offend some persons of quality, who are named therein, or
poynted out thereby. For those which have acknowledged and amended their
faults, do very well deserve, that men should suppress and bury the
remembrance thereof, rather then refresh it, and make it perpetual, by such
provoking and merry writings. Also I have heard him complain of a certain
book seller, who either through covetousness, or of jealousy toward others,
has caused this work to be printed in very small letters, ill corrected, and
very unpleasant: and who also has been so rash and headie, to take from it,
and to put to it, whatsoever pleased himself, which thing indeed justice
ought not to endure. Notwithstanding the argument is public, whereunto every
man may put additions, specially such as respect the matter: for otherwise, or
besides that I know very well, that my said cousin, neither wishes, nor hops
to have honor or praise thereby. Then I demanded of him, if there were not any
mean for me to see the said lord Agnoste. And he answered me, that there was
not any for that season, because that his said cousin did sometimes shut up
himself for eight days space together, without seeing any man. But yet that
if he had a mind to know any matter concerning his intent or purpose, he
thought he was able to satisfy me, even as well as his cousin himself, because
that they had oftentimes discoursed together, touching this matter, as also
concerning this, that some came unto him every day to report unto him the
speeches which men used in the palace, and through out the city touching his
book. I will therefore be bold, seeing that I cannot have this goodness to
behold him, even I, I say, will be bold, to demand of you some doubts, whereat
I see sundry men to stumble, and not to be able well to resolve themselves.
First, wherefore did he affect this new title of Satyr Menippized, which all
the world understands not, seeing that in the written copies, it had this
inscription, The abridgment and soul of the Estates. This question (said he)
cannot fall but in ignorant spirits, for all they which have bin brought up in
learning, know very well, that this word Satyr, does not only signify a
poesy, containing evil speech in it, for the reproof, either of public
vices, or of particular faults of some certain persons, of which sort are
those of Lucilius, Horace, Iuuenal, and Persius: but also all sorts of
writings, replenished with sundry matters, and diverse arguments, having prose
and verse intermixed or mingled therewithal, as if it were powdered neats
tongues interlarded. Varro says, that in ancient times, men called by this
name, a certain sort of pie or of pudding, into which men put diverse kinds
of herbs, and of meats. But I suppose that the word comes from the
Graecians, who at their public and solemn feasts, did bring in upon their
stages or scaffolds, certain persons disguised, like unto Satyrs, whom the
people supposed to be half Gods, full of lasines, and wantonness in the woods,
even such a one, as presented himself alive unto Sylla, and such a one of them
as Saint Hierome rehearses, appeared unto Saint Anthony. And these men
disguised after this manner, being naked and tattered, took a certain kind of
liberty unto themselves, to nippe and to floute at all the world, without
punishment. In old time, some made them to rehearse their injurious verses all
alone, without any other matter in them, then railing and speaking evil of
eueryone, afterward men mingled them with Comedy players, who brought them
into their acts, to make the people laugh: at the last, the more grave and
serious Romans chased them altogether out of their Theaters, and received in
their place, Vices in plays: but the more wise and witty Poets used them, to
content therewithal, their own bad spirit of evil speaking, which some of
them thought to be the chief goodness. And there are great numbers of them
found in our country of Parresie, who love rather to lose a good friend, then
a good word or a merry jest, applied well to the purpose. Wherefore it is not
without cause, that they have entitled this little discourse, by the name
Satyr, though that it be written in prose, being yet notwithstanding stuffed
and stored with gallant Ironies, pricking notwithstanding and biting the very
bottom of the consciences of them, that feel themselves nipped therewithal,
concerning whom it speaks nothing but truth: but on the other side, making
those to burst with laughter, that have innocent hearts, and are well assured
that they have not strayed from the good and right way. As concerning the
adjective Menippized, it is not new or unusual, for it is more then sixteen
hundred years ago, that Varro called by Quintillian, and by S. Augustine, the
most skillful amongst the Romans, made Satyrs of this name also, which
Macrobius says were called Cyniquized, and Menippized: to which he gave that
name because of Menippus the Cynicall Philosopher, who also had made the like
before him, al full of salted iestings, and poudred merry conceits of good
words, to make men to laugh, and to discover the vicious me^ of his time. And
Varro imitating him, did the like in prose, as since his time there has done
the like, Petronius Arbiter, and Lucia^ in the Greek tongue, and since his time
Apuleius, and in our age that good fellow R^belaiz, who has passed all other
men in contradicting others, and pleasant conceits, if he would cut off from
them some quodlibetarie speeches in tauernes, and his salt and biting words in
alehouses. Wherefore I cannot tell what manner of men these dainty ones are,
that think some do evil, that according to the example of these great
personages, meant to give unto a like work, a like title unto that of theirs,
which is now become common, and as we say, appellatiue, whereas before it was
proper and particular: as not long time since, a learned Flemming and a good
Antiquarian, has used the same. And this is all that I can tell you in this
respect. If you desire any other thing, I will tell you my advise or opinion.
Then said I unto him, I am sufficiently satisfied as touching the title; but
there is very great disputation amongst some, what the author should mean by
these terms, Higuiero of hell: for there are very many persons that know not
what it means, and make thereof sundry horned and ill favored
interpretations, such as in my mind the author himself never thought of. I
know very well (said he) that there are diverse that desire to play about the
affinity of the words: some, to make themselves merry therewith: and others
to draw the author into envy: but there is much odds between eight and
eighteen, and a great difference between breathing and whistling. I have
heard my cousin a hundred times say, and I know it also as well as he, that
Higuiero of hell, signifies no other thing in the Castillian or Spanish
tongue, but the Fig tree of hell. For the Spaniards, as also the Gascoignes,
turn the F into H, as hazer, harina, hijo, hogo, higo, for fair, that is, to
do, farine, meal, fills, a son* feu, fire, figue, a fig. And this at this
time is but too common in Paris, where the women have learned to speak, as
well as to do, after the Spanish manner. Where he says then, that the drugge
of the Spanish Iugler, or Apothecarie, was called Higuiero of hell, it is for
diverse reasons. First, because the fig tree is a wicked and an infamous tree,
the leaves whereof (as we may see in the Bible) have served heretofore to cover
the privy parts of our first parents, after that they had sinned, and
committed high treason against their God, their father and creator: even as the
Leaguers to cover their disobedience and ingratitude against their King, and
him that has done the^ all good, have taken the Catholigue, Apostoligue, and
Roman religion, and think therewith to hide their shame and sin. This is
the cause also why the Catholicon of Spain, that is to say, the pretext which
the King of Spain, and the Jesuits and other preachers, won by the double
ducats of Spain, have given to the seditious and ambitious Leaguers, to
rebel against their natural and lawful King, and to fall away from him, and
to make in their own country, war more dangerous than civil, may very
properly be called, the Fig tree of hell, in steed that that wherewith Adam
and Eve did cover their open sin, was the Fig tree of Paradise. And ever
since that time this tree has always been accursed, and of evil name amongst
men, bearing neither flowers nor any buddes, nor any thing else to garnish it
withal, and the very fruit it self has from thence been drawn to name the
most dishonest part of women, and the most filthy and foul disease that
breeds in the parts, that we cannot well name. You are not ignorant of this
also, that the ancient people did account this tree amongst the gibbets or
gallowses: as for example, when Timon the Athenian would have plucked up one of
them that did him some anoyance in his garden, and whereupon sundry had in
former time been hanged, he caused to be proclaimed with the sound of a
trumpet, that if any were willing to be hanged, he should dispatch and come
thither quickly, because he meant to cause it to be pulled up by the roots.
Pliny teaches us, that this tree has not any sent or savor; no more has the
League. Again, that it easily casts her fruit; and so has the League done:
that it receives all manner of corruptions, as the League has received all
sorts of people: and that it does not last or live long; no more has the
League done: and that the greatest part of the fruit, which appears at the
beginning, never comes to ripenes; no more has that of the League. But that
which yet better agrees with it, and has many more conformities with the
League, than S. Frauncis has with our Lord, is the Fig tree of the Indies,
which the very Spaniards themselves have named the Fig tree of hell.
Concerning which Mathiolus says thus much for truth, that if a man cut but
only one leaf from it, and set but the one half thereof within the ground,
it will take root there, and afterward upon that lease there will grow an
other leaf, and so leaves growing upon leaves, this plant becomes hie as it
were a tree without body, stalk, branches, and as it were without roots, in
so much that we may reckon it amongst the miracles of nature. Is there any
thing so like and so much resembling the League? which of one leaf, that is to
say, of a very small beginning, is become by little and little, from one person
to an other, to this great height wherein we have seen it: and yet
notwithstanding, because it wants a good foot, or a good stalk to bear it
up, it withered and decayed at the first blast. But this is not all. This Fig
of the Indies, called (as you have heard) the Fig tree of hell, brings
forth fruit like unto the common figs, but yet somewhat more gross and
great, finishing by the forepart in a crown, (these are the proper terms of
Mathiolus) and are of color between green and purple, within there is
nothing, saving a certain kind of puffed matter, as in our figs, but yet so
full with a certain red kind of juice, that it tainteth men's hands, as the
mulberies or black beries do, and causes them that receive it, to make urine
as red as blood, whereof many people are greatly afraid. Have you not seen that
the League has had the very same effects? The fruits thereof have been great,
and more puffed up and swollen than common fruits, and their end was a crown,
that is to fay, the crown of France, to which it tended: the color of the
League was green and red: green for the joy that they had of the death of the
late king, whereof they did a long while wear the scarf: and red, as well
that they might be known in the liueries of the Spaniards, as for the blood
of the good Frenchmen that they meant to shed. This Fig tree of hell is so
common in the Island of Hispaniola, newly discovered in the Indies, that a
certain Italian author says, that the whole country is full thereof, and
that there it comes as it were in despite, even unto the courts of their
houses. There is also an other Spanish Physician, named John Fragosus, that
writes of the property of a certain oil (which they call the oil of the
Fig tree of hell) in these terms: Some late men that write of the things of
the West Indies, have a peculiar chapter of a certain oil that they call, the
oil of the Fig tree of hell, and they say, that it comes from Gelisco, a
province in new Spain. And a little after he says: It is the same that they
account Cherua, or Catapucia mayor, which the Italians call, Palma Christi, or
Mira solis. All which plainly declares, that that which the Italians call
fico d'inferno, that is, the Fig tree of hell, it is called by the Spaniards,
Higuera d'inferno, or in the Castillian tongue, Higuiero d'infierno, that is as
before, the Fig tree of hell. These then are the reasons that have moved my
cousin, to name the Catholicon of Spain, the Fig tree of hell; because that
the Spaniards so call that Fig tree of the Indies, that bears her fruit
full of blood, as indeed the League has done. And if a man would proceed yet
further, and say that that Fig tree is the Palmar, you shall find therein a
thousand other conformities or agreements, which it would be too long to
discourse upon: and amongst other, that which a certain Physician of Africa
has written, that of the tree Palmar alone, a man might make all manner of
tools and provisions for a ship, yea the very ship it self, and that the
fruit thereof may be applied to all uses, and serves for bread, for wine, for
linen cloth, for vessel, for table, for covering of houses, and in a word,
for all that a man would have: as the League at the beginning of it, served for
all sorts of people: for all sorts of hopes, and for all means, to cover all
sorts of passions, as of hatred, of covetousness, of ambition, of reuengement,
and of ingratitude. There is indeed another tree, which Baptista Ramusius,
calls Higuero, and says that it must be pronounced by four sillables: but I
am sure it was not the purpose of my cousin to speak thereof, An herb of the
kind of spourge. A kind of spourge, with a leaf like purselane.
no more than of Lathyris, or of Helioscopion, which the grammarian
Nebrissensis calls also Higuera del infierno, that is the fig tree of hell,
because he witches and she witches commonly use it, to work their charms
and inchauntments by, as the Leaguers have used the name of Catholic religion,
to charm and inchant the people withal. And this as I take it, may suffice or
satisfy them, that would divine or dispute concerning this term. Some have
told my cousin, that diverse thought hardly of it, that he has expressed the
proper names of some of the seditious and principal authors, of all the
misery and mischief of France. But I have heard him say, that he was of such
a country, where they used to call bread, bread; and figs, figs. Those
that for money had delivered their own city to Phillip King of Macedonia,
complained indeed that his soldiers, after the yielding of it, called them
traitors, and vpbraided them with their treason. I know not (said the King)
how to do you any help in this, for my soldiers are gross and lumpish
fellows, and call things by their own names. Those, who after they had caused
sundry towns to revolt against the King, and had as much as they could
maintained war, and exercised al manner of tyrannies against the poor
people, and having ruinated all their neighbors, and who seeing themselves no
longer able to hold out, and that there was no more to catch or take, did very
dearly sell those places to the King, and delivered up the poor inhabitants
to his mercy, shall those I say, be angry, if men call the^ traitors? But it
were a hard matter, that no one word should escape the Parresiens, even against
them that have taken gold and silver, and that have merchandized, and bought,
and sold, to come to a certain price, I will have so much for doing it. For
though that they had done that which they should have done, (as Judges that
execute justice, which they are bound to do) yet for all that, in taking
money they have marred all, and ought not any longer to receive honor, for
their good doing. They cannot save themselves from this, that men should not
call them traitors, troublers of the state, merchants, and sellers of their
country; and there is none but God alone, that can bring to pass, that things
already done, should not be done, neither can he bring to pass, (unless it
be by a certain kind of gross forgetfulness, which he can bring upon our
spirits or understandings) that we should not remember any more, that which
is already past. And concerning this matter one of our poets, (whereof our
town Eleuthere, is very well furnished) has spoken not many days since, in
six small verses, Those that through civil wars for gold and silver told
Unto the King do sell, places and towns of hold,
Though in my mind, good markets they do make:
(For, for some small coin, they expose themselves to strife,
And therewithal do sell their honor and their life)
Yet never did honest man this trade upon him take.


Notwithstanding, if any are to be found, that at the beginning suffered
themselves to be carried away, with the flood of the League, whether it were for
fear to forgo their religion, or for some particular affection that they bare
to the heads of that side, or for some displeasure and hatred, that they had
conceived against the late King, they are they themselves, that submitted
themselves to, and that acknowledged, the present King, so soon as they saw
him to become a catholic: and have brought into his power, the places that
they held without merchandise, or entering into composition with their master:
and these are more excusable, for their first error or fault, than the other:
yea they deserve recommendation and praise, and to be put in our chronicles,
for that they have delivered their country from the Spanish cruelty, as we
see to have bin done to them, that have freed France from the English men. From
whence have proceeded so many goodly privileges, to families, to towns, and
to communalties, who of themselves did shake off the strange yoke, that they
might the better submit themselves to the sweet power of their natural Kings.
But that which most grieueth all honest and virtuous people, is to see that
they, that have not done it but by force and necessity, are yet
notwithstanding joyfully entertained, received, and welcomed, and boast that
they are the cause that the King is converted. These men cause me to remember
a certain answer, that Fabius the great gave to a Roman captain, governor of
Tarentum, who after that he had suffered the town to be lost by the treason
of the citizens, bragged of this, that he was the cause, that Fabius took it
again. Truly (said Fabius) I had not taken or recovered the town, if thou
had not lost it: even so may these people brag and boast here, that they
are the cause of so many Trophies and triumphs as the King has achieved in
conquering his realm again, for without their treason and rebellion, he had
not gained so much honor, as he has done by bringing them under, and ranging
them to reason. I saw also others, that have not so much as stirred out of
their houses, and from their quiet rest, to rent and tear the name of the
King, and of the princes of the blood of France, as much as they were able, who
also not being able any longer to withstand, by reason of the great necessity
that pressed them, because they had two or three days, before the reducing of
their town to the Kings obedience, some good sighing and sense to do better,
and yet notwithstanding at this day, those that speak most loftily, and have
great estates, offices, and recompenses, and brag that they have done more
service to the King, and to France it self,, tha^ those that forsook their
houses, their goods, and offices, for to follow their prince, and who did
willingly endure all manner of needs, rather than so much as to wink at the
tyranny of these strangers, whether they be Lorraines, that is of the Guysian
faction, or Spaniards. But this complaint deserves an other Satyr Menippized.
But for this time I will tell you no more, but two small quartains or verses,
which two of our good country men made by the way, or upon the sudden, as we
say, at a certain time, when we discoursed upon this matter.

If French men lewd, in France recompensed be,
And the best men advanced to no degree,
Let us somewhat be lewd: men will forget the offense,
He that has not done ill, shall have no recompense.
The other even at that very instant time also, pursued the self same matter,
and to no less purpose, than the former verses were.

To be welcome indeed, and our affairs well to do,
During this tedious time, and miserable to,
Agnoste my friend, can tell what way we shall take?
Some place lets surprise, and then our peace we will make.
I know very well, that there are many people, that take no delight to hear men
speak and write thus freely, and are offended at the first word, that any man
mentions our afflictions already past, as though after so many great losses,
they would take away from us our feeling and our tongue, and our speech, and
liberty given us to complain withal. But herein they should do worse unto
us, than Phalaris did unto them, whom he stifled and choked in his brazen
bull; for he did not hinder them from crying, but this rather, that he would
not hear their cries, as the cries of men, lest he might have pity upon
them, but as the bellowings of bullockes and bulls, the better to disguise the
sound of man's voice. This is a hard case, that they that have been pilled,
robbed, imprisoned in the Bastile, ransomed, and driven from their towns, and
from their charges, should not cast out some evil speech against them, when at
their return, they find their houses void, forsaken, ruinated, wherein there
is nothing but the bare walls, whereas they left them richly stored with
moueables, and handsomely trimmed up, with all manner of things. Who can ever
stop the mouth of the posterity, and hinder them from speaking of the third
part, and of them that have brought it out, and nursed it, and which keep it
yet shut up in a chamber, nourishing it, and sustaining it with good meat, one
day to bring it forth unto light, and to cause it to be seen, well favored,
and very great, when they shall see time and commodity fit for it? It was
never yet heard of, neither shall it ever be, (what laws or ordinances
soever, men may make therefore) that evil speech should not be better received
than praise, specially when it is drawn from the truth it self: and that
there is not a hundred times more pleasure, to speak evil of some slothful
person, than to praise an honest man. This is the punishment that wicked men
cannot escape, and though they have all their pleasures beside, yet at the
least must they have this dipleasure, and this worm about their hearts, to
know that the people teareth them in pieces, and secretly curses them, and
that writers will not spare them after their death. Thanks be to God, we are not
under any Tiberius, that spied out the speeches of his subjects, or that made
of all offenses new articles of high treason against the Prince. He gives to
honest people, as much liberty as they should desire: he knows the natural
disposition of French men, as one that cannot endure, neither all bondage, nor
all liberty. Likewise it were not reasonable continually and for ever to
stir up our old quarrels, and to use injurious fashions, that might hinder
the kitting together again of his people, in one and the same devotion, under
his obedience. For it were better to endeavor to sweeten our evils, than to
make them more sharp, to the end that we may all of us range our selves to
the ancient fidelity, and humility which we owe unto our King, without
partiality, or variety of minds. Neither should any man think it ill, that
we prick and provoke them, that show themselves to be restiue, and seem as
it were to repent that they have repented. In all events whatsoever, when there
shall be no other, but those that are notoriously wicked, and yet will be
offended therewithal, I believe that the Parresiens will not be much grieved
therewith. Neither doubt I, but that little Oliuier, and Boucher, and d'
Orleans, will be now much troubled, to make some Anticatholicon, and
Apologies, against the tables and tapistries, for they have now leisure to sell
them, and many men look for them, if their Lucubrations and studies, may
deserve such expectation. As concerning my self, I will always counsel my
cousin to busy himself about some other thing, than to answer them. But I
know more than a dozen in our town, or city, whose paper and pen are eaten
up, and yet attend but some compulsorie matter, to make extracts, and vidimus,
out of their Menippized Satyrs, much more bloody then the first. If you
learn any thing thereof, I pray you my good friend, cause me to understand the
same. You perceive how to pleasure you, I have a little straied from our
purpose, and have suffered my self to be transported to indignation and wrath,
which I have conceived against those people, that yet build upon the
foundations of the first rebellion: and who also threaten us, to play with
sharp and edged swords, whereas heretofore they have played but with rebated
weapons. And indeed I was not far off from pouring forth my choler upon the
Jesuits: but because I understand they are not like to continue long in this
country, and by that means the Spaniards shall have no greater present taste,
(for as a deputy of Bourgongne said well, a Spaniard without a Jesuit, is as
a partrich without an orange, or some other sauce) I am contented to say
nothing. But to return to the point, from which we have gone aside. I pray
you, if you do again imprint the Satyr Menippized, to blot out of it the
names of them, that are become the Kings good servants, and who also continue
therein with some good resolution. And albeit there are still some, that yet
shake in the haft, and have need of a years trial at the least, before they
may be trusted, or have their names rased out of the book: notwithstanding,
since it belongs not to you or to me to judge of them, the best way will be
to take out of the book all proper names, and not to offend any one man of
them, that may hurt, and be in the midst of us. And this is that, that I meant
to say unto you for the last point. And so you shall leave me, if you list, to
my rest, for it is now supper time. And then I perceived very well, that he
meant to give me leave to depart, and I prayed him, that he would pardon me,
because I had bin so tedious unto him, but I had taken so great pleasure to
hear him, that the time seemed unto me not to be long. Notwithstanding I
besought him that before I did depart, I might yet a little advertise him, that
sundry men said, that the oration of the Lord of Aubray, was to too long, and
over serious in comparison of them that went before it, which were all very
short, and full of fictions: and that I for my part, could not tell either what
to answer, or what reason the author had, to lead him so to do. Whereunto
he answered and said, neither do I, for my part, understand any more
thereof than you, but that I suppose that my cousin meant to imitate therein the
natural disposition of the said Lord of Aubray, who is fo abundant and
plentiful in reasons, and can never find an end, either of his knowledge, or
of his discourse, and specially in such an action, as wherein he ought to make
show of all that he knew, and that with a desire to persuade, if he could.
But in that he has made him to speak so seriously, it was to procure unto him
more dignity and credit, than to those other that went before him, who all of
them are rank knaves, to whom it had not bin seemly, to have made them
speak any good thing: and indeed there was none found but he, in whose mouth
it was fit to speak the truth, and to set out things that might serve for
the instruction, and serious knowledge of matters already past. And this is
all the craft, that men meant thereby, and the coin wherewith they should pay
these delicate and fine eared men, in whose power it is, to pare and cut off
from it, or else to read no more, but the fourth part or half of it, as they
themselves list, if they think the whole too long. But in this matter I
refer my self to men of better judgment, whether there be any thing in it,
that a man may take away, and which is not very fitly applied to the purpose.
Notwithstanding it is permitted you, to cut it, or pare it, as shall best like
you, I for my part, will not think the wine the worse therefore. And so to
conclude, I pray you leave me alone in peace to my self. Hereupon I durst not
further press him, though indeed I had very great desire to know, whether
he or the Lord Agnoste, had not done something touching the matter of the
Jesuits, but he stopped my mouth, and said unto me, we are accustomed
according to the manner of our country, to speak that that we think. I will
therefore tell you, that I suppose that we have discoursed enough at this
time, and I yet once again pray you to leave me in peace, or let me be
alone, which when he had spoken, he called his servant and said, let one come,
and lay the cloth: whereupon I was ashamed to tarry any longer, and came away
instructed and furnished with these good answers, which I thought good to
communicate unto you, for the contentation and satisfying of them, that are as
my self, curious to know the truth.

FINIS.

