A HELP TO DISCOVRSE. OR A Miscelany of Merriment. Consisting of witty,
Philosophical and Astronomicall Questions and Answers.

As also, Of Epigrams, Epitaphs, Riddles, and Jests.

Together with the COVNTRYMANS Counselor, next his yearly Oracle or
Prognostication to consult with.

Containing diverse necessary Rules and observations of much use and consequence
being known.

By W.B. and E.P.

Dauus es? huc venias and eris mox Oedipus alter.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop for Leonard Becket, and are to be sold at his
shop in the Temple near the Church, 1619.

To the Reader.
WEre all the depth and goodness can be imposde,
Or is in all books in one book inclosde,
Some curious tasters might I think come nigh it,
That would not though they read, vouchsafe to buy it.
So on the other side did all the ill,
Sprinkled in thousands, but one volume fill.
Some feuer'd Sectist, would not only like it,
But offer with his purse-strings for to strike it:
What should I say of this? I cannot tell,
But good or bad, I like it if it sell.
Bibliop.
Ad non emptores istius Libri.
HE that to save his purse this small expense,
Forsakes this Jewel, leaves it, and packes hence,
Let opportunity that season fit,
That he must snew his folly or his wit
Where let his ignorance stamp such disgrace,
That he dare near approach iuditious place,
Unless with servitude, and cappe in hand,
To wait on such as know, and understand.
H. P.
In laudem Operis and authoris.
Look as a stately edifice raised hie,
Pleases the builder, feeds his curious eye,
Yet if within the whole work we furuay,
The owners ornaments, adornes his clay,
Even so is man built up by God to bee^
A receptacle for the Trinity,
To beautify which frame nothing more dear
Then knowledge that's divine, which thou have here,
At easy rate: Its balm from Gilead brought,
Where Canaans blessed language thou art taught:
Philosophy that fraughts the Cynickes hours
With knowledge of the immortal moving powers,
Is hither brought, discoursing the true use
Of contemplation: this book does produce
A complete Synod, whose authentike words,
Becomes the sagest: Its like Jonas gorde,
Which vailde him from the Sun, for it will advance
The simplest from the veil of ignorance,
Here the reverend Fathers, Poets, Orators,
Councels, Schoolmen, and Philosophers
In one joint union gravely all agree,
That thou another Oedipus shall be.
Expounding what is most dark: whilst th'vn read swain,
Envying th'ingenious music of the brain,
Sits mute to hear thee speak, but thy reward
Is fame, respect, preferment, and regard,
Such fate attends that man that will but look
Friendly to read the good things of this book:
Seeing men from beasts this little difference have,
Man can discourse and laugh: then he that gave
Thee these indowments bettered for to be,
Take his discourse or wits Monopoly,
And such sweet profit of it shall ensue,
(As what indeed is every good man's due,
Honor and fellowship among the wise,
From whence this benefit or good does rise,
As hearing, reading, or calm conference,
Where man's most safest, shunnes the base expense
Of hasting time: times only lent to man,
His wayest' examine, Arts wide depth to sk^n:
Be then aduertisde, this Help to Discourse,
Bespeaks thy future good, it will gently force
Knowledge into thee, and the generous wise,
Will know thee fir for all societies.
If in thee, all or none of these find room:
Others will speak whilst thou with shame sits dombe.
WILLIAM LORTE.
ALLIVD
Look as a statuarie on a stone
Conceits what Image he may form thereon,
Pencils his thoughts: then his industrious hand
Drives forth the needles matters and so scans
His labors period, and to all declare,
A seeming creature, beautiful and fair.
Even so our Artisan would if he might,
Polish Gods Image, driving forth his sight,
All immateriall hinderance, that man might appear
A glorious creature, then the genious rear
And take what is offered: turn leaves and read,
Where thou shall not so seem, but be so indeed.
W. L.
In praise of this help, and he that has help us to it.
HE that desires, what he should most desire;
That would with ease, and little cost, acquire
That's worth much labor, and a large expense,
May have the goodness of his wish from hence,
Taught as he will please to take it, nor let fear
Make any one turn from it, cause there is here
A Sphinx, proposing Riddle: it is not she
Propounded only; these expounded be
By the diuiner thing: and by this, thus
Is simple Dauus made an Oedipus.
An understanding man, a man that knows
What man is then, when like a beast he goes
Upon all four; when he but cries and crawles.
Making a moral, from his many falls,
Of infancy in manhood, when from grace
Man's falls so often, in this span-like race
Run, from his birth, to dying. One that knows
What man is, man, when he on two legs go
With circumspection walking, when h'as read
This world all over, and from thence is led
To the end of his creation, thence transcends
To the power had nere beginning, never ends.
One, that knows, when he again begins
To leave to be so; when Times loathed Twins,
Age and Diseases shake him, when h'as lost
The spring of youth, wearing a hoarie Frost
Upon his head and beard, and in his blood
An Icie coldness: when (as having stood
Out many winters) he is like winter now
Witherd all over; to the ground would bow,
But that his staff supports him: one thus knows
Whats' is one four, one two, on three legs goes,
And what becommes these changes. Thou have here
At easy rate, that cost the seller dear,
Both in expense and labor. Here (I say)
Thou have in one, collected, what once lay
In many volumes: Here the old and young,
That know no more, then their own mother tongue,
Have brought, (as gold from underneath the earth)
From hidden tongues, a treasure, in its birth
Then gold more noble, a more worthy prize,
That, only makes men's rich, this makes men wise.
Which, if thou know, thou't love, if love, thou't buy:
This Guide that leads thee, where these treasures lie.
Tho. Brewer
Concerning the Errata or faults escaped in printing.
If by the absence of the Author, difficulty of the hand, misplacing of
points, some sillables or words mistaken, the sense in any place be obscured,
the judicious Reader may be so pleased to correct such easy faults which by
these means have escaped, which though we know are some, yet we hope are not
many.

A HELP TO DISCOVRSE. INDVCTIO.
TO begin in God is the best foundation that can be laid as testifies both
experience, example, and consent of ancient, sacred, and profane writers
After which example, in that little I purpose, do I task my self a follower,
that I may begin the more safely, proceed more orderly, and end more
profitably, wherein thus I proceed.

1. In Divine Propositions.
Qu. What is the most ancient of all things.

A. GOD; because he had no beginning.

Q. Wherein does he most manifest himself?

A. In the Scripture, the Heralds of his truth, and the witnesses of his
mercies.

Q. Wherefore are the holy Scriptures, containing the mystery of man's
salvation, folded up by God in such obscurity and darkness, as sometimes
Maximilian the Emperor in the first of his 8. questions to the learned Abbot
Tritemius demanded?

A. The holy Scriptures (as a Father says) unless they be read with that
Spirit, by which it is believed to be written by the inspiration of Gods'
Siprit, for the direction of man's life, and that with humility, and desire to
know and be governed by it, cannot be understood, but remain as a dead letter
in the efficacy thereof.

Concerning whom, yet further S. Gregory says, though they have in themselves
that height and depth, wherein their mystery may exercise the wisdom of the
learned, yet have they also that easiness and plainenes, that the simple may
be comforted and taught, being in themselves that wonderful river, both
shallow and deep, wherein as the Lamb may wade, the Elaphant may swim.

Of whose depth S. Austin thus speaks further; The holy Scriptures are thus
written, says he, that by their height the proud may be abased; as with
their easiness, the simple may be comforted: Adding withal, that it is our
dulnes of capacity, that they seem so hard unto us, and the veil of our
hearts which cannot be removed, unless by him which has the key of David,
which opens where no man's shuts, and shuts, where no man's opens, which only can
open that sealed Book.

And therefore as another father says, God has not wrapped up these high
mysteries of Scripture in such obscurity, as euying man's knowledge; but that
the study and industry of man might be the more profitably exercised, adding
withal that no man ought to be too much dejected, that he cannot understand
every mystery therein: for that there are some things, that to be ignorant
of, though they may somewhat subject thy presumption, will not endanger thy
salvation; for that all things are not necessary to be perceived of all. And
therefore according to Saint Austins rule, if thou love the law of God,
manifest it in reuerencing that which thou understand, not as in practicing
that which thou do understand, and thou shall have first wherewithal to
drink, after stronger meat to eat, and possess thy self patience, knowing
that whilst we are in this mortal flesh, we can perceive but as in a mirror,
yet that hereafter we shall be translated to a higher Academy, where God
himself shall be our Schoolmaster, and then we shall see him as he is, where
all shadows vanish, and the substance only is embraced, where being ascended
we shall know the truth of all, either argued or debated of in this sublunary
religion.

Q. What were those three couiunctions Saint Barnard so wonderfully wondered
at, the like whereof neither can nor shall ever be done again upon the face of
the earth?

A. Three works, three conjunctions has that omnipotent Majesty made in the
assumption of our flesh, wonderfully singular, and singularly wonderful, even
such as the very Angels were amazed at: 1. Conjunction of God and man. 2. Of a
Mother and a Virgin. 3. Of Faith, and the heart of man to believe this.


Q. What is the greatest of these conjunctions?

A. The first conjunction is wonderfully great, wherein is conjoined earth and
God, Majesty and infirmity, so much vileness, and so much purity; for
nothing is more precious then God nothing more vilde then dirt. ^. Nothing
less wonderful; for by the ear of man was it never heard, nor by the heart
of man ever conceived, that a virgin should bring forth and become a Mother,
and that there should be a Mother that should yet remain a vir-Virgin. The
third is inferior to both first and second, but not less strong that man's
heart should have power to believe this.

Q. How many several ways since the beginning of the world has God brought
forth man?

A. Four ways according to Anselmus, which are these: 1. A man without the
help of either man or woman, as Adam. 2. A woman out of man, without the help
of woman, as Eve. 3. By both man and woman, according to the common course of
Nature. 4. Of woman wit hout man as Christ.

Q. By the conjectures of the learned, for how many thousand of years from the
Creation was the world ordained to continue?

A. Six thousand years, because that as in 6. days the world and all that
therein is was created, and so God rested the seventh, so thereupon it is
probably collected that in 6000. years, which are but as 6. days in Gods
account, it shall again be dissolved: after which shall follow an everlasting
Sabbath of rest; of this opinion were many of the Fathers, and also other more
modern writers, as that there should be two thousand years before the Law, and
two thousand years under the Law, and two thousand years under the Gospel.

Q. But of this what shall I determine.

A. Let this Doctrine then suffice thee and all other good Christians, that we
are religiously to expect the end of the world, and coming of Christ, and so
daily expecting prepare our selves thereafter, but not curiously to pry into
those hidden and unrevealed secrets, not imparted to men or Angels.

Q. Why almost among all Nations is the name of God expressed in 4 letters.

A. The learned do agree, that this is done partly from the imitation of the
Hebrews, but more especially from the mere providence of God, which otherwise
could not be, as among the Latins it is Deus, the Egyptians Theut, the
Persians Syro, the Hebrews Adny, the Greeks Theos, the Arabians Alla, the
French Dieu, the Germans Got. And withal to signify that as his name
consists of 4 letters, so his mercy has a relation thereunto in that he will
have his elect gathered unto him from out of the four quarters of the world.

Q. What are those things that cannot be defined.

A. The Schoolmen affirm, God for his exceeding formosity and beauty, Sin
for the exceeding deformity and loathsomeness, the first matter for the
exceeding informitie an^ inexistency.

Q. Which number is the most vital among men.

A. Eight, because 8. souls were only preserved in the Arc, and 8. only in
the Scripture mentioned to be raised from death to life.

Q. Since Adam and Methusalem lived 900. and odd years, why did God never
suffer any to accomplish 1000.

A. The most of the learned are of opinion, that this is not without some deep
mystery, and which may be partly because a 1000. years has a type of
perfection, God never suffered any to fulfill it, to show that there is no
absolute perfection in this world.

Q. What is man and his perfection in this world.

A. Man in this world is, as he were the center or epitome of all creatures;
for several creatures live in several elements, as water-fowles and fishes in
the water, Birds in the air, Beasts upon the earth: But man enioyes all
these; with his head he looks up to Heaven, with his mind he looks into
Heaven, with his feet he walks upon the earth, his arms keep the air, as
the bird flies, with his eyes he contemplateth heaven and earth, and all
sublunarie things, he has an essence as other bodies, produces his seed as
Plants, his bones are like stones, his blood like the springs in the channels
of the earth, his hair like the grass the ornament of the earth, etc. he
lives as a Plant, flourishes as a Tree, for a man is a tree turned upward, his
feet are like the boughs, his head like the root: Beside, some creatures are
only, as Stars; some are and live, as Plants; some are, live, and have
sense, as Beasts, some understanding, as Angels: all these concur in man;
Est, viuit, sentit, intelligit.

Q. What three things are those, that he which often remembers shall seldom
do amiss.

A. That above there is an Ear, that hears all; an Eye, that beholds all; a
Book, wherein all our offenses are written.

Whereunto may likewise be annexed as a second memento, and not inferior to
the first, being S. Anselmes observation upon the last day.

Where at thy right hand shall thy sins be accusing.
At thy left hand infinite Devils expecting.
Under thee the furnace of hell buruing.
Above thee an angry Judge.
Within thee thy conscience tormenting.
Without thee the world flaming.
Where only the just shall be saved.
Whence to fly, it will be impossible.
To continue still intolerable.
Therefore, while time is, prevent that, that in time will be: for as one
says, If it be not prevented, it will be repented.

Q. Who was he that never laughed, but sometimes wept, as we read in the
Scriptures?

A. Christ: of whom we read that he three times wept. 1. When Lazarus was dead.
2. Over Jerusalem. 3. Upon the Cross, when he delivered up his spirit with
cries and tears.


Q. There be four duties we chiefly we, and among all other are especially
bound to pay, and which be they?

Debemus Deo timorem. Patriae amorem. Parentibus honorem. Proximo fauorem.
To God fear. To our Country Love. To our Parents Honor. To our Neighbor
favor.


A Rule for our Life.
So Learn as if Thou should live always. so Live as if Thou should die to
morrow.


Suspice coelum, despice mundum, respice finem.
Look up to heaven, despise the world respect thine end.
Q. There are three especially unhappy in the Law of the Lord, and who are
those?

A. 1. He that knows and teaches not. 2. He that teaches and does not. 3. He
that is ignorant, and yet learneth not.


Q. Was there any writing before the flood preserved, notwithstanding the
Deluge after it.

A. It Is answered; We have no writing before the flo^d, yet S. Jude, does
somewhat insinuate of the writing of Henoch; and Josephus and others write,
that he erected two pillars, the one of brick, and the other of stone, wherein
he wrote of the twofold destruction of the world, the one by water, and the
other by fire, which by Tradition was preserved to the days of the Apos^les.

Q. What was the sentence according to the opinions of the learned, that Christ
wrote with his finger in the dust of the pauement of the Temple.

A. Some think it was the same that he spoke, He that is innocent, let him
throw the first stone at her; others think it was this, Festucam in oculo
cernis, trabem in tuo non vides, Thou see the mote in thy brothers eye, but
not the beam in thine own.

Q. What Book did Samuel write besides those two in Scripture that bear his
name.

A. A Book of the office and institution of a King.

Q. What Books did Solomon write beside those extant in Canonical writ.

A. Solomon wrote three thousand Parables, and five thousand songs, besides
that ingens opus of the nature ofal Herbs, Trees, and Plants, from the Cedar
to the Hyssop upon the wall, al destroyed by the Babylonians at the destruction
of the Temple.

Q. Whether God created hurtful creatures, as Scorpions, Serpents, and such
like.

A. It is answered, there are some that seem evil unto us, which yet are not
simply evil of themselves, for no substance is evil of it self, and the
Scripture teaches us, that Serpents were created among other creatures, yet
God pronounces that all were good; but that some creatures are now hurtful to
man, that is not to be attributed to the first creation, but to the second
after the lapse or fall of man, who if he had persisted in his duty to God, no
creature should have been offensive unto him, but over them he should have
borne a willing subjection. For God made nothing evil neither does he make
sickness, barrenesse lamenesse, or the like, but they rather have deficient
then efficient causes, as the want of health, his good creature, is the cause
of sickness, the withdrawing of light, the interposition of darkness, and so of
the like.

Q. What name was that among the Jews so highly reverenced, that it was only
lawful for the Priests to name it, and that but at the solemn festiuals.

A. The name Jehovah a word consisting but of seven letters and yet of all the
five vowels, according to this verse: Quinque simul iunctis constas vocabilus
vna,
Dictio, and est magno maius in orb nihil.
Five vowels joined together make a name,
In Heaven or Earth none greater then the same.


Q. What of all other are held to be things of the greatest difficulty in
Scripture to believe, and of the greatest opposition to sense to conceive.

A. Some think the creation of the world, some the conservation thereof, and
all creatures therein; some the Incarnation of the Son of God, others the
resurrection of the flesh: Besides these, there are some that think, Noah's Ark, and the union and preservation of so many diverse creatures in it, so many
months fed, ordered, and at last safely delivered out.

Q. In how many chapters does consist the Canon of the old Testament?

A. In 777. The Jewish Rabbis have collected to be in the Books of the Law,
verses 5845. In the Prophets, 9294. In Haggai, 8064. In the Books of
Apocripha, chap. 173. In the new Testament, chap. 260. Malachy which was the
last of the Prophets stands as the Porch between the Old and New Testament,
whereat as Tertullian says, Iudaisme ends and Christianity begins.

Q. Where was God before he made the world.

A. Saint Austin notes this as vain curiosity to enquire, as it is to demand
what he did before he made the same, and yet to give the curious some
satisfaction, to the first he answers, that God dwelt in himself, at himself,
and was God to himself: and for the second he was not idle, in that he chose
us before the world, and purposed in himself the creation of all things. But
he that will farther busy himself to pry into this Arc, how all things
could be made by his word, why God made choice of a remnant, and rejected the
greatest part, and the like, let such questions, say we, amaze the curious, and
humble the wise, and let it be thought a sin in us to have a tongue to
speak, or a heart to think, where the Spirit of God had not a pen to write;
and let such be answered as Saint Austine answered one curious in such
questions: That he ordained a hell for such kind of inquirers, and as Euclid
the Philosopher answered one so dema^ding, what thou asks (quoth he) I am
ignorant, but this I know, God is angry with such kind of inquirers.

Q. There is a thing which is the Temple it self, the Altar, the Priest, he to
whom it was offered, he that was offered, and who was that.

A. A strange collection proposed and resolved by them that have sweat in the
trau^ll of the Scripture, and verified of him, of whom alll the Prophets bear
witness, that is Christ; for in a Sacrifice four things are to be
considered. 1. To whom it it is offered 2. by whom. 3. what is offered. 4. for
whom it is offered, which all have their concurrence on him.

Q. Whether did the Cross bear Christ, or Christ bear the Cross.

A. It did both and both at once, and in bearing him it bore all our
iniquities; and therefore as a Father prayed so I desire that he may be wholly
fastened in my heart, that was wholly fastened on the cross for me. Inter
carnifices sancto pendente latrone,
Par est poenatrium sed dispar causa Deorum.
Hi mundo sunt quippe rei pro crimine multo:
Huic reus est mundu^ saluatus sanguine iusto.
Between two thieves, the just condemnd to die,
Did hang where al like punishment did try
Though for a cause unlike, they both death tryde
For sins in the world, he for the worlds sins did.
Of which one wittily adds, that if ever goodness were in the midst of
evil, then it was.

Q. What were the first and last words that Christ spoke in this world.

A. The first was fiat, let there be, and after he added increase and
multiply: The last words were Father into thy hands I commend my spirit.

Q. Whether is it more necessary that Christ should be in heaven, or in the
Sacrament as the Papists would have him.

A. In heaven witness Christ himself, when he says, It is expedient that I
go away from you, for unless I go the comforter will not come.

Q. What wicked man was that, that for a most vilde price sold to others what
he had not in his power, and yet what was more precious then all the world
besides.

A. Judas that sold Christ; of whom as a Father writes, his death was
answerable to his life, in that he was hanged being a thief, that he bu^st
being a traitor, etc.

Q. A certain godly man from a wicked, required a gift that was more
excellent then all the world, and what was that.

A. Joseph of Arimathea when he begged of Pylate Christ's body.

Q. What part of the body of man does God chiefly require for his service.

A. The heart, that inward triangle of love for which he calls for in these
words, My son give me thy heart, and in another place, this people honor me
with their mouths, but their hearts are far from me. To which purpose is
here annexed a fable of a certain Hermit that in his devotion besought God
that he might know what worship he required chiefly, who was answered by the
Oracle in these words: Da mediam Lunam, Solemn, simul, and Canis iram.
Give the half Moon, the Sun, and the anger of the Dog.
He good old man hearing this oenigma, began to be perplexed to think of
these impossibilities, as how he should be able to pull the Moon from the
sky, though the lowest of all the Planets, yet too high for his reach or
capacity, much less the Sun in a higher Sphere and more difficult, until
it was thus explaned to him.

Give the half Moon that is C The Sun that is O the Dogs anger. that is R
And that is the heart a gift that God requires.

Q. Into how many faiths is the world divided in.

A. The world is divided into four parts, and four Religions possess the
same, and with much diversity in every one, for as the saying is, how many
heads so many opinions, which four are Iudaisme, Christianity, Mahomatism and
Paganism: Therefore it was the good counsel of Vincentius, where he said we
are not to sway religion to what fancy we would have her, but we must be
swayde by her whither she leads us; whereupon we conclude it unadvisedly
spoken by an Emperor who walking in his garden, answered one that had
endeavored to root out many sects out of his land, that their diversity
delighted him as the diversity of his flowers to look upon, and that seeing
every man made a religion to his humor; there would as soon be an unity
therein, as a truce between the wind and the Sea.

Q. To what is an Hypocrite most fitly compared.

A. To a candle that carries a fair light or show to others, but wastes it
self for his vain glory to the socket: Beside every hypocrite is said to have
the voice of Jacob, but the heart and hands of Esau.

Q. What was the difference between Caine and Abels Sacrifice.

A. Thus much has been observed by the Poet, where Abell says, Sacram pingue
dabo, nec macrum sacrificabo.
My fat to holy use I Will give,
And not my lean: they still shall live.


But every hypocrite says thus with Caine.

Sacrificabo macrum, nec dabo pingue sacrum.
My lean shall to the Alter fly,
And not my fat that ought to die.
Q. Whether were the heathen Gods or heathen men more ancient.

A. Certainly the men that made the Gods.

Q. In what place was it that the voice of on creature purced all the cares in
the world.

A. In Noah's Ark.

Q. By what precept was it that Philip king of Macedon, became something
humbled in his thoughts after his victories when nothing else could admonish
him.

A. By the wise counsel of one of his Captains, who noting his ambition; bad
him measure his own shadow and he should find it no longer then it was
before.

Q. By what means came Sesostris a king of the Egyptians somewhat to pull down
his ambitious plumes of vanity and pride.

A. This king Sesostris, as stories mention, having conquered diverse kingdoms,
and led captive their kings vassailed four of them to the service of his
horses, to draw his chariot, where ever as the wheel turned, one of them
looking back ever, earnestly noted it, insomuch that Sesostris perceiving it,
demanded his reason therefore, who told him that he observed the mutability of
fortune, in the present subiecting and sudde^ advancing of first the one part
and the^ the other, how the highest came presently to be lowest, and the lowest
wheeled presently to be highest, and al without intermission or stay, hereupon
Sesostris remembering himself, and pondering his saying, presently vnyoked his
kings, and would no more so be drawn.

Q. How became the tirant Hiero some what to contemplate of the majesty of God.

A. Upon his command to Symonides the wise Poet to discourse what God was, when
he required, first for respite one day, after that two days; after that 4.
days: whereupon Hiero wo^dering why he took such pause, required his reason,
he told him; the more he entered into consideration thereof to instruct his
inabilitie, the more unable he found himself to instruct another or to
conceive aright what God was himself.

Q. Who are those that cannot, will not, may not, do rightly understand.

A. There are certain, that neither understand God, nor can understand him and
those are dead men.

2 There are others that may understand, but care not, and they are wicked men.

3 There are another sort that desire to understand but cannot, and these are
fools.

There are a fourth sort that do both understand and make use, and these are
godly.

And therefore it is the wise saying of a father, who asked this question, art
thou a Christian? then it behooues thee to contemn that that seems to be and
is not, and to embrace that that seems not to be, and yet is.

Q. One asked a king of the Egyptians what was the most beautiful thing in the
world, And he

A. Answered, The light which distinguishes all colors, creatures, and and
beauties in the world, and is it self the most goodly comfort and object of
that most excellent sense the eye, and therefore as one says: When thou
beholdest the light of Heaven that first and blessed creature of Gods hand,
that in a minute transfuseth it self throughout all this lower Region, think of
the testimony of Saint John, that God is light, essential lightness, in whom
there is no darkness.

Q. What day was that that the like was never before, nor ever shall be
hereafter

A. When Iosuah prayed in the midst of the battle, so that the Sun stood at a
stay, and hasted not toward his Western period, so long that, as Justin
Martyr says, it made the day thirty six hours long.

Q. Of what wood was the Temple of Solomon built, dedicated and consecrated
unto God.

A. Of Cedars or Sychim wood, and that by the command of God himself, and some
reason thereof may be this: 1. For that the Cedar tree is always green,
odorous, and sweet, neither will it bend; but support it self upright with it
own strength. 2. For that is truly verified of it that is spoken of Irish wood
that neither worms nor moathes breed in it, nor live near unto. Thirdly, for
that it is neither massy nor ponderous to load or oppress the walls, but
strong and light.

Q. Of what wood was the Cross of Christ made, whether of one entire tree or
of several kinds of woods.

A. The cross of Christ as we have it by tradition, was made of three diverse
sorts of woods, which were Cypress, Pine, and Cedar, all significant, and not
without their mystery: the Cypress being an Emblem of dissolution and
death; for being cut, or wounded, it withers and wastes away. The Cedar of
immortality, because it withstands the consumption and wastes of time to a
datelesse perpetuity. The Pine, a nauigable wood that floates upon the waters:
and therefore the most useful for ships to signify that death should have
no power, nay less, to ouerwhelme him, then the Pine is subject unto drowning
by the violence of the waters.

Q. What is thought to be the occasion that Christ cursed the Figge^ tree
being barren, since it was neither a reasonable creature nor disposed of it
own seasons, and especially being not then the time of bearing.

A. This is thought not to be without many deep mysteries, one whereof
especially is conceived, to note out the hatefulness of Hypocrisy that seems
to floorish with displayed leaves but wants the true fruits of faith, which
are good works and charity.

Q. Why that same tree in Paradise (without doubt good and very good, for all
that God created was very good) was forbidden Adam to taste.

A. Many wonder hereat, and one of the Fathers in this admiration have brought
in Adam thus expostulating the case himself. If it be good, why may not I
touch it? if it be evil, what does it in Paradise. But to this S. Austin and
diverse of the Fathers do answer, that the command of God in that, was rather
for the trial of his obedience, then for any other danger that would have
grown to Adam by the eating thereof.

Q What tree was that, that the same day sprang up and perished.

A. Jonas Gourd.

Q. What trees in the Scripture are especially called the trees of God.

A. It is thought to be those that grow forth of their own accord, as the
Fur tree, the Cedar, and the wild Olive tree.

Q. Is there a distinction of sexes among trees.

A. Pliny a most certain Author, attributes both sexes and wedlock unto
trees: and first, he instanceth upon the Palm tree, the love between who^ is
such, that if the female be far di^ioyned from the masculine it becomes
barren and without fruit: if the male have his bows broken by any accident,
the female becomes desolate and droopes like a widow.

Q. What part in trees are the most strongest.

A. Those that grow and shoot toward the North.

Q. Of the apple of Paradise, or Adams apples, what is related of them.

A. That those apples so called are of exceeding sweetness, when they come to
their full maturitie and ripeness, and are called of some Musi, or musk
Apples: and it is thus observed, that what part soever of them you cut, there
appears a crucifixe in it, and it is reported for a truth, or rather
coniectured upon pregnant probabilities, that the forbidden tree of the
knowledge of good and evil was of that likeness.

Q. What apple was it that Adam in eating drew sin and death upon himself and
his whole posterity.

A. It is uncertain and cannot rightly be known, for the Scripture mentions it
not, yet some writers to satisfy the curious, thus bring in their arguments,
some think it was a Persian apple, that at this day grows in the East where
Paradise was situate, some think it was a golden apple that was sweet to taste,
and delightful to behold; some think it was a cherry, some a pear, but all
these are but uncertain; but this is certain: Adam primus homo damnabat
seculo pomo

Q. How many ribs has every man and woman.

A. This question has bred some controversy among the learned, for there are
that affirm, ever since the creation of the woman, that Adam lost a rib from
his side, the man has one rib less the^ the woman, and less then he had at
first: Now there are of the other side that affirm, and that truly, that there
are in either side, of either sex as well of the man as of the woman 12. ribs:
for that rib of which Eve was formed, was peculiarly made by God, to that
purpose, neither was it a bare bone but had flesh likewise. And therefore since
from earth and the slime of the earth, and from a bone, from that earth all
posterities are descended, though some be rich and some be poor, some be
noble, and some base, yet they are all but of one metal and descent, as to
that purpose follows, Aurea nobilitas, luteam si bestiat ollam,
Non ideo sequitur, hanc minus esse lutam.
If golden titles guild an earthen pot,
That its less earth for that it follows not.


And concerning the pride of clothing, this admonishes us that they should
not be abused to that excess, but rather for our humiliation, the sad
remembrancers of the fall of man, for Adam in his innocence wore no clothing.

Pellitus nunc es, fueras sine bestibus ante,
Mudus eras purus, crimen amictus habes.
Q. What seed of all other is the least, yet brings forth the greatest tree.

A. Christ himself expresses this of the Mustard seed, of whom it is reported
in some countries to be trees of that bigness, that they yield a shadow to
sit under.

Q. What kind of men are most rare in the kingdom of heaven.

A. Some say hypocrites, for when Christ threatens destruction to the wicked,
he says, their portion shall be with hypoccrites: some say Usurers. But the
German proverb says, Princes which are as rare in heaven, as venison in a
poor man's kitchen, but this is always to be understood of wicked and
irreligious Princes.

Q. Who are those that are called the sons of Thunder.

A. Saint James and Saint John the Apostles, and the reason of their attribute
is, for that they affright the wicked rouse up the slothful, drawing al^ to an
admiration of their highness, from whence it is as Saint Bede writes of Saint
John that son of thunder, that he thundered so high, that if he had
thundered a little higher, all the world could hardly have comprehended him.

Q. Who were those that found not a Physician to cure them being living, but
to raise them being dead?

A. Christ, Lazarus, daughters of Iayrus, the widows son, Euticus, Dorcas
and others.

Q Who were those that lived in the earth and never dyed.

A. Henoch and Elias.

Q. Who, and how many were those that had their names foretold and spoken of
before they were borne.

A. Ismael, Isaac, Joshua, Cyrus, and John the Baptist.

Q. Who was he that prophesied before he was borne.

A. John Baptist in the womb of his mother, of whom S. Austine says, that
having not yet seen the heaven, nor the earth, yet he knew the Lord of both.

Q. What issue was that that was elder then his mo^her.

A. Christ, to which purpose the Poet thus wittily follows it.

Behold the Father is the daughters son,
The bird that built the nest is hatched therein
The old of time an hour has not out run,
Eternal life to live does new begin, etc.
Q. Who was he that seeking his fathers Asses found a kingdom.

A. Saul.

Q. Whether of the two companions, the soul or the body have the greater hand
in sin, and why for the sin of the one they should be both together
jointly punished.

A. It is thus answered by a Similitude, a Master of a familily commits his
Orchyard to two keepers, of the which the one is lame, and the other blind,
where this cripple that had his eye sight, spies out certain goulden Apples
hanging upon a tree delightful to his sight and contentiue to his taste if he
might but obtain them, he not able to pluck them, relates to his fellow how
pleasant the fruit seems to him that he looks upon with his eyes, and how
willingly he would taste if he had but legs to bear him to them: To whom the
blind answers, and I would not stick to pull the apples if I had but thy eyes
to see them, and so at last between this debate they agree that he that had
his eyes should ride upon the others shoulders that had his legs, this being
done, they were able to pluck the fruit and did eat, and having eaten, the
master of the Orchyard enters and finds his damage, enquires by whom it was
done, and they both confess their act and furtherance, how the one used his
feet, and the other his eyes, and so they did it between them. The master
finding it so, punishes both with one equal punishment as they had both
deserved. After which Example does this more wise Governor exempt neither body
nor soul, because they both lend their furtherance to sin, and being thus
both guilty, thus he punishes them inseparably for ever.

Q. But why should eternity punish that which is committed in time, and
oftentimes but a short time.

A 1. Because the sin though it be committed in time, is against an infinite
Majesty. Secondly, because God judges according to the wilful inclination of a
sinner, that would sin eternally if he might live eternally, and to his
indefatigallibent of wickedness, God answers him with everlasting punishments.

Q. Whether do fools bring more profit to wise men, or wisemen to fools.

A. Cato says, that fools bring more profit to wise men, because wisemen
seeing their folly, they endeavor to avoyde it: whereas fools on the contrary
make no use of the wisdom of the wise by reason of their folly.

Q. Wherefore do Serpents since they hate all mankind, yet chiefly bend
their forces against women.

A. By reason of the perpetual enenmitie put by God between the woman and the
serpent, and the seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent. Of which one
thus writes concerning the blessed seed of the woman that broke this head of
the Serpent.

Quos anguis dirus tristi de funere strauit.
Hos Sanguis mirus Christi de vulnere lauit.
And as another to the like effect.

Anguis peccatum and mortem generauit in horto
Sanguis iustitiam and vita^ reparauit in ara.
1
Where the dire serpent brought in wounds and death:
Christ his by blood has heald, restord our breath.
2
Both sin and death to our succeeding loss,
The serpent gave in garden to mankind:
But Christ restorde again upon his cross
Justice and life whereby we ransom find.
And as another to that purpose, Soluit pendendo quod Ada^ co^misit e dendo.

Q. How is death proved to be nothing to us

A. Thus when death is, then we are not, and when we are, then death is not,
and therefore death is nothing to us.

Q. How is our life proved to be a something almost depending upon nothing.

A. Thus the years that are past are gone, and those we have not, the future
we are not certain of, and therefore boast not of, the ^ime present is but a
moment and that is the brittle thread it depends upon. And therefore to this I
add with a father, happy is he that in this his short minute lays hold upon
Christ's mercies, and even whilst it is called to day, and he may be found
that bore all our infirmities upon his cross. O Lord, says S. Bernard, I may
walk about the heaven, and the earth, the sea and the dry land but I shall find
thee no where so soon as on the cross, there thou feedst, there thou sleepst,
etc. And as he further adds, so may every sinner in this kind, concerning his
unworthiness and his sins, either to seek or find him.

Non sum laeta seges, lolium sum treste sedero:
Me tamen in messem, collige Christ tuam
English.
No fruitful field am I, no blessed wheat,
But cursed Cockle to weed out, not eat,
Yet though I am this out cast, lost, and sold
To sin yet Lord reduce me to thy fold.
Q. What is the careless liver compared unto, and most fitly.

A. To him that seeing his face in the glass, goes away and either forgets his
deformity, or cares not to amend it.

A good and short rule to meditate.

Quid sis, quid fueris, quid eris, semper meditaris.
Always meditate what thou art, what thou wast, what thou shall be.
The young man's question to the old man, concerning life and what it is to live.

Dic venerande senex humanum viuere quid sit. The old man answers.

Principium vitae dolor est, dolor exitus nigens,
Sic medium dolor est, viuere quis cupiat.
English:

The beginning of man's life is grief and misery, the end of it grief and
misery, and the middle noting but grief and misery, which conioynes both the
middle and end, and makes one complete mass of sorrow of all, of which we may
say, as one says: What joy to live on earth is found,
Where grief and cares do still abound.
And therefore the more firmly to fix this exhortation, again he says, young
men hear me an old man, that being a young man heard old men, and have both by
relation and experience found the truth hereof.

Q. What sin is that which by making

Q. What sin is that which by making others contemptible in a man's own eyes,
makes his owner contemptible in the eyes of God.

A. Pride, a sin so much beaten against by the learned of all ages, that it is
admired how it has preserved a life so flourishing to these times of ours.

A Pythy aenigma whereof to that purpose is here infixed.

O SVPER Be Mors SVPER Te Cur SVPER Bis Deus SVPER Nos Negat SVPER Bis vitam
SVPER nam. Englished. O proud man

Further motives for humility.

If these deiect thee not, then consider a little further with me whither thy
life will lead thee which is to death, and whither death will carry thee but
to judgment.

But before we come to speak of the judgment, let us a little consider death.

Mors antror su^ retror su^ considerata. Death considered backwards and
forwards.

Mors solet innumeris morbis abru^pere vita M
Omnia mors rostro deuorat ipsa fu O
Rex princeps, sapie^s, seruus, stultus miser, aege R
Sis quicunque belis, paluis et vmbra eris S
Englished.
The many sorrows that are heirs to breath
And twins adioyn'd to it are freed by death
With whose impartial since, the wise the just
Princes and kings are al mowed down to dust
Q. What is there concerning the last judgment.

Iudicabit iudices, iudex genera lis
Ibi nihil proderit dignitas papa lis
Sieve sit episcopus, sieve Cardina lis
Reus conde^nabitur nee dicetur qua lis
Ibi nihil proderit multa allega re
Neque accipere neque replica re
Nee ad Apostolicam sedem appella re
Reus condemnabitur been sciens qua re
Cogitate miseri qui and qualis es it is
Quid in hoc iuditio dicere potes it is
Quo nec erit codici locus nec diges it is
Christus Iudex, Demo^ actor, reustes it is
Englished.
Before this Judge all Judges must appear
Despite their greatness dignity or place
For to be iudgd, as they have judged here,
Where fear nor friendship Justice shall out face.
Excuses there to allege will but vain,
As to appeal unto the sea of Rome,
For there the guilty, though he much do fame,
Shall not pervert his justice nor his doom.
Weigh then must wretched man thine estate,
How in this judgment thou-maist stand upright.
Where shall no book be opened to relate.
But even the conscience shall it self indight.
Q. What shall be the last words that shall be spoken in this world?

A. Come ye blessed, Go ye cursed, etc. Aspera vox ite, sed vox benedicta
venite, Ite malis vox est apta, venite bonis. From which bitter word, I pray
with S. Bern. Deliver me O Lord in that day.

Q. What language according to the conjectures of some learned, shall we speak
in the world to come.

A. The Hebrew, a language that Christ himself spoke in this world, and the
most ancient and most sacred of all other, and which was not changed at the
confusion of Babel; the next whereto is the Greek as most rich, then the Latin,
most copious.

Q. Which of all the Psalms of David is the longest, and which the shortest.

A. The shortest is the 117. the longest the 119. the one consisting of 175.
ver. reckonning 4. lines where the meeter ends to a verse, as the other of 2.
stanzes.

Q. Which of all the Psalms of David is the most mournful and compassionate

A. The Psalm 77.

Q. What Psalm is that the wicked, nay the very devils themselves, according
as Athanasius writes, tremble and quake to hear, read or recited.

A. 68. Psalm, Let God arise and see his enemies scattered.

How many Innes or lodging did the Son of God use in this world.

Prima domus Christi, fuit alnus virginis almae,
Altera praesepe, cruxtertia, quarta sepulchrum.
Englished.
Our Saviors first house, was the Virgins womb:
Second his stall, third cross, and fourth his tomb.
testifies unto another, that it waxes old as does a Garment, or the birth
of a woman, and experience it self finds that both in the fruitfulness,
strength, and operation of herbs, plants, and vetigables, the defect and
decay whereof is daily seen, and the lessening of the operation and virtue,
most sensibly perceived in the languishing dolor of many incurable diseases.

Q. Wherefore do the Jews break the glass, in which the bride and
bridegroom drink.

A. To admonish them that all things are transitory and brittle, as that
glass, and therefore they must be moderate in their pleasures.

Q. Wherefore have all Jews a rank smell or savor.

A. Some think because they are of a bad digestio^, others think because they
use not labor, nor exercise, but live by usury, some think the wrath of God
upon them the immediate cause, howsoever they have bin a people strangly
dispersed over the face of the earth, slaughtered and tormented in all countries
France, Spain, Portugal, Germany, and England, some of their offenses were
washing and clipping the kings coin, circu^cising and stealing of christian
children, and pricking them full of holes for their blood, which they co^ceited
would cure the leprosy and rank smell both of their breath and skin. In king
John's time they were fined at 1000. marks a man, upon penalty of not payment to
lose their teeth; an old Jew had 6. of his teeth pulled out because he refused
to pay his fine. Many 1000. of them were slaughtered in diverse kingdoms, upon
a rumor spread, that they had poisoned all the wells in those countries, and
where ever they live at this day among Christians they live in subjection and
slavery to them they most hate.

Q What country in the world is the most desolate and solitary.

A. The country of the Sodomites where Satan wanne so much ground that
whereas according to Strabos description, stood 13. cities, situate upon one
of the most fruitful soyles in the whole earth; even a second Eden, or garden
of Paradise for pleasure and beauty, whence sprung those clustering grapes from
those vines of Engeddi, so renowned in Scripture, stands not now one of those
cities to magnify her self above her fellows; but all with Sodom, the Lady
of them all, desolated and destroyed, not one stone left upon another, nor no
other witness of their sometimes being, more then the dry smell of fire and
brimstone the heavy iusticers of God that destroyed the^, and for the fruit of
that vine that made glad the heart of man, in the^ perverted from his true use
to sin and dru^ke^nes, are only found now apples of a beauteous appearance, but
touch them and they are but ashes, and of a sulphurous savor, an air of so
poisonous a vapor above, that as Historiographers write, stifles the fowls
that fly over it, that they fall down dead, and the fishes likewise in that
dead sea under it poisoned as they fall in or flote from the silver streams of
Jordan, that thence empty themselves into that sulphurous lake.

There are four kind of men that lay claim to their own or others, and but
one rightly, and these are they. 1. The first says that which is mine is
thine; and that which is thine, is mine, and this is the Idiot. 2. The second
says, that which is mine is mine, and that which is thine is thine, and this
is the indifferent man. 3. The third says, that which is mine is thine, and
that which is thine is thine own, and this is the godly man. 4. The fourth
says that which is thine is mine, and that which is mine is mine own, and
this is the wicked man.


Christ all and without Christ nothing.

Possidet ille nihil, Christum qui perdidit vnum.
Perdidit ille nihil, Christum qui possidet vnum.
Q. What do we owe unto our neighbor.

A. Three things, that is to say: nostrum nosse in consiliis. nostrum posse in
subsidiis. nostrum velle in desideriis.
To counsel, to assist, to desire his good.

Three things are most precisely necessary for every Christian man, and what
they are. Faith without the which we ca^ not please God A good name without the
which we ca^ not please our neighbor A good cons. without the which we ca^ not
please our selves.


Of the latter which one writes: O vita secura vbi est conscientia pura.
O life secure, that has the conscience pure


Q Why do young men many times say they are younger then they are, and old men
they are older then they are.

A. This does youth, that he may seem to preserve the flower of his youth the
longer: this does age to regaine more reverence and authority, but either
foolishly.

Q. He that learnes from youth who does he resemble?

A. He that eats grapes before they are ripe, and drinks wine before it be
settled.

Q But who does he resemble that draws his precepts from old men.

A. He that eats ripe grapes, and drinks old wine, for seniores sunt saniores,
incipientes, insipientes. And likewise: Quae laboriosa fuere inuentuti studia,
ea suntiucu^da senectuti otia. Whose studies were not painful in youth, their
pleasures are more perfect in age.

and truly, she lends the more nourishment, when to the other but as Bastards
she withdraws it from them.

Q. Why are Cats and Whelps brought forth blind?

A. Because that drawing near to their maturity and ripeness, they wound and
pierce the Matrixe with their claws, whereupon by their Dams they are hastily,
and imperfectly cast forth before their time.

Q. Why blood issues afresh from an old member or wound many days before made
and dried up, the murderer approaching near unto it?

A. Our Naturalists observe diverse Natural causes to the effecting of the
same, which for their uncertainty we meddle not withal, But thus conclude that
murder shall not be concealed, or unrevenged, and to that end that blood of
the slaughtered cries for vengeance at the hands of God, which God so
regarding, by that means answers to approve to man what often seems
doubtful.

Q Why does the affections of Parents run upwards to their children, and not
their children run downwards to them?

A. Even as the sap in the root of a tree ascends into the branches thereof,
and from the branches returns not into the root again, bu: runs out from
thence into seed, so parents love their children, but children so love not
their parents, but their affections runs forward to a further procreation:
whereby it comes to pass that a father with more willingness brings up ten
children, then ten children in his want sustaines one father.

Q How is it that there be many more women in the world then men?

A. Some think because women are exempted from the wars, from the seas,
imprisonment, and many other troubles and dangers of the land to be a reason
sufficient: So, others likewise there are that think this may be a reason,
because in the whole course of Nature, the worst things are ever most
plentiful, to which effect Plynie tells a Story of a certain fieldmouse, that
every month brings forth thirty, when the Elephant a creature of use and
service, is three years in travel with one.

Questions of the Earth.
Q. How many miles is the earth in circuit?

A. It is uncertain, and cannot rightly be defined, for as the Lord says,
who has measured the earth? yet the Mathematicians, and Astrologia^s are of
opinion that it is 4. times 5400. miles, but howsoever, in respect of the
Heavens they conclude it but a point, where every Star in the eight sphere is
esteemed bigger then the whole circumference thereof, where if the body of the
earth should be placed in the like splendour, it would hardly appear: yet, as
says a Father, we make this little so great a matter, so admiring this
miserable dust, on which not only we that are but dust and worms do creep,
but also many other worms and beasts besides, and yet this point is divided
among mortals into many points, and with fire and sword contended for and
sought, and many are so besotted therewith, that they would exchange for a mote
of this point, their part of Heaven, could they meet with a Chapman.

Q. Where is the Center or Middlemost part of the earth?

A. At Delphos as the Ancient would have it, to which purpose Strabo tells a
Story of two Eagles sent from Jove one from the East, and another from the
West, which met at Delphos; some are of opinion that it is near the Mount
Taurus; Ptolomeus thought it under the Equinoctial; Strabo at Pernassus a
mountain in Graecia; Plutarch was likewise of that opinion; But most of our
Ecclesiastical Writers have thought Judea to be the middle of the earth, and
Jerusalem the very point and Center, of which opinion, was Saint Hirom,
Hilarious, Lyra, and others according to the Psalm, God has wrought salvation
in the midst of the earth. That is, at Jerusalem by his passion: Yet in
respect of the whole world, there is no place properly the middle, because it
is round.

Q. What were the names of those two thieves that were crucified with Christ?

A. The Scripture mentions not, yet we have it by tradition, and from
history, that they were Dismas and Gesmas, Dismas the happy, and Gesmas the
unfortunate, according the Poet.

Gismas Damnatur, et Dismas ad Astraleuatur.

Q. Wherefore is the world round?

A. Because that it and all therein should not fill the heart of man being a
Triangle receptacle for the holy Trinity.

Q. How far is the East distant from the West.

A. A days journey, for the Sun passes between them every day.

Q. Whether is the water or the earth the greater?

A. It is answered, The water is bigger then the earth, the air bigger then
the water, and the fire bigger then the air.

Q. What comparison is there between the Sun and virtue?

A. So much that when as the Sun is at the highest, the lesser shadow does it
cast upon the earth, as the nearer thereto the greater; so virtue, the more
high and eleuate it is, the more it shines unseen, unless to it self and
such as participate in the fruition thereof: as that other the more vnreall and
declining, a greater but a worser light to the World.

A certain old Doctor of the Church compared the Old Testament and the New to
the Sun and the Moon, the Old borrowing light from the New, as the Moon from
the Sun, the New being wrapped up in the Old, and the Old revealed in the New.

Q. What is the highest of all things?

A. The Sea is higher then the earth, the air higher then the Sea, the fire
higher then the air, the Poles higher then the fire, God higher then the
Poles, higher then God nothing.

Q. What may the world most fitly be compared unto.

A. To a deceitful nut, which if it be opened with the knife of truth, nothing
is found within it, but vacuity and vanity.

Q. Si fugio sequitur, si me fugit illa sequentem, Res mira and varia est, dic
mihi queso quid est.

A. The Rainbow which seems to vary in colors according to the variation of
the mind of him that beholds it.

Q. What times are we chiefly to select to our selves for the ordering of our
affairs, and as the most conuement for that purpose.

A. The morning and the evening, in the morning to prepose what we have to
do. In the evening to consider what we have done, and effected, so that we may
husband our time in the early and wise disposal and accomplishment of our
affairs, and next,

That we may also have the first of these golden verses on our side, and the
other either frustrated or not strongly against us, which ensue as follows,
and first for our early rising and the morning.

Sanctificat, ditat, sanat, quoque surgere mane.
Englished.
To rise betimes has still been understood,
A means to enrich, make wise, preserve pure blood.
For the second.

Omnia sireputes transactaetempora vitae,
Velmale, veltemere vel nihil egit homo.
Englished.
Survey all times and there swift progress scan,
Rash, bad, or nothing in them's done by man.
Q. Whether throughout the whole year, are there more clear or cloudy days.

A. The dry are more then the Rayny, clear, more then the cloudy, according to
the Poet.

Si numeres anno soles, and nubila toto
Inuenies nitidum saepius esse diem.
Number the days the cloudy and the clear,
And thou shall find more fair then foul in the year.
Q. Whether are some days to be accounted unfortunate, or not, as in our
Callend. are set down.

A. They are not; as in the Countrimans Counselor here ensuing, is further to
that purpose related: And therefore Heracluus not without cause blames Hesiod.
for his distinction of days, good and evil, as if he were ignorant that all
days were alike. To which purpose is here annexed the noble courage and
resolution of Lucullus the Captain who with no less happy event then ripe
judgment being endangered by an enemy, and upon an ominous day, as his
soldiers termed it surprised, animated them on not withstanding to a famous
rescue and victory, with this persuasion that giving the onset with resolution
they should change a black day to a white, and the success was answerable.

Q. Whether is the custom lawful or not, that is commonly used for the
celebration of our birth days.

A. The Heathens in ancient times had this custom in great esteem and
reverence, and in some measure we may be imitators of the^, but how we should
celebrate ours, S. Austen has given us a Rule that is with thankfulness and
rejoicing in God, that he would have us born to be temples consecrate to him,
then truly rejoicing when we find in our selves a willingness and perfection
in some measure to go forward and endeavor the end of our creation, which is
the service of God, unto the which unless we refer our whole care we shall
have small cause of rejoicing, but rather to wish we had never been borne.

And most of the fathers are of opinion that none of all the Saints thus
celebrated their birth days, but Gentiles as Pharaoh, Herod, and the like.

From Heathens we descend a moment to the Pope and Rome.

Q. The Pope borrowes two prerogatives from the Apostles, and what are they?

A. Saint Peter's keys, and S. Paul's sword, that what he cannot enter into by
the one, he may enforce by the other, after the example of Julius the 2. Pope
of Rome, who leading his army along by the river Tyber, threw therein his
keys, saying, When Peter's keys profit us nothing, then come out Paul's sword,
and how it is drawn at this time, the world takes notice as against Venice,
France, the Duke of Ferrara, and in an hurly burly, unsheathed throughout all
Italy, The dog that with shut eyes barks against all truth.

Q. Tell me in the virtue of holy obedience what garments wear they that
preserved their wearers from the devil.

A. The garments of S. Francis, as the Papists tell us, as if the devil cold
not as well know a knave in a Friars habit, as in any other.

Q. What is the reason of all other things, that the Pope christens his Bells,
they having many times that pre-eminence before men.

A. That the sound of them might drive devils out of the air, clear the
skies, chase away storms and tempests, quench fires, and give some comfort to
the very dead, and the like.

To which purpose here the Bells ring out their own peale.
En ego Campana, nunquam denuntio vana,
Laudo deum verum, plebem voco, congrego elerum.
Diffunctos plango, viuos voco, fulmina frango,
Vex mea, vox vitae, voco vos ad sacra venite.
Sanctos collaudo, tonitrus fugo, funera claudo
Funera plango, fulgura frango, sabatha pango
Exicto Lentos, dissipo ventos, paco ceuentos.
Englished.
Behold my uses are not small
That God to praise assemblies call,
That break the thu^der, wail the dead
And cleanse the air of tempests bred,
With fear keep off the fiends of hell,
And all by virtue of my knell.
Q. What numb was the most fatal to Rome.

A. The sixth number, according to the verse ensuing.

Sextus Tarquinius, Sextus Nero, Sextus and iste scilitet Papa Alexander 6.
Semper sub sextis perdita Roma suit.
What other names or numbers to her woone.
In the sixth still she lost, was Rome undone.
Q. What inscription or motto was that (according to the fiction) which Martin
de Asello fixing over his Gate, by reason of the false povating of the Painter,
cost him his Bishopric.

A. Portapatens esto nulli, claudaris honesto.

Where the Painter mistaking himself made the point at nulli, and so made it:
Gate be open to none, but shut out all honest men.

The Pope riding that way before Martin had corrected his inscription, taking
it professed knavery, discarded him of his Bishopric (as it was a wonder) and
placed another in his house. Who kept the inscription still but only altered
the point and made it thus, Porta patens esto, nulli claudaris honesto.

Adding thereunto, Ob vnum punctum caruit Martinus Asello.
Gate open to the good and shut out none,
For one poor point is all from Martin gone.


Q. There is a certain thing that has not the art of numeration, neither
knows the order of time how it passes, and yet least we should be ignorant,
or the time should deceive us, it instructs us both honestly.

A. A Clock upon which on thus writes, Qui nescit quo vita modo volat audiat
bora,
Quam sit vitae breuis nos docet ille sonus.
He that would know how minutes steal away,
That piece up hours, that patch out the day.
This trusty watchman to supply our need,
Proclaims our lives short span in their swift speed.


Q. What are the natures and dispositions of the four Elements?

A. The earth is dry, the water cold, the air moist, and the fire hot.

Q Which is the highest of these Elements?

A. The fire, whose nature is ever to mount upward, and if you turn it
downward, it goes out thereupon. Thence proceeds Saint Chrysostomes
admiration, that the Rays of the Sun in nature hot, in quality glorious, does
shoot downward, so contrary to the fire.

Q What fire is that that sometimes follows, and sometimes flies away.

A. An Ignus fatuus, or walking fire (one whereof keeps his station this time
near Windsor) the pace of which is caused principally by the motion of the
air, for the swifter one runs, the swifter it follows, the motion of the air
enforcing it.

Q. What thing is that most useful and precious in the world, that produces
another of novse nor goodness at all.

A. Fire, from whence proceeds smoke, of which Lipsius writes, Ita te toll a
humo vt absis a fumo.

Q. What Coals do longest of all other preserne fire.

A. The Coals of Juniper of whom it is reported that they have kept fire a
whole year together, without supply or going out.

Q. What is that which being the heauiest, and hardest, of all things, yet
yields both to the extremity of fire and water.

A. A Stone.

Q. What stone of all other is the greatest wonder.

A. The flint stone that preserues fire within it, a wonderful secret and
benefit to man.

Q. What is that which being first water, afterward assumed the form of a
stone, and still retains it.

A. The Crystal congealed by frost.

Q. What stone is that that yields neither to the fire nor to the hammer.

A. The Adamant, which as our Naturalists observe, is dissolved only by goats
blood, whereupon S. Chrysostom writes, though the heart of a Sinner be more
harder then the Adamant, yet will the blood of Christ mollify it.

Q Whether have stones a vegitiue life or no.

A. This if we doubt our Pioners and Mineralists will resolve us, who find out
by experience that although Mineralles buried deep in the earth, yet through
diverse veins and channels, suck in moisture and nourishment, as do plants and
trees, and that they do likewise increase and grow, though in a slower
progression and degree, then other things is probable and certain.

Q. Is there a difference of prerogative among stones.

A. It Is answered there is, For the stone in the Altar has more honor then
the stone in the street.
For the one is kneeled unto with devotion, the other trodden on by the feet.


Q. Which are the most precious stones for man's use.

A. The two milstones of the mill,

Of which the one never stirs, and the other never lies still.
Q. What birds of all other are the most gentle, the most innocent.

A. The Dove for gentleness and simplicity, is commended in Scripture; for the
Dove is among birds, as the Sheep is among beasts, from whose kind, no hurt
proceeds to man, being a sotiable creature for his service, of whom it is
observed that he yields up his life for the sustenance of man, sobbing it out
with a kind of meekness and patience, more then any other creature, and for
his use there is nothing unnecessary for our service in the whole composure of
him; his flesh being good for meat, his guts for the strings of Instruments,
his dung to enrich the field, his wool for cloth, so nothing superfluous: So
likewise the Dove, a patient, not an offensive creature, without beak or
tallents of oppression; having no other offense against their enemy, the Hawke
and such like, more then the swiftness of her wing, according to the Poet,
Fello columbo caret, rostro non ledit,
possidet innocuas, puraque grana ledit.
Her food is grain, her beak does not offend,
No gall this creature has, nor no bad end.
And therefore they hate the Hawke, as it is said, because of his beak.
Odimus Accipitrem quia semper vinit in armis.
We hate the Hawk, and fear him near or far,
Because his beak still threatens to us War.


Q. Whence proceeds the mourning of the Dove.

A. For fear of the miscarying of her young, which she is so fruitful in, that
she brings forth every month, or at least lays eggs, they join their beakes
in the way of love, and conceive by billing.

Q. What birds of all other are the most ravenous.

A. The Eagle, the King of birds, of whom it is delivered that they never die,
by old age or sickness, but by famia and that by reason of the upper part of her
beak so inclapsing the under that she cannot open her mouth to receive her
food. Eliamus writes that the feathers of the Eagle, put among the feathers
of other birds do consume and waste them away, as do the evil gotten goods
of some rich oppressor, not only themselves, but together the whole lump,
some whereof were well or much better gotten. To which purpose S. Chrysostom
says, a few riches evil gotten will not only waste themselves, but consume
away those that are well gotten.

Q. Why is the Eagle spread in the Emperors Arms.

A. Some think it was so given upon a compact between the Emperor of Germany
and Constantinople, upon an agreement between them, that the succeeders in
the German-Empire after Charles the great should be called Emperors of the west,
as the Emperors of Constantinople, Emperors of the East, and so the head
should look both ways, as the verse seems here to confirm it: Pu^tab ceps,
aquila, huic occasum, huic aspicit ortum:
Alter, ait, nostri est caesaris, alter erit.
The Eagle spread had this and riper scope,
To eye both present, and the future hope.


Q. What bird is that, that has the fairest feathers, but the most hellish
voice of any other.

A. The Peacocke, whom the Poet terms to be Angelus in Penna, pede latro, voce
geh^nna.
A bird that has an Angels plume,
A theeuish pace, a Hellish tune.


Pliny writes, that the Peacocke envying the profit of man, deuonres her own
dung, lest he should make use of it.

Q. What birds in the Scripture does God prefer before wicked men.

A. The Kite knows her time, as does the Turtle, the Swallow and the Storke.

Q. What birds are most perfect Heralds of the spring.

A. The Swallow and the Cuckoo.

Q. Is there any thing more of excellent observation in the Swallow.

A. There is, and this is very obseruable of her, the descretion she uses in
feeding her young, when having five in her nest, she ever begins at the eldest
and so by degrees goes over the rest, that all may have a like, and none be
forgot. In the winter she flies not away, as it is reported of her, but is
found to lie in her nest as dead, and to revive again with the approaching
warmth of the Summer, which some take to be an Emblem of the resurrection.

Q. What bird of all other is the most sweetest in voice?

A. The Nightingale, who as Pliny notes, ever sings sweetest notes in the
hearing or presence of man, and the reason is as the fiction leads us; for
that the Cuckoo, and the Nightingale two quiristers of that season, in some
ripeneile of the spring, wherein they both take their tunes, which is most
chiefly from the middle of April, to the end of May, fell into a controversy
of the excellency of their voice and note, which dissension grew so far,
that it could not be ended without an vmpire, unto which the Ass was chosen,
as thought a fit Judge, by reason of his long ears, quick hearing, and
presence, by whose judgment the Cuckoo was preferred, because her note was
easy and plain to his capacity: the Nightingale thus cast, appeals to man
for her censure, and where ever she sees him attentive, there she runs into
the variety of her most excellent Ditties.

Q. What in times past was the controversy for beauty or excellency between
the Crow and the Goose?

The Crow says. Altera me in terris non est foecundior ales
In all the earth no bird then I more white.

The Goose answers. Tu me pius loqueris, plus ego scribo tamen.
Though less I speak then thou, yet more I Will write.

And concerning the Parrat, Aristotle was of opinion, that she would speak
more and better then she does, if she drunk but wine.

Q. Who were those among men that attempted to fly like birds.

A. Icarus and Dedalus, and of late an Italian that flew from the top of Sa^nt
Mark^s tower in Venice, and did it without hurt: besides an Englishman that
offered to undertake to fly over the Thames, but afterward he flew from his
purpose, and did it not: and as I have heard since, he is flowne over the sea
in a ship.

Q. Who are the most merry, the most free, the most mad, and the most blessed
in the world.

A. The most merry ^are Popish Priests that sing when others weep, both before
they die, nd after they are dead.

The most free are Physicians, that are only licensed to kill without
punishment, so that what is death to others, is gain to them.

The most mad are nice Gra^maria^s, that fight a bout vowels, and for air and
sound, and with as much bitterness as the Turk against the Rhodes.

The fourth are the poor that are blessed, to which I incline, though with
Agur I pray to give me neither poverty nor riches, but contentedness.

Though Ovid could say concerning their blessedness.

Non tamen hoc tanti est pauper vt esse velim.
Though blessings be for them in store,
To be their heir I Would not be poor.
Q Wherefore have Grammarians formed three genders in Art, seeing there are but
two in Nature: or why does not Nature bring forth things of the Newter gender
as well as of the Masculine and the Feminine?

A. Let him tell the cause of that who can, or if he cannot, let him seek out
another Palemon that can untie this knot, for my heyser shall not plow this.

Q What is that which knows not it self to speak, understands not a voice,
yet conceales not, but repeates the voice of him that speaks.

A. Echo the daughter of the air and tongue.

Q. What may come into thy mind by recording these five musical vowels.

VT RE MI FA SOL LA. A. The custom of drunkards, for when they drink,
Incipiunt in Vt, and bibu^t Vtiliter Incipiunt in Re, and bibu^t Regulariter
Incipiunt in mi, and bibu^t mirabiliter Pergunt in fa and bibunt familiariter
Pergunt in Sol and bibunt solemniter.
Desinunt in La mi, quia exitus Lamentabilis and miserabilis.

Englished. They begin in Vt, and drink sauingly They begin in Re, and drink
Regularly They begin in mi, and drink miracu: They hold on in fa drinking
familiarly They hold on in sol drinking solemnly.
And ending in La mi, because the end is lamentable and miserable.

Q. What creatures are those, some living, and some dead, that rule all the
world?

A. The sheep, the goose, and the Be; for the sheep yields parchment, the
geose quills to write it, and the Be wax to seal it.

Q. What creatures are those that are both in the heavens, in the ear^h, and in
the Sea?

A. The Dog, and Serpent or Dragon, according to the Poet: Latrat in ede
Canis, not in equore, fulget astris.
Though more confined creatures more do pine,
The Dog in house, Sea, Sky, does bark, swim shine.


Q. Whether are there more or greater living creatures bred on the earth, or in
the Sea.

A. In the Sea (as all writers testify and agree upon, and this moreover they
add) that there is no creature on the earth that has not his like in the Sea,
and yet there are many in the Sea that the earth cannot parallel, nor any other
place, and beside, with this good difference, that those creatures that are
hurtful on the earth, in the waters are not so, as the snakes and such like
there are without their venom, and offencelesse.

Q. What is that which nothing being more heau^er of it self, yet nothing
more moveable, and if you keep it not within bounds, seuers it self into
many particulars, yet after runs into one lump and being it self
unchangeable, changes and alters the form and color of things?

A. Quickesiluer.

Q. What herb is that which presents the form of a man?

A. The root of the Mandrake.

Q. Whether is it of truth or not, that ^vulgarly reported, that those that
dig up this root escape not without death?

A. Nothing less, yet has it of it self a soporiferous nature, to procure
sleep, drunk, or applied even as Opium to death.

Q. What creature is that which at once brings forth, nourishes her young and
goes with young again?

A. The Hare, that fearful and pursued creature, of whom according to Pliny,
the males bring forth as the femaless, unto which no other creature may compare
in fruitfulness: but Conies those cunning pioners that have undermined and
subverted cities, and the money of usury that no sooner is begot it self but it
presently ingenders.

Q. Among all beasts, and birds, which are of the most beauteous and various
colors.

A. The Peacocke among birds, is as the Panther among beasts, only in this
they differ, that whereas the Peacockes deformity is his feet, the Panther^
his head.

Q. What kind of men are the^ which being as beasts themselves, sit upon
beasts, carries beasts on their hands, have beasts running about them, and all
to pursue and kill beasts?

A. Unlettered huntsmen, of which Saint Jerome further adds, that Esau was a
hunter, and Nimrod, and both wicked men, and that he had scarce read in the
Scripture of any holy man that was an hunter; not that he thought it impossible
to be so, as if they were adjuncts not be separated, nor that they were
wicked, because they hunted but that they hunted being wicked men.

Q. What twice two things are those that are oftentimes said to denoure their
masters.

A. Haec bis bina canes, and aues, seruique atque caballi Dicantur Dominos,
sepe vorare suos.
Hawks, hounds, and horses, servants, pride and stealth:
Are ofttimes found to devour their masters wealth.
Unto which may be annexed another distributer of misery and penury, not
inferior, if not greater then any of the rest, which is gaming or dice; and
therefore as the saying is: Ludens taxillis been respice quid sit in illis,
Spestua, restua, sorstua, morstua, pen^ dit in illis.
At Dice who plays in this conceit may enter.
My hope, my health, my life, my wealth to venture.


And all thereby: and therefore if he would prevent his danger, by cunning let
him know the more cunning he is in this art, the more wicked he is in his life.

A good rule to be observed both for our profit and carriage.



Haec tua verbaiubent fugiendos semper amores
Mores seruandos emnibus essebonis
Noctes atque dies orando rebus et vti
Prudenter proprijs, nec Lapidanda bona.
These words unto us this instruction preach,
First fly fond loves, of many a good the breach,
Next keep good manners, and the good embrace,
For that becomes, then pray in every place,
Next use thy goods with moderation fit,
And thou shall reap both praise and benefit.
Q. There are two things that cannot be too much trimmed, and what are they.

A. A ship, and a woman.

Q. In what places are wives of best use and most fit.

A. One of Marcions scholars answered in Thalamo et in Tumulo, In the bed, and
in the tomb.

Q. By what reasons were the Ancient Poets used to (...) marriages.

A. By comparing the adventure of such a one to the wracked Seaman, that once a
shore, will notwithstanding to Sea again; according to the verse.

The man that once from marriage free yet hastes to that pain,
Resembles much the wracked man that will to sea again.
Q. What was the young man's answer wherefore he would not marry a widow.

A. Because according to the old saying, He would not drink in the water that
another had dyed by tasting of, as follows.

In qua quis peri^t non ^ibo dixit aquam. Q. How comes it to pass that learned
men, wisemen, Churchmen, and such like, choose notwithstanding all their
wisdom, many times, wives impatient, contextious, and troublesome.

A. It is not to be doubted but that marriage is a fate suffered or appointed
by God, Genesis 28.48. and therefore not always in the power of every man, to
choose according to his wisdom and understanding at al times: but that wise
and learned men, should many times if they have not evil and unchaste wives,
meet yet with those that are bitter and contentious, unto them, I can give no,
reason for it but this fate, unless it be for this cause, that when abroad
they reprove other men's faults and errors, they may have at home those that may
preach to them their own weaknesses and infirmities. And therefore as one
says, howsoever it must be our wisdoms to love them, since it was fortune
to have them, and for their faults we must either seek to remove the^, or
endeavor to bear them, if we can take them away we make them the fitter for
our selves, if not, we become bettered our selves in our patience.

Q. Who are those that plow the sands, till another ground, and leave their
own field unhusbanded.

A. The Adulterer, who is said to want two of his five senses, at least not to
have the true use of them. That is his seeing and hearing, for if he could see,
he might behoulde the immediate destruction that waits at the threshould of
that sin, if he could not see yet he might hear from the testimony of woeful
experiencers, that cry out in each corner, this path I trod, and it brought me
to destruction.

Q. I know thou art diligent in reading the Scriptures, therefore show me in
what one Chapter of the Bible all the five senses are described.

A. Genesis 27. verse. 4. seeing. ver. 18. hearing. ver. 21. touching. ver. 25.
tasting. ver. 27. smelling. The 5. windows of the soul, of which one thus
writes, S Lucem occulis video, and varios discerno colores
H Consona me iuvat, offendit simphonia discors.
S Fragra^ti oblector, visioso offender ^dore
T Insipidum and sapidum quid sit me indice constat
T Sentio quid Callidum aut Gellidum quid molle quid asprum.
The seeing, light and colors does discry
The hearing, tunes and discords does arraine,
The smelling, odors, sweet and sour does try,
The taste, respects the Cooks both art and pain
The touching, hard and soft, and hot and cold,
Through these 5. windows does the soul behold.


Q What is the least member in the body, and yet darkens the whole man.

A. The eye lidde.

Q. Is the most perfect eyesight sometimes deceived.

A. Oftentimes, and as soon as any other of the senses for example, cast a
straight staff into a troubled water, and ^t appears to the eye as crooked
and wavering, Stand upon the shore, thou see the ship go, stand upon the
ship, why then thy eye will tell thee, the shore goes, and the ship stands
still. So the head being distempered, thou shall think fixed things move, and
one flame two.

Q What is the the swiftest of all things in the world?

A One answered the Sun, because his speed is such that in a day he compasses
the whole circuit of the earth. But another replied, that thought was swifter
then that, because it traveled the whole world in a moment.

Q. What four evils are those that chiefly trouble a house.

Sunt mala terna domus, imber, mala femina, fumus,
Quartu^ cu^ mane, surgunt pueri sine pane.
A smoke, a storm, and a contentious wife
Three ils are found that tire a husbands life:
To which a 4. is by the proverb sed,
When children cry for hunger wanting bread.
Of Martin Luther and P. Melancthons eloquence and sweetness.

Diuisae his operae sed men's suit vnica, pauit
Ore Lutherus oues, flore Melancthon apes.
Twixt Luther and Melancthon so long gone,
There works were diverse, though there faith was one.
For Luther soundnes loded by degrees His sheep, as did Melanctons flowers his
bees.

Q. What means this speech, nourish not the whelpe of the Lion.

A. It gives to understand that we are not to cherish any power above the Law,
nor to foster that strength that may afterward oppress zs.

Q. Why do they that are troubled with the Gowt ever love to talk most.

A. Because they cannot run with with their feet, they love to run with
their tongue. For the benefit of any member we are deprived of, having two of
them, we esteem the other in the reckoning of them both, as concerning the
eye, no man desires to be blind, or to have but one eye, yet if any mischa^ce
should befall the one, we esteem the other the dearer, as it follows in the
v.9.

Non habeo, nec habere velim, quod sitamen ad sit
Noncarea^ craesi si mihi de^tur opes.
Mine eye I would not sell for dross,
Though Craesus wealth repayrd my loss
None more blind the Bayard as the saying is, nor none more forward to venture
then he that least knows the dangers that he enterprises, as by this example
is made manifest.

The trees on a time went forth to select them a king, and in their progress
they came to the Olive tree, and said unto it reign over us and be king but
it refused, saying, shall I forsake my fatness, wherewith I am suppled, and
man is nourished, no I will not; and with these and the like reasons refused
their offer. Then they came to the fig tree and said, reign over us; who
answered shall I leave my sweetness and fruits more delicate then the honey of
Hybla. Then they came to the Vine and she refused saying, shall I forgo my
sweet shade, and comfortable clusters, that comfort and make glad the heart of
man, it shall not be. Then spoke the Bramble let me be king over you, that I
may curb you with sharp laws, and thus what the good refused, the worst
offers to take up and embrace, for none are more ambitious then the
vnderseeming, as in the proposition before declared.

Q What waters of all other are the most deceitful?

A. The tears of a woman, the which in the blessed weeper, are called the
blood of the soul.

Q. What creatures of all other are the most wanton.

A. Insatiate women, acording to the Poet^: Gallin^ Gallus ter qui ni sufficit
vnus,
At ter quin^ viri vix sufficit mulieri.
One Cock suffices twice five hen.
Scarce one lewd woman twice 5. men.


Q. What women of all other are the most fruitful?

A. Beggars wives, that of all other one would think should be most barre^.

Q. Of imperious women what did Cato report?

A. Cato said, our wives rule the common wealth, for we govern the people,
and our wives govern us. To which purpose Themistocles said, O wife the
Athenians rule the Gretians, I the Athenians, thou me thy son thee. Therefore in
my opinion he spoke not amiss that said, he never knew common wealth, nor
private family well governed, where the hen crew, and the cock held his peace;
for though it be said of women that they are so able of tongue, that 3. of
their clappers will make a reasonable noise for a market, yet though they
talk, they should not command or at least wise should not govern.

Q. Whether was the night or the day first.

A. Thal. Milesius answers, the night was before the day as in the creation
is manifest, so the evening and the morning were the first day. From which
notwithstanding we vary in our opinions, as preferring the day before it: and
for because the evening is but the latter part of the day, which must precede
it.

Q. How many colors are there in the Rainebow.

A. Various colors, but two especially most apparent, a watery, and a fiery
color, which two colors express two judgments, the one of water past, in
beginning of the world; and the other of fire to come, in the end thereof.

Q. Which is the longest day in all the year.

A. S. Barnaby answers, that which has the shortest night.

Q. How many are the properties of good wine.

A. As many as there are senses in man's body, for to every sense should good
wine have a relation. 1 To the sight good color, pureness and cleerenesse. 2
To the hearing, being powered forth, a sparkling and speaking noise. 3 To the
taste sweetness. 4 To the touching, coldness. 5 To the smell sweetness.


Q. How many are the veins in the body of man?

A. As many as there are days in the year, of which one thus writes, That
every thing we do may vain appear,
We have a vein for each day in the year.


Q. How many bones are there in the body of man?

A. It is answered according to Galen, Hipocrates, and others, that there are
in man's body 248. which are thus singly collected, in the head 49. in the
breast 67. in the arms and hands, 61. in the feet 60.

Q. At what years does a child present half his height?

A. Between the 3. and 4. year.

Q. How many teeth has he according to the Poets rule?

A. Sunt homini Dentes, trigenta duo comedentes.

The grinders which in time are said to cease,
Are numbered thirty two at best increase.
Q. How many are the senses of the soul?

A. Though ^he sensible things of the world be numberless, yet the Organ of
the sen^e that coprehends the^ are but five. 1. Touching. 2. Tasting. 3.
Feeling. 4. Hearing. 5. Smelling.

Q. What is the quickest and best sense of all other.

A. The eyes.

Q. Which is their best object and noblest use?

A. Their use is admirable and excellent in this world. 1. To distinguish and
show us the variety and beauty of all things in the world, but yet their chief
use shall be, through the effusion of his heavenly light, face to face, to see
God in the world to come.

Q. What sense had the greatest hand in the first transgression?

A. The eye.

Q. How shows it his sorrow.

A. By shedding tears, which no other sense does or can.

Q. From whence proceed tears.

A. Out of the brains most thin and liquid excrement, of which) being the
moistest part of the whole body, and twice as much in quantity as the brain of
an Ox) it yields great plenty.

Q. How do they see?

A. Not by sending the rays unto the object, but by receiving beams from
thence, which ever end with pointed Angels in them, where if the object be far
of, it ends in them in a sharp point, and so the thing seems small; if near,
in a broader point, and thereby seems greater.

Q. How many things are required to a perfect sight?

A. Nine things, viz. 1 Power to see. 2 Light. 3 The visible thing. 4 Not too
small. 5 Not too thin. 6 Not too nigh. 7 Not too far. 8 Clear space, 9 Time.


Q. What four things be those that be grievous to our eye sight?

A. 1 Smoke out of the moist wood. 2 Wind in a storm. 3 Tears. 4 To see our
enemies fortunate, and our friends unhappy.


Q. What things does the eyes most betray that a man would keep secret.

A. Love, and drunkennessee.

Q. What it the office of the ears, and and wherefore are they placed on
high, with windings and turnings in them.

A. To receive the sound or air into them, which forms a noise in the mases,
whereof the soul makes a distinction; they are placed on high, because all
sounds mount aloft; with turnings and windings in them, that the sound may not
too hastily strike the brain: it is the slowest, yet the daintiest sense of
all the other; for as those that have no skill in Music, can perceive a
discord, and though they know what is good, yet find what is eui^l; the most
delightful ^une they hear is the Music of the Psalms from the voices of
men and women.

Q. Wherefore have we two years and but one tongue.

A. That we should hear twice as much as we speak.

Q. Wherefore have our eyes liddes to shut them, when our ears are always o^
pen, our ears fixed, and our eyes moveable?

A. Our ears are open to hear the proof of every tale, and unmoved to the
end that though they quickly hear, they be not quickly moved to censure over
rashly, and these two are the chief intelligencers, and servants of the soul,
the other three attend upon the body.

Q. How is the taste discerned?

A. By veins which spread through the tongue and palate, to distinguish every
relish, the abusiue pleasing of which sense, as experience teaches, through
Cookery, and Sawces, has killed more bodies, then either the sword, famine, or
pestilence.

Q. Where is the seat of the smelling?

A. In the nostrils; for as GOD breathed the breath of life into them, so makes
he it their virtue by the sea^e of that sense in them, to distinguish all
airs, profitable or hurtful to the body of men.

Q. What are the benefits of good scents to the body.

A. To purify the brain, refine the wit, awake the fancy; to which purpose
old devotion ordained Incense to make such minds the more apt for heavenly
contemplations; yet some are of opinion, these perfumes are but unnecessary
furnishments, since as the Proverb is, they smell best that smell of nothing.

Q. From whence is derived the power of feeling?

A. The feeling power which is the root of life, spreads it self through
every part of the body, by sinews, which descend from the head to the foot,
and like a Net spread all over the body, she discernes (even as the Spider
sitting in the midst of her web) if ought do touch the outward thread of it,
she feels it presently shaking on every side; by this sense we do discern,
hot, cold, moist, dry, hard, soft, rough, pleasure, and pain.

Q. What may the memory be compared unto?

A. To the Sea and the Land, the part that retains all, to the Land, that
deuoureth all, to the Sea, being likewise the Lay man's table-booke, that
remembers much, and forgets much, her seat is in the hindermost part of the
brain behind.

All which in manner may be thus varied. Q. A. What is the body? The dwelling
of the soul. What the eyes? The leaders of the soul. What are the brows?
The portall of the mind. What is the ear? The interpreters of sounds. What
the lips? The leaves of the mouth. What are the hands? The workmen of the
body. What the heart? The receptacle of life, What the lungs? The bellows of
the air. What the stomach? The orderer of the meats. What the bones? The
strength of the body. What are the legs? The Collumes of the body.


Aliter,

Cor sapit, and Pulmo lequitur, Felc^m, mouet iram,
Splen^idere facit, cogit amore iccur.
Wisdom the heart, the lungs the laughter move,
Gall, spleen, and liver, anger, laughter love.
Q. How are these following Denominations, distinguished to their particulars
as of reason, understanding, opinion, and the like.

A. 1. When by moving from ground to ground she sifts things out, she obtaines
the name of reason. 2. When by reason she has found truth and stands fixed,
she is understanding. 3. When she lightly inclines her assent to either part,
she is opinion.


Q. What is the difference between wit, and will.

A. Will is the Prince, and Wit is the Counselor, which sits in counsel for
the common good of the man; for what Wit resolves upon, Will executes; Wit is
the minds chief Justice, which often controules the false judgment of Fancy;
Will is as free as an Emperor, cannot be limited, barred of her liberty, or
made will by any coaction, when she is unwilling to: and lastly, their chief
use is, our Wit being given us to know God, our Will to love him being known.

Q. Which are the three first members formed in the womb after conception.

A. The heart, the brain, and the liver, the three chief members of life.

Q. Which is the last made.

A. The eye. The interpretation of the mind; The last member formed in the
womb, and the first that loses his motion in death, for in that exigent, the
spirits of the sight betake themselves to the brain, as to their castle of
refuge, a sure token of death.

Q. When a man dies, which is the last part of him that stirs, and which of a
woman.

A. To answer merrily and not altogether impertinently, it is said the last part
of a man that stirs, is his heart, but of a woman, her tongue.

Q. A wise man said, that from the most vildest creatures on the earth, just
matter might be had whereby to glorify God; to this one answered, what take
thou from the Serpent, whereby to glorify him.

A. To praise him that he made me not such a one: To which purpose is here
annexed a story of one, who seeing a Toade lie in the way fell a weeping; two
Bishops coming by, inquired his reason, who answered, that the sight of that
ugly and loathsome creature had admonished him of his ingratitude to God, that
had never given him thanks for the excellency of his creation, being made
after his own Image, when he being but as clay in the Potters hands, it was
in his power to have made him a vessel of dishonor, yea even the basest and
deformed, such a one as that Toade.

Q. What is the most beautiful thing in the world.

A. One answered, the Sun, but another replied, that blind men saw not that,
and therefore he concluded that Virtue was much more resplen, dent, which even
the blind might perceive perfectly.

Q. What is the strongest of all things.

A. One answered, Wine, another a King, a third a Woman, and all these are very
powerful, but truth is the strongest of all, which ouercomes all things.

Q. Who is the greatest opposer of this Truth.

A. One answered, the Pope, who as Baleus recites, is so opposite, that
commonly whatsoever he praise^, is worthy of disprayse; for whatsoever he
thinks is vain, whatsoever he speaks is false, whatsoever he dislikes, is
good, whatsoever he approoues is evil, and whatsoever he extols, infamous.

Q. What seat is ordained for Popes after this life.

A. Heaven they continually sell, and daily offer to sale, and therefore Hell
is their place in reuersion according to the Poet, Vendidit and coelum Romanus
and Astra sacerdos.
Ad Stigias igitur cogiturire domos.


Q. What part of speech is Papa, for the Pope.

A. Part of a particip^e, because he partakes part from the Clergy, part from
the Laity, and part from both without Mo^d or ^e^se, Papa nec D^us, Nec
Angelus, Nec Homo^ quid tunc. the Pope is neither God, Angel, nor Man; what
then? Diabolus.

Q. Who are those that pray for all, Defend all, Feed all, Devour all?

A. In an old picture, I found it thus written, The Pope with his Clergy,
says, I pray for you all; Caesar with his Electors, I defend you all; The
Clown with his sack of Corn, I nourish you all: at last comes Death and says,
I devour you all.

Q. What little fish is that in the Sea that has the greatest strength?

A. The Rhemora, a little fish of half a foot long, which but by fastening
upon it, will stay a Ship under sail with wind and tide.

Q. What thing is a Lion most afraid of.

A. The crowing of a Cock, and the noise of a Cartwheele.

Q. What difference of Days is there of the Christians, the Turks, and the
Jews Sabbath.

A. The Christians keep their Sabbath on Sunday: The Jews on the Saturday:
and the Turks on the Friday, in scorn of Christ that was that day crucified.

Q. What is death very fitly resembled unto.

A. To a woman or a shadow, for seek it and it flies you, fly it and it
seeks you: and so a Woman according to the Poet.

Follow a shadow it still flies you,
Seem to fly, it will pursue you,
So court a woman she denies you,
Let her alone, she will court you.
Q. What is that, which of running becomes staid, of soft becomes hard, of
weak becomes strong, and of that which is infi^it becomes but one.

It is answered, Ice.

Q. Whether was Christ all ever Ice.

A. It is answered, that those waters which are congealed with a continual and
daily cold, as by the space of ten or twenty years, are called Crystal, by
reason of their transparencie, and are for the most part found upon the Alpine
Mountains, elevated against the face of the North, where they become so hard
that sc^rce they ever after yield to the hammer.

Q. What liquor of all other soonest extinguisheth the fire.

A. Vinegar, for the exceeding piercing coldness and eagerness it has.

Q What is the strongest of all things in the world.

A. Thal. Mill. answered, Fate; another Death, because it ouercomes all things.

Q. How many letters are there in the holy tongue?

A. As many as there are books in the old Testament, of which one thus further
observes, that as 22. letters form our voice, so 22. books contain our faith.

Q. What comparison is there between Prophets and Poets?

A. Thus much according to the old verse: Illi de rebus praedicere vera futuris,
Hi de perteritis dicere falsa solent.
Englished.
Of things to come, these truly make us know,
What the other of things past, does falsely show.


Q. Who were those that were seen to eat after their deaths?

A. Christ, Lazarus, the daughter of Iayrus and others.

Q. Upon what kind of persons according to Diogenes opinion, are not benefits
to be bestowed.

A. 1 Not upon old men, because they li^e not to require them. 2 Upon
children, because they forget them. 3 Upon dishonest folks, because they will
never require them.


Q. Who are those that see many things far off, but little near at hand?

A. Old men; blind in the present-tense, but for the most part, quickesighted
in the preterimperfect tense.

Q How comes it that the Husband seeks the wife, and not the contrary, the
wife the Husband?

A. Because the m^n seeks that which he lost, that is his ri^, which was taken
from him in the forming of Woman out of his side, and therefore when a man
marries a wife, what does he but fetch back the rib which he first lost.

Q. What is the choosing of wines fitly compared unto.

A. Sir Tho. More was wont to say, to the plucking by casualty Eeles out of a
Bag, wherein, for every Eele, are twenty Snakes.

Q. What is the dearest loss of all others.

A. The loss of time which cannot be recovered, of which one thus complains.

Damna fleorerum, sed plus fleo Damna dierum,
Quisque potest rebus succurere, nemus diebus.
Thus Englished.
The loss of wealth, I much lament
But more what time decaies,
For wealth may be regained that's spent
But never loss of days.
Q. It being demanded of Aristotle, whether a fault committed in drunkenness
were to be punished or remitted, a man not being the ^^ himself.

A It was answered, He which in drunkenness committed any offense was worthy
of double punishment; first, for being drunk; secondly, for his offense
therein.

Q. Who are those that draw death out of that wherewith others preserve life?

A. The Drunkard and the Glutton.

Q. What two Monasillables, are those that divide the whole world.

A. These two Pronownes, Mine and Thine.

Q. Of Retribution, how many be the sorts, and what are the best or worst
degrees therein.

A. There are four sorts, which are these following, 1. To repay good for
good, fitness. 2. To repay evil for evil, perverseness. 3. To repay evil
for good, Diuellishnesse. 4. To repay good for evil, Blessedness.


Q How many things are chiefly required in a good Surgeon?

A. These three properties. 1. A Hawks eye. 2. A Lions heart, and 3. A Ladies
hand.


Q. Cato repented himself of three things, and what were they?

A. 1. That ever he believed a woman. 2. That he ever spent time idly. 3.
That he ever went by water when he might go by land.


Q What were those three things Saint Austin wished he had lived to have seen.

Paulum in ore Romam in flore Christum in corpere.

A. 1. Rome in her flourishing estate 2. To hear Saint Paul preach. 3. To have
seen Christ in the flesh.


But we, says Lactantius, will give God thanks that we are not Pagans, but
Christians, that we live in the time of the new Testament, and not of the Old.

Q Plato gave thanks to nature for four things, and what were they?

A. 1. That he was a man and not a Beast. 2. That he was a man and not a
woman. 3. That he was a Grecian and not a Barbarian. 4. That he lived in the
time of Socrates.


Q. In how many forms does a Physician appear to his Patient.

A. In these three forms, 1. In the form of an Angel when he promises
help. 2. In the form of a God when he performs it. 3. In the form of a
Devil when he asks his reward.
And therefore it is the Physicians rule, Accipe dum dolet: Take the sound fee
whilst the sick hand gives it.

Q. What three things are those that chiefly preserve life?

A. A joyful Heart, a quiet Mind, a moderate Diet.

Q. What two things are those that make equal the Miserable and the Happy.

A. Sleep and death.

Q. What passion and disease are those that cannot be hid?

A. Love and the Chin^ cough.

Q. What is the cause that the Devil above any other beast of the field should
assume the form of a Serpent: and that out of the putrefaction of man's body,
worms and serpents should be produced?

A. It is answered, according to Melancthon, because man was puffed up with the
Poison of the Serpent in Paradise, the Devil has ever since delighted in the
form of a Serpent, for the conquest then achieved in that shape, and to this
day it is reported, that in some part of Africa and Asia, are found Serpents
that Devils do inhabit: And that out of man's corruption, Serpents do and
should spring; the cause is manifest, that it is from the impuritie and
filthiness of sin, of which as one implies, it is not unnecessary, that out
of a man's flesh, a substance of the greatest sin against God, should
creatures be engendered of the greatest hate and enmity to man.

Q. What is the wisest of all things?

A. Tha. Mal. answered, Time; for it finds out all things, teaches and
alters all things.

Q. What People are those that have but one Day and Night in the whole year?

A. Those that live under the Pole Articke, for to those the Sun never
ascends the Horizon 24. degrees, nor comes under it, so that they have six
signs above, and six beneath it.

Q. Whether may the Bat be reckoned amongst the number of birds or Mice?

A. The Bat possesses such an evenness betwixt both, that she cannot justly
be said to be absolutely either the one or the other, for she has wings but
no feathers, she flies but in the Evening, she has teeth which no bird has,
and she nourishes her young with milk, which no bird does, yet because she
has wings and flies, we reckon her among the Number of Birds.

Q. What birds are the most wicked, but the shortest lived?

A. Sparrowes, which for their much salacitie and wan^onnesse, live not above
two years, Zenocrates tells a story of a Sparrow, which pursued by a Hawke,
flew into his bosom for refuge, which he took and kept, and the bird would
still attend on him.

Q. What creatures of all other, are the longest lived?

A. Man, the Dawe, the Heart, and the Phoenix, whereas most other compared with
them are short, the Hare living but ten years, the Cat as many, the Goat, but
eight, the Ass 30. The Sheep ten, the Dog 14 and sometimes 20. The Bull 15.
the Ox because gelded 20. the Sow and Peacocke 20. the Horse 20. and sometimes
30. the Dove eight, the Turtle eight, the Partrich twenty and five.

Q What Creature of all other, sheds Tears at his death.

A. The Heart, that fearful and dry creature that brayes after the water
Brooks, Psalm. 24.

Q. What chiefly fats a Horse?

A. The eye of the Master.

Q. One asked Aristotle what was the fruit of all his Philosophy.

A. Who answered to do that out of a free disposition, which laws and
enforcements do compel others unto.

Q. What kind of Creatures are those that sleep not with their own faces?

A. Painted women, for the most part suspicious harlots.

Q. What is that, that is too hard for one to keep, enough for two, and too
much for three?

A. A Secret.

Q. To whom may a man best commit his secret.

A. To a common Liar, for he shall not be believed though he tell truth.

Q What waters of all others ascend highest.

A. The Tears of the faithful which God gathers into his Bottle.

Q. Of all the Fishes in the Sea, which do our Naturalists observe the swiftest.

A. The Dolphin, which swimmes faster then either Bird or Arrow flies, which
fish of all others, is most dangerous to Mariners.

Q. What three Letters are those that make us bond men and free.

A. They are E V A, which inuerted are A V E the Angels salutation.

Q. What two Letters are those that young Infants first cry out upon.

A. E A according to the Poet, Clamabunt E A quotquot nascuntur ab Eua.
All cry out of E. and A.
That are borne of Eua.
The males especially upon A. and the females upon E. except Zoroastes, of whom
it is read that he was borne laughing, who as Pliny notes was the first
finder out of Magic.

Q. What is that which being contained in it self, yet from it thousands do
daily spring and issue.

A. The Eg from whence are produced, fowls, fishes, birds, and serpents.

Q. Whether was the Eg or the bird first

A. The reason of this cannot be understood naturally; since the Egg without
the Bird, nor the Bird without the Egg could be brought forth, But we are to
understand that the first ^a^ke of Creatures were immediately from God without
any other secondary cause, and this great difference there is between God the
first nature, and the second Nature.

Q. What think thou of this question whether the drunken man drinks up the
wine, or the wine drinks up him.

A. It is either, for when thou have the Wine in the cup, it is in thy power,
but when it is in thy body, thou art in the power of it; when thou drinkest
first, thou take the Wine for thy pleasure, but after thou have drunk it, it
takes thee; first it is a servant and yields it self unto the drinker, but
afterward spreading it self into the veins, it becomes a Master, and is like
fire in the top of the Chimney.

Q. In a certain Banquet much wine being given to Diogenes, he powered it
down on the ground, and being asked the reason, why he spilt it,

A. Answered, If I drink it, I not only spill it, but it also spils me.

Q. How many ways does man fall?

A. The question is infinite, we die a thousand ways, though we are born but
one.

Sunt hominum morbi mill sed vna salus:
He has a thousand diseases and but one health.
Q. The devil asked a holy man these three questions.

1. What was the greatest wonder that ever God made in a little circuit?

To which the holy man answered, the face of man, that being all of one
substance and form, there should not be found in all the world two men, their
faces like in all things, and that in so small a room God had blased all the
sense.

2. Whether the Earth were higher then the Heavens?

To which he answered, that the body of Christ which is the substance of the
Earth, as from Adam, was exalted above the Heavens, and so the Earth to be
higher.

3. How much was the distance between Heaven and Earth.

To the which the holy man answered (not containing himself any longer with
patience) thou know the space better then I, for thou measuredst it when
thou fellest from Heaven, so never I, at which speech the Devil vanished away.

Q. Diogenes being asked what win^ of all others he loved best?

A. Answered, that which he drank of another man's cost.

Q. What is the heauiest burden that the Earth bears?

A. Sin, for sin weighes down to Hell.

Q. What tree in the forest does the Serpent most hate to come near?

A. The Ash according to Virgill, the fairest in the wood, which the Serpent
neither comes under, nor within the shade, as also the Juniper tree.

Q. What seed is that which joins together England and France, and many
other far distant Countries?

A. Heempseed, of which is made the sails for ships, which transport them
far and near.

Q. What three ways are they among other that are not to be found out.

A. Via auis, via Nauis, via Iuvenis, ^ The flight of a Bird, the passage of a
Ship, and the way of a young man.

Q. What four things are those that especially pervert Justice.

A. 1. Fat gifts. 2. Hatred. 3. Favor. 4. Fear.


Q. What may Law in the abuse thereof most fuly be compared unto.

A. To a thicke^ of Brambles, into which by tempest the poor Sheep being
driven from the plains, come there for refuge, and so loose their fleeces.

Q. What was a great man of this Kingdom used to compare Courtiers unto?

A. To Ember^ weeks or Fasting^Eues; the hungryest and the leanest of
themselves, yet bordering still upon great ones.

Q Who be those that may lie most freely and without control?

A. 1. Great men that few men dare reprove. 2. Old men that few men can gain
say. 3. Travelers that may lie by authority.


Q. What is that which is commendable both to do, and not to do?

A. To know when to speak, and when to keep silence, according to the Poet.

Scire loqui laus est, laus est quoque scire tacere,
Illa magis pulchra est, haec quoque pulchra magis.
Q. What things are those most virtual and of greatest secrecy and force above
other.

A. Christus vim verbis, vim gemmis, vim dedit herbis: Verbis maiorem, gemmis,
herbisque minorem.

Or thus, Stellis ac herbis vis est, sed maxima verbis.
Englished.
To herbs, and stones, much virtue Christ affords,
But more to speech, for life and death are words.


Q. What is the greatest of all moveable things, yet commanded by the least
violence or strength?

A. A Ship commanded by the stern, a little piece of wood.

Q. Who is the most renowned for memory that stories make mention of.

A. Seneca, who writes of himself that he was able to recite 2000 names after
they were once read unto him.

Q. What breaks the shell at the coming out of the chicken.

A. It is answered, and that by a double reason, the one because in that time,
the shell by continual heat and sitting upon becomes tender and soft, so
that the least stirring effects it; another cause of breaking thereof, and
that is the principal, is the defect of nourishment, which at the end of the
time is wasted in the shell, which the chicken wanting exposes it self to
seek, and so breaks it, as likewise the defect thereof is the natural cause
of all other Birds.

Q. Whose Cock, whose Dog, and whose servant may be kept at the cheapest
rate.

A. The Millers Cock, the Butchers Dog, and the Inne-keepers, servant.

Q. What was that City Aristotle so magnified above others for beauty,
largeness and strength.

A. The City of Babylon, the Walls whereof were fifty cubits thick, 200.
cubits high, this City was foure-square 15. miles from corner to corner, 60
miles in compass, it had 100. Gates, with threesholds and posts of Brass,
which when it was taken by Darius by drawing the river Euphrates dry, those
that dwelt in the farthest parts heard not of it in three days. It was
destroyed according to the Prophecy of Jeremy, and is now a desert for wild
beasts.

Hereafter follow certain Grammatical Questions.
Q. Which is the best verse in all Virgill?

A Aeneid, 6. Discite Iustitiam moniti, and non temnite Diuos.

Q. Which is the worst in all Virgill.

A. Aeneid. 1 Flectere si nequeo superos, Acherenta mouebo.

Q Which is the worst in all Ovid de art amandi.

A. Semibouemque virum semi virumque bouem.

Q. Which is the best of all Tullies Epistles?

A. The best and longest of all that is extant, is, ad Q. fratrem propretorem
minoris Asiae, most excellent, and worthy the reading of it.

Q. Which of all the Fathers is the hardest, of all the Poets the most crabbed.

A. Tertullian and Persius, which Persius when Tertullian read, and found it so
craggy and hard, he threw aside; saying, if he would not be understood, he
should not be read.

Q. Expound me this verse.

Furfur edit Pannum, Panem quoque sustineamus. A. The last word is divided into
three, and thus construed, Sus the sow, edit does eat furfur Bran, Tinea the
Moth, edit does eat Pannum cloth, Mus the mouse, edit does eat Panem Bread.

Q. What is the difference between os oris for the mouth, and os ossis for a
bone.

A. Deuorat os oris quicquid lucratur os ossis: Whatsoever is gotten by os
ossis, the bone, is devoured of os oris the mouth.

Aliter.

Os oris loquitur, sed os ossis roditurore.

Os oris, or the mouth does speak, but os ossis, or the bone is gnawne by the
mouth.

Q. At the confusion of Babell, into how many languages was the world divided.

A. Epiphanius and others do write into 72. as many as there were work men at
the building.

Others think 72. as many as there were Nations in the world, which Moses
recites to be 72.

Q. What pre-eminence have our best Linguists above others?

A. The Hebrews, that they drink at the fountains.

The Grecians at the rivers.
The Latins at the brooks.
English, and some others at the Lakes.
Q How are these 4. letters to be vnderderstood S P Q R.

A. Senatus, Populusque Romae; yet one of the Sybils inuerted it thus: Serua
populum quem redimisti: Now others have turned them iestingly upon the Pope by
way of question and answer, as thus, Sancte Pater, quid rides: Resp. Rideo quod
Papa sum.

Englished.
Holy Father, why do thou laugh?
I laugh because I am Pope.
Q. Who was that that was reputed an old man among children and yet among old
men liue^ to be a child?

A. Hermogenes, who in his youth, was the best Rethorician of his time; but in
his age lost his sense, and forgot his letters, and so became a child in his
dotage.

Q. Who was the most excellent Geometrician of his time?

A. Archimedes the Syracusian, who held it possible to remove the earth, had
he had another earth to fix his instrument upon: He held it also possible to
number the sand.

Q. Why is honos for honor written with h. an aspiration, and onus for a
burden without.

A. Because to the one al men aspire, the other few men desire.

Q. Amongst all trees, which only is of the neuter gender?

A. Balsamum, or the Balm tree, found only in Iudaea.

Q What debt is that which is always paying, and never paid.

A. Charity and love, which though we ever pay, yet we must ever owe to pay.

Q. Why is the form of money round?

A. Because it is to run from every man.

Q. Why is Nummus Latin for money.

A. O^ Numa Pompilius second king of the Romans, and first that caused money
to be made, and when copper pence, silver pence, and gold pence were made,
because every silver penny was worth ten copper pence, every gold penny worth
10 silver, therefore they were called Denarii, of December for ten.

Q By what means may every man be counted an honest man.

A. By endeavoring to be what he desires to seem.

Q. By what means should a man quickly become rich: (counsel I say, quickly to
be hearkened unto)

A. To be content with little.

Q What creature of all other is the worst that the earth nourishes.

A. If it be demanded of wild beasts a Tyrant, if of tame the Adulterer: In
another place he answered, on mountains Bears and Lions, in Cities,
Publicanes and flatterers.

Q. What creature is that which bites with the tongue?

A. All creatures bite with their teeth, as is commonly known, but the
flatterer bites with his tongue, and the wound is mortal.

Q. VVherin does man chiefly differ from beasts

A. In two things especially, Ratione, and Oratione, in reason and speech.

Q. Diogenes being asked why he wore his beard so long.

A. Answered, to the end that when I see it and touch it, I may remember my
self to be a man.

Q. One asked Diogenes what he should give to ^aue a blow at his head?

A. Answered, a Helmet.

Q. What good thing is that which is more profitable unto others then to him
that has it?

A. Beauty, that frail and flying dowry, enjoyed by looking upon by others,
being blind to the owner it self.

Q. Which were the most lasting cloth^ that ever were worn?

A. The Israelites in the wilderness, which in 40 years waxed not old.

Q. Which is a living word, and which is a dead word?

A The spoken word is the living, the written word is the dead, of which one
thus writes most wittily: Sir v^rbum vox viualicet, vox mortua scriptum,
Scripta diu viuunt, non ita verba diu.
Englished.
Although the speaking word have life
The written word be dead:
The written word shall last and be,
When th'spoken word is fled.


Q. What Beast is that that is unlike either to his Damme or Sire, and of a
mingled kind brought forth by others, and produces not his shape.

A. The Mule begotte between the Horse and the Ass, according to the Poet.

Dissimilis Patri, Matris diuersa figura,
Ex alijs nascor, nec quicquam nascitur ex me,
The Dog in the hunts, is and al keeps
The Wolf woods norished things destroieth
Q In what Laws did consist the order of Drunkenness among the Romans. 1 Not
to trip in speech. 2 Not to vomit. 3 To drink most at one sup. 4 Not to breath
in the draught. 5 To leave nothing vndrunke, if, to cast on the ground.


Discourse of wonders domestical and foreign.
Q. Which are held the most strangest accidents in the Chronicles? 1 The
removing of the earth. 2 The raining of blood. 3 The multitude of mice in the
Isle of Shepey, that could not be driven away nor the place cleansed, till a
flight of Owls came and devoured them. 4 The Chain of 24. linkes with lock
and key that a flea drew being put about her neck. 5 The man that slept in the
tower 3. days and ^. nights, and could not be wakened during that space, by
any noise or violence, by pricking with needles or otherwise.


A foreign wonder.
It is recorded by Guicciardine, L. Viues, Erasmus and others, of a certain
Countess of Holland that brought forth at one birth, 365. children, as many as
there are days in the year, which were all baptized by a Bishop, and after
dyed, which came thus to pass. A certain poor beggar woman laden with
children, came to her door, and craved an alms, which the Countess not only
denied, but also called her harlot and strumpet, telling her withal, it was
impossible she should have so many by one man: which this beggar hearing,
besought God, who knew her innocent, to manifest it unto her, by giving her so
many at one birth by her husband, as there are days in the year, which fell
out accordingly.

Q. What is the greatest wonder in the Art of Navigations?

A. The Needle of the Compass, which touched with the head of the Loadestone,
ever turns to the northpole, with the foot thereof to the South pole touched
with the one side, turns Eastward, with the other side, Westward, etc.

Of the Hermaphrodite.

Whilst my mother bare me in her womb, she went to the Gods, to know what
she had conceived, whether Male or Female: Phoebus said it was a Male, Mars a
female, Juno neither. Being borne I was an Hermaphrodite. After seeking my
destiny from these Gods, Juno said, I should be slain with a sword: Mars
that I should be hanged: Phoebus, that I should be drowned, which was my
fortune.

Climbing up a tree, from thence I fell upon my sword, my foot hung in a
bough, my head in the water, so being neither Male nor Female, but both I was
neither hanged, nor drowned, nor slain, but all.

Q. Seeing the fly is so small a creature, why has Nature given her 6. feet
to go, beside wings to fly withal, when the Elephant so great a Creature,
has no wings, and yet but four feet.

Another.

Seeing the wolf brings forth more young then the sheep, afterward wolves
eat those sheep, men kill those sheep, and yet how comes it that there be
more sheep then wolves.

Q. What did our ancients hold to be the greatest wonders in the world.

A. The Pyramides of Egypt built by the Israelites, under the oppression of
Pharaoh, which were 50. cubits high, 40. cubits thick, in compass twelve
German miles: The tower of Pharaoh, the Walls of Babylon, The Temple of
Diana of Ephesus, The tomb of Mausole and others.

Q. There are three things memorable that Spain boasts of, and what are
those? 1 A B^idge, over which the water flows, that is used to run under all
other bridges. 2 A City compassed with fire which is called Madrill, by reason
of the wall that is all of flints, enuironi^g it round about. 3 An other
bridge, on which continually 1 0000. cattle are fed, under which the water
runs 7. miles under ground, and then breaks forth again. Besides a great
mountain of Salt, from which, whatsoever is taken, it presently increases to
the quantity again.


Q. In what part of the World is it that trees bread living creatures?

A. In the Isles of O^chades in Scotland, wherein grows a tree near the sea
side, that bears a fruit like unto a foul, which dropping down into the
water, becomes a living creature, like a Ducke, if it fall upon the dry land,
it pu^rifies and tu^ns to nothing: but this is reported rather by history,
then by the people of that Country.

Q. May it be that without wood an Ox boil it self.

A. By preconiecture to forerunne this Discovery, might lead a man into some
conceyted admiration, therefore to stop that labor of the brain, the
Schythians teach us this secret of their necessity: for living in a Country
where grows no wood, they kill an Ox, and then take out all the bones from the
flesh, and of the bones make a fire that rosts or boyles him, and so it is
said the Ox rosts or boyles himself.

Q What was the answer of Bias to one that demanded of him what was done in
hell?

A. That he never was there, nor ever talked with any that came from thence.

Albertus Duke of Saxony was wont to say, that he had three Monasteries, three
wonders in his City, and what were they? 1 P^edicant Friars which had much
corn and no fields. 2 Franciscans, which had much money, and no rents. 3 Of
the order of S. Thomas, which had store of children and no wives.


Q. What are the differences between the former and later ages of the World,
for length of days, stature of body, beauty, riches, and the like.

A. The difference in some degrees is very great, in others more small: for
first concerning length of days; or long life between the former ages, and
the later, there is no comparison: for before the flood men lived 900. and odd
years, as Methusal^th, Adam, and others: Now with us the odd years are almost
counted long life; and then as the Age was long, so the size was great, large
of stature, mighty of strength, which in our times are shrunk up to a
handful: For Beauty, the Scriptures make mention of Vashti, Esther, and
others, and our Chronicles of Rosamond, Matilda, Shores wife, and others, all
liked and approved of by Kings; yet notwithstanding the blazed features of
these, many are of opinion, that some Beauties of our times of less note are
not inferior to some of these, if not exceeding: And as for riches, Abraham,
Lot, and Job are styled for their mightiness in that blessing: to let pass
the two former, whose Heardsm^n divided the Countries, and come to Job,
concerning whom is more particularly expressed, whose substance in Cattle, as
the Scripture testifies, was 700. sheep, 3000 Cammels, 500. yoke of Oxen and
500 she Asses, and at last, all this was doubled.

Amongst some others, to produce in parallel near our times, this one: It is
found in a Record in the Tower, that Sir Hugh Spencer the elder, who lived in
the time of King Edward the second, had in substance, and for the provision of
his house 28000. sheep, 1000. Oxen and Steres, 1200 Kyne and Calves, 140 Mares
and Colts, 160 drawing Horse, 2000. Hogs, 300. Bullockes, 40. Tun of Wine,
600. Bacons, 600. Muttons in Larder, 10. Tun of Syder; Plate, Jewels, and
Money 10000. pound. This done, the Censure is suspended: and left to the
judicious Readers consideration to give verdict.

Hereafter follow certain Epigrams, some old revived, and some new published.
1. Of a Lawyers absence.
A Virtuous Dame that saw a Lawyer rome,
Justly reprou'd his stay so long from home,
Saying to him that in his absence thence,
His wife might lack her due benevolence:
But to be quit himself of such disgrace,
Answered it thus by putting of a Case,
One owes a hundred pounds, now tell me whether
Is best, to have such payment altogether,
Or take it by a shilling, and a shilling,
Whereby the Bag might be the longer filling:
Sure, quoth the Dame, I think it were no loss
If one receiu'd^ such payment all in gross,
Yet in your absence this may cause your sorrows
To fear for want your wife should twelve pence borrow.
Epig. 2. In Getam.
Geta from Wool and weauing first began,
Swelling and swelling to a Gentleman:
When he was Gentleman, and bravely dight,
He left not swelling till he was a Knight:
And from a Knight, thus higher to surmount,
He swelled on bigger till he was a Count,
And still proceeding careless of his first,
He swelled to be a Lord, and then he burst.
Epigr. 3. Proverbs upon Complexions.
To a Red man read thy Read,
With a Brown man break thy bread,
At a Pale man draw thy knife.
From a black man keep thy wife.
Exposition.

The Red wise, The Brown trusty,
The Pale peevish, the Black lusty.
Epig. 4. In superbum.
I took the wall, one thrust me rudely by,
And told me the Kings way did open lie.
I thank't him, that he did me so much grace,
To take the worse, leave me the better place;
For if by th'owners we esteem of things,
The walls the Subjects, but the way's the kings.
Epig. 5.
NIX IX CorNIX
Snow. 9. A Crow.


NIX I that the winters daughter am
While thus my letters stand,
Am whiter then the plume of Swan
Or any Ladies hand.
IX Take but a way my letter first,
And then I do incline,
That stood before for milk whit snow
To be the figure nine,
And if that further you desire
By change to do some tricks,
As black as any bird I am,
Cornix By adding Cor to nix.

Epig. 6. De sanit. and Medico.
Health is a jewel true, which when we buy,
Physicians value it accordingly.
Epig. 8. In Amorosum.
A Wife you wished me (Sir) rich, fair and young,
With French Italian, and the Spanish tongue,
I must confess your kindness very much;
But yet in truth Sir, I deserve none such,
For when I wedde, as yet I mean to tarry,
A woman of one Language I Will but marry,
And with that single portion of her store.
Expect such plenty I would wish no more.
Epig. 9. Upon an Usurer and an improp. Parson.
A Clergy man that often had Preached,
From his stopped steeple throat,
And to his congregation teacht
Full often this certain note,
There could no Usurer be saved,
Unless he did restore
What he so wrongfully had shau'd
From th'backes of needy poor:
Upon a time it so fell out,
This Usurer did meet
The Parson as he went from Church,
And thus he did him greet;
Good Sir (quoth he) I wonder much
You take such fruitless pain.
To preach against a sin that's such
As you your self maintain;
But ten in the hundred do I take,
On good occasion when,
But you a hundred do reserve,
Allowing out but ten:
The Parson hearing him say so
Began to be affeard,
And never preached against that sin,
To this day that I heard.
Epig. 10. In Aulum West.
Westminster is a Mill that grindes all Causes,
But grind his Cause for me there he that list,
For by Demurs, and Erros, stays and cla^ses,
The tole is often made greater then the grist.
Epig. 11. In Iacobum.
He that does ask, Saint James does say shall speed,
O that King James would answer so my need.
Epig. 12. Consilium.
From the Confessor, Lawyer, and physician,
Hide not thy Case on no condition.
Epig. 13. Hayw. Rent.
By lease without writing one once let a Farm.
The Lesser most lewdly the rent did retain.
Whereby the lesser wanting writing had harm.
Wherefore he vowed whilst life did remain,
Without writing never to let thing again:
Husband (quoth the wife) that thing again reu^rt,
Else without writing you cannot let a fart.
Epigram. 14.
One time as was my ordinary wont,
I went abroad into the fields to hunt,
Started a Hare pursud' her with full cry
And had near wearyed her, when by and by
Miso, because I hunted in his grounds
Let lose his running dogs, and baukt my hounds
From thence, that sport I utterly forswore,
Being so unkindly croft by such a Bore
So shunning the open fields and forests wide,
My common haunt was by the water side,
For what thought I, though lands enclosed be,
Yet Seas and Rivers questionless are free:
There will I sport me with the scaly fry,
Fearelesse though all the world were standing by.
I had not scarce cast in my bayte to take,
But straight one comes, it seems he have did make
That bids me pack when first I did appear;
Away went I, it was no fishing there:
Scarce knowing now what sport to entertain,
Being banished both the earth and watery plain,
I took a piece next time, and forthwith went,
To sport me in the airy regiment,
Where having scarce discharged to kill a Daw,
Another coms and brings me statute law
Upon my piece, where I it lost, then swore
I nere would hunt, nor angle, nor shoot more.
Then took I dice in hand, my heavy fate;
Thus crossed in all, and lost my whole estate
HEREAFTER Follows certain Epitaphs on sundry persons.
1. On the Usurer.
HEre lies as least ten in the hundred,
Shackled up fast both hands and feet
That at such as lent money gratis wondered,
The gain of Vsur^e was so sweet,
But thus being new of life here^ ^^n,
It Is 100. to 10. he is scarce gone to heaven.
Epit. 2. Upon a Spendthrist.
Here lies Jack careless,
Without Tomb, without thought, without sheet
That lived in the Alehouse, the Bowling-Alley
And did in the street.
Epit. 3. Upon a riotous Courtier.
Here lies he now, where no man sees,
That lived by crooked hams and knees,
Yet in his heart did boil that lust,
That naught could quench, but earth and dust,
Where if he had sooner been laid,
Less sums his reckoning would have paid.
In Papam Pium quintum.
Papa Pius quintus moritur, res mira quod inter
Pontifices tantum quinque fuere Pii.
Pius the fist is dead, and understood
Of some so called, because but five were Good
In all the line of Popes. --
Fallar ego nam nemo pius re, nomine tantum,
Pontifices constat quinque fuisse pios.
Yet err I do in this to their more shame.
For none were good indeed though five in name.
Certain verses fixed upon a child laid in S. T. Hospital.
Conceive a fault by me conceived
By my seduced mother.
Who vows until she be a wife,
I nere shall know a brother;
And for this hospital is rich;
And has a plenteous purse;
And she is poor and cannot pay,
She has put me here to nurse.
No further she imparts her self,
Then that she is a sinner,
Though not the last that so shall err,
No nere then th'first beginner,
How ere she here has packt me up
The witness of her shame,
And left me unto you to feed,
To cloathe, and give a name.
Upon the unequal division of the earth, how some have all, and some none.
Though th'earth's the Lords, and all that is therein,
And nothing really man's own but sin,
A^ is the sea, the tributer of fountains
The sheep and cattle on a thousand mountains:
Though he that all these made, does al these feed,
And of no creature, aid does stand in need,
Yet does he from his high exalted throne
Suruay the ways men title these their own;
He sees his earth, the base of this fair frame
Intayld to greatness, to their blood and name,
Meat to the rich, in Akers of such store
That what makes one too proud, makes ten too poor.
Some of his walking earth he sees have gold
That rusts for use too se^do^e being told
And some again so s^a^ted in their need
Their sinnowes crack before their bellies feed;
Some choycest dainties sea and land afforde,
To surfeit on served daily to their board:
And some again are so penurious fed,
They think they fare rich if they purchase bread.
Another glory lies upon his back,
And having plenty there appears no lack
Veluets and silks, etc robes of endless wast
Altering with humor to give fancy taste.
When as some other whose success more bad,
Tugs 60. years like leathern Ada^ clad,
For skins or fig leaves for to hide his skin,
Whose heart being plain, he cannot this way sin;
Whose total substance all his hopes to boot,
Was never worth the trust of such a shute.
What should I say of this unequal lotte,
Would God thus have it? surely I think not:
Though some distinctions he would have to be,
Yet not in such a terrible degree:
He would not have thee see thy brother lack,
Then flake thy cost, and cloth some naked back;
He would not have thee see thy brother pine,
But him sustained from that excess of thine:
If for thy self thy whole endeauours tend,
If what thou have thou would be thine heir and spend,
Then know like that rich glutton thou may crave,
A drop, and be denide, because he gave
Not to the needy, crummes that did belong,
Drops were denide him for to cool his tongue:
Upon the late Star.
This year there has appeared a streaming star
Within our native Hemisphere or clime,
But whether it brings us news of peace or war,
Of plague, or famine, who is it can divine?
Though some interpret it to change of State,
Hostile invasion, or some great man's end:
Rumors of wars here landed to us late,
Or like particulars that they entend:
But since the Character has such a letter,
That none can understand but he that writ,
Let Us fear the worst, our sins, and make us better,
And not to other ends enterprete it,
For in the same there is matter vnderhil'd.
Which shall not to our knowledge be made plain,
Till the portant and purpose be fulfilled:
For never came such messengers in vain:
How ere with meekness, let us kiss the rod:
Hoping the best, yet leauing^al to God.
Epit. 4. S^. Tho. Becket.
Pro Christi sponsa, Christi sub tempore Christi
In templo, Christi verus amator obit.
Englished:
For Christ his Spouse, his Cause, and at Christ tide,
Within Christ's temple, Christ's true lover did.
Epit. 5. Written by a Religious Gent: before his death.
Earth take my earth, Satan my sin I leave,
The world my substance, Heaven my soul receive
Upon Jonas in the Whales belly.
Buried I am, and yet I am not dead,
Though neither earth enclose, nor stone me keeps,
I speak, I think, with living airs am fed,
In living tomb, in vnfaddom'd deepes,
What wight besides my self for shame or grace,
Ere lived in death, in such a tomb or place.
Epitaph. 6. In Verolamium. A forgotten City, sometimes near Saint Albons.
Stay thy foot that passest by,
Here is wonder to discry,
Churches that interred the dead,
Here themselves are sepulchred,
Howses where men slept and wak't,
Here in ashes vnderrak't:
In a word to allude,
Here is corn where once Troy stood,
Or more folly home to have,
Here Is a City in a grave:
Reader, wonder think it then,
Cities thus should dye like men,
And yet wonder think it none,
Many Cities thus are gone.
Epit: 7. Upon a Chambermaid,
Underneath this stone is laid,
A Ladies sometimes Chambermaide,
Who was young and plump and pretty,
And yet a Maid, alas 'twas pity.
Epit. 8. Upon a Love sick youth.
Here lies he, he lies here,
That bounst and pity cride,
The Door not op't, fell sick alas,
Alas, fell sack and did.
Epit. 9 On a rich covetous Lawyer.
Within this everlasting Tomb,
Whose house contains her dead till doom,
Is one possessed here to abide,
That yet had lived, and had not did,
If Death like him would have agreed,
At any rate to have been fee'd:
Or if he could at point of death,
That sold his wind, have bought but breath:
This cross to him could near so fall,
To have wed the Church that wooed the Hall,
Epit. 10. Upon a Citizen.
From wares and cares and fained breath
Here I at last am freed by death,
If that my dealings were not just,
The more I fear, the less I trust,
What though 100. Blue coats sing.
My friends did^ mourn, the bells did ring:
The earth received me with applause
All does not better mend my cause,
Fed I the hungry, clothed the poor,
Made I these friends to go before?
No, I left wealth behind unspent,
Coins vnreceiu'd that I had lent,
And suites vnended waged by cost:
And all I left behind is lost,
Good deeds I did, and gifts I gave,
Those went before me, those I have.
Epit. 11. A memento for mortality.
Taken from the view of Sepulchers of so many Kings and Nobles, as lie interred
in the Abbey of Westminster.
Mortality, behold and fear
What a change of flesh is here,
Think how many royal bones
Sleep within this heap of stones,
Hence removed from beds of ease,
Dainty fare, and what might please,
Fretted roofes and costly shows,
To a roof that flats the nose,
Which proclaims all flesh is grass:
How the Worlds fair Glories pass,
That there is no trust in Health,
In youth, in age, in greatness, wealth:
For if such could have repreeu'd,
Those had been immortal lived;
Know from this the World a snare,
How that greatness is but care,
How all pleasures are but pain,
And how short they do remain,
For here they lie had realms and lands
That now want strength to stir their hands:
Where from their Pulpits seel'd with dust
They preach, In Greatness is no trust.
Here Is an Aker sown indeed
With the richest royalst seed,
That the earth did ere suck in,
Since the first man did for sin,
Here the bones of birth have cride,
Though Gods they were, as men they did;
Here are sands (ignoble things)
Dropped from the ruined sides of kings,
With whom the poor man's earth being shown
The difference is not easily known,
Here Is a world of pomp and state,
Forgotten, dead, disconsolate. (Kings,
Think then, this since, that mows down
Exempts no meaner mortal things,
Then bid the wanton Lady tread,
Amid ^hese mazes of the dead.
And these truly understood,
More shall cool and quench the blood
Then her many sports aday,
And her nighty wanton play,
Bid her paint till day of doom,
To this favor she must come,
Bid the Merchant gather wealth,
The Usurer exact by stealth.
The proud man beat it from his thought,
Yet to this shape all must be brought,
A short addition or memento hereunto annexed upon the death of Queen ANNE.
See here this plotte for all her store,
With greedy throat still gapes for more:
Which with our grief, and her success,
Concludes not now in emptiness,
For newly now she has tom'bd in earth,
One great in good, as high in birth,
Unto a hopeful Prince the mother,
Wife to one King, and sister to another,
A king her father, every way borne high:
Matched great, lived great, in spear of majesty:
Yet notwithstanding this blood high disce^t
As rich in virtue, and more eminent,
Respective liber all, with a plenteous hand,
Where desert craved, or she might understand,
A needful good, or seasonable supply,
To such her stream of goodness near was dry,
Nor could the Labourer (heaven being her desire)
Who gave their verdite, sigh to want their hire,
For where that wisdom thought if f^te to pay,
It was her virtue not to keep't away:
Yet she with these, and thousands more beside,
From us was gone the moment that she did:
Gone like that fat all day of us deplord',
As soon to be called back as she restored:
'For though she be from us so lately fled,
She Is as far from life, as Adam so long dead:
Being gathered to that Sepulcher of Kings,
That best can show they are but mortal things:
Gone like that fat all day of us deplord',
As soon to be called back as she restored:
The mixture of whose bones, that n^w not ache,
Me thinks should mutine, and the building shake,
To simpathize the royalty they had,
How simply there regarded, meanly clad,
Where they shall sleep until that trumpe be blown,
That rends up sepulchers and teareth stone,
Seueres the ioynted buildings raisde^^ high,
Confusing all ith twinkling of an eye.
Hereafter follow certain Riddles, or witty Propositions.
Riddle 1
SPhinx certain monster of Thebes proposed a Riddle to all that passed by the
way, which whosoever could not resolve, he carried to the top of a high rock,
and from thence threw headlong down, which Riddle was as follows: Quod
pedibus binis, animal meat absque ruinis,
Mox graditur Ternis, post claudica^ atque quaternis.


Englished more at large.
What creature is that in the World, that first goes upon 4: feet, afterward
upon ^ feet, afterward upon 3: feet, and last of all upon 4 feet again.

This after the fall of many, was resolved by Oedipus to be a man, which first
in his childehode, creepes upon his hands and knees, as upon 4 feet,
afterward in his better strength walks upon 2 feet, afterward in declining
years walks with a staff, as with 3. feet, and lastly in his second
childehood or decrepit age, creeps upon all 4. again.

Riddle 2.
By what strange marriage was that, that this more strange kindred was
produced, that two mothers should produce two sons, that should be the
sons of their sons, brothers to their husbands, and uncles to each other,
and yet both lawfully borne in wedlock, and they their true mothers.

Resolution.
These two women had two sons that married crosly one the others mother, and
had each of them a son thereby which were thus allied as before mentioned.

Riddle 3
What part of man may that part be,
That is an implement of three,
And yet a thing of so much sled,
No woman would without it wedde,
And by which thing, or had or lost,
Each marriage is made upon crossed.
Resol.
The heart of a man a triangle figure, the beginning of love, and of every
match likely to prosper.

Rid, 4. Homers fatal Riddle.
Certain Fishermen upon the Sea having been freeing themselves from vermin,
meeting Homer by the shore side, proposed this Riddle unto him; What is that
which having taken, we have lost, and having not taken we have kept, still
meaning indeed their vermin, which he, dreaming of their fishing, dyed for
grief, because he could not resolve it.

Rid: 5.
First, my mother brought me forth, when shortly after I the Daughter bring
forth my mother again.

Resol.
Of water is first made ice, which afterward melts, and brings forth water
again, and so the daughter brings forth the mother, as the mother first the
daughter.

Riddle 6.
What one man was that that slew at once the fourth part of the world,

Resol.
Cain that slew his brother when there were but four persons in the world.

Riddle 7.
Who were those that fought before they were borne?

Resol.
Jacob and Esau in their mothers womb,
Riddle.
What Sepulcher is that, and where does it stand,
That touches neither heaven, nor earth, nor sea, nor land.
Resol.
The Tomb of Mahomet, being a chest of Iron, drawn up by loadestones, to the
top of Mecha, a church belonging to the Persians, whether the Turks go a
pilgrimage, as Christians to Jerusalem, to the Sepulcher of Christ.

Riddle. 8.
There was a man bespake a thing,
Which when the owner home did bring,
He that made it did refuse it,
And he that bought it, would not use it
And he that has it does not know,
Whether he has it, I or no,
Resol.
A Coffin bought by another for a dead man.

Riddle 9.
Two Sisters standing over a Tomb, thus bewaylde the dead therein interred.
Alas, here lies our mothers husband, our husband and the Father of our
children, and our father, how could that be?

Resol:
It is meant of Lots daughters, over the tomb of their Father.

Riddle 10.
That which thou look on with thy eyes (O Traveler) is a Sepulcher, yet
without her carcass, is a carcass, yet without her sepulchre^ yet both
carcass and sepulcher, and how can that be?

Resol:
The pillar of salt, Lots wife was turned into.

Josephus testifies that he saw that pill^^ of salt, and went purposely there
to behold it.

Riddle.
Two Gentlemen Stewards were sent to the Town to buy wine, and the one making
more haste than the other, had bought all the wine, which was only 8. gallons,
returning homewards met the other, who was going thither, told him he had
bought all that there was, nevertheless he would be ^^^tent to let him have
half, so he could measure it just in his measures, which were ^3. gallons, and
a 5^ gallons, and how was that done?

Resol,
In this manner, first he filled his measure of three Gallons, puts it into
the measure of five gallons, filles the 3, again, put 2. into the 5, then puts
the 5. into the 8. then puts the one into the 5. and then fills the measure of
3. and puts it into the 5. having one single gallon before, which so made it 4.
and so equally measured it forth.

Riddle 11,
In densis siluis venor bis quinque catellis
Quod capio, perdo, quod non capio mihi seruo.
Englished.
In thickest woods I hunt with beagles ten
After the chase, which when I do descrie,
I dispossess me of not useful then,
And what I take not, only that keep I.
Resol:
One scratching his head with both his hands.

Riddle 12
Learning has fed me, yet I know not a letter,
I have lived among books, yet am never the better:
I have eaten up the Muses, yet I know not a verse,
What student this is, I pray you rehearse.
Resol.
A worm bred in a book,

Riddle 13.
What is that which produces tears without sorrow, takes his journey to
heaven, but dies by the way, is begot by another, yet that other is not begot
without it.

Or thus.

What is that which if it be seen cannot be taken, if it be taken cannot be
held, and when it is thought to be something, by and by it turns into nothing.

Resol.
Smoke.

Rid: 14.
When I lived I fed the living, now I am dead, I bear the living, and with
swift speed walk over the living.

Resol.
A ship made of an Oak, growing fed hogs with acorns, now bears men, swims over
fishes.

Rid. 15.
Christopher bare Christ, Christ bare the world, where then stood Christophers
feet?

This must be answered by another Oedipius or Palaemon.

Riddle 16.
First I was small, and round like a pearl,
Then long and slender, as brave as an Earl,
Since like a Hermit I lived in a Cell,
And now like a rogue in the wide world I dwell,
Resol.
First, an Egg, Then a worm called a Silke^worme; then enclosed in a husk,
and last of all a Butterfly,

Riddle 17.
There is a body without a heart
That has a tongue, and yet no head,
Buried it was, ere it was made,
And loud and speaks, and yet is dead.
Resol:
A Bell which when it is cast, is founded in the ground.

Riddle. 18.
Far in the West I ^ot not where,
Are trees men say which oysters beare^
That oysters should be bred so hie,
Me thinks it sounds like a lie,
That female Plants I know that's true,
In London streets bear oysters new,
And fish and flesh, and now and then,
They bear I tell you handsome men.
Resol.
Every man or woman is a tree turned upwards, and upon such Trees you know what
fruits are borne in London.

Riddle. 19.
All day like one that is in disgrace,
He rests in some secret place,
And seldom peepeth forth his head
Until daylight be fully fled;
When in the Maids or Goodwifes hand
The Gallant first has grace to stand.
Whence to a hole they him apply,
Wherein he will both live and die.
Resol.
A Candle.

Riddle. 20.
One evening as cold as cold might be
With frost and hail and pinching weather,
Companions about three times three
Lay close all in a pound together,
Yet one after other they took a heat,
And died that night all in a sweat.
Resol.
A pound of Candles.

Riddle. 21.
A man and no man, seeing and not seeing, in the light and not in the light,
with a stone and no stone, struck a bird and no bird, sitting and not sitting,
upon a tree and no tree.

Resolution.
Androgius the Euenuch in the twylight struck a Bat, with a pumice stone,
sitting upon a mustard tree.

HEREAFTER FOLLOW certain ceasonings or Jestes to laugh out the end of a short
Discourse.
Jest. 1.
Upon a time at a banquet certain friends meeting to be merry, to further
their purpose, one began to broch this proposition: What part of the body was
the most honestest; to to which one replied, The eyes, another the heart; a
third the brain; some one thing, some another. Antonius being bid to speak,
said, the mouth because it is kissed in salutation, beheld to be the honestest:
another held that to be the honestest part we sit with, because by that the
honesty and welfare of the whole body is preserved; and again for a second
reason, because that ever was accounted the most honest and worthy part or
person which first sits down, and that is the hindermost part to which
probability al seemed to consent, and this last resolution for that time
carried it, until a second time meeting with Antonius upon a like occasion,
Antonius remembering the applause upon his argument held he had received,
gratifies him at his first sight, with a crack from the nether most parts, who
thereupon he seemed to be very angry. Antonius answered him, he had no reason
for it, since he saluted him according to his own argument, with the most
worthy part, and that which he had preferred before the mouth, and so with
laughter on all sides the controversy ended. And therefore though Claudius
Caesar made a law that a escape should be no loss of reputation, and yet we
think the contrary, and that Non est vrbanus cui retrosibilat ann^.

Jest. 2.
There was a Gentleman upon a time that from no great reason that he had,
took occasion to commend the clearenesse of his Beer, as another upon a time
to Sir Thomas More the well relish of his Hop: To who^ the first answered, that
if it had been a little more clear, one should hardly have known it from
water: The other, if it had hopped a little further, it had hopped into the
Thames.

Jest. 3.
A certain King had a fool, that kept a note-booke of all the follies (at
least wise those which he thought follies) comm^tted in or about the Court,
upon a time an Ethiopian horserider that professed great skill in horse^flesh
chanced to arrive there, whose qualities being made known to the King, the
King employed him with 3000. pound to buy Horses in Barbary, which this fool
understanding, put down into his Note-booke: which when the King heard of, he
seemed offended, and would know of his Lack wit why he had noted that?
Because (quoth he) I think he will come no more unto you; but what quoth the
king if he come again, then (quoth he) I will put you out, and put him in.

Jest. 4.
Marcus Tullius Cicero, seeing his brother Quintus Ciceros picture very
largely drawn to the middle, he being a man of very little stature, told the
Painter his half brother was bigger then his whole.

To which purpose Lentulus said when he saw his little nephew wear a great
sword, who has tide my kinsman to his weapon.

Jest. 5.
A certain Philosopher knocking at a great man's door, the Porter espying him
but in mean attire, the Door would not be opened, which he perceiving,
immediately goes back, and changing himself into rich robes, repaires to the
door again and knocks, and was forthwith let in, who entering, ever as he went
a long he kissed his garments and made obeisance unto them; the reason being
demanded by the Master thereof, he was thus answered, Honorantem honoro, I
honor those that honor me; for what virtue could not, clothes could.

Jest. 4.
A certain Player being sick and lying upon his deathbed, the Priest came
unto him, and exhorted him to make his will, which he said he would most
willingly do, (For quoth he) I have nothing but two geldings to dispose of,
and I give them to the knights and Barons of the Land.

And when the Priest asked him why he rather gave them not to the poor:
answered, I do as Fortune does, and she has given all to the rich, and
nothing to the poor, and therefore I will follow her in doing the like.

Jest. 5.
A certain Rusticall Clown came to an Archdeacon, and told him he had
married a woman, which was poor but heretofore had been rich, asking his
advice if he might not put her away and marry a Richer, who answered he might
not, why Sir (quoth he?) you have got a divorce from your poor benefice and
taken a Richer.

Jest. 6.
A poor old Woman being sick and weak, bequeathed after her death unto the
Priest her Hen, because she had nothing more, Now the Priest came and took
her away, she yet living: quoth the woman, now I perceive that our Priest is
worst than the Devil, for I have often times bid the Deui^l take her, and the
Fox take her, and yet they sparde her me, But once the Priest, and she is gone.

Jest. 7.
A certain boisterous Rusticke yet prompt and conceited, traveling on the way
with a long pike staff on his neck, was suddenly and furiously assalted by a
great Mastiffe, which came upon him with open mouth and violence as if he
would at once devour him who presently to withstand the danger, by rescue of
himself, runs the pike and sharp end thereof into his throat, whereupon he
presently dyed, which the owner thereof seeing, comes earnestly unto him, and
between threatening and chiding, asked him why he stro^ke him not rather with
the blunt end of the staff, why Sir quoth he, because your dog ran not at
me with his tail.

Jest. 8.
A certain vain glorious Soldier, bragged in all places that he came, of 9.
Kings that he had of his kindred, and going about to name them could reckon
but six: a Player standing by told him he knew the rest, The three Kings of
Colleyne.

Jest. 9.
A certain Astronomer had deuined of king Henry the seventh of England that
he should dye in such a year, the king hearing of it, sent for him, and
questioned if he were an Astronomer, who told him that he did profess that
art, the king asked him if he could foretell where he should be in the
Easter-holy days; he answered be could not, then quoth the king thou shall see
me divine more certainly, for I tell thee thou shall be in prison, whither
he (...)

Jest. 9.
One asked a prostitute Lady of Florence, how her children so likely resembled
her husband, she so usually commersing with others; Andswered, I suffer no
other to Board my ship before her carriage be full.

Jest. 10.
One asked a Painter, why, seeing he could draw such excellent proportions, he
begot such deformed children, who answered, In tenebris quidem fingo, sed in
die pingo, I make the one in the light, and the other in the dark.

Jest. 11.
A certain conceited traveler being at a Banquet, there chanced a Fly to
fall into his cup, which he being to drink, took out for himself, and
afterward put it in again for his fellow being demanded his reason, answered,
that for his own part he affected them not, but it might be some other did.

There is extant to this Jest an Epigram of Sir Thomas Mores, which I have here
inserted.

Muscas e Cratere tulit Conuina priusqu^
Ipse bibit: readit, rursus vt ipse bibit.
Addidit and causam, muscas ego non am^ dixit.
Sed tamene vobis nes^io nunquis amat.
Thus Englished.
Out of his glass one took a Fly,
In earnest or in jest
I cannot tell, but having drunk
Returned it to the rest.
And for he would offencelesse seem,
He showed his reason too,
Although I love them not my self
It may be some here do.
Jest. 12.
One asking a merry blind man in what place he lost his eyes, answered, from
either side his Nose. So likewise Diogines being at dinner with a bald man,
thus said, honest friend I will not speak thy contumely, but commend thy
hairs that flew from so bad a head.

Jest. 13.
It is reported of one James de Castello a Bononian, a man of eminent knowledge
and learning, but exceeding little stature, sent an Ambassador to Pope
Boniface the eight, insomuch that delivering his Embassage the Pope imagining
that he kneeled on his knees, made unto him long action with his hands that
he should rise up, until one of his Cardinals gave him to understand that he
was another Zacheus.

Jests.
A certain fellow condemned, and at the place of execution, began to disputes
with judge by what conscience he could hang him a poor thief and no
malefactor, who asked him by what conscience he could take from another that
was not his, and thus the controversy began and continued, till at last the
hangman turns him off, and so ends the strife.

A CONCLUSION TO this book in way of answer to him that demanded what was the
perfect use of Books.
A. To increase knowledge, confirm judgment, compare the times past with the
present, and draw use out of both for the future, to bring forth the dead
speaking and conferring their knowledge to the living, according as the Poet to
this purpose wittily writes.

O blessed letters that combine in one,
All ages past, and make one live with all,
By you we do confer with who are gone,
And the dead living unto counsel call, etc
Books the most sweet commendable and delectable household, stuffein the world,
the most free and trusty reprouers, for, Nullus amicus magis liber quam. Those
dead, yet living companions, those regular obsequies, that speak not but when
they are desired, and no longer then they are contentiue from their Treasury
what continual Physic has the World received to purge out the dullness of
natural capacity, and the very Image of death, as the Poet styles it, Nam
sine doctrina vita est quasi mortis Imago. Yet from this sweet and excellent
society, what a part of the world are exempted and live in darkness; Therefore
thou which enioyst the use thereof, and art conversant in their Councels, be
more in goodness as thou art in knowledge, and then this conclusion shall well
befit thee, thy house, and thy household stuff.

Conclusion.
Tum foelix domus est, and tum numerosa supplex.
Cum pius est Dominus and been parta domus.
Englished.
Happy the house the goods whereof excel.
When the owner's Godly, and those gotten well.
FINIS.
THE COVNTRY-MANS COVNSELLOR. OR Necessary addition to his yearly oracle or
Prognostication.

Calculated by Art as a Tutor for their help, that otherwise buy more than
they understand.

Beginning with this year of our Lord God 1619. And so continuing forward as
the Benefit and Use shall encourage.

With many other necessary Rule^ and Observations of much profit and use being
known.

By E.P. Philomathem.

LONDON. Printed by Bern. Alsop for Leonard Becket, and are to be sold at his
shop in the Temple near the Church, 1619.

TO THE BVYERS yearly of Almanackes and Prognostications.
Prefatio sieve Admonitio pia and vtilie.

THou whose short span of life, as plain appears,
Hangs but upon the wast of some few years
Which that Arithmetician best of men
Cast but in his account threescore and ten.
How soon they will determine dig thy grave,
Thou may observe that see what wings they have,
How with no sound they wheel their times about,
Eating with silence Lives and Leases out:
As here is a date but yesterday renude,
Nor more it seems, yet does a year conclude;
In which that Dayry of little cost
Is now run out, and that small value lost
Wherewith it was purchasd if thou not extend
Thy thoughts to make it thus far forth thy friend,
That every year thy Almanacke thou buyest,
Thou art one year nearer to the year thou dyest.
And from that meditation so prepare
Thy lise, that death near seize thee unawares.
One yeaee thus to another yielding room,
Have filled up many a sepulcher and tomb,
Fretted out brass with age, marble with rust,
Converted generations into dust.
From which collect though nere so young thou be,
This may doomsday final year of thee;
And from that motive such a method borrow
As thou should live an age, or die to morrow.
A Brief Chronology of the times, wherein these famous men lived and dyed.
Anno mundi. Aristotle 3640 Homer 3003 M.T. Cicero 3980 Virgil 3998

Anno Domini. S. Augustine. 400 S: Anselme Bishop of Cant. 1080 Agrippa the
Magitian. 1550 S, Bernard. 1130 S. Chrysostom 400 Erasmus, 1528 Martin Luther.
1520 Melancthon. 1530

years Since London and Paris were paued. 416 Since the building of London
bridge. 435

Of a Year, and what it is, and why it is most properly called ANNVS.
THe word Annus, which most properly signifies circle or Compass, is here
termed for the year, which is properly that space of time that the Sun runs
through the whole Signs and Zodiac, and the reason thereof is, for that as
little Circles are called Annuli Rings, so the greater circles of time are
called Anni, years or circuits, because they ever run round, and with
continual compass, inuiron all things within the verge of Age.

Q. What are the parts of a year?

A. Ver, estas, Autumnus, hiems sunt quatuor vnum,
Qui si membra simul iunxeris annus erit.


It contains Months Solar. 12 Lunar. 13
Weeks. 52 Days. 365 so many as there are veins in the body of man. Hours.
8766
According to the Poet.

Ter centum, ter viginti, cum quinque diebus,
Sex horas, neque plus integer annus habet.
Or thus, Lxv. tria, c. capit annus quilibet in sae,
Addito sex horas anni compleueris oras.


The year Astronomicall, or Julian year adds thereto 6. hours, and 6.
minutes, which every fourth year increase to a day, which makes the Leap
year, or his sextill, compounded of bis and sextus, because the 6. day next
before the Calends of March is twice repeated, or reckoned, which indeed is the
25. of February, Saint Mathias day, so adding to the month of February one
day, from whence proceeds the difference between us and other foreign
accounts.

Q. Why is it called the Julian year?

A. Because Julius Caesar the first Roman Emperor caused the year according
to the course of the Sun, to be reduced to the number of days and hours
before expressed: and whereas March was the first Month of the year with the
Hebrews and Romans, as now with us, and July was the fifth month, called by
the Romans Quintilis, the fifth month, March being the first, which Julius
Caesar borne in that month altered, and called it Julius, or July, as August.
Caesar (in whose reign Christ was borne) the month Sextilis or 6. month after
his own name, Augustus, now August with us; and so reckoning from March the 1.
Month, September according to his signification, will be the seventh month,
October the 8. month, November the 9. Month, December the 10. month, which if
you reckon from January they cross their names,

Q. The holy Scriptures make mention of sundry things done at certain hours
of the day, not like unto the hours of our account, as in S. John's Gospel,
the Rulers son healed of his sickness, it is said at the 7. hour the Ague
left him, and the Laborers that came into the vineyard, came at the 11. hour,
and Christ in his Passion, it is recorded by the Evangelists, that at the 6,
hour was darkness over the whole earth, and about the ninth hour be cried
with a loud voice, and so ga^e up the Ghost. Now I would know by our account
what hours of the day these were, as of the rest.

A. The Jews did divide their Artificial day into 4. quarters, allowing to
every quarter 3. hours, accounting the first hour of the first quarter, at
the rising of the Sun, and the third hour of the said quarter, they called
the third hour, and the third hour of the second quarter they called the 6.
hour, which was midday, the third hour of the third quarter the 9. hour and
the 2. hour of the 4. quarter, the 11. hour, and they called the 12. and last
hour of the day Euentide: So the Rulers son being healed at the 7. hour, it
was with us at one of the clock in the afternoon: and the 6. hour when
darkness was upon the earth at midday with us: the 9. hour when Christ yielded
up the Ghost, 3. a clock in the afternoon; the Laborers that came at the 11.
hour, came at 5. of the clock in the afternoon, or an hour before Sunne-set.

Q. How divided they their night?

A. They divided their ^ artificial night likewise into 4 quarters, called by
the^ the 4. watches of the night; for the first 3. hours was the first watch,
during which time all the soldiers both young and old, of any fortified Town
or Garrison, were wont to watch; the second third hour they called the second
watch, which was about midnight, at which time the young soldiers only
watched; and the third quarter of the night containing also 3 houers; was
called the third watch, in that season the soldiers of middle age did watch;
and the last 3. hours, called the 4. watch, was about the break of day, in
which the old souldiees only watched.

The day is accounted with us for payments of money between Sun and Sun;
but for inditements of murder the day is accounted from midnight to midnight,
and so are fasting days.

Q. How in the more purer and ancient times from the example of the Apostles
were the days of the week named, since corrupt by the Heathens, and called
after the names of the seven Planets, or their Gods.

A. One, or the 1. from the Sabbath, two or the 2. from the Sabbath, and three
or the 3. from the Saboth: and so of the rest.

Our yearly Almanacks make mention (which many read but few understand) of the
Golden Number, Epact, Circle of the Sun, Roman Indiction, and such like, of
which I desire to know some reasons or use.

And first of the Golden Number, what it is, when it begins, and why it is
so called.
THe Golden number is a number of 19. proceeding from 1. to 19 and so begin
again at 1. and is so called because it was sent in Golden Letters from
Alexandria in Egypt, to Rome, and it is the number of 19. because in 19. years
the Moon does make all her sundry motions, and changes, and returns again
to the place where she first begun: To find out the aforesaid Number, add
1 to the year of our Lord, whereof you enquire, and divide the same by 19.
and the remainder shall be the Golden number.

What is the Epact.
THe Epact is a Number not exceeding 30. because the Moon between change and
change, nueer passes 20. days.

The Epact is thus found out, multiply the Golden Number of the year by a 11.
the product whereof if it be under 30. is the Epact, but if it be above 30.
then divide the product by 30. and the remainder shall be the Epact.

The knowledge of the Epact serves to find out the Age of the Moon. The
Goulden Number, and Dominicall letter, change the first of January, and the
Epact the first of March. Easter day never falls lower then the 22. of March,
never higher, then the 25. of April.

Shroue Sunday has his Range between the first of February, and the seventh
of March. Whit^onday, between the 10. of May, and the 13 of June.

What is the Equinoctial, and wherefore is it ^ so called.
THe Equinoctial is a great Circle, which being in every part equally distant
from the two Poles of the World, divides the Sphere, in the very midst
thereof into equal parts, and therefore it is called of some the Cincture, or
girdle of the World.

It is called the Equinoctial, because that when the Sun touches this
Circle, which is twice in the year, it makes the day and the night of an
equal length, throughout the world, which Equinoctial happens in the
Spring, and in Autumn, about the 11 of March, and the 13. of September.

Q. What are those 12. signs or Images placed before our Calenders about the
Anatomy of man's body.

A. Those 12. Signs or Images are 12. stars, every one of them containing
many stars, whose influences are very powerful over humane bodies.

Q What makes the full Moon, and whence proceeds her Eclipse?

A. Her opposition against the Sun makes her full, but her Eclipse or
darkening, caused when the Sun is opposite unto her diametally, and the Earth
in the midst between them both, which being thick and not transparent,
casting his shadow to that point which is oposit to the place of the Sun, will
not suffer the Moon to receive any light from the Sun, without whose supply
she is always a dark body, for from it she borrows all her light.

Of what substance be the Stars.
THe stars be of the same substance that the heavens be, wherein they are
placed, differing only from them in thickness, which demensitude makes them
more apt to receive and retain the light of the Sun, which thereby become
visible to our sight, for the heavens themselus being pure, thin, and
transparent, and without color is not visible, as the Stars which shine
as well in the day, as in the night, although not perceived by reason of the
Suns greater light.

Q. What motion, have the stars?

A. The self same motion that the Heavens have wherein they are placed, which
is as some say, by the primum mobile or first mouer, turned by God himself, as
every one of the rest by his proper intelligence, and whereas the 7 Planets or
wandering Stars do change their places, now here, now there, that is not by
their own proper motion, but by the motion of the heavens, wherein they are
placed; for a star being of a round shape, has no members to walk from one
place to another, but only by the motion of the Heaven wherein they are fixed.

Q. What comparison is therein their greatness between some stars and the
earth.

A. Though their far distance of them from the earth, makes their raye
approach our eye in a sharp pointed Angle, whereby they seem to our sight and
judgment no brother then our hand breadth.

Yet is every fixed Star far greater in compass then the whole earth.

Every wandering star likewise is bigger then the same, Luna, Venus, and
Mercury excepted.

Sol is bigger then the Earth, 166 Times. Saturn. is bigger then the Earth, 95
Times. Jupiter. is bigger then the Earth, 91 Times. Mars. is bigger then the
Earth, 2 Times. Venus lesser then the Earth, 32 Times. Mercury, least of all
and is contained of the Earth. 3143 Times.


The Nature of these 7. Planets, or wandering stars.
Saturn is cold and dry, Jupiter hot and moist, Mars extreme hot and dry:
Sol hot and somewhat dry: Venus temperately cold and moist: Mercury of a
changeable Nature, Luna cold and moist,

Of the seven Ages of Man's life, with the predominancy of these 7. Planets or
wandering stars, in every one of them.
The Astrologians have divided man's life according to the Division of the World
into 7. Ages, over every which Age one of these Planets or stars, have their
Regiments assigned.

1 The first Age is called Infancy which begins with the first childhood,
and has his continuance for the space of 7. years, over which Luna or the
Moon reigns, as may well appear by their moysture^ agreeing with the
influence of that Planet, Queen over seas and floods, and children.

2 The second Age, is Childhoode, which goes onward 7. years, more and
continues till the 14. year of their life, over which Mercury is assigned
Patron, for then participating of their Regents influence, Children are
inconstant, yet of some comprehending Capacity, some what inclineable to learn.

3 The third age proceeds forward 8. years, and is termed I^^entu^, youth,
or Stripling age, it wanders between 14. and 22. over which season Venus is
predominant, for then they are amorous, lustful, loathsome of childish
sollies, and inclineable to more dangerous vices.

4 The fourth Age begins at 22. and ends 34. containing 12. years. In the
which station the Epithet or Denomination, is a young man: over this age the
Planet Sol is chief Regent, in which season, reason and discretion (like the
beams thereof) begin to spread forth to enlighten the understanding, and to
exhale and suck up the thick mists of ignorance and folly, and then begins a
man to know he is a man.

5 The fifth Age is called Virile, or Man's Age, and that proceeds where the
other ends, and continues forward sixteen years, over which season Mars is
chief governor. Now in this time a Man begins to be covetous, churlish,
chol^erick, etc.

6 The sixth Age runs forward 12. years more, and leaves him not till he has
numbered 62. this age is termed old age, though his toe touch but the heel
thereof. Now over this Jupiter is predominant, and he inclines to Justice,
moderations and Religion, and all other actions of goodness and piety.

7 The seventh and last age, continues forward 18 years, it leaves a Man at
80 in the claws of weakness, and infirmity: For age it self, without
sickness, which seldom lives at ods there with, is an infirmity: to this
decrepit Age few creep to, by reason of the Planet Saturn, which is most
melancholy and slow of all other, thereby his evil influence more enforcing a
man, to decline and droope, become froward, cold, and melancholy, then
otherwise he should, Likewise these four divisions of Man's life are compared
in this manneer to the 4. Seasons of the year.
1 His Infancy to the Spring, hot and moist. 2 His Youth to the summer, hot
and dry. 3 His Manhood to Autumn, cold and moist. 4 Senectus, or old age to
Winter, cold and dry.


Q. Why did men live longer before the flood then since?

A. Before that Deluge, the Planets were glorious in their Natures, and sent
better influences into human bodies. There were not so many Meteors, Comets and
Eclipses seen, from which innumerable defects and diseases do proceed; The
earth was more fruitful, wholesome, powerful in her Herbs, Plants, and
Vegitables, their effects and virtues better known, which ever since the
flood, which was sted away her fatness, have lost much of their operations,
and now since with age more infeebled in these weak and sickly seasons of our
times, of which one thus writes to our purpose.

And now the springes and Summers which we see,
Like sons of Women after fifty be.
Lastly, they be more continent in their lives, more satisfied in their
desires, which since, Gluttony and her new Cookerie, have killed more then the
sword, famine, or pestilence.

Their knowledge in all Arts was more enlarged, the influences of the Planets
better known, and how they work upon humane bodies, as the some Author to the
same purpose wittily follows it.

Then if a slow paced star had stolen away,
From the Obseruers marking, he might stay
Two or three hundred years to see it again
And so make up his observation plain.
Q. How is the World divided?

A. Into two essential parts, the Celestial and Elementall part, of which
the Celestial part contains the 11. Heavens or Spheres, which are thus
numbered.

The 1 Is the sphere of the Moon. 2 Of Mercury. 3 Of Venus. 4 Of the Sun. 5
Of Mars. 6 Of Jupiter, 7 Of Saturn. 8 Is the Sphere of the fixed stars. 9 Is
the sphere of the second moveable. 10 Of the primum Mobile, or first mouer. 11
The Imperial Heaven, where God and his Angels are said to dwell.


The Elementall part, does contain the 4. Elements, viz. 1 The Element of
Fire, next to the Moon, and so downward. 2 The Element of the Air. 3 The
Element of the Water. 4 And lowest of all, the Earth.


Q If there be so many several Heavens, how comes it to pass that all these
to the eye seem but as one entire body?

A The reason hereof is, because they are all so clear and transparant, that
though they inuolue and cover one another, as the skin or skale of an Onion,
yet being in their nature more bright, pure, and subtle, then either
Crystal, or the most transparant Glass, the sight does pierce through them
all as one, and viewes them all as one, though they are several and of
exceeding great thickness.

Q. Into how many Regions is the air divided?

A. The Air is divided into three Regions, by the Natural Philosophers, both
of Ancient and modern times, that is to say, into the highest, lowest, and
middle-most Region: In the highest Region turned about by the Element of fire,
are bred all lightnings, fire-drakes, Comets, Blazing-Starres, and such like.

In the Middle Region all cold and watery impressions, as Frost, Snow, Ice,
Hail, etc.

In the lowest Region, somewhat more hot by reason of the Beams of the Sun,
reflecting from the Earth, and therein are bred all clouds, dewes raines, and
such like.

A brief discourse of the Natural causes of sundry Meteors; as Snow, Hail,
Rain, Wind, things well known in their effects, though darkely in their
causes.
Happy his estate, above the fate of Kings,
That could but truly know the cause of things.
You must first understand that all watery Meteors, as Rain, Snow, or such
like, are but a moist vapor drawn up by the virtue of the Sun and the rest of
the Planets, into the middle Region of the Air, where being first congealed,
are afterward dissolu^d and fall upon the Earth, as Hail or Rain.

Of the Rainebow and the effects thereof.
If two Rainebowes appear at one time, they presage Rain to eusue, But if one
Rainbow presently after Rain, it betokens fair weather.

Dianaeus in his Phisickes says, the Rainebow is made by reason of the Sun
beams, beating upon a hollow cloud, their edge being so repelled and beaten
back against the Sun, and thus arises variety of colors by the mixture of
clouds, Air, and fiery light together, but as he says, it pretends
little alteration or change of weather.

Of the Wind, what it is, what the Motion and effect thereof, and from whence
it proceeds, though no man knows whence it comes nor whither it goes, as
testifies the holy writ. First then you have to understand, that Aristotle and
the rest of his S^ct, do define the Wind to be an Exhalation, Hot and Dry,
engendered in the bowels of the earth, where breaking his prison, and violently
rushing therout, is carried sidelong upon the face thereof.

Q. Why is not the motion thereof right upward, and downward, as well as always
sidelong.

A. Because that whilst by his heat, he strives to mount up and carry his
course through the 3. Regions of the Air, the middle Region by his extreme
does always beat it back, so that thereby, together with the confluence of
other exhalations rising out of the earth, his motion is forced to be rather
round than right, and the reason why he blows more sharply one time than
another, and in one place, more then in another, and sometimes not at all is as
fumes that arise out of new exhalations, and out of Floods, Fens, and Marshes
may join with it to increase his force, the defect or fullness, whereof may
either allay it or increase it; as also the Globe or rotunditie of the Earth,
may by the cause of the blowing of it, more in one place than in another; or
mountains, hills, or woods may hinder his force from blowing in all places
equally, whereas upon the plain or broad sea, it blows with an equal force;
and as for the stillness or ceasing thereof, it comes to pass diverse ways,
either by frost, closing and congealing up the pores of the Earth, whence it
should issue, or by the heat of the Sun drying up fumes and vapors, that
should increase it, and whereof it is engendered.

The Nature of the 4 principal winds and their effects.
1 SVbsolanus, or the East wind, is hot and dry, temperate, sweet, pure,
subtle and healthful, and especially in the morning', when the Sun rises,
by whom he is made more pure and subtle, causing no infection to man's body, but
expelling it.

2 Zephirus, or the West wind, is temperate hot, and moist, and wholesome,
especially in the evening, it dissolueth frost, ice, and snow, and makes
flowers and grass to spring, and some write that it produces Thunder.

3 Septentrio, or the North wind, is for the most part cold and dry, repelling
moisture and rain, and though it cause cold and numnesse, so nipping the
fruits of the earth, and many times the forward buds of the Spring, yet it
drives away infectious and noisome airs, and so is a means to preserve
health.

4 Auster or Notas, the South wind is hot and moist, breeding thick clouds
and sickness.

Natural causes of Earthquakes.
PLenty of winds got into the bowels, holes, and cranies of the earth, and
violently rushing out, and the earth suddenly closing up again, causes the
shaking or earthquake, which is generally a forerunner of war.

Of Thunder and Lightning.
WHen an Exhalation hot and dry, mixed with moisture is attracted into the
middle Region, and there enclosed in the body of a cloud, now these two
contraries thus included in one place together, fall at variance, and cannot
be reconciled, but break the prison wherein they are pent, the violent
out-rushing whereof makes a noise, which we call thunder, and the fire
lightning, being both borne at one instant, although the lightning be the
first perceived in regard of the quickness of the eye before the ear.

Of the strange effects of Lightning.
THat which is dry burns not at all, that which is moist burns not likewise,
but blasts, and alters the color, but that which is clear is of a strange
operation, for it draws vessels dry without hurting the Caske melts the
silver without hurting the bag, breaks the bones and hurts not the
skin, kills the child in the womb without hurt to the mother.

It hurts not the Law^ell tree, enters not above a yard into the earth, such
as are shadowed with the skins of Seals, Sea calue^, and the Eagle, are safe,
as Pliny stories it.

The Ancient Egyptians which were the first and best Astronomers, have
observed certain years in a man's life to be very dangerous, and these they
name Clymacterical, or stayry years: Now a Clymactericall year is every
seventh year of a man's life; the reason is, because then the course of the
Planets return to Saturn, who most commonly is ^n enemy to our good, and as
the Moon which is the nearest, and next Planet unto us, and swiftest of course
of all other, passes almost every seventh day into the contrary sign of the
same quality from whence she came forth, and so by that means brings in
the Critical days: so Saturn which is the Planet furthest from us, and
slowest of course, for he rests in one sign so many years, as the Moon
does days, brings in likewise these Clymactericall years, and causes
sundry mutations to follow; hence it is that in the seventh year children do
cast and renew their teeth.

Hereafter follows certain Clymactericall and dangerous years of a Man's
life.
TThe 49. year, composed of seven times seven dangerous, 56. year to men
especially borne in the night, 63. years to those borne in the day time, by
reason of the dryness of Mercury and Venus.

Whereunto Octavius the Emperor seems to con^ent, whereto this effect he
writes to his Nephew, to rejoice with him having passed over that deadly year
and enemy to old age 63 in which number the 7 and 9 do concur, as Heffman to
that purpose more largely in his Book De diebus and an^nis Criticis recites.

The Critical Days of a Man's life being collected throughout e^erie mo^eth
are observed these following.
1 and 7 of January. 2 and 4 of Frebruary. 1 and 4 of March. 8 and 10 of
April. 3 and 7 of May 10 and 15 of June 10 and 13 of July. 1 and 2 of August.
3 and 30 of September. 3 and ^0 of October. 3 and 5 of November. 7 and 10 of
December.
There are likewise in the year^more especially to be observed 3 dangerous
Mundayes, to begin any business, fall sick, or undertake any journey.

First Monday in April, which day Caine was borne and his brother Abel slain.

Second Monday in August, which day Sodom and Gommorrah were destroyed.

31 Of December, which day Judas was borne that betrayed Christ.

Of the 4. humors in man's body, and how they reign in their courses, and first
What a Humor is.
A Humor is a Distillation of a moist and running body, into which by the
Limbecke of the liver the meats are converted and diffused through the veins
and Alleys of the same, for the better nourishmeut thereof, and are thus
according to Lemnius described in his Book De quatuor Complectionibus.

1 Sanguine humor.
The blood or sanguine humor, is moist and ruddy, and hot, the principal
seat, or cesterne thereof is the Liver, or Amwell head, that waters the
whole City, or body of man, out of which issue forth the vital spirits, like
unto small and gentle winds that arise out of rivers and fountains.

2 Flegmaticke Humor.
The Phlegmatic humor is of color white and brackish, and like unto drops
of fat. his seat is chiefly in the kidneyes, which separate to themselves, the
water from the blood, dividing the blood into the veins, and expelling the
water into urine.

3 Choler.
It is hot and fiery, and to the taste bitter^, like unto Herbgrace or Rue,
and it serves not only to cleanse the guts of filth, but also to califie the
Liver, and to preserve the blood from putrefaction.

4. Melancholy.
The Melancholy Humor is black and earthly, resembling the lees of blood, and
has his seat in the spleen, of which one thus writes.

The Sanguine causes cheerefulnes.
The Melancholy despair.
The Collericke is churlish.
The Phlegmatic is fair.
Every one of these Humors reign 6. hours, blood is predominant from 9 of
the clock at night, till 3 of the morning; Choler, from 3 of the clock in
the morning, till nine of the same day; Melancholy, from nine till three in
the afternoon, and Phlegm, from three in the afternoon till nine at night.

Also blood has his dominion in the Spring, Choler in the Summer, Melancholy
in Autumn, and Phlegm in Winter, as Lemnius thus further in his said Book
testifies.

Hereunto are annexed certain verses, describing the person and quality of
that child of Chase, or Lady PECVNIA, written long since by that Gentleman of
quality I.T. and as something pertinent to our purpose hereinto inserted.
She is a Lady of most matchless carriage,
Wedded to none, though saught of all in marriage:
She may be kistt, yet neither washed nar clipped,
And if you woo not wary, soon ore-slipt,
She may belong, and yet be honest too,
To many Merchants, spite they all ca^ do
Who ere atchieues her, speak her nore so fair,
Shele not stay long before she take the air:
Shele stay with no poor man her states so great,
A rich man may her for a time entreat,
She goes in cloth of silver, cloth of gold,
Off^uer all worths, and values manif^lde,
But when she goes in golden robes best d^^bt
Then she is suspected most to be most light,
She needs no Physic to recover health,
For she is still current, and as rich in wel^h,
Some Irish Lady borne, we may suppose:
Because she runs so fast, and never goes:
If she be wronged in name, and ill abide it,
Of all men Justice Touchstone must decide it,
She that thus does, and all do thus to gain her,
Being so atchieu'd, she is but slipperie bold,
And will be gone, unless by force you strain her,
Changing her humor to another mould
By pence and half pence, and such little crummes,
Which of themselves so slightly men do prise,
In time are eaten up those larger sums,
That did not by such petty parcels rise:
Like little drops that of themselves not feared,
Yet does in time together so much slip,
That where no danger at the first appeard
It after comes to bear or drowned a ship.
Thy pence a day that may be saved from waste,
When thou do see in one year there amount,
Will be by this presentment held more fast,
And weighed as thrift persuades in more account.
Which unsuspected thief that all may know it,
^e waste but few lines more before I show it.
A brief representation of idle or extraordinary expenses with their amounts
to in the year, fit to be regarded of all those that out of a wary
disposition intend to thrive.
The Induction.
HE that makes conscience of a venial sin,
Into a mort all seldom falls in.
He that not slightly passes ore one day.
Throws not in thristllesse uses years away.
He that makes conscience for to speak the truth.
Seldom forsweares himself in age or youth.
So he that a penny gripeth fast.
Seldom throws pounds or crownes' away in waste.
As contrary he that ore^lookes these small,
And petty moyties, easily sinkes in all,
A penny is a small regardlesse sum,
Yet may in some time to some thing come,
Therefore observe this Table, thou shall know,
How great those little in small time do grow.
And how with easy steps they do decay,
Those that nere reckon pence, they waste this way.
By the Day, By the Week. A farthing. 1. d. ob. q. A half penny. 3 d. ob. A
penny. 7 d. 2 pence. 14. d. 3 pence. 21. d. 4 pence. 2. s 4. d. 5 pence. 2 s.
21. d. 6 pence. 3 s. 6. d. By the month. By the year. 7. d. 7. s. 8. d. q. 14.
d. 15. s. 2. d. ob. 2, s 4. d. 30. s. 5 d. 4. s, 8. d. 3. l. 10. d. ^7. ^. 4.
l. 11. s. 3. d. 9. s. 4. 6. l. 2. s. 6. d. 11. s. 8. d. 7. l. 12. s. 1. d. 14
s. 9. l. 2. s. 6. d.

All which said several Rates, may be thus more easily summed up after the
manner of Exchequer reckoning as follows.
A penny a day is by the year one pound, one half pound, one grote, one
penny.

Two pence a day by the ear two pound, two half pound, two grotes two pence.

Three pence a day is by the year three pound, three half pound, three
grotes, three pence.

Four pence a day is by the year four pound, four half pound, four
grotes, four pence.

And so forward of the rest, being a certain and general rule to calculate
what sum or quantity you please.

The mouth of Usury being opened, yet her fanges not pulled out, (as some
Jews were in King John's time in England) but her teeth discovered that the
borrower may beware: To which effect is showed, how much diverse principal
sums with Interest, and Interest upon Interest amount to in several years.

1. l. 2. l. 3. l. l. s. d. ob. q l. s. d ob q l: s. d. ob q year 1 1. 2. 0.
0, 0, 2, 4, 0, 0, 0 3, 6, 0, 0, 0, 2 1, 4, 2. 0, 3* 2. 8. 4. 1 2, 3. 12, 7, 0,
1 3 1, 0, 7, 0, 3, 2, ^3, 2, 1, 3 3, 19, 10, 0, 2, 4 1, 9, 4, 0, 3, 2, 18, 6,
1, 2 4, 7, 10, 0, 1. 7 1, 18, 11, 1, 1, 3 17. 11. 0 2 5 16, 11, 0. 0. 14 3, 15,
11, 0, 3 7. 11, 11, 1 2 11, 7, 10, 0, 1. 21 7, 8, 0, 0, 0, 14 16, 0, 0 0 22, 4,
0. 0, 0, 2 10. l. ^0. l. 40 l. year 1 11, 0, 0, 0, 0 22, 0 0 0 0. 44, 0. 0, 0,
0. 2 12, 2, 0, 0, 0, 24, 4, 0, 0: 0 48, 8, 0. 0, 0 3 13, 6, 2, 0, 3. 26, 12, 4,
1, 2 53, 4, 9, 1, 0 4 14, 12, 9. 1, 2, 29. 5. 7. 1. 1 58, 11, 3, 11, 0, 7 19. 9
8. 1. 2. 88. 19 5: 1, 2 77, 18, 11, 1, 1. 14 37. 9, 6. 0. 0 0 75 19 0 0. 0 151,
18, 0, 0, 0. 21 74. 0. 0, 1, 1, 148. 0. 1. 0, 1 296, 0, 2, 0, 0, 3, 50. l. 100
l. 200 year 1 55, 0, 0, 0, 0 110, 0, 0, ^, 0 220, 0, 0. 0, 0, 2 60, 10. 0^ 0.
0. 121, 0, 0, 0, 0, 244. 0. 0, 0, 0. 3 66, 11, 0. 0 0 133, 2, 0, 0, 0 266 4, 0,
0, 0, 4 73, 4, 1. 0. 2. 146, 8, 2, 0, 2 291. 16, 4. 1. 2. 7 97, 8. 8, 1, 0 192
17 5, 0 1 389, 14, 10, 0. 3 14 189, 17, 6, 0 0 379, 15, 0 0 0 752. 10. 0 0. 0
21 370, 0^, 3, 0, 0. 740. 0. 6, 0. 0, 1480. 1, 0. 0. 0,

By this Table you may easily perceive what the principal, with interest and
interest upon interest from many sums amounts vno, and how in every 7.
years (what sum soever) the Interest almost ouertaketh the Principal, and
which for the easines thereof needs no further explication.

ADMIRATIO.
That money should engender thus and breed,
Is against nature springing from no seed:
Yet see this Usury that is ever running,
Insensibly deuoures state with cunning:
See how it eats, and yet no teeth you see,
It is a monster sure, what should it be?
In 7. years, a term of time but small,
The Interest looks as big as principal:
A forward whelpe like to his dame or mother,
And every year bites deeper still than other.
Therefore, who ere thou art that meanst to thrive,
Forbear that iaw that swallows men alive,
So shall thou live thy happy days to see,
And foenus shall not to thee funus be,
And though this be the gulf that most men fear,
Yet the other petty channel come not near,
For it is al one the effect so understood
To drowned in deepest sea, or shallowest flood,
And therefore to this ruin if thou haste thee,
All Is one, if first or last, or whether waste thee.
And therefore if thou mean to live a shore,
Through Scylla and Charibdis sail no more.
Certain admonitions to Countrymen.
He is branded with the name of a sluggard that would not go forth, because.
the weather was cold, and a Lion was in the way.

But he shall be known by the cognizance of a fool that forbeares his work
or journey because his Almanac says, it shall rain.

Sow not the seed of discention, least thou reap the harvest of repentance,
neither take up Law as thy Instrument or revenge upon every small occasion,
lest in the end thou be foiled with thine own weapon; for thus know, that
although every Term have her several returns, yet if thou be too conversant
herein thy purse shall find more goings out then coming in.

Poor Countrymen for the most Part, it is your wisdom to follow the direct
rules of your Almanac, either for Phlebotomie, or other directions for the
health of the body, for sowing and setting of Seeds or Plants, for the cutting
of the hair, for the gelding of your Cattle, etc. Yet where the great Doctor
both of health and wealth, of Soul and body, shall give you rules, by his
word, by his messengers, Hoc fac and viues, this do, and you shall live: or as
it was 5000. years since, and upward spoken to our first Parents, Hoc fac, and
morieris, do this and thou shall dye: yet it will be more curious with the
poreblind World to follow your petty Anniuersary Oracle, concerning many times
there uncertain directions, and but about trash and trumpery, sticks, and
shreds, of small auaileance, then that matter of all primall importance, and
for which many thousands now smart that cannot come here to complain.

For thy choice of good, and avoiding of evil days for the speed or
hinderance of any business thou take in hand, I advise thee not to be
greatly scrupulous therein, though some have been curious to observe them, for
to the good all days are good, as to the evil all days are evil.

Concerning the causes of sundry Meteors, you for the most part think they
have none more then the immediate hand of God, To which I answer.

The Wind blows where it lists and thou hear the sound thereof.

The Thunder roareth where he lists, that holds the waters in his fist,
wayeth the Hills and mountains in a balance, and sayleth upon the wings of
the wind. Yet thou that think and rightly think, and so answerest to him,
that demands: They came from God, yet with all know they come not so
immediately from him that they have no secondarie causes as his instruments
whereof they proceed and are effected, as has in this Treatise more largely
been declared.

The end of the Countrimant Counselor. FINIS.

