A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS MAJESTY at Windsore, the 19. of July. 1625.

By HENRY LESLIE, one of his MAJESTY'S Chaplains in Ordinary.

^^^V. 28.14. (...) his heart shall fall into Evil. IER. 45.4. Thus says the
Lord, Behold, that which I have built, will I break down, and that which I
have planted, will I pluck up, even this whole land, and seek thou great
things for thy self? OXFORD, Printed by I. L. and W. T. for WILLIAM TVRNER.
Anno Dom. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JAMES.
EARL OF CARLISLE, (...) OF DONCASTER, BARON OF SALEY, one of his Majesty's
most honorable Privy Council, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.

RIght Honorable, and my singular good Lord, when I preached this Sermon, I
applied my self to this time of affliction, studying more to profit, then
please: yet it did receive a greater approbation from all, than any thing could
deserve that proceeded from my weakness. And your Honor was pleased to
demand a Copy of it, which I here humbly present unto You, in a poor and
plain style as it was preached, beseeching your Lordship to take in good part
this small offering, from him who shall always pray for Your Honors
prosperity in this life, and happiness hereafter.

Your Honors in all duty Henry Leslie.

A Table of the Contents.
The Text divided 1 the Evil, hardness of heart, which signifies 1 The
dryness of the Soul. 2 The stiffenesse of the Will. 3 the senslesnesse of 1
the mind 1 Not understanding the word. 2 Understanding the word, but not being
moved thereby. 3 Being moved, but not effectually. 4 Being provoked to do the
contrary.
2 the conscience being 1 The broad conscience. 2 The sleeping conscience. 3
The slumbring conscience. 4 The benu^med conscience.
3 of the affections, which is 1 Carnal security. 2 Senseless indolencie. 3
Worldly sorrow.


2 the cause of this evil diverse, according to the diverse hardening, 1
Natural, from our first Parents. 2 Judiciary, from God, hardening 1
Privatiuely 1 Forsaking them. 2 Permitting them. 3 Not punishing them.
2 Actiuely 1 By outward objects. 2 By themselves. 3 By Satan. 4 By his
invisible power.

3 Voluntary, from our selves, men hardening their hearts by a custom of sin.
3. The Remedies against this Evil, which are set down, Eight in number.


A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS MAJESTY.
HEB. 3.8. Harden not your hearts.
THis Apostle was inspired by the Holy Ghost: 2 Cor. 7.40.
yet here that his words might have the more authority, he alleges the
saying of the Holy Ghost. Wherefore as the Holy Ghost says, To day if ye will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts. This saying of the Holy Ghost is by
the mouth of David, Psalm. 95.7. So that the author of this exhortation makes it
fit for this place, it being the meditation of a King, the, repetition of it
makes it fit for this time, time: for was such a caveat needful not only in
David's time, but also afterward in the Apostle's time? and is it not much more
necessary at this time, when God by his judgments does call us to weeping and
to mourning, Isa. 22.12.
and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth. Give me leave therefore to
redouble this exhortation unto you, Harden not your hearts. Wherein we may
consider these three particulars, 1 The evil to be avoided, and that is
hardness of heart. 2. The cause of this evil, which my text seems to
ascribe unto our selves, saying, Harden not your hearts. 3 The remedies to be
used against this evil, that our hearts may not be hardened. The first will
serve for conviction, the second for information, the third for direction.

As for the first, the evil to be avoided is called hardness of hearts. And
what this is, is not easy to be understood. For besides that the phrase is
metaphorical, this evil is of that nature, that it takes away the sense and
knowledge of sin. Ephesians. 4.18. it is said of the Gentiles, their understanding
was darkened, and why? because of the hardness of their hearts. So that this
point of hardening is not understood, because our own hearts are hardened. But
if we take and weigh it in the balance of the Sanctuary, there we shall find
many equivalent phrases, which will help us to find out the nature, and the
weight of this evil. In Scripture it is called the brazen brow, Isa. 48.4. The
iron sinew, ibid. the spirit of perverseness, Isa. 19.14. The spirit of
slumber, or the Spirit of compunction. Isa. 29.10. The Wine of giddines, Psalm.
60.3. Spiritual drunkenness. Isa. 29.9. the seared Conscience, 1. Tim. 4.2.
the hard neck, 2 King. 17.14. the stiffenecke. Deuteronomy. 31.27. the uncircumcised
heart and ear. Act. 7.58. the face harder then a stone. Ier. 5.3. the fat
and gross heart, Isa. 6.10. blinded eyes. Ioh. 12.40. Dull or heavy ears.
Isa. 6.20. The reprobate mind. Romans 1.28. The stony heart. Ezech. 11.19. The
heart of Adamant. Zach. 7.12. and finally stubbornness of heart. Ier. 13.10.
Now compare we hardness of heart with these the like phrases, and we shall find
that a hard heart, is nothing else, but a soul that is confirmed in sinful
courses.

But that we may better understand the several kinds and degrees hereof, let
us examine from whence this speech is borrowed. The heart when it is said to be
hard, is taken sometimes for the whole soul, sometimes for the mind, sometimes
for the will, sometimes for the conscience, and other whiles for the
affections, according to the several acceptions of the word hardness, which is
the quality ascribed to the heart, and that, not properly, but metaphorically.
The metaphore is taken either from a stone, as the Scripture seems to imply,
calling our hearts not only hard, but also stony; for the hardness of a stone
is accompanied with great dryness, also the hardness of it, makes it stiff
and inflexible, not apt to bow or bend. In all which it greatly resembles the
corruption of the heart. Or else the Metaphore is from that Callum or hard
thick skin which covers the hand of the labourer, and the heel of the
traveller: For as that is void of all sense and feeling, so is the heart in
this state of corruption. And that this is the allusion may appear by the
Phrase must commonly used in the New Testament, to signify hardness of heart.
It is called (...). The word (...), signifies the thick skin that covers
the palms of the hands, and the feet, or the hardness that is in the joints,
and the small bones that are the instruments of motion, making the^ stiff,
senseless and benumbed. Hence those members that are thus obdured, are called
(...). but it matters not, whence the Metaphore is taken; for certainly it is
from things corporal, whereof only hardness is an affection. And wheresoever
it is, it has these three properties. 1. Dryness, that which is hard is dry,
not having any moisture to soften it. 2. Stiffenesse, and inflexiblenesse; for
says the Philosopher, Arist. L. 4. Mereor.
Durum est, quod non cedit in seipsum secundum superficiem. That is hard which
cannot yield, bow, or bend into any other form, then what it has. 3.
Vnmoueablenesse and Senselessness, that which neither can be bruised and broken
with strokes, nor pierced with sharpness, is hard. Now when hardness is
ascribed to the heart, it is to signify either one or all of these.

First hardness of heart imports the dryness of the Soul; for it is called
(...) from the verb (...), here used, which signifies properly to dry up and
wither. For as in natural things, so also in the Soul, there is a watering
which is good and comfortable, and there is a drying up which is dangerous and
hurtful. The watering is with the dew of grace: Isa. 55.1.
for God in Scripture compares his grace unto things liquid, as Oil, Wine,
Milk, and chiefly Water. There is a well of living waters for the Soul. Ioh.
4.14, It is called a river of living waters. Ioh. 7.38. The preaching of grace
is called watering 1. Cor. 3.6. For as water serves to supple and soften that
which is dry and withered; so does Gods grace soften and supple our withered
Souls. And of all kinds of water it is specially likened to rain and dew;
for that is most effectual to water the earth. Deuteronomy. 32.2. My doctrine shall
drop as the rain, and my speech shall still as the dew. Thus when God
promises his grace unto his people, he says, that he will come unto them as
the rain, as the latter and former rain unto the earth. Hos. 6.3. Which
similitude gives us to understand, that our souls are as a dry and thirsty
ground, burnt up with the heat of the sun, and so barren and fruitless, and
Gods grace as the rain that waters the earth, and makes it fruitful. The
like promise is Isa. 44.3. I will power water upon the thirsty, and floods
upon the dry ground. Which is according to that chap. 35.6. In the Wilderness
shall waters break out, and streams in the Desert. Greg. Mag.
Now where this watering is not, there must be withering, Si Spiritue irrigatio
defuerit omnis plantatio exarescit. That plant which is not watered with the
dew of grace will wither at the root, and never grow up in the courts of the
Lord. Therefore it is said, that the godly are like the tree planted by the
waters side; Psalm. 1.3. There is watering: but the wicked, as an Oak whose
leaf fades; and as a garden that has no water. Isa. 1.30. There is withering
and drienesse. Yea, besides the want of the Juice of grace, which causes
dryness, our souls are also burnt up with the heat of concupiscence, and so
naturally exceeding dry and withered, barren and fruitles. Ezech 11.19. and
36.26.
And therefore they are not only called bard, but also stony. A stone of all
hard things is the dryest, no Juice not Liquor can be drawn out of it.
Mettalls albeit very hard may more casily be distilled, and therefore it was a
great miracle, when out of the rock, waters did flow in the desert. So in our
hearts there is no Juice of grace, no goodness to be drawn out of them, but by
an extraordinary work of Gods power.

Secondly, hardness of heart signifies the stiffenesse and inflexiblenesse of
the will; so that a hard heart is a disobedient and vnyeelding heart, such as
indeed our hearts are by nature, perverse and froward, stubborn, obstinate,
and rebellious, not so much as flexible unto holy obedience; but altogether
averse unto that which is good, and prone to desire that alone which is evil:
So that if God do will our conversion, Math. 23.37.
we do nill it; if he would gather us under his wings, we will not be
gathered. If he command us that which is just, Zach. 7.11.
we refuse to hearken, and pull away the shoulder. If he send unto us all his
sernants the Prophets, Ier. 33.15.15.
exhorting us to return every man from his evil way, and amend our works;
yet we will not incline our ear nor obey. Yea although the Lord denounce his
indgements, and threaten a plague, except we return; Ier. 18.1^.22.
yet we will walk after our own imaginations, and do every man after the
subburnesse of his wicked heart. Finally, though God stretchforth his hands all
the day long; Isa. 65.2.
yet we remain a disobedient and gainsaying people. Ier. 13.10.
This kind of hardness is more properly called, stubburnes of heart. And it
is very aptly, signified by the stiffe-neck, hard neck, and neck that is an
iron sinew. For sinews are the instruments of motion, and all the sinews go
down from the head to the body by the neck, so that if either the neck
should be hard and stiff; or if the sinews were of iron; it should not be
possible for the head to bow down: so the heart that is in this estate of
rebellion, cannot bow down, nor submit it self unto the yoke of Gods
commandments. And that this is the meaning of these phrases may appear by the
words, rebellion, disobedience, obstinacy joined with them, as a declaration.
Deuteronomy. 31.27. I know thy rebellion and thy stiffe-necke. 2. King. 17.24. they
would not obey but hardened their necks. Isa. 48.4. because I knew that thou
art obstinate, and thy neck as an iron sinew. Ezech. 11. and and 36.26.
Finally I think God had a special respect unto this stiffenes of the will,
calling our hearts stony. For iron is as hard as any stone; yet he calls it
not Cor ferreum, but lapideum: because iron, though very hard, yet is in some
sort flexible, the fire will mollisie it, and make it pliable into any form:
but so is not a stone, the fire it self cannot soften it, nor make it bend
into any other form, then what it has. So is it with our hearts, they are no
ways flexible into holy obedience, there is not so much as any inclination to
good in them, So that the Lord in our conversion, must not only give us a
power to work, but also, a will to desire; for a man without grace is not
only unable to choose, and do that which is good; but also he cannot so much
as affect it, or aspire unto it. He cannot cooperate with God working in him,
nor open the door to God knocking, nor hearken to God calling, nor yield unto
God drawing him. But God must first breath grace into his heart, and of
unwilling make him willing. For no man can come unto me (says our Savior)
except the Father draw him. Ioh. 6.44.
Where to signify the mighty working of Gods power, overcomming all resistance
in the will of man, he calls our conversion a drawing. And this much he does
imply, when he says, he will take away the stony heart; not, I will
transform the stony heart into a fleshly, Ezech. 36.26.
but I will take away the stony heart, and give you a heart of flesh;
signifying thereby, that there is nothing in our corrupt nature that has
affinity with the divine nature, whereof we are made partakers in our
regeneration: but that our whole old nature must be taken away, and a new given
us. A little mending will not serve the turn, a new making is required.

Thirdly, hardness of heart is used to express the vnmoueablenesse and
senselessenesse of heart. So that a hard heart is a dead heart, which nothing
can move, neither word, nor Sacraments, miracles, nor motions of the spirit,
neither sense of sin, nor of Judgment for sin. L. 5. de Consider.
So Bernard describes a hard heart. Quid est cor durum? ipsum est quod nec
compunctione scinditur, nec pietate mollitur, nec movetur preeibus; minis non
cedit, flagellis duratur, ingratum est ad beneficia, impavidum ad pericula,
etc. This kind of hardness according to the difference of the object and
subject, is threefold: 1. a deadness of the mind, when we are not moved with
the means of salvation, which God has appointed to soften our hearts. 2. a
deadness of conscience, when we are not moved with our own sins. 3. a
deadness of the affections, when we are not moved with God's judgments.

The first which is a deadness or dullness of the mind, is a high degree of
hardness; when the soul is not only dry and destitute of grace, and also
inflexible and unwilling to receive grace: but further it cannot so much as be
moved with these means God has appointed to beget grace. God's word is
sharper then a two edged sword, Heb. 4.12. It is like a hammer that breaks
the stones, Ier. 23.29. and in that same place it is resembled to fire able to
melt the hardest metals. Deuteronomy. 3.^.
Finally it is compared to dew and rain that waters and so mollifieth the
ground. And yet this Word, this mighty Word, cannot pierce, it cannot bruise,
it cannot melt, it cannot moisten our hard and stony, our dry and withered
hearts: Job. 41.24. Isa. 48.4.
for as it is said of Leviathan, our heart is harder than the nether millstone.
To signify this, it is called, the brazen browe. Ye know a man's forhead is
most obvious to strokes; but if the same were of so hard a metal as brass,
it could not easily be broken or peirced. But such is the corrupt heart of man:
though God's Word be like a hammer that breaks the rocks in pieces, and
sharper then any two edged sword; yet no threatenings and admonitions of God's
Word can break it, no promises and entreaties can pierce it. Yea though this
Word be sealed with Sacraments, confirmed with miracles, and accompanied with
the inward motions of the spirit: yet all these are but as an arrow shot
against a brazen wall, Job. 41.29.
our heart being as the scales of Leviathan, Isa. 6.10.
who laughes at the shaking of the spear. This is also well signified by the
fat heart; for as the heart being covered with a mass of fatness cannot seele
any thing; no more can the mind in this estate of obduration; for as the Poe^t
says, Triplex circa praecordia ferrum. This is likewise understood by the
blinded eyes that cannot see, Isa. 6.10. Act. 6.10.
the dull or heavy ears that cannot hear, and the uncircumcised heart and
ear.

This dulnes, in not being moved with the word, Saeraments, etc. has four
degrees. 1. when a man does not so much as conceive what is said, having his
cognitations darkened, and his eyes covered with the scales of ignorance: or if
he do conceive it, yet he does not attentively consider it. This is signified
in the Parable, by the seed that fell by the highwaies side, as Christ expounds
it, Whenever a man hears the word of the kingdom, and understands it
not: the evil one comes and catches away that which was sown in his heart:
Matthew. 13.19.
this is he who has received the seed by the ways side. The disciples
themselves were charged with this dullness, Mar. 6.52. They cousidered not the
miracle of the loaves, (that is, they did not see Gods power in that work) for
their heart was hardened.

A second degree of this dullness is when a man, though in some measure he
understand what is said, yet he is not moved thereby. God's Word is a hammer:
this hammer with ten miracles, gave ten mighty strokes at Pharao his
heart, and yet could not break it. So it was with Jeroboam, he heard the
commandment of God against the altar he had set up, he saw the altar cleave
asunder, and the ashes fall out from it, according to the sign given by the
Prophet: his hand which he put forth against the Prophet was dried up, and
after healed by the prayer of the Prophet: yet was not he moved at all this.
When the Prophet cried to the altar, O Altar, Altar, thus says the Lord; 1
King. 13.^.
the altar heard and claue asunder: but Ieroboam's heart was harder then the
altar; for he heard the Word, and his heart did not break. Act. 7.50.
Thus it was with the Jews, being stiff-necked, they did always resist the
Holy Ghost, namely in the ministry of the Word.

The 3d degree of this dullness and opposition against the Word, is when one is
moved thereby, but not effectually, even moved in affection, but his will is
not changed, nor heart softened. This happens diverse ways: for the word
stirs up sundry affections even in wicked and hard-hearted men, as
astonishment, fear, joy. Sometimes it works only astonishment, and wondering,
their hearts being convinced, hearing the Word, that it has more then humane
force. This is that effect which many felt hearing Christ, when they were
astonished at his doctrine, Marc. 1.22. Ioh. 7.46. Habac. 1.5.
as teaching with authority, saying. What manner of doctrine is this? never man
spoke like this man. Thus the wicked wonder and vanish. Sometimes the Word
preached brings not only wonder, but fear also; not only fills the ears
with sound, and the heart with astonishment; but moreover shakes and
terrifieth the conscience. This effect did befall Felix; Act, 24.26.
for hearing Paul he trembled; and sometimes it goes further, not only
rauishing with admiration, and striking the conscience with terror; but also
delighting the heart with some joy for a time. This effect was in Herod, who
heard John gladly. Mare, 6.20.
And it is in temporary believers, well signified by the seed sown in stony
ground, as Christ expounds it, Math. 13.20. therefore the Apostle says of
these temporaries, Heb. 6.4.
that they tasted of the heavenly gift, that is, they were affected with some
taste of God's goodness manifested in the Gospel. But it was only a small
taste, they never digested it, nor concocted it by the vital hea^e of God's
spirit; far less were they filled with that sweet peace and joy which the
spirit of adoption works in the faithful.

The last degree is when a man is so far from being moved effectually by the
word, that he is rather provoked to do the contrary: Origin.
for such is the corruption of man's nature, vt ea quae prohibentur magis
desiderantur. Our corrupt nature is like a restie horse, who the more he is
spurred forward, the more he goes backward; and like a stream, whch being
dammed up, rages, swells and ouerfloweth all the banks. therefore is the
commandment said to be an occasion of sin, and Christ is called a rock of
offense, and the Apostles a savor of death. Take an example hereof in Pharaoh;
he is commanded to let the people go, and the more he is urged, the stiffer
and stubborner he is, and the more he rebelleth against God. And the same may
be said of the Jews: God foretells what should be the event of Isaias
ministry, namely, that he should make their hearts fat, and their ears heavy,
and shut their eyes. So that even the word becomes unto them the means of
hardening. As the middle region of the air is more cold by the Antiperistasis,
so the heart of a reprobate is more hard by the word, though the word in it
self be full of vital heart for to soften the heart. As the hammer though it
breaks the rocks yet the smithes stithie, the more the hammer strikes upon it
the harder it is; and as the heat of the sun though it melt wax, yet it
dries the clay: and as the rain, though it mollify the earth, yet hardens
sand: so the word breaks, melts and mollifieth the hearts of the Godly:
and yet obdurates, dryes and hardens the wicked, but accidentally, the fault
being in their own disposition. Itpleased some to censure me, that I did ill
to allege the spirit of Compunction, as a phrase equivalent to hardness of
heart, it being contrary unto it. Therefore understand that I took not
Compunction passiuely for contrition, as when they are said to be compuncti
cord, Act. 2.37. but actiuely, for a fretting against the word. And so the
Scripture takes it; For Romans 11.8. that which is viually rendered, the spirit of
slumber is not unfitly by others translated the Spirit of Compunction. And I
appeal from their learning, to the common sense of the meanest Reader, whether
in that place it be contrary to hardness of heart, or all one with it: for
having said, that the Jews were hardened, for confirmation thereof, he
alleges this, as it is written, God has given them the Spirit of
Compunction; and after adds, Eyes that they should not see, and ears that
they should not bear: loyning in one, two places the of prophecy of Isaiah.
This in Scripture is called the spirit of compunction, which implies a kind
of fretting, chaffing, and violent stirring against the word: as in those that
brast for anger at the Apostles Act. 5.33. That gnashed with their teeth at
Stephen. Act. 7.54.

The second kind of this senselessness is in the conscience, and respects the
sins which a man commits, when a man is not touched with sense and sorrow
for the same. 1 Timothy 4.2. Isa. 29.9. Psalm. 60.3. Isa. 29.10.
This is the seared conscience, spiritual drunkenness, the wine of giddiness
or drowsinesse, the spirit of slumber or dead sleep. for when any part of the
body is seared with a hot iron, it loses all sense, life and motion, also
when a man is drunken, he knows not, he cares not what he does. And finally
those who are overcome with drowsinesse or slumbering, cannot easily with
stirring or pricking be awaked. So he that is come to this height of hardness,
is without all sense of sin, he neither knows nor cares what evil he
does; and he is never moved with any stirring or pricking of his conscience.
Of such the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.19.
they are Past feeling, (...).

This seared conscience has several degrees. There is the broad conscience,
when a man is not moved with any sin except it be very heinous. There is the
sleeping conscience, when a man is not touched with the sense of any sin, be
it never so grievous, for a long time; Hieron.
yet at last tranquillitas ista tenpestas est, this calm proves a storrne; and
he is awakened, either by the preaching of the law, or the terrors of death, or
some grievous calamity. and there is the slumbering conscience, which has
some sense of sin, as Pharaoh had, Exodus 9.27.
when he cried out, I have sinned: but never any sound sorrow for it: he
feels not with Job, the terrors of God fighting against him, and the inuenomed
arrows of the almighty sticking fast in his ribs. This is but like the
sweating of a stone in moist weather, which notwithstanding retains its
natural hardness and dryness. finally their is the benumbed consciene, when
a man has neither sense of sin, nor sorrow for it, but is like a man in a
frenzy, or one fallen into a pleasant sleep, who though he be exceeding sick
yet he feels no pain and as in some kind of sickness a man may die laughing:
so where this degree of hardness is, a man may descend into the pit of hell
triumphing and rejoicing. Whereof I will only say with St. Austin, quid
miserius misero non miserante seipsum. None are so desperately sick as they who
feel not their disease. when the pulse does not beat, the body is in a most
dangerous estate: that school will soon decay where the monitor does not
complain: that army must necessarily be surprised where watches and alarums be
not kept: that town is dissolute where no clockes are used. But the conscience
is to the soul, as the pulse to the body, the monitor to the school, the
watch to the army, the clock to a town. And therefore when it is silent, the
soul is in a most desperate case.

The third kind of this senselessness is in the affections and respects Gods
Judgments upon us for sin, when these cannot work upon a soul any good
effect, but are as it were lost labor, as God accounts them Isa 1.5. Why
should ye he stricken any more? ye will revoult more and more. Indeed
affliction is the most effectual means, for to make our heart relent and
resolve into the tears of unfeigned repentance, either the cross will do it
or nothing, Moral. l. 26. c. 23.
as Gregory says, aurem cordis tribulatio aperit quam saepe huius mundi
prosperitas claudit, which is the same with that of Elihu, Job 33.16.
God opens the ears of men by their corrections, which he had sealed, that
he might cause man to turn away from his purpose. Therefore we find that
afflictions are the last means which God ordinarily uses to convert obstinate
sinners. When neither the oil of his gracious bounty will softenour stony
hearts; nor his Word which is the sword of the spirit, pierce them; when
neither the sweet sound of his gracious promises will allure us to obedience
nor the terrible thunder of his fearful threatenings restrain us from sin.
In the last place he visits our iniquities with the rod, and our sins with
scourges, knowing that if our case be not desperate, we will at least be
reclaimed by his judgments. Thus the Lord having complained much of the
rebellion of his people, Isa. 1. in end he promises them mercy, and shows
how he would reform them, even by casting them into the fiery surnace of
affliction, thereby to purify them, and consume away the dross of their
sins, that they might shine again in their wonted beauty: V 25.
I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take
away all thy tin. The like promise is Isa. 4.4. that he will wash the
filthiness of the daughter of Sion, by the spirit of judgment, and by the
spirit of burning. Likewise Hos. 5. both Priests and people all being so
corrupt, that their case was desperate, the Lord resolves what to do. I will
go and return to my place, (that is, I will withdraw all the testimonies of
my love and favor from them) till they acknowledge their offense, and seek my
face: V. 15.
in their affliction, they will seek me early. Which was accordingly verified
in the event; for in the next words, the Prophet brings the^ in speaking thus
in their affliction. Come let us return unto the Lord, etc. Hos. ^.1.
and finally, the Lord promising to incline his Church, namely to obedience, he
shows by what means he will do it, even by bringing her into the wilderness.
Hos. 2.14. Behold I will incline her, and bring her into the wilderness; or
after that I have brought her into the wilderness: by the wilderness is meant
extreme misery: the reby showing that the Jews could not be inclined to
obedience, until they were pressed with diverse calamities, as it were cast
into a desert of desperation. So that the Lord deals with us, as the Smith
with the iron. Iron is very hard, but the Smith knows how to mollify it, and
make it flexible by putting it into the fire; so our hearts are so hard, that
when God would make them flexible unto his obedience, he is feign to cast them
into the fiery furnace of affliction, whereby they are mollified. Yet many
hearts are so hard, that the fire it self will not soften them, nor God's
judgments move them. So the Lord complains of his people, Isa. 9.13, The
people turns not to him that smites them. And Ier. 8.7. the Storke in the
heaven knows her appointed times, etc. but my people know not the judgments
of the Lord. Amos 4.
And by the Prophet Amos he reckons up his several judgments wherewith he
had afflicted them, as famine, pestilence, the sword: and after every one of
them is subjoyned; yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord.

This contempt of God's judgments has three degrees. 1. carnal security,
when a man is not moved with God's judgments before they seize upon him: but
although they be threatened against him, and he see them already upon others,
and he find in himself the cause that will procure them; yea and he perceive
God's instruments set on work to effect them: yet he blesses himself in his
heart, and having made a covenant with death and with hell, he sleeps as
secure as Jonas did in the ship. Thus it was with the old World, they ate,
drank, Math. 24.38.
married wives, and knew nothing, (that is, feared nothing) till the flood came
and took them all away. Thus it fared with Belshazzar, he was feasting with
his Princes, his wives, and his concubines, and carousing out of the holy
vessels, at the same time when the handwriting on the wall denounced his
destruction: so the whore of Babel, Dan. 5.
even then when her fall is begun, says in her heart. I sit a Queen, Revel.
18.7.
and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. But especially see an example of
this security in the Israelites. Isa. 22.12. In that day did the Lord of hosts
call to weeping and mourning, to baldness, and girding with sackcloath, and
behold joy and gladness; etc. If this should be found to be our case, we have
great cause for to fear; for the Scripture has always marked this security,
as a certain forerunner of destruction, and experience has taught us, that
quos perdere vult ^upiter, hos occaecat.

The 2 degree is senseless indolencie, and blockish stupiditie, when a man is
not affected with grief, even then when Gods hand lies heavy upon him, but
puts off the feeling thereof with desperate contempt, laboring to outface his
greifes, and forget his soars, by goeing into merry company, gaming, feasting,
reuelling, and such other carnal delights: who may be compared to Salomons
drunkard, who sleeps securely in the midst of the sea, and on the top of
the mast, whom he brings in speaking thus, Prove. 23.24.
they have stricken me and I was not sick, they have beaten me and I felt not.
Amongst the Heathens we have many examples hereof. Aristides was not moved with
his banishme^ts, nor Regulus with his exquisit torments, nor Scipio with all
those indignities which his ungrateful countrymen offered unto him: nor Paulus
Aemilius, and Horatius Puluillus with the death of their children. This was
commended by the Stoics for great patience: but indeed as Seneca says, nulla
virtus est quae non sentias perpeti: there can be no patience, where there is
no passion. And here there is no feeling; for this indolencie is a kind of dead
palsy, or sleepie lethargy, and ( as S. Austine says) it is stupor morbi, De
patient. ^. 23.
non robur sanitatis. The Israelites are taxed with this Ier. 5.3. Thou have
stricken them, but they have not sorrwed, thou have consumed them, but they
have refused to receive correction.

The last degree is when a man is moved with Gods judgments, but not
effectually. Thus there are many, who being afflicted, mourn too much,
complain, cry, houle, and wring their hands: and yet the sense of judgment
never drives them unto true repentance. But either their sorrow is only
natural for the affliction; they say with Pharaoh, Take away the plague, not
with David, take away the sin: or else they are so far from any humiliation
for their sins, that they are rather moved to think that God must needs love
them, because he corrects them: Or finally, if the sense of judgment, bring
them to the sight of their sins; yet there follows no amendment, but they
are swallowed up of despair; and having a sight of their sins in the glass
of the Law, without any sense of Gods mercy revealed in the Gospel, their
hearts are broken and battered, but not dissolved and softened. Prove. 27.22.
So that though thou should bray a fool in a mortar, yet will not his
foolishness depart from him.

Thus have I discovered this monster with many heads. You see, that a dry soul
that is void of grace, is a hard heart; a stiff and vnyeelding will, is a hard
heart: a dead and dull mind, that is not moved with Gods word is a hard heart:
a seared conscience that never smites for sin, is a hard heart: and finally
blockish affections, that are not sensible of Gods judgments, are a hard
heart. Oh now that we would enter application upon our own souls, and examine
what want of grace is in the soul, what rebellion in the will, what opposition
against Gods word in the mind, what Numnesse and dumnesse in the conscience.
And finally what contempt of Gods judgments in the affections. And I doubt,
that upon this search it will be found, that this hardness of heart is an
epidemicall disease, that possesses the whole body of the land.

Now if we be sick of this disease, it is meet that in the next place, we
should proceed to enquire into the cause of this evil. And upon trial, it
will be found to be within us: for my Text ascribes it to our selves; harden
not your hearts. Which is to be understood of voluntary or habitual hardness:
for there is a natural hardness which we suck from the tender breasts of our
mother, all men being borne, as with a dark mind, so with a hard heart. And
there is a iudiciarie hardness, which God as a just judge inflicteth as a
judgment upon some notorious offenders, Romans 1 27. Revel. 22.11. August.
for a recompense of their former errors as is meet, that they who are filthy
may be more filthy, Iudicio vtique, suo aliquando aperto, aliquando occulto,
semper aute^ justo. Thus God in Scripture is said, Percutere amentia and
scotomate, Isa. 19.14. Isa. 29.10. Isa. 6.10.
to strike men with maddenesse and blindness; to mingle among them the spirit
of error, and the spirit of slumber; to blind their eyes, make their ears
heavy and their hearts fat: Math. 6.13. Rom, 1.24.26.28.
to lead men into temptation; to give them over to uncleanness, to vile
affections, to a reprobate mind; to send strong delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
or the efficacy of errors. And oftentimes he is said to harden the heart.

Here there is great question, after what manner God hardens the heart, whether
only privatiuely, as deserendo, forsaking them, and permittendo, not hindering
them, and non puniendo; or per Patientiam, and dilatione poenae, in not
punishing them. Or if he concur to the hardening of the hearts also
actiuelie, and that either by outward objects and occasions, or by themselves,
giving them over to their own hearts lusts, or by Satan, to whose power he
delivers such hearts, for him to work upon, as a judge delivers the
malefactor to the hangman to be tormented: Or finally inwardly so working by
his invisible power, that their corrupt hearts are more and more hardened.
Indeed I dare not adventure to wade into this depth. Only this I must say,
that the Scripture's words do manifestly signify an action, and cannot
without wresting be drawn unto a bare permission. Besides it is as injurious
to the divine majesty, to rob him of his power, wisdom, and providence; as
to accuse his justice. And Florinus his blasphemy is not more carefully to be
avoided on the one side, then the Pelagian Heresy is on the other Therefore we
must not consider God as an idle beholder of wicked actions, like the Poet's
Jupiter, who was feasting in Aethiopia, while things went out of order: but as
an omnipotent Creator giving power and life to all, and by his concurrence
causing every motion and action in the creature: Also as a most wise governor,
ordering even that which he made not: And finally as a just judge, punishing
sin by sin. Further let us consider that even those sins, which are only
sins, and not also punishments, are done by Gods permission. Permission has
place in all sins, even in the sins of the godly, yea in the first sin
that ever was, quia non fieret si non sineret. In Enchir, c. 100.
says Aust. And shall we think that God has no further hand in this
judiciarie obduration of wieked men? Surely, then God might as well be said to
steal, murder, commit adultery, as to harden the heart, because he permits
these sins to be done: Then, why should it only be said of notorious wicked
persons, and not of all, that God hardens them? Finally, then shall not
obduration be a punishment, as is acknowledged by all, even by Bellarmine
himself: De stat. pecc. l. 2. c. 14.
For punishments are just and from God, as they are punishments, though they be
also sins. As says the Master of the Sentences, ea quae peccata sunt, L. 2.
Did. 36. and did. 32.
and poena peccati etc. That which is both a sin, and a punishment of sin,
is of God, as it is a punishment; for all punishments are just. He gives
instance of concupiscence, Concupiscentia in quantum poena peccati, Deum habet
authorem. And Ferus applies it to this point we have in hand, saying that
hardness of heart is of God as it is Poena, not as it is Culpa. And last of
all, if we respect the consent of the fathers, surely S. Austine was resolute
in this point, that God concurreth in the hardening of the heart, Non mod^
secundum permissione^, l. 5. cont. Julian
vel patientiam, sed etiam secundum actionem and potentiam. To this purpose
could I allege many sentences of the Jesuits and best learned Schoolmen: yet
such is their malice, that they accuse that for heresy and blasphemy in us,
which is approved for Catholic doctrine, when it passes from their quill. I
will not vouchsafe these foule-mouthed Rabsakeh's, sent forth to rail on the
host of the living God, any other answer, then what Michael the Arch-angell
gave unto their father. The Lord rebuke thee, Satan. Only give me leave, to
vindicate Gods Justice.

This that has been said of Gods hardening seems unto carnal minded men, who
measure all things by the crooked rule of their own reason, to cast some
aspersion upon God: Therefore will I breifely show that God cannot be accused,
for hardening the heart. The first reason is, because God does not make any
heart that is soft to become hard; but only, that heart which already is hard,
partly by nature, and partly by custom, he hardens yet more, sealing it up, as
it were, Romans 11.35.
unto eternal condemnation. 2. Because God is debtor to no man, so that he is
not bound to give his grace unto any man, or to hinder him from sin or to
abstain from doing of these things, which are good in themselves, though man
be ready to abuse them unto evil. A third Reason I will borrow from judicious
S. Austin, teaching us, that God concurreth in hardening of the heart, L. 5.
cont. Julian
Secundu^ actione^ and potentia^, non sane per qua^ fiat, immediate durities
ipsius cordis, sed per quam multa fiant a quibus peccator vitio suo concipiat
duritiem cordis. As if he should say, God does not instill hardness into any,
nor produce it immediately, nor enforce it as a necessary effect: only God
does such things, whence the sinner through his own fault, conceiueth
hardness. 4. It must always be remenbred that God hardens the heart Per
judicium, for a punishment of their former obstinacy, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
because men receive not the love of the truth, God sends them strong
delusions. And so the Gentiles for their idolatry, were ginen up by God, Romans
1.
to their lusts, to vile affections, to a reprobate mind. De Not. and Great. c.
12.
Which was a recompense of their errors at was meet. To this purpose says
Austin, prioribus meritis etc. Hoc redditum est Pharaoni vt cor eius
induraretur. The last consideration I will use to justify God, is, that all
iudiciarie obduration is also voluntary: So that no man is hardened against his
will; but they willingly draw upon themselves the infliction of this judgment,
and freely rush into this pit of hardness. Hence it is that as God is said to
harden Pharaoh his heart, so Pharaoh is said to harden his own heart; and
sometimes it is simply said that his heart was hardened, namely by the ministry
of Satan. Deus indurauit per justum judicium, August. de liber. Arb. c. 23.
Pharao per liberum arbitrium. The same hardness is ascribed to God as the
judge, to Satan as the hangman, to man himself as the party guilty. So
likewise where the Apostle says, that God gave up the Ge^tile to uncleanness.
Romans 1.24. The same Apostle to show that they were not given up against their
will: says in another place, that they gave up themselves, Ephesians. 4.19.
(...). And therefore since men are willingly obstinate and hard-harted, and
willingly yield themselves to their lusts, as those who will not fight with
their enemies, render themselves willingly captive to obey them in every thing:
There is no reason why they should accuse any other then themselves, as Austine
sweetly, Ligatus teneor non ferro alieno, sed mea ferrea voluntate, Neither
need we labor so much to know how God hardens, as how we our selves become
hardened. Origin well obseruerth, that whereas sometimes Pharaoh is said to
harden his own heart, and sometimes God is said to harden it: The first kind
of hardening is declared by the Apostle how it comes, even when men by their
impenitencie abuse the lenity of God. Romans 2.5. But the same Apostle making
mention of the other hardening by the Lord, Romans 9. He passes it over without
any declaration, and it may be thought to be one of those high matters, which
Paul heard being taken up into Paradise, and is not to be uttered. So I,
following the example of the Apostle, and judgment of Origin, will leave to
enquire into the manner of Gods hardening; and come to show how it is that men
harden their own hearts.

Here the Apostle has eased me of a labor, resolving this in a word. ver. 13.
that we are hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin, so it is said of
Pharaoh Exodus 9.34. Auxit peccatum, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart.
The former is the cause of the latter. As a path is hardened by the continual
trampling of passengers, so is the heart by the continual custom of sin. By
our frequent sinning, the soul is made dry; for every sin is as fuel to
the fire of concupiscence, whereby the soul is burnt and dried up. It is also
by often sinning that the will of it self rebellious, becomes more
inflexible; for the more a tree is backe-bended, the worse it is to bow the
right way: But every sin is a back-be^ding of our will from God. Finally, by
a customable sinning, the mind is made so dull, that the word cannot pierce it;
the affections so blockish, that Gods judgments, are not sensible unto theur;
and especially the conscience by this custom of sin, grows past all
feeling. Tuscul. 2.
For, as Tully says, Labor callum quoddam obducit dolori. As Mithridates
accustomed his body so much to the receipt of poison, that at length no poison
would work on him: So he that accustometh his soul to the poison of sin,
shall at length come to that pass,e that he will feel no sin: For, says
Austin, Sermon. 4. in Adven.
omne peccatum vilescit consuetudine and sit homini quasi nullum. The custom
of sin takes away the sense of sin. Romans 2 15.
At first the light of Nature stands out against sin, and (as the Apostle
says) our thoughts accuse us. But when we are often carried to commit sins
against the light of Nature, by practice of such sins the light of Nature is
extinguished: Augus de lib. ^^. L. 3.
for Iustissima poena est, vt qui sciens rectum non facit, amittat scire quod
rectum, and then comes the reprobat mind, which judges evil, good; and
good, evil: Wherevpo^ follows the seared conscience. At the first a man's
conscience speaks unto him; as Peter to Christ, Master, pity thy self. Her
prick-arrowes as the shafts of Jonathan, forewarne David of the great Kings
displeasure: but if we neglect her call, and will not lend our cares, while she
does spend her tongue, this good Cassandra will cry no more, and so we become
past feeling. As the eye of al other parts of the body is most tender, and
impatient of the lightest touch; but if it be covered with a hard fleshly
skin, called Scirrhosis oculi, it becomes of all other parts most insensible.
So the conscience at first is so tender, that small sins vex and torment it,
but when through custom of sinning it is ouer-spread with a Callum, or thick
skin, it becomes insensible, and nothing will wound it. This is not done in
an instant, but piece and piece, by degrees; first sin is importable, then
heavy, after that light, and lastly past feeling. At the first sin is
importable, it seems intolerable to be borne, it made David cry out, Ps. 33.4.
Day and night thy hand was heavy upon me. and again, there is no rest in my
bones, because of my sin: Ps. 38 3.
for mine iniquities are gone over my head, as an heavy burden they are too
heavy for me. But it is not long so: for sin being committed twice or thrice, is
not as before importable, only it is so^ewhat heavy. we are sorry for it, but
not so cast down with it, as in former times. After this, sin being often
committed, that which at first was importable, and afterward heavy, becomes
light and easy, it never breaks our sleep. and then in the last place after
that sin is made light of, and that there is no remorse for sin, then men grow
past feeling, in a reprobate sense, given over to work uncleanness even with
greedines, as having caroused the cup of slumber unto the very dregs. Here is
descensus Averni, these are the stairs that lead unto the chambers of death,
and the steps whereby the wicked do descend into this pit of obduration.

But, as S: Austin says in another case, if the town be on fire, we should
not be so curious to know how it came in, as careful to put it out: Therefore
in the last place, let us bethink our selves of a salve for this soar. Indeed
it is a most dangerous and desperate disease. The stone in the heart is a great
deal worse than the stone in the bladder; for after hardness comes the heart
that cannot repent, Romans 2.5. and without repentance there can be no salvation.
So that he who hardens his heart shill fall into evil Prove. 28.14. Eccles.
3.27.
and as the Wis^man says, Cor durum habebit male in navissimo. It shall be in an
ill case at the last day. Therefore you see that as when God would show mercy to
a people, he has no more forcible means to express the same, then to say, I
will take away the stony heart: so when he would take vengeance on any, he
has no more grievous way to do it, then by hardening of their hearts, or
giving them up to the hardness of their hearts. It is no marvel then that the
Scripture does so carefully dehort us from this hardness of heart. and on the
other part does so earnestly recommend unto us the contrary to a hard heart,
Deuteronomy 10.16. Luc. 6.15. I^s. 51.17. Isa. 66.2. 2. King. 22.19. Ezech. 36.26.
which is set forth in Scripture by sundry properties; as that it is a
circumcised contrite heart, a good and honest heart, a broken and contrite
heart, a relenting; melting, trembling heart, a poor, humble and obedient
heart, a tender heart, a new heart, sprinkled with the blood of Christ, washed
by his grace, heated and inflamed by his holy spirit. In a word, a heart of
flesh, or a soft heart, that is soon checked and controlled, soon pierced,
soon made to bleed; soon stirred up to amendment.

Now that we may get such a heart, these remedies are to be used, applying them
to our own conscience; for that is the hammer that breaks the stones, it is
the fire that melts the hardest metals: it is the two edged sword, that
pierces to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit. This Recipe is
prescribed by the Apostle, a little after, exhort one another daily, while it is
called to day, v. 13.
lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

Fourchly, No man repented, says Jeremy, but why? No man said, what have I
done, but as the horse rusheth into the battle, so they into their sins.
Therefore it behooves us to examine our ways, and to erectan inquisitio^, and
keep an audit in our hearts, looking upon our selves continually in the glass
of the Law; and therein meditating often upon the Justice of God, and his
greathatred against sin, upon the truth of God's threatenings, upon the last
judgment, and the fearful torments prepared in hell for hard-hearted
sinne^s. And if thou thus strike the rock of thy heart with the rod of the Law,
rivers of Water will gush forth. 5. But lest, the stirring of our affections!
the melting and relenting of our repenting hearts.

Sixthly, Bellum Dei contra homines. These three should be unto us as the three
arrows which Iona. than shot to forewarne David of the Kings displeasure: As
David understood thereby that the King was angry, and so got up, and made have
to be gone: So may we by those darts that come from Heaven, and fall so near
unto this place, perceive that the wrath of God is kindled against us: And
therefore we shall do well, to get up, as David did, and make have to flee
from the face of an angry God, whose wrath is a consuming fire, hiding our
selves in the holes of that rock Christ Jesus, who is a propitiation for our
sins. But this is not all to perceive by Gods judgments that he is angry. In
the next place, we shall do well to look back into our selves, and enquire
what we have done, that has provoked the Lord to wrath; for he never strikes
without a cause. ^. Sam. 21.1.
So David when the famine was upon the land, consulted with the Lord, and he
found, that it was for the blood of the Gibeonites shed by Saul. Yea so much
devotion we may learn from the Assyrians. After the king of Ashur had sent
into Samaria new Colonies from Babylon, Cutha, Ana, Hamath, and from
Sepharuaim, there came Lions and destroyed them. And they rightly apprehended
the cause of it to be; for that they did not worship the God of the land; but
served idols in that place, which the Lord of hosts had sanctified for his own
worship: Whereupon the king gave order, that one of the Priests should be
carried back, 2. King. 17.24. etc.
to teach them the manner of the God of the land. Belike they knew that the
Ark of God and Dagon would not dwell vnderone roof. So if we search into the
cause that has provoked God to wrath, we will find such as this, and many
more in ourselves. So the consideration of Gods judgments will bring us to the
sight of our sins, which is a good means to make our hearts relent.

Seventhly, Pilat, Judas, or the Jews; that our sins were the nails that
boared his hands and his seete, and the spear which pierced his side, and the
thorns that pricked his head. If, I say, this meditation could take place in
our hearts; bitterness of spirit, with wailing and mourning should take place in
like manner. Thus, Peter in his sermon. Act. 2. struck the Jews as with a
thunderclap from Heaven, when he told them, that they had crucified the Lord of
glory, so that 3000 of them were pricked in their hearts, Act. 2.37.
and cried, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Even so if we be of the number
of those upon whom God has promised to power forth his spirit in the last
days; We shall look upon him whom we have pierced, and we shall lament for
him, as one mourns for his only son. Zach. 12.10. Finally, because a soft
heart is the gift of God; let us have recourse unto him by earnest and frequent
prayer, beseeching him of his fatherly goodness, that according to his promises
in the new covenant, he would take away this stony heart from us, and give us
a heart of flesh, which may receive the stamp of his word, be pliable to the
operation of his blessed spirit, and tremble at his judgments. And unto prayer
we must sometimes add fasting, which is like scouring, now and the^ to be
joined with ordinary washing. When destruction was threatened against Niniveh
the King proclaimed a solemn fast; so has our religious King done at this
time: Not as the king of Niniveh. For that king did proclaim the fast* upon
the warning of a Prophet: but he himself gave warning to the Prophets, and
like the good Kings of Judah, we have seen him go before the Priests, in the
zeal of Gods service. I will not forestall the market, but reserve the work
of the day, for the day it self. Only give me leave to blow the trumpet in
Sion for sanctifying of this fast, and to ring a peale this day before, giving
you warning that if ye will hear his voice, and meet the Lord by repentance
in that day of humiliation; ye must not harden your hearts.

AMEN.

