CONCERNING THE DEFENSE OF THE HONOR OF THE RIGHT HIGH, MIGHTY AND NOBLE
Princess, Marie Queen of Scotland, and Douager of France, with a Declaration,
as well of her Right, Title, and Interest, to the Succession of the Croune of
England: as that the Regiment of women is conformable to the law of God and
Nature.

Made by Morgan Philippes, Bachelar of Divinity, An. 1570.

LEODII. Apud Gualterum Morberium. 1571.

A DEFENSE OF THE HONOR OF THE RIGHT HIGH, RIGHT MIGHTY and Noble Princess,
Marie Queen of Scotland, and Douager of France. The First Book.
IT were to be wished, that as God and nature have most decently, ordinately,
and prouidentely furnished and adorned manne with two eyes; two ears, and but
with one mouth, and one tongue, wonderfully bridled and kept in with the lips
and the teeth: so men would consider the cause of it, and the great providence
of God therein, and after due consideration, use them selves accordingly. Then
should we sone learn and practice a good lesson, to hear and see many
things, and yet not to run headlong, nor rudely and rashly to talk of al we
hear and see, but to talk within a compass, and to refer al our talk to a
temperance and sobriety, and to a known tried truth: especially where the
said talk may sound to the blemishing and disgracing of any man's good name and
estimation.

But now a days (the more pity) there is nothing almost, but that as soon as
it is perceived by the eye or the ear, must furthwith be lasshed out again by
the mouth: such a superfluous and curious itching we have, dissolutely and
vnaduisely to talk of al matters, though they tend to the great hinderance
and infamy of many of our brethren, and though we be nothing assured of the
certain truth of the matter, yea without respect to private or public
persons.

Of such unbridled talk no man or woman in our days has (as I suppose) more
just cause to complain, then the right Excellent Princess, Lady Marie
Queen of Scotland: whose honor many have gone about to blotte and deface, in
charging her most falsely and unjustly with the death of her late husband the
Lord Darley. For the defense and mainteining of whose innocence in this
behalf, we intend to lay forth before the gentle Reader, the most chief and
principal reasons, grounds and arguments, whereupon the Patrones, the Inuentors
and workers of al these mischieuouse and devilish driftes grounded themselves,
and all their outrageous doomges. And then consequently to infringe and repulse
the same. For to rehearse, answer to, and repel all their assertions and
objections, it would require a very long, tediouse and a superfluouse
Discourse, in as much, as these iolie gaie orators, measuring their dooinges
more by number of false objections, then by true substantial and pitthy matter,
to make a goodly flourish and a trim show, to face out and countenance their
crafty Iuglinges, and to cover their disordered dealings therewithal, have
raked up and heaped together one upon another against their good Maistres and
Sovereign Queen no small number of slanderous Articles.

But in all this rablement, in all this raking and racking, what thing else do
they, but utter and disclose their own spiteful malice and malicious spite, to
the discrediting of their cause, and them selves also? Even as the accusers of
Aristophanes among the Athenienses did, by whom he being ninety and five
times grievously accused, was yet every time by the Judges cleared and found
guiltless: as I do no whit doubt, but that this good innocent Lady will be (by
the verdit and sentence of al indifferent men) rid and unburdened in like
manner, of al manner of suspicion, that these reprocheful men would by their
malice and ambition bring her into (by their wills) with all the world. For as
goodly and as great a muster as they make, two parts of their slanderous
accusation are manifest false, and open untruths and foul forged lies. The
residue thereof though in some part they bear truth, and be nothing
prejudicial to the Queen in this matter: yet they are full calumniously and
marvelous maliciously depraved, drawn and wrested to the worst.

The effect and drifte of the whole tends to this, that first they would we
should believe: that after her marriage her mind was as it were alienated from
her husband.

Secondly they pretend certain letters, that they surmise and would have, to
have been written by her Grace: whereby they seek to infer against her many a
presumption, as their wily brains imagine. But the most weighty of them al
seems to them to be her pretensed Marriage, whereof we will lastly entreat.

And yet though they have done their worste, though they have cast out al their
spite and malice against her: they never have been able by any direct and
lawful means, to prove any thing at al, whereby they may stain her Graces
honor in any one of the foresaid points. Had they brought forth any such
necessarily concluding illation, we had not attempted this Defense in her
behalf: but would have yielded and given place to an open known truth. But
seeing that the best matter they have to supporte their doings withal, is
nothing else, but presumptions and surmises, which yet are not of the surest
and most probable forte, neither such, as are presumptions Iuris, and de
Iure^ contra quas non admittitur probatio: Me^ should be rather prone to
absolve, then to condemn.
seeing also that we ought always in criminal causes, chiefly when a Prince is
touched, who is Gods anointed, to be more procliue and prone to favor, then
to hatred, to be readier to absolve and release, then to deteine and condemn,
and that it is far better, and a more sure and more indifferent and upright
way, to save the guilties life, then to condemn and cast away the innocent: I
trust and am in an assured hope, that all the indifferent Readers hereof (this
being the cause and woeful adversity of a Prince, whereas the like estate of
Princes ought and is wont to move and stir al honest hearted men to
commiseration and pity, and to do their endeavor, to the redress and
reformation of such wrong and oppression done) will with indifferency, and
without all partiality, weigh and consider the allegatio^s of the one and the
other side, and judge of the matter, as it falls out accordingly. Which is
the very thing we most desire.

And seeing the Adversaries throughout al their cause; wander by ghesses and
uncertain presumptions: let us also, as I may say, abuse a little part of our
Defense. What ^y I, abuse? (perchance truly, if we had no better, or they any
good matter at al) nay rather use them accordingly, for the more ample and
better trial and justification of our cause. We as ke the^ then, why the better
and the stronger presumptions should not frustrate, avoid and set back the
weaker and the worse? This sex naturally abhors such butcherly practices.
Surely rare it is, to hear such foul practices in women. And may we find in
our hearts to believe, that it is now at length found and practiced by such a
Lady and Princess, from whose person, her noble birth, her honorable state
and pri^cely educatio^, and the whole trade of al her godly and virtuous life
past, do far repel and drive away al such suspicion and co^iectural
presumptio^s? And whom al Christian Princes have had in high estimation and
worthy price for her great prude^cie, and many other Princely qualities, the
which full goodly do adorn and beautify the grace and comlines of her Roial
personage.

Does any man or woman fall to extreme lewdnes al at ones? No verily. We do
both rise, and fall by degrees, as well to all singular virtues, as to al extreme
naughtines. Let them show me then, if they can, any evil doings in all her
former life, whereupon to make a sinister divination, to fasten upon her their
treacherous accusations. What unseemly outragiouse and unprincely part has
she hitherto played? Let the noble Realm of France testify of her demeanor
and behavior. Let her own subjects, that be not her open enemies, and her
duble duble traitors, accuse her hardly, and spare her not. But yet let them
well think withal at their better leisure, and when they shall be better advised:
whether there be any indifferent person, who will not both detest and utterly
abhor the peruers and naughty nature of such ungrate traitors. Or that will
not think it far unlike, that this noble Queen, who has so graciously
pardoned them duble and treble treasons, would ever find in her heart, so to
use her own dear husband. This is unlikely, this is incredible: and the
more, al circumstances considered. For if she had been desirous to have been
rid of him, as they falsely, and maliciously imagine and report her to have been: she had good and lawful means to serve her turn.

Albe it he was her head in wedlock, It is nothing like, that the Queen
would have sought the destruction of the Lord Darley by these means: when
she might have openly put him to death by Justice.
yet was he otherwise but a member of her common Weal, subject to her, as to
his principal and supreme Gouernesse, and to her laws. By the due and ordinary
process and course whereof he might justly have been convicted, condemned and
executed, as well for the murder committed upon David her Secretary, in whose
body his dagger was found stabbed: as for the imprisoning of the Queen, and
for the attempting to remove her from Civil government, to intrude him self
thereto, and for diverse other the like pageants by him played.

Who can now reasonably think, that where she by law and justice might have
fully satisfied this her falsely surmised will and desire: that she would not
take the opportunities in this sort offered, but omitting them al, seek
unlawful means to his destruction? This vehement presumption of her innocency
is much helped, for that she would not consent to a divorce between her and the
Lord Darley (as we shall hereafter declare) though she were moved thereto by a
great number of her Nobility, and by such as be now her greatest Adversaries.

I add thereto, as a great and an urgent presumption and token of her
innocence and pure conscience, The Q. contrary to mind of her Nobles came
into England.
that she voluntarily came into England (refusing the offers of diverse of her
own subjects, who besought her Grace to repair into their quarters,
profering to preserve her Grace safe therein) where she knew right well were both
the father and mother of the said Lord Darley, a Noble Princess, that would
not see the blood of her nere Cosen unrevenged, and a worthy sort of men of
Nobility also, who would neither suffer such a fact to pass and escape
unpunished, nor so virtuous and giltlesse a Queen to remain without aid,
help and succor, being with Rebels and Traitors shamefully oppressed and
bereaved of her Royal dignity. The worthy saying also of the wise Cassiue is
here to be remembered: Cui bono? Whereby he did signify, that in such doubtful
coniecturall cases a man may make a great aim and conjecture against the
person appeached, if by the fact doing he should enjoy any special
profitte, emolument or commodity.

If the Queen had after his fatal and final end, purchased to her self the
matching in marriage with any great and mighty Prince for her great advancement,
or any other increase of her honor or advantage whatsoever: there had been some
color and show, whereby one might have an apparent presumption.

Again, she was not ignorant, but that his death either proceeding from such
naughty means, or otherwise naturally, was likely to be a merueilous great
let and impediment to her great affairs. Among other things the testimony and
confession of diverse guyltie, as they be reported, and executed in Scotland for
the said offense, which they openly made at the time of their death, does tend
much to the advancing and approbation of her innocence.

These men yet peradventure will reply and say, that these are but slender
presumptions. And yet were it so, that they were of force sufficient: they must
yield to an approved truth. It remains now then, that we consider, how sure
and substantial their proof is.

Concerning therefore the first part, we will not altogether deny, but that
she was somewhat estranged from him: and therefore they might have spared a
great sort of then needelesse and frivolous arguments, and yet flat and plain
lies withal, to prove the same. The Q. enemies lay to her, discord with the
Lord Darley, whereof they were the authors.
But fie upon the cruelty of these accusers, who were the very authors them
selves, and themselves the only workers and bringers to pass of all this
discord, training this seely young Gentleman by there guilefull and wily
circu^uentions wretchedly to conspire with them against his own dear wife and
dradde Sovereign, to the most cruel and detestable slaughter of her trusty
Secretary David, and to the imprisonnement of the royal person of the very
Queen her self.

These and many other like pranks and practices, as the reuocation of The Earl
Murray, and of other traitors of your allie and affinity, without the Queens
knowledge, by the Lord Darleyes youthful, rash and remerariouse device to
depart the Realm, with many other like practices, purposes and attemptes for
his princely person very unmeet and far unseemly, ye craftily suppress, and
speak no word of, for fear of burning your own clothes.

I say therefore, fie, and dubble fie upon ^e impudency of these mischievous
trai^^rs, now to lay to the Queen's charge, and reprochefully to object to her
the changing ^her mind toward her husband, which rose and began upon causes,
for the which they had been long erst trised up, if they had not fortuned upon
and met with so gratiouse a Mastresse, as I know, and they, though undeserving
it, do well feel, that the whole world has very few her like. And yet all this
your pretensed alienation of her accustomed favor from him not withstanding,
her very motherly care (for bysides al other respects, though they were not
far different in years, she was to him not only a loyal Prince, a loving and
dear wife, but a most careful and tender mother withal) was never a deal
lessed or minished: albe it for a time she did dissemble and forbear outwardly
to show and utter her most inward heart and affectionate love, upon most ^^st
and good respects: As the manner and practice of provident and most loving
parents oftentimes is toward their dear children; for the better reclaiming
of the wandering mind and wavering will of the youthful unadvised gentleman. And
therefore hearing and advertised, The Q. was fully reconciled to the L. Darley
before his death.
that he was repentant and sorrowful, and that he desired her presence, she
without delay, thereby to renew, quicke^ and refresh his sprites, and to
comfort his heart, to the amendment and repayring of his health lately by sickness
sore impaired, hasted with such speed, as she co^uenie^tly might to see and
visit him at Glasco. Whereas also at diverse other places, especially at
Edenborough, she from time to time most lovingly enterteined, and most tenderly
cherished him ever, even to the very last hour, that ever she saw him. Whereby
it did to al men most evidently appear, that al manner of displeasure or
variance, whatsoever your coniectural surmises suppose to have been between
them, or your seditious practices and ambitious procedinges had sown in their
stomakes and minds, was not only now we^ aswaged and fully appeased, but
utterly for ever quenched, as being altogether forgotten and trodden (to your
much misliking and great discomfort) under foot of them both, never to be
renewed again. But for as much as these men do well perceive, that if this be
true, which is in deed so certeinely true, that they them selves are for the
manifest evidence thereof; even driven and for^^ to acknowledge and confess
the same: then their great Samsons post of discord and debate, wherewith they
would underprop and uphold al their traitorous procedings, as also this
their mischievous accusation and grievous crimination, the which they had fully
now conceived and brought, as they hoped, to perfection, by the mischievous
driftes of their shrewd, wily, devilish disposed brains, against her, would
fail them and fall to the ground.

For this consideration, I say, they now measuring these most commendable
doings of the very virtuous and well meaning Queen, by their own deep and
dubble dissembling crafty nature, their former drifte failing them, began to
lay a new foundation to build their long conceived treasons on: and say: that
all this curtesy, favor, love and amity was but a set matter on her part, and
coulorable show, and a dissembled drift and fained pretense by her colorably
conveyed, upon none other purpose, but to flatter and entice him to Edenborough
to his bane, which, say they, appears by her own leters.

It irketh and greeueth them to the very heart, to hear of the reconciliation,
and therefore they toil and tumble from (...) kind of lying Rhetorike, to an
other, even quite contrary. For as before they found great fault with her, for
estranging her favor from him: so now at the last they mislike at her great
travail taken in her progress, to visit and cumfort him, judging and reputing
al her dutiful kindness, as hypocritical and counterfeited dissimulation. Wherein
by their malicious construing and wrong interpreting of well and commendable
doing, they represent the natural disposition and froward inclination of the
Devil, who has that name, for that he is willingly and of purpose a malicious
false reporter and accuser.

As for the letters they take hold on, and slander her for, we shall hereafter
examine them, what weight they bear. Well then, if there were such a
reconciliatio^ made between them, as I have said to be, as there is little or no
cause at al, why any man should think, that the Queen was privy or ware of
the means of his death: so may it seem but mere superfluous for us, either to
rehearse, what surmised difference were between them, or to confute the
falsitie of al such allegations, The adueriaties charge the Q with their own
wicked devises.
namely seeing that in some thereof they charge the most innocent Queen with
their own most lewd, naughty and wicked devises, and detestable practices.

As, for an example and proof thereof, the Earl Murray and his counsel
perceauing, that for a time the Queen seemed not well to like of her husbands
doings (albe it whatsoever her said misliking were, it was, as is aforesaid,
for the love of him, in respect of his own profit and commodity) being very
desirous to bring home again their co^federated mate, The Earl Morton, who
then was in banishment, and remained in England for the slaughter of David her
Secretary, without whose presence and present advice their fetching practices
were half maimed and lacked force to take effect: were earnest suitors, that if
she would pardon him, they would procure a divorce between them, whereto she
would not agree. The Q. moved by them. to make a divorce with the L. Darley.
But what have these good men now done, think ye, in this part? Surely they
have played the said pageant with this innocent Susan, as the two wicked Judges
did play with the other former Susan. They lay hard to her charge their own
naughty and wicked counsel and devise. It were therefore but a vain and lost
labor for us, to stay and tarry long upon the confutation of their own
crafty malicious inventions and procedinges, in procuring an alienation of the
Queens mind from her dear and well beloved husband, or upon any other
alienation whatsoever: it so being, that they them selves can not deny, but
that there followed a good pacification and reconciliation between them.

We will consequently therefore consider the second principal point of our
discourse. The accusation touching letters lent by her to the Earl Bothevvel
For they say, that they have a sufficient prouf to justify the chiefest part
of their accusation. A proper justification, pardie. This, this is their ioly
witness, this is their singular jewel, whereby they set much store, the value
whereof in their eyesight they repute and account as of an inestimable
treasure. This most necessary witness they have alwares attendant at hand and
ready at a beck to serve their turn at a pinche, when need requires, for all
their purposes and atte^pts.

If ye doubt of the verity of any part of their accusations, this witness,
though ye never saw nor heard of any such thing, will full fair bleate it out,
and make al things according to their mind as clear as Cristal or as the
bright shining son. So that if this witness once fails them, then al their
accusation fails them therewith, and by and by quaileth. And soothly this
witness yet, all this notwithstanding, what else is it, but a blind and deaf
and a do^me testimony of certain obscure letters, written and indicted (as
they most falsely, and as vainly auouche, and hitherto were never able to
prove) by the Queen to the Earl Bothwel.

It is forsooth a box of letters taken from one Doughleysh, The unlikely tale
of the Earl Both welles letters surmised to be sent to Master Balfoure.
who was executed for the Lord Darleyes death, the Earls man forsooth: which
letters he received at Edenborough of one Sir James Balfoure, to convey to his
Master. Thus say they. But we say to you, as is said in Terence: Non sunt haec
satis diuisa temporibus. The very time, if nothing else were, bewraieth you,
and your whole cause withal. Is it to be thought, that either the Earl would
send to the said Sir James, who had before assisted the faction against the
Queen with the force and strength of Edenborough Castle, and driven from thence
the very Earl him self: or that the said Sir James would send any such thing
to the Earl? Is it likely? Is it credible? Had the forger and inuentour of
this tale by seemly conueiance parted and divided the distinction of his
times? How say ye? Whereas now it is in no case to be supposed or
coniectured, that such a wise, virtuous Lady would send any such letters:
yet putting the case that she had sent them, it is not to be thought, that
either the receauer thereof, or that she her self, whom ye conceive to have
sent them, would have suffered them, for the hasarding of her estimation and
honor, to remain undefaced: namely seeing there was a special mention made,
and warning given forthwith to burn them, and make them away.

Nevertheless when you have taken your best advantage you can of them: In case
the su^mised letters were sent by the Q they can make no good prouf against
her.
such kind of letters missiue and Epistles, especially not containing any
express commandment of any unlawful act or deed to be committed and
perpetrated, not ratifiyng or specifiyng the accomplishment of any such fact
already past, but by unsure and uncertain ghesses, aims and coniecturall
supposinges, are not able in any wise to make a lawful presumption, much less
any good and substantial proof, not only against your Sovereign and Prince,
but not so much as against the poorest woman or simplest wretched creature in all Scotland.

Surely the Civil law wills, that in criminal matters (for such are these)
the accusers allege and bring forth nothing, but that they may be able to
approve and justify by the testimony of good and lawefull witnesses, or by
some other most manifest, clear and evident proof or presumptions. Sciant
cuncti accusatores, L. sin. e d^ Probat. What exquisite proufes be re quired in
criminal causes.
eam se rem defer in publicam notionem debere, quae munita sit idoneis
testibus, vel instructa apertissimis documentis, vel indiciis ad probationem
indubit atis and luce clarioribus expedita. This rule ought to be observed and
kept in the simplest and seeliest poor man's cause, that is: and think you
now, you most ungrate and unthankful subjects, that ye may lawefullye
take arms against your Maistresse and your most benign Queen, that ye may
cast her into vile prison, and spoil her of her Croune, and (which is more)
of her good and honorable name, fame, and estimation: and then bleare men's
eyes, The surmi sed letters neither have superscriptio^ of the writer, nor
subscription, neitherany date, neither signed nor sealed, and the beater never
knovve^
and face the world out with the show of these letters, as it were with a card
of ten? But yet, say you, they are her letters? She denies them, and we deny
them to. There is neither subscription of the writer, nor superscriptio^ unto
whom they were directed: they are neither sealed nor signed, there appears
neither date, wherein they were dated, neither day, nor month. There is no
mention made of the bearer, who is, as it may be supposed, for any name he
bears, the man in the Moon He was never yet known, nor herd of, that did
either receive, or deliver them. For as for him that ye surmise was the bearer
of them, He that was the surmised bearer, at his death denied the same.
and whom you have executed of late for the said murder: he at the time of
his said execution took it upon his death, as he should answer before God,
that he never carried any such letters, nor that the Queen was participant, nor
of counsel in the cause. Think ye, that wise and expert me^ are ignorant, how
perilous and dangerous a matter it is, An easy thing to cou^terfeit a man's
hand.
to fasten any good proof upon illation of letters, and how easy it is to some
men, to imitate and counterfeat any character? The which a Knight lately
deceased in England could so lively and subtilely do, that he who wrote most
crabbedly and vnleageably, could hardly discern his own hand writing from
the Knights counterfeiting hand.

But who conferred these letters, I pray you, with your Queens own hand
writing? Dare you to warrant them, in this so perilous and weighty a cause, to
have been so exquisitely and so exactly vewed and conferred with all such dew
circumstances, as the Civil law does require, were it but a Civil or a money
matter? You will peradventure answer, that there was dew collation by you made.
O perfect and worthy collation. O meet and apt men for such a purpose.

As though it is not notoriously known throughout the world, that ye are her
most mortal enemies: as though these counterfeit letters were not the
underpropped posts and vpholders of your whole treachery and usurped kingdom:
as though that many in Scotland could not express, and resemble, and
counterfeit in their writings the Queens very character: and as though there
were not among your selves some singular artificer in this ha^dycraft, These
letters were fained and contrived by the Queens Adversaries.
and that has sent letters also in her very name, as well into England, as to
other places bysides, without either her commandment, or knowledge. How can I
chose then, but say, that this deed is your shameful handycraft, and not her
hand writing? Yea surely, all this is your own fained forging and most vile
counterfeiting.

If ye be angry with me, for thus saying by you, I hope you will be sone cold
with me again: seeing that I will not bring out any dead witnesses, as ye
craftily do, contrary to reason and law: Quia testibus, non testimonijs
credendum est: nor such like, but good, sufficient and lawful witnesses, such
as ye can not by any just exception or tergiuersation avoid or elude. And
these are none other, but even your own selves.

For either you must bring forth good and apparent witnesses, to prove it her
hand: or some such as were privy to the meaning of the said letters: which
ye neither yet have done, nor are likely ever to do. Or ye must grant, that
you were privy to them your selves with the Queen, or at least with the said
Earl, whom ye surmise to have received these letters: or that all this is by
you maliciously driven and concluded.

If ye grant us, that ye were privy of the said letters: we trust then you
will be good to the Queen, and if it were but for your own honesties sake. If
ye deny that, and withal that you were the contriuers thereof your selves: we
pray you to tell us, and blush not, how you could so readily and so directly hit
the interpretation of these words (our affairs) and what these words should
mean, there being so many affairs, as ye pretend in these your feigned false
letters, between the Queen and the Earl.

That only thing, that by these words ye surmise, pretend and conjecture, I
suppose, that if you were well examined of this point upon the sudden, and were
urged and vehemently pressed by any indifferent and upright Judge, you would
be somewhat to feeke. And yet take at your leisure as good aduisement, and as
long consultatio^ with your selves, as ye can and may think meet, and seek as
many fine fetches, as ye list: ye never shall shift it of with honesty, nor
well rid your hands thereof. Whereof I for my part do take my self full
assured, and therefore do think it a nedelesse discourse for me, to make any
further descant upon such an unpleasant, iarring and untuneable plain song of
your own setting and making: and am right well contented, that ye do make as
gaye glosing comments and interpretations, as ye list, and as your cunning and
skill will serve you, to these your own shameful untrue textes.

But now weigh and consider with your selves, I heartily pray you, and see
whether that al your legerdemaine and close conueiances in your false play,
as well touching and concerning your fit iugling box, as al your other like
tricks and cunning illusions, be not fully espied, and plainly and openly
enough laid out to each man's eye to behold and view. And as touching your said
iugling box, you have been very foully and merue^lously ouersene in the close
and clean conueia^ce of your fingers, for that a man more then half blind
may perfectly see and perceive your foul play, for as much as the very self
said Doughleish, whom among other ye executed and rid out of the way, has
said and sufficiently declared for the Queen's innocence.

Nay, nay, perhaps you will say, although our letters, although our dead
witnesses, and although our other matters fail us: yet we hope, that the little
faint mourning she made for his death, the acquital of the Earl and her
pretended marriage with him will help your cause, and give testimony against her.
And why so, I pray you? Was not his body enbalmed, inseared and interred
bysides the Queens father, the late King James, accompanied with Justice
Clerk, the Lord of Traquarre and with diverse other Gentlemen? The ceremonies
in deed were the fewer, because that the greatest part of the Counsel were
Protestants, and had before enterred their own parents without accustomed
solennities of ceremonies. An answer to the Adversaries obiectio^s, that the
Queen did not mourn the death of the L. Darley.
Neither is there any such order or custom, as ye pretend and make your
reckning of, for the reservation of the corpse forty days, nor any such
observation was kept and used about the corpse of the very father of the Prince:
neither yet was there any such order taken or appointed by the Counsel for
the enterring of the said Lord Darleyes body in such sort as ye notify, but
even directly to the contrary. Yea, ye are as little able to prove that there
has been any such customarie solemnity observed of so straight and strange a
mourning, as ye most severely would restrain and bind the Queen unto: as ye
be able to prove the residue of the premises. But in case ye could well
justify some such usual order, yet shall ye never be able to show, that it does
extend and apperteine to such kind of Queens, as she is. For they mourn
their husbands, who were Kings: her Grace mourns after an other sort: she a
Prince, her husband a private man and a subject. They, as women most commonly
do, take their honor and chief dignity of their husbands. Her husbands
increase of advancement came by his matching with her*

And further, L. Liberor. ff. de his qui notantur inf.
women by the Civil law are in diverse cases discharged and excused for their
omitting thereof, and forbearing their so doing. And yet did this good gentle
Lady bemone, even such a one, a notable time enjoying and using none other
then candle light, as was known to all the Nobility of Scotland, and also to
one M. Henry Killigraie, who was sent thither from England to her comfort,
according to the use and ma^er of Princes. Who had a longer time in this
lame^ting wise continued, had she not ben most earnestly dehorted by the
vehement exhortatio^s and persuasio^s of her Counsel: who were moved thereto
by her Physicians informatio^s, declaring to them the great and (immine^t
dangers of her health and life, if she did not in all speed break up and leave
that kind of close and solitary life, and repair to some good open and
wholesome air: which she did being this advised, and earnestly thereto solicited
by her said Counsel. Al which yet not withstanding, this her fact is with
these most severe and grave Censors taken for and reputed, as the very next sin
of al to the most grievous sin against the holy Ghost. But o good pitiful
men, who for the very tender love and singular affection, which you did ever
bear to the L. Darley (the which truly was so vehement, that for your exceeding
hot and fervent love toward him, ye ever sought his hearts blood) do now so
pitifully bewail him? But if she had by reason of the closenes of the air,
and somewhat longer co^tinua^ce in her mourning place, and in her desolate and
doleful estate, accelerated her own death withal: then had she by the Earl
Murrare^ and his adherents gostly judgments mourned like a good honest wife,
and to their best co^tentation: it being the right way, and readiest means to
have conveyed and brought the said Earl to that place, where unto he so long
and so greedily aspired, and the which now at the length he has atchie ued and
atteined.

As for the residue of their saynges, (...) there be any fault in the Queen:
it surely falls dubble and treble upon these A chitophelles. And the good
innocent Lady, wh^ has been so wretchedly and so unworthily by them abused and
circumuented, is mo^ to be pitied, then to be blamed. The Earl Bothwel was
acquitted by his Peers, according to the common and ordinary trad^ and manner,
in such cases usually observed These unnatural and disloyal subjects, these
most shameful, crafty colluders, her Aduer saries and accusers, I mean, the
Earl Morto^, the Lord Simple, the Lord Lindzay with their adherents and
affinity, especially procured, and with all diligence labored hi^ purgation
and acquital: which was afterward confirmed by the three Estates by Act of
Parliament.

These, these, I say, whereof some are now the vehement and hot fault
finders, and most earnest reprouers and blamers of the said pretended Marriage,
were then the principal inuenters, practisers, persuaders and compassers of the
same. They procured a great part of the Nobility to solicit the Queen, to
couple her self in marriage with the said Earl, as with a man most fit, apt
and mete for her present estate and case.

First, alleging the dangerous world, The consideration moving* or rather
forcing the Queen to this pretensed m^ riage.
and often inculcating into her mind and remembrance the present perilous time
and dealinges of men: which the better to prevent, and more surely to
withstand, by their counsel and persuadings induced her, and by other their
crafty doings as it were enforced and constrained her, to take a husband, to
be her comforter, her assister, her buckler and her shilde, to defend her
against al her whatsoever Adversaries.

If she would be contented so to do, they promised him service, and to the
Queen loyal obedience. Yea, many of them bound them selves to the said Earl
by their own hand writing, to assist, maintain and defend him against al
men that would then after challenge or pursue him, as guilty of the said
crime. The wihch their doings the Queen considering, and fearing dangers
imminent, and withal calling to mind the sundry and diverse vprours and
seditio^s already made against her, the wretched and most cruel murder of her
Secretary in her own presence, the late strange and miserable murder of her
husband, the distress, the discomforte and desolation, wherein she was
presently bewrapped, the Earls actiuitie in Martial feats, and the good and
faithful service done by him to her mother and to her self, fearing some new
and fresh stir and calamity, if she should refuse her Nobilities request
(though very circu^spect and naturally prudent in all her other doings) yet
nevertheless a woman, and especially never to that hour ones admonished,
either openly or privately after the Earls acquital, that he was guilty of
the said fact, nor suspecting any thing thereof, yielded to that, to the which
these crafty colluding, seditious heads, and the necessity of the time, as
then to her seemed, did in a manner enforce her.

Let them now lay on lode let them now rage and rave against this acquital and
marriage, let them lie to their own shame upon their own deuifes and doings,
thereby to defame their Queen. Let them lie, that the Earl of Huntley was
restored to his fathers patrimony, to procure his sisters consent to the
divorce between th'Erle and her: which restitution was made, not for that
consideration, but by cause the Queen thought in her conscience, his father
wrongfully condemned.

Let them cry out upon The Earl Bothwel, for that the sentence of divorce was
promulged, partly by force, partly without the just and usual order of the law,
and without sufficient proufs. Let them cry out upon him, for his violent
taking and deteining the Queen. Yet if they ca^ not precisely prove the Queen's
consent to any of his unlawful acts, as hitherto they were never able to do:
then can they not get or gather any just occasion (which is the thing they only
seek for) to suspect the Queen of this grievous act. On the other side, it is
well known, and easy to be proved, that this faction did chiefly procure (as we
have said) as well the acquital, as the supposed marriage: and therefore by
likelihod was privy of all other consequent devises and practices. Wherefore
they do nothing but blow out and blase to the world, with their own foul,
filthy mouths, their own shame: and do fare like a man, that does thrust a
sword through both his own sides to prick a little and raise but the outward
skin only of his enemy.

Ye may now well perceive, gentle Reader, that hitherto they have produced little
matter of credit against their Queen: and yet, as it appears, very good
matter against them selves, and for their own discredit. Now may ye therefore
easily conjecture, and by these their chief and principal matters and grounds
easily perceive, what account is to be made of all the residue of their lewd
slanders, and what small force and strength al their whole sayings do bear.
They see it, they see it well enough themselves, good Reader: whereby they well
perceive and fully understand, that they altogether are unable, to bear out
and maintain by reason, justice or law these their outrageous and seditious
procedinges. And therefore they set upon them the best color and countenance
they can. Wherein you shall now hear, what they did allege, being in England,
for them selves.

They say, that no man can charge them, The Adversaries declaration before the
Commissioners of England.
or the residue of their Nobility, that they have gone as much as one only
step from the office and duty of good subjects, in taking arms against the
outrageous enormities already committed, and to prevent the great dangers
immine^t to the persons of their Queen, and her dear son, to their
Nobility, and to the whole state of their weal public. And that it was no
small hearts grief to them, to hear, what vilanie al Nations thought, and openly
spoke of them, for suffering such a Tragical matter to escape unpunished: which
thing ingendreth of us (say they) among strangers and al forain Nations an ill
and sinister opinion of some common consent thereto made by our whole
Nobility. Yea, to see also the very Executour thereof him self by violent
force, to take, deteine and keep his and their Sovereign, and with mariyng
with her to disteine her honor.

Wherefore to set her Majesty at freedom out of his bondage, to preserve her
honor and the person of her son, and by due punishment of such a
malefactor, to recover their good name and estimation with the rest and
quietness of their Country: when they had but in vain attempted as well al other
means, as by the offering to the Earl singular battle, they were driven to
gather force to resist them, who came to the field against them with a strong
army. But he refusing either to wage singular battle, which was then offered
to him, or to join in battle with their ca^pe, escaped by flight. The Queen
in the meanewhile rendered herself into the Nobilities hands there assembled,
and by them was conveyed to Ede^borough: but afterward they were of very
necessity compelled, to sequester her, until such time, as some remedy might
be found for these matters, into Lochleue^. Where she having now advised with her
self, and fully perceued her own disabilitie, to susteme the weight of so
great a room, freely and volu^tarily (by their saying) gave over the Croune to
her son, appointing the Earl Murray, being at that time out of the Realm,
to be Rege^t thereof, during her sons minority. The Earl Bothwel not long
after being by them pursued, fled the Realm to escape their hands.

Now this said resignation by the Queen ones made to her son, he was
forthwith by them solemnly crouned, and he as King, the Earl Murray as Regent,
obeyed, and the state of both these Regime^ts was by Act of Parlame^t
established. Whereupon quietness began to increase, and justice more and more
daily to take place: which yet some persons (sai they) much enuiyng at, to the
disturba^ce of the same and of the kings authority: first practiced, contrary
to the said their Act of Parliament, the Queens deliverance out of Lochleuen,
and then showed them selves in arms. But as their attempt (say they) was
unlawful, so the victory fell against them on our the righteous side. Whereby
God him self seems to have given sentence for the equity of our whole cause
against our Adversaries.

These are the principal allegations that these good men have proposed for the
justification of their proceedinges against the Queen, before the Commisioners
of England. Finally, they say, that the most part of them selves are for
particular benefits privately so much beholding to their said Queen, that a
number of them could be co^te^ted and well willing, if they might preserve
Scotland in the state of a Kingdom, preserving also the profession of true
religion, with the Kings person, and the whole state from danger, to live
willingly in perpetual exile and bannishment.

God be thanked, that after these seditious and traiterous subjects have been
so stout and storming in the rekoning up and accumulating of faults and
offenses of their innocent Maistresse and Queen, they are yet at the length
forced to answer for themselves, and for their excessive outrageous rebellious
doings. Their glorious and glittering excuses may perhaps at the first show
seem, to some of the Readers to have a ioly face of much probability, great
truth and fervent zeal to the weal public. But may it please them,
advisedly and depely to ponder and weigh, as well what we have said, as what we
farther shall say in supplement of full answer, and then to judge and deem of
the matter none otherwise, then reason, equity and law do crave: they shalat
length find out, and thoroughly perceive and know these men's dealinges and
doings, who as yet cover their foul filthy lying, detestable practices and
trayterouse enormities with such a visarde of counterfeit fained holiness, and
such exceeding great show of zeal to the Queens honor, in punishing
malefactors, and to the preservation of the state of the Realm: as though all the world would fall and go to ruin, if it were not vpholden and underpropped
by the strength of their shoulders. They shall see, how they will appear in
their own natural likeness, so ougly, that al good hearts will utterly detest
them, and think them most worthy for example sake to all the world hereafter
of extreme punishment.

We affirm then first, that as they have produced nothing in the world,
touching the principal points: as of the Lord Darleyes death, the acquital of
the Earl Bothwel, and the Queens marriage with him, justly to charge her
withal: so are they them selves, as well for the said acquital and marriage, as
for their damnable and rebellious attempts against their Sovereign, and for
many other enormous crimes, so far and so depely charged, so foul stained,
and so shamefully marked and noted: that never shall they with all their
hypocritical fine fetches be able, to rub out the dirty blottes thereof from
their skirts. which thing wilb^ easily perceived of them, that will vouchesafe
advisedly to consider the frivolous and contradictorie excuses, they make in
their defense.

At the beginning, The causes that the Rebels pretended at the beginning.
their open surmised quarrel, whereby they went about to draw the peoples
hearts to them selves, and to stre^gthen their own faction, stood in three
points, as appears by their excuses, and by their pretensed Proclamations.

The first was, to deliver the Queen from the Earl Bothwel, who violently
detained her, and to prevent dangers imminent to her person.

The second, to revenge the Kings death upon the said Bothwel, whom they knew
(as they pretended) to have been the principal doer in the execution of the said
murder.

The third was, to preserve the young Prince, the Queens son. This is their
ioly and holy pretense.

Now let us see, Answer to the first.
how conformable their worthy procedinges are to these their colorable cloked
holy collusions.

The first gentle and humble admonition, that these good loving subjects gave
her, to refourme these surmised enormities, was in ^attail array at Bortwike
Castle, which they thought upon the sudden to have possessed with the Queens
person. Whereupon they being disapointed thereof, gat into the Town and
Fortress of Edenboroug, by the treason of Balfoure the Captain thereof, and
of Cragmiler the Provost of the City: whereby they being the more animated, to
follow and prosecute their wicked enterprise, began now to be strong in the
field. The Queen having also a good strong army, and thinking her self well
able thereby to encounter with the enemy, and to repress their furious outrage:
yet notwithstanding, for the great love and pity she had to them (though
rebellious subjects) willing as much as in her lay, to keep and preserve their
blood from sheding offered them fair of her own free motion, that if they
would use her as their Queen, she would peaceably come to them, The Lord
Grange promised upon his knees obedience in all the Rebels names.
and take due and convenient order for the redress of al such things, as
might appear by law and reason mete to be reformed.

Whereupon the Lord Grange was sent by the Lords to her, who in all their
names most humbly upon his knees assured her of al dew obedience, of
security an^ safety of both her life and honor. And (...) the good Lady,
her conscience bearing he^ witness of al her just and upright dealinge^ and
therefore nothing mistrusting, dismissing her army, yielded her self to the
Lords: wh^ conveyed her to Edenborough, and there set her at such a marvelous
liberty, and (...) such security and safety, that al good me^ to the worlds
end will wonder at their exceeding good loyalty.

First they keeping her own Palaice, se^ and placed her in a merchants house,
and used her otherwise very homely. She now considering and perceauing, to what
end these matters tended, most pitifully cried and called upon them, to
remember their late promise: or at the least, that she might be brought before
the Counsel, offering to stand to the order and direction of the States of
the realm. But, God knows, al in vain. For now had they the pray, whereon
they intended to whet their bluddy teeth, ere they did dismiss or forgo her,
as the event does declare. Wherefore in the night privily she was conveyed, and
with haste in disguised apparel, to the strong Forte of Lochleuen, and after a
few days being strip^ed out and spoiled of al her princely at^rement, The Q.
imprisoned at Lochleue^.
was clothed with a course broune ^assoke.

After this these good loial subjects, pra^ising and increasing more and more
daily ^he performance of their said promised ^bedience, never ceased, until
they had usurped the full authority and Regiment of the whole. Into the which
though they had intruded themselves, yet seeing, as blind as they were, by
disordinate, unseemly and unmeasurable ambition, that the Queen remained and
was still Queen, and that there was no just cause, by the ordinary course of
the law, or for any her demerits and deserts to bring her forth to her trial,
that she might be convicted and deposed: went like good honest plain men and
well meaning subjects, bluntly to work, and co^sulted and determined, to
dispatche and rid her out of her life: unless she would yield to them, and
subscribe such writings, as they would send to her, concerning the dimission
of her Croune to her son, and the Regiment of the Realm to the Earl of
Murray.

Whereupon The Earl of Athele, Secret^rie Ledington with other principals of
their factious band, sent Robert Miluen to Loch^leuen, to will her in any ease,
if she sought the safeguard of her life, to co^descend to such demaundes, and
set her hand to al such writings, as should be proposed and brough^ to her.
Which (as they said) to do, neu^ could be prejudicial to her, The Q. thretned
to be ^id away, if she would not renounce her Croune.
being by for^^ and violence extorted. Sir Nicolas Throgmorton also, being then
Ambassador the^^ from England, gave her the like advise.

Now at the last comes the Lord Lindzay, sent in Commission from their
Counsel to present and offer unto her the writings who most grievously with
fearful words and very cruel and stern countenance thre^ned her, that
unless she would thereto subscribe, she should lose her life.

But call you this voluntary yelding ou^ and Resignation of the Croune? A
voluntary assignation of the regiment to you, Earl Murray? yea surely, as free
and voluntary, a^ a man with his own hands casts into the sea his goods in a
maine and raging tempest freely and voluntarily: saving that peradventure ye
may reply and say, that there is so much will in him, that he had rather bide
the ^duenture of his goods and riches, then of his life, being contented to
redeem the ^afegard of his life, with the loss of his goods.

And yet as voluntary as ye make it, free and voluntary ye shall no more make
it, then ye shall be able to prove, that the peoples good will was alienated from
her, as ye surmise. For the procuring whereof, ye have by your crafty
slanderous leasinges and wretched practices done all the endeavor, that your
malicious and spiteful brains could invent and search out. But surely your
dooinges have been so gracious, that if she had been deadly hated before, they
might have procured and gotten her a wonderful love and favor of the people
again. And whereas she was (even as she well deserved) most entierly and
tenderly beloved before: now ye have by these your so Tragical and Tyra^nical
procedings purchased to her such an augmentation and increase of the same
(specially when that the people, among whom for a while some ye have through
your cou lorable crafty conueiances made to misdeme and have somewhat the worse
liking of her, shall thoroughly and perfectly understand and know your said wily
policies, as more and more daily they do) that she shalb^ much beholding to
you: but no God hau^ mercy to you therefore.

But now to proceed and go forward with your loving loyal procedings toward
her ye never ceased nor stayed, until ye had procured and obtained a
coulorable Parlame^t whereby ye got your usurped and unnatural kingdom
ratified and confirmed: and not only al your wicked practices already past,
but even what mischief soever y^ would, should afterward pass also, against
her quietness and safety And thus behold, how these humble, obedient and loving
subjects have purchased and procured a Commiss^o long before hand: the like
whereof (as ^ suppose) was never in the world heard of a fore, in any
whatsoever rude, savage and barbarous Nation or Country, to slay, kill and
murder their own Sovereign Queen and a most innocent Lady, at their own
wills and pleasure. The which their said Commission they had in this wise
executed long ere this as it is credibly thought: if God had not wonderfully
eluded, and miraculously frustrated this their mischeiuous malicious purpose
and intent.

And yet is there one injury more, that does grieve and molest this good
guiltless Lady more, then al these foretold villainous pra^ks played of them
against her. And surely not without just cause of grief. For in deed it far
passes and excedeth them al. And that is, their shameful and most traitorous
diffaming her, being altogether innocent therein, with the death of her
husband: as though that she had suborned the Earl Bothwel thereto, and
rewarded him therefore with the marriage of her own body.

Here perchance they will say: The answer to the second.
Mary this is our chief quarrel in deed, this was the mark, we principally
shot at. The great love and zeal we bear to Justice, and the earnest desire
we have to purge and rid the Realm of the slander and infamy, that arises
thereto by this horrible fact, moves and stirs us up, to seek by all means
we can, the punishing of the said Earl, who was the co^mitter and chief
perpetrator thereof.

If it so be, surely there is upon the sudden commen upon you a marvelous
devotion. For why? Were not ye, and your band and Adhere^ts the chief and
principa^^ authors, assisters, fautours, aiders and abetters, for the clearing
and iustifiyng of the said Bothwel accused and indicted as gilty of the said
murder? what is it, that makes you now so hot, that then were so cold? By
like the world and wether is anew changed and altered of late. The Queen's ene
mies dimissed the Earl Both well, when they might have taken him.
Yet tell us, we pray you in good earnest: was your principal scope and zeal,
to apprehend th'Erle Bothwel? Tell us then a good cause, why ye did dismiss
him, when you might have had him at your pleasure? Did not the forsaid Grange,
coming to the Queen from you, speak to him also? Did he not take him by the
hand, and will him to depart, assuring and telling him, that no man should follow
or pursue him? Did not th'Erle remain in the Country at hand many months
after, until the returning home of the Earl Murray? And then for a face and
countenance, there were made out to the seas certain ships to apprehend him: it
being of you pretended, that he was now become an arrant Pirate and Rouer upon
the sea.

Nay, nay: it was not he, you so long sought after. It was an other bird, and
her ye had fast in the cage: and therefore ye permitted the Earl to flee
whether he would. But ye you say in your Accusation put up to the
Commissioners of England, that as he was the chief executor of the said Lord
Darleys death: so she was of the foreknowledge and counsel, yea and the
mainteiner thereof also. And therefore she both stopped the inquisition of the
fact and punishment of him, and also matched her self in marriage with him.

I ask then, as before, of you: why through the special suit and procurement
of your faction he was acquitted and set on clear board? Why did you with a
great number of the Nobility move further, and work the said marriage, The
Queen's enemies bound by their haud vvriting, to obey the E^le Bothvvel if he
matied the Q.
as most metee and necessary for your Queen? Why did you, as by your hand
writing it wilappeare, proffer and promise to him your faithful service, and
to her your loyal obeisance? Why did none of all your faction, nor any other
else, either openly, or privately declare and detect this matter to your Queen,
before the pretended marriage? Was there no time, occasion and opportunity, to
give her warning thereof, but by the terrible and fearful blast and sound of
the Martial trumpet? For she good innocent Lady, has upon her honor
protested, and plainly declared (the which her protestation also, the
disorderly, ambitious and Tragical doings of these rebellious and traitorous
subjects do much help and confirm) that before her taking and inprisonme^t,
she never knew, who were either principal, or accessarie, or by any means
culpable and blame worthy, concerning the said murder.

Touching the third point, An answer to the third.
it is not worthy the co^futing. For these men knew right well, that the Queen
had put her son safe and sure enough in the guarde and custody of the Earl
of Murray. But see, I pray you, the impudency of these men, and consider, how
much it is to be mused and merueled at, who are not ashamed to publish by open
Edictes and Proclamatio^s, that the Prince should be in more security and
safegarde under the protection and keeping of the Regent and usurping Rebels,
then under the hands and bringing up of his own most natural and dear
mother, with diverse other like unnatural, ridiculous and absurd propositions.

God bless him, and grant him no worse to speed, then this most tender and
loving mother daily wishes and continually prays for. Who, good sweet babe,
if he had age and discretion, to understand their doings, The Prince, if he
were at age, would not like the en^mies doings against his mother.
would give the Earl Murray and his fellows but cold thanks for the
intruding of him, against his good mother, unto the Croune and government of
the realm: but would and might well say, that this was but a color, under his
shadow to strengthen him (the said Earl) against his good mother, and
perchance against his own self to.

His own unnatural Coronation also (though these men much brag it solemnly
and orderly to have proceeded) he would as much mislike. Neither would he buy
it so dear, nor come forth to be a King so unnaturally, as the Vipers enter
into the world eating and gnawing out the mothers womb. He would demand and
ask, what a strange new found solennitie, He was vnlavvfully crouned
and fond manner of Coronation this was? For the matter being of so great and
weighty importance: of one hundred, Earls, Bisshoppes, and Lords, and more,
that have voice in Perlament, whereof al, or the more part of them should have
an agreement, liking and consent, as to al other, so to these public doings
also: there were no more present, but four Earls only, whereof the most
honorable had not the souenth or eigth voice in the Parlame^t among the
Earls, nor yet the first of twenty voice^ among all the States.

Ye had farther but six Lords, who also were such, as had laid their violent
hande^ upon their Queen before, and put her in prison. And least al should be
void, if they should seem to lack their full Congregation of the Spiritualitie
and Temporaltie: in leapeth me one Bishop, and two or three Abbats and Priors.
But yet were there not solemn Protestations, I pray you, then openly made and
authentical Instruments thereof made also, that whatsoever was that day done,
e^ther for the Coronation, or inuesting of the King, or for the establishing of
a Regent, or otherwise against the Queens Royal estate and person: it
should not be to her in any point hurtful or prejudicial, as being then
violently detained and imprisoned? Why the confirmation of the Rebels doings
made by an act of Parliament is nothing vvorth.


Well, you will allege peradventure, that al these procedinges were ratified and
confirmed by act of Parliament. Yet all this not withstanding, this Noble Impe
(if he were at ripe years) would, no doubt, acknowledge and allow no such
disordered Parliament: but would enquire of you, what ^uthoritie you had, to call
and sommon the said Parliament? He would say, that the ratifiyng of the said
dimission of the Crouno by his mother, is not allowable, or to be approved.

First, by cause she was then in prison, and not at her own liberty. Next, by
cause it was done by violence, and forced with fear of life, and so whatsoever
was builded upon this foundation, being of such weakness and so unstable, could
never be firmly and surely established and corroborated. He would farther say,
that diverse of the chief and most principal among the Nobility, namely the
Earls of Argile and Huntley with the Lord Harris, would not in any wise
accord or agree thereto, otherwise then it should stand with the Queens
voluntary will, void and free from al manner threatninges, force and violence.
Whereof they did full earnestly and solemnly protest, requiring their
Protestations to be enacted and recorded.

He would moreover say, that he could in no wise well like of that Parliament,
that should so dishonor his own good mother and make her to be an infamous
Princess, having none other ground and proof to lead them to do so, but only
a few uncertain ghesses, and unknown obscure letters. He would, no doubt, for all these men's vain bosting and bragging of Justice and quietness, most
te^derly lament and woefully bewail the miserable and pitiful case and
dolorouse state of that sely poor ragged and rent Realm, the wretched and
infinite robberies and spoils committed and done upon the true loial subjects
thereof, being daily most greeuousty oppressed, and shamefully murdered, and
the whole Realm so meruelously maimed, that the very outward enemy does sore
lament to see it or hear thereof, and that will be wondered at of all the
posterity, so long as the world does stand. He would yet say, that in case
there had been no injury offered, either to his mother, or to any other: he
would not such miser^e should through him, or under his name be caused or
occasioned, though he might purchase thereby the greatest Empire in the world.

Thus may every man see and perceive, how dishonorable and how disloyal your
acts and doings have been, and also how disagreable to your sayings,
protestations and pretenses. For ye pretended at your first seditious motion
(as we have declared) the Queens liberty and honor, and, that ye would duly
and faithfully serve her: which your service what it was, let your doings
declare.

Ye make pretense, that ye took arms chiefly for the apprehension of the Earl
Bothwel: and yet ye dismissed and let him go being present, and never (but long
after, and coulorably) sought him.

Ye pretended the quietness and peaceable government of the Realm. But the
Realm was never these many hundred years so disquieted and turmoyled with so
sore storms and blustering tempests.

Ye pretended at your first inueiyng and conference against your said
Maistresse before the Commissioners of England, The inco^stancy of the Queens
enemies, first prete^ding before the Counsel of England her voluntary
dimission of the Croune. and after ward that she was deposed.
that she finding her self unable and unmeet to rule and govern her Realm and
subjects, voluntarily yielded up and surre^dred the Croune. But the contrary is
most appare^tly known: yea, you your selves about two months after, quite
forgetting your first allegations, say, that the States of the Realm of
Scotland deprived and deposed her. At what time ye also made solemn
hypocritical and cloked protestations, how loath you were, to publish and detect
any matter to her dishonor. Whereto might be replied against you as well the rule
of the law, that Protestatio co^traria facto, non releuat, as also the old
proverb, Crotodili Lachry^^a, the false traitorous tears of the hypocritical
Crocodile.

Fie therefore, and out upon these your Crocodile tears, whereby you would
persuade and make the world believe, that you would redeem and save her honor
with your perpetual bannishment. And as for the religion ye speak of, it were
much to be merueled and sore to be pitied, if it could not be maintained and
borne out, without such soul, dishonest and outrageous means and shifts. But
all this your great fear, least that Scotland otherwise should not be able to
have and bear the countenance and maintenance of a Kingdom, is mere vain and
altogether nedelesse. For why should you thus fear, having such a noble
Queen, lineally descending from the Roial race of the noble Kings of
Scotland, and inheriting the Croune thereof of right: she having bisides (God be
thanked therefore) so goodly a noble Impe, when the time and law calls him
thereto, A strange doctrine of Master knoxe against vvo man's Government.
to succeed his mother, unless that you be M. Knoxes own good scholars, and
such of his affinity, that have set up and erected a ioly new schole (as we
have declared) teaching, that it is not lauful for a woman Prince, to have
Civil Government.

These and many the like things would this good and gracious Impe, reasonably
and like a good natural loving child, tell and reprove you of, if he were of
discretion and intelligence, to weigh and consider your strange procedings and
devilish dealinges against his most dear and tender mother. Yea, he would tell
you, that his mothers inestimable and unmeasurable benefits were well and
worthily employed and bestowed upon such a wicked and ungrate generation.

He would also say and tell you, that you should purchase your selves small
renoune and little reward of God or of the world, for this your false fained
patience, in heari^g your selves called (and that full worthily) traitors and
Rebels. No more surely, then if ye had hard, as now ye must (for this dainty
dish we have reserved for you to the last course) and so proved withal the
deuisers and procurers of the shameful, vile, vilanous murder of the noble
young Lord, the Lord Darley, your own Mastresse and Queens most dear
husband. Whose tender heart never any worldily thing so nigh and so depely
pierced, as did this mischievous note.

Ye triumph and vaunt of your glorious victory, The Queen's enemies fondly
triumph of their victory against her true subjects.
and of the unmerciful slaughter, that you have made upon the Queens most
loving, loyal and faithful subjects. Ye value, measure and rule thereby the
goodness and equity of your quarrel and cause. But this rule does not always
hold as never having exception and instance.

The Israelites quarrel against the Tribe of Benjamin, rising upon a truth and
horrible fact perpetrated, and committed by the Gabaonits, whom the Beniamits
did defend, and not upon false feigned doings and outrageous ambition, as
yours does against your Sovereign, was a thousand times better and more just,
then is this your pretensed quarrel and seditious uproar. And yet the Beniamits
gave them a sore grievous and pitiful overthrow.

And surely it were no il counsel for ^ou, to remember withal the old
saying, ^spice finem: take good head, what may fall ^^t at the end. Ye do little
weigh and con^ider the great providence of almighty God in this fact, whereby
he seems to ^une provided such an indifferent way and so free from al
sinister suspicion, for the ^rouf and justification of the Queens in^ocencie
and integrity, and for the mainte^^nce and preservation of her name and honor
(the which she estemeth and prefers before al earthly things) and for your
^tter confusion and shame, the like whereof could not by man be found.

What shall I then say to you? How shall I begin, or wherein to accuse you?
Surely I may well cry out: O heaven, o earth, o God, o man. Hearken, hearke^ to
such a heighnous devilish device and drift, as doubtless neither Tragedy, nor
any record of Antiquity can lightly report a more heinous. Hearke^, I say, to
this detestable and abominable fact. Hearken of subjects that have consented
unto, and caused their own Princes Husband to be slain: and not contented to
enjoy their own impunitie of so horrible and greeuouse a crime, have sought
and inverted means and ways, willingly and w^^ tingly to have slandered
therewithal the^ most innocent Maistresse and Souereign^ and have most
wrongfully and full iniuriou^ly cast her in prison, and spoiled her of a^ her
Princely estate, being in a readiness eue^ ry hour to have bereaved her of her
li^ and al: and as they have of them selves re^ ported, have been of nothing
more repe^ tant and sorry, then that they have not full^ executed their
purposed mischief.

We say then no less boldly, then truly First, that the Queen for this fact
is far fr^ al fault. We say next, that ye Murray, an^ your companions are the
very deuisers and co^triuers of the murder of this noble gentle man, your
selves. But to disclose and open these matters at the full, it requires a very
large scope and discourse. Yet will we, a^ briefly, as the cause will suffer,
prosecute the same. For the first part, that may suffice, that we have already
declared, and shall here after declare for her innocence.

Now before we proceed to the second, for the more evident and open
comdemnation of these men, let us imagine that to be done, that never was
thought of her part to be ^one. Let us imagine and suppose, that the Queen was
therein guilty, In case the Queen were culpable, yet are her enemies procedigs
unlawful.
as these men most ^lsely and slanderously report: yet are all ^hese their
procedings of no validity or ^orce, and she remains still their Queen, and
in her fulauthoritie, by good reason and ^awe. The zeal to punnish great
crimes is ^o^mendable, It is not enough to do a good thing, unless it be well
done.
so it be measured by order and ^^we. For as Aristotle says: It is not enough
(...) do (...), a good deed: unless it be (...), well done also. The one
whereof respects ^he fact, the other the form, manner and fa^hion, the
quality, means and order of the ^oing thereof: Quia forma datesse rei. This
^orme and fasshio^ of well doing has not ben observed in your procedings. For
it can not ^e well done, that is unlawfully, and disor^erly done. If it had been
but a pore private man's cause, for the lack of dew and conue^ient form in the
treating and handling thereof, The law gives exceptions to the Defendant,
against the Judges the Accusers and vvitnesses.
the whole procedinges had been of none effect or purpose. The laws of well
ordered common wealths, especially the Ci^il law, the Principal and Mastresse
of all other Civil policies and ordinances, do re^uire in aliudgements to be
given against the ^efenda^t, three several and distinct persons: the Judge, the
Accuser and the witnesse^ The defendant has the benefit of just an^ lawful
exceptions, C. Qui accusat, non po. L. Iniquum and l. fin. L. qui accusat. ff.
de accusa.
as well against the Iudge^ as against the Accusers and witnesses. Ech^ of whom
may be rejected for open enim^^ toward the Defendant, and for diverse other
causes. Accusers may be repulsed, some ^^ that they have received a singular
benes^ of the party defendant, as a bondeman m^ numitted and made free, in
case he will a^ cuse his patron and manumisser: or if a man will accuse his
educatour and bringer vpp^^ Some for nearnes in blood and consangu^ nitie, as
the brother. Some for naught^ and infamous behavior, and some for other
respects.

Shall these ungrateful Traitors then, tha^ justly neither can be Judge, nor
accuser, no^ as much as witness against their Sou^ reign (and to them a most
gracious Queen by any reason or law, play them selves a^ the three parts in
the Tragedy? For the have in all these their worslipful procedinge against her,
made such a hotchepoche such a minglemangle, such a confuse an^ disordered
Chaos against Justice and Nature: that they them selves were the Accusers, they
them selves the witnesses, they them selves the Judges and examiners of her
cause.

Is there any honest meaning and gentle natured heart, that can once patiently
abide and suffer to hear these their taunting and intolerable outrageous
inueyings and accusations; especially of the Earls Murray and Murto^, the
Capiteines, ringleaders and chief practitioners thereof against her, to whom
they are most depely bound, as well for high preferment undeserved, as for diverse
pardons of death, by manifold treasons worthily deserved? To whom the one of
them is by nature and blood (albe it base) as a brother entierly conjoined. And
to whom they both ought to be with the rest, as to their Irege Lady most
loially subjected. Shall they now with the Lord Lindzay be admitted, to stain
and defile her honor, to seek her hearts blood, who long since had worthily
lost there ingrate chorlishe traiterouse blood, if they had not ben preserved by
her singular and incredible clemency?

Yet let us consider their precise and most holy form of Judgment. The Queen
was disorderly and rebelliously apprehended, she was cast in prison, not once
heard to answer for her self, most instantly and pitifully craving audience.
She was forced and constrained by most vehement and just fear to give over her
Croune, and dimisse the regiment to the Earl Murray. A good argument that the
Queen by co^pulsion dimissed the Croune.
One great argument of the said constraint and compulsion among other is, that
she never readde such writings, as were offered to her, to be by her
subscribed, nor entered into any covenant or talk for the maintenance of her
living or safeguard of her life. Which thing she would never by any indifferent
man's judgment have done, if she had freely and voluntarily yielded up her Regal
Dignity. Neither can the pretensed Parlame^t be prejudicial to her, standing
upon no better nor surer ground, then upon such as we have rehearsed, and upon
such worshipful letters missiue, as are by them, I can not tell more falsely, or
more fondly counterfeited. Surely such Traitors, as durst lay violent hands
upon their Queen, and intrude them selves into the Regal Government, will
make but small* courtesy in the faining and forging a letter, thereby to work
their purposed mischief.

I would then father demand of them, what authority they had, to somon and
assemble a Parliament? And whether this fact of hers, supposing she were therein
guilty, deserves in her, being a Prince, and considering how heinously the
Lord Darley had offended her and the Croune of Scotland, such extreme
punishment to be levied upon her for one simple murder: especially by them,
that committed that shameful murder upon her Secretary, that have committed
so many treasons, and daily do commit so many horrible murders upon the
Queen's true loving subjects. How many and how cruel and terrible deaths do
such Traitors deserve?

We have moreover to demand of them whereas they pretend a merueilous and a
singular zeal to religion and holy Scripture, and to measure al their doings
precisely by Scripture and order thereof, what sufficient warrant they have
therein, by their private authority to set violent hands upon their anointed
Prince? I find there, that King David was both an adultrer, and also a
murderer? I find, that God was highly displeased with him therefore. Yet find
I not, that he was therefore by his subjects deposed. And here might I take
occasion out of the sacred Scriptures, to declaime and discourse against your
disordered doings: but that it is nedelesse, and our matters otherwise grow
long.

But yet consider ye with your self, you the Earls Murray and Murton, with
your consociats, that even adiudging the Queen were culpable and in some
fault, as she is not in this matter: whether it had not ben much better, and
more available to your common wealth and to the state thereof, prudently to
have dissembled the matter (as your forefathers have heretofore done in a
greater cause then this, The Duke Robert of Scotland.
namely in Duke Robert the Governor, Kings Roberts brother) then to have
permitted your common wealth to have commen into so miserable and wretched a
state, as it is now fallen in, and daily like to be in worse case and worse. I
suppose it will be found, that it had been a much better policy to have reserved
the punishment thereof to Gods own rod and justice, in this, or in an other
world: then to have taken from him, that he has reserved to his own only
judgment, and to have given to the subjects of other Princes such a wicked
president, that if these other subjects tread fast upon your steps, there
will shortly few Kings and Princes have any sure and fast hold of their
Scepter and Ro^al Dignity.

We conclude then against you (speak and do the worste by her that ye can
invent) that your proceedinges be not agreeable or correspondent to law, order
and Justice, and therefore to be revoked and adnulled. We say, that the common
rule of the law ought here to take place, Spoliatus ante omnia resti^uendus
est: unless where all laws, as well Gods, as man's law, do favor and prefer
Princes causes with singular privileges and prerogatives, ye have now espied
out a new law, whereby Princes shall have and enjoy less benefits and
preeminences in their own defense, then other private persons.

We say, that for these and many other good and necessary considerations, all
is void that ye have busied your selves about. We say, that al your dooinges
ought to be removed, reuersed and clearly annulled, and the Queen wrongfully
by you displaced, to be restored to her state and former dignity and honor.
Then let the whole matter be, if there be any just cause, before competent and
meet Judges, to sit upon a Prince, justly and orderly heard and determined.
For as for you, especially the Earl Marray and Murton, ye are to be charged
and challenged, byside al other just exceptions, even as the principal
inuentours mainteiners and workers of this shameful and cruel murder, for the
which ye have made all this hurly burly, and as I may say, stirred heaven and
earth against your own very natural Prince.

Neither may the Lord Lindzay be heard or suffered, to intermedle against her,
if law take place, for diverse his demerites, among which he stands charged,
as well for that, that he was one of the chief instruments in the slaughter of
the Queens Secretary David, as also in the apprehending and imprisoning of
her Grace.

But I much muse and merueyle, how the Bisshoppe of Orkney for shame could so
presumptuously and heynously inueigh and declaime before the Commissioners of
England against his Maistresse pretensed marriage with the Earl Bothwell,
seeinge that he him self did celebrate the solemnity thereof. Who also was
your only Bifshop, that was present at the Coronation of your new erected
King. A man most apt and ready to serve all worlds and turns.

Against you the Earl Murton, bysides the murder of the Queens Secretary
and of the Lord Darleye her husband, there are many just exceptions and
chalenges to be laid and taken, as well of other misdooinges, as of manyfolde
and apparent treasons, which ye seem to have sucked with your mothers milk:
ye have been a Traitor so often times to your Prince and Sovereign.

But the Earl Murray it is, Exceptio^s most just against the Queens accusers,
(...)ly against the Earl of Murray.
whom above all other, we have to charge and burden. His base nativity, his
baser conditions, the notable saying of the foresaid Cassius, Cui bono, the
trade of all his former life, will much stayne and press him: if we do well
weygh and mark the weyghtie presumptions, that be evident and plain against
him. I will make my beginning with the great and unnatural unkindness and
ingratitude, by him showed to his dear Sister, and his loving and most
bountiful Maistresse and Sovereign.

At what time she minded, after the death of her first husband the French King
to repair into her own Realm of Scotland, she sent forthwith for him into
France, The great benefits employed by the Q. upon the said Earl.
and used his advise and counsel in all her affairs, even as she did also after
her return into Scotlad, so far, that she had but, as it were, the name and
calling, he bearing the very sway of the Regiment by her entitled to, and
honored and adorned with the Earldome of Murray, and at length by one means
or other furnished with so great and ample possessions, that bysides other
commodities and advantages, the yearly rent thereof passes and surmounteth
the sum of twenty and six thousand pounds after the rate of their money.

Behold now the thankfulness of this good and grateful nature. He labored and
endeavored all that he possibly could, He went about, to entaile the Croune of
the Realm to him self and the Stevvardes
to withholde the Queens mind, and stay her from al manner of marriage, and to
entaile the Groune of the Realm unto himself, though he were illegitimate and
incapable thereof) and to the name and the blood of the Stewards. But when he
saw and thoroughly perceived, and well knew, that the Queen was fully minded and
earnestly bent, and had now determined to join her self in ma^^ge with the
Lord Darley: he practiced means by his afsistance and procurements, to have
slain him and his father, and to have imprisoned her at Lochleuen, and to have
usurped the government himself, as he now does.

But now when he saw this his intent and purpose disclosed and prevented, His
tebell^^ against the Q^ene
and that the solemnization of the marriage was already past: he showed himself
with his adherents in open field and in arms against the Queen his
Maistresse. Whereupon he was dr^^en to flee into England. At which his there
abode, he instantly solicited and besought for aid against his Sovereign,
which was worthily denied him.

Then began he to practice with the Earl Morton by his letters and
messengers about the derestable slaughter of David the Queens Secretary, who
by their mischienous sleights and crafty persuasions, indueed the Lord
Darley, promising him to remove the Queen from the meddling with all politic
affairs, His co^spiracy with them, that slevve the Secretatie David.
and actually to put him i^ possession of the Croune, and of the rule and
government of the Realm, to ioyn^ with them in this traitorous conspiracy
against the Queen his most dear and loving wife and most dread Soueregne.
Whereupon the murder was in most horrible and traitorous wise committed in the
Queens own chamber of Presence, A charged pistilet set to the Queens belly.
upon him violently plucked from the Queen: she also being cruelly manaced and
sore threatened, having also a charged pistolet set to her belly, being then
great with child, and then removed from her privy chamber into an other,
where she was kept as prisoner.

The young inexpert and rash Lord Darley, who being blinded with outrageous
ambition, could not forsee the devilish drifte of these crafty merchants,
began now, but almost to late, to epsy it: and seeing him self as nigh the
danger as was his wife the Queen, repaired to her, most humbly asking her
pardon of his heinous attempt, and pitifully crieng out to her to provide and
find out some present way, to preserve them selves both. Who by the Queen's
politic industry was privily with her self conveyed away out of the Rebels
danger: The Q. by her industry co^ueied her self away with the L. Darley.
and by him, this wicked drift, and the driuers and contriuers thereof were
discovered to the Queen.

But lo, the next day after this slaughter, the Earl Murray entered into
Scotland, and repaired to the Queen with as fair a countenance, as though he
had been clear, as well for that fact, as for alother treasons. Whereof the gentle
and merciful Queen pardoned him, admitting him again into her Graces love and
favor. Whereat the L. Darley much misliking, and vehemently repining: feared,
that he would be, as he was in deed, when he saw his time, revenged upon him,
The cause, why the Earl Murray hated the Lord Darley.
by cause he was of him detected to the Queen, for being one and the chief of
the counsailers, aiders and assisters in the conspiracy about the murder of
the Secretary now committed.

These and the like imaginations so depely sanke into and pierced the young man's
heart, that he finally resolved with himself, by one means or other, to rid
the Earl Murray out of the way. Whereabout he went so far forth, that he
communicated his purpose to the Queen, who did most highly mislike therewith,
and most vehemently deter him from the said his intent. Yet did he brea^ the
matter farther as to certain other nobl^ nien, by whom at the last it was
reueale^ to the (...) arle Murray. Wherefore the Ear^ did continually after
bear him a deadly enmity and hatred. Whereupon at length al other attempts
failing him, this execrabl^ murder was by him the said Earl Murray and by the
Earl Murton first devised, an^ afterward in such strange and heinous fort as
the world knows and detesteth, most horribly practiced and put in execution.

What? peradventure some man will say of all the men in the world, the Earl
Murray is farthest of from al manner of spot and finister suspicion touching
this matter. For he was not at the Court, when this murthe^ was committed: and
when the Queen was apprehended he was out of Scotland and who did drive out of
Scotland the Earl Bothwel, but the Earl Murray? Who is he, that has taken so
much pains and travail, to boult and find out, and execute such, as were
cu^pable therein, but the Earl Murray?

In deed for his bodily presence at the deed doing, I will nothing affirm: he
must ^eld the price thereof to his companion the ^arle Bothwel. He must be
contented for ^s share, with the preeminence and preroat^ue of his special
deadly foade toward the Lord Darley, and preposterous policy and wit, so
closely and so smothly to con^ey and compass it, and bear out with so great
countenance so heinous a fact, and ^o reward him self for his pains taken
ther^n, with the extrusion of his Maistresse and Queen, and intrusion of him
self, though absent, to the regiment and government of the whole Realm.

This, this, I say may sufficiently serve him for the advancement of his
commendation and praise, and for the signification of his fine politic head
and invention: I mean, for that before his departure out of Scotland into
France, with his Matchiauels practices, he had so conningly co^triued the whole
matter with his faction, that they should procure not only the Earl Bothwel to
be acquitted of the murder, but for his good service to be rewarded with the
Queen's espousalles, intending by this mischievous policy, the utter undoing
and overthrow as well of him the Earl Bothwel, as of the Q. her self also.

There never lacked good will in them, a^ it well appears by their ungracious
doing to have long before overthrown their fa^^ Maistresse: but there ever
lacked apparent matter, to blind men's eyes withal, and to make her odiouse
with the people. Now these wily men well knew, that if they might once compass
and bring this marriage to pass with the Earl, whom they intended then as
fast to blase abroad for the murder by him committed, as they did suppress
the same before from their good Lady and Queen, The cause why the Enemies
did impute the slaughter to the Q.
until they had brought her to the bait: it would seem very probable, not
only to the eyes and judgment of the rude and common people, but also of many
sage, grave, wise and learned men, that she was privy o^ her husbands death.
Whereby they might pretend one execrable act against her that al men would
detest and abhor, to color and cloak their rebellious treacheries. Lucifer
him self could not have fetched a finer and a more mischievous and devilish
fetch, then herein these men have done.

As for the Earl Murraies absence, it does nothing releaue or excuse him: yea,
it is ^ingulerly to be noted and marked, The vvorking of Murray in the time of
his absence
that his ^ery iourneyes lack not their fine fetches ^o serve his turn.
Through his first journey unto France, he wan and purchased the high ^ue and
favor of his benign Maistresse. ^e returns out of England, at the very
point serving two turns at once: by the one thereof, to circumuent his good
innocent ^adie, thinki^g to make her believe by reason of his absenc, ethat he
was far from the society of that conspiracy: by the other, to ^ssist the
better with his presence the con^ederates, and suddenly to join with them, as
he did.

I grant, that he was absent bodyly at the fact doing: but yet nothing was
done, the which was not by his counsel or agreement concluded. The which his
devise was so horrible, that it caused the murder of his Souereignes
Secretary, her imprisonment by her own husband, that the Queen being great
with child, was put in such a fear, as might have tended to the present
danger of her life, and of her child. Yea, the very scope of this devilish
drift was, even to have overthrown him also, whom they made their unhappy
and unlucky instrument, to overthrow and depose his own loving wife and most
dread Sovereign.

These mysteries full stuffed with such mischievous purposes, lo, wrought this
Earl in this time of his absence. Now it is to be considered, that about
sixtene hours before the Lord Darley was slain, the better to color the
matter, he departed from the Court. About two months after, he took his
journey into France, leaving the Earl Bothwel as his most entier and trusty
frinde, recommending al his causes and affairs to him before al other.

At his second return from France, he intrudeth himself into the Scepter
Roial under the name and shadow of the young Prince. The which thing was so
imagined invented and devised, long ere that he departed, and in his absence by
his trusty frinds remaining in Scotland, accordingly accomplished and executed.

The Queen was afterward apprehended, and cast into prison at Lochleue^, where
his mother and brother dwells: unto the which Fortress she should have been
sent, as we have said, at the first co^spiracie of the said Murray, if their
malicious mind and intent had not ben disapointed by the providence of God.

Now what search, when, and after what sort it was made for the said Earl
Bothwel, we have already declared.

If ye allege farther, and say, that no man can deny, but that the said Earl
Murray made also long diligent and narrow search for the murderers, Murray and
Morto^ the heads of the co^spiracy against the L. Darley.
and did severely punish them: to this we reply and say, that he needed not,
to travail much or far for the sewing out of this matter. For he might at
al times have found the heads of the conspiratours upon the Earl Murtons and
his own shoulders.

We say farther, that as it is a strange and new kind of devotion in the Earl
Murray, so to quarrel for lack of sole^nitie at the burial of him, for whose
said burial he longed and looked for so long: so we say likewise, that it
seems wonderful, to love him so tenderly, being deceased and dead, whom he
so depely hated living. And to seek so seriously and severely to punish the
murderers of him, whom he would so often have murdered him self.

This gear seems (to us poor simple and slender witted men) unlikely,
incredible and half repugnant to nature. And whatsoever the cause be, we be of
that mind, that it is not likely to proceed of any fervent zeal or great
affection he bears to the party, or to the execution of Justice.

Ye are, good Reader, desirous peradventure to learn, what other cause there
might be, of so strange dealing. Well, as strange as it is, we lack not
examples of the like crafty and subtle policy, 2. Machab. 3. and 4.
as well in holy Scripture and in the monumentes of Antiquity of diverse other
Countries, as of England, and especially of Scotland it self.

We find then in Holy Scripture, that there was one Onias at Jerusalem the
High Priest, a man of singular virtue and perfection, and one that meruelousely
tendered Gods honor, and the honor and wealth of his Country. There was also
at the same time one Simon, a very evil disposed and wicked creature, which
went about certain naughty and wicked devises. But seeing that he could not
atchiue his mischievous purpose, by reason this blessed man Onias stayed,
stopped and prevented him, he practices this wicked devise.

He causes King Seleucus to be infour^ed of the great and inestimable
treasure remaining and reposed in the Temple at Jerusalem. Whereupon the King
sent Heliodorus, to fetch away by force the said treasure.

But afterward when this purpose chaunted to be frustrated and void, by reason
that this Heliodorus, being wonderfully plagued of God, was constreined to
forbear and relinquish this enterprise, and the people also wonderfully
offended and in a great rage, to see such a heinous sacrilege attempted: what
does now, think ye, this good and honest man Simon? Surely he plaieth the same
part, that the Earl Murray has played with his most gracious Queen, openly
charging the good innocent Onias with his own shameful act, and saying, that
he solicited and incensed the King, to rob and spoil the Temple.

We find in the Chronicles of our Realm, that albe it Vortiger aspiring to the
Croune of the Realm, actually and really obtained the same by the murdering
of King Constance (which was not done without his crafty incensing and privy
consent) yet he pretended outwardly great sorrow, weeping and lame^ting the
murder of him, the which he nevertheless longed for, and was the occasion of
the same. Hect Boet. Lib. 11. The Earl of Murray resembled to Dunvvaldus, that
procured the slaughter of King Duffus in Scotland.


As for Scotland, I report me to the Tragical history of King Duffus slain
by a Nobleman named Dunwaldus, who was in great estimation and authority with
the said King. When the King was a bed in the Castle, whereof this Dunwaldus
had the keeping, he banketed his Chamberlaines, and so oppressed them with
immoderate surfeting and drinking, that when they were once gotten about high
midnight to sleep in their beds, ye might have rong a great be^ over their
heads long, ere they would wake: who being in their dead and deep sleep, the
King was murdered and slain by such as this Noble man had suborned. His dead
body was carried away and buried in a river. The laborers, that buried him,
were also slain, that they might tell no tales. In the morning the King was
missing, his bed was found imbrued with blood. Has drousy dru^cken
Chamberlaines, that least knew of the matter, were had in greatest suspicion,
and without farther delay, by the said Dunvaldus like a man zelouse to punish
malefactors, were slain and put to death. No man being farther a great while
from suspicion, then he: until first his own over busy searching for the
murderers, Idem li. 16.
and afterward other things bread upon him such suspicion, that he was there
upon apprehended, and being found guilty, worthily executed.

The like pranck played Duke Robert brother to the King of Scotland, The like
pa^te played by Duke Robert in Scotland.
and Governor of the Realm, of whom we spoke before. He procured the Prince
his nephew to be made away and murdered, and yet pretending himself as holy,
as Murray does, to be zealouse in the punis^hing of such an heinous fact,
caused certain innocent persons to be executed therefore.

We say then, that the Earl Murrayes dooinges proceed not from any great care
he has to the maintenance of law and Justice, who is most culpable himself:
but only colourably to cloak and hide his own mischievous treacheries, and to
turn the blame of the fault from him self, upon his good Lady and Queen,
from whose person it is farthest. Whereof they themselves gave in manner
plain testimony and witness. For though they had openly in their pretensed
and disordered Parliament detected her thereof: yet before the English
Commissioners they alleged other matters, as her voluntary resignation of the
Croune, etc. The which allegations, when they well saw, would not serve their
turn, and that men did understand, how and after what sort they had proceeded
against her in Scotland: they were, as it were, driven and forced, being
excluded from all other apparent shifts, The Earl Murray and his fellows
being driven from al other shifts, at length laid to their Queen the death of
the Lord Darley before the Counsel of England.
after seven or eight weeks aduisement, after their first inuectiue, to
obiecte the said fact against her.

Whereof the good innocent Queen hearing, and astonished at their strange and
contumelious canuasinges and impudency in their dooinges, and being since her
apprehension credibly informed, and by apparencie of matter and proof thereof,
lead and induced, to believe and give credit, that this wicked enterprise was
chiefly invented and compassed by the Earls Murray and Murton: made earnest
suit by her Commissioners, to arrest them, that they should not shrink away
and depart, until they had answered that matter for them selves, which she
fully intended most effectually to prosecute against them and others. And so
did accuse them in deed by her Commisioners, and desired farther, that she
might comme in her own person before the Nobility and the Ambassadors of
other Countries there resident, and go foreward with and prosecute her said
accusation against them.

Whereof they hearing: they fretted, they fumed, they stamped, they stared, and
for a small while made much hot stir But when they had well considered and
digested the matter, loking in their own breasts, they became upon the
sudden so cold, that they thought every day an hundred, until they were
packing home, and never ceased, alleging many vain and friuolouse excuses to
urge their dimission most importunately, until they had at the last obtained
their suit.

O that Cassius were now liui^g, that he might lay to the Earl Murrais charge,
his accustomed worthy saing, Cui bono? He would tell him, that as the Queen by
this fact had no manner of hoped commodity, and is of over good and virtuous
disposition and nature, in any respect of worldly commodity, so to dishonor
her self and state, and even as The Earl Murraies birth and natural
inclination were most apt and mete to work such naughty practices: so were
there many occasions also for his part, such as he had best liking and
contentation of, to the putting of the same in practice.

Among other things, it pincheth him and al his faction, The causes why the
Earl Murray went about as well to make away the L. Darley, as to depose the
Queen.
and greeueth them to the very heart, to remember the reuocation the Queen had
made the April before of al such things, as apperteine to the Croune, that had
by her self or others in her minority, ben alienated. Which reuocation by an
old law and order in Scotland, the Princes there may make before the
accomplishment of twenty and five year of age. Now had the Earl Murray and his
faction, by one means or other, gotten into their hands and possession, two
parts of the yearly revenues of the whole Croune.

See, see, I pray thee, good Reader, if this were not the very undoubted cause,
that made him and them so pitiful and so tender hearted toward the L. Darley
being dead, whose death they had so long thirsted for, and whose life they had
by so many snares and mischievous ways assaulted and laid wait for.

Yea there was a farther, Cui bono? then this. They thought to drive by their
ioly politic practices, all the displeasure and hatred of the fact upon the
Queen: and so for this pretensed mischievous fact to drive her from the
possession of her Croune, and to intrude them selves by some pretty colorable
conueiances, into the sole intermedling with all the public affairs, and to
the Government of the Realm under the title of the good Infant the Queens
son; and to assure their possessions to them selves, at least the space of
twenty and five years more. But I pray God there be not a farther and a worse
fetch, then all this comes to.

Well then, al these their foretold purposes has the Devil brought to pass
for them even according to their hearts desire: saving that he owes them a
shame and will pay it them, when they count them seluet most cock sure. And
begins (as it seems already) full properly to pay them home every one day
more then other. For as close and as secret as they hid and kept their doings
from the world, especially fro their good Queen, until they had quitted
The Earl Bothwel, and coupled him most dishonourably with that upright and well
meaning Lady in prete^fed marriage, they could never bring their matters to
pass. And for all their vain bragging and outfacing (as it were) their
innocent Sovereign: their whole wicked drift is derected, burst out and come
to the certain knowledge of no small number of men.

Is it unknown, think ye the Earl Murray, what the Lord Harris said to your
face openly, even at your: own table a few days after the murder was
committed? Did he not charge you with the fore knowledge of the same murder?
Did not he, nulla circuitione vsus, flatly and plainly burden you; that you
riding in Fiffe, and coming with one of your most assured trusty servants the
said day, wherein you departed from Edenborough, The Earl Murray de clared the
day before that the L Darley should be slain. Diverse assembles of the Earl
Murray and his adherents to consult upon the slaughter of the L. Darley.
said to him among other talk: This night ere morning the Lord Darley shall
lose his life?

Is it not full well known, think ye, that ye and the Earls Bothwel, Morton
and others assembled at the Castle of Cragmiler and other places at diverse
times, to consult and devise upon this mischief? If need were we could
rehearse and recompte to you the whole sum and effect of the oration made by
the most eloquent among you, to stir up, exhort and inflame your faction
then present, to determine, and resolve them selves, to dispatche and make a
hand with the L. Darley.

We can tell you, Indentures made and subscribed for the execution of the said
purpose.
that there were interchangeable Indentures made and subscribed by you, that he
which had the best opportunity offered to make him away, should furthwith take
it in hand and dispatche him

We ca^ tell you, and so ca^ five thousand and more of their own hearing, that
John Hepborne the Earl Bothwels servant, being executed for his and your
traitorous fact, did openly say, and testify, as he should answer to the
contrary before God, that you were principal authors, counsailers and
assisters with his Master of this execrable murder: and that his said Master
so told him, and farthermore, that he him self had seen the Indentures we
spoke of.

We can tell you, that John Hay of Galoway, Diverse excuted in Scotland for the
said murder. whereof none could charge the Queen.
that Powry, that Dowglish, and last of all that Paris, al being put to death
for this crime, took God to record at the time of their death, that this
murder was by your counsel, invention and drift committed. Who also
declared, that they never knew the Queen to be participant or ware thereof.

Well, we can farther tell you of the great goodness of God, and of the mighty
force of the truth. Whereby though ye have wonderfully turmoiled and tossed,
though ye have racked and put to death as well innocents, as guilty, your own
confederats, and offered many of them their pardons, so they would depose any
thing against the Queen: God has so wrought, that as for no torments nor fayer
promises they could be brought, falsely to defame their Mastresse: so without
any torments at al they have voluntarily purged her, and so laid the burden
upon your necks and shoulders, that ye shall never be able to shake it of.

We can tell you, that England does well know these your detestable practices,
neither will suffer it self to be spotted with the favoring and assisting of
your abominable doings.

We can tell you, that this good Lady is unjustly accused, and wrongfully
oppressed, as good Susanna was.

We can tell you, that ye altogether resemble the two old wicked Governors that
wrongfully accused her, as an aduoutresse, being the aduouterers them selves,
and brought her into danger of present death by their false testimony (as ye
have done with your well intending Queen) for that she would not consent, and
yield to the old lusty leacherous rebels.

We can tell you, that if you do not the sooner repent, ye see by example of
them, what your reward shall be, and that in the mean while God has as
woderfully delivered out of your hands this our innocent Susanna, as ever he
did the other from them. For though she were kept so straight in a strong
Forstresse and Castle with watch and ward, The Q. in a manner miraculously
delivered out of Lochleuen prison
in such forte, that none of her well willers and frinds, no not so much as the
French Kings Ambassadors might be suffered to come at, or to speak with her:
though she were daily guarded with great number, though the gates were every
evening surely and customably locked, and the keys thereof were continually
night by night delivered to the Lord of the said Castle: though the botes were
continually fastened and locked up: yet God so wrought, that the keys of the
said Castle were in the said Lords very presence taken away by a poor orpha^
simple boy being not yet eightene years old, bred always and brought up in
the same house. Which feate by him wrought, and a toke^ or signification given
thereof to the Queen, she departed out of her prisonhouse into the court
thereof at seven of the clock at night, upon the second day of May, and so
passing, went to the said gates unlocked and opened by the said orphan boy.
Who taking bote also, rowed her and her waiting maid withal, with much a do
over the water.

Who having now passed the water, was on the other side received by certain
ge^tlemen, and by them conveyed and conducted to Hamilton: where she before her
Nobili^e revoked, annihilated and made void all that she did in prison before,
with solemn protestation upon her oath, that she was violently forced thereto,
and put in just ^eare of the loss of her life.

After this it pleased God to put her in mind, to take her journey into
England, as well for the special and comfortable promises to her made before her
comnig, by messengers, letters and tokens sent from the best there, both
co^forting and promising her (opportunity serving) al convenient succor and
help, as that we Englshemen (which must needs honor and reverence her, who
is of the next roial blood and true Heir apparent of the Croune of this Realm
of England) should thoroughly know and fully understand, to our great
comfort, her pureness, integrity and innocence in the matter: under prete^se
whereof her traitorous and rebellious subjects, thereby to accomplish their
seditious and ambitious minds and purposes, have molested, vexed and disquieted
her in manner aforesaid, and now at the last ^epe her, not only from her Croune
and Realm: but from al whatsoever either her private, or other goods, as
unwilling that she should either keep the state and port of a Prince, or any
other meaner estate whatsoever.

Neither has it altogether fallen out contrary to her expectation and desire.
For the Nobles of England, that were appointed to hear and examine al such
matters, as the Rebels should lay against the Queen, have not only found the
said Queen innoce^ and guiltless of the death of her hushand but do withal
fully understand, that her accusers were the very contriuers, deuisers
practitioners and workers of the said murder, and have farther also so much
increased and in such wise renewed the good estimation and great hope they
always had o^ her, now perfectly knowing her innocence and thereto moved
through other prince^ qualities resplendent in her, The Commissioners appointed
in England to hear the Queen of Scotland her matters well liked of her faid
innocence and of her title to the succession of the Cioune.
with man whereof she is much adorned and singule^ly endued: that they have in
most earne^ wise solicited and entreated, that she might be restored again to
her honor an^ Croune. They have moved the said Quen^ of Scotland also, that it
may please her to accept and like of the most noblest man of all England,
between whom and her there might be a marriage concluded, to the quieting and
comfort of both the Realms of England and Scotland.

Finally the noblemen of this our Realm acknowledge and accept her for the
very true and right heir apparent of this Realm of England, being fully minded
and always ready (when God shall so dispose) to receive and serve her as their
undoubted Queen, Maistresse and Sovereign: whereby it may easily appear,
how well they like of her cause, that had the hearing and trial of the same,
although they never as yet came in her presence.

These things now and many other (which for the eschuing of prolixitie we
forbear to enlarge our Treatise with) may be alleged for the defense of the
Queens integrity, and for the vprightnes of her cause, An exhortation to the
Earls Murray and Murton and others to reconcile themselves to the Q.
the which I would wish you the Earls Murray and Murton with your allied
confederats, before al other, most depely and bytimes to weigh and consider
accordingly, as the weight and greatness of the cause, as your own safety with
the wealth and honor of your own native Country do require. I am not ignorant,
that the matter is gone very far with you, and that many impedimentes do
concur to withdraw you, to seek that remedy for reformation of things past,
which is the best and the only remedy. But surely when ye have fully weighed al
things on every side accordingly, ye shall find no sure and sound remedy,
but in making a true, a sincere and an unfeigned humble submission to your
gracious Queen, whom ye have so grievously offended and molested.

Let not the greatness or number of your treasons wrought against both your
Queen and Country, let not any vain false imagined opinion either of the
shame of the world, or of your utter overthrow, by reason of such fond
presumption of your present high estate, of your great power, force and
strength: let no vain expectation of external succors stay or stop you from
so necessary a duty, and so commendable before God and the world. The Q. of
Scotland full of mercy.
Ye best know, that among all the Princely ornaments and virtues of your
Queen, her mercy and cleme^cy are singular and peerlesse. She seems well to
have learned that lesson of the Gospel: If thy brother do offend thee, forgive
him, not only seven times, but seanenty times seven times. She will not
only forgive, but forget also.

She neither is ignorant, in what state her Realm stands in, nor that
extreme severity, from the which she naturally abhors, is not of al other
times now (against such, as will embrace mercy offered to them) to be showed
and practiced. She will rather like the law of (...), oblivion and
forgetfulness, so much of the Writers commended. The great benefit whereof ye
have so often and so abundantly received at her hands. And therefore ye need
the less to fear the discontinuance of your high and honorable estate and
condition. As for shame, it stands in the evil doing it self, and not in the
amending and reforming of il deeds, which amendment and reformation if ye
earnestly and truly mind, it will be to the great contentation of your most
gracious Queen, and of al her loving subjects. And in so doing, you shall both
highly auaunce your honorable estate and estimation, and make her a good
amends for that which is past, and can not be revoked.

But on the other side, if ye give over and refuse this occasion now present,
and go forward with your rebellious enterprises and attempts, minding to abide
and try the vttermoste: ye must wilfully cut away and exclude from your self
al good hope of mercy and pardon, and take a wrong way for your own saftie
and preservation. For your cause is naught, and so ye well know it to be. And
therefore can ye not look to have and obtain a good prosperous success and
end thereof. Well ye may, as hitherto ye have done, toss, turmoile and tumble
al things vpside dounewards for a while: but be ye assured, that Gods hand
will fall and light the heuier and with a greater paise upon you at the length
therefore.

It is easy to be seen by the course of all times, The end of Rebels ever
unhappy.
as well by your own very Stories at home, as by the Chronicles of all other
Nations abroad: to what end commonly such seditious conspiracies and treasons
do come to: that is, to the utter overthrow and confusion for ever of those
persons, that work, attempt, practice and maintain the same. They seem for a
while to bear great sway, and all the world for a while to run with them: but
in the end they fail and are clean given over.

What marvel were it, if a house should not long continue, that is builded
but upon a yelding sandy ground? Ye have builded and founded al your doings
upon untrue and lying slau^ders and treacherous treasons against your dread
Sovereign. The sincere verity whereof we have herein truly declared. The
which being once thoroughly detected, and evidently known to such, as ye have
in Scotland craftily abused, and shamefully circumuented (as surely it daily
bursteth out more and more) ye shall see your selves suddenly leaft naked, and
quite forsaken, even of those, who have been your greatest assisters, aiders,
and furtherers. For, as the old proverb is, Truth is the daughter of time.
And as ye shall be leaft alone at home, so can ye not look for maintenance and
vpbearing of foraine Prin^es. They will not defile them selves and their
honorable vocation with helping so foul a cause, and so dangerous and
perilous a matter, that may tend to the molestation and hurt, not only of
their own state, but of the states of all Kings Christened. Other Princes
vvil not suffer the Queen of Scotland to be iniuried by her subjects.


Nay, ye must rather think, that other Princes will judge and take it to touch
the^ to nigh, to suffer such a vilanie to pass an^ escape unrevenged, and so
good a Lady t^ be left destitute and desolate. The Emperou^ will not bear it,
France will not bear i^ Spain will not bear it. And especially England with
her worthy Nobility will no^ bear or suffer such outrageous dealinges against
their next loui^g neighbor, yea against the heir appare^t of this most noble
Realme^ albe it that ye with your surmised lies, the better to maintain your
usurped and new erected Kingdom, put others in fear o^ their own state, in
case the said innocent Queen should be restored to her Croune again.

FINIS.
(...) the tears of an english heart. And his soden arryuall here with all the
manner and circumstances thereof would yield nevve arguments of an other much
longer discourse. For first his coming hither as it were in a mask, bewraies
a strange melancholik nature in himself: who delights to make all his iourneis
in such sulle^ solitary sort, and therefore belike an ill companion to live
withal in any fellowship. Then yt shows his extreme want of ability to
defray the expense of woeng in a bountiful show sitting such a prince as
comes to obtein out Queen. This his secret coming and departing, discouers
a mistrustfulnes in him toward our people, and therefore no love, which must
needs come from his own ill consci ence of fearing french measure in England.
for on our part (the Lord be thanked) we have not committed such villenies all
men deem him unworthy to speed who comes in a net as though he were loath to
auow his errand. Some men may think he is ashamed to show his face, but I
think verily that he means not sincerely who loves not light and will not com
abroad. The last noble princely gentleman that went out of England to vvin a
Queen in france gave trial and show of vvisdome, manhod, behavior, and
personage, by open co^uersatio^ and performing al manner of knightly excercises:
which makes us in England to find very strange, this vnmanlike, vnprincelike,
secret, fearful, suspicious, disdainful, needy french kind of woeng in
Monsieur, and we can not choose but by the same still, as by all the other former
demonstratife remonstra^ces, conclude that this french marriage, is the
streightest line that can be drawn from Rome to the utter ruin of our
church: and the very rightest perpendicular downfall that can be imagined from
the point france to our English state: fetching in within one circle of
lamentable fall the royal estate of our noble Queen, of her person, nobility,
and commons. whose Christian honorable, healthful, joyful, peaceful, and long,
sovereign reign without all superior ouerruling commander, especially french,
namely Monsieur, the king of kings hold on, to his glory and her assurance of
true glory in that other kingdom of heaven. Amen Amen. Amen.

A TREATISE TOUCHING THE RIGHT, TITLE, AND INTEREST OF the mighty and noble
Princess Marie, Queen of Scotland, to the succession of the Croune of England.

Made by Morgan Philippes, Bachelar of Divinity, assisted with the advice of
Antonie Broune Knight, one of the Justices of the Common Place. An. 1567.

LEODII. Apud Gualterum Morberium. 1571.

A TREATISE TOUCHING THE RIGHT, TITLE AND INTEREST OF the mighty and noble
Princess Marie, Queen of Scotland, to the succession of the Croune of
England. The Second Book.
THE great providence, good Reader, of the eternal God, who of nothing created
all things, did not only create the same by his ineffable power, but by the
same power gave a special gift and grace also to every living thing, to
continue, to renew, and to preserve each his own kind. But in this
consideration the condition of man among and above al earthly things has his
pearelesse prerogative of wit and reason, Man only has the pierogatiue of wit
and reason among al earthlye creatures.
wherewith he only is of God graciously endewed and adorned: by the which he
does provide not only for his present necessity and sauegard (as do also
naturally after their sort al beasts, and al other living things void of
reason) but also by the pregnancie of wit, and reasonable discourse does long
before forsee the dangerous perils that many years after may happen, either to
himself, or to his Country: and then by diligence and careful provision does
invent apt and mete remedies for the eschewing of such mischieffes, as might
outragiously afterward occur. And the greater the fear is of greater
mischief: the greater, the deper, and the speedier care is wont to be taken, to
prevent and cut of the the same.

It is also most certain by the confession of all the world, Men are most bound
to the preservation of their Country.
that this care is principally dew, by each man that has opportunity to do
good therein, to his Prince, his Country, and to the common Weal and good
quiet of the Country, for the continuance and happy preservation of the same.
To the preservation whereof, as there are many parts and branches belonging:
so one principal part is for Subjects, lovingly and reverently to honor,
dread, and obediently to serve their Sovereign, A great commodity to the
common wealth, to know the heir appa rent.
that chances presently to rule and govern. The next, to foreknow, to whom
they should bear their allegiance, after the deceasse of their foresaid Prince
and Governor.

Which being once certain and assuredly known, as it procures, when the time
requires, ready and serviceable obedience, with the great comfort and
universal reast and quietness of the Subjects: so where for the said Successor
there is among them discord and diversity of judgments: the matter grows
to faction, and from faction to plain hostility, and from hostility to the
danger of many men's lives, and many times to the utter subversion of the whole
state.

For the better avoiding of such and the like inconveniences (albeit at the
beginning Princes reigned not by descente of blood and succession, but by
choice and election of the worthieste) the world was for the most part
constrained, to repudiate election, and so often times for the better and the
worthier to take a certain issue and ofspringe of some one only person, Why
all the world almost does enbrace succession of Princes rather then election.
though otherwise perchance not so mete. Which defecte is so supplied, partly
by the great benefit of the universal rest and quietness that the people enjoy
thereby, and partly by the grave and sage Counsaylours to Princes: that the
whole world in a manner these many thousand years has embraced succession by
blood, rather then election. And politic Princes, which have had no children
of their own to succeed them, have had ever a special care and foresight
thereof for avoiding of civil discention. So that the people might always
know the true and certain Heir apparent, chiefly, where there appeared any
likelyhod of variety of opinions or faction to ensewe about the true and
lawful succession in government.

This care and foresight does manifestly appear to have been not only in many
Princes of foraine Countreies, but also of this Realm, as well before the time
of the Conqueste, as also after, namely in King Edward the Confessor, Flores
histor. anno 1057.
in declaring and appointing Eadgare Atheling his nephews son his heir, as
also in King Richard the first, who before he interprised his Journey to
Jerusalem (where for his chivalry he atchiued high honor) declared by
consent of his Nobility and Co^mous, Richardus Canonicus sanctae Trinit. Land.
Flor. histo anno 1190. Polid li. 14
Arthur son of his brother Duke of Britain, his next heir in succession of
the Crown. Of the which Arthur, as also of the said Eadgare Atheling we will
speak more hereafter.

This care also had King Richard the second, what time by authority of
Parliament he declared the Lord Edmond Mortymer, that married Philippe dawghter
and heir to his Uncle Leonel Duke of Clarence, Polid li. 20
heir apparente. And to descend to later times, our late Noble Sovereign
King Henry the eight showed, as it is known, his prudente and zealous care in
this behalf before his last noble voyage into France.

And now, if God should (as we be al, as well Princes, as others, subject to
mortal chances) once bereave us of the present Governor, the hearts and
judgments of men being no better, nor more firmly settled and fixed toward
the expectation of a certain succession, then they seem now to be: then woe and
alas: it yrketh my very heart, even onse to think upon the imminente and
almost the inevitable danger of this our noble Realm, being like to be
overwhelmed with the raging and roaring waves of mutual discord, and to be
consumed with the terrible fire of civil disce^tion.

The fear whereof is the more, by reason already in these later years some
flames thereof have sparkled and flusshed abroad, and some part of the rage of
the said fluddes have already beaten upon the banks. I mean the hot
contention, that has been therein in so many places, and among so many
persons: of books also, that have been spread abroad, and daily are spread,
being framed affectionately, and sounding according to the sinister opinion of
every man's private appetite.

Seeing therefore, that there is just cause of fear and of great danger likely
to happen by this variety of men's judgments so diuersely affected, as well of
mean men, as of great personages: I take it the part of every true
Englishman, to labor ad travail each man for his possibility, and for such
talente, as God has given him, to help in convenient time for the preventing
of the imminent danger. We know, what wit, what policy, what pains, what
charges men imploie, to provide, that the Temmes or sea do not ouerflowe
such places, as be most subject to danger. We know, what politic provision
is made in many good Cities and towns, both to foresee, that by negligence
there rise no dangerouse fires, and if they chance, with all diligence to
repress the rage thereof. Wherein among other his prudente dooinges Augustus
the Emperor is commended, for appointing at Rome seven companies ordinarily to
watch the City, for the purpose aforesaid. Whereunto he was enduced, by
reason the City was in one day in seven several places set on fire. And
shall not we every man for his his part and vocation, have a vigilant care and
respect, to the extinguishement of this fire already sprung out, that may (if
the matter be not wisely foreseen) destroy, subvert and consume, not one City
only, but importe an universal calamity and destruction?

Which to repress, one ready and good way seems unto me, if men may know
and be thoroughly persuaded, in what person the right of the succession of the
Croune of this our Realm does stand and remain. For now many men through
ignorance of the said Right and Title, and also the same being depraved by
certain sinister persuasions in some books, whereunto they have to lightly
given creditte, be carried away from the right opinion and good heart, that they
otherwise would and should have.

The which kind of men I do heartily wish from their said corrupt judgment
to be revoked: and shall in this Treatise do my best endeavor, to remove, not
presuming upon my self, that I am any thing better able, then others, this to
do (for I know my own infirmity) but being glad and willing, to impart unto
others such motives, as upon the reading of such books, which of late have been
set forth by the Adversaries, and after the diligent weying of diverse
arguments to the contrary, seem unto me sufficient to satisfy any honest
and indifferent man, that is not obstinately bent to his own wilful
affections, or to some other sinister meaning and dealing.

We say then and affirm, that the right Heir and Successor apparent unto the
Croune of this Realm of England, is at this time such a one, as for the
excellent gifts of God and nature in her most princely appearing, is worthy
to inherit either this noble Realm, or any other, be it of much more dignity
and worthiness.

But now I claim nothing, for the worthiness of the person, which God forbid
should be any thing prejudicial to the just title of others. If most open and
manifest right, justice and title do not concur with the worthiness of the
person: then let the praise and worthiness remain where it is, and the right
where God and the law has placed it.

But seeing God, Nature and the law does call the person to this expectation,
whose interest and claim I do now prosequute (I mean the right excellent
Lady, The Queen of Scotts is right heir apparent to the Croune of England.
Lady Marie Queen of Scotland) I hope, that when her right and just title
shall be thoroughly heard and considered by the indifferent Reader, if he be
persuaded already for her right, he shall be more firmly settled in his true and
good opinion, and that the other parties, being of a contrary mind, shall
find good causes and grounds, to remove them from the fame, and to give over
and yield to the truth.

Her Graces Title then, as it is most open and euidente, so it is most
conformable to the law of God, of Nature, and of this Realm: And consequently
in a manner of all other Realms in the world, as growing by the nearest
proximitie of the Roial blood. She is a Kings and a Queens daughter, her
self a Queen, daughter to the late King James of Scotland, son to Lady
Margarete the eldest Sister to our late Sovereign King Henry the Eight. Whose
daughter also the Lady Lenoux is, but by a later husband: the Lady Frauncis,
late wife to Henry Marquis Dorsette, afterward Duke of Suffolk: and the
Lady Elenour, late wife to the Earl of Cumberlande, and their Progeny
proceeds from the Lady Marie, Dowager of France, youngest Sister of the said
King Henry, late wife to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk.

I might here fetch forth old farne days. I might reach back to the noble
and worthy Kings long before the Conquest, of whose Roial blood she is
descended. Which is no part of our purpose, neither does enforce her Title
more then to prove her no stranger within this Realm. But the Arguments and
prouffes, which we mean to allege and bring forth for the confirmation of her
right and Title in Succession (as Heir apparent) to the Croune of England, are
gathered and grounded upon the laws of God and nature, and not only received
in the Civil policies of other nations, but also in the old laws and
Customs of our own Country, by reason approved, and by usage and long
continuance of time observed, from the first constitution of this Realm in
political order unto this present day.

And yet for all that has it been, and yet is, by some men attempted,
artificially to obiecte and cast many mystie dark clouds before men's eyes,
to keep from them (if it may be) the clear light of the said just title, the
which they would extinguish, or at the least blemish with some obscure shadow
of law, but in deed against the law, and with the shadow of Parlamentes,
but in deed against the true meaning of the Parlamentes.

And albe it, it were enough for us (our cause being so firmly and suerly
establisshed upon al good reason and law) to stand at defense, and only to
avoid (as easily we may) their objections, which principally and chiefly are
grounded upon the common laws and Statutes of this Realm: yet for the
bettering and strengthening of the same, we shall lay forth sundry great and
invincible reasons, co^ioyned with good and sufficient authority of the law,
so approved and confirmed, that the Adversaries shall never be able justly to
impugn them. And so that we trust, after the reading of this Treatise, and the
effects of the same well digested, no manner of scruple ought to remain in any
indifferent man's heart, concerning her right and Title.

Whose expectation and conscience allthough we trust fully in this Discourse
to satisfy, and doubt nothing in the world of the righteousness of our cause:
yet must we needs confess, the manner and form to entreat thereof to be full
of difficulty and perplexity. For such causes of Princes, as they be seldom
and rare, so is it more rare and strange, to find them discoursed, discussed
and determined by any law or statute, albe it now and then some statutes
tend that way. Inst. de just. and iure. fin.
Neither do our laws, nor the Corpse of the Roman and Civil law lightly
meddle with the princely government, but with private men's causes.

And yet this notwithstanding, for the better justification of our cause, albe
it I deny not, but that by the common law it must be known, who ought to
have the Croune, and that the common law must discern the right, as well of
the Croune, as of subjects: yet I say, that there is a great difference
between the Kings right, and the right of others: And that the Title of the
Croune of this Realm is not subject to the rules and principles of the common
law of this Realm, as to be ruled and tried after such order and course, as
the inheritance of private persons is by the same. The common law of this
Realm is rather grounded upon a general custom, then any law written. In
Prologo suo eiusdem li. fo. 1. et 2. De dict. Ra nulpho Gla^uilla uide Giraldum
Cambren. in topogra. de Wallia.
For the prous whereof let us consider, what the common law of this Realm is,
and how the rules thereof be grounded and do take place.

It is very manifest and plain, that the common law of this Realm of
England is no law written, but grounded only upon a common and general custom
throughout the whole realm, as appears by the Treatise of the ancient and
famous Writer of the laws of the realm named Ranulphus de Glanuilla, who
wrote in the time of the noble King Henry the second, of the law and Custom
of the realm of England: being then, and also in the time of the reign of
King Richard the first, the chief Counsailour and Justice of the same King,
Fortescue de lau. Leg. Angl. c. 17.^. E. 4.19.33. H. 6.51. Pinsons printe.
and also by the famous Justice Fortescue in his book which he wrote being
Chancellor of England De laudibus Legum Angltae. And by 33. H. 6.51. and by
E. 4.19. Which Custom by usage and continual practice heretofore had in the
Kings Courts within this Realm is only known and maintained: wherein we
seem much agreeable to the old Lacedaemonians, who many hundred years past most
politikely and famously governed their common Wealth with law unwritten: Inst.
de iure natura. ge^t. and civil.. ex non script.
whereas among the Athenians the written laws bare all the sway.

This thing being so true, that with any reason or good authority it can not
be denied: then we are farther to consider, whether the Kings Title to the
Croune can be examined, tried and ordered by this common Custom, or no. If ye
say it may: then must ye prove by some record, that it has been so used:
otherwise ye only say it, and nothing at all prove it. For nothing can be said
by law to be subject to any custom, unless the same has been used
accordingly, and by force of the same custom. I am well assured, that you are
not able to prove the usage and practice thereof by any record in any of the
Kings courts. Yea I will farther say unto you, and also prove it, that there is
no one rule general or special of the common law of this Realm, which ye
^^ther have showed, or can show, that (...) been taken by any just
construction to (...) tend unto, or bind the King or his Crou^^^. I will not
deny, but that to declare and see forth the prerogative and Jurisdiction of
the King, ye may show many rules of the law, but to bind him (as I have
said) ye can show none.

Ye say in your book, that it is a Maxim in our law most manifest, that who
so ever is borne out of England, and of father and mother not being of the
obedience of the King of England, can not be capable to inherit any thing in
England. Which rule being general, without any words of exception, ye also
say, must needs extend unto the Croune. What you mean by your law, I know
not. But if you mean (as I think you do) the common law of England: I
answer, there is no such Maxim in the common law of this Realm of England,
as hereafter I shall manifestly prove.

But if it were for arguments sake admitted for this time, that it be a Maxim
or general rule of the common law of England: yet to say, that it is so
general, as that no exception can be taken against the same rule, ye show your
self either ignorant, or else very careless of your creditte. For it does
plainly appear by the Statute of 25. 25. E. 3.
E. 3. (being a declaration of that rule of the Law, which I suppose ye
mean, terming it a Maxim) that that rule extends not unto the Kings
children.

Whereby it most evidently appears, that it extends not generally to al.
And if it extend not to bind the Kings children in respect of any
inheritance descended unto them from any of their Ancestors: it is an
Argument a fortiori, that it does not extend to bind the King or his Croune.

And for a full and short answer to your Authorities set forth in your
marginall Notes, as 5. Ed ward. 3. tit. Ayle. 13. Ed war. 3. tit. Bref. 31.
Edw. 3. tit Coson. 42. Ed war. 3. fol. 2. 22. Henric. 6. fol. 42.11. Henric. 4.
fol. 23. and 24. Litleton. ca. vilenage: it may plainly appear unto all, that
will read and pervse those Books, that there is none of them al, that does so
much as with a piece of a word, or by any color or shadow seem to intend,
that the Title of the Croune is bound by that your supposed general rule or
Maxim. For every one of the said Cases argued and noted in the said Book,
are only concerning the dishabilitie of an Alien borne, and not Denizon, The
adue^ sacies case pettineth to subjects only.
to demand any lands by the laws of the Realm by suite and action only,
as a subject under the King, and nothing touching any dishabilitie to be laid
to the King himself, or to his subjects.

Is there any controversy about the Title of the Croune, by reason of any such
dishabilitie touched in any of these Books? No verily, not one world, I dare
boldly say. As it may most manifestly appear to them, that will read and
pervse those books. And yet ye are not ashamed, to note them as sufficient
authorities for the maintenance of your evil purpose and intent. But as ye
would seem to understand, that your rule of dishabilitie is a general Maxim
of the law: so me thinks ye should not be ignorant, that it is also as
general, yea a more general rule and Maxim of the law, No Maxim of the law
binds the Croune, unless the Croune specially be named.
that no Maxim or rule of the law can extend, to bind the King or the
Croune, unless the same be specially mentioned therein, as may appear by
diverse principles and rules of the law, which be as general, as is your said
supposed Maxim, and yet neither the King, nor the Croune is by any of them
bound.

As for example: it is very plain, that the rule of the Tenante by the
Courtesy is general without any exception at al. Of the Tenante by the curtesy
And yet the same binds not the Croune, neither does extend to give any
benefitte to him that shall marie the Queen of England. As it was plainly
agreed by all the lawiers of this Realm, when King Philippe was married unto
Queen Marie, although for the more suertie and plain declaration of the
intentes of King Philippe and Queen Marie, and of all the states of this
realm, it was enacted, that King Philip should not claim any Title to be
Tenant by the Courtesy.

It is also a general rule, Nor that the lands shall be divided among the
daughters.
that if a man dye seized of any lands in Fee simple without issue male,
having diverse daughters: the land shallbe equally divided among the
daughters. Which rule the learned men in the laws of this Realm agreed upon
in the life of the late noble Prince Edward, and also every reasonable man
knows by usage to take no place in the succession of the Croune. For there
the eldest enjoys al, as though she were issue male.

Likewise it is a general rule, that the wife Not the wife shall have the
third part.
And yet it is very clear, that any Queen shall not have the third part of
the lands belonging to the Croune, as appears in 5. E. 3. Tit. praerogat. 5.
E. 3. Tit. praerog. 21. E. 3.9. and 28. H. 6. Nor the rule o^ Possessio fratris
etc.
21. E. 3.9. and 28. H. 6. and diverse other books.

Bysides that, the rule of Possessio fratris, being general, neither has
been, or can be stretched to the inheritance of the Croune. For the brother of
the half blood shall succeed, and not the sister of the whole blood, as may
appear by Justice Moile, as may be proved by King Etheldred brother and
successor to King Edward the Martyr, and by King Edward the Confessor,
brother to King Edmunde, and diverse other, who succeeded in the Croune of
England, being but of the half blood. As was also the late Queen Marie, and
is at this present her sister who both in all records of our law, wherein
their several rightes and titles to the Croune are pleaded (as by daily
experience, as well in the Exchequer, as also in all other Courts is manifest)
do make their conueiance as heirs in blood the one to the other, which if they
were common or private persons, they could not be allowed in law, they (as is
well known) being of the half blood one to the other, that is to wit, begotten
of one father, but borne of sundry mothers.

It is also a general rule in the law, Nor that the executour shall have the
goods and Chattles of the res^atour. 7. H. 4. sol. 42.
and not the heir. And yet is it otherwise in the case of the Croune. For
there the successor shall have them, and not the executour, as appears in 7.
H. 4. by Gascoine. It is likewise a general rule, that a man attainted of
felony or treason, his heir through the corruption of blood without pardon and
restitution of blood, Nor that a traitor i unable to take lands by discente
and without pardon.
is unable to take any lands by discente. Which rule although it be general,
yet it extends not to the discente or succession of the Croune, although the
same Attainder were by act of Parlamente, as may appear by the Attainder of
Richard Duke of York, and King Edward his son, and also of King Henry the
seventh, who were attainted by act of Parliament, and never restored, and yet
no dishabilitie thereby unto Edward the fourth, nor unto Henry the seventh, to
receive the Croune by lawful succession.

But to this you would seem to answer in your said book, saying, that Henry
the seventh, notwithstanding his Attainder, came to the Croune, as cast upon
him by the order of the law: forasmuch that when the Croune was cast upon
him, that dishabilitie ceased. Wherein ye confess directly, that the
Attainder is no dishabilitie at all to the succession of the Croune. For
although no dishabilitie can be alleged in him, that has the Croune in
possession: yet if there were any dishabilitie in him before to receue and take
the same by lawful succession, then must ye say, that he was not lawful King,
but an usurper. And therefore in confessing Henry the seventh to be a lawful
King, and that the Croune was lawfully cast upon him, ye confess directly
thereby, that before he was King in possession, there was no dishabilitie in
him to take the Croune by lawful succession, his said Attainder
notwithstanding: which is as much as I would wish you to grant.

But in conclusion, understanding your self, that this your reason can not
maintain your intent: you go about an other way to help your self, making a
difference in the law between the case of Attainder, and the case of foraine
birth out of the Kings allogea^ce: An answer to the Adversary making a
difference be tvvene Attainder and the birth out of the allegea^ce.
saying, that in the case of the Attainder neessitie does enforce the
succession of the Croune upon the party attaynted. For otherwise, ye say, the
Croune shall not descend to any. But upon the birth out of the Kings
allegance, ye say, it is otherwise. And for proof thereof, ye put a case of
I.S. being seized of lands, and having issue A. and B. A. is attainted in the
life of I.S. his father, and after I.S. dies, A. living vnrestored. Now the
land shall not descend either to A. or B. but shall go to the Lord of the Fee
by way of eschete. Otherwise it had been (ye say) if A. had been borne beyond the
sea, I. S. breaking his allegea^ce to the King, and after I. S. comes again
into the Realm, and has issue B. and dies. for now (ye say) B. shall inherit
his fathers Lands.

If the Croune had been holden of any person, to whom it might have escheted,
as in your case of I.S. the land did: then peradventure there had been some
affinity between your said case, and the case of the Croune. But there is no
such matter.

Bysides that, ye must consider, that the King comes to the Croune, not only
by descente, but also and chiefly by succession, as unto a corporation. And
therefore ye might easily have seen a difference in your cases between the
Kings Majesty, and I.S. a subject: And also between lands holden of a Lord
above, and the Croune holden of no earthly Lord, but of God almighty only.

But yet for arguments sake I would feign know, where you find your
difference, and what authority you can show for the prouf thereof? Ye have
made no marginal note of any authority: and therefore unless ye also say,
that ye are Pythagoras, I will not believe your difference. Well I am assured,
that I can show you good authority to the contrary, and that there is no
difference in your cases. Pervse I pray you 22. H. 6. 22. H. 6. fol. 43.
And there may you see the opinion of Justice Newton, that there is no
difference in your cases, but that in both your cases the land shall eschete
unto the Lord. And Prisote, being then of Counsel with the party that
claimed the lands by a descent, where the eldest son was borne beyond the
seas, durst not abide in law upon the title. This authority is against your
difference, and this authority I am well assured is better, then any that you
have showed to prove your difference. But if we shall admit your difference to
be according to the law: yet your cases, whereunto you apply your difference,
are nothing like, as I have said before.

But to proceed on in the proof of our purpose, as it does appear, that
neither the King, nor his Croune is bound by these general rules, which before
I have showed: so do I likewise say of all the residue of the general rules and
Maxims of the law, The suppo sed Maxim of the Adversaries touching not
Kings borne beyond the sea, as appears by King Stephen and King H. 2.
being in a manner infinite.

But to return again unto your only supposed Maxim, which you make so
general, concerning the dishabilitie of persons borne beyond the seas: it is
very plain, that it was never taken, to extend unto the Croune of this Realm
of England, as it may appear by King Stephen, and by King Henry the second,
who were both strangers and Frenchemen, and borne out of the Kings
allegiance, and neither were they Kings children immediate, nor their parents
of the allegiance, and yet they have been always accounted lawful Kings of
England, nor their title was by any man at any time defaced or comptrolled for
any such consideration or exception of foraine birth.

And it is a world to see, The Adversaries objection touching King H. 2.
avoided.
how you would shifte your hands from the said King Henry. Ye say, he came not
to the Croune by order of the law, but by capitulation, for as much as his
mother, by whom he conveyed his Title, was then living. Well, admit that he
came to the Croune by capitulation, during his mothers life: yet this does not
prove, that he was dishabled to receive the Croune, but rather proves his
ability. And although I did also admit, that he had not the Croune by order of
the law during his mothers life: yet after his mothers death, no man has
hitherto doubted, but that he was King by lawful succession, and not against
the laws and Customs of this Realm. For so might you put a doubt in all the
Kings of this Realm, that ever governed since, and drive us to seake heirs
in Scotland, or else where. Which thing we suppose you are over wise to go
about.

Bysides this, I have hard some of the adversaries for farther help of their
intention in this matter say, that King Henry the second was a Queens child,
and so King by the rule of the common law. Truly I know, he was an Emperesse
child, but no Queen of Englandes child. For although Maude the Emperesse his
mother had a right and a good title to the Croune, and to be Queen of England,
yet was she never in possession, but kept from the possession by King Stephen.
And therefore King Henry the second can not justly be said, to be a Queen of
Englandes child, nor yet any Kings child, unless ye would intend the Kings
children by the words of Infantes de Roy etc. to be children of farther
degree, and descended from the right line of the King: so ye might say truly,
that he was the child of King Henry the first, being in deed the son and
heir of Maude the Emperesse, daughter and heir of King Henry the first.
Whereby your said rule is here fowly foiled. As touching Arthur King Richardes
nephevve. Vt autem pax ista. and summa dilectio, ta^ multiplici, qua^ arctiori
uin culo connectatur: praedictis curiae uestrae Magnatibus id ex part u^ stra
tracta^tibus Domino disponente co^diximus, inter Arthurum egregiu^ D^ cem
Brita^niae, nepote^ nostrum and haeredem si forte sine prole obir^ nos contig^
rit, and filia^ uestra^ matrimonium contrahendum etc.


And therefore ye would feign, for the maintenance of your pretensed Maxim,
catch some hold upon Arthur the son of Ieffrey, one of the sons of the
said Henry the second Ye say then like a good and ioly Antyquarie, that he
was rejected from the Croune, because he was borne out of the Realm. That he
was borne out of the Realm, it is very true: but that he was rejected from the
Croune for that cause, it is very false. Neither have you any authority to
prove your vain opinion in this point. For it is to be proved by the
Cronicles of this Realm, that King Richard the first, uncle unto the said
Arthur, taking his journey toward Jerusalem, declared the said Arthur (as we
have declared before) to be heir apparent unto the Croune: which would not
have been, if he had been taken to be unable to receive the Croune by reason of
foraine birth.

And although King John did usurp, as well upon the said King Richard the
first his eldest brother, as also upon the said Arthur thur his nephewe: In
tractatu paci^ inter Richa. 1. and Tancredu^ Regem Si ciliae. Vide Reg.
Houeden. and Richardu^ Canonicum S. Trinitatis Londin.
yet that is no prouf, that he was rejected, because he was borne out of the
Realm. If ye could prove that, then had you showed some reason and president
to prove your intent, whereas hitherto you have showed none at al, nor I am well
assured shall never be able to show.

Thus may ye see, gentle Reader, that neither this pretensed Maxim of the law
set forth by th'Aduersaries, nor a great number more, as general as this is
(which before I have showed) can by any reasonable means be stretched, to
bind the Croune of England. These reasons and authorities may for this time
suffice, to prove, that the Croune of this Realm is not subject to the rules
and the Principles of the common law, neither can be ruled and tried by the
same. Which thing being true, all the obiectio^s of the Adversaries made
against the title of Marie the Queen of Scotland to the succession of the
Croune of this Realm, are fully answered, and thereby clearly wiped away.

Yet for farther arguments sake, and to the end we might have al matters
sifted to the uttermost, and thereby al things made plain: let us for this time
somewhat yield unto the Adversaries, admitting, that the Title of the Croune
of this Realm were to be examined and tried by the rules and principles of the
common law, and then let us consider and examine farther, whether there be any
rule of the common law, or else any statute, that by good and just construction
can seem to inpugne the said title of Marie the Queen of Scotland, or no. For
touching her lineal descente from King Henry the seventh, and by his eldest
daughter (as we have showed) there is no man so impudent to deny. What is
there then to be objected among all the rules, Maxims, and judgments of the
common law of this Realm? Only one rule, as a general Maxim, is objected
against her. And yet the same rule is so untruly set forth, that I can not well
agree, that it is any rule or Maxim of the common law of this Realm of
England. Your prete^sed Maxim is, whosoever is born out of the realm of
England, and of father and mother not being under the obedience of the King of
England, cannot be capable to inherit any thing in England. A false Maxim set
forth by the Adversary.
Which rule is nothing true, but altogether false. For every stranger and Alien
is hable to purchase the inheritance of lands within this Realm, as it may
appear in 7. and 9. of king Edward the fourth, 7. E. 4. fo. 28.9. E. 4. fo.
5.11. H. 4 fo 25.14. H. 4. fo. 10.
and also in 11. and 14. of king He^rie the fourth. And although the same
purchase is of some men accounted to be to the use of the King: yet until such
time as the king be entitled thereunto by matter of Record, the inheritance
remains in the Alien by the opinion of al men. And so is a very Alien capable
of inheritance within this Realm. And then it must needs fall out very plainly,
that your general Maxim, where upon you have talked and bragged so much, is
now become no rule of the common law of this Realm. And if it be so: then have
you uttered very many words to small purpose.

But yet let us see fartther, whether there be any rule or Maxim in the common
Law, that may seem any thing like to that rule, whereupon any matter may be
gathered against the Title of the said Marie Queen of Scotland. There is one
rule of the common Law, in words somewhat like unto that, which has been
alleged by the Adversaries. Which rule is set forth and declared by a statute
made anno 25. of King Edward the third. Which statute reciting the doubt that
then was, whether infants borne out of the allegiance of England, should be
hable to demand any heritage within the same allegiance, or no: it was by the
same statute ordained, that al infantes inheritours, which after that time
should be borne out of the allegiance of the King, whose father and mother at
the time of their birth, were of the feaith and allegea^ce of the King of
England, should have and enjoy the same benefittes and advantages, to have and
carry heritage within the said allegiance, as other heirs should. Whereupon it
is to be gathered by dew and just construction of the statute, and has been
heretofore commonly taken, that the common law always was, and yet is, that no
person borne out of the allegea^ce of the King of England, whose father and
mother were not of the same allegea^ce, should be able to have or demand any
heritage within the same allegiance, as heir to any person. Which rule I take
to be the same supposed Maxim, which the Adversaries do mean. But to stretch
it generally to al inheritances (as the Adversaries would seem to do) by any
reasonable means can not be. For (as I have said before) every stranger and
Alien borne, may have and take inheritance, the statute of Edw. 3. An. 25. to
^ cheth in^e rita^ce, not purchase. ^ H. 4. fo. 25.
as a purchaser. And if an Alien do marie a woman inheritable, the inheritance
thereby is both in the Alien, and also in his wife, and the Alien thereby a
purchaser. Noman doubts, but that a Denizon may purchase lands to his own
use: but to inherit lands, as heir to any person within the allegea^ce of
England, he can not by any means. So that it seems very plain, that the
said rule binds also Denyzo^s, and does only extend to Desce^tes of
inheritance, and not to the having of any lands by purchase.

Now will we then consider, whether this rule by any reasonable construction can
extend unto the Lady Marie the Queen of Scotland, for and concerning her
Title to the Croune of England. It has been said by the Adversaries, that she
was borne in Scotland, which realm is out of the allegea^ce of England, her
father and mother not being of the same allegiance. And therefore by the said
rule, she is not inheritable to the Croune of this Realm. Although I might at
the beginning very well and orderly deny the consequent of your argument: yet
for this time we will first examine the Antecedent, whether it be true or no,
and then consider upon the consequent. Scotland is within the allegiance of
England.
That the Queen of Scotland was borne in Scotland, it must needs be granted,
but that Scotland is out of the allegea^ce of England, though the said Queen
and al her subjects of Scotland, will stourly affirm the same: yet there is a
great number of men in Eng and, both learned and others, that be not of that
opinion, being lead and persuaded thereto by diverse histories, Registers,
Records and Instruments of Homage, remaining in the treasury of this Realm,
wherein is metioned, that the Kings of Scotland have acknowledged the King of
England to be the superior Lord over the Realm of Scotland, and have done
homage and fealty for the same. Which thing being true (notwithstanding it be
commonly denied by all Scotsmen) then by the laws of this realm Scotland must
needs be accounted to be within the allegiance of England. And although sins
the time of King Henry the sixth, none of the Kings of Scotland have done the
said service unto the Kings of England: yet that is no reason in our law, to
say, that therefore the Realm of Scotland at the time of the birth of the said
Lady Marie Queen of Scotland, being in the thirty and fourth year of the
reign of our late Sovereign Lord King Henry the eight, was out of the
allegiance of the kings of England. The Lord loses not his seignorie, though
the tena^te does not his service
For the law of this Realm is very plain, that though the Tenant do not his
service unto the Lord, yet has not the Lord thereby lost his Seignorie. For
the land still remains within his Fee and Seignorie, that notwithstanding.

But peradventure some will obiecte and say, that by that reason France should
likewise be said to be within the allegiance of England: forasmuch as the
possession of the Croune of France has been within a little more then the space
of one hundred years now last past, laufully vested in the kings of England,
whose right and title still remains.

To that objection it may be answered, that there is a great difference between
the right and title, which the Kings of England claim to the Realm of
France, and the right and title which they claim to the Realm of Scotland.
Although it be true, that the Kings of England have been lawfully possessed
of the Croune of France: yet during such time, as they by usurpation of others
are dispossessed of the said Realm of France, the same Realm by no means
can be said to be within their allegiance: especially considering, how that
syns the time of usurpation, the people of France have wholly forsaken their
allegiance and subjection, which they did owe unto the Kings of England, and
have given and submitted them selves under the obedience and allegiance of the
usurpers. But as for the Realm of Scotland, it is otherwise.

For the Title, which the Kings of England have claimed unto the Realm of
Scotland, is not in the possession of the land and Croune of Scotland: but
only unto the service of homage and fealty for the same. And although the
Kings of Scotland, since the time of King Henry the eight, have intermitted to
do the said homage and fealty unto the Kings of England: yet for all that
the Kings of Scotland can not by any reason or law be called usurpers.

And thus may ye see, gentle Reader, by the opinion of al indifferente men, not
lead by affection, that the Realm of Scotland has been, and is yet within
the allegiance and dominion of England. And so is the Antecedent or first
proposition false. And yet that makes no proof, that the Realm of France
likewise should now be said to be within the allegiance of the Kings of
England, by reason of the manifest and apparent difference before showed.

But what if your Antecedent were true, and that we did agree both with the
said Queen of Scotland and her subjects, and also with you, that Scotland
were out of the allegiance of England? Yet it is very plain, that your
consequent and conclusion can not by any means be true. The causes why the
Croune ca^ not be comprised within the pretended Maxim.
And that principally for three causes, whereof one is, for that neither the
King, not the Croune (not being specially mentioned in the said rule or
pretended Maxim) can be intended to be within the meaning of the same Maxim,
as we have before sufficiently proved by a great number of other such like
general rules and Maxims of the laws. An other cause is, for that the Croune
can not be taken to be within the words of the said supposed Maxim: and that
for two respects: one is, because the rule does only dishable Aliens to
demand any heritage within the allegiance of England. Which rule can not be
stretched to the demand of the Croune of England, which is not with in the
allegiance of England: but is the very allegiance it self. As for a like
example: it is true, that all the lands within the Kings dominion are holde^
of the King, either mediatly, or immediately: and yet it is not true, that the
Croune (by which only the King has his Dominion) can be said to be holde^ of
the King. Without the croune there can neither be King nor allegiance
For without the Croune there can be neither King, nor allegiance. And so long
as the Croune rests only in demand, not being vested in any person, there is
no allegea^ce at al. So that the Croune can not be said by any means to be
within the allegiance of England: and therefore not within the words of the
said rule or Maime. The Title of the Croune is also out of the words and
meaning of the same rule in an other respect: and that is, bycanse that rule
does only dishable an Alien to demand lands by descent as heir. For it does
not extend unto lands purchased by an Alien, as we have before sufficiently
proved. And then can not that rule extend unto the Croune being a thing
incorporate, the right whereof does not descend according to the common course
of private inheritance, but goes by succession, as other corporatio^s do.

No man doubts, but that a Prior Alien being no denizon, 40. E. 3. fol. 10.
13. E. 3. Tit. Bref. 264.16. E. 3. iurans desait. 166.17. E. 3. tit. scire fac.
7. A Deane, a Person, a Priour being an Alien may demand land in the right of
his corporation. An 3. R. 2.6. C. 3. fo. 21. tit. droit 26. lib. Ass. p. 54.12.
li. Ass. tit. enfant. 13. H ^ fol. 14.7. E. 4. fol. 10.16. E. 3. iurans defait
9. H. 6. fol. 33.35. H. 6. so. 35.5. E. 4 fol. 70.49. li. Ass. A. 8^ 22. H. 6.
fo. 31.13. H. ^. so. 14.
might always in time of peace demand land in the right of his corporatio^.
And so likewise a Deane or a Person being Aliens, and no deniznos, might
demand land, in respect of their corporations, not withstanding the said
supposed rule or Maxim, as may appear by diverse book cases, as also by the
statute made in the time of King Richard the second. And although the Croune
has always gone according to the common course of a Descent: yet does it not
properly descend, but succeed. And that is the reason of the law, that
although the King be more favored in all his doings, then any common person
shall be: yet can not the King by law avoid his grauntes and Letters Patentes
by reason of his Nonage, as other infantes may do, but shall always be said to
be of full age in respect of his Croune: even as a Person, Vicare or Deane, or
any other person incorporate shall be. Which can not by any means be said in
law, to be within age in respect of their corporations, although the
corporation be but one year old.

Bysides that, the King can not by the law avoid the Letters Patentes made by
any usurper of the Croune (unless it be by act of Parliament) no more then
other persons incorporate shall avoid the grauntes made by one that was before
wrongfully in their places and romes: The King is alvvaies at full age in
respect of his Croune.
whereas in Descentes of inheritance the law is otherwise. For there the heir
may avoid al estates made by the disseafour, or abatour, or any other person,
whose estate is by law defeated. Whereby it does plainly appear, that the
King is incorporate unto the Croune, and has the same properly by succession,
and not by Descent only. And that is likewise an other reason, to prove, that
the King and the Croune can neither be said to be within the words, nor yet
with in the meaning of the said general rule or Maxim.

The third and most prncipall cause of all is, for that in the said statute,
whereupon the said supposed rule or Maxim is gathered, the children
descendantes and descended of the blood royal by the words of Infantes de Roy
are expressly excepted out of the said supposed rule or Maxim. The Kings
children are expressly excepted from the surmised Maxim.
Which words the Adversaries do much abuse, in restraini^g and construing
them, to extend but to the first degree only: whereas the same words may very
well bear a more large and ample interpretation: And that for three causes and
considerations.

First by the Civil law this word Liberi (which the word Infantes, being the
usual and original word of the statute written in the French tongue,
counteruaileth) does comprehend by proper and peculier signification not only
the children of the first degree, ^ Liberoru^ ff. de uerbo ru^ signific.
but other Descendants also in the law, saying: L. Sed and si de in ius uo
ca^do instit. de haere. ab intest.
That he who is manumissed or made free, shall not commence any Action against
the children of the Patron or manumissour without license, not only the first
degree, but the other also is contained. L. Lucius ff. de baered. instit. L.
Iusta. and L. N^toru^. and L. Liberorum de uerb. signif. L. 2. s^ matter ad S.
C. Tertul. L. Filius. de S. C. Maced. L. Senatus de ritu nug^.
The like is, when the law of the twelve Tables says: The first place and
room of succession, after the death of the parents that die intestate, is due
to the children, which succession apperteineth as well to degrees removed, as to
the first. Yea in all causes favorable (as ours is) this word son Filius,
co^teineth the nephew, though not by the property of the voice or speech, yet
by interpretation admittable in all such things, as the law disposes of. As
touching this word Infantes, in French: We say, L quod s^ nepotes. ff. test.
cu^ notatis ibid.
that it reaches to other Descenda^ts, as well as the first degree. Wherein I
do refer me to such as be expert in the said tongue. We have no one word
(for the barenes of our English tongue) to cou^terpaise the said French word
Infantes, Infantes in French cou^teruaileth this word liberi in lat.
or the Latin word Liberi. Therefore do we supply it, as well as we may, by
this word children. The Spaniardes also use this word Infantes in this ample
sort, when they call the next heir to the heir appare^t, Infant of Spain:
even as the late deceased Lord Charles of Austrich was called, his father and
grandfather then living.

If then the original word of the statute, declaring the said rule, may
naturally and properly apperteine to all the Descendants: why should we strain
and bind it to the first degree only, otherwise then the nature of the word
or reason will bear? For I suppose verily, that it will be very hard for the
Adversary, to give any good and substantial reason, why to make a diversity
in the cases. But touching the contrary, there are good and probable
consideratio^s, which shall serve us for the second cause. As, for that the
gra^dfathers call their nephews, as by a more pleasant plausible name, The
grand fathers call their nephues, sons. L. Gall^^. Institue^s. ff. de liber.
E^ post. l. ff. C. de impub. Al^is substan c 1. q. 4 Father and son co^pted in
person and flesh, in manner one
not only their children, but their sons also, and for that the son being
deceased (the gra^dfather suruiuing) not only the gra^dfathers affection, but
also such right, title and interest, as the son has by the law, and by
proximitie of blood, grow and draw al to the nephew, who represents and
supplieth the fathers place, the father and the son being compted in person
and in flesh in manner but as one. Why shall then the bare and naked
consideration of the external and accidental place of the birth only sever and
sunder such an entier, inward and natural conjunction? Add thereunto, the
many and great absurdities, that may hereof spring and ensue.

Diverse of the Kings of this Realm, as well before the time of King Edward
the third (in whose time this statute was made) as after him, Great absurdity,
in excluding the true and right successor, for the place of his birth only.
gave their daughters out to foraine, and sometimes to mean Princes in
marriage. Which they would never so often times have done, if they had thought,
that while they went about to set forth and advance their issue, their doings
should have tended to the disheriting of them from so great, large and noble a
Realm, as this is: which might have chanced, if the daughter having a son or
daughter, had died, her father living. For there should this supposed Maxim
have been a bar to the children, to succeed their grandfather.

This absurdity would have been more notable, if it had chanced about the time
of King Henry the second, or this king Edward or king Henry the first and
sixte, when the possessions of the Croune of this Realm were so amply enlarged
in other Countries beyond the seas. And yet never so notable, as it might have
been hereafter in our fresh memory and remembrance, if any such thing had
chanced (as by possibility it might have chanced) by the late marriage of King
Philippe and Queen Marie.

For, admitting their daughter married to a foraine Prince, should have dyed
before them, she leaving a son suruiuing his father and grandmother, they
having none other issue so nigh in degree: then would this late framed Maxim
have excluded the same son lame^tably and unnaturally from the succession of
the Croune of England, and also the same Croune from the inheritance of the
Realms of Spain, of both Sicilies, with their appurtena^ces, of the Dukedo^ of
Milan, and other lands and Dominions in Lumbardy and Italy, as also from the
Dukedomes of Brabant, Luxe^burg, Geldres, Zutphan, Burgundy, Friseland, from
the Countreies of Flandres, Artois, Holland, Zeala^d, and Namurs, and from the
new found lands, parcel of the said Kingdom of Spain*. Which are (unless I
be deceued) more ample by dubble or treble, then all the Countreies now
rehearsed. All the which Countreies by the foresaid Marriage should have been by all right deuolued to the said son, if any such child had been borne.

If either the same by the force of this iolye new found Maxim had been
excluded from the Croune of England, or the said Croune from the inheritance
of the foresaid Countreies: were there any reason to be yielded, for the
maintenance of this supposed rule or Maxim in that case? Or might there
possibly rise any commodity to the Realm, by observing therein this rigorous
pretensed rule, that should by one hundred part counteruaile this importable
loss and spoil of the Croune, and of the lawful inheritour of the same? An
evasion avoided, prete^ding the privilege of the Ki^gs children not to be in
respect of the Croune, but of other lands.


But perchance for the avoiding of this exception limited unto the blood roial,
some will say, that the same was but a privilege granted to the Kings
children, not in respect of the succession of the Croune, but of other lands
descending to them from their Ancestors. Which although we might very well
admit and allow: yet can it not be denied, but that the same privilege was
granted unto the Kings children and other descendantes of the Blood roial, by
reason of the dignity and worthiness of the Croune, which the King their father
did enjoy, and the great reverence, which the law gives of dewtie thereunto.
And therefore if ye would go about, to restrain and withdraw from the Croune
that privilege, which the law gives to the Kings children for the Crounes
sake: ye should do therein contrary to al reason, and against the rules of
the Art of Reasoning, which says, that: Propter quod vnumquodque, and illud
magis.

Byside that, I would feign know, by what reason might a man say, that they
of the Kings Bloodde borne out of the allegeaunce of England, may inherit
lands within this Realm, as heirs unto their Ancestors, not being able to
inherit the Croune. Truly in mine opinion it were against al reason. But on
the contrary side, the very force of reason must drive us to grant the like.
Yea more great and ample privilege and benefit of the law in the succession of
the Croune. The royal blood bears his honor with it, vvhereso ever it be.
For the Roial blood, where so ever it be found, will be taken as a precious and
singular Jewel, and will carry with it his worthy estimation and honor with
the people, and, where it is dew, his right withal.

By the Civil law the right of the inheritance of private persons is hemmed and
inched within the bands of the tenth degree. Vide Anto. Corsetum de potest. et
excel. regi. q. 106.
The Blood roial runs a farther race, and so far as it may be found:
wherewith the great and mighty Conquerors are glad and feign to join withal,
Co^querors glad to ioinevvith the ioyall blood. Henry the first.
ever fearing the weakness of their blooddie sword, in respect of the great
force and strength of the same. For this cause was Henry the first, called
for his learning and wisdom Beauclerke, glad to consociate and couple him
self with the ancient Roial blood of the Saxons, which continuing in the
Princely Succession from worthy king Alured was cut of by the death of the
good king Edward: and by the mariyng of Mathildis being in the fourth degree in
lineal descent to the said king Edward, was revived and reunited. From this
Edward the Queen of Scotland (as we have before showed) takes her noble
auncieht Petigrue. These then, and diverse other reasons and causes mo, may be
alleged for the waying and setting forth of the true meaning and intent of
the said law.

Now in case these two causes and considerations will not satisfy th
Adversary: we will adioine thereunto a third, which he shall never by any good
and honest shift avoid. And that is the use and practice of the Realm, as well
in the time foregoing the said statute, as afterward.

We stand upon the interpretation of the common law recited and declared by the
said statute. And how shall we better understand, L. ^. ff. de legious.
what the law is therein, then by the use and practice of the said law?
Commonvse and p^^ctise the best interpretation of the law Eod^ anno Rex cu^ in
diebus suis processisset Aeldreda^ Vigornen sem Episco pum ad Regem Hunga riae
trans mittens, reuocauit inde filium fratris sui Edmundi Eduardum cu^ tota fa
milia sua. ut uel ipse, uel filij eius sibi succedere^t in regnum. Flor. histor
1057.
For the best interpretation of the law, is custom. But the Realm before the
statute, admitted to the Croune not only kings children and others of the first
degree, but also of a farther degree, and such as were plainly borne out of the
Kings allegiance. The soresaid use and practice appears as well before, as
since the time of the Conquest. Among other King Edward the Confessor, being
destitute of a lawful Heir within the Realm, sent into Hu^gary for Edward his
Nephew surnamed Outlaw, son to King Edmu^d called Iro^side, after many years of
his exile, to return into England, to the intent the said Outlaw should
inherit this Realm, which nevertheless came not to effect, by reason the
said outlaw died before the said king Edward his Uncle.

After whose death the said king appointed Eadgar Etheling son of the said
Outlaw, being his next cosen and heir, as he was of right to the Croune of
England. And for that the said Eadgar was but of young and tender years, Flor
histo. ^066. Aelredus Regioual lens. de reg Anglorum ad Regem Henr. 2.
and not able to take upon him so great a government: the said king committed
the protection, as well of the young Prince, as also of the Realm, to Harold
Earl of Kent, until such time, as the said Eadgar had obtained perfect age to
be hable to weld the state of a King, Which Harold nevertheless contrary to
the trust, supplanted the said young Prince of the Kingdom, and put the Croune
upon his own head.

By this it is apparent, that foraine birth was not accounted of, before the
time of the Conquest, a just cause to repel and reject any man, being of the
next proximitie in blood, from the Title of the Croune. And though the said
king Edward the Co^fessors will and purpose took no such force and effect, as he
desired, and the law craved: yet the like succession took place effectuously in
king Stephen and king Henry the second, King Stephen, and King H. ^.
as we have already declared. Neither will th'Aduersaries shift of foramers
borne of father and mother, which be not of the kings alegea^ce, help him:
forasmuch as this clause of the said statut is not to be applied to the kings
children, but to others, as appears in the same statute. And these two kings,
Stephen and Henry the 2. as they were borne in a forain place: The aduer
saries fond imagination, that King H. 2. should come to the croune by
composition: not by proximitie of blood.
so their fathers and mothers were not of the kings allegea^ce, but mere Aliens
and strangers. And how notorious a vain thing is it, that th'Aduersarie would
persuade us, that the said K. Henry the second rather came in by force of a
composition, then by the proximitie and nearenes of blood: I leave it to every
man to consider, that has any manner of feling in the discourse of the stories
of this realm. The co^positio^ did procure him quietness and rest for the time
with a good and sure hope of quiet and peaceable entrance also after the death
of King Stephen. Rex Stepha nus omni haerede ui duatus prae ter solummo do
Ducem Henricum, recognouit in conuentu Episcoporu^ and aliorum de regno
Optimatum quod Dux He^r ius hae reditariu^ in regnu^ Angliae habebat.
and so it followed in deed: but there grew to him no more right thereby, then
was due to him before. For he was the true heir to the Croune, as appears by
Stephen his Adversaries own confession. Henry the first married his daughter
Mathildis to Henry the Emperor, by whom he had no children. And no dout in
case she had had any children by The Emperor, they should have been heirs by
succession to the Croune of England. Et Dux benign concessit, ut Rex Stepha
nus tota uita sua suu^ regnu^ pacifice possideret. Ita tamen confirmatum est
pactu^, quod ipse Rex, and ipsttu^e praesentes cum caeteris regni optimatibus
iurare^t, quod Dux Henr. post morte^ Regu, si illum superuiueret, regnum sine
aliqua contradictione obtincret. Flor. histo. An 1153. The like fond
imagination touching King Richardes nephew.
After whose death she returned to her father: yet did King Henry cause all
the Nobility by an express oath, to embrace her after his death as Queen,
and after her, her children.

Not long after, she was married to Ieffrey Plantagenet a Frenchman borne, Earl
of Aniowe, who begat of her this Henry the second, being in France. Whereupon
the said King did revive and renew the like oath of allegea^ce, as well to her,
as to her son after her. With the like false persuasio^ the Adueruersarie
abuses him self and his Reader, touching Arthur Duke of Britanie, Nephew to
King Richard the first. As though forsooth he were justly excluded by King
John his uncle, by cause he was a forainer borne. If he had said, that he was
excluded, by reason the uncle ought to be preferred before the Nephewe, though
it should have been a false allegation, and plain against the rules of the
laws of this Realm: (as may well appear among other things by King Richard
the second, who succeeded his gra^dfather king Edward the third, which Richard
had diverse worthy and noble uncles, who neither for lack of knowledge could
be ignorant of the right, Diversity of opinions touching the uncle and nephue
whether of them ought to be preferred in the royal government.
neither for lack of friends, courage and power, be enforced to forbear to
challenge their title and interest) yet should he have had some countenance of
reason and probability, because many arguments and the authority of many
learned and notable Ciuilians do concur for the uncles right, before the
Nephewe.

But to make the place of the nativity of an inheritour to a kingdom, a
sufficient bar against the right of his blood, it seems to have but a weak
and slender hold and ground. And in our case it is a most unsure and false
ground, seeing it is most true, that King Richard the first (as we have said)
declared the said Arthur, borne in Britanie, and not son of a King, but his
brother Geffreys son Duke of Britanie, heir apparent, his uncle John yet
living. And for such a one is he taken in all our stories. And for such a one
did all the world take him, after the said King Richard his death, neither was
King John taken for other, then for an usurper by excluding him, and afterward
for a murderer for imprisoning him, and privily making him away. The possions
of the Croune of Englad that were beyondthe seas, sealed into the French
kings hands for the murder of Arthur.
For the which fact the French King seized upon all the goodly Countries in
France belonging to the King of England, as forfeited to him being the chief
Lord. By this outrageous deed of King John, we lost Normandy withal, and
our possibility to the inheritance of all Britanie, the right and Title to the
said Britanie being dew to the said Arthur and his heirs by the right of his
mother Constance. And though the said king John by the practice and ambition of
Queen Elenour his mother, and by the special procurement of Huberte then
Archbishop of Caunterburie, and of some other factious persons in England,
prevented the said Arthur his nephew (as it was easy for him to do) having
gotten into his hands al his brother Richardes treasure, by sides many other
rentes then in England: and the said Arthur being an infant, and remaining
beyond the sea in the custody of the said Constance: yet of this fact, being
against al Justice, as well the said Archbishop, as also many of the other did
after most earnestly repent, considering the cruel and the unjust putting to
death of the said Arthur procured, and (after some Authors) committed by the
said John himself. Polid. 15. flor histor. An. 120^.
Which most foul and shamful act the said John neded not to have committed, if
by foraine birth the said Arthur had be^ barred to inherit the Croune of
England. And much less to have imprisoned that most innocent Lady Elenor,
sister to the said Arthur, in Bristow Castle, where she miserably ended her
life: if that gay Maxim would have served, to have excluded these two
children, because they were strangers, borne in the parts beyond the seas. Yea,
it appears in other doings also of the said time, and by the story of the
said John, that the birth out of the legea^ce of England, by father and mother
foram, was not taken for a sufficient repulse and reiectio^ to the right and
title of the Croune. For the Barons of England, being then at dissension with
the said King John, and renou^cing their allegiance to him, received Lewis the
eldest son of Philip the French king, to be their King, in the right of
Blanch his wife, which was a stranger borne, albe it the lawful Niece of the
said Richard, and daughter to Alphonse king of Ca^til, begotten on the body of
Elenour his wife, one of the daughters of king Henry the second, and sister to
the said king Richard and king John. Which story I allege only to this
purpose, Lewis the French Kings son claimed the Croune of this Realm in the
Title of his wise Pro hereditate uxoris meae, scilicet neptis Regis loa^.
usque ad mortem ^^ necessitas exigeret, decertabo. Flor histo. Anno 1216.
thereby to gather the opinion of the time, that foraine birth was then thought
no bar in the Title of the Croune. For otherwise, how could Lewis of France
pretend title to the Croune in the right of the said Bblach his wife borne in
Spain?

These examples are sufficient, I suppose, to satisfy and content any man
(that is not obstinatly wedded to his own fond fantasies and froward frivolous
imaginatio^s, or otherwise worse depraved) for a good sure and substantial
interpretation of the common law. And it were not altogether from the purpose,
here to consider and weigh, with what and how grievous plagues this Realm has
been often afflicted and scourged, by reason of wrongful and usurped titles.
Haroldus, muneribu^ and genere fretus, regni diadema innasit. H. Hunte hist.
Angli lib. 5 Cut regnu^ iure hereditario debebatur Palredus Rhie ual in histo.
R. Angliae ad H. 2. Cui de iure debebatur regnum An glorum Io. Land. in Chron.
Angliae. Eadem uerba sunt in Math West mon. in flor. hist. a. 1066 What
calamities sell to this Realm by the usurping of King Harolde, King Stephen,
and John.
I will not revive by odious rehearsal the greatenes and number of the same
plagues, as well otherwise, as especially by the contention of the noble houses
and families of York and Lancaster: seeing it is so fortunately, and almost
within man's remembrance extinct and buried.

I will now put the gentle Reader in remembrance of those only, with whose
usurping Titles we are now presently in hand. And to begin with the most
ancient: what became, I pray you, of Harold, that by briberie and help of his
kindred, usurped the Croune against the foresaid young Eadgar, who (as I have
said, and as the old momuments of our Historiographers do plainly testify) was
the true and lawful Heir? Could he, think you enjoy his ambitious and naughty
usurping one whole entier year? No surely. ere the first year of his usurped
reign turned about, he was spoiled and turned out both of Croune, and his life
withal. Yea his usurpation occasioned the conquest of the whole realm by
William Duke of Norma^die bastard son to Robert the sixth Duke of the same.
And may we think al safe and sound now from like danger, if we should tread
the said wrong steps with Harolde, Rex Eduar dus misit etc. ut uel ipse
Eduar. uel filius e ius sibi succederent etc. Rich. Cicest. uid. Will. Malmest.
de reg. Angl. E. 2. c. 45. lib. 3. c. 5.
forsaking the right and high way of law and justice?

What shall I now speak of the cruel civil wars between King Stephen and King
Henry the second, which wars rose, by reason of the said Henry was unjustly
kept from the Croune dew to his mother Maude, and to him afterward. The
pitiful reign of the said John who does not lament, with the lamentable loss
of Normandy, Aquitaine, and the possibility of the Dukedom of Britanie, and
with the loss of our other goodly possessions in France, whereof the Croune of
England was robbed and spoiled by the unlawful usurping of him against his
nephew Arthur. Well let us leave these greuouse and loathsome remembrances, and
let us yet seek, if we may find any later interpretation, either of the said
statute, or rather of the common law for our purpose. And lo, the great goodness
and providence of God, who has (if the foresaid examples would not serve)
provided a later, but so good, so sure, so apt and mete interpretation for our
cause, as any reasonable heart may desire. The interpretation directly touches
our case, which I mean by the marriage of the Lady Margaret eldest daughter to
King Henry the vij. unto James the fourth King of Scotland, and by the opinion
of the said most prudent Prince in bestowing his said daughter into Scotland: a
ma ter sufficient enough, to overthrow al those cauilling inue^tio^s of the
adversary. For what time King James the fourth sent his ambassador to king
Henry the seventh to obtain his good will, to espouse the said Lady Margaret,
Polid. 26.
there were of his Counsel not ignorant of the laws and Customs of the
Realm, King. H. 7 with his Counsel is a good interpretor of our present
cause.
that did not well like upon the said Marriage, saying, it might so fall out, that
the right and Title of the Croune might be deuolued to the Lady Margaret and
her children, and the Realm thereby might be subject to Scotland. To the which
the prudent and wise King answered, that in case any such deuolution should
happen, it would be nothing prejudicial to England. For England, as the chief,
and principal, and worthiest part of the I Will, should draw Scotland to it, as
it did Normandy from the time of the Conqueste. Which answer was wonderfully
well liked of all the Counsel. And so consequ^tly the marriage took effect, as
appears by Polydor the Historiographer of this Realm, and such a one, as wrote
the Acts of the time by the instruction of the King him self.

I say then, the worthy wise Solomon foreseeing, that such deuolution might
happen, was an interpretour with his prudente and sage Counsel for our cause.
For else, they neaded not to reason of any such subjection to Scotland, if the
children of the Lady Margaret might not lawfully inherit the Croune of
England. For, as to her husband we could not be subject, having him self no
right by this marriage to the Title of the Croune of this Realm. Whereupon I
may well infer, that the said new Maxim of these men (whereby they would
rule and over rule the succession of Princes) was not known to the said wise
King, neither to any of his Counsel: Or if it were, yet was it taken not to
reach to his blood royal borne in Scotland. And so on every side the Title
of Queen Marie is assured. So that now by this that we have said, it may easily
be seen, by what light and slender consideration the Adversary has gone about
to strain the words Infantes or children to the first degree only. Of the
like weight is his other consideration, imagini^g and surmising, this statute
to be made, because the King had so many occasions to be so often over the sea
with his spouse the Queen. As though diverse Kings before him used not often to
pass over the seas. As though this were a personal statute made of special
purpose, and not to be taken as a declaration of the common law. Which to say,
is most directly repugnant and contrary to the letter of the said statute. Or
as though his children also did not very often repair to outward Countries:
The marriages of King E. 3. sons.
as John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, that married Peter's the King of Castiles
eldest daughter, by whose right he claimed the Croune of Castile: as his
brother Edmu^d Earl of Cambridge, that married the youngest daughter: as Lionell
Duke of Claraunce, that married at Milaine Viola^t daughter and heir to
Galeatius Duke of Milan: But especially Prince Edward, which most
victoriously took in battle John the French King, and brought him into
England his prisoner, to the great triumph and rejoicing of the Realm, whose
eldest son Edward that died in short time after, was borne beyond the seas in
Gascome, and his other son Richard, that succeeded his grandfather, was borne
at Bordeaux, as these noble King Edwardes sons married with forainers: so did
they give out their daughters in marriage to foraine Princes, as the Duke of
Lancaster, his daughter Philippe to the king of Portingale, and his daughter
Catherin to the King of Spain, and his Niece Johan, daughter to his son
Earl of Somerset, was joined in marriage to the King of Scotts: Johan,
daughter to his brother Thomas of Wodstocke Duke of Gloucester was Queen of
Spain, and his other daughter Marie, Duchess of Britannie.

Now by this man's interpretation, none of the issue of al these noble Women
could have enjoyed the Croune of England, when it had fallen to them (though
they had been of the nearest roial blood) after the death of their Ancestors.
Which surely had been against the ancient presidentes and examples that we
have declared, and against the common Law (the which must not be thought by
this Statute any thing taken away, but only declared) and against al good
reason also. For as we would have thought this Realm greatly injured, if it
had been defrauded of Spain or any of the foresaid cou^treies, being deuolued
to the same by the foresaid Marriages, as we think our self at this day
injured, for the withholding of France: so the issue of the foresaid noble
women might and would have thought them hardly and injuriously handled, if any
such case had happened. Neither such frivolous interpretation and gloses, as
this man now frames, and makes upon the statute, would then have served,
nor now will serve.

But of all other his frivolous and folish ghessing upon the clause of the
statute for Infantes de Roy, A fond imagination of the Adversary of the
statute of 25. E. 3.
there is one most fond of al. For he would make us believe, such is the man's
skill, that this statute touching Infantes de Roy was made for the great doubt
more in them, then in other persons, touching their inheritance to their
Ancestors. For being then a Maxim (says he) in the law, that none could
inherit to his Ancestors being not of father and mother under the obedience
of the King: seeing the King him self could not be under obedience: it plainly
seemed, that the Kings children were of far worse condition, then others,
and quite excluded. And therefore he says, that this statute was not to give
them any other privilege, but to make them equal with other. And that
therefore this statute, touching the Kings children, is rather in the
superficial part of the word, then in effect.

Now among other things he says (as we have showed before) that this word
Infantes de Roy in this statute mentioned, must be taken for the children of
the first degree, which he seems to prove by a note taken out of M. There
was no doubt made of the Kings children borne beyond the seas.
Rastal. But to this we answer, that this man swetely dreamed, when he imagined
this fond and fantastical exposition: And that he showed him self a very
infant in law and reason. For this was no Maxim, or at lest not so certain,
before the making of this statute, which gives no new right to the Kings
children, nor answers any doubt touching them, and their inheritance: but
says, that the law of the Croune of England is, and always has been, which
law, says the King, say the Lords, say the Commons, we allow and affirm
for ever, that the Kings children shall be hable to inherit the Lands of their
Auncesters, where^oeuer they be borne.

All the doubt was for other persons, as appears evidently by the tenor of
the statute, whether by the common law they being borne out of the allegiance,
were heritable to their Ancestors. And it appears, that the Adversary is
driven to the hard wall, when he is feign to catch hold upon a selie poor
marginal note of M. Rastal, of the Kings children, and not of the Kings
childrens children. Which yet nothing at al serves his purpose touching this
statute. But he, or the Printer, or who so ever he be, as he draws out of the
text many other notes of the matter therein comprised: so upon these French
words, Les enfants de Roy, he notes in the Marge^t, The Kings children: but
how far that word reaches, he says neither more, nor less.

Neither it is any thing prejudicial to the said Queens right or Title,
whether the said words Infants, ought to be taken strictly for the first
degree, or farther enlarged. For if this statute touches only the succession
of the Kings children to their Ancestors for other inheritance, and not for
the Cround, as most men take it, and as it may be (as we have said) very well
taken and allowed: then does this supposed Maxim of forain borne, that seems
to be gathered out of this statute, nothing anoy or hinder the Queen of
Scotlandes Title to the Croune, as not thereto apperteining. On the other side,
if by the inheritance of the kings children, the Croune also is meant: yet
neither may we enforce the rule of foraine borne upon the kings children, which
are by the^presse words of the statute excepted, neither enforce the word
In^^^s to the first degree only, for such reasons, presidents, and examples,
and other prouffes largely by us before set forth to the contrary: seeing that
the right of the Croune falling upon them, they may well be called the kings
Children, or at the lest the children of the Croune. There is also one other
cause, why though this statute reach to the Croune, This statute touches not
the Q. of Scotland, as one not borne beyond the seas.
and may, and ought to be expounded of the same: the said Queen is out of the
reach and compass of the said statute. For the said statute can not be
understood of any persons borne in Scotland or Wales, but only of persons
borne beyond the sea, out of the allegiance of the King of England: that is to
wrtte, France, Flandres, and such like. For England, Scotland and Wales be al
within one Territory, and not divided by any sea. And al old Records of the
law, concerning service to be done in those two Countries, have these words
Infra quatuor Maria, within the four seas, which must needs be understand, in
Scotland and Wales, as well as in England because they be al within one continent
compassed with four seas. And likewise be many ancient statutes of this Realm
writre^ in the Norma^ French, which have these words deins les quatre mers,
that is, within the four seas. Now concerning the statute the title of the
same is, of those that are born beyond the sea, the doubt moved in the corpse of
the said statut, is also of children born beyond the sea out of the allegiance
with diverse other branches of the statute te^ding that way. Vide statuta
Walliae in magna Charta. Walesvvas under the allegiance of England before it
was united to the Croune.
Whereby it seems, that no part of the statute touches these that are born in
Wales or Scot, la^d. And albe it at this time, and before in tho reign of
Edward the first, Wales was fully reduced, annexed and united to the prop^^
Dothinion of England: yet was it before subrected to the Croune and King of
England as to the Lord and S^igniour, as well as Scotland Wherefore if this
statute had (...) made before the time of the said Edward the (...), it
seems, that it could not have been stretched, to Wales, no more then it can
now to Scotland. I do not therefore a little marvel, that ever this man for
pure shame could find in his heart, so childishly to wrangle upon this word
Infantes, and so openly to detorte, deprave, and corrupt the common law, and
the Acts of Parliament.

And thus may you see, gentle Reader, that nothing can be gathered, either out
of the said supposed general rule or Maxim, or of any other rule or Principle
of the law, that by any good and reasonable construction can seem to impugn
the title of the said Lady Marie now Queen of Scotland, of, and to the Croune
of this Realm of England, as is aforesaid.

We are therefore now last of al to consider, whether there be any statute or
Act of Parliament that does seem, either to take away, or preiud^ce the title
of the said Lady Marie. And because touching the foresaid mentioned statute of
the 25. year of King Edward the third, being only a declaration of the common
law, we have already sufficiently answered: we will pass it over, and consider
upon the statute of 28. and 36. of King Henry the eight, being the only
shoteanker of all the Adversaries, whether there be any matter therein
contained, or depending upon the same, that can by any means destroy or hurt
the title of the said Lady Marie Queen of Scotland to the succession of the
Croune of England.

It does appear by the said statute of 28. The statutes of King H. 8. touching
the succession of the Croune.
of King Henry the eight, that there was authority given him by the same, to
declare, limite, appoint, and assign the succession of the Croune by his
Letters Patentes, or by his last Will signed with his own hand. It appears
also by the foresaid statute made 35. of the said King, that it was by the same
enacted, that the Croune of this Realm should go and be to the said King, and
to the heirs of his body lawfully begotten, that is to say, unto his Highness
first son of his body between him and the Lady Jane then his wife, begotten,
and for default of such issue, then unto the Lady Marie his daughter, and to
the heirs of her body lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue, then
unto the Lady Elizabeth his daughter, and to the heirs of her body laufully
begotten, and for default of such issue, unto such person or persons in
remainder or reuersion, as should please the said King Henry the eight, and
according to such estate, and after such manner, order and condition, as should
be expressed, declared, named and limited in his Letters Patentes, or by his
last Will in writing, signed with his own hand.

By virtue of which said Act of Parliament the Adversaries do allege, that
the said late King Henry the eight afterward by his last Will in writing signed
with his own hand, did ordeine and appoint, that if it happen, the said Prince
Edward, Lady Marie, and Lady Elizabeth to dye without issue of their bodies
lawfully begotten: then the Croune of this Realm of England, should go and
remain unto the heirs of the body of the Lady Francis his Niece, and
th'eldest daughter of the F^e^ch Queen. And for the defaulte of such issue, to
the heirs of the body of the Lady Elenour his Niece, second daughter to the
French Queen, lawfully begotten. And if it happened, the said Lady Elenor to
dye without issue of her body lawfully begotten, to remain and come to the
next rightful heirs. Whereupon the Adversaries do infer, that the
succession of the Croune ought to go to the children of the said Lady Francis,
and to their heirs, according to the said supposed Will of our late Sovereign
Lord King Henry the eight: and not unto the Lady Marie Queen of Scotland
that now is.

To this it is, An ansvves to the fore said statute
on the befalf of the said Lady Marie Queen of Scotland among other things
answered, that King Henry the eight never signed the prete^sed Will with his own
hand: and that therefore the said Will can not be any whit prejudicial to the
said Queen. Against which answer for the defense and upholding of the said
Will, it is replied by the Adversaries, The effect of the Adversaries arguments
for the exclusion of the Queen of Scotland by a pretensed vvil of King H. 8
first that there were diverse copies of his Will found signed with his own
hand, or at the leastwise enterlined, and some for the most part written with
his own hand: out of the which it is likely, that the original Will, commonly
called King Henry the eightes Will, was taken and fayer drawn out. Then, that
there be great and vehement presumptions, that for the fatherly love that he
bare to the common wealth, and for the avoiding of the uncertainty of the
succession, he welliked upon and accepted the authority given him by
Parliament, and signed with his own hand the said original Will, which had the
said limitation and assignation of the Croune.

And these presumptions are the more enforced, for that he had no cause, why he
should bear any affection either to the said Queen of Scotland, or to the
Lady Leneux and having withal no cause to be greaued or offended with his
sisters the French Queens children, but to put the matter quite out of al
ambiguitie and doubt, it appears (they say) that there were eleven witnesses
purposely called by the king, who were present at the signing of the said Will,
and subscribed their names to the same. Yea the chief Lords of the Counsel
were made and appointed executours of the said Will, and they and other had
great Legacies given them in the said Will which were paid, and other things
comprised in the Will, accomplished accordingly.

There passed also purchases, and Letters Patentes between King Edward, and
the executors of the said Will, and others for the execution and performance of
the same. Finally the said Testament was recorded in the Chancerie. Wherefore
they affirm, tha^ there ought no manner of doubt move any man to the
contrary, and that either we must grant this Will to be signed with his hand,
or that he made no Will at al: both must be granted, or both denied. If any will
deny it, in case he be one of the witnesses, he shall impugn his own
testimony: if he be one of the executours, he shall overthrow the foundation of
al his doings, in procuring the said Will to be enrolled, and set forth under
the great Seal. And so by their dubblenes they shall make them selves no mete
witnesses.

Now a man can not lightly imagine, how any other, bysides these two kind of
witnesses (for some of them, and of the executors, were such, as were
continually waiting upon the Kings person) may impugn this Will, and prove,
that the king did not sign the same. But if any such impugn the Will, it would
be considered, how many they are, and what they are: and it will be very hard to
prove negatiuam facti. But it is euidente, say they, that there was never any
such lawful proof against the said Will producted. For if it had been, it would
have been published in the Starrechamber, preached at Poules Cross, declared by
Act of Parliament, proclaimed in every quarter of the Realm. Yea, admitting,
say they, that it were proved, that the said pretensed Will lacked the Kings
hand: yet nevertheless (say they) the very copies we have spoken of, being
written and signed, or at least interlined with his own hand, may be said a
sufficient signing with his own hand.

For seeing the scope and final purpose of the statute was, to have the
succession provided for and ascerteined, which is sufficiently done in the
said Will: and seeing his own hand was required but only for eschewing evil
and sinister dealing, whereof there is no suspicion in this Will to be
gathered: what matter in the world, or what difference is there, when the King
fulfilled and accomplisihed this gratiouse Act, that was looked for at his
hands, whether he signed the Will with his own hand, or no?

If it be objected, that the King was obliged and bound to a certain precise
order and form, which he could in no wise shift, but that the Act without it
must perish, and be of no valewe: then, say they, we undo whole Parlamentes,
as well in Queen Mary's time, as in King Henry the eightes time. In Queen
Mary's time, because she omitted the Style appointed by Parlamente, An. H.
8.35. An. H. 8.33. and 21.
Anno (...) octaui^rice simo quinto: In King Henry's time, by reason there was
a statute, that the Kings royal assent may be given to an Act of Parlamente
by his Letters Patentes signed with his hand, though he be not there
personally. And yet did the said King supply full often his confente by the
stamp only. This yet notwithstanding, the said Parlamentes for the omission of
these forms so exactely and precisely appointed, are not destroyed and
disannulled.

After this sort in effect have the Adversaries replied for the defense of
the said pretensed Will. An ansvvet by the way of reioinde^ to the same.
To this we will make our reioynder, and say: First, that our principal
matter is, not to join an islewe, whether the said King made and ordained
any sufficient Will, or no. We leave that to an other time. But, whether he
made any Testament, in such order and form, as the statute requires.
Wherefore if it be defective in the said form, as we affirm it to be, were it
otherwise never so good and perfect, though it were exemplified by the great
Seal, and recorded in Chancerie, and taken commonly for his W^ll, and so
accomplished: it is nothing to the principal question. It rests then for us
to consider the weight of the Adversaries presumptions whereby they would
enforce a probability that the Testament had the foresaid requisite form.
Yet first, it is to be considered, what presumptions, and of what force and
number, do occur to avoid and frustrate the Adversaries presumptions, and
all other like.

We say then, Diverse presumptions and reasons against this supposed vvil.
there occur many likelyhoddes, many presumptions, many great and weighty
reasons, to make us to think, that as the king never had good and just cause,
to mind and enterprise such an Act, as is pretended: so likewise he did
enterprise no such Act in deed. I deny not, but that the^ was such authority
given him, neither I de^y, but that he might also in some honorable sort have
practiced the same, to the honor and wealth of the Realm, and to the good
co^tentation of the same Realm. But that he had either cause, or did exercise
the said authority in such strange and dishonorable sort, as is pretended: I
plainly deny. For being at the time of this pretensed Will furnished and
adorned with issue, the late king Edward, and the Ladies Marie, and Elizabeth,
their state and succession being also lately by Act of Parliament established:
what need or likelyhod was there, for the king then to practice such new
devises, as never did, I suppose, any king in this Realm before, and few in
any other byside? And where they were practiced, commonly had unfortunate and
lamentable success.

What likelyhode was there, for him to practice such devises, especially in his
later days (when wisdom, the love of God, and his Realm should have been
most ripe in him) that were likely to stir up a greater fire of greeuouse
contention and woeful destruction in England, then ever did the deadly faction
of the red Rose and the white; lately by the incorporation and union of the
house of York and Lancaster, in the person of his father through the marriage
of Lady Elizabeth eldest daughter of king Edward the fourth, most happily
extinguished and buried? And though it might be thought or said, that there
would be no such eause of fear, by reason the matter passed by Parliament: yet
could not he be ignorant, that neither Parlamentes made for Henry the fourth,
or continuance of two Descentes (which took no place in giving any Title
touching the Croune) in King Henry the sixth: nor Parlamentes made for King
R^chard the third, nor Parlaments of attainder made against his father, could
either prejudice his fathers right, or releaue other against such, as pretended
just right and title.

And as he could not be ignorant thereof: so it is not to be thought, that he
would abuse the great confidence put upon him by the Parliament, and disherite
without any apparent cause the next royal blood, and think all things sure by
the color of Parliament. The little force whereof against the right inheritour,
he had (to his fathers and his own so ample benefit) so lately and so largely
seen and felt. And yet if he minded at any time, to prejudice the said Lady
Marie Queend of Scotland, of al times he would not have done it then, when al
his care was, by all possible means to contriue and compass a marriage, between
his son Edward, and the said Lady and Queen. Surely he was to wise of him
self, and was furnished with to wise Cou^sailours, to take such an homely way,
to procure and purchase the said marriage by.

And least of all can we say he attempted that dishonorable disherision for any
special inclination or favor he bare to the French Queen his sisters
children. For there have been of his near and privy Counfaile, that have
reported, that the King never had any great liking of the marriage of his sister
with the Duke of Suffolk, who married her first privily in France, and
afterward openly in England. And as it is said, had his pardon for the said
privy marriage in writing. How so ever this matter goes, certain it is, that
if this pretensed Will be true, he transferreed and tra^sposed the reuersion of
the Croune, not only from the Queen of Scotland, from my Lady Leneux and
their issue, but even from my Lady Francis, and my Lady Elenour also,
daughters to the French Queen, which is a ching in a manner incredible, and
therefore nothing likely.

I must now, gentle Reader, put thee in remembrance of two other most pregna^t
and notable conjectures and presumptions. For among al other inco^ueniences,
and absurdities, that do, and may acco^panie this rash and unadvised act by
this prete^sed Will inconsiderately maintained: it is principally to be noted,
that this Act gives appare^t and just occasion of perpetual disherison of the
Style and Title of France incorporated and united to the Croune of this Realm.
The supposed vvil is prejudicial to the Croune of England, for the claim of
the croune of France.
For whereby do or have the Frenchmen hitherto excluded the Kings of this
Realm, claiming the Croune of France by the Title of Edward the third, falling
upon him by the right of his mother, other then by a politic and civil law of
their own, that barreth the female from the right of the Croune? And what does
this prete^sed Act of king Henry, but justify and strengthen their quarrel,
and ouerthoweth the foundation and bulworke, whereby we mainteme our foresaid
Title and claim? If we may by our municipal law exclude the said Queen of
Scotland, being called to the Croune by the Title of general heritage: then is
their municipal law likewise good and effectual, and consequently we (...) and
have made all this while an unjust and wrongful claim to the Croune of France.

But now to go somewhat farther in the matter, or rather to come nearer home,
and to the quick of the matter, we say: as there was some apparent and good
cause, why the king should the twenty and eight year of his reign think
upon some limitation and appointement of the Croune (king Edward as yet
unborn) so after he was borne, and that the Title and interest of the
reuersion of the Croune after him was the thirty and fifte year by Parliament
confirmed to the late Queen Marie and her sister Elizabeth: it is not to be
thought, that he would afterward ieoparde so great a matter by a Testament and
Will, which may easily be altered and counterfeyted. And least of al make such
assignation of the Croune, as is now pretended.

For being a Prince of such wisdom and experience, he could not be ignorant,
that this was the next and rediest way, to put the state at least of both his
daughters to great peril and utter disherison. This supposed vvil gives
occasion of ambitious aspiring.
For the Kings example and boldness in interrupting and cutting away so many
branches of the nearest side and line, might sone breed in aspiring and
ambitious hearts a bold and wicked attempt, the way being so far brought in
and prepared to their hands by the King him self, and their natures so ready
and prone to follow evil presidents, and to clime high by some colorable
means or other, to spoil and deprive the said daughters of their right of the
Croune, that should descend and fall upon them, and to convey the same to the
heirs of the said Lady Francis. And did not, I pray you, this drift and
devise fall out even so, tending to the utter exclusio^ of the late Queen
Marie, and her Sister Elizabeth: if God had not of his mercy, most graciously
and wonderfully repressed and overthrown the same?

These reasons then and presumptions may seem well able and sufficient, to bear
down, to break down and overthrow the weak and slender presumptions of
th'Aduersaries, grounded upon uncertain and mere surmises, ghesses and
conjectures: as among other that the King was offended with the Queen of
Scotland, and with the Lady Leneux. Which is not true. And as for the Lady
Leneux, it has no manner of probability: as it has not in deed in the said
Queen. And if it had, yet it is as probable and much more probable, that the
King would have especially at that time (for such cause, as we have declared)
suppressed the same displeasure. Granting now, that there were some such
displeasure: was it honorable, either for the King, or the Realm, or was it,
think ye, ever thought by the Parliament, that the King should disherite them
for every light displeasure? And if (as the Adversaries confess) the king had
no cause to be offended with the French Queen's children: why did he disherite
the Lady Francis, and the Lady Elenor also?

Their other presumption, which they ground upon the avoiding of the
uncertainty of the succession, by reason of his Will, is of small force, and
rather turns against them. For it is so far of, that by this means the
succession is made more certain and sure: that contrariwise it is subject to
more uncertainty, and to less suertie, then before. Succession to the Croune
more vncerte^ by the supposed vvil, then before.
For whereas before the right and claim to the Croune hong upon an ordinary
and certain course of the common law, upon the certain and assured right of
the royal and unspotted blood, yea upon the very law of nature (whereby many
inconveniences, many troubles, dangers and seditions are in all Countries
politikely avoided: so now depending upon the statute only, it is as easy by
an other statute to be intringed and overthrown. And depending upon a
Testament, is subject to many corruptions, sinister dealinges, cauillations,
yea and just overthrows, by the dishabilitie of the Testatours witnesses or
the Legatorie himself, or for lack of dew order to be observed, or by the
death of the Witnesses unexamined, and for many other like considerations. The
Monumentes of al antiquity, Much forgene and counterfeyting of Testamets
the memory of al ages, and of our own age, and daily experience can tell and
show us many lamentable examples of many a good and lawful Testament by undue
and crafty means, by false and suborned witnesses, by the covetous bearing
and main tenance of such as be in authority, quite undone and overthrown.
Wherefore Valerius Maxtmus cries out against M. Crassus, Valerius Maximus
dict. et fact. lib. 9. c. 4.
and Q. Hortensiu: Lumina ^uriae, ornamenta Fori, quod scelus vindicare
debebant, inhonesti lucri captura inuitati, authoritatibus suis texerunt. This
presumption then of the Adversaries rather makes for us, and ministers to us
good occasion, to think, that the King would not hasard the weight and
importance of such a matter, to rest upon the validity or mualiditie of a
bare Testament only.

By this that we have said we may probably gather, that the King had no cause
to adventure so great an interprise by a bare Will and se^tament. Ye shall now
hear also, why we think he did never attempt or enterprise any such thing. It
is well known, the King was not wont lightly to ouerslippe the occasion of any
great commodity presently offered. And yet this notwithstanding, having given
to him by Act of Parliament the ordering and disposition of al Chantries and
Colleges, he did never or very little practice and execute this authority. And
shall we think, unless full and sufficient prouse necessarily enforce
creditte, that the King, to his no present commodity and advantage, but yet to
his great dishonor, and to the great obloquie of his subjects and other
Countries, to the notable disherison of so many the next royal blood, did use
any such authority, as is surmised?

Again, if he had made any such assignation: who doubts, but that as he
conditioned in the said pretensed Will with his noble daughters, to marie with
his Counsels advise, In this supposed vvil is no condition for the marriage of
the heirs of the L. Francis, as is for the, Kings own daughters.
either else not to enjoy the benefitte of the succession: he would have tied
the said Lady Francis and Lady Elenours heirs to the same condition.

Farthermore, I am driven to think, that there passed no such limitatio^ by the
said king Henry's will, by reason there is not, nor was these many years any
original copy thereof, nor any authe^tical Record in the Cha^cerie, or else where
to be showed in all England, as the Adversaries themselves confess, and in the
copies that be spread abroad, the witnesses pretended to be present at the
signing of the said Will, be such for the meanness of their state on the one
side, and for the greatness and weight of the cause on the other side, as seem
not the most sufficient for such a case.

The importance of the cause, being no less then the disherision of so many
heirs of the Croune (as well from the one sister, as from the other) required
and craved some one or other of the privy Counsel, or some one honorable and
notable person to have been present at the said signing, or that some
notificatio^ should have been made afterward to such persons by the King him
self, or at least before some Notarie and authe^tical person for the better
strengthening of the said Will.

Here is now farther to be considered, that seeing the interest to the Croune is
become a plain testamentarie matter and claim, and depends upon a last Will:
when, and before what Ordinary this Will was exhibited, al lowed and proved?
Where, and of whom took the Executours their oath for the true performance of
the Will? No order taken for the probate of the supposed vvil.
Who committed to the^ th'administratio^ of the Kings goods and chattles? When,
and to whom have they brought in the Inue^tory of the same? Who examined the
witnesses upon their oath, for the tenor and truth of the said Testament?
Namely upon the signement of the Kings hand, wherein only consists the
weight of no less, then of the Croune it self: where, or in what spiritual or
temporal Court may one find their depositions? But it were a very hard thing,
to find that, that (as far as men can learn) never was.

And yet if the matter were so plain, so good and so sound, as these men bear
us in hand, if the original Testament had been such, as might have bidde^ the
touchstone, the trial the light and the sight of the world: why did not they,
that enjoyed most commodity thereby (and, for the sway and authorite they bare,
might and ought best to have done it) take convenient and sure order, that
the original might hane ben duly and safely preserved, or at the least the
ordinary Probate, which is in every poor man's Testament diligently observed,
might have been procured or seen, one or other aute^tical Instrument thereof
reserved? The Adversaries themselves see well enough, yea and are feign to
confess these defectes. But to help this mischief, they would fame have the
Enrolme^t in the Chancerie to be taken for a sufficient Probate, The
enrollement in the chance rye is not a probate.
by cause (as they say) both the spiritual and temporal authority did concur
in the Kings person.

Yet do they know well enough, that this plaster will not cure the sore, and
that this is but a poor help and a shift. For neither the Letters Patents,
nor th'Enrolme^t may in any wise be counted a sufficient Probate. The Cha^cerie
is not the Court or ordinary place for the probate of Wills, nor the Rolls
for recording the same. Both must be done in the Spiritual Courts, where
th'Executours also must be impleaded, and give their account, where the
weakness or strength of the Will must be tried, the witnesses examined, finally
the probate, and al other things thereto requisite, dispatched. Or if it may
be done by any other person: yet must his authority be showed. The probate and
al things must be done accordingly. And among other things the usual clause of
Saluo iure cuiuscunque, must not be omitted. Which things, I am assured, the
recording in the Cha^cerie cannot import.

But this caution and prouiso of Saluo iure cuiuscunque (which is most
comfortable to al law and reason) did little serve some men's turn. And
therefore there was one other caution and prouiso: that though the poorest man's
Testament in all England has this prouiso at the probate of the same: yet for
this Testament, the weightiest, I trow, that ever was made in England no such
probate or clause can be found, either in the one, or the other Court. Yet we
needs must, all this notwithstanding, be borne in hand, and borne down, that
there was a Testament and Will, formably framed, according to the purpose and
effect of the statute, yet must the right of the imperial Croune of England be
co^ueied and carried away with the color and shadow only of a Will. I say, the
shadow only, by reason of another conjecture and presumption, which I shall tell
you of. Which is so lively and effectual, that I verily suppose, it will be
very hard for any man, by any good and probable reason, to answer and avoid
the same. And is so important and vehement, that this only might seem, utterly
to destroy all the Adversaries coniectural prouffes, concerning the maintenance
of this supposed Will.

We say therefore and affirm, that in case there had been any good and sure
help and handfast, to take and hold the Croune for the heirs of Lady Francis
by the said Will: that the faction, that unjustly intruded the Lady Jane, eldest
daughter to the said Lady Francis to the possession of the Croune, would never
have omitted to take, receive and embrace the occasion and benefit thereof to
them presently offered. They neither would, nor could have been driven, to so
hard and bare a shifte, as to color their usurpation against the Late Queen
Marie only, and her Sister Elizabeth, with the Letters Patents of King Edward
the sixth, and with the consent of such as they had procured. A great
presumption against the supposed vvil, for that the late pretensed Q. Jane did
not use the benefit of the same against the Q. of Scotland and others.
Which King by law had no authority (as it is notorious) to make any limitatio^
and assignation of the Croune otherwise then the common law does dispose it. It
was need for them, I say, as they procured such Letters Patentes, so to have
set forth also the said pretensed Will, if there had been then any such Will in
deed sufficiently and dewly to be proved, as is now surmised there was. The
Record of the said surmised Will was in the Cha^cerie, which they might have
used with the pretensed witnesses, and with the original prete^sed Will, and
with all other things thereto belonging to their best advantage. It can not be
thought, that either they were ignorant of it, or that they would forbear and
forgo so great a commodity offered, and such a plausible pretext of their
prete^sed vsurpatio^, bearing the contenance and authority of the Kings Will,
and of the whole Parliament, for the exclusion of the Queen of Scotland and
others of the nerer royal blood. Neither can it be said, that the Letters
Patentes were made, as it were for a stronger corroboratio^ and co^firmatio^
only of the said pretensed Will: See the proclamation made the x. of Iulie the
first year of her pretensed reign.
for that there is not so much as one word in their whole prete^sed
proclamation for the supposed right of the said Lady Jane, by the force of that
surmised Will: whereby it might any thing appear, that king Henry the eight
made any manner of limitation or assignation of the Croune to the heirs of the
Lady Francis. Whereupon it may well be gathered, that either they knew of no
such limitation to the children of the Lady Francis by the said supposed Will,
or took it to be such, as could give no good and lawful force and strength, to
aid and maintain their usurpation for the manifest forgerie of the same. And
therefore they purposely (for, ignorance can not be pretended in them) kept
back and suppressed in the said Letters Patentes this pretensed limitation
surmised to be made for the children of the said Lady Francis. Which
nevertheless the Adversaries do now with so great and vehement asseueration
blow into al men's cares. which is utterly rejected and overthrown, and it
were by nothing else but by this Proclamation for the pretensed Title of the
said Lady Jane. So that we need to travail no farther for any more proof
against the said asseueration.

But yet in ease any man do look for any other, and more persuasio^ and proof,
which as I said, need not: o the great providence of God, o his great favor
and goodness to this Realm, of the which it has been said: Regnum Angliae, est
regnum Det, Polid. lib. 8.
and that God has ever had a special care of it: o his great goodness, I say,
to this Realm even in this cafe also. For he has opened and brought to light
the very truth of the matter, which is burst out, though never so craftily
suppressed and kept under. We say then, that the King never signed the
pretensed Will with his own hand, neither do we say it by bare hearsay, or
gather it by our former conjectures and presumptions only, though very
effectual and probable, but by good and hable witnesses, that auouche and
justify of their own certain knowledge, that the Stamp only was put to the
said Will, and that even when the King him self was now dead, or dying and
past al remembrance.

The Lord Paget being one of the privy Counsel with Queen Marie, of his
own freewil and godly motion, for the honor of the Realm, The forgetie of
this (...) (...) disclose^ before the Parliament by the L. Paget.
for reverence of truth and justice, though in the fact him self culpable,
and in a manner thereto by great authority forced, did first of al men
disclose the matter, first to the said Counsel, and then before the whole
Parliament. Sir Edward Mou^tegue also the chief Justice, that was privy and
present at the said doings, did confess the same, as well before the
Counsel, as before the Parlame^t. Yea, William Clarke, ascribed among other
prete^sed witnesses, confessed the premises to be true. And that him self put
the stamp to the said Will, and afterward purchased his Charter of pardon for
the said fact.

Upon the which depositions well and advisedly weied and pondered, Queen Marie
with the advice of her Counsel, to the honor of God, and this Realm, to the
maintenance of truth and justice, and the rightful succession of the Croune,
for the eschewing of many foul mischieffes, that might upon this forgerie
ensue, caused the Record of the said forged Will remaining in the Chancerie, A
worthy deed for a Prince to cancel false Records.
to be be cancelled, defaced and abolished, as not worthy to remain among the
true and sincere Records of this noble Realm. Which her noble fact deserves
i^mortalitie of eternal praise and fame, no less, then the fact of the
Romans that abolished the name and memory of the Tarquinians, for the foul
act of Sextus Tarquinius in defiling Lucretia: Cicero. 3. offic.
No less, then the fact of the Ephesians, who made a law, that the name of
the wicked Herostratus should never be recorded in the books of any their
Historiographers: No less then the fact of the family of the Manlians at
Rome, taking a solemn oath, that none among them should ever be called
Capitolinus, Sueton. de uiris illustrib.
by cause M. Manlius Capitolinus had sought to oppress his Country with
tyra^nie. And to come nerer home, no less then our forefathers deserved,
which quite rased out of the years and times the memory and name of the
wicked Apostates Osricus and Eanfridus, Bed. lib. 3. histor. Ecclesiast. c. 1.
numbering their time under the reign of the good king Oswald.

The Adversaries therefore are much to be blamed, going about to stain and
blotte the memory of the said Queen and Magistrates, as though they had done
this thing disorderly, and as though there had been some special commodity
therein to them: which is apparently false. For as the said abolition was
nothing beneficial to other Magistrates: so if it had been a true and an
undoubted Will, the said Queen would never have caused it to be cancelled, as
well for her honor and conscience sake, as for private respect, seeing her own
royal estate was by the same set forth and confirmed. Yet would they feign
blemish and disgrace the testimony of the said Lord Paget, and S. Edward
Mou^tigue. They set against them eleven witnesses, thinking to match and
ouermatche them with the number.

But here it must be remembered, that though they be eleue^, yet they are to
sle^der and weak for the weight and importance of the matter. It is again to
be remembered, that often times the law does as well weigh the credit, as number
the persons of the witnesses. L. tefliu^. ff. de testibus L. Ob carnem ibid.
Alias (says Calistratus) numerus, alias dignitas and authoritas confirmat
rei, de qua agitur, fidem. According to this, says also Arcadius: Confirmabit
ludex mo^um animi sui ex argumentis and testimoniis, quae rei aptiora, and vero
proximiora esse compererit. Non enim ad multitudinem respicere oportet, sed ad
sinceram testimoniorum fidem and testimonia, quibus potius lux veritatis
assistit.

It has not lightly been heard or seen, that men of such state and vocation
in so great and weighty a cause would incur first the displeasure of God,
then of their Prince, and of some other of the best sort, if their depositions
were untrue, and would purchase them selves dishonor, slander and infamy:
yea disclose their own shame to their own no manner of way hoped commodity,
nor to the commodity of other their friends, or discommoditie and hurt of
their enemies. This sufficiently does purge them (I will not say, No just ^a^se
to repel ^he testimony of the L. Paget and others.
of their fact and fault) from al sinister suspicion for this their deposition
and testimony, their deposition proceeding, as it plainly seems, from no
affection, corruption or partiality, but from a zeal to the truth, and to
the honor of the Realm. And though perchance, if they had been thereof
iudicially convicted and condemned, and had not by dew penance themselves
reformed, some exceptio^s might have been laid against them by any party
iudicially co^uented for his better advantage: yet as the case stands now,
there is no cause in the world, L. Fam^^ ff. ad (...) maies l. muliere ff de
accusat.
to discredit their testimony: yea and by the way of accusation also such
persons, as be otherwise dishabled, are in treason and other public matters,
touching the state, enhabled both to accuse, and testify.

As for the eleven witnesses, the best of of them Sir John Gates, we know, by
what means he is departed out of this life. One other, the said William Clarke
is so gone from them, that he gives good cause, to misdeeme and mistrust the
whole matter. How many of the residue live, I know not. To whom perchance
some thing might be said, if we once know, what them selves say. Which seeing
it does not by authentical record appear, bare names of dumme witnesses can
in no wise hinder and deface so solemn a testimony of the foresaid L. Paget
and Sir Edward Mountague. Neither is the difficulty so great, as the
Adversaries pretend, in proving Negatiuam facti. How a negative may be proved.
Which as we grant it to be true, when it stands within the limits of a
mere negative: so being restrained and referred to time and place, may be as
well proved, as the affirmative. Gloss. and Doct. c. bo na de elect
It appears now then by the premises, that the Adversaries arguments,
whereby they would weaken and discredit the testimony, either of the
witnesses, or of the executours, that have or may come in against the said
pretensed Will, are but of small force and strength. And especially their slender
exaggeration by a superficial Rhetorike enforced. Whereby they would abuse the
ignorance of the people, and make them believe, that there was no good and
substantial prouffe brought forth against the forgerie of this supposed Will,
by cause the untruth of the same was not preached at Poules Cross, and
declared in all open places and assembles through the Realm: when they know
well enough, that there was no necessity so to do. And that it was notoriously
known, by reason it was disclosed by the said Lord Paget, as well to the
Counsel, as to the higher and lower house of the Parliament. And the foresaid
forged Record in the Chancerie thereupon worthily defaced, and abolished. The
disclosing whereof seeing it came forth by such, and in such sort and order, as
we have specified: as it does nothing deface or blemish the testimony given
against the said supposed Will, How and when the later testimony is to be
accepted before the former.
whether it were of any of the witnesses, or executours: so is there no need at
al, why any other witnesses, bysides those that have already impugned the same,
should be now farther producted.

I deny not, but that if any such witness or Exeoutour had upon his oath
before a lawful Judge, deposed of his own certain notice and knoweledge, that
the said Will was signed with the Kings own hand: in case he should afterward
contrary and revoke this his solemn deposition, it ought not lightly to be
discredited for any such contradiction afterward happening. But, as I have
said, such authentical and ordinary examinations and depositions we find not,
nor yet hear of any such so passed. Now contrariwise if any of the said
witnesses or executours have or shall before a compete^t Judge, especially not
producted of any party, or against any party for any private suite commenced,
but, as I have said, moved of conscience only, and of a zeal to truth, and to
the honor of God and the Realm, freely and voluntary discover and detecte
such forgerie (although perchance it touches them selves for some thing done
or said of them to the contrary, or being called by the said co^petent Judge,
have or shall declare and testify any thing against the same) this later
testimony may be well credited by good reason and law.

Whereas they would now infer, that either this pretenfed Will was King
Henry's Will, or that he made none at al: I do not (as I have said) entende,
nor need not curiously to examine and discuss this thing as a matter not
apperteining to our principal purpose. And well it may be, that he made a Will
containing the whole tenor of this pretensed Will (saving for the limitation of
the Croune) and that these supposed witnesses were present, either when he
subscribed the same with his own hand, or when by his co^maundment the Stamp
(of which and of his own hand, the common sort of men make no difference, as
in deed in diverse other cases there is no difference, which these witnesses
might take to be as it were his own hand) was set to the Will.

This, I say, might after some sort so be. And yet this notwithstanding there
might be (as there was in deed) an other Will touching the prete^sed limitation
of the Croune by the Kings own hand counterfeyted and suborned after his
death falsely and coulorably, bearing the countenance of his own hand, and of
the pretensed witnesses names. How so ever it be, it is but to small purpose, to
go about any full and exquisite answer touching this point, seeing that
neither the original surmised Will, whereof these witnesses are supposed to be
privy, is extant, nor their depositions any where appear, nor yet that it
appears, that ever they were (as we have said) iudicially examined.

Seeing now then, that if it so falls out, that the principal Will, and that
that was by the great Seal exemplified, and in the Cha^cery recorded, had not
(at least touching the clause of limitation and assignment of the Croune) the
Kings hand to it: we need not nor will not tarry about certain scrolles and
copies of the said Will, that the Adversaries pretend to have been either writ,
or signed with his hand. A kingdom is to heavy to be so easily carried away by
such scrolles and copies. When all this fails, the Adversaries have yet one
shift left for the last cast. They urge the equity of the matter and the mind
of the Parliament. Which is, they say, accomplished and satisfied, by making
this assignation for the establishing of the succession, and providing, that
the Realm should not be left void of a Governor. And therefore we must not
subvert the statute, in cauilling for the defect of the Kings hand: forasmuch
as the Parliament might have had authorized his consent only, without any hand
writing. Which as I do not deny, so in these great affairs and so ample a
commission, in such absolute authority given to him, it was prouidently and
necessarily foresene, to bind the Act to the Kings own hand, for avoiding al
sinister and evil dealing, the which the Adversaries would have us in no case
to misdoubt or mistrust in this Will. Whereas the notoriousnes of the fact, and
the lamentable event of things do openly declare the same, and pitifully cries
out against it.

Neither will we grant to them, that the mind and purpose of the Parliament is
satisfied, for such causes, as we have and shall hereafter more largely
declare. And if it were otherwise true, yet does this only defect of the Kings
hand break and infringe the whole Act. Why the stamp cannot counteruaile the
Kings hand in this case.
For this is a statute correctorie, and derogatorie to the common course of the
Law, as cutting away the succession of the lawful and true inheritours. It is
also, as appears by the tenor of the same, a most greuouse penal Law, and
therefore we may not shift or alter the words of the law. Neither may we supply
the manner and doing of the Act prescribed, by any other Act equivalent. So
that albe it in some other thing the Stamp or the Kings certain and known
consent may counterpaise his hand: yet, as the case stands here, it will not
serve the turn, by reason there is a precise order and form prescribed and
appointed. Wherefore if by a statute of a City, Joan Andr. in adit. spe cul
tit. de requisite. consul. ad finem.
there be certain persons appointed to do a certain act, and the whole
people do the same act in the presence of the the said persons: the act by
the judgment of learned Ciuilians is vicious, and of no valewe: L. Sifundus
ff. de rebus corum^c de rebus Ecelesiae in 6.
yea though the reason of the law cease, yet must the form be observed. For
it is a rule and a Maxim, that where the law appoints and prescribes a
certain plat form, whereby the Act must be bound and tied: in that case
though the reason of the law cease, yet is the act void and naught.

And whereas the Adversaries obiecte against this rule, An answer to the
adversaries, touching Acts of Parliament alleged to prove, that the Kings
own hand was not necessary to the supposed vvil.
the Parlamentes made by Queen Marie, without the usual style called and
somoned: this objection may sone be answered. For it may sone appear to all
them, that read and pervse the said statute of Anno 35. Henrici octaui,
containing the said style, that by any especial words therein mentioned, it is
not there limited and appointed, that the form of the style therein set
forth should be observed in every Writ. And therefore not to be compared unto
the said statutes of 28. and 35. Henrici octaui, wherein by special words one
express form and order for the limiting of the succession of the Croune by
the King, is declared and set forth.

Bysides that the said Writtes being made both according to the ancient form
of the Regester, and also by express commandment of the Prince, utterly
refusing the said style, could neither be derogatorie to the said Queens
Majesty and her Croune, nor meaning of the said statute. Concerning the said
style, and for a final and sul answer unto this matter: it is to be noted,
that the Writts being th'Actes of the Court, though they want the prescript
form set forth either by the common law, or statute: yet are not they, nor
the judgments subseque^t thereupon abated or void, but only abatable and
voidable by exception of the party by judgment of the Court. 18. E. 3. fol.
30. 3. H. 4. fol. 3. and 11. 11. H. 4. fol. 67.9. H. 6. fo. 6. 19. H. 6. fo. 7.
et 10 35. H. 6. fol. 12. 10. H. 6. fol. 26. 3. H. 6. fol. 8. 33. E. 3. fo. 13.
Vide Prisot. 33. H. 6. fol. 39.
For if the party without any exception do admit the form of the said
Writ, and plead unto the matter, whereupon the Court does proceed: then does
the Writ, and the judgment thereupon following remain good and effectual in
law. And therefore admitting, that the said statute of 35. H. 8. had by
special words appointed the said style to be put in every Writ, and that for
that cause the said Writtes of Somons were vicious, wanting their prescript
form: yet when the parties unto the said Writtes had admitted them for good,
both by their election, and also by their appearence upon the same: the law
does admit the said Writtes and al acts subsequent upon the same, to be good
and effectual. And yet this makes no prouffe, that therefore the said supposed
Will, wanting the prescript order and form, should likewise be good and
effectual in law.

For as touching specialties, estates and co^ueiances, or any other external
act to be done or made by any person, whose form and order is prescribed,
either by the common law, or by statute: if they want any part of their
prescript form, they are accounted in law to be of no validity or effect. As
for example: the law does appoint every Specialtie or Deed to be made, 9. H.
6. fol. 35.35. H. 6. fol. 34.40. E. 3. fol. 2.
either in the first person, or in the third person. Therefore if part of a
Deed be made in the first person, and the residue in the third person: that
Deed is not effectual, but void in the Law. Bysides that, the law has
appointed, that in every Deed mention should be made, 40. E. 3. fol. 35.21. E.
4. fol. 97.7. H. 7. fol. 15.
that the party has putto his Seal to the same. If therefore any Deed does
want that special clause and mention, although the party in deed has put his
Seal unto the same: yet is that Deed or Specialtie void in law.

So likewise the law gives authority to the Lord, to distraine upon the land
holden of him for his rentes and services dew for the same. And farther does
appoint, to carry or drive the same distress unto the pound, there to remain
as a gage in law for his said rents and services. 9. E. 4. fo. 2. 22. E. 4. fo.
47. 29. H. 6. fol. 6.29. lib. Assis. P. 64.
If the Lord shall either distraine his Tenant out of his Fee or Seignory, or if
he shall labor and occupy the Chatles distrained: the distress so taken by
him is insurious and wrongful in law, forasmuch as he has not done according
to the prescribed order of the law. The statute made An. 32. H. 8. gives
authority unto Tenant in tail, and to others being seized of land in the
right of their wives or Churches, to make leases of the same. Wherein also a
prescript order and form for the same is set forth. If any of the said
persons shall make any Lease, wherein he does not observe the same prescribed
order in all points, the same Lease is not warranted in any point by the said
statute.

Likewise the statute made in Anno 27. Henrici octau^, 27. H. 8. c. 10.
of Bargains and sales of land appoints a form and order for the same, that
they must be by writing, inde^ted, sealed and enrolled within six months next
after the dates of the same writings. If any bargain and sale of land be made,
wherein any of the things appointed by the said statute are omitted, the same
is vicious and void in the law. 32. H. 3. c. 1.
So likewise the statute made in Anno 32. H. 8. gives authority, to dispose
lands and Testamentes by last Will and Testament in writing. If a man do demise
his land by his last Will and Testament nuncupatiue without writing, this
demise is insufcient in law, and not warranted by the said statute.

We leave of a number of like cases, that we might multiply in the prouffe of
this matter: wherein we have tarried the longer, by cause the Adversaries make
so great a countenance thereupon: and because al under one, it may serve for
the answer also touching the Kings royal assente to be given to Parlamentes
by his Letters Patentes signed with his hand, which is nothing else but a
declaration and affirma^ce of the common law, and no new authority given to
him, to do that he could not do before, or any form prescribed to bind him
unto. Bysides that, in this case there is no fear in the world of forging and
counterfeyting the Kings hand: whereas in the Testamentarie cause it is far
otherwise, as the world knows, and daily experience teaches. And so withal
do we conclude, that by reason this surmised Will was not signed with the Kings
hand: it can not any way hurt or hinder the just right and claim of the Queen
of Scotland, to the succession of the Croune of England.

Now supposing, that neither the L. Paget, nor Sir Edward Montague, and William
Clarke had testified or published any thing to the infringing annd overthrowing
of the Adversaries assertion, touching the signing of the said Will: yet is not
thereby the Queen of Scotlandes title altogether hindered. For she yet has her
just and lawful defense for the oppugning of the said assertion, as well
against the persons and saying of the witnesses, if any shall come forth, as
otherwise she may justly require the said Will to be brought forth to light,
and especially the signing of the same with the Kings hand, to be duly and
consideratly pondered, we yed and conferred. She has her just defense and
exceptions, and must have. And it were against al laws, and the law of nature
it self, to spoil her of the same. And all good reason gives, that the said
original Will standing upon the trial of the Kings hand, be exhibited, that
it may be compared with his other certain and well known hand writing. And
that other things may be done requisite in this behalf.

But yet all this notwithstanding, let us now imagine and suppose, that the
King him self, whose heart and hand were doubtelesse far from any such
doings: let us yet, I say, admit, that he had signed the said Will with
his own hand. Yet for all that, the Adversaries perchance shall not find, no
not in this case, that the Queens just Title, right and interest does any
thing fail or quayle. Or rather let us without any perchance say, the
justice and equity of her cause, The supposed vvil ca^ not prejudice the Q of
Scot la^d, though it had been signed with the Kings own hand
and the invincible force of truth to be such, that neither the Stamp, nor
the Kings own hand can bear and beat it down. Which thing we we speak
not without good probable and weighty reasons.

Neither do we at this time mind, to debate and discourse, what power and
authority, and how far the Parliament has it, in this and like cases. Which
perchance some other would here do. We will only intermedle with other things,
that reach not so far, nor so high, and seem in this our present question
worthy and necessary to be considered.

And first, before we enter into other matters, we ask this reasonable and
necessary question, whether these general words, whereby this large and ample
authority is co^ueied to king Henry, must be as generally, and as amply taken,
or be restrained by some manner of limitation and restrictio^ agreeable to such
mind and purpose of the Parliament, as must of very necessity or great
likelihod be construed, to be the very mind and purpose of the said Parlame^t.
Ye will say perchance, that the power and authority of assignatio^ must be taken
generally and absolutely, without exception, saving for the outward signing of
the Will. Truth it is, there is nothing else expressed: but yet was there some
thing else principally intended, and yet for all that, needed not to be specified.

The outward manner was so specially and precisely appointed and specified, to
avoid suspicious dealing, There must needs be some qualification and restrait
of the general words of the statute.
to avoid corruption and forgery. And yet was the Will good and effectual,
without the Kings hand. Yea and the assignatio^ to, had been good, had not
that restrainte of the Kings hand been added by the Parliament. But for the
qualification of the person to be limited and assigned, and so for the
necessary restriction and limitation of the words, were they never so large
and ample: there is (though nothing were spoken thereof) an ordinary help and
remedy. Otherwise, if the Realm had been set over to a furious or a mad man,
or to an idiote, Matthae us Paristensis in Johan.
or to some foraine and Mahometical Prince (and to such a one our stories
testify that King John would have submitted him self and his Realm) or to
any other notorious incapable or unable person: the generality of the words
seem to bear it, but the good mind and purpose of the Parliament, and man's
reason do in no wise bear it. If ye grant, that these words must needs have
some good and honest constructio^ and interpretation, as reason does force you
to grant it: yet will I ask farther, whether as the King cut of in this
pretensed Will the whole noble race of the eldest sister, and the first issue of
the youngest sister: so if he had cut of also all the ofspringes as well of the
said youngest sister, as of the remnante of the royal blood, and placed some,
being not of the said blood, and perchance otherwise unable: this assignatio^
had been good and vailable in law, as conformable to reason, and to the mind
and purpose of the Parliament? It were surely to great an absurdity, to grant
it.

There must be therefore in this matter some reasonable moderation and
interpretation, as well touching the persons co^prehe^ded within this
assignation, and their qualities, and for the persons also having right, and
yet excluded, as for the manner of the doing of the Act, and signing the Will.
For the king as King, could not dispose the Croune by his Will: and was in this
behalf but an Arbiter and Commissioner. Wherefore his doings must be directed
and ruled by the law, and according to the good mind and meaning of those,
that gave the authority. And what their mind was, it will appear well enough,
even in the statute it self. It was for the avoiding of all ambiguities,
doubts and divisions, touching the Succession. They put their whole trust
upon the King, as one, whom they thought most earnestly to mind the wealth of
the Realm, as one that would, and could best and most prudently consider and
weigh the matter of the Succession, and provide for the same accordingly.

If the doings of the King do not plainly and evidently tend to this end
and scope, if a zealous mind to the common Wealth, if prudence and wisdom did
not rule and measure al these doings, but contrariewise partial affection and
displeasure, if this arbitrament puts not away al contentions and striffes,
if the mind and purpose of the honorable Parliament be not satisfied, if there
be dishonorable devises and assignmentes of the Croune in this Will and
Testament, if there be a new Succession unnaturally devised, finally if this be
not a Testament and last Will, L. 1. ff. qu^ Testamenta facere. The definition
of a Testament.
such as Modestinus defines: Testamentum est tusta voluntatus nostra sententia
de eo, quod quis post mortem suam fieti velit: then though the Kings hand were
put to it, the matter goes not altogether so well and so smothe. But that there
is good and great cause farther to consider and debate upon it, whether it be
so, or no: let the indifferent, when they have well thought upon it, judge
accordingly.

The Adversaries them selves can not altogether deny, but that this Testament
is not correspondent to such expectation, as men worthily should have of it.
Which thing they do plainly confess. For in urging their presumptions,
whereof we have spoken, and minding to prove, that this will, which they say is
commonly called King Henry's Will, was no new Will devised in his sickness, but
even the very same, whereof (as they say) were diverse old copies: they infer
these words, saying thus:

For if it be a new Will then devised, who could think, that either him self
would, or any man durst have moved him, to put therein so many things contrary
to his honor? Much less durst they themselves devise any new succession, or
move him to alter it, otherwise then they found it, when they saw, that
naturally it could not be otherwise disposed. Wherein they say very truly. For
it is certain, that not only the common law of this Realm, but nature it
self tells us, that the Queen of Scotland (after the said Kings children)
is the next and rightful Heir of the Croune. Wherefore the King, if he had
excluded her, he had done an unnatural act. Ye will say, he had some cause to
do this, by reason she was a forainer, and borne out of the Realm. Yet this
notwithstanding he did very unnaturally, yea unadvisedly, inconsideratly and
wrongfully, and to the great prejudice and danger of his own Title to the
Croune of France, as we have already declared.

And moreover it is well to be weighed, that reason, and equity, and Iu^
Ge^^ium does require and crave, that as the Kings of this Realm would think
them selves to be injuriously handled and openly wronged, if they mariyng with
the heirs of Spain, Scotland or any other Country (where the succession of
the Croune deuolueth to the woman) were shut out, and barred from their said
right dew to them by the wives (as we have said): so likewise they ought to
think of women of their royal blood, that marie in Scotland, that they may well
judge and take them selves much injured, unnaturally and wrongfully dealt
withal, to be thruste from the succession of this Croune, being thereto called
by the next proximitie of the royal blood. And such deuolutio^s of other
Kingdoms to the Croune of England by foraine marriage, might by possibility
often times have chanced, and was even now in this our time very like to have
chanced for Scotland, if the intended marriage with the Queen of Scotland that
now is, and the late King Edward the sixth with his longer life, and some issue
had taken place.

But now, that she is no such forainer, as is not capable of the Croune, we
have at large already discussed. Yea I will now say farther, that supposing the
Parliament minded, to exclude her, and might rightfully so do, and that the
King by virtue of this statute did exclude her in his supposed Will: yet is she
not a plain forainer, and incapable of the Croune. For if the lawful heirs
of the said Lady Francis, and of the Lady Elenour should happen to fail
(which seem now to fail, at the least in the Lady Katherin and her issue,
for whose title, great stir has lately ben made, by reason of a late
sentence definitive, given against her pretensed marriage with the Earl of
Herford) then is there no stay or stop, either by the Parliament, or by the
supposed Will, but that she the said Queen of Scotland, and her Heirs, may
have and obtain their just Title and claim. For by the said pretensed Will it
is limited, that for default of the lawful Heirs of the said Ladre Francis
and Elenour, the Croune shall remain and come to the next rightful Heirs.

But if she shall be said to be a forainer for the time, for the induction of
farther argument: then what say the Adversaries to my Lady Leneux, borne at
Herbottel in England, and from thirtene years of age brought up also in
England, and commonly taken and reputed as well of the King and Nobility, as
of other, the lawefully Niece of the said King? Yea to turn now to the other
Sister of the King, married to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and her
children, the Lady Francis, and the Lady Elenour: why are they also
disherited? Surely, if there be no just cause, neither in the Lady Leneux, nor
in the other: it seems the King has made a plain Donatiue of the Croune.
Which thing whether he could do, or whether it be conformable to the
expectation of the Parliament, or for the Kings honor, or for the honor for
the Realm, I leave it to the farther consideration of other.

Now, what causes should move the King, to shut them out by his pretensed
Will from the Title of the Croune: I mind not, nor need not (especially
seeing I take no notice of any such Will, touching the limitation of the said
Croune) here to to prosecute or examine.

Yet am I not ignorant, what impedimentes many do talk of, and some as well
by printed, as unprinted Books, do write of. Wherein I will not take upon me
any asseueration, any resolution or judgment.

Thus only will I propound, as it were by the way of consideration, duly and
depely to be wayed and thought upon: that is, for as much as the benefitte of
this surmised Will tends to the extrusion of the Queen of Scotland, and
others altogether, to the issue of the French Queen: whether in case the King
had no cause to be offended with his sisters the French Queens children (as
the Adversaries them selves confess he had not, and that there was no lawful
impediment in them, to take the succession of the Croune) it were any thing
reasonable, or ever was once meant of the Parliament, that the King without
cause should disherite and exclude them from the Title of the Croune. On
the other side, if there were any such impediment (whereof this surmised Will
gives out a great suspicion) it is to be considered, whether it stands with
reason and justice, with the honor of the King, and the whole Realm, or with
the mind, purpose and intent of the said Parliament, that the King should not
only frustrate and exclude such, whose right by the common law is most
euidente and notoriouse, but call and substitute such other, L. fl pater. ff.
Quae in frau. credit. L. fill. famil. ff. de Donat.
as by the same law are plainly excluded. In consideration whereof many
notable Rules of the Civil law do concur.

First, L. 1. c quae res pign l. obligatione. ff. de pigno. c in genera. de
Regum iuris in 6. L. quida^. ff. de uerb. s^g. L. ut grada.. 1. de numer. and
honor. L. permitte^do cu^ notatis. ff. de iure dotiu^. In giving general au
thoritie, that seems not to be comprised, that the party would not have
granted, being specially demanded. General voordes must be referred to hable
persons. L. 2. c. de Nopal.
that who soever gives any man a general authority, to do any thing, seems
not to give him authority, to do that thing, which he would not have granted,
if his mind therein had been severally and specially asked and required.
Again, general words either of the Testatours, or of such as make any
contract, and especially of statutes, touching any persons, to do or enjoy any
thing, ought to be restrained and referred to hable, mete, and capable persons
only.

It is further more a rule and a Principle, that statutes must be ruled,
measured and interpreted, according to the mind and direction of the general
and common law. Wherefore the King in limiting the succession of the Croune in
this sort, as is pretended, seems not to answer and satisfy the
expectation of the Parliament: putting the ease there were any such surmised
impediment, as also on the other side likewise, if there were no such supposed
impediment.

For here an other rule must be regarded: which is, that in Testaments,
Contractes, and namely in statutes, the generality of words must be gently
and ciuilly moderated, and measured by the common law, and restrained, L. fin.
in computatione. De iure deliber. and ibi notat Alciat. in l. 1. de uerb.
significat.
when so ever any man should by that generality take any damage and hurt
undeservedly. Yea, the Statute shall rather in that case cease and quail, and
be taken as void. As for example, it appears by the Civil law, that if it be
enacted by statute in some Cities, that noman shall plead against an
Instrument, no not the Executour: yet this notwithstanding, if th'Executour
make a true and perfect Inuentarie of the goods of the Testatour, if he deal
faithfully and truly, rather then he should wrongfully and without cause pay
the Testatours debt of his own, he may come and plead against the Instrument.
Wherefore the Kings doings seem either much defective in the said Lady
Francis, and Lady Elenour, or much excessive in their children. And so though
he had signed the said Will with his hand: yet the said doings seem not
comfortable to the mind and purpose of the Parlame^t.

We will now go forward, and propound other great and grave considerations
serving our said purpose and intent. Whereof one is that in limiting the Croune
unto the heirs of the body of the Lady Francis, the same Lady then, and so
long after living, the said King did not appoint the Succession of the Croune,
according to the order and meaning of the honorable Parliament: forasmuch as the
said Act of Parliament gave to him authority, to limite and appoint the Croune
to such person, or persons in reuersion or remainder, as should please his
Highness. Meaning thereby some person certain, of whom the people might have
certain knowledge and understanding, after the death of King Henry the eight.
Which persons certain the heirs of the Lady Francis could not by any means
be intended: 11. H. 4. fol. 72. 9. H. 6. fol. 24.11. H. 6. fol. 15.
forasmuch as the said Lady Francis was then living, and therefore could then
have no heirs at al. By reason whereof the people of this Realm could not have
certain knowledge and perfect understanding of the Succession, according to the
true meaning and intent of the said Act of Parliament.

But to this matter some peradventure would seem to answer and say, that
although at the time of the said King Henry's death, the Heirs of the body of
the said Lady Francis begotten, were uncertain: yet at such time, as the
said remainder should happen to fall, the said heirs might then certainly be
known. In deed I will not deny, but that peradventure they might be then
certainly known. But what great mischieffes and inconveniences might have
ensewed, and yet may, if the Will take place upon that peradventure and
uncertain limitation: I would wish all men well to note and consider.

It is not to be doubted, but that it might have fortuned, at such time as the
remainder should happen to fall to the said heirs of the Lady Francis, the same
Lady Francis should then be also living: who, I pray you, then should have had
the Croune? Paradue^ture ye would say, the heirs of the body of the Lady
Elenor, to who^ the next remainder was appointed. Undoubtedly that were
contrary to the meaning of the said supposed Will: forsamuch as the remainder
is thereby limited unto the heirs of the body of the Lady Elenour, only for
default of issue of the Lady Francis. Whereby it may be very plainly gathered
upon the said supposed Will, that the meani^g thereof was not, that the children
of the Lady Elenour should enjoy the Croune, before the children of the Lady
Francis. But what if the said Lady Elenour had been then also living (which
might have happened, forasmuch as both the said Lady Francis and Lady
Elenour, by common course of nature, might have lived longer, then until this
day) who then should have had the Croune? Truly the right Heir (whom this
supposed Will meante to exclude) so long as there should remain any issue,
either of the body of the said Lady Francis, or of the body of the said Lady
Elenour lawfully begotten. And therefore quite contrary to the meaning of the
said supposed Will. Wherefore I do verily think, that it would hardly sink
into any reasonable man's head, that had any experience of the great wisdom and
advised doings of King Henry the eight about other matters being of nothing
like weight, that he would so slenderly and so vnaduifedly dispose the
succession of the croune (whereupon the whole estate of this Realm does depend)
in such wise, that they, to whom he meant to give the same, by his will could
not enjoy it by the law. Whereupon ye may plainly see, not only the great
vnlikelihod, that King Henry the eight would make any such Will with such
slender advise, but also, that by the limitation of the said Will, the
succession of the Croune is made more uncertain and doubtful, then it was
before the making of the said Acts of Parliament. Which is contrary to the
meaning and intent of the said Acts, and therefore without any sufficient
warrant in law.

But peradventure some here will say, that although these dangers and
uncertainties might have ensewed upon the limitation of the said will: yet
forasmuch as they have not happened, neither be like to happen, they are
therefore not to be spoken of. Yeas verily, it was not to be omitted. For
although these things have not happened, and therefore the more tolerable: yet
forasmuch as they might have happened, by the limitation of the said supposed
Will contrary to the meaning of the said Acts: the Will can not by any means be
said to be made according to the meaning and intent of the makers of the said
statutes. And therefore in that respect the said Will is insufficient in law.
And to aggrauate the matter farther, ye shall understand of great inconveniences
and imminent dangers, which as yet are likely to ensue, if that supposed Will
should take place.

It is not unknown, but that at the time of the making of the said Will, the
said Lady Francis had no issue male, but only three daughters between her,
and Henry Duke of Suffolk. Afterward in the time of our late sovereign Lady
Queen Marie, the said Duke of Suffolk was attainted, and suffered
accordingly. After whose death the said Lady Francis, to her great dishonor
and abasing of her self, took to husband one Adrian Stokes, who was before
her servant, a man of very mean estate and vocation, and had issue by him.
Which issue (if it were a son, and be also yet living) by the words of the
said supposed Will, is to inherit the Croune of this Realm, before the
daughters between her and the said late Duke of Suffolk begotten, which thing
was neither intended, nor meant by the makers of the said Acts. Who can with
any reason or common sense think, that all the states of the Realm assembled
together at the said Parliament, did mean, to give authority to King Henry the
eight, by his Letters Pate^ts or last Will to disherit the Queen of Scotland
lineally descended of the blood roial of this Realm, and to appoint the son
of Adrian Stokes, then a mean serving man of the Duke of Suffolks, to be King
and Governor over this noble Realm of England. The inconveniences whereof, as
also of the like that might have followed of the prete^sed Marriage of M. Keys
the late Sergeante Porter, I refer to the grave consideratio^s and
judgments of the honorable and worshipful of this Realm.

Some peradventure will say, that King Henry the eight meant by his Will, to
dispose the Croune unto the Heirs of the body of the said Lady Francis by the
said Duke lawfully begotten, and not unto the heirs by any other person to be
begotten. Which meaning although it might very hardly be gathered upon the said
supposed Will: yet can not the same be without as great inconveniences, as the
other. For if the Croune should now remain unto the heirs of the body of
the said Lady Francis by the said Duke begotten: then should it remain unto
two daughters jointly, they both being termed and certainly accounted in law
but one heir. And by that means the state and government of this Realm
should be changed from the ancient Monarchy, into the government of many.
For the Title of the Lady Francis being by way of remainder, which is compted
in law a joint purchase, does make all the issue female inheritable a like, and
cannot go according to the ancient law of a desce^t to the Croune: which is,
that the Croune by descent must go to the eldest daughter only, as is
aforesaid. For great differences be in law, where one comes to any Title by
descent, and where, as a purchaser. And also if the one of those issues female
dye, then were her heir in the Title, as a several tenant in tail. And so
there should follow, that so many daughters, so many general Governors, and so
might their issue, being heirs females, make the government grow infinite.
Which thing was most far from the meaning of the makers of that Act of
Parlame^t.

What if the said King had by his last Will disposed this realm into two or
three parts, dividing the government thereof to three persons, to rule as
several Kings: as for example, Wales unto one, the North parts unto an
other, the South parts unto the third, and by that means had miserably rent
this Realm into parts? Had this ben according to the intent and meaning of
the said Act of Parliament? Or had it been a good and sufficient limitation in
law? No verily, I think no man of any reasonable understanding will so say. And
no more can he either say, or think of the remainder limited unto heirs of
the body of the said Lady Francis by the said supposed Will.

Now to co^plete and finish this our Treatise touching the Queen of Scotla^ds
Title to the fuccession of the Croune: as we have done, so let us freely and
liberally grant the Adversaries that, which is not true, that is, that the
said supposed Will was signed with the Kings own hand. Let the heirs of the
Lady Francis come forth in Gods name, and lay forth to the world their demand
and supposed right against the said Q. of Scotlandes interest. The Queen on
the other side, to fortify and stre^gthen her claim, lays forth to the open
sight of all the world her ^ust title and interest, signed, and always before
this time allowed, not only as with the Seals, but with the oaths also of all the Kings, that ever were in England, taken at the time of their Coronation, for
the continuance of the laws of this noble Realm of England, signed and
allowed, I say, almost of all the world by sides: yea signed with God and
natures own fingers. Her right is as open, and as clear, as the bright Son.
Now, to darken and shadow this glorious light: what do the heirs of the said
Lady Francis, or others bring forth, to ground their just claim and demand
upon? When al is done, they are feign to ru^ne and catch hold upon King Henry
the eightes written Will, signed with his own hand. Well, let them take as good
handfast thereon, as they can: but yet let them show the said Queen the
said original Will. It is well known, that they themselves have said, that that
to do they can not. Yet let them at least lay forth some authe^tical Record of
the same. It is also notorious, that they can not. If then the foundation of
their claim, being the Will of such a Prince, and of so late and fresh memory
made, neither the original, nor yet any good and worthy Record sufficiently
authorized, remain of the same: by what color will they exclude the said
Queen? They must claim either by proximitie of blood, or by Charter. For the
first, nature has excluded them: Charter they have none to show.

They will perchance cry out, and complain of the loss and imbeaseling of the
same and say, that such a casualtie should not destroy and extinguish their
right. This were some thing perchance, if it were in a private ma^s case. It
were somewhat, if their demand did not destroy the common law, and the law of
nature also. It were somewhat, if their supposed Charter were perished, or by
any frau dule^t means intercepted by the said Queen. Upon whom in this point
it is not possible, to fasten any the very least sinister suspicio^. It were
somewhat, if they did not aspire to take gain and lucre, or if the Queen
sought not to avoid damage. For damage it is, when any person is spoiled of
any right due to him by law and reason. And there is a great odds in the
consideration of the law and reason, between aua^cing our gain (and gain we do
that, that does grow and accrue unto us by mere gift or legacy, Non est par
rati^. lucra non capere. and damna sentire. L. sin. C. de co dicil. and L.
Proculus ff. de damno infect. Insti. de legate. Si res.
as does the Croune, to these competitours and Heirs of the Lady Francis) and
eschewing damage and loss. And loss the law accompteth to be, when we are
defeated of our Au^cestours inheritance. So that both being put in the
indifferent balance of reason, law and conscience: the damage shall ouerweigh
the mere lucre and gain. Yea, I will say more, that in case either the said
Queen of Scotland, or any other were in possession of the Croune, having no
right to the same: yet if the issue of the Lady Francis had no farther, nor
better right, then these pretended writings, the defendants cleaving to the
only possession, were salfe and sure, and were not bound, to show to them their
Title. L. qui ^ee^ sare C. d^ edendo. commodum. lust. de indict.
For it is a rule of the Law, that if the Plaintiff fail in his prouffe, the
Defendant shall be discharged: yea, though he have no better right, then bare and
naked possession. Neither could they any thing be releaued, though the
pretensed Record of the Cha^cerie were yet extant, not for such causes only, as
we have specified, but for diverse other. For it may well be doubted, though the
said Record might bear a sufficient credit among the subjects of this
Realm, whether it may bear the same against one, that is no subject. L. st
qui^ i^ aliquo documento C. de edend^.


Again it is a rule, that the public Instrument, making mention of an other,
does nothing prove against the party, in respect of any thing so mentioned,
unless the original it self be producted. If therefore these co^petitours have
lost their instruments and Evidences, where upon they must of necessity build
their demand and Claim, to the exclusion of an other notorious right and
Title: they must bear the disco^moditie thereof, that sought thereby their
lucratiue advancement and commodity, not the person, that demau^deth nothing
else, but that to him lawfully and orderly is due.

Yea, they, and we to, have good cause to think, that this thing (in case any
such Will were) is wonderfully wrought by Gods permission and providence. For
it is almost incredible, to hear and believe, such kind of writings (and in
so great and weighty a matter, as this prete^sed Will compriseth) to be so sone
extinguished, and perished, as it were, for special purpose, to preserve to
this Noble Realm the true and sincere succession of the next royal blood.
Which if it should, by certain (I can not tell what) interlined papers and
scrolles be derived and transferred to any other wrongful heirs: it would be
a wonderful and strange thing to the world to hear, and to importable to us
and our posterity, to bear it. It will then be so far of, that that thing,
which the Parliament most regarded in this Commission, shall by this prete^sed
Will be produced and purchased to this realm, as to have a certain known
undoubted lawful Governor and King, to have striffe, contentions and diuisio^s
for the Croune cut away: that even the very thing the Parliament most feared, is
most unfortunately and most lamentably like soonest to chance. He that
remembers the tragical procedinges of the last, by name, and not by right,
King Richard, needs not greatly to doubt, but that as he could find in his
heart, to bastard his eldest brother and lawful king, and to defame his own
natural mother as an harlot: even so now there will some be found, that will
easily be enduced, for aua^cing and setting forth of their supposed right and
Title to the Croune, to seek means, to wring them out that shall wrongfully
sit in the royal Throne, and to seek to extort the Croune from their
possession.

Which unhappy day, if it should once chance (as God forbid) then may we cry
out, and sing a woeful and doleful song: then may we not without cause look for
the botomelesse Ocean sea of infinite troubles, miseries and mischieffes to
ouerwhelme the Realm. The which my mind and heart abhors to think upon,
and my pen in my hand trembles to write thereof.

Finis.
Hos libros a viris Catholicis, ijsque, eruditissimis lectos, and examinatos,
intellecto ab ijsdem librorum argumento, vna cum editionis necessarijs causis,
iudic aui merit^ edendos esse.

Actum Louanij. 6. Martij. 1571. Thomas Gozaeus a Bellomonte, sacrae Theologiae
Professor, and authoritate Pontificis librorum approbator.

A TREATISE VVHERIN IS DECLARED, THAT THE REGIMENT OF WOMEN IS CONFORMABLE TO
the law of God and Nature. *

Made by Morgan Philippes, Bachelar of Divinity, An. 1570.

LEODII. A pud Gualterum Morberium. 1571.

A TREATISE VVHERIN IS DECLARED, THAT THE REGIMENT OF WOMEN IS CONFORMABLE TO
the law of God and Nature. The Third Book.
ALBE it (good Reader) you have now heard a convenient and a sufficient prou^e,
so far as the Laws of this Realm may serve, for the right Title and Claim
of the Queen of Scotland, and so we might right well seem to have fully
discharged our promise and office: yet as the matter now falls our, An
infamous libel made lately against the Queen of Scot.
especially, if we shall give any credit to any infamous libel, or rather a
fierbrande of sedition late cast abroad, al our cost is forlorn al our
travail employed in vain, and must begin a fresh.

For all this notwithstanding, her right is doubtful (says this man) and such
as against which is just exception taken, by the law of God and man: It will
never be proved by the law, no, not by her best frindes: so will the Croune
never be given her by just and common counsel: I mean not the consent of
unquiet spirits and brauling brains, but of a great number of them, which are
to be accounted amongst the best, for the love of Religion and of the common
wealth.

Surely these are only words, this is confidently spoken But yet let us hear
withal, what proufes this sober brained man, and so fervent zealatour of
Religion, and of the common wealth brings forth, for the auouohing of his
sturdie allegation. What law, what Act of Parliament, what custom or usage,
what ancient record of history of this Realm, does this man lay forth for
him self? Surely none at al. And as he lays forth not so much as one jot
this way: so no doubt, he shall never be able, to lay forth any thing of like
weight, as that, that already is alleged.

No, no (good Reader) this man goes not by Act of Parliament, nor by any law
of this Realm, nor (what soever he speaks, of man's law, for a bare
countenance) by Civil or any other human law. This extraordinary wily
fellow runs another race: all these laws are but beggarly baggage to him,
and arguments of brauling brains. This sober braind man will not abase
himself, with intermedling with so low matters, but aspireth, and amounts
aloft, and fetches a marvelous high fetch and reach, and being as it were
ghostly ravished, contemning as it seems al human laws and policies, he
makes as it it were a plain demurre with us in law, that we have pleaded our
matters all this while in a wrong Court.

For lo, this matter by this sobre man's judgment, seems not triable, either
in the Arches or Consistory of Poules by the Civil or Canno^law, The Author
of the same seems little to regard touching, the succession of the Croune,
any law, but holy Scripture only.
or in Westminster Hal by any law or Act of Parlame^t. This plee must be only
maintained with the records of holy Scripture, but of his own sobre brains
interpretation only, and holde^ before himself, and his new erected tribunal,
furnished and adorned with such quiet and sobre spirits as hiself is.
Th'infallible verity, the high Mie. of the sacred scriptures I do most hartly
confess and most humbly reverence. But yet, if ye will intrude your self and
others, with the promulging from your new Tribunal seat, such and so strange
paradoxes and sentences to the utter overthrowing of al human policies and
laws, yea to the present and and i^minent danger not only of this of Scotland,
but also of al other whatsoever Queens: we must be bold to see what warrant
and commission you have, and to examine and well to view the same, we must
buckle with you and try, whether the authority of holy Scripture, which is
your only refuge, will uphold and bear out your strange and stout conclusion.

The place then, He groundeh him self chefly upon the 17. of Deuteron.
whereupon he grou^deth him self, is this: Thou shall make him King over thee,
whom thy Lord thy God shall choose from amongst thy brethern: him shall thou
make a King amongst them. From this authority he fetches out al his high
mystical and supernatural conclusions. And first he excludes the Queen of
Scotland, because she is an alien, and not ex fratribus: and therefore not
chosen of God. Whereunto he adds, that the King must be such, as the people
may say to him, ^. Samuel. ^
as the Israelites said to King David: Ecce ^s tuum, and caro tua nos sumus: We
are of one nation and blood. Thereunto he adioyneth, that it is assigned, as
one just cause, 2. Reg. 11.
why Athalia was turned out of her kingdom, because she was alienigena, an
alien, maternum genus ducens a Tyriis and Sidoni^^.

These now are all the proufes deducted by this man out of holy Scripture. For
other has he none, why the Queen of Scotland, being a stranger, ought to be
disherited, and rejected from al such claim, as she pretends to the Croune
of England.

Now for answer, and first to the 17. An answer tou chinge the 17. of
Deuteron.
of Deuteronomie, wherein as I will not quarrel with you for the shrewde meaning,
that perchance some man may probably gather out of this Treatise, and small
liking that ye have to the Government proceeding from succession only: so I
plainly affirm, first, that we are not bound to the Ceremonial or Judicial,
or other precepts of the Jewish law (except the Decaloge) farther then the
Church or Civil policy have renewed again. I say then farther, that this
authority of Deutronomie, can not fitly serve your purpose, for that it takes
place, when the people chooses a King, and not when there is a lawful and
ordinary Succession, as was even amongst the Jews from King Dauides time.
Albe it he, and King Saul before him, came in by Gods and the peoples special
election.

Wherefore I do admit your Principle to be well grounded upon Scripture: That
the choice and election of Princes must be directed and measured by Gods Holy
Word, will and pleasure. What then? I would fame know, by what Logike, by what
reason a man may thus conclude: we ought to choose no stranger to our Prince:
ergo a stranger, though he be the just, and next inheritour to the Croune,
must be displaced. The one d^pendeth of our own free will and election, which
we may measure, and rule, as we see good cause: the other hangs only upon the
disposition and providence of God. Great difference be tvvixt succession and
clection.
There we may pick out choice: here we must take such as God sends. There
consent bears the stroke: here proximitie of blood bears the sway. There we
offer no injury to any party, in accepting the one, and leaving the other:
here do we injury to god that does send, and to the party, that is by him
sent. And to say the truth; it is but a malaperte controlment of Gods own
direction and providence. For in the former part, we be the choosers, and must
direct and govern our choice by reason and discretion by the merit and
worthiness of the person: here all the choice all the voices, are in Gods hand
only. As good right has the infant in the swaddling clothes, as has any man
called at his perfect age and wisdom.

It is a true saying, Christiani fimus, August. de merit. and remis pecc. cont.
Pela. li 3. c 8. and 9. to 7 and in quaest. ex nouo Test. ca. 8. to. 4.
we are made Christian men^ we are not borne Christian men, no^ nascimur. But
in this case of succession, Reges nascu^tur, no^ fium: men are borne and not
made kings. Let this fellow therefore conclude as strongly as he ca^ or will
against the chosing of strangers: yet if he bring forth no place out of
Scripture against the Succession of a stranger, claiming by proximitie of the
blood Roial: as far as the man shoteth, he shoteth to short to hit the mark.
But Lord what an ^lfauored short shote will it be accounted, if she be found no
stranger at al? It is very probable, that in this place the scripture means
of a mere foreiner and stranger, such as were neither borne in Iewrie, nor of
the Iewishe blood. For with such Aliens they were forbidden also to couple in
marriage, by reason they were Idolatours, and might thereby them selves be
occasioned (as they were oftentimes in deed) to abandone and forsake their
true and sincere Religion. Such a stranger, I am well assured, this Lady is not
to us (if she be any stranger at al.) The Scottesmen and we be al Christians
and of one Island, of one tongue, and almost of one fashion and manners,
customs, and laws. So that we can not in any wise account them amongst such
kind of strangers, that this place of Moses mentions: namely the Lady
Marie the Queen of Scotland, being not only in heart well affectioned and minded
to al Englishmen, as has by many experiments ben well known: but also by
descent and Roial blood all English, which she takes from the noble Kings
long before the Conquest, and after the Conquest from the worthy Princes
Henry the first, Queen of Scotland no stranger.
and Edward the third, and of late days from the excellent Prince King Henry
the seventh, and his daughter Lady Margaret her grandmother.

Al which causes, with some other in such number concurrant, ought rather to
enforce us, to think and to take her, as no stranger to us, rather then to
estraunge her from us, by the only place of her Nativity, which is yet
nevertheless within the four seas, and very nigh to England, by Osbred,
bounding at Starling bridge.

Last of al, touching the forsaid Chapter of Deuteronomie, we affirm, that it
is untrue, that ye say, as well that this law of Government binds our Kings
to the having and following of this law, as we have said (unless to omit
other things, ye would bind our Kings also, to receive the Deuteronomie at
the hands of the Leuitical Tribe) as that ye say, that God gave here a law to
the Jews, to make or choose a King: and so consequently, al your illations out
of this place seem to be of small force. For to say the truth, as God neither
gave them this or any other law, for choosing of a King, nor did bid or will
them to choose a King: so did the people most grievously offend God in
demanding a King.

For though by the judgment of Aristotle and other Philosophers, Monarchy, 3.
Politico.
well and orderly used, is the best kind of al other Regiments (which God does
also well like) yet would he have no such magistrate among the Jews. But as he
chose them, for his propre, peculier, and selecte people, and ruled them, as
well in the Desert, as in Judea, by a several, peculier and distinct order and
Government from other Nations, and after such wonderful and miraculous sort,
as the like was never hard of in any Regiment by sides: so would he also
reserve to him self only, the said Supremacy and Monarchy.

Neither was he a little angry with the Jews, nor they committed any small
fault, but (as it were) renounced and rejected Gods own Monarchy, in craving
a King, as holy Scripture plainly and openly testifiet: 1. Reg. 8.
Non^ie (inquit) reiecerunt, sed me, ne regnem super eos. And the people
afterward acknowledged their fault: 2. Reg. 12.
Addidimus vniuersis peccatis nostris malum, vt peteremus nobu Regem. God
therefore did not bid them, or will them, to choose a King, but forknowing
long before by his eternal forsight, what they would do (though contrary to
his blessed will and pleasure) did in this, as in other matters, bear with
their weakness, and condescended unto the same and fortold them in the said 17.
Chapter, that in case they would needs have a King, of what kind and sort he
should be.

And therefore immediately before the words, that ye recite (thou shall make
him a King over them) is this text: Cum ingressus fuer is terram, quam Dominus
Deus dabit tibi, and possederis illam, hab^^auerisque in illa, and dixeris:
constituam super me Regem, sicut habent omnes per circuitum Nationes: ^um
constitues, etc. And when thou shall come into the la^d, which the Lord thy God
gives thee, and shall possess, yea and dwell therein, if thou say, I will set a
King over me, like as all the Nations that are about me: then thou shall make
him King over thee, whom etc. Which words making for the illustratio^ of
this place, ye have omitted. Wherefore as this place serves nothing for any
absolute election of a King, the second, which you seem especially to regard
and ground your self upon, so does it (as we have showed) as little relieve
you, to prove thereby your conclusions (especially against the ordinary
succession, either of a stranger, or of a woman) that ye would gather and
conclude out of the same.

Thus have we sufficiently answered the place of Deuteronomie for this one
purpose. The Other two autorities, may be much more easily answered. The people
meant nothing else, An answer to the 2.
by their said words spoken to David, but that they were the seed of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, as well as he, and intended with true and sincere hearts
unfeignedly to agnise him as their chief Lord and Sovereign. Samuel. 5.
For at that time the Tribe of Judah only (whereof King David came by lineal
descent) did acknowledge him as king. Now the residue, which before held with
Saules son, did also incorporate and unite themselves to the said kingdom.
If this man look well upon the matter, he shall find, I trow, that the Queen
of Scotland may as well call her self, the bones and flesh of the Noble Princes
of England, as this people call them selves, the bones and sheshe of King David.

But yet the great terrible battering Cannon Athalia is behind. She being in
possessession of the kingdom seven years, was justly thrust out, by cause she
was an Alien. We may then, (says this man) justly deny the Queen of Scotland
the right of that, which if she had in possession, she should not justly enjoy.
Yet Sir, if the Queen of Scotland be no Alien (as we have said) then is your
Cannon shot more fearful, then dangerous. We deny not, but that Athalia was
lawfully deposed: but we beseech you, to tell us your Authors name, that does
assign the cause to be such, as you allege. Surely for my part after
diligent search, I find no such Author. Truth is it, Joseph. Iudaic. An
tiq. lib. 9. cap. 6.
that Josephus writes as ye do, that she descended by the mothers side, of
the Tyrians and Sidonians: yet nevertheless, he assigns no such cause, as ye
do.

And as ye are in this your preatie poisoned pamflet, the first (I trow) of al
Christian men (I will not except either Latin, or Greek, unless it be some
fantastical fond, and new vpstart Doctor, as M. Knoxe, or some the like,
neither Jew, Chaldee, nor Arabian) that has thus straungely glosed and
deformed this place of holy Scripture, against the ordinary succession of
women Princes: so are you the first also of all other Divines, or Lawiers
throughout the world, that has set forth this new fond foolish law, that
the Kings child must be counted an Alien, whose father and mother are not of
the same and one Country. A nevve, fond and mad in terpretation, who is an
Alie^, made by the Aduer sarie.
If the French or Spanish King chance to mar^e an English woman, or the King
of England to marie a French, a Spanish or any other Country woman: their
Children by this new Lycurgus, are Aliens, and so consequently in all other
Nations, al such are, have been and shall be Alie^s, by this your new oracle. For
what other cause show you, that this Athalia was an Alien, Joseph. ibi. cap. 6.
but by cause her mother was an Alien, genus duce^s, say you a Tyrijs and
Sydo^iis, coming by lineal descent, by the mothers side, from the Tyrians and
Sydonians?

King Achas married her mother, daughter to Ithobal King of the said Tyrians and
Sydonians. This Athalia, whom Josephus call leth Gotholio. Achas daughter,
married Iora^ King of uda, her brother called also Ioram, being king of Israel,
after the decease of his father Achas. So then ye see, that this Athalia was
no more an Alien among the Jews, Athalia was no Aheamo^g the jews
then ^^ing Edbalde Baldus was, the son of Bertha a French woman, and of King
Ethelbertus, the first Christian King of The English nation: no more then was
the noble King Edward the third borne of a French woman: ^more then Queen Marie
was: no more ^en should have been the issue of the said Q. Marie, in case she
had had any by the king ^f Spain. I perceive, that your fellows, that ^ould
feign make King Stephen, King He^^e the second, and Arthur Neuew to King
^ichard the first, Aliens: had but rude, dull, and gross heads, in comparison
of your ^^e, subtle, and high fetches.

If I should now desire your patience, notwithstanding the allegations of al
your Di^initie, to be content a while, and touching this matter to harken to
the most excellent Ciuilian Vlpia^, though he were an Ethnike: ye would
perchance make little account of him, and be angry with me, for producing a
profane Witness against you. And yet truly, in this I offer neither to you,
nor yet to Gods holy Word, any injury in the world. For Christ's high and
Divine Doctrine does not subvert and impugn human and Civil policy, being
not repugnant to his express Word and will. Let us then hear, whom the said
Vlpian makes an Alien. Who is an Alien by Vlpian.


He is a Campane (says this Vlpian) that is borne of father and mother being
Campaines: panes: Who is an Alien by Vlpian.
yea if his father be a Campane, and his mother be a Puteolane: yet is the
child a Citizen or Burgess of Campanie. And then he shows farther, that in
some Countries, as among the Ilians, and Delphians, and them of Pontus, the
Child shall be counted to be originally of the mothers, and not of the Fathers
Country. His words in Latin, as he wrote them, L. 1. ff. ad municip.
are these: Qui ex duobus Campanis parentibus natus est, Campanus est. Sed si
ex patre Campano, matre Puteolana, aeque municeps Campanus est: nisi forte
priuilegio aliquo materna origo censeatur. Tunc enim maternae originis erit
municeps. Vipote I lien sibus concessum est, vt qui matre Iliensi est, sit
eorum municeps. Etiam Delphis hoc idem tributum and conseruatum est. Celsus
etiam refert, Ponticis ex beneficio Pompeij Magni competere, vt qui Pontica
matre natus esset, Ponticus esset. Which his saying is direct against you, for
this your strange declaration of Alienigena, an Alien.

Well, if neither the declaration of Vlpian, nor yet the practice of the world
most conformable also to reason, nor any thing else will satisfy you, unless it
be derived and taken out of the Holy Scripture: we are content, to join issue
with you, and (...) be tried by the same only. Christ came Lineally of Booz,
Matthew. 12 Iosue. 6.
whom Solomon begat of Raab (as the most common opinion of Writers is) that
betrayed Hiericho to Iosue: and may we now falsely think, that this Booz was a
stranger, an Alie^, and no Jew? and so withal infringe, break and pervert the
Genealogy of Christ, and the continual Succession of the Jews, Christ's
progenitors? Ye know, that as Athalias mother was a Tyria^, or a Sydonian: so
was Ruth a Moabite. This Ruth married the foresaid Booz. I ask you now again,
whether Obed the son of the said Booz, and Ruth were Alie^s among the jews? If
ye say, he was not: then must you needs confess, the same of Athalia. If you
say, he was: then the holy Scripture makes evidently against you. For of this
Obed Christ came lineally. And if you step forward (as you lustily begin) a
foot or two more, ye will, David and Christ descend of Obed Ruthes son.
or as well you may, make king David also, to whom Obed was gra^dfather, yea and
Christ himself, not much better then Alie^s. And so has Athalia at length
spon a fair thread for you. We deny then, 4. Reg. 11.
that this Athalia was an Alie^ among the Israelits: and therefore she could not
be bard from any inheritance due unto the daughter, among the Children of
Israel. Neither was she removed from the kingdom, as this sobre man being best
awaked dreameth, because she was a stranger. But for that she most cruelly,
and unnaturally, sleaing and murdering her Nevewes, the sons of her son
King Othozias, lately killed by Iehu, by shameful means usurped her self the
croune apperteining to her Nephew Ioas, who by the providence of God was (she
being usurper of it) preserved from her boutcherie. And after seven years, by
the help of Ioada the High Priest, was anointed King, and she deposed, and
worthily put to death. And this cause does appear even in the very Chapter and
place, that this brauling brain does allege. As for the cause he him self
proponeth, we will not stick with him, to give him a longer date, to fetch out
and show us his records, and his authors, at his good leisure.

Well, this string will not serve his bow: we will therefore listen again to
him, and consider, how well he harpeth upon the next string: which surely does
give as il favored a iarring, and as untunable a noice as the first, or rather
more untunable. Wherein our good quiet brother does so strain and wrest the
word, ex fratribus, among the brethren: that he wresteth away not only the
right, and interest, that the Queen of Scotland pretends to the Succession
of the Croune, but does wrest withal the Croune from al Princes necks that
have been, are, or shall be women. And of al such as have, do, or shall claim
their inheritance, by th'interest, and title of their mothers, which have no
better Title, then their progenitors from whom they claim.

For amongst his new notable notes, that he notes out of this seuententh
Chapter of Deuteronomie, for the choosing of a King, we may note (says he) the
sex, by the masculine gendre, used in this word ex fratribus: for under the
other sex, Ataxia most commonly creeps into the stock and Country.

He says also afterward, this politic law, that God did give the Jews, is
grounded upon the law of Nature, and is also as everlasting, as Nature it self
is, and is of all natural men to be observed. It is (says he) of Nature, that
the prescribed sex should govern the other: he means, women should be
governed. Then he knitteth up the Conclusio of his new pestiferous policy:
which I conclude, that Gods law, Nature, and good reason do reiecte the Queen
of Scotland, and deny her that kingdom, which she would feign possess. Who
would ever have thought that such a quiet sobre brain, out of this one word
fratribus, could have found in his heart so unbrotherly, and so unchristianly,
and so fondly withal to extort such an interpretation as is able (if it were
received) to disturb, infri^ge, and break the quiet and lauful possession,
and inheritance of a great part of the Princes of the world? Yea and as fondly,
and unnaturally to frame of himself a new law of Nature also: and so most
wretchedly to corrupt, deprave, and maim both the law of God and Nature? Yet
because this man gives out his matters, as it were co^pe^dious oracles, and
least some might think, that such a sobre man has some good and substa^tial
ground in this his saying: seeing he is so bold with his own gloses upon the
holy Scriptures: I will be as bold upon him alitle, to sift, and examine the
weight and verity of the^. An answer to the Aduer far, touching the law
of, Nature, which he vvresteth against vvomens government. L. 1. ff. de just.
and iure l. ueluti l. ex hoc. l. omnes cod.
And first touchi^g the law of nature, which he makes as a pikaxe to undermine
the state of so many Princes: we might here enlarge many things, how and in
what sort the law of Nature may be taken. But we will be therein compendious and
short. The law of Nature commonly is propre, apperteining as well to other living
things, as to man, as Vlpia^ the notable lawier writes. There is an other law,
that is called Ius Ge^tiu^, the law of al Nations, and it is called also the
law of Nature, because the discourse of natu ral reason forces al Nations, to
obey and keep this law, as to honor God, to obey our Parents, and Magistrates,
to keep and maintain our bargains and promises, Est enim no^ scripta. sed nata
lex, etc. Cicero pro Milone.
in buyng and selling, and in other co^tracts, to defend ourselfe from violence
and injury, with a number of such other. I suppose th'Aduersarie means not
of the first kind, but of the second. Whereof he must needs mean, if he mean
to speak any thing to the purpose. I say then, that this is a false and an
unnatural assertion, to make this surmised law everlasting, as nature it self
is. The law of Nature, or Ius Gentium, is, and ever was, after the time that
there was any Nations of people, and ever shall be. This counterfeit law of
Nature neither is, nor ever was, nor as far as reason may reach to, ever
shall be, It shall be enough for us, to overthrow and cast under foot this
counterfeit law: The practice of Women's Regiment in Asia. Aphrica and Europa.
to show and prove, that women have from time to time, borne Princely Regiment
in the most notable parts in the world and in the best and most famous common
wealths, that ever have been. For the knowledge whereof, Straebo ge^ graph.
lib. 14.
I refer the Reader to ancient histories, being the registers of Antiquity,
which do plainly testify, the same to have been often practiced in Asia,
Aphrica, and Europa.

Concerning Asia, First in Asia. Queen Artemesia
I find, that Artemesia, who builded the sepulcher of her husband Mausolus,
one of the notable spectacles and wonders of the world, Queen Ada.
and her sister Ada with others, Solinus in collect. lib. 67. Plinius lib. 6.
cap. 20. Adrianus lib. 8. de gestis Alexa^. mag. Justinius li. 1 Herod. li. 1.
Strab. li. 16
reigned in Caria. Woman's regiment in Pandea a country in Judea. Queen
Semiramis and Nitrochris Queen Thomiris.
This Ada being thrust out, was restored by Alexander the great. The country
also of Pandea, in Iudaea, was governed by women. The government of the Queen
Semiramis and Nitrochris in The Empire of Babylon, of Queen Thomiris, among the
Mesagites, is to her great praise and commendation in ancient monumentes
recorded. Joseph. lib. 20. and 21. Antiq. c. 2. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 12. Ruff
lib. 2. Eccle. hist. c. 6. Clemens Alex. lib. 1. stromat. Justinius lib. 1.
Tacitus lib. 2.
Josephus makes mention of Helena the Queen of the Adiabens. Eusebius of
Maumia the Queen of Saracens. Atossa was gouernesse of the Persians, a most
excellent woman also for her learning.

It may also appear by the story that Iustine writes of Astiages the King of
the Medians, that in in Media the women supplied the lack of male children,
Queen ^rato.
in Princely government. There is mention made also of Erato, whom the
Parthians chose to be their Queen. We will now make up our conclusion for Asia
with Claudians verse. Medis, Claudianus lib. 1. in Eutropium.
leuibusque Gabeis
Imperat hic sexus, Reginaru^que sub armis
Barbariae pars magna iacet.


Out of the which we have purposely leaft Judea, reserving it as a principal
help, for the utter overthrowing of this man's fantastical interpretation of
the forsaid word, Fratribus. Woman's Regiment in Aphrica Queen Dido. Queen
Cleopatra Queen Isis.
In the stories and monumentes touching Aphrike, Strabo, 12. and ^^ Justin.
(...) 18. and ^^ Diodor. Sicul. lib c. 2. and (...)
we read of Queen Dido at Carthage, Cleopatra in Egypt, and of diverse other
Queens there. The first King of Egypt was Ofiris, who in his absence
committed the whole Regiment to his wife Isis. In AEthiopia, where reigns a
mighty Prince, a Christian man, and one that has many Kings subjected to him,
not many years sithence in the nonage of King David, Damianue^ Agoes de side
and moribus AEthiopu^.
his grandmother the Queen did most politikely, wisely, and godly rule those
Realms. And it appears in the old stories, that in Christ's time, and
before, that Country had no other Princes, then women, Beda ca. 8 in Acta
Apostolorum. Eusebius. lib. 2 Ecclesiast. cap. 1. Plinius li 6 c. 29. Strabo lib.
17. Act. Apostolor. ca. 8.
which were called al Candaces. Such a one reigned there about the time of
Christ's Passion, whose chief servant was converted to Christ's faith by S.
Philip. By whose means the Queen also upon his return, became with her
subjects a Christian woman. And that is thought to be the first Country,
Dorotheus de uita and obitu Prophetaru^ and Apostolorum. Hieronym. in cap. 52.
Esaiae. Hilar. in Psalm. 61. Eusebius. lib. 2 cap. 1. Sabel. Strabo lib. 16.
that publicly embraced the faith of Christ. ^hiopia (...) first ^stia^amo^.
(...) other ^un^s. But ^taine (...) first ^o^g the ^ounces Rome.
And thervpo^ the saying of the Prophet David seems to be verified, saying:
Aethiopia praeueniet manus cius Deo. And yet that notwithstanding our worthy
Britanie, among all the Provinces, that were of the Roman Empire, has thereof
the noble prerogative.

Women were the chief Magistrates among the Tenesians and Sebrites. In the time
of King Solomon, the notable woman, that came from the uttermost part of the
earth, to hear the wisdom of the said Solomon, whom the old Testament
calls the Queen of Saba, the new Testament the Queen of the South, was a
Queen, 3. Reg. 10. 2. Paral. 9. Math. 12. Luc. 11. Joseph. Iudaicar. antiq.
lib. 8. cap. 12.
and as Josephus writes, the Queen of Ethiopia and Egypt, Countries of such
greatness and largenes, as no one Prince throughout al Europe, has so ample
dominion within the same. Percha^ce her dominion did streach to Cephalia,
which draws well toward the fardest part of Aphrica. Salomons ships fet ched
gold from Cephalia.
Wh^ interpretation seems not far a square fr^ the words of the holy
Scripture. Fr^ thence, as the Annals of the said Coun^ record, Salomons ships
every third ye^ brought merueilouse plenty of gold a^ silver. Other suppose,
that the said Na^ went to the late found lands of west I^ dia, especially to
the Island now called Sp^ gnola.

Stobaeue 4^2. ex Nicolao de moribue gentium.
I find in the said Aphrica one strange and fond kind of people, called Buaci,
wh^ men governed men only, and women go^uerned women only: and yet were the^
not so hard masters to women, as ye are, no^ thought women's Regiment (as ye do)
to be^ against nature. And to finishe this second^ part, it seems by Lucan,
that in these quarters of the world, it was no new o^ strange thing, to see
a woman a Prince, as appears by these words of Queen Cleopatra: Non vrbes
prima tenebo
Foemina Niliacas, Lue^n. lib. 10.
nullo discrimine sexus
Reginam scit far Pharos.


As for Europe, as it is better known to us, so therein have we withal greater
store (...) examples of this kind of Government. Woman's regiment in Europa.
Queen Olimpias in Epyre. Olimpias in Macedonia. Irene. Theodora Eudocia.
Zonaras Tom. 3. Annalium.
^^^pire, as it appears by Olympias daugh^^^ to Pyrrhus: In Macedonia, where
a wo^^^ called also Olimpias, succeeded after the ^^^th of Alexander the great:
yea and in the ^^^at and famous Empire of Constantinople, ^^ere Irene,
Theodora, Zoe, an other The^^^^a, and Eudocia were the chief and high
^^gistrates. The said second and last Theo^^ra answered the Ambassador her
self, ^^d iudicially in her own person gave sen^^^ce, as well in public, as
in private causes. those government was also prosperous, ^^ppie and fortunate.

Moreover, it appears, that the Illyrians and Slauons were ruled by Queen
Teuca. ^nius lib. ^. cap. 6. ^^^ca.
What shall I speak of Spaigne and Portingale, and of the Dukedom of Burgundy,
Woman's regiment in Spain, Portingale, Burgundy and Flanders.
and of the Earldom of Flanders, and of other parts of low Germany? Conrade
the Duke of Franconie and Landgraue of Hesse was made County Palatine of
Rhene, Irmelgardis daugh^er of Conrade Duke of Franconie
and Duke of Loraine, by the inheritance of his wife Irmelgardis. He had but
one daughter, who was married to Conrade Duke of Sueuia, whereby was made County
Palatine of Rhene. T^ Conrade had a daughter called Agnes, ^^ried to Henry Duke
of Saxony and Li^ burge, Agnes wife to Henry Duke of Saxony.
who thereby inioyed the County P^latine. The like may be said of diverse oth^
parts of the Germanical Empire, yea a w^ man has ruled and governed the said
who Empire, Agnes wife to Henry the 3. Emperor. Pau. Aemil. lib. 3. Car. lib.
3.
as it is evident in Agnes the wi^ of the Emperor Henry the third, duri^ the
time of the minority of her son H^rie the fourth. And yet the same Empire ye
wot well, passes by choice and election and not by lineal succession of
blood: ye^ many hundereth years, Full. de dict. and fact. memor. lib. 8. cap.
16.
ere she was borne and in the flourishing time of the old Ro^maine Empire, Mesa
Varia grandmother to the Emperor Heliogabalus and Alexander Seuerus, sat with
the Senate at Rome, heard and examined the weighty causes o^ the Empire, Crana
No^ahs daughter Beros. lib. 5 Liui. lib. 1. de^c. 1. AEneas Syl nius de Asia.
c. 20. Lauinia.
and set her hand also to such things as passed, touchi^g the public affairs.

I do now adioyne the kingdom of Sicile and Naples in Italy, of the which
Italy Noah, whom the profane Writers call Ianus, made Crana his daughter ruler
and Queen, where also Lauinia reigned after the death of Aeneas. And as for
Naples, this president of womanly Government is not there only of later years
in both the Queens called Iohanne, but even from very ancient time: which
thing the stories do record in Amalasintha, ^^ene ^aples ^la^a.
that governed after the death of her father King Theodoricus with her son
Athalaricus. The said Amalasintha was mother to Almaricus King of Spain, ^ias
lib. Regum ^an.
and after his death ruled her self the said Realm.

Let us now add farther, Chronie. Palmerij. Her. Contrac. Mu^stuniuers. Cosm.
lib. 4 AEneas Syluius in descript. Asiae. d. ca. 20. Hect. Boet. lib. 1. Histo.
Scoti. uide la geneal. des Rois d^ France impre. Paris 1561. in Carolo Magno.
the Dukedoms of Loraine and Mantua, ^omans ^giment (...) Lorain, ^d Man^a.
the kingdom of Swetia, and Dania, and of Noruegia, whereof Margaret the
daughter of Waldemarus was gouernesse and Queen: ^n the ^ingdoms of Svvetia
Dania and Noruegia.
the kingdom of Beam and of Hu^garie. And to draw nere home, the Realm also of
Scotland, which realm has denomination of a woman, as their stories report, as
has likewise Flaunders. Boemia. Hungaria. Scotland.
The like, some of our stories report of England, wherein I will make no fast
footing.

England.
Now touching the feminine Success^ to the right of the Croune of England, it^
no new found Succession, and much le^ unnatural. We read in our Chronicles
Queen Cordel the third heir and daug^ter of King Leyre the tenth King of
Eritan^ that restored her father to the kingdom^ being deposed by her two other
sisters. W^ read, that about three hundred, fifty an^ five years before the
Nativity of Christ^ Martia Proba, Martia Proba.
during the nonage of he^ son, did govern this Realm full politik^ly and
wisely, and established certain lawe^ called Leges Martianae.

There be as well of our own, as of exterternal historiographers, Helena mo^her
to Consta^tin the great. Onuph. de Rom Principib. Eusebius. de uita Constantin.
lib. 1. Eccl.
that for a most certeinty affirm, that Helena the noble Constantine his
mother, was a Britain, and the only daughter and heir of Coelus King of
Britanie, and that the said Constantine was borne in Britanie. Surely that his
father Co^stantinus died in Britanie at York, and that the said Constantinus
began his noble Victorious race of his most worthy Empire in Britany, it is
reported by ancient Writers, and of great faith and credit. And that likewise,
long before the said Helens time, women bare the greatest sway, both in war
and peace: and that the Britains had women or their Capteines in warfare.
Among other Cornelius Tacitus writes thus: Voadicae.
His at^e allis inuicem instructi, In uita Agricolae.
Voadica generis regij ^mina Duce (neque enim sexum in Impertis ^scernunt)
sumpsere vniuersi bellum.

We have now already showed of Henry he second, Henry the second K. by his
mothers right
who obtained the Croune by ^he mothers right. Which said King by the Title of
his wife, and after him his Succes^ours Kings of England, did enjoy the
Duke^omes of Aquitania, Vide Alligeneal cap. 1561.
and the Dukedom of Poiters, as the said Kings Successor should ^aue done
also (as we have showed before) the Dukedom of Britanie, if Arthur King
Richardes Neuew had not by the usurping of King John, and his unnatural
cruelty, died without issue. And by what other right, then by the woman's
inheritance dew to King Edward the third by his mother the French Kings
daughter, do the Kings of this Realm bear the Arms and Title of the Kings
of France? The French make not vvomens Regiment unnatural.
And though the French men think their part the better against us, it is not
but upon an old politic law of their own (as they say) and not upon any such
fond ground, as ye pretend, that women Regiment is unnatural.

Which Regiment ye stoutly affirm to b^ far a sunder from any natural
Regiment, ye^ truly, as far as was the boys head from the shoulders, the
last Bartholmew Fair at London, which many a poor fool did believe to be
true. For as the boys head remained still upon his neck and shoulders, though
i^ seemed by a light lively legerdemaine, to be a great way from the body: so
would you now cast a mist before our eyes, and make us believe, that woman's
government and nature be so divided and sundred, that they may i^ no wise be
lincked and coupled together. But surely the French nation was never so unwise,
to think this kind of Gouerme^t repugnant to Nature, or to Gods holy Word. For
then they would never have suffered their Realm to have been so often governed
and ruled by women, Adela K. Philippus mother and Blanch the mother of S.
Lewis. See the prefaces of the said alliances.
in the time of the nonage or absence of their Kings. As by Adela the mother of
King Philip, and by Blanch the mother of S. Lewis, and by the wife of the late
King Frauncis taken prisoner at Paura, and by diverse others. Neither should the
said Adela and Blanch have been so commended of their said noble and worthy
rule and ^uernme^t. The said Frenchmen, The French men hold great prin
cipalities by the vvo ma^s right.
though by ^oli^ie they have provided, to exclude fo^iners from the inheritance
of the Croune: (...) they themselves hold at this day, by ^e womans title and
interest, the Dukedom ^f Britanie, with diverse other goodly pos^ssions. And we
have showed before, how ^ewis the Dolphin of France made a Title (...) the
Croune of this Realm, in the right ^f his wife. Thus I have, as I suppose, The
conclusion against the Adversaries, touching the law of Nature.
sufficiently proved, that this kind of Regiment (...) not against Nature, by
the ancient and ^ontinual practice of Asia, Aphrica and Eu^^pa. For the
perfecting of the which last ^^rte of Europa, and of the whole three ^artes,
I end with the notable Poet Virgils verses: Filius huic fato Diuum prolesque
virilis
Nulla fuit primaque oriens erepta iuuenta est: Virgi. li. 7.

Sola domum, and tantas seruabat filia seeds.
We knit up therefore our conclusion against you after this sort. That law and
usage cannot be compted against the law of nature, or ius Ge^tiu^, which the
most part of al countries, and one great or notable part of the whole world does
and has used: but this law or usage is such: Ergo it is not against the law
of Nature. The Mayor needs no proof: and for the proof of the Minor, we
need to employ no farther labor, then we have already done. Whereupon the
conseque^t must nede^ be inferred: that this law or usage does we^ agree and
stand with the law of nature. The reason thereof is, that it is most natural,
the daughter to inherit her fathers patrimonie^ whereunto if there be a
dignity annexed^ both are so united and knit together, tha^ they can in no
wise be vnlinked.

Marie, if you had driven your argument, of the duty and obedience, that the
wife owes to her husband, and had argued: It is the law of Nature, that the
wife should be ruled and governed by her husband: Ergo it is against Nature,
(...) he wife (...) some ^ase may b^e head to her husband.
that the wife should be head to her husband, in respect that she is his wife:
then had you argued conformably to reason, Scripture and Nature. But if you will
thereof infer: Ergo she can in no wise be head to her husband: then play you
the Sophister, making a fallible and vicious argument, and making a confuse
mingling of those things, that be of sundry and diverse Natures.

The child must obey his Scholemaister, ^^d Parents, and may justly of them be
^hastised, though he be a Prince: yet this notwithstanding, the said child may
use ^is authority, by his Magistrates, against his ^cholemaister, yea and if
the cause so re^uire, against his Parents to, as did Edward ^^e Confessor, and
King Edward the third against their mothers. Eue^ so the case fares with the
husband and the wife. The wife ^ay without any impairing or mayming of ^er
duty, to God, or to her wedlock, re^^esse her husbands misdemeanour, if it
be ^eedeful to the common Wealth. And yet (...) she not thereby exempted from
such dew^^e, as the matrimonial conjunction craves of the wife, toward her
husband.

You frame an other argument of incon^eniences, as though under the womans
Regiment, Ataxia, that is to say, disorder most commonly creeps in. I will not
deny, but sometime it is so: but that most commonly ^t is so, that I deny. Let
both the Regiments be compared and matched together, and weied by an
indifferent balance, and I am deceived, but the inconveniences of the man's
Regiment for the rate, will ouerpaise the other. And it is full unmeet,
unseemly, and a dangerous matter, to rule Princes right and Titles, by such
blind ghesses.

Well, you will yet say, you have Scripture on your side: you say, the Iues were
commanded, to take no King, but exfratribus, a brother: Ergo we can have no
Sister to our Q. To this objection also my two former answers may sufficiently
serve. First you must prove, that al Christian Princes are obliged and
subjected to this part of Moses law: and that shall you never be able to do.
Which thing you saw well enough, and therefore you were feign, to underprop and
uphold this your ruinous and weak building, with the strong force of the law
of Nature. But this force, as you have hard, is but the force of a bulrush. Our
second answer also will sone infringe and break this your conclusion, which
respects only the free and voluntary election and choice of a King. But we
speak of birth and Succession, wherein we have none interest, but God, who is
the only judge and vmpier, and has by his Divine providence, made to our hands
his choice already, which if we should undo and reuerse, we might seem to be
very-saucy and malapert with him. But we will remove and relin^uish al these
helps, and see, what, and how ^arre this authority forces by the very words.

Frater, What absurdity follovveth by the streining this word ex fratrib'.
Marc. ulti.
is the masculine ge^dre (you say) and therefore women are to be removed. Then
by this rule women also must be excluded from their salvation, because
Scripture says: He that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved. Holy
Scripture abu^deth of like places. As, Beatus vir, qui non abijt in consilio
imptoru^, Psalm. 1. et 4.
etc. Beatus, qui intelligit etc. And by this rule women are excluded from the
eight beati^udes. But we will not shifte your own word (brother). We say
therefore, that this word must not be taken so strictly and ^arrowly, as you
take it. For first, not only in Scripture, but in old ancient profane
Authors, L. Luci'. quaesitu^ ff. de legate. 3. and ibi Barto. Genes. 13.
it comprehe^deth the brothers child: yea and sometime in Civil law coosin
germans coming of two brethern. Abraham called Loath his brothers son,
brother. Medea also calls her sister Chalciopes sons, her brethern,
speaking to her sister in this sort.

(...)
(...)
Again, L. 1. ff. de uerborum signific. L. Tresfra tres. ff de pact. and l.
Lucius. fa^ni. Ercis. Dict. l. Lucius. Quaesitum. Quaesitum. est. an quod
baeredes fra tribus rogati ^ssent restituere, etiam ad sorores per tinet.
Respo^dit, pertinere, nist aliud sensisse testatorem probetur. Leuit. 9. Deuteronomy.
23. Zacha. 7. Math. 18. 2. These. 3. 1. Joan. 2.
as in the Civil law the masculin^ gendre co^prehendeth the feminine: so does
it in your word (brother). Modestinus writes thus: Tres fratres, Titius
Meuius, and (...) Paulus also and Titius, fratres. Sceuola says, the bequestes
made by the testatour fratribus, to his brethern, shall be beneficial to his
sisters also, unless it may be proved, that the testatour meant otherwise.

Now when the holy Scripture says, thou shall not hate they brother: Thou
shall not lend upon usury to thy brother: let every man use his brother
mercifully: if thy brother trespace against thee, forgive him: withdraw your
self from every brother walking disorderly: he that ha^eth his brother, is in
darkness, with a number of like sort: shall we infer thereupon, that we may
hate our sister, that we may oppress our sister with usury, that we may use
our sister as unmercifully, as we will, without any remorse of conscience, and
are not bound to forgive her, nor to eschew her company being excommunicated,
or a notorious offendour?

Wherefore neither this word (brother) excludes a sister, Neither this word
brother excludes a sister, nor this word King a Queen by any Scripture.
Melech. Malcah.
nor this word King in Scripture excludes a Queen. In the Greek ^ongue, one
word represents both brother; and sister, saving that there is a difference
of gendre, (...). After the same rate, the words King and Queen are ^^it up
both in one, as well in the Greek, as in the Hebrew (...), and in the French, Roy
and Royne: and from this the Latin tongue Rex and Regina, does not far disagre.

Seeing then by interpretation, this word (brother) contains the word
(Sister) also in Scripture, and the word (King) by propriety of one and the
same voice and signification expresses the Queen, both in Scripture, and in
other tongues: why should we not as well communicate to women the dignity
apperteining to the name, and resembled by the same, as the name it self? For
even in this our own Country, albe it the names of the King and of the Queen
do utterly vary one from the other, and also the ancient Statutes of the
Realm do not only attribute and refer al prerogative and preemine^ce, power
and jurisdiction unto the name of a king, but do give also, assign and appoint
the correction and punishment of al offenders against the Realm and dignity of
the Croune, and the laws of the Realm unto the King: yet al manner of the for
said jurisdiction and other prerogatives are, and ought to be fully and wholly,
and as absolutely in the Prince female, as in the male. And so was it ever
deemed, judged, and accepted, Anno Mariae 1. c. 2.
before the Satute made for the farther declaration in this point.

The like we say of both the forsaid words, brother and Rex, used in this place
of Scripture. whereof if there do yet remain any scruple or doubt, to any man:
for the avoiding and clean extinguishing of the same, we will refer the
Reader to the noble Ciuilian Paulus, and to the rule before, by us touched. L
fi. ff. de Legibus.
Si de interpretationelegis quaeratur: inprimis inspiciendum est, quo iure
Ciuitas retro in eiusmodi casibus vsa fuit. Optima enim legum interpres
consuetudo. the Jews never in terpreted this word after the sort, as the
adversary does.
It is for us then to consider, whether in Judea and Jerusalem women have at
any time ben the chief Rulers and governesses, and whether the Jews ever
interpreted this place after the meaning and sense of this man?

Surely at such time, as Christian men bare rule at Jerusalem, we know well,
there was no such interpretation. For among other ^ulko the County of Aniow,
Alliances c. Paradin^ Fulko and others ki^gs of Jerusalem by their vviues
right.
who leaft his said County to Geffrey his son, Father (...) Henry the
second, by th'Empresse Maude, and went to Jerusalem to King Balduin the
second, and there married Melysa^d his daughter and heir, was afterward by his
wives title King of Jerusalem. Salome Herodes sister was made Gouernesse by
Augustus Caesar of Iamnia^, Azorum, Phasilides and Ascalonia. Which thing is a
good proof, Joseph. lib. antiq. Iud. 17. c. 13.
that the Romans thought it not unnatural (as ye think) for a woman to enjoy
civil government.

I might hereto add the wives of Ioa^nes, Iose. lib. 13. c. 19. and 20 Egesip.
de excid. Hiero. l. 1. c. 12 the vviues of Ioannes Aristobulus and Alexander
governed the Jews
of Aristobulus and of Alexander, who governed and ruled the said Jews, after
the death of their husbands, with such other. Which stories though they be not
in Scripture, yet are they. Authentical, and of good credit. And yet are we not
altogether unfurnished of a scripturely example, but rather we are so
furnished, that God so long before forseeing that there should come such
unnatural cauilling quarellers against his creature and providence, has as it
were al at once met with them, and answered to al such calume nious cauilling
of yours and such others, as you shall by and by understand.

A woman, pardy (if we believe you) must not keep the state and honor of a
Prince and Queen. Genes 2. and 3.
And why, I pray you? Was not she created to the image of God, as well as man?
And does not she represent the Majesty of God? Did not God bless them both?
Did not God bid them rule over the fish of the sea, and over the foul of
heaven, and over every beast, that moves upon the earth? But what thing mean
you by the image of God? Mean you, as S. Paul seems to mean, that man was
created in righteousness and true holiness? This is true also in the woman.

Some think, that the Image of God represents the blessed Trinity, which is
(as such an high thing may be) somewhat resembled by memory, by will and by
understanding: which are in women, as well as in men. What thing is there, that
reason, wit and understanding may reach to, that women have not, or may not
atchieue and atteine? For learning, there have been many women exactly learned,
in Music, A strononie, Philosophy, Oratorie, Physique, in Poetry, in Law
and Divinity.

Atossa the Queen of the Persians, Women earned.
of whom we have spoken before, was the first, that invented the manner of
writing of epi^^les. Clement Alexand. Stromat. lib. 1. Plato in Mean. Socrates
in Simposio Platon. Albericus l. Qui filiu^ Vbi pupit. Hieron. In Praefat. in
Sopho. ad Panlum and Eustoc. Tripart. lib. 11: c. 12. Diodor Sicul. lib. 1. and
5.
Aspasia was Scholemaistresse to that ^oble Orator and Captain Pericles. The
^oble Philosopher Socrates was not ashaned, to be taught of Diotina. Accursius
his daughter professed the Civil law openly at Bononie. The Sybilles be famous
among Writers, as well Christians, as other. Paula and her daughter Eustochia
were notably learned: and diverse other women in S. Hieromes time, as it
appears in his works, bisides diverse other before his time, of whom he
makes mention, as also of the aforenamed Aspasia, Sappho, Cornelia, and such
like. Hyptachia passed all the Philosophers of her time, and succeeded Plotinus
in Plato his Schole, openly professing at Alexandria diverse liberal sciences.
And what were the nine Muses, but virgins most excellent in the same? Who is
called the Goddess of learning, but Minerua? Which also found out the Art of
planting and setting? What should I now speak of the noble learned woman of
our Britanie? of Ca^bra the daughter of King Belin, who promulged the laws
which of her name, as some of our Country men write, have their denomination;
and are called Sycambricae: Illa Numae coniunx. consiliu^que fuit. Ovid. 3.
Fastoru^. Justinian and other Princes consulted with their vviues in public
affairs. Women the occasion that the Kings their husbands were converted to
the faith. Theodelida Bertha. Clothildis. Justinian. Authen. ut Iudic. sine
quo. qui suffrag in princip l. been. c. de praescript. quadrie^na. Hero. Hal
lic. lib. 1. Tripart. lib. 9. c. 31.
of Martia Proba, of Helena, and such other like. We need no^ run up to so
high and far years: w^ have hereof at home date and also present and worthy
examples. Perchance you will object, that women are unable and insurf^^cient,
to consult of great and weighty affairs, as being but of weak and feeble wit
and counsel. If this reason hold, you must exclude from al princely Honor
and Regiment, al. Kings that be under age, or otherwise that lack discretion,
as well as women. And yet, as weak as they are, Numa King of the Romans, the
great Monarche Justinian, bysides others, did consult to the great commodity
of themselves and their co^monwealthes, with their wives, for the better
ordering of the public affairs. The life of the great Monarche Cyrus was
preserved by the counsel of the wife of an heardman. Theodosius also
The Emperor took great benefit, by the good co^saile of his wife. Theodolinda
was th'occasio^, that her husband Agilolphus K. of the Lo^bardes, and Bertha,
that our King Ethelbertus, Clotildis, that Clodoueus the King of France,
received the Christian faith. The Lacedemonia^s, the wifest people amongst the
Grecians, Paulus Diacon. de gestis Long. Beda lib. 1. Eccl. Hist. Paulus Ae.
mil. lib. 1. Plutarc. in com Numae and Lycurg. and in uita Aegidis. August. d^
Ciuit. Dei lib. 18. c. 9. Plato and Aristotle do not utterly reiecte vvomens
government. Tacitus de moribus Germanor. Plato. Dialog. 5. Repub. Polit. lib. 2.
c. 7.
and the Athe^e^ses also used in the old time, to have women present at the
debating of public affairs. Which thing was practiced among the old Germans.
Neither Socrates, nor Plato ^o altogether remove women, being apt and mete
thereto, from public administration. A^stotle confesses, that in the
commo^wealth of the Lacedaemonians, many things were done by women. The said
Aristotle, though he preserre the rule and government of men, yet does he not
reject the other, as unnatural, but grants, (...). That sometime women, being
great inheritours, have the pri^cipalitie. Now that many co^monwealths have been
commendably and worthily governed by the^, and that in their government lacked
neither wit, policy, dexterity, prudence, liberality, justice nor morcy,
neither any other thing mete for a Prince: I could easily declare, but I do
forbear by reason of tediousnes, and for that in the pervsing and discussing
of the stories by me already rehearsed, it will most easily, most fully and most
evidently fall out, to al such as be desirours to travail therein.

In case all this will not satisfy you, and that you think it still to be
unnatural and against Scripture, for a woman, that is ordained to be subjected
to her husband, to be Gouernesse and Head to a public state: and that you
think also, that for all other respects, a woman might be a Gouernesse: yet
considering that she must have the managing of martial exploits, which in deed
may seem in no wise agreeable to a woman, and is surely the dificultest matter
of all in our case and question, and that you can not, nor will not be
satisfied, unless you may for this, and all other doubts, be by Scripture
persuaded: lo then I bring to you one authority of Holy Scripture to serve al
turns. I bring, I say, noble Debora, to decide and determine all this
controversy and contention. who, you can not deny, Debora was Gouernesse of
the Jews by Gods special appointment. Iudic. 4.
was the chief and supreme Magistrate over the people of God, to Gods well
liking, and by his own special gracious appointment. She heard, determined,
and decided al manner of litigious and doubtful controversies, as well for
bargains and contractes, as for doubts and ambiguities of the law: and that
not by other Magistrates intermediant, but by her self personally. Erat autem
Prophetissa: she was a Prophetess. Homil. 4. in 4. cap. Iudic.
which words Origin singulerly well does ^ote, saying: that holy Scripture
does not use such phrase of speaking of any other of the Judges, least any man
should grudge and repine (as this froward natured man does) at woman's regiment.

Let no man tell me now of the courageous Amazones. Pollio V^pistue in uita
Aurelia^. Herod. lib. 8. Iusti. lib. 2.
Let no man tell me of Zenobia the Queen of the Palmeries, and bysides her
excellent learning, of her noble Chivalry, nor of Artemisias, that white
liuered and cowarde Perses manly wife, nor of our manly Voadica, nor of any
other the wise politic victorious Queens, that we have before named, or of
any such like. Our Debora shall serve us, one for all.

Iabin the King of the Chananees had kept the people of Israel for their sins
and offenses to God twenty years in great misery, slavery, and bondage.
Iudic. 4. Joseph. antiq. Iud lik. 5. c. 6.
He had three hundred thousand footmen, ten thousand horsemen, and three
thousand charnotes, serving for the exploits of his wars. This noble Debora
sent for Baracke willing him to muster the people, and with ten thousand men,
to set upon Sisara, ^abins Capiteine. But Barac would not go, The great victory
of Debora.
unless she went also. Well, says she, I will go with the. When they should
have buckled, Barac and th'Israelites, fearing the huge multitude of
the enemies, would have recoiled back into some safer and surer places. Nay,
says Debora, depart not, pluck up your hearts, for all is ours. And upon this
they incountred with th'enimie, and behold there fell suddenly upon th'enimies
faces so vehement a storm of rain and hail, that it took from them their
sight, and did so sore beat them, that for very cold and weakness, they were not
able to hold their weapons in their hands. Thereupon being wonderfully
discouraged, breaking there array, they took them to their fete, and in fleeing,
some were slain by th'Israelits, some by their own horsemen and Chariotes.

I speak not this of Debora, because I think warlike matters properly, and so
well to apperteine to women, as to men. I know and do well allow the saying in
Homer, of Hector to his wife: (...).

I speak it to this purpose only, to show, that a woman may not only have
civil regiment in other things, but may intermedle also, when the case
requires, with warlike matters, and be present with the Army in the field.
The ceremonies that Kings of England used in their coronation.
And this also among other ancient and solemn ceremonies, the gyrding of a
Queen at her Coronation with a sword, the setting of a pair of spurs to
her heels may well signify.

Which Ceremonies though they have been used from the time of King Edward the
Confessor at least, and from the noble Alured and that upon Kings only, except
our own time: yet the reason and signification of the same, Vide specu lum
Histor. Rich. Castrens. lib. 3. cap. 3.
may and does take place in women Princes also, to put them in remembrance, to
chastise al malefactors with convenient justice. Yea with speed to pursue not
only by their vnderofficers, but in their own Roial persons (if the
necessity of the time require it) their inward and outward enemies. Wherein
they have a president in this worthy Debora.

This Barac, of whom we have spoken, by the consent of the most part of the
expositors of holy Scripture, was Deboras husband: whereby ye may see, that the
matrimonial duty of the wise to the husband does nothing repugne to the
public administration and office of the wife. Each without other may frindly
and preaceably agree. She may serve al turns, to the contentation of God, her
husband, and the Commonwealth. For the respect whereof, the said husband being
but a member and parcel of the same, and as subject to his wife, in that
respect, as any other: she may, yea and ought to command the said husband, and
as the case may stand, severely to punish his outragiouse behavior, and
doings toward the said Commonwealth. This noble Debora therefore condemns
your Conclusion, as both unnatural, and derogatiue to holy Scripture.

Neither will this evasion relieve you) (that some of your affinity, for the
maintenance of this so wrong an opinion have used) that this is but one bare
and an extraordinary priuileged and personal example, having none other the
like in Scripture. One only example in Scripture a sufficient president.
And therefore not to be drawn, to make thereof a rule or president for womanly
government. If this your reply be effectual, then farewell the Baptism of young
children, whereof it will be hard to find more then one, if that one example may
be found in all the holy Scripture. Then farewell a number of rights, Ceremonies,
customs, and orders, as well in ecclesiastical, as in political affairs, al
which have but one, and some no one example at al therein. Yet it so being,
that the use thereof is not repugnant to the said holy Scriptures: they have been, they are, and may well hereafter be kept, used and observed.

And yet I know no cause, but that the worthy Judith may be another example
also: Judith. 19.
who though she were not gouernesse of the Commo^wealth at that time, but
others: yet played she that part, that seemed most abhorring and strange to
woman kind, devising, yea and most manfully and meruelously executing in her
own person, the renoumed slaughter of the arrogant, haughty and proud Tyrant
Holofernes. As her stomach and courage was manly and stout in that act: so was
she not only a noble virtuous woman, but a marvelous wise woman withal, and
so was taken and judged to be of all the people. Whereby it will follow by good
reason, that in case she had been the Gouernesse of all the people, her government
would have been as well profitable to the commonwealth, as comfortable both to
nature, and the holy Scripture also. Which example though it may seem
sufficient to overthrow your answer (be it never so artificially forged) to
Debora: yet to refute and refel it utterly, not only by examples, but even by
plain and full authority of holy Scripture, let me be so bold, as to demand
your answer to a question or two? First, whether if a man seized in lands and
possessions, dye without issue male, his daughter by holy Scripture shall enjoy
the said lands and inheritance, or no? In case ye say, she shall not: the
plain words of the scripture evidently do reprove you. If you grant it, the^
ask I farther, what if any civil gouerme^t more or less be annexed and united
to this inheritance (as it is not only in Empires and Kingdoms, but in many
Dukedo^s, Earldoms, yea and Lordships also) whether she shall be excluded from
the said her inheritance? If ye say, yea: then you say against Scripture. If
you say, that the inheritance must remain in her, and the civil government to
others: then say you against al reason, against the use, manner, and custom of
the whole world: it is but your own fond folish gloss. Whereupon I do infer,
It seems by the rules and words of holy Scripture, that a vvorma^ may have
Civil government.
that womanly government is admitted, not only by these examples, but even by
the very words, rules, and decrees of holy Scripture. And so I trust you are,
or have cause to be fully satisfied, as well touching your allegatio^, that
woma^ly Regiment is against nature, as also touchi^g a brother to be chosen
king. And therefore I conclude against you, that neither the law of God, nor of
Nature, nor yet reason, (upon the which also you ground yourself) do reject
the said Queen Marie from the succession of the Croune of England.

You reason, that where the people erect themself an Head of their own kind
and Nation, there nature assures the people of natural government: and where a
stranger carries opinion of unnatural tyranny, it assures the ruler of
unnatural subjection. To a stranger is murmurre, and rebellion threatened. But
now if this excellent Lady and Princess be no stranger, and be of our own
kindred, and of the ancient and late Roial blood of this Realm (as we have
declared) then is your reason also withal avoided, which may and does
oftentimes take place in more strangers, coming in by violent and forceable
means. But here, as natural a man, as you make your self, ye seem to go
altogether against reason, and against nature also. If Princes Children were to
be counted strangers and Aliens, or to be suspected as enemies and Tyrants
succeding to their own Progenitors inheritance, it was an unnatural part,
and a great folly in the noble Kings of this and of many other Realms, to
give out their daughters to foreine Princes in marriage. And in stead of
preferring and advancing them by their marriage, and procuring thereby frindship
and amity with other Princes, to disable their said children from there
Ancestors inherita^ces in those Countries, from whence they originally
proceeded. And as it seems by your kind of reasoning, to purchase and procure
byside to them thereby an opinion of enmity and tyranny.

This, this, I say, is a froward and an unnatural interpretation. Nature
moves and drives us, to think otherwise, and that both a Prince will favor,
love and cherishe the people, from whence he fetches his roial blood, and by
who^ he must now maintain, keep, and defend his roial estate, and that the
people likewise will bear singular love and affection to such a one, specially
of such known Princely qualities, as this noble Lady is adorned withal. The
Q. of Scotland no stranger to England
Surely it is no more unnatural to such a Prince, descending from the anncient
and late roial blood of the Kings of England, to bear rule in England, and as
it were to return to the head and fountain, from whence originally she
spra^g: then it is for all fluddes and rivers which (as Homer says) flow out of
the great Ocea^ sea, (...). to reuert, return and reflow again to the said
Ocean.

This coherence, conjunction, copulatio^, inclination, and favor running
interchangeably betwixt such a Prince and the people, is no more strange to
nature, then is the conjunction of the tree and the rote thereof, then of the
fountain and the River issewing from thence, then of the son and of the
son beams, and finally then is the conjunction betwixt the old ancient
living grandmother, and her young and tender daughter. Neither do I well know,
how I may better call noble England, then a living grandmother to this good
gentle Lady, who^ we (I do not doubt, if ever God call her to the Roial state
thereof) shall not only find a loving and gracious Maistresse, but a most dear
and tender good daughter. For these and other co^sideratio^s, the laws of the
Realm do not nor ever did estra^ge such Princes, from the succession of the
Croun of this realm which by reason of the said mutual inclination and
beneuole^ce of the one to the other, stands with the law of God and nature,
and with all good reason. And therefore your conclusion is against Gods law,
Nature and al good reason. Whereby you full ungodly, unnaturally, and
unreasonably, do conclude, an exclusion of the Q. of Scotland (pretending her
to be a stranger) to that right, that God, Nature and reason, and the true
hearts of al good natural English men do call her unto. The which her said just
right, title and interest, we trust we have now fully proved and justified, and
sufficiently repulsed the sundry obiectio^s of the adversaries. And as this
being the principal, ought to breed no doubt or scruple in any man, so many
other folish, fond and fantastical objections, not worthy of any answer, that
busy quareli^g heads do cast forth, to disable her right, or to disgrace her,
and bleamish either her honor, or this happy vnio^ of both Realms, if God
shall so dispose of it, ought much less to move any man. An happy vnio^ I call
it, A great commodity that shall come to England and Scotland, by the union of
them, in case this Succession chance.
because it shall not only take away the long mortal enmity, the deadly hatred,
the most cruel and sharp wars, that have so many hundred years ben
continewed, betwixt our neighbors, the Scotsmen and us, but shall so intierly
consociate, conioine and so honorably set forth and aduau^ce us both and the
whole Island of Britanie, as neither tongue ca^ express the greatness of our
felicity and happiness, nor heart wish any greater. The old enmity has trodden
down, and kept us both under foot, and has given occasion to the common
enemy, as the Danes and other to spoil us both. It has caused for these
thousand years, and more, so infinite and so ougly slaughters, as it will
grieve and pity any man's heart to remember: and yet neither to the great
augmentatio^ of our possessions at this day, nor to their much loss, they
having lost nothing of their old aunciene inheritance, saving Barwike only. If
this co^iunctio^ once happen, and if we be once united and knit together in one
kingdom and dominion, in one entier brotherly love and amity, as we are
already knit by neighborhood, by tongue, and almost by all manners, fashions,
and behauiours: then will al unnatural and butcherly slaughter, so long
hitherto practiced cease, then will rest, quiet wealth and prosperity increase
at home: then will al outward Princes our frindes rejoice and be comforted, our
enemies dread us. Then will the honor, fame, and Majesty of the Island of
Albion daily grow more and more, and her power and strength so greatly
increase, as to the frinde will be a good shield, and to the enemy an horrible
terror. Then shall the vtwarde enemy little inda^mage us: then shall we with our
children after us reap the pleasant fruits of this noble co^iunctio^, wrought
thus to our hands by Gods good and gracious providence, without expense, force
or slaughter, which hitherto a number of our courageous, wise and mighty
Princes, have this thousand years and upward sought for (but in vain as yet)
with so excessive charges, with so great pains, and with so many and maine
Armies, and with the blood of so many of their subjects.

Then shall we most fortunately see, and most gloriously inioye a perfect and
entier Monarchy of this I Will of Britanie, or Albion, united and incorporated
after a most merueilous sort and in the worthy and excellent person of a
Prince, mete and capable of such a monarchy. As in whose person, by side her
worthy, noble and princely qualities, not only the roial and unspotted blood of
the ancient and noble Kings of Scotland, but of the Normans, and of The English
Kings withal, as well long before, as sithe^ce the Conquest: yea and of the
Britains also the most ancient inhabitants and Lords of this Island, do
wonderfully, and (as it were) even for such a notable purpose, by the great
providence of God, most happily concur. The evident truth whereof, the said
Queens petigrue does most plainly, and openly set forth to every man's sight
and eye: Then I say, may this noble Realm and Island be called not Albion only,
but rather Olbion, that is, fortunate, happy and blessed.

Which happy and blessed conjunction (when it chau^ceth) if we unthankfully
refuse, we refuse our health and welfare, and Gods good blessing upon us: we
refuse our dewty to God, who sends our dewty to the party whom he sends,
and our dewty to our native Country to whom he sends such a person to be our
Maistresse. And such commodities and honor withal coming thereby (as I have
said) to whole Albio^, as a greater we cannot wish. And finally we shall
procure and purchase (as much as in us lies) such disturbance of the
commonwealth, such vexatio^s, troubles, and wars, as may tend to the utter
subversion of this Realm: from which dangers God of his great and unspeakable
mercy defend and pre serve us.

FINIS.
Hos tres libros a viris Catholicis, ijsque eruditissimis lectos, and
examinatos, intellecto ab ijsdem librorum argumento, vna cum editionis
necessarijs causis, iudicaui merito edendos esse.

Actum Louanij. 6. Martij. 1571. Thomas Gozaeus a Bellomonte, sacrae Theologiae
Professor, and authoritate Pontificis librorum approbator.

Errata Libri secundi. Fol. Pa. Lin. Errata. Correction. 4 2 16 Ad And 10 1 18
world word. 11 2 14 good goods 28 2 17 Bblach Blanch. 32 1 3 in Chauncerie
In the Chauncerie. 53 2 16 lands and testamentes lands and teneme^tes 58 2 24
laufully niece laufull niece. 64 2 5 unto heirs unto the heirs. 66 2 27 be
produced be procured. 67 1 17 put out wrongfully. Errata Libri tertij. 9 1 2
Solomon Salmon. 9 1 5 fasly safely. 15 2 22 father Constantinus father
Constantius.


