A SERMON PREACHED ABOARD of the GLOBE the 18. of May, Anno 1617. At an Anchor
by the Cape of Good Hope, in the Bay of SOVLDANIA, 34. Degrees to the Southward
of the Aequinoctiall line.

By WILLIAM LESK, Minister of Gods Word.

Entertained by the Honorable Company of Merchants trading into East India,
for the instruction and comfort of the Fleet, by them sent forth for those
Eastern parts Anno, 1614. (*)

PSALM. 71. VERSE, 17, 18. O God thou have taught me from my youth: and
hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works.

Now also, O God, forsake me not, until I have showed thy strength unto this
Generation, and thy power unto every one that is to come.

LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe, and are to be sold at his house near the
East end of Christ-Church. 1617.

TO THE TRVELY Honorable, and right Worshipful Knight, Sir THO. SMITH,
Governor of the East India, Muscouia, Summer Islands, and French Companies,
etc. All increase of Grace, Health and Happiness in this life, and Glory in
that which is to come.
JOSEPH (Honorable Sir) in the wisdom and great goodness of Gods all-ruling
providence, being by Pharaoh delivered from the violence and oppression of his
mighty, but malicious enemies, throughout the whole course of his life
thereafter, testified his thankfulness unto the great God of Heaven, for so
comfortable a blessing, by his effectual and earnest endeauours, Genesis 41.33,
34, 35, 36. and 47.11, 12.
making both for the advancement of Gods glory, and good of the Commonwealth
wherein he lived: as his wise, grave, and discreet counsel for provision
against the famine to come, and charitable feeding of the Lords chosen,
sufficiently witness: there needs no application: for it is a great deal
better known, then that by my pen the fame thereof can be increased, how
seriously (the success still answering the zeal and greatness of your
endeavors) since the first time it pleased our gracious Sovereign to cast his
eye upon your singular and rare endowments, you have taken to heart this holy
task. Leaving therefore the wise and discreet carriage of the Honorable
Embassage unto the Emperor of Muscouia, by his Majesty imposed and laid upon
you, your more then ordinary care of increasing the Trade of Merchandise,
beneficial unto ^^l, but especially unto Ilanders, whereof our ^^e^ies
themselves being Judges, we are inferio^^ unto none; your great and manifold
aduent^^es unto far distant and remote Countries, for animating and
encouraging of others unto the like attempts, your bountiful expense and
charges upon new Discoueries, your liberal maintaining of men skillful in the
Mathematikes, and other Sciences, making for the direction of Seafaring men,
in conducting their ships into whatsoever parts of the world, and, which both
in Policy and Piety exceeds all, your Christian commiseration and favorable
acceptance indifferently of all poor distressed men, in whom sparkles of
Ingenuitie, and ripeness of Judgment, whereby in time the Commonwealth may be
benefited, are in any competent measure to be seen: whence it comes to pass,
that many, who otherwise should have lain buried in the pit of oblivion, for
want of preferment, forced to betake themselves unto the basest and most
servile employments, live now in some eminency and places of note in their
Countries, being helpefull rather then chargeable unto others: all which making
rather for posterity, then present gain, (for what benefit can your gray
hairs expect by Plantations, Discoueries, and other Attempts of that or the
like nature?) afford sufficient matter of a right large and ample Discourse,
being a subject well worthy and deserving the applause and commendation of a
learned Writer, unto whom (although in duty as far obliged as any) leaving
the exact performance of so great and weighty an employment, I shall at this
time content my self with a brief remembrance of the reason moving me to
publish these slender Meditations under the covert and shade of your
protection, I mean your religious care, in furnishing the Ships and Factories
under your government, with painful, learned, and conscionable Preachers and
disposers of the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, whereby God is glorified
in the assemblies of your servants, and they themselves, although (the supply
of their necessities so requiring) for a season deprived of the benefit and
comfort of their Country, live as at home in regard of spiritual food: In
which respect, as in general, all that love the prosperity of Sion, are
obliged, and become debtors unto your devotion: so more particularly, those
unto whom the propagation of Gods worship, after a special manner, is
committed: but of all, most especially we, who in this kind have been
eyewitnesses of your care, executioners of your zeal, and objects of your
manifold and great favors, for Christ and the Gospels sake, conferred and
bestowed upon us. The due consideration whereof, makes me an humble suitor,
that according to your wonted respect, and reverence of the meanest endeavors
of this nature, you will be pleased to safeguard and protect from the slanderous
and carping tongues of malicious Atheists, this small Treatise, that under your
name of all good and godly men justly honored, coming into the public view
of the world, God in some measure thereby may be glorified, his people edified,
and others of your quality and condition, as by many other means, so by this
small exercise, understanding the religious course of your government, may
thereby be incited and stirred up unto the like proceedings: according to that
of our Savior, Let your light so shine before men, Mat. 5.15.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

Your Worships in all humble duty to be commanded, WILLIAM LESK.

A Sermon preached aboard of the Globe, riding at Anchor in the Bay of
SOVLDANIA.
Matthew. 11. Verse 28.29.30. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest.

Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart:
and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

For my yoke is easy, and my burden light.


ALthough in the day of his Creation, Man was in the riches of the bounty and
great goodness of his Creator, made Lord of the World, and Commander of
whatsoever breathed upon the face of the Earth; Genesis 1.18. and 14.
the Heavens serving for his use, the Earth for his habitation, the Stars for
signs, for seasons, for days and for years, and all the creatures as bondmen
attending his beck, ready to yield homage and obedience unto him, as their
lawful Commander: yet the Almighty, Esaias 42.8.
who will not give his glory unto another, made him not so absolute, but that
still he had a necessary dependence and deeply engraven reference unto a
superior power: for even in the height and greatest of his perfection, there
was by the finger of God powerfully rooted in the furthest and most secret
corners of his heart, a natural instinct, that Honor and Homage was due from
him unto a greater then himself; which directed by an understanding rightly
informed, and affections in nothing swaruing from the true verdict and sound
judgment of the intellectiue part, directly guided, and in all safety
conducted this noble creature unto the great Creator of Heaven and Earth, as
the only true object of his submission, unto whom Iure creationis he was in
duty bound to perform obedience. In the fruition of whom, as he then enjoyed
all happiness; so well might he have still continued in the same perfection,
if the malice of Satan had not inclined the freedom of his will unto the
worser part. But alas, after this doleful and neuer-sufficiently lamented
alteration, he was in Justice, by the righteous Judge of the world, so disarmed
and stripped naked of, if not all, yet the greater part of his former dignity,
that, that which was before the cause of his greatest happiness, is now the
original of all the confusion, which in the very rudiments and first
principles of Religion far and near covers well-nigh the face of the whole
earth: for the natural instinct spoken off before, since the fall deprived of
the eye of understanding, whereby it was sometimes directed in the right way,
is now the ground of all the Diversity, Schism, and Division, which (proh
dolor) is every where to be seen both in the object and manner of divine
worship, all men agreeing upon this, that there is a God to be worshipped,
according to that of the Heathen, Cic. lib. 1. de Leg.
Nulla gens tam effera, nulla natio tam barbara, cui non insideat haec notio,
esse Deum, There is (says he) no Nation so rude, nor people so barbarous,
where this Principle, That a God is to be worshipped, is not acknowledged and
received as an undoubted truth: all (I say) agreeing upon this, but by
disobedience deprived of the eye of righteous judgment, ever have, and to this
day still do grievously and grossly err, both in finding out the person of
him that is to be worshipped, and in the manner how, being found, this Homage
is to be performed: as easily might, at great length, by special induction of
Nations, Countries, and People, worshipping the Sun, the Moon, Fire, Water,
and other Elements, particularly be dilated, if Histories both sacred and
profane did not furnish every meanest capacity with too too many examples of
Catts, Cowes, Stocks, and Blocks, which have been thought not unworthy of
divine worship; so deeply is this principle, That there is a God, rooted in
the heart of man, that howsoever otherwise beyond all measure ambitious and
proud, yet rather then he will have no God, he can be content to submit
himself unto the basest of the creatures that possibly can be named. Thus man,
with Elymas the Sorcerer, Act. 13.11.
wandering to and again, as one deeply plunged in a Labyrinth of more then
Egyptian darkness, should for ever thus have continued, without so much as in
the least measure approaching unto, much less attaining the end of his labor,
if the God of all comfort and consolation, moved only with pity and
co^miseration toward the workmanship of his own hands, had not, beyond all
expectation, yea to the great astonishment both of men and Angels, found out a
means, whereby man, enforced to seek, but never able to find, might be
directed unto the true object of that worship and obedience, which by a deeply
rooted instinct he was in duty bound to perform unto a superior power, in the
right acknowledgement and due performance whereof his greatest felicity and
happiness does consist: which howsoever by divine dispensation it was at the
first revealed only a far off, Genesis 3.15.
The seed of the woman shall tread down the head of the serpent; and
afterward, for many years together, in that ancient Commonwealth, whereof
amongst all Nations, the Lord was pleased to make choice for placing his Name
from hand to hand, under types and figures, darkly conveyed: yet when the
fullness of time was come, Galat. 4.4.
God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them
that are under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons, who from
Heaven miraculously declared to be the Son of God, and by the Father
anointed, for the performance of this great and weighty employment, Matthew.
3.17.
inuites all that desire the knowledge of the true God, Esaias 61.1.
leaving the by-ways and beggarly rudiments of worldly elements, to come unto
him as the only mean by the decree and determination of the sacred Trinity
appointed for reducing and bringing back wretched man, so far estrayed, unto
the knowledge and understanding of the true God. Ioh. 14.6.
I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life: no man comes unto the Father but by
me: Come therefore unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest.

First, Matthew. 11.27.
Come. Because all things are delivered unto me of my Father: So that in me
alone is to be found whatsoever is requisite and necessary for the safeguard
and salvation of your souls: for there is none other Name under Heaven given
amongst men whereby we must be saved, Act. 4.12. Ioh. 7.37.
but the name JESUS: If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink: He
that believes in me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living Water: Come therefore unto me all ye that labor and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Secondly, unto me. Come unto me:
Without any the least expectation of Enthusiasmes, or immediate revelations
from the Father: For God, Heb. 1.1.
who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past to the
Fathers, by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son,
whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the world,
Coloss. 2.3.
and in whom are laid up all the treasures of true Knowledge and Understanding:
Come therefore unto me, as the ordinary means from above appointed, for
effecting and bringing this matter to pass. This is my wel-beloued Son,
Matthew. 17.5.
in whom I am well pleased, hear him: For in and by the Mediator between God
and man, God is reconciled unto man, and man reunited unto his Creator, for
the attainement of everlasting happiness: Come therefore unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Thirdly, because the
remembrance of former transgressions, and guilt of sin and iniquity, how
manifold or gross soever, should not so far prevail, as to dishearten or
discourage us from undertaking this holy enterprise: Therefore expressly he
sets down the quality and condition of his ghests, naming even that which the
subtlety and craft of Satan might otherwise have happily used as a stumbling
block, to hinder and let men from coming unto him: For how soon man begins,
in any least measure, to think upon reformation of his wicked and evil
courses, then our Adversary the Devil, 1. Pet. 5.8.
who goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, vnmaskes
whatsoever formerly he has kept secret, and amplifieth to the full those
things, which when he did leave, he labored greatly to extenuate and value at
the smallest rate. Come therefore unto me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest: Esaias 61.1.2.3.4.5.
because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek, he has
sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives,
and the opening of the Prison to them that are bound, to proclaim the
acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort
all that mourn in Zion, to give unto them Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of Joy
for Mourning, the Garment of Praise for the spirit of Heaviness, that they
might be called Trees of Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he
might be glorified. Fourthly, because men, to their endless and irrecouerable
loss, should not wrest or pervert that which goes before in the seven and
twentieth verse, No man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whomsoever
the Son will reveal him: As if the grace of God were in Christ Jesus offered
only to some few of those that labor and are heavy laden under the burden
of their sins: therefore (all) are mentioned. Come unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, Esaias 1.18.
and I will give you rest. If your sins were as red as crimson, come unto me,
and I will make them as white as snow: At what time soever a sinner does repent
him of his wickedness, and comes unto me, though his sins be as scarlet,
they shall be as wool: If ten Lepers come unto me, although they be even
ten, they shall all be cleansed of their loathsome and filthy disease:
although your souls be as blind with the dust and dirt of Iniquity, as was
Bartimeus the beggar, come unto me, and ye shall receive sight: If your
transgressions be such, and so many, that even a Legion of Devils torture and
torment your souls, come unto me, and you shall find rest: If from the Womb
you have been so lame and cripple, that you are unable to move one
hayre-breadth toward the Kingdom of Heaven, come unto me, and I will enable
your joints: If you have so long lain in the puddle of sin, that with Lazarus
you stink in the grave of Iniquity, come unto me, and I will breathe in your
face the breath of life, whereby you shall be made living souls: where all are
invited, there none is excluded: where such as labor and are heavy laden
under the burden of Sin and Iniquity, are willed to come, there a secret
reason is given, why the mercy and favor of God, offered unto all, is not by
all received, because all do not labor, and are heavy laden under the
burden of their sins: for Christ came not to save the righteous, but to call
sinners to repentance: the whole need no Physician, but such as are maimed and
lame under the intolerable weight of their transgressions. Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled.

To the end then, that comfortably and with profit we may come unto Christ, it
is necessary, that we labor, and be heavy laden under the burden of sin,
that our hearts be ready to melt, because of our transgressions, and our souls
standing at the gates of death, because of the intolerable weight of iniquity,
which can never sufficiently be effected without a distinct knowledge of the
nature, quality and condition of sin; Romans 3.20. and 7.7.
By the Law is the knowledge of sin; I had not known sin but by the Law,
for I had not known lust, except the law had said, Thou shall not covet; for
whereas all other learning serves rather to blow up the heart of man with an
idle opinion, and vain conceit of his own worth, founding nothing else in his
ear, but shrill and loud blasts of the excellency of his soul, the wonderful
fabric and making of his body, the goodly sympathy, and fellow feeling,
which every part, faculty, and power has one with another, and the sweet
harmony, and concord of the whole compound, the Law of the Lord is that which
bewrays and lays open unto man, the ugliness of his heart, the nakedness of
his imaginations, and the perverseness of his ways: to the Law therefore and
to the testimony; if they soul spenke and think not according unto this word,
Esaias 8.20.
it is because there is no light in it; therefore DAVID speaking of this Law
says, that it is perfect, converting the Soul, that it is sure, making wise
the simple, that it is right, reioicing the heart, that it is pure,
enlightening the eyes, that it is true, and righteous altogether, Psalm. 19.7.8,
9, 10. and 1.2.
more to be desired then gold, yea, then much fine gold, sweeter also then the
honey and the hony-combe: Blessed therefore is the man, whose delight is in the
Law of the Lord, and in his Law does meditate night and day.

Secondly, because man (naturally) is so bewitched with the pleasures of sin,
and glued to the alluring, and entising sweetness of wickedness, that a bare
knowledge of the nature of transgression, is never able to bring this labor
and wearisomenesse upon his soul; therefore, after that by the Law we have
attained unto the knowledge of sin, it is necessary that we understand the
value and esteem which it has in the eyes of the Lord, by himself at great
length revealed in his Word; sometimes, by speeches and words full of dislike,
and disdain: My people ask counsel at their stocks, Hos. 4.12.
and their staff declares unto them, for the spirit of whoredom has caused
them to err, and they have gone a whoring from under their God. God saw the
wickedness of man that it was great in the earth, and that every Imagination
of the thought of his heart was only evil continually; Genesis 6.5.
therefore it repented the Lord that he had made man upon the earth, and it
grieved him at his heart: your Incense and Sacrifices are abomination, Esaias
1.15.
because your hands are full of blood: sometimes, he denounces heavy
Judgments against the children of disobedience, thereby to testify his great
dislike of Iniquity; The end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is
filled with violence through them, Genesis 6.13.
and behold, I will destroy them with the earth. If thine heart turn away, so
that thou will not hear, Deuteronomy. 30.17, 18.
but shall be drawn away and worship other gods, and serve them, I denounce
unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish: and sometimes again, he
inflicts exemplary punishments upon such as delight and take pleasure in the
ways thereof; as the destruction of the primitive world, the overthrow of
Sodom, and reiection of the Jewish Nation sufficiently witness.

Exodus 19.18.
the Lord appeared after so fearful and terrible a manner, that all the
people that were in the camp trembled for fear, that thereby seeing the
greatness of his power, in whose sight sin is loathsome and abhorred, they
might fear to commit iniquity, and tremble at the remembrance of by gone
transgressions; yea commonly, when as the Almighty publishes and proclaims
unto the world, his dislike and detestation of sin, there are still let fall
some flashes and apparent significations of his might, majesty, and power: Thus
says the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, Esaias 1.24.20.
the mighty One of Israel, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me
of mine enemies. If ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured by the sword:
for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Deuteronomy. 29.19.
though I walk in the imagination of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst:
therefore for attaining the effect aforesaid, it is expedient that men thoroughly
be persuade that the Lord has appointed a day of recompense, wherein every
man shall be rewarded according to that which he has done in the flesh, Romans
2.6.
whether it be good or bad. Now these things thoroughly learned, 1. Cor. 5.5. 2.
Cor. 1.14.
cannot but bring us to a true sense and feeling of the heavy burden and
intolerable weight of sin and iniquity; and consequently to labor and be
heavy laden under the burden of our transgressions, whereby we come to have
interest in this comfortable inuitation, and are made capable of the large, and
ample promise annexed thereunto: Come unto me all ye that labor, and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest; not immunity and freedom from the
temptations of Satan, the troubles of the world, and crosses incident unto us
whilst we live here upon earth: No, no, for through many tribulations we
enter into the Kingdom of heaven; if we be without chastisements, whereof all
are partakers, we are bastards, and not the Sons of God; for the Lord whom he
loves he chastises, and he corrects every Son whom he receives: but the
words that I speak unto you are spirit and truth; in the world ye shall have
tribulation, but in me peace: be of good comfort I have overcome the world:
Ioh. 16.33. and 14.27. and 15.11
Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give you, not as the world gives give I
unto you: these things have I spoken unto you that my joy might remain in you,
and that your joy might be full. For the rest which Christ here promises unto
such as come unto him, must of necessity be of the same nature with his
Kingdom, because of temporal felicity he himself publicly professed that
the Foxes had holes, and the Fowls of the heaven had nests, but the Son of
man had not whereon to lay his head: Come therefore unto me all ye that labor
and are heavy laden, and you shall have my joy fulfilled in you; howsoever, as
concerning the things of this life, Ioh. 17.13.
you must resolve to take up my yoke, and learn from the intertainment which I
have had in the world, that the Father in this life will not have his children
free from temptation and trouble: Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ioh. 15.16.
the servant is not greater then his Lord, neither he that is sent, greater
then he that sent him: if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub,
how much more shall they call them of his household? if they have persecuted me,
they will also persecute you; take up therefore my yoke and learn of me, for I
am meek and lowly in heart: Ier. 11.11.
I was like a Lamb or an Ox that is brought unto the slaughter, and being in
the form of God, made my self of no reputation, took upon me the form of a
servant, and was found in fashion, as a man humbling my self unto the death,
even the death of the Cross; Phil. 2 7, 8.
learn therefore of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart: but because I have
said these things unto you, sorrow has filled your hearts: nevertheless I
tell you the truth, Ioh. 16.6, 7.
it is expedient for you to stand in the ways, and see and ask for the old
paths and walk therein, Ier. 6.16.
and ye shall find rest for your souls; for though our outward man perish,
yet the inward man is renewed day by day: whosoever then will come unto me, let
him take up his cross and follow me, for my yoke is easy, and my burden
light; because God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above
that you are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that
ye may be able to bear it; 1. Cor. 10.16.
for the Almighty by the gracious influence of his holy Spirit comforts,
vpholds, and strengthens his children in the time of trouble, whereby that
becomes easy and light unto them, which otherwise they could never possibly
be able to bear, according to that of the Apostle: Blessed be God, 2. Cor.
1.1.3, 4, 5.
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God
of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able
to comfort them that are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our
selves are comforted of God; for as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so
our consolation also abounds by Christ.

The words divide themselves into two several branches, in the first whereof
Christ graciously inuites all such as labor, and are heavy laden under the
burden of their sins, to come unto him, as the only Physicion and comforter
of perplexed spirits, come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest. The second contains a maine condition, with all care and
diligence, sincerely to be performed by such as accept and embrace this
comfortable offer; take upon you my yoke and learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls, for my yoke is easy
and my burden light: the inuitation affords these particulars to our
consideration; first, the exhortation it self, Come unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden; secondly, a large and ample promise annexed
thereunto, and I will give you rest, or as it is in the next Verse, and you
shall find rest unto your souls. In the inuitation we are first to consider
the particle or word of exhorting (Come:) Secondly, the quality and condition
of the ghuests invited, ye that labor and are heavy laden: Thirdly, the
number of them (all:) and Fourthly, the feast-maker, or he by whom these
ghuests are invited (Me) come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden:
the promise after the same manner, resolves it self into these particulars;
first, the thing promised (rest) secondly, the quality of it, it is a gift,
and thirdly, the guide from whom the same is to be expected (I) come unto me,
and I will give you rest. In the second part of the Text, the condition to be
performed by such as accept Christ's offer is first generally propounded, take
upon you my yoke; secondly, the same is by two several arguments, particularly
enforced, whereof the first, set down in the end of the 29. Verse, is taken
from Christ's own example; Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in mind:
the second, from the facility and ease of this task, in that which follows,
for my yoke is easy and my burden light; of these then in order, and first of
the first.

Come: this word is diversely taken in text of holy Scripture, sometimes it is a
word of exhortation, which looking back upon something to be forsaken,
implies a secret reason why departure is to be made from the same, in which
sense it is then commonly used, when as one stepping out from the rest, exhorts
and entreats others to enterprise or undertake this or that: thus Jacobs sons
upon the approach of their brother Joseph, encourage one another, for effecting
and bringing to pass their unlawful ends; Genesis 37.20.
Come now therefore and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit, and we
shall say, Some evil beast has devoured him, and we shall see what shall
become of his dreams: and Balack in his speech unto Balaam, Come, I pray thee,
Numb. 23.27.
and I will bring thee unto another place, peradventure it will please God that
thou may curse me the^ from thence: and in the Parable of the Householder,
who going into a far Country, let out his Vineyard unto tenants, the
husbandmen upon the coming of the Heir, are brought in after this manner,
speaking one to another, This is the Heir, come, let us kill him, Matthew. 21 38.
and let us seize on his inheritance. Come (says the Prophet David) and hear,
Ps. 66.16. and 24.11.
all ye that fear God, and I will declare what the Lord has done for my
soul. And again, Come ye children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the
fear of the Lord. Sometimes again it is a word of command and charge, as
appears by the messages of the two Captains, whom Ahaziah sent for Eliah the
Prophet; Thou man of God, the king has said, Come down: 2. Kings. 1.9. and 11.
O man of God, thus has the King said, Come down quickly. Both which
significations of this first word applied unto the present occasion, afford
streams of great comfort and consolation unto perplexed spirits, that the
Son of God Jesus Christ stepping (as it were) out from amongst his brethren,
should friendly exhort, beseech and entreat, that forsaking their wretched and
miserable estate, the momentarie pleasures of sin, the bondage of Satan, and
allurements of this wicked world; now, at length they would be content to
shelter and safeguard themselves under the covert and shade of his protection:
or otherwise for expressing of his further care, and more earnest desire of the
salvation of our souls, that knowing the natural and imborne backwardness of
the heart of man, in embracing and intertaining motions making for the good and
everlasting happiness of his soul, he should as Lord and Master command, and
charge us leaving our former wicked, and evil courses, to come unto him, the
only fountain and wel-spring of true happiness: howsoever then the words
thus expounded afford many singular and extraordinary comforts unto distressed
and diseased souls: yet if in this place we understand (come) to be the same
that (believe) we shall not come far short of the true sense and meaning of
the speaker; as by collation and conference of other Scriptures of like nature
evidently does appear: Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life; No
man comes unto the Father, Ioh. 5.40 and 14.8. and 6.44.
but by me: No man can come unto me, except the Father which has sent me,
draw him: Faith then in the Mediator Jesus Christ is that, whereby broken and
contrite spirits, laboring, and heavy laden under the burden of sin, find
rest unto their souls: not a bare knowledge of the History of holy Scripture;
for then the devils might challenge interest in Christ's death, as well as
others, Iam 2.19.
because Saint James witnesses; The devils believe and tremble: but besides
this knowledge, there must be an assurance, grounded upon the authority of
Gods word, that for Christ his sake, God is reconciled unto us; according to
that of the Apostle, Being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body
now dead, when he was about an hundred year old, Romans 4.18, 19, 20, 21.
neither the deadness of Saras womb: he staggered not at the promise of God,
through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory unto God, being
fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was able also to perform: so
that the says whereby we come unto CHRIST, has his seat in both parts of
the soul, in the intellectiue or understanding part, a sure and certain
knowledge of the truth of those things which are to be believed; for faith, as
the Apostle witnesses, is the substance of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1.
and the evidence of things not seen. And again, therefore it is of faith,
that it might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the
seed, Romans 4.10.
not to that only which is of the Law, but to that also which is of the faith
of Abraham, who is the father of us all. And in the will, faith leaves an
assurance, that God is both able, and in due time will make good in our
particular the general promises of Mercy and Grace, according to that of the
Apostle, I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angles, Romans 8.38,
39.
nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Therefore it is, that almost
every where the Holy Ghost speaking of things, for Christ his sake in due time
to be conferred and bestowed upon us, he speaks of them in the time past, as if
already we were in full possession thereof: Blessed be God, the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.3.
who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus, in whom we have: edemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of his grace: but God, who is rich in mercy,
Ephesians. 1.7. and 2.4, 5, 6.
for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins and
trespasses, has quickened us together, and has made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Such then is the assurance which faith leaves
in the heart, that the believer speaks and thinks of the promises of mercy
and salvation, as of things present, whereof already he is in full possession:
again, that in faith there is not only a sure and certain knowledge of the
History of Gods holy Word, but also an assurance of the love and favor of God
in and for the mediation of Jesus Christ, these subsequent Scriptures
sufficiently witness: Romans 5.1.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Now this is certain, that the knowledge of the History of Gods holy
Word is so far from quieting and bringing peace unto the souls of men, that
on the contrary, it serves rather more and more to increase amazement, fear,
and terror in their hearts: according to that of S. James, Iam. 2.19.
The Devils believe, and tremble; they believe, that is, by the History they
know the wrath of God to be so fierce against Sin and Iniquity, that it can
be expiate and done away by no other means, but by the death of his only
begotten Son: by the knowledge of the History of Gods holy Word, they
understand themselves finally, and without all hope of redemption, wholly to be
rejected and cast off: by the History they know, that JESUS is appointed Judge
both of Men and Angels, and that for ever they shall have their abode in
everlasting misery and torment; therefore they believe and tremble. Man
likewise, in the knowledge of the History, what can he see, but every where
manifest tokens of the wrath of God against sin? as Death, Disease, and
diverse other calamities, usually ensuing and befalling us whilst we live here
upon earth; and which most of all increases our fear, that the wrath and
indignation of the Almighty is such, and so great, against all manner of
iniquity, that it could by no other means be appeased, but by the death of
his only begotten Son JESUS CHRIST: all which bringing rather matter of
horror and fear, then peace unto the souls of men, there must be something
else besides Historical knowledge, in that faith, whereby being justified, we
have peace with God; which can be nothing else, but an assurance of the love
and favor of Almighty God, in, and for the mediation and all-sufficient
sacrifice of his dearly beloved Son JESUS CHRIST; by whom also we have
access by faith into this grace wherein we stand. Abak. 1.4.
To the same purpose makes that of Abbakuk; The just shall live by faith. No
man lives by an Historical knowledge of the Word of God; which, as even now,
at great length, has been delivered, furnishes rather matter of horror,
desperation, and fear, then of life, health, happiness, and the like:
therefore the faith spoken of by the Prophet, must, besides knowledge, be an
assent unto and assurance of the love and favor of God, in, and for the
mediation of his Son. Thirdly, S. Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians, so
plainly maintains and powerfully avouches the assurance of faith which now
we have in hand, that if there were no more, this one Scripture may well serve
for confirmation of the same: Ephesians. 3.12.
In whom we have boldness with confidence by the faith of him: and again, Let
us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of grace, Heb. 4.16.
that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. Who,
knowing only the History of Gods holy Word, dare presume boldly and with
confidence to approach and draw near unto the dreadful Majesty of Almighty
God, whom as an angry and severe Judge he sees ready to power down the
viols of his fierce wrath and indignation upon the transgressors of his Law;
that faith then, whereby with boldness confidently we present our selves
before God, besides knowledge of the History, must of necessity have an
assurance of reconciliation in JESUS CHRIST. Genesis 4.4.5.24. and 49.20.
This is that faith whereby Abel became more acceptable in the sight of the
Lord, then his brother Cain; Enoch walked with God, and was seen no more;
Jacob dying, took order for his burial in the promised Land; Luke 7.48.
and Marie Magdalene obtained free pardon and forgiveness of all her
transgressions. If therefore ye have this faith, Come unto me all ye that
labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Come. From this, and other Texts of holy Scripture, Psalm. 50.15.
of the same or like nature: as, Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me: Mal. 3.13.
Return unto me, and I will return unto you: Turn ye now from your evil
ways, and from your evil doings: Wash ye, Zach. 1.4.
make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes,
cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, Esaias 1.16.17.19.
relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow: if ye will
be obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land. The Sanballats and subtle
Sophists of these last days gather, I cannot tell what natural and imborne
ability and power in man, ex puris naturaelibus, as they say, to perform
obedience unto the Commandments of God; because first it were in vain to
exhort, advise, request, and beseech such as wholly and altogether are impotent
and unable to hearken and obey: again, the large promises of health and
happiness, in case of obedience, were mockages rather then true promises, if
there were no power at all in man to perform the Commandment; as if seeing a
man altogether deprived of the use of his legs, one should promise him great
sums of money, with all celeritie and swiftness, speedily to run a race,
whom he very well knew unable so much as to stand, much less swiftly to
run. Being then that the Lord commands, exhorts, advises, and by large and
ample promises allures men to the obedience of his Commandments, it must of
necessity follow, that there is some power and ability in them for the
performance of this obedience: Christ his Come unto me, then puts us in mind,
that if we will, we may believe in the Mediator between God and man; if we
list, there is power in us enough to obey his commandment; and if carefully we
bestirre our selves, there is no want of strength in our hearts to corporate
and work together with the Spirit of God, for consummating and bringing to
full perfection the work of our salvation; for else the great Shepherd JESUS
CHRIST would not require that of us which altogether we are unable to perform.
But needless multiplication and increase of words removed and set aside, if
these men can be persuaded to turn unto the sixth of S. John's Gospel and four
and fortieth verse, they shall find the same mouth, that in the Text which now
we have in hand, inuites and exhorts such as labor and are heavy laden, to
come unto him, there publicly preaching unto the Jews: No man can come unto
me, except the Father which has sent me draw him. Where is now their imborne
strength? What is now become of their natural ability in spiritual things?
And of what validity and force, I pray you, is their strong Goliath, taken from
the nature of Christ's speech? If no man can come, except he be drawn,
certainly of our selves we are dead in sins and trespasses: Ephesians. 2.5.
if we must be drawn, then we are not sufficient of our selves to think a
good thought, 2. Cor. 3.5.
much less to do any thing that good is: if we must be drawn unto Christ,
then naturally every imagination of the thoughts of our hearts are only evil
continually. In like manner, the same Spirit, Genesis 6.5.
which by the mouth of Malachie exhorts Israel to turn unto the Lord their
God, by Ezechiel professes, Mal. 3.7.
That he will give them one heart, and put a new spirit within them: That he
will take away the stony heart out of their flesh, and give them an heart of
flesh, Ezech. 11.19, 20.
that they may walk in his Statutes, and keep his Ordinances, to do them,
and they shall be his people, and he will be their God: and again, I will give
them one heart, and one way, Ierem. 32.39.
that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children
after them. That then we walk in the obedience of Gods commandments, it is
the Lords own blessing, and not any natural or imborne strength of ours:
according to that of S. Cyprian, Dei est, inquam, Cyp. lib. 2. Ep. 2.
Dei est omne quod possumus, inde viuimus, inde pollemus, inde sumpto and
concepto vigore hic adhuc positi futurorum indicia praenoscimus; Whatsoever we
are able to do for the attainement of everlasting happiness, is to be
ascribed unto the grace and gift of God; it is from God, I say, and not our
own: for in him we live, by him we are enabled, and from him endowed with
strength, living yet here upon earth, by the eyes of faith we behold and look
upon the badges and notes of everlasting happiness. And S. Augustine speaking
to the same purpose: Nemo se palpet, Aug. Hom. 49. in Joan.
de suo Satanas est: tollat homo peccatum quod suum est, Deo iustitiam
relinquat; Let no man, in the matter of regeneration, ascribe any thing unto
himself, for of ourselves we are adversaries, and opposite unto the ways of
righteousness: Let man then, if he must needs challenge ought to himself,
take to him the sinful part, which is his, ascribing all his righteousness
unto the Lord. Therefore the Prophet David blusheth not to beg at the hands
of the Lord, even the beginnings and first steps of holiness, Psalm. 51.10. and
119.18.35.34.35.
Create in me a clean heart, O Lord, and renew a right spirit within me: open
thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law: make me
understand the path of thy Commandments, so shall I talk of thy Precepts:
give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law, yea I shall observe it with
my whole heart: make me to go in the path of thy Commandments, for therein
do I delight. What then had David of his own? or where was his natural and
imborne strength, whereby he was able of himself to do somewhat toward the
attainement of everlasting happiness? a clean heart and a right spirit he
begges to have created within him: now creatio est ex nihilo, this is the
difference between made and created; that making presupposes the substance of
the thing made, to have been before, being nothing else in it self, but
inductio nouae formae, the bringing of a new shape, fashion, or form upon an
old subject, as to make a Ship, a Boat, an Oar, or the like, is nothing else
but to square and proportion Timber and Wood, which (happily) long, or (at least)
sometime before has had his being, into form and fashion, fit to swim or
sail in the Sea: but to create, is of nothing to make some substance. If then
David must have a clean heart and a right spirit created in him, it will of
necessity follow, that there was at this time no such thing to be found in his
breast: Secondly, he cranes not only a clean heart and a right spirit to be
created in him; but Lord open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous
things out of thy Law: give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law: make
me to go in the path of thy Commandments. As if Hanna, having by prayer and
supplication obtained a son at the hands of the Lord, should beg safe
deliverance at the Throne of Gods mercy, professing thereby, both the
conception and birth to be from above. Just so, David having begged the
foundation and ground, a clean heart and a right spirit, finding in himself
not so much as ability and strength, to make use of the Lords blessings for
the salvation of his soul, much less power to do any thing that good is, he
sueth, That the Almighty, having of nothing framed the new man in his heart,
he would be pleased to open his eyes, that he might see, and strengthen his
limbs, that he might walk, and firmly tread within the Courts of his
Sanctuary. Thus then you see, what warrant the adversary has from this and
such like Scriptures, for maintaining a position so prejudicial unto the
all-sufficient Sacrifice of Christ's death. But what then, may some man say, is
the meaning of Gods holy Spirit, in these and the like kind of speeches? Unto
which question I had rather answer by Saint Augustine, then mine own mouth:
who disputing against Pelagius the same very question which now we have in
hand, speaks after this manner, Aug. de lib. Arbit. cap. 16.
Iubet Deus quae non possumus, vt nouerimus quid ab illo petere debeamus;
Therefore (says he) God commands us often to do those things which he
knows us wholly unable to perform, thereby to teach us what to ask, beg,
and crave at his hand. And again, Aug. de corrept. and great. cap. 3.
O homo in praeceptione cognosce quid debeas habere; in correptione cognosce
tuo te vitio non habere; in oratione cognosce vnde accipias quod vis habere; O
man, in and by the commandment learn what thou ought to have; in
punishment, that thou thy self art the cause of all thy wants; in supplication
and prayer, understand from whence supply of thy defects is to be had: for as a
broken-winged Foul, by offering to fly, perceiues the defect and decay of
that part of her body, which before she thought to be sound; so man, being by
divine authority commanded to perform these and these spiritual duties, in
ipso conatu, in the very attempt and enterprise it self he is informed of his
own inabilitie and weakness. Come then unto me, does not, as the Papists
falsely imagine, argue any natural or imborne strength in man, for the
performance of spiritual duties, but is a means which it pleases the wisdom
of Almighty God to use for bringing of him to the knowledge and
acknowledgement of his natural and imborne frailty, and by consequence, unto
a begging of things necessary unto endless and everlasting happiness, from
the Throne of his mercy: according unto that of S. Augustine, Ideo Iubet vt
facere iussa conati, Epist. 89.
and in nostra infirmitate sub lege fatigati, adiutorium gratiae petere
nouerimus; Therefore (says he) God commands, that in the enterprise and
attempt of obedience, by reason of our manifold infirmities wearied under the
yoke of so absolute and perfect a law, we may learn to sue unto the Throne of
Gods mercy, for the gracious assistance of his holy Spirit, whereby we may be
enabled to perform that which he so justly does exact and require at our
hands.

Unto me. The soul of man guilty of many heinous abominations, and
understanding both the fierceness of Gods wrath and indignation against the
breach of his Law, and great power which he has to do what he will for the
overthrow and final subversion of his enemies, seeks nothing more, then how
to appease this consuming fire, and be in favor with this great and dreadful
Judge of the World. The Books and Learning of the Heathen are able to afford no
direction in this case, because they themselves blinded with a vain conceit of
Righteousness, were altogether ignorant of the great misery, by the fall of our
first parents brought upon the whole posterity. The Penmen of Holy Scripture
have discovered two means for effecting and bringing this matter to pass,
which S. Paul calls the Law of Works, and the Law of Faith, Where is boasting
then? Romans 3.27.
It is excluded: By what Law? Of Works? Nay, but by the Law of Faith. The
first, howsoever it be in it self sufficiently able safely to conduct us unto
the Haven of everlasting happiness; yet in regard of our inabilitie and
weakness to perform the condition of perfect obedience, contained therein,
it becomes rather an accuser and vpbraider of our misery, then a wholesome
salve of sick and diseased souls: according to that of the Apostle, Now we
know, that what things soever the Law says, Romans 3.19, 20.
it says to them who are under the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and
all the world may become guilty before God: therefore by the deeds of the Law
there shall no flesh living be justified in his sight, for by the Law is the
knowledge of sin: And again, The Law works wrath, for where no Law is,
Romans 4.15.
there is no transgression. For this cause it was, that the Prophets and
Preachers of that ancient Church, before the coming of Christ, have from time
to time taught Gods people to appeal from this, where no comfort was to be
found, unto the Law of Faith in Jesus Christ, Romans 3.25.
whom God has set to be a propitiation for the remission of sins, through
faith in his blood: that Adam, whom the voice of God summoning and citing to
appear before the Tribunal of his justice, made afraid, may by a more gentle
and mild voice, Genesis 3.10. and 15
The seed of the woman shall tread down the head of the serpent, be comforted
and set on foot; and David, in whose flesh there was no soundness, Psalm. 38.3.
because of the Lords anger, nor rest in his bones, because of his sin, might
in the promise of the Gospel, In thy seed shall all the Nations of the world be
blessed, Genesis 26.4.
fully be strengthened and raised up. These things, in former ages more
obscurely delivered unto the faithful of those times, at Christ's coming into
the world, were publicly and plainly preached unto the Church: first
extraordinarily from Heaven, This is my well-beloved Son, Matthew.
in whom I am well pleased, hear him: and again, Fear not, for behold, I
bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all people for unto you is
born this day in the city of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord: and
this shall be a sign unto you, Luk^ (...)
Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger.
Secondly, a great deal more at large by himself and his Apostles: I am the
Door of the sheep, Ioh. 10.9. and 8.10. and 7.37.38.
by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and
find pasture; I am the light of the world, he that follows me shall not
walk in darkness, but have the light of life; If any man thirst, let him
come unto me and drink, he that believes in me, as the Scripture has said,
out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living water. The Law justifies no man
without perfect obedience: according to that of Moses, Cursed be he that
confirms not all the words of this Law to do them; Deuteronomy. 27.26.
our works even when they are at the best, being fowly bedawb'd with the blots
and blemishes of the old man, can deserve nothing but vengeance from him, who
in Justice rewards, nothing coming short of the least circumstance and title
of his Law: Come therefore unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden,
and I will give you rest; by faith then in the Savior of the world, Jesus
Christ, all our sins are forgiven, and we again received into the favor of
God.

All universality of grace, by virtue of this, and other Scriptures of the same
or like nature by some maintained, and from hence, by others, in large and
learned discourses powerfully confuted, I forbear in this place so much as to
name, because the words rightly considered, give not the least occasion of any
such discourse, challenging rather the conueiance of comfort unto the most
heinous, gross, and grievous sort of those transgressors, who laboring, and
heavy laden under the burden of their sins, come unto Christ, then any such
general interest in Christ's death unto all: For as Satan, the common enemy of
man's salvation, has great variety and store of sleights and subtilties to
hinder our approach unto the Throne of grace; so this is none of the least,
that with great enlargement, and amplifications he sets before our eyes, the
sins and offenses which formerly we have committed, thereby to make us despair
of Gods goodness and mercy: this was that School where Cain learned that
doleful doctrine, My sins are greater then can be forgiven: this was the
stratagem which brought wretched Judas unnaturally to become the executioner of
his own body; to speak nothing of many others, who even in our times, by this
means, have been brought to commit things, far misbeseeming their holy
profession; therefore, for preventing of so great harm, otherwise like to
ensue and fall upon the creature, it has pleased the wisdom of Gods holy
Spirit, so to publish the riches and great depth of his mercy, that Satan's
subtilty may prevail against none, how great and grievous transgressors
soever, in the least measure industrious and careful of the salvation of their
souls: for this cause it is, that sometimes in the plural number he is
called, the Father of mercies: 2. Cor. 1, 3, 4.
Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation,
that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, Psa. 103.9, 10,
11, 12, 13.
by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God: sometimes a
merciful and gracious Lord, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy, such a one
as will not chide always, nor keep his anger for ever, who deals not with us
after our sins, nor rewards us after our iniquities; for as high as the
heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him:
as far as the East is from the West, so far has he removed our
transgressions from us; like as a Father pittieth his children, so the Lord
pittieth them that fear him: and again, Exodus 34.6, 7.
The Lord, the Lord, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin: and sometime he is said to be rich in mercy and grace:
God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when
we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ, Ephesians. 2.4, 5.
that in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, and
kindness toward us, through Christ Jesus: Romans 2.4.
and in the Epistle to the Romans, Despisest thou the riches of his goodness,
forbearance and long suffering, not knowing, that the goodness of God leads
thee to repentance: I will spare them (says the Lord, by the mouth of the
Prophet) as a man spares his own son that serves him. Mal. 3.17.
There is then no sin so odious and abominable in the sight of God, but upon a
true sense and feeling of the lothsomnesse of the same, by faith, in the
Mediator, Jesus Christ, free pardon and forgiveness is assuredly to be looked
for, and expected from the Throne of mercy, and grace: Come therefore unto me
all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest: though your
sins be as skarlet, they shall be as white as snow, though they be red as
crimson, they shall be as wool; for if the wicked will, turn from all his
sins that he has committed, Eze. 18.21, 22.
and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall
surely live, he shall not dye; all his transgressions that he has committed,
they shall not be mentioned unto him, in his righteousness that he has done
he shall live.

Ye that labor, (...), such as be skillful in the original tongues, make this
difference between (...), that the latter generally signifying whatsoever
labor, exercise and travail; the first betokens a paineful, wearisome,
sorrowful, and heavy labor, so that (...), labor is the cause of
wearisomenesse or painful, and tedious emploiment; and therefore the
Septuagint, and other Translations of the old Scripture into the Greek
tongue, have used (...) in such places of the old Testament where the Original
expresses such and so great ouerspending of the vital parts, by reason of too
much sorrow, grief, labor and toil, that without present succor, relief,
and comfort, nothing but death and fearful dissolution is undoubtedly to be
expected: as in that of Deuteronomy, Remember what Amalek did unto thee by the
way, Deuteronomy. 25.17, 18.
when ye were come forth out of Egypt, how he met thee by the way, and smote
the hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble, behind thee, when thou wast
faint and weary. And again, Ahitophel offering his service unto Absalon
against David, 2. Sam. 17.2.
says, I will come upon him while he is weary and weak handed, and will make
him afraid: I have given you a Land, for which ye did not labor, Josh. 24.13.
and Cities which ye built not, and ye dwell in them: What! Did not Israel
labor for the Land of Canaan, for which they had many sharp skirmishes, and
encountered with many several oppositions? Yes verily, but because of the
extraordinary assistance of Gods holy Spirit, and unaccustomed presence of his
almighty power, and outstretched arm, whereby they subdued those nations with
great facility and ease, they might well have (...), but they had not (...), it
was unto them some kind of exercise, but not an ouer-spending, and out-wearing
of their strength; sometimes again, the word (...) is used, for expressing of
those places of the old Testament, where the Original signifies a conjunction
of labor, sorrow, travel, heaviness and pain: Man is borne unto trouble, as
the sparks fly upwards. Job. 5.7.
And again, the days of our years are threescore and ten, and if by reason
of strength they be fourscore, Psalm. 90.10.
yet is their strength labor and sorrow. Thirdly, the word (...) is used by the
Penmen of holy Scripture, for expressing the variety of tribulation, calamity
and cross, under which in this life the Saints continually groan: 1. Cor.
4.11, 12.
Even unto this present hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are
buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place, (...), and labor working with
our own hands. 1. Tim. 4.10.
And again, (...), for therefore we labor and suffer reproach, because we
trust in the living God who is the Savior of all men, especially of those that
believe: Mat. 26.9.
and in the 26. of S. Mathews Gospel, (...). Why trouble ye the woman, for
she has wrought a good work on me? In like manner, (...), in weariness and
painfulnesse, 2. Cor. 11.27.
in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in coldness and
nakedness: and again, (...), neither did we eat any man's bread for naught,
2. These. 3.8.
but wrought with labor and travel, night and day, that we might not be
chargeable unto any.

From hence then it is easy to understand who, and what manner of ghuests they
be, whom Christ so friendly exhorts, all by-respects set aside, directly to
come unto him: First, such as either in the Ceremonies of the ancient Law, the
traditions of men, or precise and strict performance of the Moral Law, with
great labor, perplexity, and trouble, seek the favor of God, peace of
conscience, and everlasting happiness; but after inexpressible anguish, finding
rather further torture and torment of conscience, then any least beginnings of
ease, are ready to give over, as men by their own endeavors wholly and
altogether unable to stand in the presence of a consuming fire; those our
Savior Jesus Christ lovingly inuites, not to despair in this their wrestling
with the wrath of God, nor any longer to confide and trust in their own
righteousness, whence no comfort at all is to be expected; but altering their
course, to come, or believe in him, unto whom all things requisite and
necessary for the safeguard, and salvation of men's souls are given of the
Father, unto which sense the word (...), or heavy laden, fitly does agree: for
the Law is by the Prophet, Esaias 9.4.
compared to a burden, Thou have broken the yoke of his burden, and the
staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in the day of Midian:
and again, They bind (...), heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay
them on men's shoulders, but they themselves will not move them with one of
their fingers; Mat. 23.4.
such then as confident in their own strength, have earnestly endeavored the
atonement of Righteousness, by the works of the Law, but by experience,
finding the heaviness of this yoke, and greatness of their inability, by
their own endeavors, to stand in the presence of so great and terrible a
Judge, are truly humbled and cast down, upon the sense and feeling of this
their weakness; such (I say) are fit ghuests for CHRIST'S Table, as appears
by his reply upon the Pharisees modest and discreet speech, Mark 12.34
Thou art not far from the Kingdom of Heaven. The second sort of ghuests,
whom by these words Christ so favorably inuites to come unto him, are those,
who upon a sense and feeling of their manifold transgressions, the apprehension
of the wrath of God, and horror of the last day, are at the pit and pinch of
desperation it self, whereunto also the word, (...), very fitly does accord and
agree; for Esaias speaking of the burden of sin and wrath of God, says, He has
borne our griefs, Esa. 3.4.11.
and carried our sorrows, yet did we esteem him stricken, smitten of God and
afflicted: he shall see the travel of his soul and shall be satisfied, by his
knowledge shall my righteous Servant justify many, for he shall bear their
iniquities: Zach. 5.7.
and Zachary speaking to this same purpose says, that Wickedness sits upon
a talent of lead: and David speaks of transgression, as of a heavy burden:
Mine Iniquities are gone over mine head, Psalm. 38.4.
as an heavy burden they are to heavy for me; so that (...), without either
violence or strayning, are properly understood of such as labor and are heavy
laden, under the weight and intolerable burden of their sins.

Thirdly, such as under the heavy burden of cross and calamity are
grievously perplexed, and borne down, but finding no ease, nor way to escape,
are ready well-nigh to sink under the burden; those, Christ lovingly and
friendly exhorts, not because of their present calamities to think themselves
cast off of God, or debarred from the Kingdom of Heaven; but all such extremes
set aside, to come unto him where undoubtedly they shall find rest unto their
souls, either by a final remouall of their calamity, as Hanna, Mordecai,
Rebecca, and diverse others: or mitigation, and asswaging the heat of their
tribulation, Genesis 39.21. Dan. 6.12. and 3.23.
as Joseph whilst he lived in Pharaohs Iayle, Daniel in the Lions den: or if
their further good require continuance in tribulation, by the sweet influence
of his holy Spirit, quieting and calming their distressed and perplexed spirits
in the agony and greatest heat of the fiercest temptations, as Stephen in his
martyrdom, David in the days of his ttouble, and the blessed Apostles in
their several persecutions for the Gospels sake. These then being the ghuests,
whom so lovingly Christ bids, and comfortably inuites to come unto him; it is
easy from bence to understand who they be that debar and make themselves
incapable of the grace of Christ: First, such as drunk with a vain conceit
and opinion of their own righteousness, think themselves sufficiently able
to perform and obey the commandments of the Lord, and consequently feel not
themselves laboring, and heavy laden under the burden of their sins:
Secondly, Epicures, and all such as weigh not, nor regard their sins, think
not upon the wrarh of God, and terror of the last Judgment, but carelessly
contemn, neglect and despise the same; of whom the Apostle speaking, says,
(...), Ephesians. 4.19.
who being past feeling, have given themselves over unto lasciuionsnesse, to
work all uncleanness with greediness: Thirdly, (...), such as besotted with
the dainties and soft allurements of the world, feel not their miserable and
wretched estate, in regard of their manifold transgressions and dreadful
Judgment of Almighty God, nor think upon the favor and grace of God here, and
everlasting happiness in the life to come: Fourthly, and lastly, such as upon
the sense and feeling of their sins, and apprehension of Gods wrath and
indignation against them for their transgressions, being thoroughly humbled and
cast down, choose rather to sink in the bottomless pit of death and
desperation, then to come unto Christ Jesus, the Spiritual Physicion, and
Comforter of sick and diseased souls.

And I will give you rest. Fear of punishment, and hope of reward, are two
maine motives, whereby man is either encouraged in the ways of godliness. or
restrained from transgressing the Commandments of the Lord: and therefore in
the book of the Law, where summarily, and in general, is set down whatsoever
elsewhere throughout the Text of holy Scripture is more at length delivered,
Moses under those two comprehends all the motives which possibly can be devised
and found out, either for animating and encouraging of man unto the better
things, or dissuading of him from the worst, See, I have set before thee this
day life and good, death and evil, Deuteronomy. 30.15, 16, 17, 18.
in that I command thee this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk in his
ways, and to keep his commandments, and his statutes, and his judgments,
that thou may live and multiply, and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in
the Land whither thou go to possess it: but if thine heart turn away, so
that thou will not hear, but shall be drawn away, and worship other gods, and
serve them, I denounce unto you this day, that ye shall surely perish, and
that ye shall not prolong your days upon the Land whither thou passest over
Jordan, to go to possess it. And again, It shall come to pass, Deuteronomy.
38.1.15.
if thou shall hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to
observe and do all his commandments which I command thee this day, that the
Lord thy God will set thee on high, above all Nations of the earth: but if thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and do all his
commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day, that all these
curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee. In like manner have the Lords
proceedings been with particular persons: Genesis 4.6, 7.
And the Lord said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth, and why is thy countenance
fallen? if thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not
well, sin lies at the door. 2. Sam. 7.14.
I will set up thy Seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and
I will establish his kingdom; I will be his father, and he shall be my son:
if he commit Iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the
stripes of the children of men. 1. Kings 3.14.
If thou will walk in my ways, to keep my statutes and commandments as thy
Father David did walk, then I will lengthen thy days. And here, in the Text
which now we have in hand, Christ friendly inuiting such as labor and are
heavy laden, to come unto him, the exhortation is enforced by an ample and
large promise of reward, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest. For as the elements of the world naturally incline
each of them to his own Region and place of abode: so the soul of man, by
transgression having fallen from his rest, is so perplexed and wearied,
wandering to and again, that it hearkens unto nothing more willingly, then
motions and means serving for that purpose: Confess. lib. 1. cap. 1.
according to that of S. Augustine, Cor nostrum creasti ad te Domine, and nisi
te, nunquam satiari potest; O Lord, thou have created our souls to thine own
image, so that but in thee they never receive content. Which our Savior well
considering, uses the same as an vnfaileable argument to induce and persuade
us to come and drink freely of the waters of life, (...), and I will give you
rest. The word (...) is commonly used, when as after labor and toil we betake
our selves unto tranquillity and ease, for refreshing of our weary,
ouer-spent, and decaying strength: as in that of Lucian, (...), after long and
tedious sickness receiving or enjoying rest: and Suidas, (...), who would not
out of misery and tedious employment, come unto rest? And thus the Greek
Translation uses the word, in expressing the Lords speech unto David,
concerning his son Solomon, 1. Chron. 22.9.
Behold, a son shall be borne unto thee, who shall be a man of rest, and I
will give him rest from all his enemies round about him. But most frequently in
the text of holy Scripture, this word is used to express the tranquillity and
calmness of the mind: as in the fifth of Genesis, and nine and twentieth
verse, old Lamech supposing that his son had been the Messiah promised in
the Garden, calls him Noah, saying, This son shall comfort us, concerning our
work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord has cursed.
Where the Greek Translations use the word (...). Whereunto our Savior
alluding, says, (...), Come unto me, and I will give you rest. Giving us
thereby to understand, that he is that true Noah, from whom the holy
Patriarchs, laboring under the burden of sin and iniquity, did expect and
look for rest unto their souls. In like manner, the day of festiuitie and
joy, which the Jews celebrated upon the news of their deliverance from the
trecheries of wicked Haman, and sentence of death formerly passed upon them, is
called (...), a day of rest and tranquillity. And again, the refreshment
which Saul, vexed with the evil spirit, received by David's Music, the Greek
Translation expresses it by (...), 1. Sam. 16.23.
so Saul was refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him.
From hence then it is easy to understand the nature of this promise, which
Christ here in the Text makes unto such, as laboring and heavy laden under
the burden of their sins, come unto him for relief and comfort, viz. in
this life, refreshment, rest, and ease unto their souls, from the consuming
heat of Gods wrath, the rottenness of sin, and heat of the torment, and
torture of conscience, which formerly they have endured; and in that which is
to come, perfect joy, felicity, and happiness, being freed from all misery
whatsoever. Therefore S. Peter calls the time of Christ's coming unto
judgment, (...), the times of refreshing, or rest. What pains are answerable
unto so great a reward? Shall not the children of this life rise up and
condemn us in the last day, who refuse no travel, perplexity, and trouble,
for attainement of worldly preferment? Which gotten, is first corruptible, and
subject to the out-wearing power of time; secondly, uncertain, and doubtful,
after a world of misery and trouble undertaken for attainement of the same. I
will not now speak of Alexander his travails, in subduing Asia, of Annibal
his labors, in passing from Spain over the Alps into Italy, Xerxes his
perplexity during his abode in Europe, together with many other of that
nature: whereof some, after unspeakable pains, have come short of their ends,
as Xerxes of the conquest of Europe, Annibal of Italy, Crassus and Antonius of
Persia: others, after great labor and pain, have still continued uncertain,
fearful, and in doubt, till the very moment and last period of enjoying their
ends. What warrant had Alexander for his assurance of subduing Asia? Augustus
of Pompey, Cassius and the like? and all subject to corruption; for where are
now the great Monarchies of Assyria, Media, Persia, Grecia, and of the Romans?
well then, being that men undergo such and so great labor and toil, for
attaining uncertain and corruptible glory, what should we do for attaining
the rest spoken of here in the Text, which once gotten, is free from all
corruption, and whereof by the means here mentioned, we may undoubtedly be
assured?

Take upon you my yoke. As man by nothing more is encouraged to undertake great
and weighty matters, then by hope and expectation of reward, so failing and
coming short of his ends, he seldom misseth shameful Apostasy, and
defection from his former resolution; yea oftentimes, although the error be in
his own false conceit, and misunderstanding of the promise. Thus Israel
hearing in Egypt, that a Land flowing with milk and honey was prepared for
them, and that the Lord himself would safely conduct them into that good Land;
O they are a fire, till the journey be in force; but how soon as come to the
red Sea, they see themselves environed with great and high mountains on the
one side, the Egyptian forces on the other, and the raging waves of merciless
water before their faces, how soon they came into the desert and barren
wilderness, and heard of the great strength and walled Cities of Canaan, as
men frustrate and disappointed of their promised reward, like broken bows they
start back, and make defection from their former profession. Many, in hope and
expectation of future preferment, followed Christ in the beginning of his
Ministry, fondly dreaming of a temporal kingdom: but perceiving, in
process of time, all things to fall out quite contrary, the Text says, That
they went back, Ioh. 6.66. 2. Tim. 4.10. Luke 22.4.
and walked no more with him. This was Demas his bane, Judas his ruin, Simons
overthrow, and a great stumbling block unto the two disciples iournying
toward Emmaus, as by their own conference evidently does appear, Act. 8.19.
We trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel: beside all
this, to day is the third day since these things were done: yea, and certain
women also of our company made us astonished, which were early at the
Sepulcher, and when they found not his body, they came, saying, that they had
also seen a vision of Angels, Act. 24.21, 22, 23, 24.
which said, that he was alive. Therefore Christ, for preventing of this so
great an inconvenience, has from time to time labored rightly to inform such
as come unto him, of the nature and quality of the entertainment, which from
his hands is to be expected. Thus the Pharisee offering his service, hears,
That the Foxes have holes, Matthew. 8.20.
and the Birds of the Heaven have nests, but the Son of man has not whereon
to lay his head. And here, in the Text which now we have in hand, having
comfortably invited all such as labor and are heavy laden under the burden
of their sins, to come unto him, with a promise of rest; lest men hereupon
should promise unto themselves worldly pleasure, temporal felicity, and the
fulfilling of the delights and desires of the flesh, the missing whereof might
afterward occasion a disgraceful apostafie and defection from this holy
profession: therefore after the promise, immediately he subioynes a large
commentary and exposition of his former words, Take upon you my yoke: As if he
should have said, I came not to cleanse you from your sins, that being
reconciled and received again into the love and favor of Almighty God, you
should challenge liberty and freedom, without all restraint, at randon to
wallow in sin and iniquity: it is neither a bodily nor fleshly rest, which
from me is to be looked for and expected; for why should the followers of a
Prince, whose kingdom is not in this world, dream of such things? but the
rest which I promise, is spiritual, Come unto me, and you shall find rest unto
your souls. As concerning the things of this life, you must learn to put off,
concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt, according to
the deceitful lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of your mind, putting on the
new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. Our
freedom in Christ Jesus then is not such, that as lawless men we may do what
we list: but on the contrary, being ingrafted into his mystical body, we
must take upon us his yoke of repentance and faith; by the one putting off,
concerning our former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt, according to
the deceitful lusts; and by the other, being renewed in the spirit of our
minds, putting on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness. Neither is the Rest by Christ Jesus promised, a cessation of
tribulation and cross, but by faith being united unto the great Shepherd, we
must take upon us his yoke of calamity and trouble: If any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, Matthew. 16.24.
and follow me. Take upon you my yoke: The word yoke, in his proper
signification, is an instrument framed by the wit and invention of man, for
combining and joining beasts together in Carts or Coaches, for the more easy
and swift carriage of ponderous and weighty things; wherein three things offer
themselves to our consideration: first, a distinct and several kind of labor
and working; for beasts under the yoke are confined unto one particular manner
of travail: secondly, the weight and heaviness of the burden; for yoking
presupposes an intention in the owner, to lay more upon the beasts then
otherwise conveniently they could be brought to bear: and thirdly, the
cruelty of the Dryuer; because beasts under yoke, restrained from working as
they would, are bitterly pusht and pricked forward with goades, whips, scourges,
and the like: From which three properties of a yoke, the Penmen of holy
Scripture have drawn three several metaphors, using the word sometimes for
the doctrine, instruction, and teaching, wherein the Lord trains and brings up
his Church here upon earth: because as a yoke confines beasts unto a definite
and certain kind of working; so doctrine, institution, and teaching, commands
us to think, speak, and do after this or that manner: These have altogether
broken the yoke, and burst the bonds, Ier. 5.5.
that is, they have forsaken and cast off the obedience of Gods commandments.
If in this sense we understand Christ his words, the meaning will be, that by
faith in his death we are not so freed from the yoke of his Law, as that we
have liberty to do what we list; but by faith in the Mediator being
reconciled unto God, we are to take this yoke upon us, using the Law as a
guide, a path, and sure way, to walk and pass through the wilderness of this
life, into the spiritual Canaan of everlasting happiness. Herein then stands
the difference between Christians and Jews, as concerning the works and
observation of the Moral Law, that the one is bound to a strict performance of
the exquisite and exact justice required therein, upon pain of death and
everlasting damnation: according to that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this Law, to do them. But
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law; Gal. 3.13.
so that we are not confined within these straits, either by perfect and
absolute obedience to purchase life, or in case of defect and failing in the
least, to expect the fearful sentence of death and damnation to pass upon
us; howsoever a serious and earnest endeavor be required in putting off,
concerning our former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to
the deceitful lusts, Ephesians. 4.20.
and putting on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness, being not without law to God, but under the law to Christ: for
the more that we are bound to the mercy and favor of God, the more are we
obliged to conform our selves to his good will and pleasure. Romans 9.21.
Being then, that by faith in his Son we are freed from the curse of the Law,
the Father, for Christ his sake, accepting our halfe-maimed and imperfect
obedience as absolute and without blame, let it beget in our hearts rather a
more earnest endeavor of performing the Law, as a perfect path of
righteousness, then careless Epicurisme, in following our own ways;
professing and saying with the blessed Apostle, Romans 7.22.
I delight in the Law of God, after the inward man. Sometimes again, because
of the second property, the word Yoke is used for the heavy burden,
perplexity, and sorrow, which in case of disobedience the Law brings upon
the souls and consciences of men, in which respect the Law is often called a
yoke: Act. 15.10.
Why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples, which
neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? that is, Why labor ye to
entangle and bring again within the curse of Gods Law those, who by faith in
Christ may well be freed therefrom? Gal. 5.1.
And again, Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and
be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage: in which sense, Christ his my
yoke imports an Antithesis and opposition between the Law of Faith and the Law
of Works: as if he should have said, You have heretofore labored and been
heavy laden under the intolerable yoke and heavy burden of the Law, which
was never able to afford you any comfort, or give rest unto perplexed spirits;
Romans 3.20.
for by the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh living be justified in his
sight: take therefore upon you my yoke of the Gospel, and you shall find rest
unto your souls. Sometimes, because of the third property, the word yoke is
used, for the hard usage, calamity and tribulation, which men receive and
endure at the hands of others; Of old time I have broken thy yoke, and burst
thy bonds: Ier. 2.20. and 28.2.14.
Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, saying, I have broken the
yoke of the King of Babylon: and again, I have put a yoke of Iron upon the
neck of all these Nations, that they may serve Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon.
And in this sense (although I neither dare, nor do reject the former) after a
special manner are Christ his words here to be understood, that in this life
such as come unto him, stand in need of calamity and tribulation, for
suppressing and keeping down the exorbitant wickedness, and unruly
wantonness of the flesh. Take upon you my yoke, then is the same with that of
our Savior: If any man will come after me, Mat. 16.24. and 10.30.
let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me: and again, He
that takes not his cross and follows me, is not worthy of me: Whosoever
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me.

The happiness then which we find in Christ Jesus, Mark 8.34.
does not consist in the delights and pleasures of the flesh, but in the
quieting calmness of the mind: Come unto me and ye shall find rest unto your
souls; let us not then be dismayed or cast down, if so be, seeking rest and
quietness, by faith in the Son of God, we be environed with the snares of
calamity and tribulation; for it is the good will and pleasure of our heavenly
Father, to lay this yoke upon us whilst we live here upon earth. First, to call
to our remembrance, the general Apostasy and defection by us in our first
Parents, made from the Lord our God: for the world knows not the fearful
disease, loathsome contagion, and fierce wrath and indignation, thereby
violently drawn upon the whole posterity: and consequently, by the reares of
repentance, and faith in the Mediator, sue not for atonement, nor seek to be
reconciled unto this consuming fire: Therefore, it pleases the wisdom of our
great Advocate, to lay this yoke upon the necks of his Disciples, that by
these sour fruits, understanding the bitterness of the root, they may
thereby be incited and stirred up to sue unto the true Elisha, 2. King. 2.19.
and 4.40.
JESUS CHRIST, for curing these poisoned waters, and sweetning this deadly
meal: Secondly, thereby to beget in our hearts a deeper consideration, and
higher esteeem and value of our atonement and reconciliation made by the death
and all-sufficient sacrifice of Jesus Christ: the better the patient understands
the danger of his disease, the more thankful is he unto the Physicion for his
cure: the more evidences and infallible arguments that men have of death, the
more ioifully and gladly do they receive their pardon: he that is adjudged to
be burnt quick, escapes afterward with the loss of a finger, by this small
taste better knows the greatness of the Judge his favor, then if so be he had
not at all felt any heat of the fire: Even so the sufferance of temporal
afflictions, the least part of that which our sins have deserved at the hands
of the Lord, makes us understand the great obligation, wherein we are bound unto
the Son of God, by whom we are redeemed from so great damnation, and more
thankful unto his holiness for so great a blessing; for if so be these
excrements be so heavy, what should the whole burden have bin? if we find such
and so great difficulty in bearing the smallest and least part: what if the
whole desert of our transgressions had bin laid upon us? Thirdly, the yoke of
calamity and tribulation serves for preventing of future slips, according to
that of the Prophet Danid: Psalm. 119.67. and 71.
Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now have I kept thy word: And
again, It is good for me that I have bin afflicted, that I might learn thy
statutes: for as the bitterness of sour and unsavory things makes the
suckling forbear and refrain the dug, whereunto he otherwise he naturally
inclines. Just so the bitterness of calamity and tribulation, which for
Iniquity lies heavy upon the dearest of Gods children, makes them forsake and
renounce the pleasures of sin, from whence otherwise they could not so easily
be weaned and kept back.

And learn of me: There is no doctrine more harsh and unsavory unto the
natural man, then that of the cross; therefore when as mention is made
thereof, usually it pleases the wisdom of Gods holy Spirit to subioyne words
of encouragement and comfort, as in that Prophecy of Isreal's tribulation in
the land of Egypt: Know for a surety, that thy seed shall be a stranger in a
Land that is not theirs, Genesis 15.13, 14.
and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years, and
also that Nation whom they shall serve, I will judge, and afterward shall they
come out with great substance: and again, These things have I spoken unto you,
Ioh. 15.33.
that in me ye might have peace, in the world ye shall have tribulation: but
be of good cheer, I have overcome the world; as here in the Text which now we
have in hand, Christ in the beginning of the Verse, having spoken of a yoke,
lest thereupon men should be discouraged and dis-heartned from coming unto
him, he is not content to promise unto them in the agony, and greatest heat of
affliction rest unto their souls, that though the outward man perish, yet the
inward man shall be renewed day by day; though the body be dead, because of
sin, yet the spirit shall live, because of righteousness; though the flesh
be destroyed, yet the spirit shall be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus: but
for their further encouragement he adds two forcible and effectual arguments,
for begetting in their hearts patience and constancy in bearing of this yoke:
the first whereof is taken from his own example, which ought so much the more
to prevail with us, as he is is more worthy and in the favor of God then we;
learn therefore of me, that the father in this life will not have his
children free from the yoke of calamity and tribulation; for if we be without
chastisement, whereof all are partakers, we are bastards and not the sonne^
(...) God: because the Lord whom he loves, he chastises and corrects every
son, whom he receives; and certainly, if we ponder and weigh things in an
even balance, this cannot but prevent every least beginning of discontent,
that we taste of no other cup, then that whereof the Son of God has
liberally drunk before, there is no other measure given us, then that which
Jesus Christ has formerly received: 1. Pet. 2.21.
Hereunto (says the Apostle) were ye called, because Christ also suffered,
leaving for us an example that we should follow his steps: and again, Whom
he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his
Son: Romans 8.29.
that as he in all meekness and lowliness of mind, submitted himself to
the good will and pleasure of his heavenly Father; so by his example we might
learn to do the same: according to that of the Apostle: Being found in
fashion as a man, Phil. 2.8.
he humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of
the Cross: And again, Though he were a Son, Heb. 5.8.
yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; Rejoice greatly, O
Daughter of Sion, shout, O Daughter of Jerusalem, behold, thy King comes unto
thee, Zach. 9.9.
he is just and having salvation, lowly, and riding upon an Ass, and upon a
Colt, the Foale of an Ass. For herein stands the difference between the Godly
and the wicked, in carrying about the badges of guilt, that the one does it
with unspeakable wrestling, repining, grudging, murmuring, and fretting against
the Lord: but the other with all meekness and lowliness of mind, submit
themselves under the afflicting hand of Almighty God, and why? because they
understand their afflictions to proceed from a loving and gracious Father, who
will do nothing but for their good, howsoever for the present his proceedings
be sour and unsavory unto the natural man: but the wicked seeing nothing,
but the fierce countenance of an angry Judge, fret and fume against him as the
enemy and destroier of their being. If the Judgment of God be denounced
a^^^^st Cain for his offense, Genesis 3.13.
as an untamed Heifer he will kick against his Maker: My punishment is
greater then I can bear; 1. Sam. 3.18.
but let Samuel deliver unto Eli never so harsh news, the grossest of his
carriage shall be, it is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: If
Ahitophel be disgraced, the Gallows shall bewray the implacable discontent of
his heart: but although King David be openly reproved for his sin, humble
confession is the worst entertainment that he gives the Lords message, learn
therefore of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest
unto your souls.

My yoke is easy: The second argument which Christ uses to persuade such as
come unto him, with patience and constancy to take his yoke upon them, is
taken from the easiness, and facility of the task: things light and easy to
be performed are at the command of a Superior, with great patience and
constancy cagerly to be taken in hand; especially, being exceeding profitable,
and making for the good of the Patient, but so it is, that my yoke is easy,
and my burden light.

First, because of the perpetual assistance of my holy Spirit, whereby you are
strengthened in the inner-man, the better to bear the afflictions which
outwardly you suffer in the body: according to that of the Apostle: 1. Cor.
10.13.
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are
able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be
able to bear it.

Secondly, it is easy, because of the unspeakable felicity and happiness,
which after small continuance it brings unto the Patient: Our light affliction,
2. Cor. 4.17.
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding, and
eternal weight of glory: And again, Romans 8.18.
I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. Therefore Saint Paul
speaking of himself, says, Coloss. 1.24.
Who now rejoice in my suffering for you, and fill up that which is behind of
the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his bodies sake, which is the Church.
And again, Romans 5.3.
We rejoice in tribulations: my brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into
diverse temptations.

My yoke. First, because according to my good will and pleasure, I impose and
lay the same upon the necks of my followers: for afflictions come not unto the
Saints by chance, or fortune, but from the Lord; according to that of Job, Job.
1.21. and 5.17, 18.
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the Name of the Lord.
And again, Happy is the man whom God corrects: therefore despise not thou
the chastening of the Almighty, for he makes sore and binds up, he wounds
and his hands make whole: Secondly it is his yoke, because in his own person
he has deeply tasted the bottom and very dregs of this Cup; according
unto that of the Prophet, He is despised and rejected of men, Esaias 53.3, 4, 5,
6.
a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: surely he has borne our
griefs, and carried our sorrows, he was wounded for our transgressions, he
was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him.
Thirdly, he calls it his yoke, for difference and distinctions sake between
the afflictions of the godly, and punishments of the wicked: the one bears
the yoke of Gods fierce wrath and indignation, because of their abominable
transgressions; but the other, the yoke of fatherly correction: the one yoke is
imposed and laid on, for the destruction and overthrow of the patient; but the
other, for the chastisement of sons, that thereby they may learn, not to
provoke their heavenly Father unto further displeasure. Fourthly and lastly,
Christ calls it my yoke, in regard of the gracious assistance of his holy
Spirit, whereby he comforts, vpholds, and strengthens the hearts of his
children, for the more patient and constant bearing of the same: For we have
not an High Priest, Heb. 4.15.
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all
things tempted as we are, that he might be a merciful and faithful High
Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of
the people. Blessed therefore be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our
tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by
the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. To whom, the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be all honor, praise, and glory, now, and for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

