AN HERBAL FOR THE BIBLE. CONTAINING A PLAIN AND FAMILIAR EXPOSITION of such
Similitudes, Parables, and Metaphors, both in the old Testament and the New,
as are borrowed and taken from Herbs, Plants, Trees, Fruits and Simples, by
observation of their Virtues, qualities, natures, properties, operations, and
effects: And BY THE HOLY PROPHETS, SACRED WRITERS, Christ himself, and his
blessed Apostles usually alleged, and into their heavenly Oracles, for the
better beautifieng and plainer opening of the same, profitably inserted.

Drawn into English by THOMAS NEWTON.

Imprinted at London by Edmund Bollifant. 1587

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY VERY GOOD LORD, ROBERT EARL of ESSEX and Ewe,
Vicount of Hereford and Bourgchier, LORD Ferrers of Chartley, Bourgchier and
Louaine, etc. Your most humble, THOMAS NEWTON wishes increase of all
spiritual gifts, long life and happy days, with all felicity in flourishing
honor.
IF I WERE to yield a reason for my boldness, in presuming to present by way
of dedication, this my poor travail unto your Honor: beside other of
sufficient force to move me thereunto, I might (and that truly) say, that the
lively sparks, and tried proof of your L. Heroical spirit, far and near
with general voice sounded out and emblazoned (...) ^our thankful
welwillers, your undaunted cou^ and valor abroad, your surpassing affability
and courtly courtesy at home; and (which most is of all) your fervent zeal
according to knowledge toward the glorious Gospel of Christ, were causes
moving, or rather vehemently thrusting me on, by this means and in this sort,
dutifully to attempt your Honorable patience. Of such force is true Nobility,
accompanied with her proper adjuncts, and invested with her peculiar titles,
that she draws all men into the love and admiration of her. So that all men
to their incredible comfort do joyfully note and evidently behold the lively
image and express pattern of that Mirror of Nobility, your late most
magnificent father, brightly shining in you his son: being like enough
(through Gods good favor, mercifully finishing that, which he has already
graciously and richly begun in you) if not in each point to surmount, (which is
scarcely possible) yet at least to match (which is most Honorable) his martial
services, valorous prowess, worthy attempts, venturous exploits, invincible
courage, renoumed bounty, and most noble generositie.

The troop therefore of Virtues, delivered unto your Honor (as it were by
hand) from your so noble a Parent, and together with the hereditarie succession
of his lands, left, and (by nature) lineally descended unto you, was the
Loadestone, that mightily drew me, being a rude lump of unwrought Iron, to
admire your excellent graces: and by such means as I am able, to testify this
my zealous loialtie toward so Honorable a Gentleman, so rare a Peer, so sure a
Botreaux unto his Country, and so precious a Paragon of perfect Nobility. Not
doubting, but your good Lordship will dispense with my presumption, ^d accept
in good part this small token of my faith^^ll heart and loyal mind: which
being most willing ^d ready, would not stay to perform (even to the ^termost)
that which I ought, if I could do that, which (alas) I cannot.

The work (my Lord) in my simple opinion, for the choice of the Argument,
raritie of the matter, and profit of the circumstance deserves to be advisedly
read, attentively considered, effectually ruminated, and perfectly digested. I
am the bolder thus much to speak in the behalf of it, even for Lemnius his
sake, the chief Author thereof: whom especially I have followed; although for
respects, not always (as a Votarie) precisely tied my self unto his sentence,
nor every where word for word religiously expressed his discourse. But have
(upon occasion) in some places, added unto him for the more perspicuitie: in
some, taken away, to avoid ^^diousnes and prolixitie: in many, by conference
with other Authors, at large explaned that, which I thought was too
compendiously couched, and over mystically inuolued in terms of obscurity:
but no where (perdie) otherwise have I dealt, than I know to be usually
tolerable, and by good presidents a^g the learned, authentically warrantable.

^e frankly confess, and willingly profess my ^ have been singularly
delighted in reading (...) of this man's learned books: and have partly
testified my good liking thereof, ten years ago, by publishing in print a
profitable Work of his, under the title of The Touchstone of Complexions;
which I then translated out of Latin into English, in my native Country of
Chesshyre, and dedicated unto the Right Honorable, my singular good Lord, the
Baron of Cobham.

Receive now therefore (Right Honorable) into your protection and patrociny,
these my poor labors* and if they seem worthy, shroud them from the
critical doom of waiwarde Wranglers and surly Areopagites, that without
looking into my intent, will perhaps be busy enough to condemn mine attempt.
Which humble suit, as I doubt not but to obtain at your Honors hands: so,
enjoying the same, I shall think my pains sufficiently recompensed; my self
to enterprise some other thing to your L. liking, encouraged: and to be each way
as surely guarded, as Ulysses ever thought himself under the shield of noble
Ajax.

From my poor house at Little Ilford in Essex, the 26. of May. 1587. Your L.
at commandment, THOMAS NEWTON.

MONARCHS, KINGS, PRINCES, PROPHETS, AND SACRED Writers have been singularly
delighted, and profoundly seen in the skill of Plants and Herbs: as by the
sundry Metaphors, Similitudes and Parables, by them in their Works, Prophesies,
and Writings used, it does manifestly appear.
The first Chapter.
THat noble Kings and renowned princes in the old time (even otherwise most
busily encombred with garboyles of wars) have been studiously addicted and
singularly delighted in the search and knowledge of the nature of Plants and
Herbs: both ancient histories do sufficiently witness, and the books of the
sacred Bible do largely testify. For, the search and skill of these things,
carrieng with it such pleasant store of delectable variety: and furnished no
less with profit than pleasure, seemed nothing at all derogatorie from the
majesty of Kings, nor any whit unsitting the honorable estate of Princes,
somewhiles to solace and recreate themselves with these kinds of studies:
namely and specially when and so often as they could (as it were) breath from
their other most urgent affairs, and have either time or leisure to intermitte
their other weighty and serious proceedings. And by this kind of study
(whereby not only Kings and princes, great Herbarists, and Students of
Physic.
their minds, but their bodies also were singularly solaced) their fame and
memories became as glorious and renowned, and their honorable magnificence as
highly dignified, as by any other their worthy acts, noble conquests, or
triumphant victories whatsoever.

Heerby Mythridates the noble king of Pontus (having under him 19. kingdoms)
through excellent skill in herbs, and for that his most singular invention of
the sovereign Triacle Mythridate, found out and devised by a mighty king.
and cordial preservative against poison, and all other contagious and
infectiue diseases, has won unto himself an immortal name among all
posterities. Lysimachus, Eupator, Gentius Several herbs known by the names of
these princes, for that they first found out the virtues thereof.
the king of Illyria, Artemisia Queen of Caria and wife to Mausolus, with
many others, are famously renowned, not so much for their noble exploits in
martial affairs, as for their exquisite skill and profounde knowledge of
Plants and Herbs.

Marcus Curious a noble warrior and right valiant General among the Romans,
after he had vanquished Pyrrhus the puissant king of the Epyrotes, so greatly
delighted in this knowledge of Herbs, that he withdrew himself from all
worldly cares, and quietly betook himself to end the remainder of his days
in the delectable practice thereof, in the Country. The same course did Lucius
Cincinnatus, and Marcus Valerius Coruinus (two noble personages) likewise take.

Solomon also the mightiest and richest king Solomon a most excellent Herbarist.
that ever was (who beside his infinite treasures and inestimable wealth, had
given unto him by almighty God such ripe wisdom and exact knowledge of
things, that no king in the world was comparable unto him) among other his rare
and admirable virtues, is set down in holy Scriptures to be surpassingly
skilled in the virtues, qualities, and operations of Herbs: and that he was
able to reason, discourse, and dispute not only of Beasts, Fowls, creeping
things, and Fishes, but of trees 1. Kin. 4, 33.
also and Plants, from the Cedar in Lebanon to the Hysope that springs out of
the wall: that is, from the highest and tallest tree, to the smallest Wisd. 7,
17.
shrub and lowest herb.

Besides Solomon, there be sundry other holy men and blessed Prophets among
the Hebrews, that do many times insert into their prophesies, and usually
borrow comparisons, Herbs have sundry effect, and operations.
taken from the names and effects of Herbs. For some plants serving to one
purpose, and some to another, some being good for nourishment, some for
medicine, and some for both: some being hurtful and dangerous to nature, some
wholesome, cordial, and sovereign: the Prophets of God were thereupon moved
to take and fetch from them many right apt Similitudes and proper comparisons,
to adorn their Sermons, and garnish their matters withal, to make the same by
such familiar means the easier to be conceived, and the readier to be believed.

And although in each other kind of learning, humane discipline and
philosophy, there be many singular ornaments and peculiar garnishments,
effectually to delight the mind, and to draw it by example and imitation to
virtue and honesty: yet for the true and perfect atchieuing, and fuller
bringing to pass of these things, there be none of greater, nor yet of like
force and efficacy, to those that are used by the holy Prophets in their
divine Writings and Prophesies; so that to him that is any whit reasonably
seen either in the works of Nature, or in heavenly contemplations, it may
easily appear, how that their writings and prophesies are not barren, rude,
ignorant, and vnartificiall: but profitable, fruitful, learned, and eloquent.
For, the holy scripture being given by inspiration from God, fully and
sufficiently instructs the mind, and furnishes the conscience and soul with
most sweet food and wholesome nourishment. Which thing, the kingly prophet
David right well declares, where he uses a very fit similitude borrowed from
fresh Pastures, green Meadows, pleasant Brooks, and wholesome Waters, wherewith
cattle be delicately fed, and expediently nourished. The Lord (says he) is my
shepherd, I Psalm. 23. 1.
shall want nothing: he makes me to rest in green pasture, and leads me by
the still waters. So likewise in another Psalm, where he reioiceth in the
Lord, and highly praises his holy name for blessing him with store of
heavenly riches, yea and of earthly benefits also, as Cattle and fruitful
soil, he says: The lines are fallen unto me Psalm. 16, 6.
in pleasant places. For in the old time, men used to measure their land with
long ropes, and thereby to share out their Acres and bounds, according to
eueriemans right and title: as now we do with perches or poles.

Now, for that there be of these kinds of speeches infinite places both in the
old and new Testament, diligently noted and found out as well by the ordinary
practice and course of life, as also by observation of the nature, effect, and
virtue of Things: I have at this time thought good to bestow some labor in
this Book to set down the same unto the view and consideration of the
studious Reader: whereby he may see what a rich treasure of knowledge and
wisdom there is laid up in the sacred Scriptures; which affoordeth unto the
industrious Christian, store enough of matter both pleasurable and profitable,
delightful and wholesome. Neither is it possible for a man to reap any the
like benefit of plentiful knowledge and copious learning, nor to taste such
foison of sovereign food both for soul and conscience, out of any Works
written by Philosophers, Orators, or Poets, as he may out of the most
plentiful storehouse, and aye lasting fountain of Divinity, and out of those
books which were endited by the holy Ghost, and written by heavenly
inspiration. So that whosoever shall advisedly consider, and attentively
discuss the deep mysteries and profound knowledge laid up in the Scriptures,
and therewithal also what surpassing wisdom harbored in their minds, which
left behind them such divine instructions and wholesome documents, cannot choose
but most plainly perceive, by how many degrees, divine learning and sacred
studies do incomparably surmount all profane skill, and humane knowledge: and
how far things heavenly and eternal do excel things earthly and transitory.

That the holy Prophets were not only most exactly seen in the peerless
skill of Divinity, but most exquisitly also furnished with the entire
knowledge of all thigns natural: and not ignorant in any kind of learning or
discipline; may henceforth be sufficiently proved, and manifestly gathered,
for that in their writings they use so many Similitudes, and make so many
Comparisons of things fetched out of the very secrets and bowels of Nature; as
namely, from beasts, fouls, worms, creeping and swimming creatures, Herbs,
Trees, the Elements, fire, water, earth, air, rivers, brooks, wels, cesternes,
seas, stars, pearls, stones, lightening, thunder, rain, dew, heat, drowth,
cold, winds, blasts, hail, snow, frost, ice, corn, seed, salt, leaven,
nets, snares: and likewise from the humors in a man's body, Blood, milk,
generatiue seed, menstrue, woman in travel, childbirth, dross, iron, gold,
silver, and innumerable other things, wherewith they learnedly beautify their
matter, and (as it were) bravely garnish and deck out their terms, words, and
sentences with tropes and figurative Phrases, Metaphors, Translations,
Parables, Comparisons, Collations, Examples, Schemes, and other ornaments of
speech, giving thereby unto their matter a certain kind of lively gesture, and
so consequently attiring it with light, perspicuitie, easiness, estimation,
and dignity: stirring up thereby men's drowsy minds, and awaking slothful,
negligent, careless, sluggish, and retchlesse people to the consideration and
acknowledgement of the truth, and to the following and embracing of godliness.

Hereby as they do withdraw and deter the wicked from their wicked ways,
by laieng down before them, Similitudes tending to such purpose: so do they
no less stir them up to virtue, to true happiness, to perfect felicity, to
sound assurance, to the fear of God, and trust in his mercy. Finally, they
each way seek to win them to the knowledge of God, and of themselves; and
leave no way unattempted to allure and bring them to the truth and perfect
blessedness.

And as touching the godly, which fear the Lord, and frame their lives
accordingly, they cease not to encourage, confirm, strengthen, and establish
them in their virtuous doings, by earnest exhortation to persist in their well
begun exercise. They do (as the Apostle S. Paul also wills) admonish such as
walk inordinately, and live out of course, being intractable 2. These. 3, verse.
11.
and unruly, to remember their duty, and to acknowledge their fault; they
gently 1. These. 5, verse. 11.
reprove them, and mildly seek to recover them: they comfort the weak, and
cheer up the moornfull, they strengthen and raise up the feeble and broken
hearted, they revive the Isai. 61, 1.
sorrowful and heavy spirited, they raise up them that are thrown down:
they use lenity, mildness and compassion toward al men in general: they are
slow to anger, slow to revenge and violence: they heal the broken Luke 4, 18.
and bruised consciences, they preach deliverance to the captives, sight to the
blind, liberty to the imprisoned, comfort to the afflicted, joy to the
distressed, health to the sick, recovery to the diseased; and to the
miserable, releasement from the thraldom and tyranny of the Devil: all these
they notably and elegantly set forth in their writings by most apt Parables,
forcible Comparisons, and effectuous Similitudes.

Seeing therefore each one of the Prophets (among whom, many were kings, and
descended of royal blood) have discoursed of these things, and inserted the
same into their writings: seeing likewise our Savior Jesus Christ and his
Apostles have practiced the same, and showed forth the like kind of doctrine:
I thought my labor should be well bestowed, if briesly and by the way, I
should in this treatise show what store of excellent learning, pro^ound
wisdom, hidden knowledge, and ex^ct skill of nature; what zeal likewise of
ad^ancing true religion, and of banishing al ido^^trie and superstition there
rested in those men that by divine inspiration have left and delivered unto us
such worthy and wholesome matters, and such surpassing knowledge, by drawing
into their books (for the greater ornament and setting out of their speech)
the ^hole store and furniture of Nature.

The second Chapter.
Of the quality, property and nature of Mandrake, which Rahel, by entreaty
and composition got of her sister Leah.

IN the infinite number of fresh, green and flourishing herbs, which almighty
God the creator and maker of all things has made and appointed to grow out of
the earth for the use of man: the herb Mandrake is not of least account, not
last to be reckoned. Of the which, (because there is special mention thereof
made in the holy Bible, and for that also it was accounted of, as dainty,
delicate, and much desired to be eaten) we will therefore begin this our present
discourse, and argument thereat.

There be of this Herb two kinds: the one having leaves much like unto
Lettice, saving Mandrake.
that they be narrower and smaller, and of adarke or dim green color. The
Apple whereof grows out at the center or middle of the stalk, upon the small
slender stems, in the bigness of a Filberd, and some as big as a Walnut, or
Chestnut. And this kind is called the female Mandrake.

But the male Mandrake has more goodly, fair and large leaves, of a whitish
or milkie ^reene color: whose Apples growing out at ^he middle of the stem
among the broad and spread leaves, are in form round and orbicular, and of
color, yellow, much like to the yolke of a hens egg, of a strong sent and
savor, provoking sleep; but yet pleasant and delightsome: the root is
blackish, cloven into two divisions or clifts, like legs, folding and wrapped
one about another, about the which, there grow many fine threeds or small
hairs. Whereupon certain cosening Makeshiftes, Much paltrie and cosening
knauerie used about Mandrakes.
deceitful Pedlars, and hypocritical lurdeins in times past, and yet still in
some places, devise out of the root of this herb, and Brionie, to make
certain shapes and proportions like to the feature and phisnamie of a man,
resem^ling sometime a man and sometime a woman; being neither afraid nor
ashamed to persuade and bear the simple ignorant people in hand that they grow
naturally out of the earth in such form, proportion and making. Some of this
lewd rabble of shifting mates, and shameless deceivers, impudently and boldly
avouch and constantly affirm, that this is a creature, having life, and
engendered under the earth of the seed of some dead person, that has been
convicted and put to death for some felony or murder, and that they had the
same in such dampish and funeral places where the said convicted persons were
buried: by which persuasion they pitifully abuse the credulity of seely
people, and get from them by color thereof no small sums of money. And some
have been made to believe, that the apples and root of this herb has had
great virtue to procure antasie (which they call love) and as it were to
enchant, and (perforce) to cause the party to whom it should be given to doat
in amorous conceits, and to be foaded in a fools paradise, as it is termed.

Rahel (as the scripture mentions) was very desirous of this Apple, and made
importunate suit to obtain it. For when as Ruben went out into the fields in
the days of wheat Genesis 30, ^4.
harvest, he found Mandrakes and brought them to his mother Leah: which when
Rahel perceived, being one that envied her sister for Rahe^^ suit to Leah for
Mandrake.
her fruitfulnes in bearing children, she desired and entreated her said sister
to give her of the same Mandrakes. Leah being offended with her sisters
importunity, denied her request, and refused to bestow the Apples upon her. At
length the matter between them was composed and agreed upon, under this
condition, that Leah the night next following should sleep with Jacob, who
was husband to them both, and slept with them by turns: and that Rahel should
have and enjoy the Mandrakes, which she is thought to have gotten from her
sister, to the intent thereby the sooner to conceive, by eating the same apple,
and sleeping with the patriarch Jacob her husband. For, she greatly spighting
her sisters fruitful womb, and no less desiring to banish and put away
from her self the rebuke of barrainnes and sterilitie: bitterly expostulated
with her husband, for that she could bear no children, whereas her sister was
the mother of many. But Jacob wisely and gravely correcting her error, and
somewhat moved with displeasure against her, told her, that he was not
therefore to be blamed; for that fruitfulnes and beareing of children was the
gift of God, and disposed at his divine will and pleasure.

Now, whether Mandrake have any such virtue to make women fruitful, and to
help conception, therein lies the question and doubt. For, seeing that it
has a soporiferous nature and sleepie quality, and is withal also very
cold, it is thought to be utterly unprofitable, unfit and strengthlesse to
work any such effect. For answer whereunto, this I say, that as I confess
it to be unavailable and unable to work such effect, or to bring any such
thing to pass in cold and moist countries, or in a cold and moist womb: so
again in hot, parched and adust places it stands with good reason that it may
well effect such a consequence. So that I am of opinion, that in Aphrike,
Spain, Jury, Mauritanie, Barbary, Egypt and such like countries, where the
women be of an hot constitution, and have adust, ^rie, unkindly, faint and
lean wombes, this kind of Apple may safely and very conveniently be eaten.
For by the eating thereof, the body may expediently be brought (as I think)
to a temperatenes: in that, the same (after carnal knowledge) being brought a
sleep, the womb is the better enabled to retain the seed, not suffering it
to euaporate as in an hot and dry matrix it usually comes to pass. Which
thing I have (by experience) in many found to be true: who for the great and
excessive distemperance of their wombs, have continued barraine and childlesse,
albeit their husbands have been as likely men to have begotten children as
any. Yea this same distemperance has many times bred contagion in the
generatiue parts of many men, through the salsuginous, and frequent
unnatural humor thereof. To women of such constitution, (who for the most
part are immoderatelie thereby given to untamed lust) these Mandrake apples may
without any danger, yea to great purpose and avail be safely given: as also
Pompions, Cucumbers, Gourds, Melons, Purselane, Lettice, Nightshade, with such
like cooling Simples, whereby that excessive heat, and immoderate
distemperance of the matrix and womb may be qualified, and conveniently
rectified.

I know right well that in these our Northren parts of the world there are
sundry kinds of Plants and Herbs, which being naturally harmefull and
pernicious, can not choose but empaire and damnifie health, if their dangerous
quality and offensive effect be not inhibited and met withal. This is the
reason, why we qualify all those Herbs that are naturally cold, with pepper,
ginger, and grains of Paradise: by the which, their malice is restrained, and
their harmfull quality conquered. So, Mushromes and such other excrements of
the earth, to the Italians and people beyond the Alps are nourishable and
harmless, whereas to us inhabiting this country, they are both dangerous and
venomous, unless their pernicious quality by some hot condiments be mitigated
and mastered. Moreover in hot regions, parched and burned with the full force
of the Sun, all things attain the sooner and the better to their ripenes:
whereby it comes to pass, that these kinds of delicacies, which (as
stirrers and prouokers of wanton lust) are so highly esteemed, and so
inordinately desired of these lascivious riotours and incontinent
spend-thriftes, to increase and irrite their beastly lust, do little or nothing
prejudice the health of their bodies.

But that the Hebrews in the old time took great delight and made singular
account of Mandrake for the fragrant smell, and singular comfortable sent
thereof, may well appear by that marriage song or Canticle of Solomon. Which
makes me to think that it was greatly esteemed, much desired, often Cant. 7,
13.
handled, and carried about in Jury, for that it has in it a very delicate
and pleasant smell, inducing and provoking sleep, which unto weary and weak
persons is both comfortable and recreatiue.

And now to speak somewhat by experience in my self, what I have found and
tried by this Mandrake, I will here by the way show you, what happened unto me
through the same. It so fell out, that in the summer season (for at this time
of the year the Mandrakes be ripe) I chanced once or twice negligentlie and
rechlessely to lay up on a shelfe in my study some of these goodly and
beautiful apples. But behold what thereof ensued. Certes I became so sleepie
and drowsy, that I could not, but with very much ado, keep my self
waking. Striving thus (all that I could) to shake off this drowsines, and
finding no reason to lead me how it should so come to pass, at length by
casting mine eye about each corner, I espied the Mandrakes, which I had before
there laid: which after that I had taken away and removed into another room,
I presently recovered my former alacrity, and put to flight my sluggish
drowsines.

But from this sweet smelling and most fragrant apple, (whereby the carrier
thereof becomes gracious and the better liked with his beloved) the
bridegroom takes occasion Cant. 7, 11.
to walk forth into the field. For, when as in the spring and summer seasons
all things do^^ burgen and flourish, and that the Mandrak^^ and other pleasant
plants do gallantly and odoriferouslie smell, he calls his sponse o^ bride
out of her chamber, to the intent she may for a while leave the city, and
pleasantly repose her self in the gardens of pleasure in the suburbs,
refreshing her self with the manifold variety of most beautiful herbs, and
delightsome trees, as namely, spikenard, violet, lillies, pomegranate,
Mandrakes, and the flourishing vine. For, as all the trees, herbs and plants
growing out of the earth, do in the spring time of the year, specially
flourish and blossom, and exceedingly both for the gallant hue of the bloomes,
and also for fragrancie of smell delight the beholder: so namely and above the
rest, the Vine sends forth a most excellent and surpassing sent.

It flowreth about the beginning of June, and having many weak and slender
branches from whence grows sundry new knottie shootes, bringing forth at
every knot or joint, broad iagged leaves divided into five cuts or parts, it
yields forth a most pleasant smell, wherewith the heart and brain of man is
maruellously recreated, so that it is no small solace and delight for a man
during the time of the flowring thereof, to dine, sup, or otherwise to pass
away the time in some convenient arbor or gallerie under this most gallant and
brave tree.

It is also said that the odor and smell of ^^e leaves and flowers of this
tree be so soue^aigne, that no venomous beasts will approach near thereunto;
insomuch that Serpents, Snakes, Adders, Toades, and such like, cannot abide to
come near where it is. During the season and time therefore of the flow ring of
this tree, it is right wholesome under the shade thereof to walk, sit,
confer, talk, and cool our selves, since the same may without danger of
noisome and venomous creatures be safely performed. The Bridegroom Christ
therefore (for so is he termed by John the Baptist, being singularly affected
toward his Spouse the Church, which is the Congregation of faithful believers)
delights in nothing more, than in the advancement of the honor, dignity,
comeliness and beauty of his Bride: neither contrariwise, does the Bride in
any thing so much delight as in requital of kindness, and recompense of
courtesies toward her husband and Spouse: so that between them twain, there is
no apt, proper, and resembling Similitude to be conveniently gathered either
out of the Heavens, Stars, Planets, Mountains, Hills, Woods, Groves, Fields,
Herbs, Flowers, Trees, Wine or Vine, out of which any sweet, pleasant,
delectable, or wholesome smell, savor, or sent proceeds; but that the same
be most pithily, and according to the honorable dignity of either party most
fitly applied, and upon occasion most orderly and learnedly alleged.

Thus is the Bridegroom there aptly compared to sweet Spikenard, to a bundle
of Mirrhe, to a bunch or cluster of pleasant Grapes. The same Bridegroom also
compares his beloved (for her excellent whitenes and sweet smell) to a
Lilly: insomuch that if her handmaids or those of her train should be
compared unto her, they should seem to be but thorns and mungrels, without
honor, beauty, estimation or dignity. These and such like Metaphors are most
plentifully to be read and seen, not in this Song or Canticle only, but in
all the rest of the sacred Scripture also; so that there is offered unto each
diligent Reader and industrious Student matter enough, wherewith to delight
himself, and to recreate his mind, at least way, if he attentively bend
himself in fervent desire, entire care, and advised cogitation to consider
herein the excellency of Nature, and the incomprehensible majesty of the
Maker and Creator.

There are found (I say) in this Song or Canticle, very elegant similitudes
taken from such things as are known to be cordial and sovereign remedies
against the debilitie of the vital spirits, Sounding ecstasies or Traunces: as
namely, sweet, smelling and redolent wine, delightful and comfortable
Nosegaies of fragrant Herbs and pleasant Flowers. So likewise the Bride being
now ready to faint and languish, and (as it were) at the point to quail and
shrink down through immoderate love toward her husband and Spouse,
commands her handmaids to bring some comfortable Restoratiues, and to apply
sweet sented odours to her nose: Stay me (says she) with flowers, and comfort
me with apples, least I Cant. 2, 5.
faint, for I am love sick. So also do we use, when any fall into a sounding
or trance, to give unto them Cinamome, Cloves, Vinegar, Citrons, Lymons,
Myrtle, Narde, and other soote Simples to smell unto, which by the Scriptures,
and ordinary experience are known to be for that purpose good, cordial and
sovereign.

The third Chapter.
Of Manna: and first of that which rained down from Heaven: and next of that,
which is usual in Physic.

WHereas the children of Israel in the wilderness were fed with Manna: it may
not be thought Exo. 16, 14. Number 11, 8. Deuteronomy. 8, 16. Psalm. 78, 24.
to proceed from any natural cause, but even from the divine power, and
miraculous handie work of almighty GOD, who yet (notwithstanding) used the
ministry of nature in the doing thereof: as he likewise did in the Quails
which he sent among them into the Camp: and as he also did, when as the Rock
being smitten, yielded forth water abundantly for the refreshing of the dry
and thirsty people: or as when by the casting in of a piece of wood the bitter
waters became Exo. 15, 25. Number. 20, 8. Exo. 14, 21.
sweet: or as finally, when by a most strong East wind the red Sea was dried
up, and gave free passage unto the Hebrews (all the Egyptians pursuing them,
being utterly swallowed up and drowned.)

The like reason is to be given of the Meal and of the Oil which was still
increased 1. Kin. 17 16 2. Ring. 4, 6.
without wasting, at the prayer of Elijah, and of Elisha: of the Raven that
brought bread and flesh to Elijah: of the Angel that brought unto him a cake
baked on the coals, and a pot of water; in the strength whereof he iournied
forty days and forty nights Cap. 19, 6.
without any other food, until he came to Horeb, the Mount of God, where he
found a cave, in the which he safely hid himself from the tyranny of wicked
Iezebel, who cruelly persecuted and hunted all the Prophets of the Lord to
death.

These and such like admirable, wonderful and miraculous works, could the
Lord even with a word or a beck without the help of any thing, have brought
to pass: but yet his divine will and pleasure was, to use natural things,
(whereof he is both the worker and governor) as the means or instrument
whereby to atchieue and work the same strange effects, to the relief of his
children, and comfort to their distressed minds.

The like have we to observe and note also in Hezekiah being sick, and by the
doom of Isaie. 38, 21. 2. Kin. 20, 7.
God himself appointed to die, whose boil was cured by a lump of dry figs
(which in operation are maturatiue) laid plaisterwise to the same. Out of the
which, we are to learn this most profitable lesson, that albeit God be able
to heal without any medicines, yet his pleasure is, that in the time of
sickness, we should not contemn Physic, as the means whereby our recovery
is wrought, but to use the same in the fear of God, for the restoring of our
health and prolongation of our life.

The like means did Christ himself also use, in restoring sight unto a poor
blind John. 9, 6.
man, when as he spat on the ground and made claie of the spettle, with the
which he anointed his eyes, with further commandment to him to go and wash
himself in the poole of Siloam. In like sort also, cured he a dumb man, and
restored unto him his speech, Mark. 7, 32.
by putting his fingers into his ears, and touching his tongue with spettle.

These kinds of miracles did the Lord work, some while with only touching,
and Mat. 20. 34. Mar. 10, 52. Luke 18, 42.
some while with only a word, requiring nothing else at their hands that were
cured, but only firm and steadfast faith and undoubted confidence to obtain
their requests, as namely in poor blind Bartimaeus, faithfully crieng unto
Christ, (notwithstanding the churlish rebukes and checkes that he sustained for
so doing, at the hands of some of the company) appears.

But albeit Almighty God for his great mercy sake, and for the inestimable
love wherewith he most bountifully loved mankind, did many and sundry ways
signify his infinite goodness toward them: yet most singularly and notably did
he testify and make apparent his wonderful power and heavenly might, in
working most strange, most supernatural and inimitable miracles. Among the
which being innumerable, the raining and sending down of Manna so copiouslie
and abundantly from heaven, to suffice such an huge and populous multitude, is
namely and specially to be remembered.

For, when as the people (being a confused multitude) to the number of six
hundredth thousand persons, repiningly murmured against God, and Moses his
servant, for bringing them out of Egypt, into that waste Number. 11, verse. 31.
Exo. 16, 13. Psalm. 78, 24.
Wilderness, to be (as they seditiouslie muttered) there sterued and famished:
God in the evening of the same day sent into their Camp an incredible
multitude of Quails: and in the morning the Dew lay round about the Host
upon the ground, and when the Dew that was fallen, was ascended, the^^
appeered upon the face of the Wilderness, a small round thing, thin as the
hoare frost upon the earth, in the likeness of Coriand^^ seed, of the color of
Bdellium, and in relish or taste like unto Wafers made with Honey. When the
children of Israel being thereat greatly a^^onied, or (as some expound it)
contemptuously regarding it, did with admiration or irrision behold it; they
said one to another, Manhu, What is this? For they wist not what it was.

The Manna which is used in Physic. being hot, temperate and moist is not
altogether unlike unto this which we have now mentioned. For there is gathered
in hot Countries and warm Regions an Aerie and Dewie Honey, distilling and
dropping from the Air in the night time about the Canicular days in Summer,
and falling upon Trees, Branches, Herbs, Boughs, Flowers and Stones in small
drops or grains, which being rolled and chafed a little while with the tongue,
melts and dissolueth as it were Sugar, and with a most delicate sweetenes
singularly delights the palate and mouth. It is right sovereign and
beneficial to lenifie the roughnes of the Jaws, and asperitie of the Throat.
It notably quenches heat, purges blood, loses and mollifieth the belly,
as the Cassia fistula does, but somewhat more gently and mildely: and therefore
may safely and without any fear or danger be ministered to tender Folks,
Yoonglings, Aged persons, Women with child, or that lie in childebed, taking
the quantity of an ounce in weight at once, having always regard and respect
(as meet it is) to the nature and constitution of each particular persons body.

And it is termed by the name of Manna, or Melaereum, because being drawn up
from the earth by the heat of the Sun in the day time; it falls down
again in the cool night season, and lights upon Trees, Plants, etc. in
such proportion, shape, taste, sweetenes and relish almost, as the other Manna
was, which the Bible describes, and which the Israelites did eat many years;
insomuch that with the long use thereof, they fell to loathing of it, and
disdainefully to despise the great bountiful gift of their Lord and God.

I my self have sometimes found this Manna at such times as I have purposely
walked out of the University to seek for Herbs in mornings before dailight,
specially at the later end of the Spring, when the Air has been mild and
the weather calm.

But there is sold by some of these covetous and unconscionable Apothecaries
in steed of this true right Manna or Ayrie Honey, another counterfeited and
sophisticated Manna, made of Seen and Sugar. But by the melting thereof in the
mouth, the patcherie and slight may soon be espied.

There be some that gather about Be hyues, and other places where Bees do
mellifie, certain excrements of yellowish color and sweet relish like to
Honey, believing and making others to believe that the same is the right Manna,
distilling out of the Air, whereas in very deed, it is nothing else, than a
certain excrementall lyquor, juice, iellie, slime or spittle, coming from
Wasps, Dorres, Drones and Gnats. For, these kinds of unprofitable Bees do lie
in wait to lurch the labors, and to suck the Honey made and gathered by the
painful toyling Bees, which so soon as the same poor Bees epsy, they join
their forces together, set upon those theeuish Drones and filching vermin, and
never leave till they have banished or destroyed and slain them: And this is
by the most excellent Poet Virgil notably avouched and set out, where he says:

They fashion, trym and bravely deck Georg. lib. 4.

Their Combs for Honey sweet:
And neately frame their waxie web
As for their work is meet.
With careful care some hatch and breed
Mo young ones for increase:
While others, Honey of the best
To gather never cease:
Wherewith their stately Cells they fill
With store of Nectar fine:
Showing themselves a dapper Crew
To brew this juice divine,
Each one is set unto his task,
Each one his work does know:
Some range abroad: some stay at home
And labor do bestow,
By couching into order neat
What others home do bring:
Or else in Warlike guise they drive
The Drones from Hyue with sting.
The fourth Chapter.
Of wild Letuce.

Almighty God every way seeking the benefit and furtherance of Exodus 12.
Numb. 9.
man in godliness, and in most ample sort pouring out his unspeakable bounty
upon him, requires at his hands again in lieu thereof none other recompense,
but that he should love and honor him, and in most assured trust and undoubted
belief lean unto his most gracious promises. He sundry ways admonishes him,
and in many sorts puts him in remembrance of his duty, and stirs him up
from his slothful, negligent and careless security, to an acknowledgement of
the benefits which he has received, least otherwise he should ungratefully
forget them: For this cause and purpose the Lord GOD instituted diverse rites,
and sundry solemn ceremonies, not only in the old Law wherein all things
concerning Christ and his kingdom were typicallie shadowed, but also in the
Gospel, wherein all the promises of God were reallie, perfectly, plainly and
effectually exhibited, fully finished, and substantially manifested, as
Christ at the time of his giving up of the Ghost witnessed. Ioh. 19. 30.


Thus does he testify and assure men of the infallible performance of his
promises, and of his heavenly atonement and reconciliation Why Sacraments were
ordained.
with them, by certain Signs, Tokens, Seals, or Sacraments, visible to the
eye, and apparently subject to outward senses.

For Baptism being the Seal of the righteousness Baptism. Romans 4, 11. Genesis
17, 12. Exo. 14, 22.
of Faith, and the first entrance and receiving into the Church, was figured by
Circumcision and by passing through the red Sea: insomuch that we be thereby
consecrated unto God, and engraffed into him, by faith, with full deliverance
from the guilt of our sins.

And in place or steed of the eating of the Paschall Lamb, we have now the
holy Communion Supper of the Lord. Luke 22, 19. 1. Co. 11, 24
of the body and blood of Christ: which he has left unto us and commanded to
be solemnlie frequented and celebrated of al true Christians, for a perpetual
remembrance of his death and passion, and for a continual memory of that his
most inestimable benefit of redeeming us freely without any desert or merit
in us, from the tyranny of the Devil, and from the power of death, having all
our sins and iniquities entierly forgiven, and clearly pardoned, in and
through our merciful Mediator, Advocate and Atonement maker Jesus Christ. For
the Law was given by Moses, but grace and John. 1, 17.
truth came by Jesus Christ. This mystery lively and truly exhibited in
Christ, was long before prefigured and shadowed by the willing obedience of
Abraham, in the sacrificing of Genesis 22, 6.
his son Isaac: and in the ordinance and institution of a male Lamb without
blemish, which Moses by the prescript commandment of God, solemnly appointed
to be eaten with sower Herbs, or wild Letuce, for Exodus 12, 5.
the better retaining in fresh memory: the miserable slavery and thraldom
wherein they before lived under Pharao in Egypt: from which most slavish yoke
and intolerable bondage, they were mercifully delivered.

The Passover therefore was instituted, to Passover. Paschall Lamb.
revive, retain, and renew the memory of that day, wherein the Israelites by
striking their door posts with the blood of the Lamb were preserved from the
danger of the Angel, that was sent to destroy and kill all the first borne in
Egypt: and whereby they safely passed through the red Sea: which day was
thereupon termed Passover, being a word aptly and fitly importing most
wholesome instruction and comfortable direction, unto us living in the
troublesome wilderness of this miserable world; to admonish us of our passage
toward our heavenly Country, and blessed dwelling of immortality.

This Lamb was commanded to be eaten with sower Herbs, or wild Letuce: for
that, in this our wretched life, all things are bitter, troublesome, grievous,
and full of calamity, having in it a great deal more Aloe than Honey, that
is, much greater store of misery and mischief, than of joy and tranquillity.

Some hold opinion, that under the name of Letuce, there be also comprehended
the Herbs Succorie and Endive, bearing a white bluish flower and iagged: which
being kept covered and buried in sand or gravel, is used in winter time for
salads at the beginning of meals. The using and handling of it in this sort,
causes it to forgo and loose his bitterness, and withal to become
excellentlye white, much like to the inner leaves of the great white Cabage or
Colewort. And these Herbs be very good and profitable against the obstructions
of the Liver, for that, they have in respect of their bitterness, an
abstersive virtue and cleansing force, opening the pores and passages, and
enlarge all oppilations. They be also very good to cure the tertian Ague, and
the Iaundice. They qualify also and mitigate all the distemperance both of the
Gall and Liver, wherewith (as by their tawnie complexions it appears) the
Jews are specially incombred. These Herbs or Plants has Virgil learnedlye
remembered and set out, where he terms Endive to be Georg. lib. 1.
naturally bitter. And in another place, he says:

I could describe (if leisure seru'de) Georg. lib. 4.

The Garden how to dress:
And how each Herb to plant and sow,
All this I could express:
The Rosebanks that renowned be
Of Paestum fertile soil,
Which twice a year yield forth their crop,
With help of slender toil.
Endive likewise and Cichorie
That grows in watrish ground
In Meades and Ditches; Smallage green
And Parselie might I sound.
And how the gallant Cucumber
Delightfully does smell
And stretch it self along the grass:
Of all these could I tell, etc.
Columella likewise greatly commends Lib. 10.
them, and wishes them to be carefully planted and nourished in Gardens, as a
necessary help at a pinch for any present occasion: for that, the husbandly
benefit and household stay thereby growing, may serve in steed of a thriftie
Larder, as Tullie in his Book of Old Age terms it.

Let Gardens stored be with Herbs that bring
Good taste to meats, and stir up appetite;
As Cheruill, Endive, Letuce, and such thing
As orderly the stomach may irrite.
Like unto these in virtue, nature, effect and operation, are the herbs
Chondrilla (which we may call Gum Succorie) the soft milk Thistle, Dent de
Lion, or Rostrum Porcinum, Hawkeweede called Hieracium; all which have in them
a milk white juice and yellowish flower, very pleasant and dainty food for
Hares and Conies. For by eating thereof, these small Creatures preserve
themselves from embolning and dropsie-like swelling, by reason that the
bitterness of these Herbs, dries up their moisture and superfluous humor.
Wherefore such of them as be not too greatly bitter, are in the beginning of
the Spring, when their leaves be tender, good to be used in salads.

But that the wild Letuce (which is termed by the name of Endive) was used at
the eating of the Paschall Lamb only as a condiment or sauce, I cannot easily
be persuaded: because (by reason of the notable nipping bitterness thereof,
which biteth the tongue) it is not fit to be eaten, neither can it serve for
food, nourishment or meat, saving only when it first springs up, and is
very young, that is, ere it be armed on his back side with sharp prickles.
For the common Endive which is the very right Wild Letuce, in bitterness
passes all other plants and herbs whatsoever that contain in them white
juice, sap or liquor. And therefore Physicians use to minister Endive in
medicine, while it is young and tender, and not when it is full grown,
prickly, and old. But the other kinds thereof, namely Succory and Seriola, I
am fully persuaded may be used as a sauce or seasoning, to relish Lamb being
either roast or sodden: and thereof (as well the leaves as the roots) have our
Country folks learned to make right wholesome and toothsome Salades. The root
thereof is well near a cubite and a half in length, which many do use to slit
into small parts, like to the red Parsenep or Carot, and so to eat it with
Oil, Vinegar and Pepper, as they do Cucumbers, Sampiere, Charlocke or Raponse,
with many such like, as the time and season of the year does conveniently
yield and afford.

The fifth Chapter.
Of the Olyue and wild Olyue Trees, and of Olyues and Oil.

AS the Palm tree (which will not be kept down with any weight) is the Revel.
7, 9.
Badge, Ensign and token of victory: so is the Olyue tree a betokener and
singnfier of peace: for proof whereof, the Dove may serve, which Noah sent out
of the Arc, who after the floode was abated and the waters slaked, came
again, bringing in her mouth an Olyue leaf, as an apparent figure of Gods
wrath mitigated. Genesis 8, 11.


The leaves of this Tree be long and narrow, much like to the leaves of a
Willow, Wythie or Pryuet, green at the top, but whitish and of an hoarie
color rowarde the nether end, like the white Popler: the flowers be small,
and many, of color brown, pleasantly and delightfullie smelling. It bears
berries in marvelous great number, in form like to an Egg: which when they
draw toward ripenes, are endued with an Oil and fatiuice. Out of whom there
is pressed and drawn an Oil, that is of excellent virtue to strengthen the
joints, comfort the members, and also to mitigate and assuage any dolours of
the body. It suppleth the Lyms, and makes them nymble, active and lively,
specially being outwardly applied, rather than inwardly received. There with
the body being anointed not only looks the neater and smoother, but also
becomes a great deal the stronger, readier, and fitter to any exercise or
labor.

This (no doubt) did David well know, where he expresselie mentions the
same, and breaks out into most earnest, hearty and vehement praise, and
thanksgiving to God for the same, and other benefits. It is Psa. 104, 15
the Lord (says he) that causes grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for
the use of man, that he may bring forth bread out of the earth, and Wine that
makes glad the heart of man, and Oil to make the face to shine, and Bread to
strengthen man's heart.

To the same purpose tends also that saying of Pliny, affirming that, there
be two Liquors, most wholesome to man's body, to wit, inwardly, Wine, and
outwardly, Oil.

That pitiful Samaritane also (by whom is Luke 10, 34.
meant Christ) powered Oil and Wine into the wounds of the man that fell among
Thieves, being two most excellent things in such cases to be ministered: Wine,
to scowre, cleanse and mundifie the wound: and Oil to supple, lenifie, and
assuage the pain, and to heal the distressed patient. Hereby is meant and
signified, that Christ (contrary to the guise of the careless Priests and
negligent Levites) heals with his heavenly doctrine, afflicted consciences
and wounded Souls, binds up the soars of the amazed mind, recureth and
skinneth the agonies of the troubled conscience, and that in such sort, that no
appeerance or show thereof is left to be seen, that is to say, so entirely and
wholly, that none of all the misdeedes which he has before committed, shall be
to him imputed, or once laid to his charge.

This Oil being inwardly taken, does mollify and loose the belly, asswageth
all pain, swelling and inflammation, slicketh and smootheth al roughnes and
asperities, daunteth and encountreth poison; it makes the belly soluble and
slipperie; it provoke vomit, whereby all noisome, hurtful and pernicious
things may be the better expelled; it hinders and lets through the
slipperie nature and gliding faculty that is in it, that poisoned drinks and
venomous potions shall not pearce or enter into the veins, to the endangering
of the body with death: yea, it has this quality, property and commodity
also further, that being taken before hand, it withstandeth dronkennes, and will
keep a man that he shall not hastily or quickly be overtaken and cupshot.

Unadvisedly and beside the rules of art do some deal, that apply and lay to
such members as are broken, wrentched, out of joint, bruised, shronken, battered
and harmed by some fall, this Oil or Butter. But the Verdiuyce, or Oil that
is made of the Olive before it be full ripe, has an astringent power, and is
very good to bind, unite, knit and consolidate the sundred and dissolved parts
of the body. But yet, at the first, and in the beginning while the wound is
green, (if the age of the party will bear it) it shall not be amiss to
anoint or instill into the place some Butter or Oil, (a vein being first
opened) to assuage the pain, and dissolve the clottered and congealed blood
engendered in the same.

For which purpose, my use and order is to minister unto the party, a potion
made with the powder of Madder and Nutmigs: and afterward to apply unto them
some such things as are by nature consolidatiue, to wit, A potion consolidatiue.
Milfoyle or Yarrow, red roses before they be full blown, Myrtle Berries, all
the kinds of Symphitum or Comfrey, Sperma Coeti, right Mumia, Rhabarbe, and
Nu^mig; and to boil al these together in red wine, which is by nature
stipticke and astringent.

The berries are called in every Country almost by the name of Olives: which
being Olives.
gathered before they be ripe, and while they be yet but newly green, are
usually kept in pickle or brine, and are excellent good to provoke appetite,
and procure to a man a stomach to his meat; and they be good also, to
withstand droonkennesse, as like wise bitter Almonds be.

From the fruit and flowers of this Tree or Plant, divine Writers derive and
fetch sundry Similitudes both apt and elegant. So in the book of Job, where
speedy destruction is denounced to the wicked and blasphemous, it is thus
said: Before his day shall God Job. 15, 33.
destroy him, and his branch shall not be green: be shall be cast out, as the
Vine does her sower grape, and as the Olive does her flower. That is to say,
he shall be taken away before his day by quick and sudden death, and shall not
arrive to ripe age.

And the Similitude is taken from such Trees and fresh Herbs, as in the Spring
tide grow up gallantly, and appear most beautiful, and yet their bloomes
through blasting, do either come to nothing, or else are shaken down with the
sturdie storms of nipping winds and tempestuous weather. For, God does not
long suffer the wicked to enjoy their prosperity, or to have in all things
their wished will and desired success, but even in the midst of their
slaunting pride, and when as for age they might have lived a great while
longer, he cutteth off their days, and brings upon them a sudden and
speedy destruction.

Thus do we read, how God hastened his judgments, and brought the flood upon
the world, for that they would not be warned, nor repent and amend their
wicked lives, Genesis 6.
but daily grew from worse to worse. And God threatening sudden destruction,
and denouncing dreadful woes unto the Priests and Ringleaders of Ephraim, for
their careless contempt of Religion, whereunto thorough their pride and
droonkennesse they were fallen, thundereth out his grievous ire and heavy
indignation against them for the same by his Prophet, where he says: Woe to
Isai. 28, 1.
the Crown of Pride, the Droonkards of Ephraim: for his glorious beauty shall
be a fading flower, and as the hasty fruit before Summer and ripening time.
Whereby his meaning is, that they with all their pomp, stateliness and
arrogance, shall be brought low, and thro^wne down, as Summer fruit and soon
ripe figs, that are by and by with greediness pulled and eaten, and cannot be
kept till winter.

A much like argument does the same Prophet also in another place (as an
Ambassador or messenger sent from God) denounce against the Egyptians: Before
the Harvest when the flower is finished, and the fruit is riping in the
flower, shall the branches (of Egypt) be cut down, and the boughs thereof
taken away. Whereby he signifies that the Egyptians shall be served, even as
soon ripe fruits, and first grapes or berries, which are ripe before their
time, and are ready to be eaten before the season that other fruits are. For
such kind of fruits do quickly rot, and will not long be kept, so that
thereby his plain meening is, that their felicity and glory shall not be of
any continuance.

By the Olyue Tree also and other Trees besides, the good success and
plentiful abundance of all things toward the godly, together with the
increase and continuance of the same, is signified, which the Prophet David
plainly witnesses, in his comparing of a godly and virtuous man fearing God,
to a Tree planted by the water side, that is fruitful Psalm. 1, 3.
and brings forth his fruit in due season.

Jeremiah amplifieth and discourses the same Argument more at large, where he
pronounces all calamity and misery to the froward and stiffenecked people,
that forsaking the Lord God, sought help, refuge and succor in man, and
things of vanity. Cursed (says he) be the man that trusts in man, and
Ierem. 17, 5
makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the Lord: for he shall be
like the Heath in the Wilderness, and shall not see when any good comes, but
shall inhabit the parched places, in a salt hungry and fruitless soil. But
blessed be the man that trusts in the Lord, and puts all his trust and
confidence in him. For he shall be as a Tree that is planted by the river, and
shall not feel when the heat comes, but her leaf shall be green, and
shall not care for the time of drought, neither shall cease from yielding
fruit. By these and such like Metaphors is the steadfast trust that ought to be
wholly put in God, commended and set forth: signifieng that our heart, mind,
hope and cogitations, ought not to depend on any other, not to be directed to
any other, than to him alone, from whom all goodness flows, and who is most
bountiful, willing and ready to give all manner of good things unto men (truly
calling upon him) in most large and ample foison.

Heerupon it was that David relying upon God, and staieng himself under his
governance and protection, rather than upon any vain, transitory, and
momentanie things of the world, contrary to the guise, custom, and manner of
the wicked, says thus: I shall be Psalm. 52, 8.
like a green Olive tree in the house of God: for I trust in the mercies of
God for ever. Again, where he describes and sets out the blessedness and
plenty that shall light upon the man that is not idle, but fears the Lord and
walks in his commandments: and the fruitfulnes that shall be given to his
wife, he says: Blessed Psalm. 128.
is the man that fears the Lord and walks in his ways, he shall eat the
labors of his hands, and all things shall go well with him: His wife shall be as
the fruitful Vine on the sides of his house: His children as the Olive
branches round about his table. Lo, thus shall the man be blessed that fears
the Lord. Likewise in the prophecy of Jeremiah, God calls the people: that
he takes singular delight in, A green Olive tree, a fair and Ier. 11, 16.
of goodly fruit, which is, as though he should say, the name of it is unto
him pleasant, gracious and amiable.

With the same agrees also the Prophet Hosea, who with the same Spirit and
out of the same fountain wrate his Prophesies. The beauty of Israel (says
he) shall be as the Olive Hosea. 14, 7
tree, and his smell as Lebanon. Whereby he signifies, that all they which
assuredly and undoubtedly cleave unto God, and obediently walk in his
precepts, shall stand highly in his favor and grace, and be unto him both
pleasant and acceptable. For, as a sweet smell and fragrant odor reuiueth the
spirits, and refreshes the senses: so does the smell of a man that imbraceth
the wholesome doctrine of God, and dutifully conformeth himself to his divine
will, delight, recreate, refresh, and please him.

And that chosen vessel S. Paul, showing how gracious and favorable they
stand before God, which sincerely advance his glorious Gospel, and faithfully
instruct others in the same, says that We are unto God the sweet 2. Cor. 2,
15.
savor of Christ in every place.

And the Patriarch Isaac: The smell of my Genesis 27, 27.
Son is as the smell of a pleasant field, which the Lord has blessed.

Finally, in the Canticle or Song of Solemon, the Bride being the Church
speaking of Christ her Spouse, says: Because of the savor Cant. 1, 2.
of thine ointments, we will run after thee, etc. that is to say, we will
endeavor and study the best that we can or are able every one of us in his
calling, that we may be fed and refreshed with his wholesome doctrine, which
cheereth the feeble, and recreateth the weary, none otherwise than a sweet and
pleasant smell delights the senses of those that swoune, or fall down for
debilitie and weakness of their vital spirits.

The sixth Chapter.
Of the prickly Bush or thornie Shrub, called Rhamnus: and of some, Christ's
Thorn.

THis thorn Rhamnus is a kind of Shrub or Bush, that is on every side beset
and encompassed with many sharp prickles and short stubbed thorns: out of the
which there grows (clusterwise) by small and slender stems, the fruit or
berries, in great number and quantity, of an yellowish color, and round
form, as big as a Myrtle or Juniper, and of taste most sharp, sower, tart,
and eigre. If a man be not wary and heedfull in the handeling whereof, he may
quickly wound his hand with the sharp prickles that grow thereupon. The berries
which are sobbie and watrish, being bitten with the teeth, tasted with the
tongue, or crushed and bruised with the fingers, (...) tanne and die the same
with a yellowish or saffron color.

Of this Thorn there be three kinds: among the which this kind that we not
speak of, grows in great abundance in the grauelly soil and bushie grounds
of Zeland. In which country all along by the sandy soil of the Sea coast,
there are growing many and sundry sorts of these and such like shrubs, shootes,
and thornie prickled bushes, as namely this Rhamnus, Bremble brier, Sea
Purcelaine, Furze or Gorse, Holme or Huluer, Teasels, Cardthistles, Seaholly,
Camock, Restharrowe and petie Whin, beside many others.

Bellonius a learned man (who for the increase of his knowledge traveled
through the land of Jury and Syria) holds opinion that the thornie Crown,
wherewith the Jews crowned our Savior Christ, was of this Rhamnus: whereunto
he is persuaded, for that in those Countries there is none other sort of thorn
growing.

From this thornie Bush or prickly shrub, does the princely Prophet David take
a most excellent and fit Similitude, against the hawtie pride, presumptuous
tyranny, factions mutiny, and intolerable cruelty of bloody Caitifs and
treacherous wretches, that maliciously lie in wait to surprise the innocent,
and supplant the godly: whose wicked practices and undermining drifts, shall
(notwithstanding) be frustrated and defeated: and all their spiteful
imaginations adnihilated. As raw flesh (says he) beforc your pots feel the
fire of Psalm. 58, 9.
Thorns, so let them be snatched up. That is, they shall miss of their
purpose, and quail in their conceived mischief: their devises shall be dashed
ere they be thoroughly hatched, even as young thorns, which shall be plucked up
and weeded out before they ever come to full ripeness, or to have any hard
prickly nature: because the Lord (as it were with a tempest) will destroy them,
and carry them away (as with a whirlewind) in his wrath, and bring down their
high looks and mischievous platforms. By which words, he signifies and
means, that although they practice never so many sleights, policies, devises,
deceits, frauds, quarrels, massacres, murders, spoils and desolations, yet
shall they come short of their desire, and not be able to bring to pass their
conceived mischiefs, but shall be nipped (as it were) in the bud, before they
can attain to any ripeness or strength to work their malice.

Under which words there be covertly also included this further meaning; that
such wicked persons practicing tyranny and oppression toward the seely
inferior people, shall be violently taken out of this life, even as flesh is
taken out of the pot or caldron, being half raw, or before it beynough sodden,
or meet to be eaten: having scarcely felt the heat of the fire that is made of
thornie, prickly, and crackling Rhamnus.

For, Fagots and Bauens of Furze, Thorns, Rhamnus, Juniper, Brembles, Briars
and Bushes, are wont not only to scratch, prick and wound the hands of such as
deal with them and handle them; but also being laid on the fire, they
terrify and make afraid those that sit thereat, with their crackling flame
and sparkling noise, in so much that they cast out upon those that be near,
dangerous sparks and hot burning brands.

This therefore must be understood to be the sense and meaning of these words
of the Prophet: That although Tyrants, Oppressors, Sycophants, and Bloodsuckers
do rage and rave, stamp and stare, fret and fume, and every way seek
occasions to ouercrow and supplant the innocent, yet shall they miss of their
purpose, and nothing shall succeed according to their desire, but that by their
sudden and unlooked for death, the godly and innocent shall be delivered out
of their jaws and danger.

The seventh Chapter.
Of the wild Gourd, commonly called Colloquintida.

COlloquintida is used in Physic to purge Phlegm and Choler, as well yellow
as black: which humors it expels mightily and forcibly, but not without
detriment and danger to the powers and faculties of the body: so strongly
sometimes opening the veins, that it causes blood to ^ome forth. To qualify
therefore his dangerous nature and imperious operation, it shall be very
expedient to put to it Masticke and such other things, as are good to
streng^hen and comfort the stomach.

The fruit of it when it is ripe, is round and ^leake or whitish, of the bigness
of a Ball, or ^f an Orange or Cytron. If the upper part of ^^e rind or bark
being yellowish, be pared ^ay with a knife, the inside is full of juice, ^^d of
a most bitter taste. As appears in ^^e history of the Book of Kings.

For, whereas Elisha his servant went out 2. Kin. 4, 39.
to the fields to gather Potherbes, and a^ong others gathering this
Colloquintida, and shredding it into the Pot, not knowing what it was, powered
out the potage for the men to eat, they had no sooner tasted thereof, but they
presently cried out and said, Death is in the Pot: because the bitterness thereof
was so extreme, that they thought they had been poisoned. Elisha being not
unskillful in the Secrets of Nature, forthwith bethought himself, how this
bitterness might be met withal and qualified. And therwithall he cast Meal
into the Pot, whereby the potage became good and sauerie, and might Meal.
be safely eaten, without danger or harm.

There is reason Physical to be yielded for this matter. For Malt meal,
namely, o^ Barlie malt, has that virtue, nature, and operation, that it
takes away all unnatural relish and bitter taste. And by common experience we
find it true, that brackish and bitter water being mingled with Barlie malt,
becomes sweet, delicate and sauorie: And so likewise does the Bean meal* in
so much that within the space of two hours, it will become of good relish and
potable, and may safely without danger b^ received into the body.

The eight Chapter.
Of the Willow.

THe Willow is called Salix, and has his name, a saliendo, for that it
quickly grows up, and soon becomes a Tree. Heerewith do they in some
country trim up their parlours and dining rooms in Summer, and stick fresh
green leaves thereof about their beds for coolenes. From this does God by his
Prophet Isaiah take a most excellent similitude, wherein he promises to the
godly that put their trust in him, plenty and abundance of all things, and
prosperous success in all their affairs: and that he will bountifully give
unto them, not only external and corporal benefits, but spiritual and
eternal blessings also; and that he will refresh their dry souls, with the
most plentiful food of ^is holy spirit; and moysten their thirsty
^onsciences, with the perpetual fountain and lasting Spring of his blessed
Divinity. Whereby the mournful and dry souls are most ^omfortably cheered, and
animated to bring ^oorth plentiful fruits of (...) (...) charity, ^oth toward
God and th^or. (...) Isai. 44, 2.
not (says he) O Jacob my servant whom I (...) chosen. For I will pour water
upon the thirsty, and floudes upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirits
upon thy seed; and my blessing upon thy buds: And they shall grow as among the
grass, and as the Willowes by the rivers of water.

For, as Trees planted and set by the waters side, seem fair and pleasant,
adorned with store and variety of fresh and green leaves: so likewise does
the mind of man (being garnished with godly knowledge, and moystened with the
water of Gods divine spirit) flourish and shine with the bright beams of
virtue, and spread abroad his boughs, both of faith toward God, and also
yield forth the fruit of Christian works toward his neighbor.

The Jews being carried away captive into Babylon, and seeing themselves
destitute, forsaken Psalm. 137.
and comfortless, hanged their Harpes (whereon they were wont to chaunt Hymns
and play songs of thanksgiving unto Go^ for his benefits) upon the Willow
trees: making grievous moan for that their so miserab^ and lamentable case,
wherewith they were so deeply and pitifully distressed, that the^ could have
no manner of joy; so much (...) once to show forth any token of mirth, (...)
to handle their musical instruments. A^ very fitly are they described by the
Psalmi^ to have hanged their instruments on the (...) ^s, for that, this tree
is barraine and (...) seth his blossoms, before his seed be ripe.

Beside this, it is bitter, and nothing so de^ectable or pleasant to the eye,
as is the Plane tree, the Palm, the Cedar, the Cypress, the Terebinth or
Turpentine tree. And therefore the comparison between Banishment and this Tree
is very fit, and agreeable, and therefore did they hang their Harpes thereon. For
^s the Willow is bitter, and not greatly to the eye delightsome, so was their
banishment and transmigration into Chaldea, to the Jews, bitter, doleful,
heavy, comfortless and lamentable: and the rather for their often cal^ing to
remembrance the hill Sion, the City ^erusalem, and the most stately and
sumptu^us Temple, in the which they were wont ^o sing Psalms, and Divine
Ditties in the ^raise and honor of God. Yea, they were so ^eepely stricken with
sorrow in their hearts, ^o see the true worship and sincere religion ^f God,
contemned, despised, profaned, ^lasphemed and trodden under foot: to con^^der
how their Prophets were banished and ^aried away: to behold the pitiful plight
of their City, which was ruinated, destroyed, and made even with the ground,
that nothing could make them merry; nothing ^ould mitigate their conceived
grief; ney^^er could they by any all^rements or en^^eaties, be drawn and
persuaded, to sing ^^eir holy and sacred S^ (...) (...) ^^dicated and directe^
praise of God, among such blasphemous, wicked and profane persons, that did
none other thing than scornefully disdain, and malapertlie deride the Lord
God and his true religion.

These corrosiues of mind so galled the^ at the heart, and so grieved their
zealous consciences, that all melody among them (...) forgotten, and in lieu
thereof all grief an^ Ierem. Lament. 4, 19.
sorrow entirely possessed them. For Musi^ in the time of mourning, is
(according to t^^ old saying) unmeet, indecent and out of^ Eccl. 2, 1.
son: and therefore it was very fitly by the^ answered again, How shall we
sing a Song (...) Psalm. 137, 4.
the Lord, in a strange land, among a number (...) Atheistes and godless
people, that are nothing moved with compassion over (...) calamities, nor
touched with any remorse (...) our miseries, but do rather insult upon (...)
and scoff, taunt, deride, and mock the wo^ ship and honor which we have been
acc^stomed to yield to the immortal Go^ Therefore their request and suit to
us, to delight them with our Harpes or Instrumen^ is bootelesse and in vain,
seeing the despightfullie contemn, and scoffing^ despise, both us, and the God
of the H^ brewes.

The ninth Chapter.
Of the Herb Saliunca.

SAliunca is thought of Ruellius. Plinius.
some to be the same that is otherwise called Nardus Coltica. It is a small,
shrubbie, short and turfie plant, never growing to be so high as our common
Lauender. For it never ^iseth it self much above the ground. Which Virgil
well noted, where by certain ^mparisons drawn from sundry plants, he ^oke
occasion to commend one for his ex^ellencie in piping, and thereby to set forth
^s superiority over his adversary, with ^^ese words in effect:

So much as winding willow yeeldes Eclog. 5.

In goodness to pale Olyue tree:
And Saliunca low in fields
To ruddie Rose yields in degree:
So far (me thinks) in Art and (...)
A^yntas comes behind thee (...).
^f this Saliunca is used to be made (...) (...) smell unto, for the restoring
and (...) ^g of the powers and faculties of (...) (...), ^d to drine away,
fulsome, ^ ^gious sauors. For it ^ sweetenes and odor, insomuch that being
laid among Naperie, and Garments, it bo^ causes them to smell excellently,
and with also preserves the same from Mothes a^ Vermin. In lieu and place
hereof many d^ use for the same intent and purpose, Sp^ and Lauender, (whose
flower is most commonly blewe, and spyke-eared at the top (...) the stalk)
which yields forth such (...) strong sent and vehement smell, that it man
times causes headache and induces vn^tines.

We have known some Hucksters, T^uerners and Vinteners, that have been proved
to have distilled this Lauender wat^^ and to mingle it with their Wine, to the
(...) to make it show the brauer and perfecter, a^^ the quicklier to ouerturne,
and inebriate the drinkers. By which legierdemayne and deceitefull trick,
their Guestes the next d^ have been grievously troubled with the headache,
which could not otherwise by a^^ remedies be helped or eased, than by re^uing
some sleepie potion, or by drinki^^ cold Water, or Whaye, and that in gr^
quantity.

But out of this small and slender Pla^ does God (who bountifully both promise^
and largely performs gracious bene^ unto his children) take similitudes and
(...) comparisons: as namely where he says: (...) Isaie. 55, 12.
mountains and hills shall break forth before into joy, and all the trees of
the field shall clap their hands. That is, they shall all be glad for your
welfare, and rejoice at your felicity: each of them shall yield honor unto you,
and solemnly extol your praises: because you being now delivered out of
miserable thraldom, by the free mercies of God, and advanced to such honorable
dignity through his only goodness, and withal (after your hard and heavy
exile) enriched with such and so great bounties, There shall grow unto you in
steed of low Saliunca or small thorns, the tall and high Fur trees, and for
Nettles there shall grow the Myrrh tree. Of which words, the meaning is, that
all things shall prosper and increase with them, and have good success, so
that for small, abject, and seely poor Herbs (yea those that be hurtful)
there shall grow goodly, fair, and fruitful trees.

These great blessings are not to be referred, only to temporal and external
things, but also to the inward gifts of the soul and ornaments of the mind:
so that for fiercenes, violence, cruelty, hawtines, pride, arrogancy, and
loftines, (which (as S. Paul witnesses) are the undoubted works of the Gal.
5, 20.
flesh) there shall be found gentiones, meekenes, courtesy, mildnes, lenity,
humanity, peace, placabilitie, long sufferance, temperance, and such like,
which the Apostle there reckons among the fr^ of that Spi^. So that now there
shall be a (...) ^d ^tion, seeing that in steed of wrong, iniquity and
wickedness, there shall be seen Justice, equity, and righteous dealing: in
steed of incontinencie, lust, chambering, wantonness and prodigality, there
shall be chastity, moderation, frugalitie and modesty: in steed of sloth and
sleepie drowsines, shall be lively lustines, courage, cheerefulnes,
magnanimity, contempt of base matters, and condign account of virtues. So that
the order of things shall be quite altered, and in steed of corrupt affections,
or rather unruly perturbations, which carry the mind from the right rule of
Reason, and from the sincere Law of God and Nature, there shall be peace and
tranquillity of conscience, surely anchored (...) an undoubted trust and
infallible assurance of Gods mercies and promises.

The tenth Chapter.
Of the Herb Borith, of Physicions called Struthion, of the Mauritanians,
Arabians, and Apothecaries, Condisi: in form, quality, operation, effect and
virtue, very like (if not the same) that (...) Saponaria, which we call
Sopewort, or Fullers weed, is, because the juice thereof will mundifie and
scowre like Soap.

THe people of the Jews a little before t^ destruction of their City, being
d^ned in sins, and desperately frozen in the dregs of their many and filthy
abominations, so that they might seem to be even at the highest degree of
forlorn wickedness; it pleased God for the plainer discovery thereof, to detect
their shameful enormities, and to give sentence upon their graceless
disobedience, by using a very apt, fit and elegant Similitude, whereby he
notes their grievous and lamentable stubbornnes, that with no manner of
wholesome remedy and sovereign aduertisements, could be reclaimed from their
disloialtie to dutiful behavior.

For when as they had shrunk away and started aside from the true and sincere
worship of God, unto spiritual fornication and gross Idolatry, seeking help
and reposing their trust in others beside God; when as they laid snares to
entrap the innocent, and that not secretly and covertly, but even openly and
professedly in every common place and corner, despising law, contemning
justice, and rejecting all good, godly, and civil order; and in the lawless
doing thereof, made no conscience, but either thought they might lawfully
without controlment do what they list, and live as they would: or if they
thought themselves to have done any thing amiss, yet persuaded themselves;
that their ouersight^ and off^ ^be easily expiated, qualified, (...) (...)
(...) (...); ed away by a kind of strange worship and frivolous manner of
religion, displeasant and detestable to Almighty God: Therefore the Lord
seeing them thus lewdly to contemn his precepts, so disobediently to
transgress his laws, so vainly to fode themselves in their helpless hope,
and to nuzzle their foolish and fantastical minds in devise of such
deceivable means, whereby they thought to make themselves pure and clean,
and thereby to have all things cocksure on their sides, as they fondly
persuaded themselves. God therefore (I say) because he would not see his honor
so defaced, his glory so profaned, nor his majesty and magnificence so
despised, reprooueth them for the same, and sharply expostulateth with them,
for that they had forsaken him, and fled to others: that they had gone away
from him being the fountain of living waters, and dug to themselves broken
cesterns, and pits that can hold no water.

And he does so effectually deal in this his expostulation, that he touches
and reprooueth every one of them by name: I had planted thee (says he) a noble
Vine, whose plants were Ier. 2, 21.
all natural; how then art thou turned into the plants of a strange, unkindly
and bastard Vi^ And because he would show that this their revolt, defection and
apostacy could not easily be done away, he adds further saying, Though thou
wash thee with Nitre, and multipl^^ Verse. 22.
upon thy self the herb Borith, or use much soap: yet shall thou be stained,
filthy and spotted before me in thine iniquity. As if he should thus say:
Although in outward show and at the first sight thou seem (through this thy
superstitious worship of thine own devising, and whereby thou dishonorest the
glory of God, with thy hypocritical and visured Religion) to have satisfied
for thine offenses, and to have washed away thy sins and transgressions: yet
never persuade thy self that God is appeased and pleased with any such manner
of dealing, neither think that thou shall ever by this means recover that
clear and clean estate that thou imaginest. No, no, thou must take another
course, and practice another way, if thou desire to appear fair and
beautiful in the sight of God, and to be reconciled and at one with the Lord
thy Creator.

Thou must utterly defy, detest, renounce and forsake all filthy Idolatry,
all false Religion and counterfeit worship, all faith and hope in any other
saving only in the true and living God: thou must lead a godly and Christian
life, thou must embrace and follow the rules of honest and virtuous
conversation, thou must extirpe and weed out of the garden of thy conscience
all (...) de opinions and wickedness: thou must firmly ^ thy faith, and
assuredly ^ upon God, and ^ lie unto him and stay assuredly upon his divine
providence. For, to depend upon any other helper, and to look for safeguard,
protection or salvation at the hands of any other, or by any other mean or
manner of counterfeit and superstitious worship, neither required nor commanded
by God, is not only vain, foolish, bootelesse and helpless, but also
damnable, injurious, and derogatorie to the majesty of God.

This herb Borith or Struthion, which we here call Sopewort or fullers weed,
does naturally (indeed) whiten and scowre woollen clothes, and that excellently:
so does Soap supple and smooth the skin; and takes away the spots, freckles or
morphew in the face and body; but no worldly thing can be found, that has
such abstersive faculty, to wipe away and mundifie the spots and filth of the
Soul.

He that refuses to acknowledge his discase, and wilfully contemns the
wholesome direction and sound counsel of the faithful and learned Physician,
is incurable and in a desperate case: and to such an one, Hippocrates for
bids to appy any medicine. Yea another Cap. 3.
manner of teacher than Hippocrates, even the heavenly Physician Christ our
Savior and Redeemer, charge us to depart from them Mat. 10, 14. Luke 10, 11.
and to leave them to their own folly, when as no labor, care, industry,
pains and diligence bestowed upon them for their amendment and recovery, will
take place and be harkened unto.

But God by his Prophet Malachie promises, Mal. 3, 1. Luke 7. 27. Mark. (...),
2. (...). 40, 3.
that he will send his messenger or ambassador to prepare his way: by which
prophecy was meant John Baptist, as Christ himself in the Gospel expounds
it: and that speedily thereupon the Lord and governor himself should come,
that is to say Christ, who at his coming should renew many things, and bestow
much labor among them, to amend their lives, correct their sins, and direct
their manners, which have the charge of the Lords flock, to teach and instruct
them with good and wholesome doctrine. For, he is like a purging fire, and like
Fullers s^pe. And he shall sit Mala. 3, 2.
down to try and fine the silver: he shall try and fine the sons of Leui,
and purify them as gold and s^^uer: That is to say, he shall make them pure,
clean, neat, fine and trim, without any rust or dross of vices hanging upon
them, even as metals are scoured and burnished in a furnace or Goldsmithes
forge.

It pleased him therefore first to polish and beautify the Ministry, from all
filth and drossines, least they that should deal in the sacred mysteries of
the Lord, and expound his word to others, should be found themselves
enblemished with crimes, and ^med with wickedness. And this does ^ Similitude
(as we see) ^ things, being ^ ses, apply the same to the mind. For this Herb
Struthion, Sopewoorte or Fullers weed, is a most excellent scowrer of spots
and filth out of clothes, and of an incredible and notable effect, for the
whiting of Wooles or Woollen. Yea it is so woonderfully abstersive, that it
draws Phlegm and other corrupt baggage out of the head, scoureth and
cleanses the breast, of all gross superfluities, and so forciblie procures
neesing, that it brings forth a child though it be dead.

The 11. Chapter.
Of Scarlet, Crimsen, Purple.

THere is a Plant or small Shrub, having slender boughs and sharp prickly
leaves, whereon there grows that, which we term and call Grain, yielding a
most gallant and orient red, most delectable to behold, and right amiable to
the eye. Heerewith they use to die and engraine wool, cloth, silk, and other
stuff, into a most brave, gallant, beautiful and rich rednes. Of this Grain
is Scarlet denominated, Coccius.
and heerewith is it died: and of this is mention made many times and often in
the Scriptures, as also of Purple, which were wont to be the peculiar colors
for the Robes and Palles of Emperors, Kings, Potentates and Princes.

So in that excellent Song or Canticle of Solomon, the ruddie lips of the
Spouse are compared to a thread of Scarlet, or Rose colored Cant. 4, 3.
Ribband.

Joshua being by God appointed to be the captain and conductor of the
Israelites, after the death of Moses, is said to have worn a Scarlet Cloak.

And Christ as though he had vsurpinglie Mat. 27, 28.
affected a kingdom, was in mockage and derision stripped, and clothed with a
Scarlet Robe.

In the Revelation also of Saint John, the Whore is described and set out,
Sitting upon Reave. 17, 3.
a scarlet colored beast: which Whore was apparelled in Purple and Scarlet,
and gilded with gold, and precious stones, and pearls, having a cup of gold
in his hand, full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication. And in
her forehead was a name written, A Mystery, Great Babylon, the Mother of
Whore domes and abominations of the earth: All which is a type and figure of
the City of Rome, as Ierom expounds it. By which titles, terms and
Epithites, he notes her hawtie arrogancy, snuffing pride, and cruel nature,
embrued with the blood of Innocents.

The rich Glutton men^ Luke 16, (...)
pell, beside his sumptuous fare and delicious bankets, was clothed in purple
and fine linen, having (notwithstanding) no remorse, pity or compassion on
the poor and needy members of Christ.

From the princely and orient color of this most delicate and goodly juice,
in the Prophet Isaiah there is taken an occasion of a very fit Similitude and
Comparison, in the person of God, against those that gape after blood, and
seek by violence to oppress the innocent. In which Sermon, the Lord lovingly
stirs them up to repentance, and seeks to draw them to an acknowledgement
of their wickedness. Which if he persuade them unto, and that they will
willingly and obediently be reduced and brought again into the right way, he
assures them of forgiveness, and that he will utterly forget their sins and
transgressions, how many and how grievous soever they be.

For thus does he there reason with them, and thus does he begin his Oration
and speech unto them: Wash ye, make you clean: take away Isai. 1, 16.
the evil of your works from before mine eyes: cease to do evil, learn to
do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed judge the fatherless, and
defend the widow. If your sins were as Crimsin, they s^ be made white as
snow; and though they were (...) as scarlet, they shall be as wool. Whereby
his meaning is, that though their sins were he^nous and bloody with the
murder and death of the Innocent, yet were they pardonable, and might by
earnest and hearty repentance, firm faith, and assured trust in the mercies of
God, be easily washed away, so that withal there were joined therewith a full
purpose of amendment and newness of life.

But that Robes and Garments of Scarlet, Purple, Silk and Velvet, were used
and worn in the old time by the ancient Hebrews, as well for the honor,
ornament, and dignity of their bodies, as also sometime for riotous bravery,
proud pomp, and wilful ostentation, the Scripture in sundry places
sufficiently witnesses. As namely in Jeremiah, where there is an hard doom
and dreadful commination against Israel, for that, having forsaken the Lord
their God, from whom a^one flows all goodness, and on whom a^one depends
their whole and entire salvation, they vowed and bowed themselves ^o Idols, and
went a whooring after strange Gods, painting and pranking themselves ^ike
adulterous harlots, with strange and fo^aine attire, thereby to feed the eyes
of their ^aramours, and to draw them the sooner into their love and liking:
When as (says the Lord) Ierem. 4. 30
all places and corners shall be full of slaughter and de^lation; when as the
strong men being discomfited ^^all fly for fear into thickets, and climb up
into ^igh rocks: And when thou shall be destroyed and ^asted, what will thou
do? Though thou (...) ^^y self with Scarlet, though (...) (...) (...) with
ornaments of gold, though thou paintest thy face with colors, yet shall thou
trim thy self in vain: for thy lovers will abhor thee and seeks thy life:
they will not awhit be moved to compassion with thy gay and brave apparel,
but greedily seek thy spoil and confusion.

Ezechiel also charging Samaria and Jerusalem, with whooredome and adultery,
by the which, he means Idolatry and Apostasy, denounces against them in
the person of God, plagues and punishments no less dreadful and intolerable.
For, as the breach of wedlock, and defiling of the marriage bed by filthy
adultery, is a most wicked and detestable sin: so likewise is Idolatry a
most shameful and execrable thing: when as the honor and glory due to the
living God, is profaned and given to another.

Wherefore the wrath of the Lord is the more fiercely kindled against them, for
that, not only in Groves and Valleies, they sacrificed to their Idols, and set
up unto them, Altars, Images, and Temples with great pomp^ and foizon of
Calves, after the manner of t^ Heathen: but also by calling and sending f^
others to bear them company, they defile^ his Sanctuary, profaned his
Sabboths, and polluted his holy Temple, consecrated and dedicated to his name.
And to the inte^ that all things might seem unto the beholders more gorgious,
magnificent and holie^ Thou have for their sakes (says he) washed thy se^ Eze.
^3, 40.
and painted thine ^i^s, and decked thee with ornaments: And satest upon a
costly bed, and a table prepared before it, whereupon thou have set mine
Incense and mine Oil, and a great multitude with thee reioicing. As if he
should say: The honor and worship which is due and ought to be given unto me,
is bestowed upon Idols and Devils, and that in solemn sort and order, while a
confused rabble and dissolute multitude of brainlesse Genti^ and wicked
Heathen, do join with thee in the same, and run headlong into semblable madness.

The 12. Chapter.
Of the Furze or Brier called Paliurus, which is prickly and sharp, and unto
which, bloody, cruel, deceitful, and hurtful persons be in the Scriptures
compared.

THe Prophets in many places vehemently inueighing against the sins of the
people, and earnestly beating down the rage, fierceness, and cruelty of such
as do trouble, annoie, disquiet, damnifie, hurt, devour, oppress and disturb
the state of their seely weak ^rethren, do resemble, liken, and compare them
sometimes to Wolves, Lions, Panthers, Leopards, Adders, Snakes, and other
harme^ull Creatures: sometimes to Foxes, W^ and other such subtle and crafty
beasts: and sometimes to Prickles, Thorns, Briers or other sharp pointed
plants.

Thus did Michah the prophet bewail the want and contempt of Religion, the
overthrow and decay of godliness, the subversion of justice, the profanation of
Divine worship, and finally the lamentable revolt of all men in general from
virtue, honesty and integrity. So that there was nothing else practiced among
men but fraud, craft, subtlety, deceit, quarrels, underminings, catching at
advantage, lieng in wait, wrangling, collusion, dissembling, and al manner of
mischiuous drifts and hateful dealings. He does therefore in this sort
amplify their grievous enormities, and thus does he aggrauate their faults by
laieng them in heaps before them; using for the ^ame, a Similitude taken from
Thorns and Prickles: Goodmen (says he) are perished from the earth, and there
is none righteous Mich. 7, 2.
among men: they all lie in wait for blood; every man hunteth his brother
with a net, and the evil of their hands they call good; that is, they flatter
themselves in their misdeeds and errors: the Prince asks, and the Judge
judges for a reward, that is, he yields in all respects to such things as he
knows, will please the Prince, he feeds his humor, and obeieth his
requests; without any regard at all either of Law, Reason, or Conscience; he
suffers him to ouerrule all matters after his own will, to oppress the
poor people, and wring from them what he lists, or to practice tyranny over
them according to his own lawless lust and imperious sensuality. The best of
them is as a Prickle or Brier, and the most righteous of them, is sharper than
a Thorn hedge.

And therefore where such kind of persons bear rule and be placed in office,
his meaning is, that there the state of things is such by means of whispering
Talecariers, and secret priers into every man's life, manners and trade, that no
man can safely trust an other, nor reveal his secrets and open his counsel,
no not to his familiar friend and known acquaintance.

For where such disorder reigns, that men's cases and estates be so narrowly
sifted, and their deeds and words so vndermininglie searched, the hearts of many
do quayle, their courages be daunted, their minds be dismayed, and they
brought even to their wits end; insomuch that they not only forsake and
mistrust their friends, but many times bewray and betray them: which things
Christ himself foretold should come to Mat. 10, 35. Mark. 13, 9.
pass.

Therefore in this so dangerous, doubtful, and wavering trust and faithfulness,
the Prophet further warns us what to do, saying: Trust ye not a friend,
neither put ye confidence in a counselor. Keep the doors of thy mouth from
her that lies in thy bosom: that is, disclose not thy mind, no not to thine
own wife. For the Son reuileth the Father, the Daughter rises up against
her Mother: the Daughter in law against her Mother in law: and a man's enemies
are the men of his own house.

In this so lamentable a garboyle and disordered state of the common wealth, he
teaches every man, which way to work, and whereunto he may best and safest
betake himself; saying: Therefore will I look unto the Lord, I will wait for
God my Savior. My God will hear me. Here he having his full hope and assured
confidence grounded upon God, rests undoubtedly persuaded, that God will
deliver and preserve him against all the violent, proud and cruel rage of all
wicked oppressors.

For whereas God is gentle, mild and exorable, they on the other side be
raging, fierce, cruel, spightfull, churlish, discourteous and (like thorns,
brembles, and briers) armed with sharp prickles, and poynant ends, whereby they
hurt, wound, and damnifie those that be innocent, harmless, helpless, and
comfortless.

We see therefore how here from Prickly plants the Prophet borrows a
Similitude, whereby aptly to express, and exactly to set down the nature,
property and condition of wilful and wicked men. For the Furze, Bryer,
Bremble, Eglentine, Berberie bush, (if we only respect their flowers and
berries, are to the eye right pleasant and delightsome, and in cases of
Physic and medieine, have their profitable and necessary uses) but in
handling they are dangerous, and like enough to gash, split, and wound the hand
of a man that rashly and unadvisedly touches them.

And in like sort, there be some sly persons, crafty shifters, subtle mates,
and double dealing dissemblers, who at the first blush do outwardly in show
pretend much friendship, and speak smoothly, but if they may once upon any
light occasion, epsy occasion and opportunity to utter forth their inward
spite, or where to work their devilish and cankred malice, they will be found
(I warrant you) ready enough both to prick, sting, and wound to the uttermost.

Now this Paliurus being (as has before been said) a kind of sharp prickly
Furze or Brier, is described by Theophrastus, Virgil, Pliny, Dioscorides,
Columella and others, with general consent to be sharp, thornie, and dangerous
to the handler: howbeit they do not all agree about the description of his
form and fashion.

Not much unlike, is it to that which we commonly call Berberies, termed in
Greek Oxyacantha, where with some (for the gallant beauty and seemly show)
use to deck and adorn their doors, and to keep the slips and boughs
thereof in Pots, for the longer keeping thereof in their flourishing hue and
greenenes.

When the flowring and blowing time is past, it brings forth berries being
at the first green, and in fashion somewhat long, which when they be ripe,
become red of color, and have within, a hard stone, environed and encompassed
with a small slender and thin skin or rind. The inyce thereof being fattie and
unctuous, is used in Physic as a right sovereign remedy against the Stone
and Gravel.

The thirteenth Chapter.
Of Gith, called in Greek Melanthion, and with us commonly Nigella: and of
certain other sorts of Plants and Grain beside.

I Saiah the Prophet was (as before has been showed) most excellently seem in
the Secrets of Nature, and most skillful in the qualities and operations of
Plants. Which may easily be proved by the manifold Similitudes which he
takes (for the garnishing of his Themes and Arguments) from Herbs, Plants,
Flowers, and Seeds, inserting the same into his divine Sermons. As namely Gith
or Nigella, Cumine, Wheat, Barley, Isaie. 28, 25.
Millet, and Fitches; all which be things well known, affoording both fodder
for Cattle, and nourishment for men.

This Gith, (called commonly Nigella) is growing in the Gardens of many
Herbaristes, Gith or Nigella.
a cubite high or sometimes more, accordingly as the ground is in ranknes,
whose leaves be much like to Fenell or Fumiterrie, all too cut and iagged, the
flowers of a light blew: which being once past, there comes up on the top
small knops or heads as in Popie, with little sharp horns upon them,
longwise, wherein be certain small cells, chambers or husks containing the
seed, which is somewhat black, much like unto Onion or Leeke seed: in taste
sharp, and of a strong, pleasant and fragrant savor, which in some places,
they use to mix with their Paste or Dough, before it be put into the Oven, to
make it have the better relish and delicater taste.

But specially Physicions use the Seed hereof as right commodious to help
Catarrhes, Murres, and Poses; to kill and drive away worms, being either
droonken with wine or water, or else laid to the navel of the belly: to take
away the toothach; to bring down women's natural diseases; to provoke urine,
to take away lentils, freckles, spots, and other blemishes deforming the skin
and outward parts of the body.

Cumine is good to scatter and break the Cumine.
windiness of the Stomach, Belly and Matrix: and to alay and help the
griping torments, and the gnawings and frettings of the Entrails: It is also
excellent good to slake and dissolve the blasting and swelling of the Cods and
Genitories, being laid thereunto. For which purpose, my order and custom is, to
mingle unto it some Nigella, Bayberries, and Millet meal.

Barlie is a grain generally well known, Barlie.
and the uses thereof both to man and beast, right necessary and profitable.
In time of dearth and scarcity of Wheat and Rye, the poor people grind the
same to make bread. This Barlie being hulled and cleansed from the rind, and
then beaten, broken, and sodden, makes the noble drink called Ptis^^a; which
is most sovereign to quench hot burning Choler in vehement Fevers, and to
help the corruption and oppilation of the Lungs, and hoarsenesse in the vocal
Artery, with shortness of wind: specially if those parts be exasperated or
exulcerated with superfluity of salt Phlegm or yellow Choler, putting into it
a quantity of the flowers of Violets or Buglosse.

Heerewith also (being made into Malt) is made that most noble, necessary,
and delicate licour, called Beer, of such color as the Brewer is disposed to
give unto it, as namely, yellow, Saffronlike, reddish, brown, or such like,
specially when the yest or barme (which they use also to make their bread
withal) is settled down to the bottom. For then comes it to his kindly
color, and is (to look upon) very gallant and pleasant, much like to Maluesey
or Bastard, and relisheth not altogether unlike to Wine; and being
immoderately taken, causes droonkennes as well, and as soon as Wine does.

Wheat, the noblest grain and of chiefest Wheat.
account to make bread withal, is of sundry sorts, as manchet, cheat,
cribble, biscoct, household, and brannie, with other sorts needelesse to be
rehearsed.

Mill or Millet is of sundry sorts, as Asian, Mill.
Indian, Spanish and Turkish, which bears a red brownish or yellowish grain:
wherewith some poor people have learned to make bread and broth.

Fitches be a kind of Pulse, and are good Fitches.
prouender for Horses and Cattle, as Lentils, Pease and Beans be.

Thus much have I thought not amiss here by the way to note; to the intent,
the mind and purpose of the Prophet might exactly and plainly be found out:
whose only drift is in this place to show, that God does nothing rashly,
unadvisedly, disorderly, confusedly, by chance or at randon, but in all his
actions deals most wisely, orderly, advisedly, deliberately, and both by law
and reason: one while sending punishments and plagues, to repress men's
inordinate lusts and outrageous behauiours; and another while curing their
wounds, healing their sores, suppling their grieves, comforting their
distressed minds, and relieuing their afflicted Consciences. Which thing he
somewhile hasteneth to put in execution and practice; somewhile lingereth ere
he take the matter in hand; and somewhile showing forth his mighty power
both ways upon the sudden, even as it seems good in his eyes, and as he
sees it expedient, when occasion serves.

Wherefore the Prophet admonishes all those, that think otherwise than
reverently and dutifully of the judgments of God, speedily to reform their
opinions, carefully to circumcise their affections, awfully to regard his holy
word, religiously to think of his sacred Majesty and divine Providence,
highly to extol his name, reverently to speak, and dutifully to think of
him: and neither to murmur, repine, mutter, or accuse him in his dealings, when
as they see the wicked to flaunt and flourish in all prosperity, and to enjoy
abundance of all things to their hearts desire: whereas in the mean while the
godly be thrown into miseries, afflicted with cares, pinched with pains,
oppressed with wrongs, and each way laid open to calamities, vexations, and
troubles of the world. For the Lord by his heavenly wisdom and unsearchable
counsel, does govern and rule the world, and al things therein, justly,
wisely, and rightly.

For the better beautifieng, and garnishing of his matter in this behalf, the
Prophet uses a very fit Similitude, borrowed from the industrious toil of
husbandmen, and from the manner, order, and trade of plowing, sowing, and
thrashing. For, the husbandmau at certain seasons of the year, fallowing and
turning up his land, casts his seed into the furrows thereof in due
proportion and measure, according to the nature of the soil, and quality of
the ground; sowing in one place Wheat or Barlie, and in another Gith, Lupines,
Spelt, Millet, or some such kind of Pulse. Neither does he rashly and
harebrainedly shuffle all manner of seeds together, and so desperately and
fondly cast the same on the ground, but advisedly and discreetely pondereth
with himself, what place and soil is fittest for each several grain.

The sowing time being past, he thinks not himself discharged of care,
neither gives he himself to ease and idleness, but longinglie, hops for his
Harvest, and many a time wishes for the time wherein he may reap his labored
crop: and in the mean while (ere the corn be ripe) he weedeth it, and sets
his servants to work, to pluck up the Darnel, Thistels, and other noisome
baggage, that would otherwise choke the Corn.

After he has inned and brought it into his Barnes, he sits not still,
neither gives he himself to ease, but as one work ends, so begins he an
other, and the end of one labor is the entrance into an other.

For then goes he about to thrash, fan, and winnow it, and that so
carefully, that he will not confusedly iumble and mingle one seed with an
other, but make clean the same in order, and every kind by it self, as to
the nature thereof appertains. As namely, in one sort deals he with small
and slender seeds, in an other sort with them that be great and big: and in
an other, with Wheat, Barley, Rye, Otes, Amilcorne, Lupines, Beans, Fitches,
Lentils, Cumin, Gith, etc.

As a painful and careful Husbandman therefore looks diligently to all
points of his business, and bestows his industry and labor in each respect, as
the time and season affoordeth, and as the nature and quality of each Grain
requires, in hope thereby to receive a good increase and plentiful crop: Even
so God tries each way, to draw and bring all men, of all sorts, and condition
in this Theater of the world, to acknowledgement of their duties, and desire of
their salvation. And as an Husbandman after he has plowed up his land, and
sowed it, does afterward harrow it, and break the hard clods thereof: as he
(I say) sows, reapeth, thrasheth, fanneth and searceth the chafe from the
Corn as he cutteth, pruneth and loppeth his trees, and keeps them under,
least they should grow rugged, or spread their boughs to far out of course
and order: and finally as he graffeth, planteth, and teaches his young
Siences to be naturalized in another stock than their own: So likewise does
God deal with men in this world, punishing and afflicting some with losses,
hindrances, and other tokens of his hidden judgment, for the better trial of
their patience and constancy: Some (though evil and wicked persons) he
tollerateth, spares, and (as it were) winketh at, in hope of their conversion
and amendment.

Neither may any man be so hardy as once to mutter or murmr for the same
against him, since by his providence he wisely dispenses and governs all
things, and best knows why and for what reason he does this or that.
Wherefore if any adversity surprise us, if any trouble assail us, if sickness
attach us, if calamities, plagues, or other encumbrances of this life infest
and follow us, let us be persuaded that all these things are sent to us from
God, as means to work in us repentance of our former wickedness, whereby we
may flee to him for succor, comfort, and relief; in whom only consists and
depends our whole hope, entire affiance, and perfect salvation.

On the other side, if all things go well with us, and according to our hearts
desire, if wealth increase, if riches abound, if lands, living, and revenues,
honors, dignities, offices, goods and cattels be multiplied and heaped upon us;
if health, strength, courage, lustines and soundnes of body be given unto us;
let us meekely and humbly acknowledge, from whom all these do flow; and let us
be undoubtedly persuaded, that all things as well in time of prosperity, as of
adversity, come unto us by his divine ordinance, decree, direction and
appointment.

And this does he not only most notably declare and signify; where he
puts Cyrus the king of Persia in remembrance of his duty, by acknowledging
how that by the power and might of God, and for the Jews sake his chosen
people, all things went luckily and prosperously forward with him, and
nations were subdued and brought in subjection under him: but also thereby he
testified unto all men in general, that God is Almighty and able to bring al
things to pass, whenever and which way soever he pleases: which might and
power as in other places he sets out right divinely, so specially and namely
in the Prophet Isaiah, he most lively and pithilie sets the same down,
where he says thus: I am the Lord, and there is Isai. 45, 5.
none other: there is no God besides me: I form the light, and create darkness:
I make peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all these things. Whereby he
means, that prosperous success is his heavenly gift: and that losses,
hindrances, adversities, spoil, pestilence, hunger, war, and such like, be
sent of him as punishments and reuengements of our wicked life and heinous
transgressions. For he it is, that so strengthens such as faithfully depend
on him, and unfeignedly lean unto his protection, that they live a good, a
quiet, and a peaceable life. Contrarily, such as wallow in the filthy puddle
and swinish mire of lewd behavior and careless dealings, shall taste of the
whip of his ire, and be plagued with grievous punishments, according to their
evil demerits.

The Lord appointed the office and function of an husbandman unto Jeremiah
also, Ierem. 1, 9.
whose mouth he touched with his hand, saying: Behold, I have put my words in
thy mouth: Behold, this day have I set thee over the nations, and over the
kingdoms, to pluck up and to root out, and to destroy and throw down, to
build and to plant. Whereby he means, that he being fortified and armed with
the power of his word, should have strength to pull up Sin by the roots, to
weed out errors, to grub out of the minds and consciences of men, their
outrageous, dissolute, and enormious affections: and in steed thereof, to
plant in them the seed of godliness, to instill into their hearts the wholesome
doctrine of faith, and entirely to inflame them with an unfeigned love toward
the true and living God.

The like Argument does our Savior Christ handle, where he takes a Similitude
from the vine and his Branches, saying: I am Ioh. 15, 1.
the true Vine, and my father is an Husbandman. Every Branch that bears not
fruit in me, that is, that shows not forth his faith by the works of love,
he takes away, and cutteth down as unprofitable spray, fit for nothing, but
for the fire: but every Branch that bears fruit, he purges, (lopping and
shredding away all vicious, corrupt, and naughty affections) that it may bring
forth more fruit.

Not unlike unto this, is that excellent Similitude which the Apostle uses,
concerning the graffing in of the wild Olive tree into the true and right
Olive, and of the breaking off, of the boughs and branches from the natural
Olive. Whereby he means Romans 11, 17
none other thing, but that some were fallen from their happy estate, of
glorious salvation; and that others were chosen and received into the number of
the faithful, not for any desert of theirs at al, but only by the mere favor,
singular mercy, and free grace of God. Which benefit, unless they thankfully
acknowledge, dutifully remember, and constantly persist in faith, he
pronounces that they shall be cut off again, and for their ingratitude
rejected from the fellowship of God: and that those shall be again received
and regraffed in, if they abide not in unbelief; but by hearty repentance call
unto God for mercy, loath and detest their former sins and wicked life,
seek health, embrace truth, and faithfully believe in God, whom before they had
forsaken.

By this means, the Lord partly beats down the insolent pride, and hawtie
arrogancy of vainglorious persons, least any man should either be puffed up
with a vain persuasion of his holiness, or flattering himself in his own
peevish conceit, should loftily contemn or disdainfully insult upon the
miseries and calamities of others. And partly hereby he cherishes and
nourishes an hope in them, that being now alienated and estranged from God,
shall be graffed in again, and eftsoons received into the fellowship and
company of the faithful.

The 14. Chapter.
Of the Lentiske or Masticke tree, called in Greek Schinos: and of the Prime
tree, called Ilex.

WHAT time as the virtuous and chaste woman Susanna, was publikelie charged,
and iudicially arraigned upon surmise of incontinencie and adulterous life,
through the cankered suggestion and false accusation of two crafty old
Lechours, that burned in lust toward her: Daniel (being then but a young
child, and raised up of the Lord to examine and sifte out the bloody
treachery intended against her) by his wise and heavenly policy, searched out
the bottom of the matter, boulted out the truth, discussed the cause, and
finally delivered the innocent Lady, both from the present danger of death,
and also from all manner suspicion of crime and filthiness. For when as she was
led forth Dan. 13.
to be put to death, being faultlesse and guiltless, committing and referring
both her self and her cause unto God, Daniell by the motion of the Spirit of
the Lord, lifted up his voice, and cried aloud, protesting himself to be
clear and free from the blood of that chaste woman, who was there and then
most wrongfully without desert adjudged to die, willing them to enquire further
of the matter, and more narrowly to search out the circumstances of such an
horrible practice.

Whereupon the Elders and Counsailours being a new assembled, and the matter
being again before the whole audience of the people with advised deliberation,
brought into question, Daniel caused the two Accusers to be put aside, and kept
a sunder the one from the other. Which done, he first called forth the one,
and demanded of him, under what Tree he saw them companieng together? Under a
Lentiske tree: (quoth he.) At the hearing whereof Daniel sharply reproouing
him for his shameless lie, and false testimony, and thundering against him the
heavy wrath and severe judgment of God, deservedly due unto him for the same,
put him aside. Then calling the other forth, and likewise asking him, under
what tree, he took them companieng together? Under a Prime tree, (said he.)
Therefore were they both according to their wicked deserts, put to death, and
served with the same sauce, that they had prepared for others, according to
Deu. 19, 19. Prou. 19, 5. Dan. 13, 62.
the Law of Moses, for that they were convicted to have borne false witness,
and to have wrongfully accused another.

But now somewhat by the way to describe the nature of this Lentiske tree: it is
a tree of a reasonable bigness and mean sise, broad in compass, and leaued
like an Ash, bearing many small red berries, couched close together in round
clusters, which when they be full ripe, are of a blackish color. This Tree
yields forth a kind of Rosen or Gummie juice, (like as the Terebinthin Tree
does) which is called Masticke, which grows not together as other Rosens do;
but remain a sunder in diverse small grains, or parts like kernels, or little
white roundels. And this Masticke is very sovereign to dry up rheumes and
catarrhes, and to stop all common laskes and bloody flixes, and all other
fluxes of blood whatsoever. A perfume made therewith, or chawing the same in
the mouth, sasteneth the teeth that be loose, and makes a sweet breath.

Of this Tree there be made in Italy fine Toothpickers, like as they do in
the Low Countries, of Juniper and Baies, very good to cleanse, whiten and
mundifie the teeth withal. Insomuch that it is grown into a common byworde or
proverb, when we will note any persons that be too curious and precise in
trimming themselves, or bestow too much diligence in polishing and dressing
their teeth, to say that he chaweth Lentiske. We in these Countries make
Toothpickers, sometimes of the Bittours claw being set either in gold, silver
or iuorie, sometimes of the bones of the fish Pastinaca or Galeus. But the best
of all be made of this Lentiske, because they do not only no hurt to the gums,
but also do rather by means of their astringent nature, bind and comfort both
them and the jaws. And that these were in use in the old time, the Poet
Martial well witnesses where he says:

Best Toothpickes are of Lentiske made, Martial in Apophoretis.

Or if that wood be scant,
A Quill will serve the turn full well
And may supply the want.
But the other crafty and sly mate, that went about to blanch his villainy,
and plaster his falsehood, by the which he sought the disparagement and death
of the innocent Lady, with shamlesse mouth saucily avouched, that he saw her
commit the act under a Prime Tree.

This Tree is reckoned among such as bear Maste, whose leaves be at all times
of the year, green, without falling or withering: whereon there also grows
a kind of Misselto, which Phisicions do use, as an excellent remedy against
the Epilepsie or falling sickness, and such other diseases engendered of
excessive and abounding humors.

There is one kind of this Prime or Ilex, that bears the fine Grain, which
Diers use to engraine the Cloth or silk into a most orient and gallant red
color. And there is another kind of Grain not much unlike unto this, which
is found in the Huluer tree, whose leaves are on each side prickly and sharp,
but all the other parts thereof smooth and plain, which in Brabant grows in
hedges and high ways, and seldom reaches to any high stature. Yet have I
seen of them near to Zirickzea, that have been as big as a Prime tree, which
being diligently looked unto, and often pruned and trimmed by the owners, have
grown to be very high and tall. About the beginning of Autumn it bears
berries round like a Pease, and of an excellent red color, such as does our
Kneeholme, Butchers broom, or prickly B^, and also the Ewe tree, which is
leafed like the Larch, Pitch tree, or Fur. The shadow of this Tree in
England is not deadly, nor the berries lethall and dangerous to the Inhabitants
of that Island, as not many years ago I saw and found by experience at my
being in London. In Hispaine they are persuaded that these berries are endued
with a venomous quality, and that it is so hurtful for man's body, that such
as do but only sleep under the shadow thereof, either die, or at least
become dangerously sick thereby, specially in the time that it bloometh. The
nature thereof being so venomous, and against man's nature, they dare not
inwardly receive the same. And yet has it by some of that Country been
proved, that their hens will feed thereon without danger, and become therewith
very fat.

The 15. Chapter.
Of the Hyacinth, which of some is called Crowtoes, and of some, our Ladies
flower: and of Hyacinthine, blew, azured and violet colored garments.

IN sundry places of the sacred Bible we read of headbandes, laces, ribands,
fillets, garlandes, hems, purfles, fringes, welts, gardes, plaits, pals, robes,
clokes, garments, and couerings of blew or violet color, the better thereby to
set forth the honor Iere. 10, 9.
and state of the person that wore it, and the more to delight the eyes of the
beholders, as also in this our age we see by experience the same to be had in
great estimation. So were the garments and Robes of the high priest among the
Jews, appointed to be of such color as should outwardly show a majesty and
royalty to the people, namely, of gold, blewe silk (or Hyacinth) purple,
Exodus 28, 5.
skarlet, fine linen and embroderie: whereby the seely ignorant and simple
people were in the old time, kept in order and obedience, and the readier and
feruenter toward Religion.

But now in the bright shining light of the glorious Gospel, we must rather
respect the inward and spiritual ornaments, than any outward, garish and
pompious attire, and must raise up our minds to things that be of more
behoof and importance for our instruction and comfort. For the outward
bravery and pompous magnificence of rich and sumptuous attire, does many times
nuzzle superstition in the consciences of the simpler sort, and dazell the eyes
of their minds, with an admiration of those things which God either would have
to be lightly esteemed, or at least way, to be employed to moderate uses. And
of this sort be these pals and copes wrought with gold, pearls, and precious
stones, clokes, garments, and couerings, of blew azure, purple, skarlet, and
other costly colors, artificially and curiously bedected and garnished.

The name of this color, is taken partly from the gallant gem and beautiful
stone Hyacinth or Iacinct, a precious stone.
called Iacinct, having a most radiant tincture of violet color: and partly
from an amiable and delightsome flower of the same name, of a perfect Azure or
purple color, Hvacinth an Herb.
such as is in the precious stone called an Amethist, or in common Buglosse and
sundry other Herbs, whose flowers being of bright purple color, be marvelous
pleasant and delightful to the eyes of the beholders.

And God does many times and in many places in his word sharply reprove the
stately arrogance, and pompous pride of such vain persons, as by the bravery
of their apparel, and sumptuous araie, advance themselves in bragging sort and
ridiculous ostentation, malapertly and scornefully contemning others of
inferior calling. And sometimes heerehence he takes apt Metaphors and fit
Similitudes, applieng the same to the inward gifts, and ornaments of the mind.
For by such examples does the Lord stir up and admonish such, as be lulled and
rocked in the cradle of Security and slouthful retchlessenesse, to look about
them and to remember their duty, which they owe unto God: to consider what
honor and worship they are bound to yield unto him, and how (casting aside,
detesting, abhorring and renouncing all superstition and Idolatry) they ought
entirely to embrace his pure, sincere, and sound religion.

Which thing both in other places, but namely by his Prophet Ezechiel, he
plainly Ezec. 16.
sets down and manifestly displaieth. For, first he puts them in
remembrance, what great and inestimable benefits he had bestowed upon them, how
bountiful and liberal he had showed himself toward them: what grace and
goodness both spiritual and temporal he had extended upon them: what wholesome
laws and profitable precepts he had delivered unto them, and how fatherly he
had instructed them with the sovereign skill of his most blessed and sincere
Religion.

Afterward he expostulateth with them for their revolt and sliding back, he
vpbraideth them with their ingratitude and unthankfulness, for that they had
abused all these his heavenly blessings, and converted the same to Idolatrous
purposes, strange worships and profane superstitions: insomuch that their
mind, reason, understanding and wit, was not now employed (as it ought to have
bin) in magnifieng his holy name, and setting forth his glorious majesty, nor
in the maintenance and observance of his sacred and pure Religion, but in
setting up and establishing Idolatrous, superstitious, counterfaite and
hypocritical devises, forged out of their own idle brains.

Thus therefore does he ratingly and chidingly direct his speech unto
Jerusalem, saying: When as thou wast naked, poor, needy, helpless, The 16.
Chapter of Ezechiel paraphrastically expounded.
comfortless, and cast out into the open field, so soon as thou wast borne,
without swaddling clouts, polluted in thine own blood, and sprawling in thy
natural filthiness: not having thy navel cut, nor washed in water: I came and
passed by thee, and espieng thee wallowing and tumbling in thy blood, I
exceedingly multiplied thee, as the bud of the field: insomuch that by little
and little in process of time thou grewest pretty and big, able to be decked
and fit to be womanly araide, as by thy well fashioned breasts, and long
grown hair may appear. And although thou wast in this age, yet wast thou
naked and bare, and lay open (contrary to the natural shamefastnes of
womanhoode) to the gazing view of all passengers. Yet when I passed by thee and
looked upon thee, perceiving thee to be of such ripe age, and mariageable
years, fit to be wooed and sought unto by suitors and wooers, I spread my
skirtes over thee and covered thy filthiness, and I shrouded from the fight of
men, those things that might not with any modesty and shamefastnes be seen.
Yea I swear unto thee, and by a new covenant betrothed thee unto my self, and
made thee mine. Whereupon having received thee as my mate and lawful Spouse, I
washed thee from thy filthiness, so that no blemish disgraced thee: Yea I
anointed thee with oil, and clothed thee with embrodered work: I shod thee
with Hyacinth: I decked thee with bracelets upon thine hands and a chain on
thy neck, and a beautiful crown upon thine head, etc. Now thou being thus
pranked up in bravery, and thus richly decked, have played the harlot, and
have powered out thy fornications on every one that passed by: and all those
rich ornaments (which in right and equity belonged to me) thou have lewdly
converted to profane and wicked uses.

In all which process of words his meaning is none other than this: namely to
show, that as an adulterous woman by prostitution of her body becomes
impudent and infamous, so was Jerusalem defiled with Idolatry: in that she
bestowed that honor, worship, and service upon Devils and Idols, which in right
was only due unto God, on whom alone depends the whole hope, health, and
salvation of all men. For then is the Majesty of the most high God most
contumeliously dishonored, when the honor, (which is due unto none but to him)
is taken from him, and given to another: wherein he is injuriously robbed, and
we thereby (forsaking his sincere worship) are carried headlong into miserable
perdition, and manifest danger of our own Souls health.

The 16. Chapter.
Of Sedge and Rushes.

SEdge, (called of some Segge, or Sheregrasse) Sedge.
grows in fenny Sugs and watrie grounds, triangled in form, and sharp edged
of each side: with the which, many in this Country do use in Summer time to
straw their Parlours, and Churches, as well for coolenes, as for pleasant
smell.

The Rush is a round smooth shoot without Rush.
knots or ioints, having within it a white substance or pith, which being drawn
forth, shows like long, white, soft, gentle and round thread, and serves for
many purposes. Heerewith be made many pretty imagined devises for Bride-ales,
and other solemnities, as little baskets, hampers, paniers, pitchers, dishes,
combs, brushes, stools, chaires, purses with strings, girdles, and many such
other pretty, curious and artificial conceits, which at such times many do
take the pains to make and hang up in the houses, as tokens of good will to
the new married Bride: and after the solemnity ended, to bestow abroad for
Bride-gifts or Presents.

And because the stem or shanke of this Rush is smooth and vnknottie, it has
ministered occasion to the learned, thereof to devise a Proverb, namely, To
seek a knot in a Rush. Which is very aptly and fitly applied to those which
are scrupulous in cases, where no need is; or that make doubt of a thing, that
of it self is most plain.

Of the greater sort of these Rushes, our people do use to make Mats,
horse-collers, wilchins, frailes, and little maunds.

In Zeland where the ground is grauelly and sandy, there grows store of
Bulrushes, which be not of any great height, but be sharp pointed as an Awle,
and serve to keep and defend their corn grounds from being ouercouered with
sand and dust, which the force of the wind, tide, and weather usually blows
and casts up.

Of the slender and straight form of this Bulrush, such young simpring
Damsels as pranke up themselves, and desire to be slender bodied, are termed
by Terence, to be Bulrushlike. As among us many dainty young huswiues that
would feign be fine and slender, girde themselves strait, and use to lick
Salt: fearing (forsooth) least if they should be corpulent or fat, they should
be accounted great Roils or championlike Fustiluggesses. Chaerea therefore
bearing great affection to his Darling, whose face was beautiful, whose In
Eunuch^. Act. 2. scen. 3
complexion and color was true and natural, not painted, nor with slib
bersauces procured; whose body was sound, wholesome, and full of good blood,
and being also in the very prime of flourishing age, commenteth her above
others, which being nothing so handsome and fair, do devise to amend nature by
Art and Diet.

And as here with us there grows abundance of Rushes, Reeds, Typh, Cats
tail, and Water torch: so in the bogs of Egypt, near the river Nilus, there
grows a kind of big Rush, called Papyrus, whereof in the old time they made
Paper, as they do now in Europe of linen cloutes, chopped small and stieped
in water: which, for that it serves to the same use, purpose, and commodity
that the Paper in the old time did, retains still the same name.

This Paper rush is eight or ten cubits high, as the Reed is in Spain,
iointed and triangled, and as thick and big as a man can well gripe in his
fist. When they be dry, they are good to make sine smooth walking staves, of a
dark brown color like the utter rind of a Chestnut: which aged Gentlemen
delight much to have, for stay of their weak and feeble bodies.

The pith of this Rush yields forth a kind of sweetish and toothsome
licour, like as does the white root of our Reed.

Of this big Paper Rush they used in the old time to make boats, punts,
lighters, and other engines of carriage, being pitched ^^st together, as not
only Pliny, but the holy Lib. 13. c. 11.
Prophet of God Isaiah also testifies: who Isai. 18, 1.
threateneth the land which is beyond the rivers of Aethiopia (that is, the
borderers upon Nilus) because they sent Ambassadors by the Sea in vessels of
Reeds or Rushes, to make league and join together in confederacy with other
nations, for the overthrow and conquest of the Israelites.

But to go on with our purposed Argument: In the Bible, there be taken from
these above named shutes and Rushes, sundry proper Similitudes and fit
Metaphores. As when the holy man Job discoursed with the Nobles and Gentlemen
that came for courtesy to visit him, and to bewail with him, his sore and
grievous calamity, where there Job. 8.
were among them, many notable points to and fro canuassed, argued and
disputed, of the frailty and misery of man's life, of the providence and great
goodness of God toward man, of afflictions, troubles, griefs, and vexations,
which are common as well to the good as to the bad; of prosperity and worldly
welfare, which the bad and wicked as well as the good and godly do enjoy; one
of the company named Bildad the Shuhite, brought certain strong and weighty
arguments, grounded upon natural reasons, whereby he went about to prove
that wicked, godless, infamous persons, slanderers, and Hypocrites which
dissemble with God, and think to please him with their counterfeit mawmetrie,
cannot long continue: and that although for a time they seem to flourish, yet by
Gods just judgment, they quickly wither away and are brought to nothing, even
as Rushes, Sedge, grass or green herbs being not moistened with water. For
the wicked when they are assailed with dangers, afflictions and calamities a
little before their death, are grievously troubled in their inward consciences,
for that they are not vpholden with an assured trust and comfort in the mercies
of God, whereby they are lamentably tumbled headlong into plain distrust and
desperation.

Not unlike unto this, is the Prophecy of Isaiah against the Egyptians, whom
he pronounces should be grievously distressed and brought to extreme
penury: and that all such trades, wherein their chief commodities consisted,
should fail and be taken from them, as namely their traffike, fishing, and
other handy crafts, which brought unto them large gain and profit. The waters
Isai. 19, 5.
(says he) of the Sea shall fail, and the rivers shall be dried up and
wasted: and the rivers shall go far away, and the rivers of defense shall be
emptied and dried up: the reeds and the rushes shall wither, and all the
green grass about the river bank shall perish. In which words he foretells
of a marvelous great barrennes, scarcity, dearth and sterilitie that should
light among them, that they should have among them no store of fishermen, no
traffic nor intercourse of merchandise, nor any resort of chapmen and buiers.

God likeneth the prosperous success of the godly, with their virtuous
proceeding and going forward in the race of grace and goodness, sometimes unto
fresh springing waters, and pleasant running rivers: sometimes to green herbs
and flourishing flowers: and sometimes to gallant meadows and delightful
Arbors.

And the Prophet Isaiah promises fruitefulnes and fertility to the barren,
unfruitful and dry fields: saying, that they should be watered with most
wholesome and lively springing waters, and be adorned with store of most fair
flowers, and beautiful Herbs. Whereby he means, that the dry and hungry
souls of the people, should be moystened with the fruitful word of God, and
plentifully bedewed with his wholesome doctrine and heavenly spirit. His words
be these: The Isai. 35, 1.
desert and the wilderness shall rejoice, and the waste ground shall be glad,
and flourish as the Lilly. The dry ground shall be as a poole, and the
thirsty (as springs of water in the habitation of dragons, where they lay)
shall be a place for reeds and rushes. As if he should have said: in steed
of ugly vices and monstrous enormities, there shall appear virtue and
godliness: and there shall be sowed and planted in men's hearts, the seeds of
Love and charity both toward God and man: there shall be settled in their
minds and consciences an undoubted hope and assured trust of their salvation.
So that they which before were as barren, yielding forth no fruit, shall now,
being watered and moistened with the lively fountain of Gods word, and
inuinciblie strengthened with the strong staff of firm faith, begin to
fructify, like a well manured field, that yields forth abundant store of
rank corn and gallant Herbs.

The 17. Chapter.
Of Woormewood.

THere be three sorts of Wormwood. The first is called Wormwoode Roman or
Ponticum, which is planted in Gardens, and has somewhat a pleasant smell. The
second is Sea Wormewoode, growing in Salt water creeks and Sea shores. The
third is our common Woormewood, being exceeding bitter in taste, and is a most
sovereign and present remedy against woorms. But being removed into Gardens,
it maruellously alters both in nature, taste, savor, smell, yea and in the
color of his leaves also. For, of grayish ash color, it becomes green,
yielding smell neither loathsome nor altogether unpleasant.

From this most bitter herb, the sacred writers do in many places fetch
sundry Similitudes, which they most fitly apply against the wicked.

So when as God by his Prophet Jeremiah threateneth and denounces doleful,
heavy and bitter calamities to the stubborn, disobedient, and wicked people:
Behold (says he) I will feed this people with Woormewood, Ierem. 9, 15
and will give them the water of gall to drink: and I will scatter them among
the heathen, whom neither they, nor their fathers have known, and I will send
a sword after them, till I have consumed them.

Again, speaking to the lieng and dissembling Prophets which abuse the word
of God, and corrupt it with their adle gloses: Behold (says he) I will feed
them with Woormewood, Iere. 23, 15.
and make them drink the water of Gall: for from the Prophets of Jerusalem is
wickedness gone forth into all the land.

The Prophet Amos also sharply inueighing against false Prophets, that
delighted more to flatter the Princes and people, with plausible and pleasing
terms, than to prophecy the sincere word of truth: and which defiled the
right worship and sound religion of God, with their vain, fantastical,
superstitious, and peevish expositions, keeping the heads and rulers in
ignorance, and blind folding them in errors, to whom it cheefely belonged to
seek equity, and administer justice, says that, they turned judgment into
Woormewood, and left off righteousness in the earth: Amos. 5, 7. and 6, 12.
that is, they digress and turn away from equity, neither do they faithfully
execute the office and duty of upright Judges: which is a most bitter and
heavy case to a poor distressed innocent man, desiring in his rightful cause
to be delivered from wrong and oppression.

In many places does Isaiah sharply reprove Isai. 5, 20.
and pronounce grievous woes unto such Judges, as call evil good, and good
evil: which put darkness for light, and light for darkness: and which put bitter
for sweet, and sweet for sower.

And in another place he also denounces severe sentence against those that
take rewards to oppress the innocent, and to defeat the right of the widow
and fatherless; whose cause they ought to defend, and speedily to see them
restored to their lawful right. Thus therefore does he thunder against such
wicked Lawmakers: Woe unto them Isai. 10, 1. Ezec. 22, 7. Hose. 10, 4.
that decree wicked decrees, and write grievous things, to keep back the
poor from judgment, and to take away the judgment of the poor of my people,
that widows may be their pray, and that they may spoil the fatherless.

No less terribly does the Lord by his Prophet Jeremy reprove such
unconscionable Creatures, saying: There are found among Iere. 5, 26.
my people, wicked persons, that lay wait as he that sets snares: they have
made a pit to catch men. As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full
of deceit: thereby are they become great and waxen rich: they execute no
judgment, no, not the judgment of the fatherless, etc. Generally,
wheresoever there is any mention in the Scriptures, made of Wormwood, it
signifies grievous calamity and bitter torment of mind.

So, in that lamentable destruction of Jerusalem, the Prophet Jeremiah in the
person of his Country men and fellow citizens, complains, that He was
encompassed with gall, filled Lam. 3, 5. and 15.
with bitterness, and made droonken with Woormewood. Whereby is meant, that
the misery, grief, desolation and anguish was so great, that nothing could
be more added thereunto.

Like unto this is that complaint of David, being dangerously circumuented, and
maliciously pursued by his enemies, where he powers out his prayers and
requests unto God, saying: O God thou have cast us out, thou Psalm. 60, 1.
have scattered us, thou have been angry, turn again unto us. Thou have
made the Land to tremble, and have made it to gape: thou have showed thy people
heavy things: thou have made us to drink the Wine of compunction and
giddines. As though he should say; Thou have set such sights before our eyes,
whereby we are nothing at (...) cheered, but rather discomforted and thro^^
into sorrow and heaviness, into grief, pe^siuenes and horror of death, even as
they that have droonke some deadly poison, whereby their vital parts be
incurably infected, benumbed, and stupefied.

The very same Metaphor is used by the Prophets Isaiah, Jeremiah, and
Ezechiel, describing Isaie. 51, 17. Iere. 23, 15. Ezec. 25, 4.
the cup of the Lords wrath, whereof as well the Kings and Princes, as the
subjects and Commons have droonken; and whereby they were carried into such
outrage, madness, and astonishment, that they were even brought to their wits
end, and knew not what to do, nor which way to turn themselves.

In no better case shall he be, that keeps company with whoores and harlots;
and suffers himself to be ensnared and intrapped with their flatteries,
allurements, prouocations and suttleties.

Which thing Solomon well knew, and therefore diligently advises and earnestly
warns a young man (whose age for want of experience is slipperie and
unskillful) to disacquaint and estrange himself from the company of wicked
women, and not to suffer himself at any hand to be enchanted with their
flattering lures and glosing entisements. For the lips of Prou. 5, 3. and 7, 5.
an harlot (says he) drop as an honey comb, that is, her words be fawning and
sweet, and her mouth and throat, finer and smoother than oil: but the end of
her is bitter as Woormewood, and sharp as a two edged sword. For, all that she
does is subtle, fraudulent, and dissembled: and the whole drift of her cunning
shifts is only to rob, spoil, and undo thee.

Finally, under the name of Gal and Woormwood is generally understood heavy,
noisome, hurtful, bitter, cruel, and lamentable dealings, as beside the above
rehearsed examples, is signified also in the Revelation. Where it is read, how
that the Angel blowing the Trumpet, there fell a great Star from heaven,
burning like a Torch (whereby is meant the wrath of God enkindled against the
wicked) and the Reu. 8, 10.
name of the Star was called Woormewood; and it fell into the third part of
the rivers, and into the fountains of waters: wherefore the third part of the
waters became Woormwood: and many men died of the waters, because they were
made bitter.

Now, as the conjunctions and aspects of Planets, and constellations, do
sometime betoken and portend slaughter, death, decaie, harm, and danger both to
men, beasts, corn, grain and fruits: so was this Star thus falling,
harmfull unto mankind, signifieng the wrath and vengeance of God, to hang
flamingly over the heads of all those that be wicked and impenitent.

The 18. Chapter.
Of Thistles, Thorns, Bushes, Briers, Brembles and Burres: how in the
Scriptures they be commonly applied, and what they signify.

THystles, Briers, Brembles, and weeds, which grow out of the ground of
themselves, without planting or Husbanding, yield in a manner no kind of
commodity for the use of man, but rather detriment and annoyance both to man by
their prickles, and to grain by their ill company and neighborhood.

Therefore when as God inioined penance, misery, and toil to Adam for his
transgression, he said, Cursed is the earth for Genesis 3, 17.
thy sake: in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life: in the
sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread. Thorns and thistles shall it
bring forth to thee, and thou shall eat the herb of the field.

Likewise the Lord being wroth with the Israelites for their extreme
ingratitude toward him, grievously threateneth them under the name of a
Vineyard: for that, after such a deal of careful Husbandry bestowed on it,
in steed of sauerie grapes, it brought forth wild grapes. Now therefore
(says he) I Isai. 5, 5.
will tell you what I will do to my Vineyarde: I will take away the hedge
thereof, and it shall be eaten up: I will break the wall thereof, and it shall
be trodden down: and I will lay it waste: it shall not be cut, nor dug, but
Briers and Thorns shall grow up in it.

By which figurative speech he shows Hos. 10, 1. and 8.
that he has bestowed all the labor and diligence that possibly could be,
for the behoof and benefit of the Israelites, and for the training and
instructing of them in the way of godliness with sound, wholesome, and heavenly
doctrine; and that he omitted nothing, which was expedient and needful for
their direction. But all in vain: for all travel, labor, industry and
diligence employed about them, was lost and to no purpose.

Wherefore he vpbraied them with wilful contempt of their own advancement,
and for the careless regard which they had of their own salvation. And now
he therefore here protests that he makes none other account of them, than
of persons desperate and forlorn: and that for their stubborn Romans 1, 24.
refusal of mercy and grace offered unto them, they should run headlong
into all shame and wickedness, into vile lusts and filthy affections, into
dissolute life and lewd manners: insomuch that their minds being thus woefully
pestered and possessed with beastly vices, and no whit garnished with virtues
and goodness, should lie like a rugged, untilled and unmanured field, which
brings forth nothing but weeds and hurtful herbs.

Again, in another place he threatens to plague them with barrennes, dearth,
scarcity, want of Corn and yearly increase of Isai. 7, 23. 24, 25.
fruits; insomuch that the land should remain as under a curse, bringing forth
nothing but Briers and Thorns. So that in what place soever there were a
thousand Vines, worth a thousandpeeces of silver, they should be turned into
Briers and Thorns; and all the ground in the land should not be able to
bear sufficient corn and competent food, to relieve the Isaie. 32, 13.
hungry necessity of the sterueling Inhabitants.

And afterward in the 34. Chapter he denounces far more dreadful and
horrible plagues against the Idumaeans, that is to say, the enemies of God and
his Church: The rivers thereof shall be turned into Pitch, and the ground
thereof into Brimstone, and the land thereof Isai. 34, 9.
shall be burning Pitch, which shall not be quenched night nor day: the smoke
thereof shall go up evermore: it shall be desolate from generation to
generation: none shall pass through it for ever: But the Pellicane and the
Hedgehog shall possess it, and the great Owl and the Raven shall dwell in it;
being Fowls and creatures that love not the company or sight of man. The
Nobles thereof shall call to the kingdom, and there shall be ^one, and all the
Princes thereof shall be as nothing: that is, there shall be no form of a
common wealth, no state, no order, no policy, no honor nor dignity of a
Prince: no majesty of a kingdom, no government, no Counselors, no Peers; but
a disordered confusion and minglemangle of the nobility and communaltie
together, and a mere overthrow of all law and equity.

Moreover to aggrauate this their miserable plight and woeful condition, the
palaces of their kings and princes shall be thrown down and made even with
the ground, and all their sumptuous buildings and gorgeous houses utterly
ruinated, and being abandoned of any inhabitant, shall be nothing else than
caves and dens for wild beasts and ravenous birds.

For thus does the Prophet both in this and also in other places, heap up the
miserable desolation of the Country: There shall grow in the places thereof
thorns and nettles, and thistles in the strong Holds thereof, as commonly we
see in ruinous palaces, and castles thrown down and despoiled by the rage of
war. And it shall be an habitation for Dragons, and a court for Ostriches:
there shall walk wicked spirits and Goblins, the Satyrs and Shrichowles:
there shall the Hag lodge, and there shall the Owl make her nest, and lay, and
hatch: there also shall the Vultures and Kites be gathered together, every one
with her Make. By this beadroll and reh^ he sets down before the eyes an
horrible kind of desolation, and a dreadful pu^ture of extreme waste: the
very sight or he^ ring whereof drives a shiuering horror into any man's mind,
and pearceth it deeply with a quaking and trembling dread, to consider how
that in a late most flourishing Realm and renowned Country, there should be
such an alteration, and such a state of al things turned vpside down: that
there should be no more resort of Merchants and Traffikers, no concourse of
people, no bartering, no marting, no buieng and selling, no chopping and
changing, but only a sight of ugly monsters, prodigious creatures, and
ravenous wild beasts, the very sight whereof would affright the stoutest man
that lives.

Into these deformed monsters and ugly creatures, do Devils and wicked Spirits
many times transform themselves: and assuming their shapes do with many
delusions and apparitions terrify and affright fearful and weak people,
specially those, that are not sufficiently strengthened, furnished, and armed
with the knowledge of God, and the power of his word.

Such monsterous objects and strange apparitions, do such persons in their
imagination and conceit think themselves to see, which be Melancholic,
Frentike, Lunatike, Doting, Droonken, Agewy, or those that are inwardly
tormented in their conscience with remorse of their horrible sins and bloody
offenses. For, such persons have their minds grievously disquieted, with
sundry absurd visions, and fantastical apparitions, by reason of the
distemperance of their brain, and stuffing of their spirit animal with
abundance of gross humors and thick vapors: whereby (the head being out of
course) reason, judgment, and memory is likewise out of frame, and pestered
with sundry idle and vain imaginations of such things as they meet withal,
or think upon.

The 19. Chapter.
Of the Fig tree, and of the Fig.

THe Fig tree bears two sorts of fruit: the one, which grows till it be full
ripe, and then being taken from the tree, is dried and put into Frailes: the
other, be the primitive and green Figs, which either arrive not at all to
ripenes; or at least way be very late ripe. For when as other trees do burgen
and bloome, the Fig tree showing forth no blossoms or flowers at all, brings
forth the green Fig.

From this tree and his fruit, be taken in the Scriptures many, and the same
(...) proper Similitudes and excellent examples.

When Christ foretold to the Jews the grievous calamities, and lamentable
destruction of Jerusalem, he stirred up them, and us all to watchfulnes, and
heedful vigilancie by many examples, least that day of the Lord shall come
upon them unawares: and the Similitude which he uses, is of the Fig tree when
it bloometh. For as when the boughs of Mat. 24, 32. Mat. 13, 28.
this Tree be tender, and that it begins to bring forth leaves, it is a
certain token that Summer is near. So, treasons, pestilence, wars, famine,
earthquakes, etc. are the prefaces or prologs to sorrows, and show that the
day of Judgment is near, even at the doors.

Figs are sovereign good to ripe an Apostumation, to assuage and lenifie an
hard sore, as the noble Prophet Isaiah does witness, and in his heavenly
Prophesies has accordingly set down. For we read that he caused 2. Kin. 20, 7.
Isaie. 38, 21.
to be made a plaster of dry Figs, and laid it on the boil or impostume of
Hezachiah, whereby he was recovered to health and had his life lengthened
fifteen years.

The Prophet Nahum aduouching all humane helps to be vain, weak and
helpless, and all Fortresses, Holds, Castles, Towers, Skonses, Munitions,
Rampires, and Bulwarks Nahu. 3, 12
to be unable to stand against God, compares them to ripe Figs, which if they
be never so little shaken, fall down. Thus therefore does he insult upon the
Affyrians, All thy strong cities shall be like Fig trees, with their first ripe
Figs, for if they be shaken, they fall into the mouth of the eater. Whereby he
means, that all their strength, power and force shall be confounded and
brought to nothing, by the mighty hand of God.

The Lord also by his Prophet Hosea, taking from this, and such other most
sweet and pleasant fruits, an apt Similitude, does expostulate and reason with
the Israelites, because they had forsaken so gracious and loving a God, and
betaken themselves to gross, horrible and palpable Idolatry. For thus does he
set out and express his great favor and love toward them: I found Israel
Hos. 9, 10.
like Grapes in the wilderness, and as the first ripe in the Fig tree. Of which
words the meaning is: that he was no otherwise affected toward Israel, nor
delighted any less in them, than a weary and thirsty wayfaring man,
reioiceth when he finds a sauorie, and moist Grape in some waste wilderness
and barren place unlooked for: or some ripe Fig to cool his thirst, and
refresh his wearied spirits.

This so great love of God toward them notwithstanding, whereby he showed
himself to be delighted no less in them, than is a weary and thirsty
traveler with some delectable fruit, they did not mutually require with love
again, but ran a gadding to Baal-Peor: that is to say, the Idol of Priapus,
and there defiled themselves with most shameful Idolatry and heathenish
worship.

Infinite be the Similitudes that are each where in the Prophets, taken as well
from this Fig tree, as also from his leaves, and from his fruit: whereby they
sometimes signify plenty, foyson, abundance of things, and prosperous success
of the godly in their affairs and dealings: sometimes again, they thereby
mean barrennes, dearth, scarcity, and destruction of the wicked.

Thus did Christ curse the Fig tree, that had nothing on it but leaves: whereby
he noted Mat. 21, 19. Mat. 11, 13.
his mislike of all outward show and hypocritical ostentation of Religion,
being not accompanied with good works which are the fruits of a sound faith.

The Prophet Micah using a Metaphor taken from rough, and unmanured ground,
and from Trees whose fruits are gathered, (as in the end of Autumn it
comes to pass) bewaileth the state of the world in his days, and
complains that he lived in such an age, wherein all good and godly men were
vanished and gone. Woe is me, for that I am as Micah. 7, 1.
one that goes a gleaning in Harvest, and as one that gathers after the
Grapes of the Vintage: there is no cluster to eat: my soul desired the first
ripe figs. The good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none
righteous among men. Whereby he means, that justice is banished, godliness
exiled, religion contemned, true worship of God trodden under foot and utterly
suppressed: that wickedness flowed, iniquity abounded, and all things
generally were full of blood, oppression and cruelty.

Many other such like textes be there in sundry books of the holy Scriptures,
which might here be alleged for further proof Isai. 34, 4. Ierem. 5, 7.
Joel. 1, 12. Iere. 8, 13. Amos. 4, 9.
and confirmation of this matter, but I think it not convenient to trouble and
pester the Reader with the recital of all, since these few before alleged may
suffice.

The 20. Chapter.
Of the Palm or Date tree, and the fruit thereof: and what in the Scriptures
is meant thereby.

THe Palm or Date tree has a great tall and straight Truncke or stem, and
many long straight and narrow leaves or twigges like Reeds or Gladen. The
fruit is pleasant in taste, and is also right medicinable, and restoratiue. For
it cherishes and comfort the radical humor, and conveniently nourishes
those bodies that be dry and exhausted.

The nature of this tree is to resist and strive against any burden or weight
laid upon it: wherefore it was wont to be used as an ensign of victory to
such as were valiant conquerours, and puissant warriors, for their invincible
courage and undaunted animositie.

So, the true Servants and Martyrs of Christ, which constantly perseuered to
the end, in their Christian profession, maugre the malice, spite, cruelty
and persecution of blooddie Tyrants, are read to be araide in long white Robes,
and to carry Palms in their hands, in token Reave. 7, 9.
of purity and victory.

Likewise they that love righteousness, and embrace equity, boldly opposing
themselves against the enemies of God, are resembled unto the Palm, and other
fair and goodly trees. For so does David, saying: The Psalm. 92, 12.
righteous shall flourish like a Palm tree, and shall grow like a Cedar in
Lebanon.

For whereas the wicked shall wither away like grass, the just and godly shall
prosper and continue still like a Palm, and bring forth profitable and
pleasant fruit. And shall triumph as the Cedar, which being an high, soote, and
odoriferous tree, free from al rottennes, and that will never putrify and
corrupt, yields also withal a most gallant and delectable shadow.

And this is it, that the holy man Job meant, where, upon confidence of his
upright conscience, and true dealing, he boldly pronounces of himself,
saying: I shall die in my Job. 29, 18.
nest, and I shall multiply my days as the Palm. Whereby his meaning was,
that he assured himself of long life and flourishing days, with much joy and
tranquillity.

In that excellent Song of Solomon, the hairs and locks of the Bridegroom are
resembled to the bushie top of the Palm tree: which Cant. 5, 11.
Similitude and resemblance is taken from the young tender bundles of twigs and
leaves that grow out of the top of this tree: or from the cluster or husk
wherein the fruit is lapped, which is called Phaenico^alanus, having a black,
brown, or aburne color. So that thereby is meant, that his hair was
glittering, shining, fast and not shedding, as are the leaves of the Palm tree
which never fall.

But when God sees the people to run headlong into perdition, to continue in
wilful obstinacy and blindness, and not willing any way to harken unto good
counsel and sound aduertisements; neither by any punishments, plagues or
afflictions to be reclaimed and converted from their errors, but that still
they will wallow in the mire of their own wicked imaginations; not
acknowledging the same plagues to proceed, and to be sent from God, but
referring and ascribing the same to blind fortune, and ordinary course of
nature; then does he severely thunder out other greater, and bitter punishments
against them: insomuch that beside the Palmer woorme, Grassehopper,
Cankerwoorme and Caterpiller which consume and devour Corn, grain and fruit;
he threateneth by his Prophet Joel, that all their Vineyards should be wasted,
and all their goodly fruitful Trees should be supplanted and rooted up,
whereby there should follow extreme penury of victuals and food; and that
nothing should be left to alay the extremity of hunger.

For these be the words, which he there ^seth in describing this dreadful
dearth, and wonderful scarcity, the rather thereby to stir up their drow sie
heads and careless minds, seeing such a grievous calamity hanging over them.
Awake ye Droonkards, weep and howl all Joel. 1. 5.
ye bibbers of Wine, because of the new Wine: f^ shall be pulled from your
mouths. For a nation is come upon my land, mighty and without number: his
teeth are as the teeth of a Lion, and he has the jews of a great Lion. He
has destroyed my Vine, and pilled off the bark of my Fig tree, (for Trees
die, when the bark or rind is plucked off from them) The Vine is dried up,
and the Fig tree is decayed, the Pomegranate tree, and the Palm tree, and the
Apple tree, even all the trees of the field are withered.

The 21. Chapter.
Of Hebenus, and certain other precious Simples and strange Drugs, mentioned
in the Scriptures of God.

WHAT a noble Mart town Tyrus in the old time was, being the paragon and
flower of al Asia, and what renowned traffike was there kept by Merchants of al
countries with their wares and commodities; beside other famous
Historiographers, the holy Prophet Ezechiel amply testifies.

Who particularly reckons up the several sorts of sundry merchandises,
brought thither by Merchants of diverse Realms, Countries and Provinces; for
that the situation thereof was so commodious, and the resort thither so
incredible, before it was conquered and destroyed by Alexander the King of
Macedonie, which conquest and destruction the Prophet in his 27. chapter
foresheweth. Ezec. 27.
Wherein among many other wares and merchandries, he mentions Iuorie, Rosen,
Myrrh, Cassia, Balm, Coral, Pearl, Spices, Gems and Precious stones.

Hebenus is of color very black, and withal Heben.
so massy and ponderous, that although it be sliced and parted into very
thin plates or pieces, and put into water, yet sinketh it down to the
bottom.

Of this there be two sorts, the one, which comes out of India, the other out
of Aethiopia: and of this latter sort I have seen (...) crooked Pipe or Cornet
made, that has been above two foot long, as black and as smooth as Iet, and
as hard as a stone: and which in the handling, could not be well discerned
whether it might be termed Wood, Stone or hard Horn.

Of the kind of this Hebenus, is another strange and foreign Wood, commonly
called Guiacum: the powder whereof being filed of, and boiled in water till
three parts be consumed, is most sovereign to cure the Pocks, and the loathsome
infection, gotten by lewd, filthy and lecherous life.

I have used the powder heerof being steeped and put into the water of Fenell,
as an excellent remedy and approved medicine to cure the dimnesse of sight,
and the web in the eye.

To cause one to sweat, my order is to give the decoction hereof with
Fumitorie, Marigold leaves, Balm and Figs: the which also I have proved to be
excellent good, to drive out the Measles and small Pockes in young children.

Iuorie is of an astringent nature: and Iuorie.
therefore Combs made thereof do both comfort the head, and keep the hair
from falling and shedding.

And because it is of an exceeding and surpassing whitenes, specially when the
teeth are first taken out of the Elephants jaws, therefore does the Bryde in
dignifieng and setting out the beauty of her Spouse his body, attribute and
ascribe unto him a belly Cant. 5, 14.
like white Iuorie, coueredwith Sapphires. And the neck of the Bride is
resembled to an Iuorie Tower, because it is firm, strong, steadfast, upright,
and not stowping.

Jeremiah compares the Nazarites (who were consecrated to God) unto Iuorie,
which when it is very old and long kept, waxes ruddie. For thus does he
bemone and bewail them, being so deformed and disfigured, that they could not
be known for the same they were before: Her Nazarites were purer Lam. 4, 7.
than the snow, and whiter than the milk: they were more ruddie in body than
the old Iuorie: they were fairer than the polished Saphyre: But now is their
visage blacker than a cole. By which words it is easy to guess, into what
misery they were thrown, and what calamity they sustained.

Myrrh is a sweet gum, distilling and Myrthe.
sweating out of a tree like Terebinthine, whose virtue and property is to
preserve the body from rotting and putrefaction.

Stact is a rosennie liquor, the flower of Stact.
the Myrrh or the fatnes that first destilleth out of it, the which is
commonly called Styrax liquida, and of Physicians Styrax calamita.

Frankincense is a kind of soote perfume, Frankincense.
and is of great virtue to nourish and engender flesh in the bodies of men or
women.

Gum Ammoniack destilling from a tree on Ammoniake.
the sand, (whereupon it is termed by some Gutta) is a kind of sweet
smelling gum, brought out of Aphrica, which has great virtue to mollify,
warm and draw; it loses the belly, helps the spleen, and brings forth
the dead child.

Beniamen being a congealed juice and odoriferous gum, senteth most delicately,
and is of excellent effect to smell unto in the time of the Plague or other
like contagious infection: like as is also Ziuet, Ambregrice, Musk, Cassia and
Cloves, which do comfort the heart, and souereignlie recover and strengthen the
spirits of those that through faintnes of nature, fall into ecstasies, traunces,
and cardiacke passions.

Aloe is a juice or congealed liquor of a Aloe, or Sea A^greene.
certain plant of the same name, which is of a perfect green color. The
slips thereof being brought to us out of Spain, be commonly hanged up in
houses, and will continue two years in their natural beauty and gallant
greenenes, without being watered. The juice hereof is excellent good to
withstand putrefaction, to cleanse and mundifie al corruption, to kill the
woormes in the belly, to clear the sight, and to preserve the body from all
infection of dangerous and contagious diseases.

The sweet and precious wood also, commonly Lignum Aloes. Agalochum.
called Lignum Aloes, and of some Agalochum, is in nature, quality and form
not unlike to the sweet Thorn Aspalatus, was both well known and much used
among the old Hebrews, for the great virtue which it has to make one to have
a sweet breath; like as does Lignum Rhodium.

All these before recited, together also with the most noble and renowned Balm,
are used in the Scriptures of God, to signify the high honor and excellency
of virtue, and the most sweet and comfortable perfumes of heavenly love and
doctrine, wherewith the mind of man is most graciously inspired and divinely
endued.

So David in his Psalms, under the name of Solomon, sets out the noble
honor, majesty and magnificence of Christ where as he says, that his garments
smelled of Myrrh, Psalm. 45, 8.
Aloe and Cassia, out of the Iuorie palaces. Meaning, that there should
proceed and issue from him a most sweet, pleasant, delectable, fragrant, and
odoriferous smell, wherewith all people far and near should be recreated and
refreshed.

A much like phrase is that which we read in the Canticles of Solomon, where
the Spouse most affectionately delighting in the conference of her Well-beloved,
utters these and Cant. 5, 13.
many the like terms, His lips do drop the pure and principal Myrrh.
Signifieng thereby, that his words and speeches were fraught full of grace and
truth, preserving the godly from evil, and striking the godless to the heart,
with bitterness for their impenitencie: the Metaphor being taken from Myrthe,
the which although it be most soote and fragrant, yet is it (withal) most tart
and bitter.

The 22. Chapter.
Of the Terebinth, out of which runs a Gum called Turpentine.

THe Terebinth or Turpentine tree grows in Syria and Palestina, and is a
goodly pleasant tree to behold. It has leaves almost like the Baie, and
flowers not much unlike to the Olive tree, of a reddish color. His berries be
in the beginning green, but afterward red, and when they be ripe, black,
yielding a pleasant savor.

Out of this tree there runs in the Summer time a most gallant Gum and
sovereign Rosen, called Turpentine, marvelous soote and pleasant in smell,
and so clear, that a man may see through, unto the bottom of the Pot wherein
it is kept.

It is with effect used in emplaisters to cure and heal wounds, and to
assuage the anguish and pain of sores and greefes. Inwardly it cleanses the
breast, lungs, and kidneyes; it ripeth phlegmes, expels gross humors,
opens the obstructio^s of the liver and milt; it notably provoke urine,
drives out the gravel, and mundifieth the passages for the better, freer, and
easier conueiance out of the same.

From this tree and many others there are taken many most notable comparisons
and proper Similitudes. As first, the Prophet Isaiah, who after their great
misery and distress, recomforteth the Israelites, and puts them (so many
as were left) in assured hope of prosperous estate. That which is left in Isai.
6, 13.
the midst of the land shall be multiplied, and there shall be in it yet a
tenth: and it shall return, and shall be as the Terebinth tree, and as the Oak
which have a substance in them when they cast their leaves: Even so the holy
seed shall be the stay and substance thereof.

Whereby he means, that it should so happen to them as it does to trees,
which in the nipping Winter, being frost bitten and without leaves, or blasted
with lightening and perilously wind shaken, seem as though they were utterly
dead, and in outward show, appear to be as it were without any lively sap or
vital juice: whereas (notwithstanding) there is left in them some portion of
strength and natural moistnes, that reuiueth them again the next Spring, and
makes them eftsoons gallantly to bloome and flourish.

He therefore denounces unto the Israelites a lamentable spoil, and pitiful
massacre, so that scarcely the tenth person shall escape: yet not so, as that a
general and universal desolation should come upon them, to make full havoc
and sweepstake among them: but that some remnants should be left, which
seemed as persons appointed to the slaughter, and to be as dead men, without
all hope of recovery. These (says he) shall be made alive again, and by the
seed of the word of God restored unto their former estate and dignity; like
as the Linden and Terebinth, and other brave and beautiful trees; which, in
the cold winter seeming to be withered and dead, do in the Spring bud again,
and afresh spread their boughs and leaves most gallantly.

But Christ being the Wisdom of God his Father, resembles himself unto the
Terebinth, and many other fair and goodly trees, showing by the way, how
desirous every one of us ought to be to embrace his doctrine, and to learn his
precepts. And thus does Wisdom in the commendation of her self, set forth
her virtues and properties, thereby to draw unto her all those that have any
care of their souls health and salvation. I am come Eccle. 24, 5.
out of the mouth of the most high, first borne before all creatures. I caused
the light that fails not, to Verse. 15.
arise in the Heaven: I am set up on high like a Cedar in Libanus, and as a
Cypress tree upon mount Sion. I am exalted as a Palm tree in Cades, and as a
Rose plant in Jericho: as a fair Olyue tree in a pleasant field: and am
advanced as a Plane tree by the water. I have given a smell in the streets as
Cinnamome and Balm: I have given a sweet odor as it were Mhyrre of the best,
as Storax, Galbanum, Onyx and sweet perfume of Incense. As the Terebinth have
I stretched out my branches: and my branches are the branches of honor and
grace.

In these and others of the like sort, is Christ, the Wisdom of God the
Father, most highly commended, and honorably set forth, to the end that all
men should with readier minds and willinger hearts flee unto him for refuge;
and from him, as from a most abundant and plentiful Fountain, draw out the
pure water of life; and not to seek broken Cesterns and vile pits that can
hold no water, as the Lord by his Prophet Iere. 2, 13.
Jeremiah witnesses.

Touching the nature and properties of the Cedar and Cypress tree it were
superfluous here to speak much, sithence the virtues, qualities and effects
of them be copiously set out and largely described by Dioscorides, Pliny, and
many others. Let this only for this place suffice, that in the Scriptures of
God there be many Similitudes taken from the roots, stems, boughs, leaves,
flowers, and seed: from their shape, form, proportion, stature, beauty,
odor, smell, fragrancy, durablenes and eternity: from the pleasant shadow that
they yield and affoorde to the wearied traveler: from their most delectable
fruits, which for the use of man they bear and bring forth. By the which is
signified (for the most part) the excellency and prerogative of virtue, the
honorable dignity and blessed estate of the godly, the blameless integrity of
the inward mind, and the honest manners of those that seek each way to
benefit and do good to all, and to hurt, damnifie, prejudice, or hinder none.

Sometime they signify the stately insolency, arrogant pride, and hautie
swelling of wicked persons. For trees that be of great height, do many times
oppress and hinder the growth and increase of low shrubs, growing under them,
even as we see, the great, rich and mighty men of the world do keep under awe
and subjection the poor and needy.

Again, as Tempests when they arise, and lightening (when it pleases God to
send either the one or the other) quickly and with a tryce hurleth down and
ouerturneth mountains and the highest trees, according to that saying of the
Psalmist: The voice of the Psalm. 29, 5.
Lord breaks the Cedar trees, etc: even so does he bring down with a
breakenecke fall the proud, hauty, arrogant, and insolent, which set
themselves against God, and seek the spoil of those that be quiet and godly.

To the same effect also is that saying of the Prophet Isaiah: The day of the
Lord of hosts, is Isai. 2, 12.
upon all the proud and hautie, and upon all that is exalted, and he shall be
brought low. And upon all high and stout Cedar trees of Libanus, that are high
and exalted, and upon all the Oaks of Basan. Whereby he declares that God is
able easily to bring down and overthrow all Fortresses, Bulwarks, and
Castles, be they never so strong: and all the wealth, riches, and power of the
stately and lofty minded: and that nothing is any way able to withstand his
force and might when it pleases him to strike.

To the same purpose and effect does Zachary likewise advise the people, not
rashly and vainly to put their trust in any walled towns or help of man,
because no strength (seem it never so impregnable and invincible) can protect
or deliver out of the hand of the Lord. These woeful words therefore uses he
unto Israel, denouncing unto them (as an Herault at Arms sent from God, to
sommon them) grievous destruction and lamentable desolation. Open (says he)
thy doors, O Zach. 11, 1.
Lebanon, and the fire shall devour thy Cedars: Howl ye Fir trees (by the
which, he means the inferior Magistrates) because the Cedar is fallen, that
is, because thy chief Rulers and sovereign Governors be destroyed. Howl O ye
Oaks of Basan: that is, ye stiff-necked, froward and intractable persons,
because the mighty defenced forest is cut down.

The like dismal day does he there likewise threaten to the Shepherds, which
being puffed up with pride in themselves, little cared for the welfare of the
poor flock, but reigned as Lords over them, practicing rigor, tyranny,
cruelty, and austeritie as Lions upon them. Which miserable abuse Ezechiel in
his time does also greatly bewail. Ezec. 34, 3.


The 23. Chapter.
Of Heath, Tamariske, Ling, and Broom.

HEath or Tamariske is a little small Tree or Plant of low growth (as Virgil
well noted) bearing a rugged or rough leaf, not much unlike to Sauine, and a
flower of a brown purple color, and withal somewhat mossie or woollie: Bees
delight very much therein. The ground where it commonly grows is dry,
hungry, barren, waste, and unfruitful.

From these do the Prophets in many places allege sundry Similitudes,
whenever they denounce and notify unto men, what heavy haps, afflictions
and calamities shall befall them. As namely Jeremiah: Cursed Iere. 17, 5.
be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws
his heart from the Lord. In which words he pronounces that man accursed
whosoever he be, that reposeth his confidence and trust in any bodily, earthly
and frail thing whatsoever it be: or that in his distress and danger seeks
help and succor at the hands of any, saving of God alone. For he that so
does, shall be like the Heath, which receives no benefit by the temperate and
mild disposition of the air, but cumberously occupies the soil, and for a
small time continues, growing no where else, but in barren, hungry, dry,
salt, parched, rugged and vnfertile grounds.

But blessed and happy is the man that puts Psalm. 1, 3.
his trust in the Lord: for he shall be like a tree that is planted by the
water side; which being continually watered, spreads out her roots and
boughs, and shall not feel when the heat comes, but her leaf shall be
still green, and shall not care for the year of drought, neither shall cease
from yielding fruit.

Again, where God threateneth ruin, destruction, spoil and desolation to
hang over the heads of the Moabites, who (lineally descending from the Jews,
namely from Lot the brother of Abraham) were still (notwithstanding) their
professed enemies; he bids them to Flee and save their lives, and to Iere.
48, 6.
be like the Heath in the wilderness. Whereby he advises them, with speed to
withdraw themselves out of their Holds, and by hasty flight to provide for
the safety of their lives: because their Cities should shortly be destroyed,
ransacked and desolated, and their people and citizens spoiled, and deprived of
all honor, dignity and estimation; so that they should no more be accounted of
or regarded, than the base Ling and baggage Heath in the wilderness.

The 24. Chapter.
Of Rosen in general.

ROsen is all that Oily fatness and gummie substance, which with the heat of
the Sun runs out of the Pyne tree, Pitch tree, Fur, Larch, Lentiske, and
Terebinth. With us also here in these Countries there issues and sweateth out
of the Cherie tree and Damson tree, a rosen or gum of the color of honey,
which is very good against the grauel and stone. The white Popler also
yields a certain gummy juice or liquor like Ambre, out at the clifts of the
rind. But of all others, the Terebinth rosen (which we call Turpentine) is
the chiefest: next whereunto is the rosen of the Lentiske, which we term
Masticke. After it in goodness is the Pine; the Fur, and the Pitch Rosen next.
The worst and last be those that run out of the wild Pine, and out of the root
of Scammonie, which are termed Stroblina and Colophonia.

And there be of Rosen (as there is likewise of pitch) two differences or
sorts; the one liquide and current; the other dry and clear. The virtue and
effect both of the one and of the other, is to assuage pain, to lenifie
greefes, to bind and close up wounds, specially the Turpentine that runs
out of the Terebinth; whose operations and effects the prophet Jeremiah
metaphorically applies to the inward wounds of the mind, which with the
sovereign emplaister and liniment of the word of God be recured and healed.

Thus therefore does he expostulate with the Israelites: Is there no Rosen (or
Balm) in Ierem. 8.
Gilead? Is there no Physician there? Why then is not the health of the
daughter of my people recovered? As though he should say: There is a
sovereign salve to be had, and a present remedy is readily prepared, able to
heal the wounded mind, and bruised conscience: but the daughter of my people
careless of her recovery, and forgetful of her salvation and health,
refuses to apply the same remedies unto her filthy, stinking and mattery
wounds: she passes not a whit for the wholesome Cataplasmes and suppling salues
of the word of God: she discovers not her botches, boiles and impostumes to
the expert and skillful Physician, to wit, God: she craves no advise nor help
at his hands: who is able and willing, out of his infinite store to afford
present remedies for the healing of all afflicted and diseased consciences, and
to minister unto the same the Wine and Oil of his consolation and mercy; as
appears in the parable which Christ himself used of the Samaritane (by whom
he himself was figured) and of the wayfairing man, that fell Luke 10, 30.
among thieves and was wounded.

Whereby is meant the state of mankind, through Satan's malice, despoiled of
his robes of innocence and integrity, and left full fraught and miserably
pestered with all sin and wickedness, like (even) to sterue and be thrown
headlong into the gulf of desperation.

But God when for our sins he wounds us, that is, when he sends unto us
famine, dearth, penury, scarcity, calamity, wars, troubles, sickness, and
such like, his will and pleasure is, that for redress thereof we should come
to him, and of him alone crave our deliverance.

Touching which point, we read a most comfortable and sweet discourse in the
Prophet Jeremiah, wherein the Lord our God complains him self of our to too
wilful disobedience; and utters speeches of great grief, for that mankind
seeks aid and help else where than at him, and that they polluting and
defiling themselves with gross idolatry, superstition, vain worship and
ridiculous tromperies, do most unkindly forsake so liberal and so bountiful a
Lord, to serve in miserable thraldom and slavery, a cruel, crafty and
bloody Tyrant.

Not without cause therefore does he thus reason the matter with his people: Am
I Iere. 2, 31.
become as a wilderness unto Israel, or a land that has no light? Wherefore
then says my people, we are Lords, we will come no more unto thee?

Which Similitude is taken from a barren soil, and fruitless ground that
bears no corn, grain nor fruit for man's use and sustentation. Whereas on
the other side, the Lord God, the Creator and maker of all things, is most
far from all such sterilitie: yea with him is all plenty and abundance that
can possibly be conceived, ready at all times to be had and enjoyed, if we
could thankefully receive them, and heartily sue for them. So that all they be
utterly and each way inexcusable, that shrink and start from such a bountiful
Lord, since there can no lawful or reasonable cause of such peevish revolt be
by any color alleged, why they should so do. And therefore (as it were)
greatly moved with the treacherous indignity of such a foul disparagement, he
lays open the hainousnes of their crime, by another example, saying: Can a
maid forget her ornaments, or a Bride her attire? Yet my people have forgotten
me, days without number.

But in these heavenly offers of sovereign remedies, and cordial medicines to
afflicted minds, the Lord (with all) insulteth and sharply taunteth the people
of Egypt, because they applied and laid to their wounds such medicines and
emplaisters, as were no manner of way, available or profitable, but rather
increased, than mitigated their grief and malady. And therefore he shows
them, where and whence they should seek for help, and to whom to sue for
their recure: Go up (says he) unto Gilead, and take Rosen (or Balm) O Virgin,
the daughter of Egypt: but Iere. 46, 11.
in vain shall thou go to Surgerie, for thou shall have no health.

Now, Gilead was one of the six franchised Towns, appointed to be as Cities
of refuge Gilead, a Sanctuary or place of refuge. Number. 35. Deuteronomy. 19. Josh. 20.
for such as had unawares without any pretensed malice killed any man: and that
City was assigned to the Levites and Priests, whose office and function was
about the Law and ministry of the word of God. For as says the Prophet
Malachie: The Priests lips shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek the
Mala. 2, 7.
Law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts: that is, he
is the Ambassador of God, and is enjoined by his office to teach, and expound
the Law and word of the Lord.

The Prophet therefore directing his speeches to the afflicted, shows him
that all help must come from God, and that for his direction in the way of
godliness, he ought to resort unto his godly ministers. Otherwise, if he else
where hoped for help and assistance, the remedies should prove not only
helpelesse and bootelesse, but also damnable and dangerous, if any mite of
salvation be reposed in any other than only in the everliving God.

Jeremiah prophecieng the destruction of Babylon, which was as a filthy sink
of all wickedness, warns all men to take heed and to withdraw themselves
from her: and Ierem. 50.
for that she had refused all wholesome admonitions, and turned the deaf care
unto all ghostly counsels and spiritual aduertisements, he warns all men to
abandon her company, and utterly to reject and forsake her, as sorlorne,
desperate and incurable.

Whereby the Prophet shows, that the Preachers and ministers of the word of
God used and applied all possible remedies for the curing of their diseases,
and healing of their rustie and festered wounds; and that they left no way
unattempted to purge their hearts and minds from errors: but all was in vain.

He thought it good therefore to leave them to their own blindness, and to
refer them to the heavy judgment of God; who would shortly stir up and
send among them a lamentable slaughter and grievous plague, by raising against
them most fierce, cruel and bloody enemies.

The like calamity did Christ foreshew and denounce should come to pass upon
the obstinate Jews, who despising and refusing so Matt. 23, 38
many and great benefits, cruelly raged against the Prophets, against Christ
himself, and against his Apostles and followers.

The 25. Chapter.
Of the Vine, with all the parts and appurtenances thereof, as branches,
leaves, twigs, boughs, stalks, claspers, taglets, capreoles: Grape, cluster,
kernel, etc.

AS sundry Parables, Similitudes and Resemblances of things well known unto
us, be often used in the sacred Bible, for establishing of the truth, and for
proof and confirmation of such matters as otherwise would seem doubtful and
obscure: so is there none that more notably sets out, garnisheth,
beautifieth, adorneth and illustrateth either the Prophesies, or the Sermons
and discourses of the holy Writers, than those that are taken from the Vine,
and the appurtenances thereunto.

And first, that notable prophesy of Jacob the Patriark concerning the Messiah,
who descending of the seed and race of Judah, restored health, reconciled
mankind, and brought him into the favor and love of God again: The Genesis 49, 10.
scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiuer from between his feet,
until Shiloh come; that is, the kingdom shall not be altered, nor translated
into any other stock, till Jesus Christ the Messiah, and author of all
prosperity and saving health do come. And the people shall be gathered unto
him: that is, the Gentiles shall be converted and be brought to receive his
doctrine, to embrace his religion, to repose their trust, confidence and
belief in him, and to imitate his life, manners, behavior and example. He
shall bind his Asse-foale unto the Vine, and his Asses colt unto the best
Vine. He shall wash his garment in Wine, and his cloak in the blood of Grapes.
Whereby is signified the mystery of his cross and passion, by the virtue
whereof we be purged, and by the efficacy of his glorious resurrection, out of
the tyrannous clowtches of Devil and death, brought into freedom and liberty.

A much like saying has Isaiah, and tending to the same sense: In that day
shall the Isaie. 11, 10
Gentiles inquire after the root of Iesse, which shall be set up for a token
unto the people, and the nations shall seek unto it and his rest shall be
glorious. He alludeth in these words to a Standard, Banner, Mark or token,
that may be discerned and seen a great way off, such as be our Beacons or
Pires; which in the day time, Mariners and Seafaring men (for direction of
their course) do steadfastly behold and look unto; as in the night, they do
unto the north star or pole Arctike.

And for that, the Vine is a pleasant, amiable, and delectable tree, yielding
to the owners and beholders (by reason of his gallant branches, brave leaves,
clasping tendrels, and clustering grapes) as well profit and benefit, as
pleasure and recreation, therefore is a wife, that is fruitful in bearing of
children compared and resembled thereunto, as in the Psalms: Thy wife shall be
as the fruitful Psalm. 128, 3.
Uine on the sides of thine house.

Wisdom also commending her self, says: As a Vine have I brought forth
fruit of a sweet Eccl. 24, 19.
savor: that is, I deliver unto all men sweet doctrine and comfortable
instruction, whereby they may be refreshed as with a pleasant, toothsom and
moist Grape. For who so gives ear unto her directions and counsels, shall be
sure to have prosperous success in ^ll his affairs, and to receive daily
increase and furtherance in virtue and godliness.

This prosperous felicity, the Lord, by certain excellent and pithie
Metaphors promises by his Prophet Hosea, unto Israel, and to so many as seek
to be at one with God, saying: I will heal their rebellion; whereby he
means, that he will freely and graciously pardon their offenses. I will love
them freely. Hose. 14, 4.
For mine anger is turned away from them. I will be as the dew unto Israel: he
shall grow as the Lilly; and his root shall break out as the trees of
Lebanon. His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive tree,
and his smell as Lebanon. They that dwell under his shadow, shall return, and
grow up as the corn, and flourish as the Vine.

In which words he covertly means foyson, plenty, abundance and prosperity
in all things; and that the state of their common wealth should be
flourishing and renowned, not wanting any thing, appertaining to the inward
beautifieng and ornanament of the mind.

Whereas to them that be unmindful of Gods benefits, and swinishly wallow
still in their puddle of pleasures, wantonness and sensuality, all things
shall happen and come to pass clean contrary, as the Prophet Isaiah
witnesses: namely, that their Vines shall be rooted up, that there shall be no
Isai. 24, 7.
Vintage, and that Wine shall fail to them that usually solace themselves with
songs and musical instruments, at their bankets and feasts, and to such as
are all upon the hoigh in their iolitie and huffing mood. Finally, that such
shall be the misery, desolation, waste, and massacre among them, that the
people (which be the honor, beauty, and strength of their Cities) should be
destroyed, and so brought (in a manner) to nothing, that few or none of them
shall be left alive. For he flatly tells them, that even such shall their
case be, as is of Olives when they be shaken off from the Olive tree, and as
the Grapes when the Vintage is ended. For as the fruits in the gathering of
these and such like trees, be not so generally all gathered, but that some
remain and be left on the tree: so of the great and woeful calamity which they
should suffer, some small number should remain vndestroied.

The like Argument does the Lord handle and prosecute by his Prophet Jeremiah,
pronouncing upon the wicked not only ruin and desolation, but also penury,
dearth and famine, insomuch that there should be no Grapes on the Vine, nor
fig on the fig tree; and that and 48, 33. Iere. 8, 13.
the leaves should be so plucked up, that nothing might be hoped or looked for
to grow thereon. Whereby he signifies, that the famine should be most extreme
and remediless, and that the souls likewise should be miserably
hungersterued; and finally that every mothers son of them should be gleaned
away and gathered, even as figs and Grapes, so that few or none should escape
or be left behind.

And as ripe Grapes do relish sauourely, and with their pleasant and tooth
some juice do singularly refresh the palate, and delight the throat: Even so
sound doctrine, wholesome admonition, and gracious speeches do cheer the
spirits, and comfort the minds of men.

Moses likewise compares pestilent and noisome doctrine, and the company,
acquaintance, familiarity, conversation, conference, life, manners and dealings
of wicked persons, unto venomous and poisoned grapes, which with their
pestiferous and dangerous juice do infect the minds (that are otherwise well
trained and disposed) and carry them clean away from the true worship and
religion of God: Their Vine (says he) is of the Deu. 32, 32.
Vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrha: their Grapes are grapes of
Gall: their clusters be bitter. Their Wine is the poison of Dragons, and the
cruel gall of Aspes. That is, their speech is so pestilent and venomous, that
it even presently infecteth, and forthwith slaieth.

To the same purpose is also that saying, sharp reprehension, and nipping
subsannation of Hosea, against those that follow superstition, and seek after
strange gods, even as drunkards that wholly give themselves to bibbing and
swilling. They have respect (says Hose. 3, 1.
he) and set their love on strange Gods, and delight in the Wine bottles.
Wherein he compares their sottish madness (which carried them to idolatry,
unto the manner and state of drunkards, that have none other pleasure, delight or
joy but in quaffing and tippling, and think their chief solace to consist in
the company of Rynsepitchers and Tossepots.

But forasmuch as we are now entered into this discourse of the Vine, this is by
the way to be noted, that the Prophets of God, under the name of the Uine,
Grapes and other Isa. 17, 6. 10
Plants, do signify and mean somewhile abundance and fertility: somewhile
dearth and scarcity: somewhile fewness and destruction of the people: and
somewhile the great store and multitude; which of few, do grow unto a very
populous increase and number.

So in the Prophet Jeremiah we read how the Lord by an elegant Metaphor
pronounces that the Idum^ans should be so entirely spoiled, that nothing at al
of the^ should be left: insomuch as their very enemies should be somewhat more
favorable unto them, than he would be. For (says he) If the Grape gatherers
Iere. 49, 9.
should come upon thee, would they not leave so^^ Grapes? If thieves should
come upon thee by night, would they not destroy and rob till they had enough?
That is, they would not altogether have spoiled thee, nor utterly ransacked all
thy goods, but would have left somewhat behind them. But I (says the Lord)
have left Esau bare, and discovered his secrets, that he shall not be able to
hide himself, or any thing that he has.

And as all pride, arrogancy and hawtines coming of abundance and
prosperity, (wherewith thanklesse Caitifs, droonken with wealth, do grow
stately and insolent) is unto Almighty God, odious and detestable: so does he
in sundry places sharply reprove and vehemently beat down the same:
pronouncing and giving severe sentence against all such as are stained
therewith: that albeit they seem for a while to flourish, and stand scotfree,
yet shall they be cut down, as corn which the Mowers with full handfuls mow
and reap: so that even those few which shall be left of many, shall also be
gleaned and gathered up, as the ears are gleaned in the end of harvest. And
yet some he promises to leave, bringing another Similitude; even as Grapes are
left on the Vines, and Olive berries on the Olive tree.

For as in Vintage time the Grape-gathering cannot be so clean, but that some
be left behind; nor the shaking off of Olives so precisely done, but that some
berries remain, either among the leaves, or in the top of the tree: even so in
the doleful massacre and lamentable destruction of the people, there should
not be made such a general sweepestake, but that some should be left and
reserved under hope of mercy. In that Isai. 17, 4.
day (says he) shall it come to pass, that the glory of Jacob shall be
impouerished, and the fatness of his flesh shall be made lean: And it shall
be, as when the harvest man gathers the corn, and reapeth the ears with his
arm. Yet shall not the gleaning be so, but that some gathering of ears shall
be left, and some Grapes and Olives remain: as of two or three berries in the
top of the vpmost boughs; and of four or five in the high fruitful branches.
Whereby his meaning is, that the rich Cobs and head Rulers (swelling with pride
and arrogancy) should be thrown down and ruinated: but of the poor
Communaltie and seely inferior people, there should a remnant be left, as in
the Vintage season it is seen to come to pass, that some clusters and berries
be left, wherewith the poor people are somewhat refreshed and relieved.

The 26. Chapter.
Of Hysope.

HYsope is a Garden herb of excellent smell and pleasant taste, and therefore
good to be used in broths; for that, being boiled with meats, it makes the
same not only wholesome, but the better also in relish and savor.

It cleanses the breast and lungs, and purges the head very orderly from
phlegm, and tough clammie humors: and therefore is of singular effect to help
the Pleurisy, Stitch, or any other grief and pain in the side.

Whereupon it pleased the Lord to appoint this herb to be used in solmne
sacrifices, either when as Lepers were to be cleansed; or any other enormous
offense to be expiated, Leuit. 14, 4. Numb. 19, 6. 18.
by dipping a bundle of Hysope in the blood of a Sparrow, or of a red Cow.

David also acknowledging his grievous sins of adultery and murder,
beseeches God to forgive him, and to purge him with Hysope, that having the
foul spots of his Psalm. 51, 7.
soul cleansed, he may have quiet of conscience, and be renewed in spirit.
Wherein he had respect unto the rites, and sacrifices of the old Testament, by
the which it was ordained, that whosoever was purified according to the Law of
Moses, with blood sprinkled Exo. 24, 6.
on him with Hysope and a scarlet lace, were cleansed.

All which things were shadows and figures of Christ, by whose blood all our
sins are cleansed, and washed away through faith Heb. 9. 14.
for ever.

But whereas we read of Hysope in the Books of the Kings, where Solomon is
said 1. King. 4.
to be so skillful and wise, that he was able to dispute of the nature of each
plant and herb, from the Cedar tree that is in Lebanon, even unto the Hysope
that springs out of the wall: my opinion is, that the same is not there meant
of our common Hysope, which is not any small and slender herb, but sometime of
a foot or more in height, bearing a spiked purple or dark bluish flower. I
think therefore that thereby is meant the herb called Maydenhaire, whose leaves
are hackt, or snipt round about, and which grows by walls and stony shadowie
places: And because in leaves it is like to Rue, it is sometime called Ruta
muraria, that is, Stone Rue or Wall Rue.

Like also unto this, is that which we call Trichomanes, which grows always
in moist and shadowie places, being commonly of a span long; and has the
stalks of his leaves small, straight, and lean, beset on either side with
many little pretty leaves, standing in comely order one against another, and
continues always green.

His effects and faculties are the same in operation that Maydenhaire has: and
is of great virtue to help old coughes, shortness of wind, and obstructions
of the lungs, and breast. And these are sometimes called by other names, as
Polytrichon, and Callitrichon, because of the effect which they work in
fastening the hair, and making it to grow black, thick, and curled.

Therefore, this being such a small low Herb, scarcely a span high, and also
growing in walls, I am persuaded that it is in that place to be understood, for
Hysope. For the drift and meaning of the words in that sentence is none other,
but that he had perfect skill and exact knowledge of all manner of things,
even from the tallest and highest Cedar, to the lowest and least herb that
grows out of the wall.

The 27. Chapter.
Of the Reed, with the several sorts and differences thereof: of Flax,
Stubble, Chafe, Chips, Parings, and other trifling things of slight and
slender acount.

OF Reed there be sundry sorts and kinds. Whereof one has a long, smooth,
naked stalk, without knots or joints, called in latin Typha palustris, and
with us Reed Mace, Cattes tail, or Water Torch. Such a Reed was that which
was in Matt. 27, 29 Reed mace or Cats tail
derision delivered into Christ's right hand, in steed of a Scepter royal,
for that he called himself a king. For in the top thereof it has the form of
a Scepter imperial, two handfuls high or there abouts, round in compass, and
as big as a man's thumb, thick, soft and smooth as though it were wool or
flocks, which in the handling has a fine, soft, and thrummie nap like Velvet,
and when it waxes ripe, is dissolved and turned into a Down or Cotton, easily
carried away with the wind.

Another kind of Reed there is growing by the banks of standing waters, and
on the shores of rivers, which has a long, round and hollow stalk or straw,
full of knottie ioints, and at the top large tuftes or downy ears, growing
scatteringly and loosely, not closely compact together, which do also change
into a cotton or mossie substance, and are also lightly carried away with the
wind. And this kind, is our common Poole Poole Reed.
Reed, Spier or Cane reed. The root whereof being beaten small and laid to
the place, ripeneth an Impostume, and draws thorns or splinters out of the
flesh.

And for that the Reed is tottering, shaking and yielding every way with the
least wind that blows, therefore all such weathercocklike Temporizers as in
their words and deeds be wavering, unconstant, slippery, changeable, fickle,
fainte hearted and dare not stoutely persist in their conceived opinion, but (as
turn coats) say and unsay, do and undo, are fitly resembled and very aptly
compared unto a Reed, that shakes with every blast.

And for that the blessed man John the Baptist was most far from this vicious
disposition, our Savior Christ (in praise of his constancy, and for that his
doctrine and testimony of the Messiah were sound and agreeable to the
touchstone of the truth) gave an honorable Eulogie of him, plainly and
effectually telling the people, that he was nothing at all like to a Reed
shaken with the wind, that Mat. 11, 7. Luke 7, 24.
he was of a wavering and inconstant mind, to speak one thing standing, and
another sitting, or that upon every light occasion was ready to recant and
shrink from that opinion and judgment which before he liked and allowed: but
that he was a stayed, stable, firm, constant, and true man, without suspi.
tion of lightness and mutabilitie, and that therefore in equity and right every
one was to speak and think honorably and woorthily of such an excellent
Herault and heavenly preacher; and not to esteem of him according to the fond
conceit and foolish opinion of the ignorant multitude, but according to truth
and as the matter indeed rightly required.

But to go forward with the rest: we have a common term and usual proverb,
taken from the nature and condition of the Reed, when we would specify and
describe a man that puts his trust and confidence in a thing, which not only
not helps him, but rather damnifieth and greatly hurts him, to say that he
leans unto a staff of Reed.

The same metaphore (as Isaiah witnesses) did Rabshakeh use at the siege of
Jerusalem, Isai 36, 6.
when as he thought thereby to daunt and quail the godly mind and invincible
courage of good king Hezekiah, and to make 2. King. 18, 21.
him (for fear) to surrender and yield up both himself, his people and the
city.

The Lord also by his Prophet Ezec^ using the same Similitude, insulteth upon
the king of Egypt and threateneth unto him utter destruction. For when as he
took upon him to protect and defend the Israelites, which shrouded themselves
under his power and countenance, he himself became but a staff of Reed,
which brake into shiuers; and in splitting both wounded himself, and pitifully
Ezec. 29. 6.
galled them also; renting their shoulders, and wringing their loins. Whereby
was meant, that all their power and forces were abated and decayed, and all
their strength of war utterly frustrated and discomfited.

So also does God (as witnesses the Psalmist) scatter and defeat the practices
of the proud and insolent Spearmen, that ietted Psalm. 67, 30.
armed with Iauelines like long and great Reeds. The like plague and calamity
did God inflict upon the stock and race of Jeroboam, and smot Israel for their
Idolatry, like as a 1. King. 14, 15.
Reed is shaken in the water: and weeded them out of their good and fruitful
land, which he had given to their progenitors. Meaning thereby that they were
brought to nothing, and despoiled of all their honor and dignity.

Now as God by Similitudes of Reeds, does many whiles cast down and confound
all those, that vainly trust in things transitory, brittle, and momentanie: so
on the other side them that be weak, pensive, faintharted, sorrowful and
moorning, he does Isaie. 42, 13. Luke 4, 18.
raise up and recomfort: and with spiritual instruction does cherish, furnish
and refresh the sick soul and bruised conscience. Heerunto is to be referred
that notable prophecy of Isaiah concerning the mildenes and lenity of Christ,
and of his heavenly comfort to all groaning and afflicted consciences: Behold my
Isai. 42, 1.
servant on whom I have leaned: mine elect, in whom my soul delights: I have
put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. He
shall not cry nor lift up his voice; neither shall his voice be heard in the
streets. A bruised Reed shall he not break, and the smoking Flax shall he not
quench, but shall bring forth judgment in truth: he shall not fail nor be
discouraged, and the Gentiles shall wait for his laws.

By these two Metaphors of a bruised Reed and smoking flax, he declares the
surpassing Isai. 61, 1.
clemency, and unspeakable mildnes of the Lord God toward weak hearts,
troubled consciences, moorning spirits, and afflicted minds: how gently he
binds up their wounds, and how kindly he heals their diseases; not bitterly
rating and violently forcing them, not churlishly threatening, and fiercely
affrighting them; nor yet with cruel speeches and rough dealing discouraging
them, as many troublesome, crabbed natured people use to do, which deal with
their poor brethren more hardly and cruelly than Christian mildnes can
warrant, thundering against them for their frail transgressions the inevitable
judgments of God, without any hope of repentance.

Likewise, will he not quench smoking flax. Which Similitude is taken from a
Lamp, or from the week or match of a Candle, Link or Torch, which either
wanting oil and tallow, or having thereof not sufficient, yields forth at
some time but a dark, blind, snuffie and imperfect light.

By this Comparison therefore is meant a weak, slender and wavering faith,
which yet (notwithstanding) is not quite quenched and extinct, albeit at some
time it be very near thereunto. This small pittance of faith, Christ and those
that be his ministers never quite quench and put out, but so long as any spark
of godliness appears, do cherish, nourish, stir up, and with the bellows
of the holy Ghost blow and kindle; that all dimnesse being expelled, the
light of faith and piety may clearly shine out, and glitteringly appear both
to the glory of God, and also to the benefit of his neghbor.

For so does God temper and qualify his sacred lore and heavenly doctrine
(being the food and nourishment of our souls) that neither can any through
too much severity justly shrink from his profession; or estrange himself
from his Church and congregation: neither yet through overmuch Ienitie and
mildnes (as it were with dandling and wanton cockering) be corrupted and
nuzzeled in security and licentious supinitie.

The godless and wicked are kept in awe and obedience with dread and severity
of justice; but the weaklings are best won by gentleness and lenity. After
this sort in the Gospel (offering grace, mercy and salvation unto every one)
there be sweet and sower intermingled together, for therein are heanenly
consolations joined with menacing threats; and sharp reprehensions qualified
with comfortable aduertisements.

By Smoke, vapor and mists; by Hay, straw, chafe, stubble, embers, dust,
parings, shauings, offall, riffraffe, and other refuse, dross or castaway
baggage, are meant and signified in the Bible, both men and things that belewd,
light, vain, of no account and reckoning, of no estimation or commodity, of
no price or value, but are as trifling paltrie, slight trumperie, and such base
trinkettrie and trash, as yields more harm than benefit, more loss than
gain.

From these are taken many and sundry notable Similitudes by sacred and holy
Writers, to garnish, beautify and adorn their sentences withal. As when God
by his Prophet pronounces that the wicked shall be scattered as Chafe, and
driven away as Dust, Psalm. 1, 5. Isai. 17, 13. Job. 21, 17.
and other baggage stuff with the wind. And likewise in the book of Job: The
candle of the wicked shall be put out; that is, their honor, dignity, glory,
state, worship and magnificence shall be dimmed and brought down; and they
shall be as stubble before the wind, and as chafe that the storm carries
away, that is, they shall be suddenly destroyed and brought to utter confusion.
In like manner the Prophet Isaiah pronounces desolation to the Moabites, and
all the enemies of the Church of God, saying, that they shall be threshed even
as Isai. 25, 10. and 5. 24.
straw is threshed; and as quickly consumed, as dry stubble with a vehement
fire.

No less dreadful plagues and lamentable desolation threatens he to such as
have hardened themselves in sin, and by an usual and domestical practice of
ordinary transgressio^ have entered into familiar league and natural
acquaintance with wickedness. If the black Moore can change his skin, or the
Leopard his spots, then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.
Therefore will I scatter Iere. 13, 23.
you as stubble that is taken away with the Southwinde.

The like calamity does the Lord threaten to fall upon them that commit
Idolatry, and repose their trust in Idols: Ye shall be (says Isai. 1, 29.
he) as an Oak, whose leaf fades; and as a Garden that has no water: and
your strength, that is, your false God, in whom ye trusted, shall be as Towe,
and the maker of it as a spark: and they shall both burn together, and none
shall quench them: that is to say, all the glittering pomp and painted show of
fained worship and counterfeite religion, shall perish and come to naught, even
as Flax and Towe when fire is put unto them.

But to the rest. The Prophet Amos sharply inueigheth against covetous
Cornemongers, who having their Graners and Cornelofts full fraught and thwackd
with Grain, swallowed up the poor and needy, being ready to sterue for want
of food, making the Amos. 8, 4.
Epha small and the shekle great, that is, the measure scantie, and the price
high, and falsify the waightes by deceit, driving the poor people for very
need, to be glad to take at their hands, not only scantie measure; but also
in steed of clean Wheat, do retaile and sell unto them, chafe, dust,
refuse, ofcorne, husks, pods, and baggage worse than bran: whereby they catch
the poor within their danger, and make them to become indebted unto them, that
they dare not go else where to buy any, although they might of others buy
better cheap. These Caterpillars and Cormorants of the common wealth, are
they, that sell the poor for Isai. 3, 15.
silver, and the needy for shoes, braieng the Lords people in a mortar, and
grinding the faces of the poor (as it were) against a grindstone.

He that diligently considers the drift of this Prophet Amos, and searches
the depth of his meaning in this his sharp reproof and satyricall inuectiue
against these covetous Chuffes, and market raisers, which for their own
private lucre, uncharitably enhaunce the price of Grain and Victual, to the
pitiful spoil of the poor and needy of the land, may plainly see the
greedy Cobs and hunger snouted Slouches of these our days lively in their
colors described; and may (as in a table) behold the punishments that God
has in store for such merciless Caitifes, as devour the poor, and withdraw
from the needy, necessary food, and relief expedient for their
sustentation. But leaving these, let us again retire to the Metaphores and
Similitudes, that are taken from this kind of trifling stuff and unprofitable
baggage, to set forth other things that are sound, true, and profitable in
deed.

God by his Prophet Jeremy compares his word and doctrine (which is mighty
and potentiall in operation; and most effectual in comforting and feeding
hungring consciences) unto Wheat. For as Wheat gives sound, good, and
substantial nourishment unto the body, so does the true word of God,
mightily and wholesomely nourish the soul. And as for the adle devises,
trifling inventions, doting doctrines, deceitful traditions, and superstitious
religions, coined by man's foolish, fantastical, and phanaticall brain, he
fitly resembles unto dreams and chafe. What (says he) is the Chafe to the
Iere. 23, 28.
Wheat? that is, what has vanity to do with verity? what agreement is there
between truth and falsehood: what concord is there between gross darkness of
superstitious ignorance, and the clear bright shining light of the glorious
Gospel?

The same Metaphor of Chafe, does John Baptist the forerunner of Christ use,
in his sharp reprehension and nipping exhortation to the Pharisees and
Sadduces, which impugned the truth, and resisted the benefit of their offered
salvation: telling them that the Messiah was come, who having his fan in Mat.
3, 12.
his hand, would make clean his floor and gather his Wheat into his garner,
but would burn up the Chafe with unquenchable fire. Whereby he shows that
the godly after the race of this life run, should be received into everlasting
Tabernacles, and the wicked committed unto euerburning fire.

Now, as John for his part did severely admonish the people of their duty, and
roundly exhort them to repentance and amendment, by alleging Similitudes and
parables of an Axe put to the root of the Tree, and of seuering and dissorting
the Wheat from the Chafe: so likewise Christ (to whom all hypocrisy,
counterfaite religion, and faired sanctity is loathsome and odious) by
alleging a Similitude of a beam and of a Matt. 7, 3.
mote, sharply reprooueth those busy priers into other men's lives, which are
very quick sighted to epsy faults, and to too curious in noting even the
least ouersightes of others, whereas in the mean while, in their own gross
sins they are contented to be as blind as Betels, flattering themselves in
their loose dealings, and so extenuating their own mis-vsages, as though they
were nothing.

To the end therefore that this and such like enormities and wilful
affections, as namely, selfeloue, ouerweening of our selves, insolency, pride,
hawtines, arrogancy, stateliness, disdain, contempt of our neighbor, hatred,
wrath, desire of revenge, and such other vices might be extirped, weeded, and
grubbed out of men's minds, the holy Prophets of God, and sacred Writers endued
with the spirit of wisdom from above, used these means to reduce the dull
hearts of men to modesty, and to the knowledge of themselves, and how brief,
short, brittle, vain and transitory this life is; how many ways subject to
incurable dangers and casualties, and within what narrow and strait limits it
is bounded. So that the life of man is by them in sundry places resembled to
many things of small account, and less continuance, namely to a Dream, to a
smoke, to a Psa. 103, 14 Job. 7, 67. and 8, 9. and 13, 25. and 14, 2. Isai. 40,
6. Hos. 13, 3. Iac. 4, 13.
vapor, to a puff of wind, to a shadow, to a bubble of water, to hay, to
grass, to an herb, to a flower, to a leaf, to a tale, to vanity, to a
weauers shuttle, to a wind, to dried stubble, to a post, to nothing.

By these Metaphores the spirit of God teaches, that all the glory, beauty,
magnificence, strength and wisdom of man is nothing else then vain, brittle,
transitory and ruinous, unless it be sustained, vpholden and vndershored by
the heavenly power of the sure and eternal work of God.

These might al be abundantly confirmed by textes and testimonies of the
Scriptures; which for brevity sake, and least the volume should grow too big,
we do here omit. The studious and diligent Reader, desiring to Isai. 40, 6.
Iac. 1, 10. 1. Pe. 1, 24. Eccl. 14, 18.
know the same more at large, may be sufficiently therein satisfied by these
few places quoted in the margent.

The 28. Chapter.
Of the Cucumber, and certain others.

THe Cucumber is so generally well known, that to use any description thereof,
were but needless and superfluous. It and other herbs also were much used and
well known among the old H^brewes and Egyptians, as in the history of the
Bible we plainly read.

For Moses the servant of God was importunately urged, and grievously
disquieted by the murmuring Israelites and disordered multitude, lusting after
flesh, and saying: Who Number. 11, 4.
shall give us flesh to eat? We remember the fish that we did eat in Egypt:
the Cucumbers, the pepons, the leekes, the onions and the garlic. These
fruits are not only usually eaten by people of low degree and base calling,
but of noblemen and wealthy personages also, partly as meat and condiments to
feed on, partly as salades with oil, vinegar and pepper, to sharpen the
stomach and provoke appetite.

They used in the old time in their vineyardes and Cucumber gardens, to erect
and build little cotages and lodges for their watchfolkes and keepers that
looked to the same, for fear of filchers and stealers: which lodges and
cotages, so soon as the grapes and Cucumbers were gathered, were abandoned of
the watchmen and keepers, and no more frequented. From this forsaking and
leaving of these lodges and cotages, the Prophet Isaiah takes a Similitude,
and applies the same against Jerusalem, the which he pronounces should be so
ruinated and laid waste, that no relicke thereof should be left; and that it
should become even as an empty and tenantlesse cotage or lodge, in aforsaken
vineyard and abandoned Cucumber garden: The daughter of Sion (says he) shall
remain Isai. 1, 8.
like a cotage in a vineyard, and like a lodge in a garden of Cucumbers, and
shall be like a besieged city.

Baruch also deriding the images and shrines of the Idols, whereunto blockish
people bowed themselves and offered sacrifice, in most plain terms, and in a
long discourse says, that such Mawmetry can do no more hurt, nor bring any
more fear than a desolate cotage in a Cucumber garden. For (says Baruc. 6, 69
he) as a Scarcrow in a garden of Cucumbers keeps nothing, so are their gods
of wood, of silver and of gold: and they are like unto a white thorn in an
Orchard, that every bird sits upon. He alludeth unto the image of Priapus,
which the Paynims used to set in their gardens to drive and scarre away night
thieves. Which thing Horace also in certain verses, (iumping in sense with the
before recited words of Baruch) does approve and testify, deriding the to too
foolish superstition of the doltish and ignorant people, his words in effect
are these.

Erewhile a lumpish log was I Horat.

Serving no use at all,
Till Carpenter in doubtful dumpe
Began home his wits to call:
And to bethink him, whether he
A bench of me should make,
Or else Priapus image brave:
At length yet did he take
The course, a God of me to make:
A iollie God since then
I am (forsooth) and gardens keep
To fray both birds and men, etc.
The 29. Chapter.
Of the Juniper.

AS the Gourd served for a pleasant arbor or booth to shadow Jonah Jonah. 4, 6.
from the scorching heat of the hot Sun: so was the Juniper a comfortable
shadow to Elijah, being weary 1. Kin. 19, 4.
and faint with travel.

For when as the Prophet fled for the safe guard of his life from the fury of
Iezabel, and had long traveled in a desert and hot region, for very faintnes
in the end he sat down under a Juniper tree. For this tree being thick leaued
and branched, is very commodious to sit under in hot seasons, to keep away
the parching beams of the broiling Sun. And therefore in his heaviness and
agony of mind, being also extremely ouerwearied with tedious iourneying, the
shadow heerof was some comfort to him, when as with grief and hunger he was
each way so grievously assaulted, encumbred and beset, that he wished for
present death to end his miserable plight and distressed condition.

But after he had slept awhile under it, behold an Angel appeered unto him,
willing him to arise and eat. Whereupon he saw ready baked for him a Cake,
baked on the coals, and a pot of water at his head: wherewith he refreshing
himself, came in the strength thereof unto mount Horeb: and there in a cave
lodged safe from the ambushments and treacherous devises, wrought and intended
against the Prophets of God, by the commandment of that wicked bloody woman.

The lesson heerby taught unto every one is this: that God in this life diverse
and sundry ways, tries his children: to whet their zeal, and to make proof
of their faith and constancy. But yet that in the end he never forsakes nor
leaves them destitute, neither suffers them to be tempted above their
strength, nor to be oppressed and overwhelmed with the weight of the
calamities, by his providence and permission laid upon them.

Job being thrown down from so high a step of wealth and felicity, into the
lowest and extremest degree of misery that could be, bewaileth and
complains, how lewdly he was mocked, flowted and derided by rascal pezants
and abject villains, which were the very scumme and offscowring of men, and
such sterueling Rakehels, as for very misery and poverty were glad to range
abroad in the fields and wilderness, to gather nettles about the bushes, and the
berries and roots of Juniper, and other Plants to stanch their Job. 30, 4.
hunger: as now adays with us there be some such loitring Vagabonds, sturdie
Landleapers, and smelfeast Lubbers, which refusing honest lobour, do (like
drones) live of the sweat of other men's brows; listening and harkening after
doles and belly-cheere, where they may understand of any. Which failing, they
are glad many times to lie under hedges, and to feed their greedy and
hungry maw with the roots of Sea Hollies, Eringes, Thistles, wild Carrots,
Hawes, berries and such like.

The 30. Chapter.
Of the wild Vine.

THe wild Vine brings forth a bitter and unpleasant Grape, attaining never
to any ripenes. This fruit because it is harsh, vntoothsom and eiger, God by
his Prophet Isaiah resembles Isai (...)
unto the froward, crooked, perverse and peevish manners of wilful men.

For whenas he had most diligently bestowed his labor in the rectifieng and
manuring of the crabbed dispositions of the ungrateful Jews, and had left no
way unattempted for the reclaiming and reducing of them unto the
acknowledgement of their duties, he found by proof in the end that al his
labor, diligence, industry, travel and pain (that way taken and sustained)
was frustrate and lost. For albeit he each way carefully pruned, and studiously
husbanded his Vineyard (in hope to receive sauourie and toothsome Grapes) yet
brought it forth nothing, but wild, sower, tart, bitter, and unripe Grapes.

After so long manuring and pains sustained among them, he looked for
judgment, equity, integrity, truth, honest behavior, and thankfulness toward
so diligent and industrious a Vinetrimmer: but alas, all things proved clean
contrary: for they brought forth the rotten fruit of iniquity,
unrighteousness, contempt of virtue, envy, hatred, wrath, indignation and
ingratitude toward so bountiful and liberal an owner, that took such
incessant pains in the polishing and beautifieng of their hearts and
consciences.

The same speech elsewhere uses he, and applies it to the wicked which forget
and forsake God: flatly telling them, that their dealings shall be in vain,
that their conceived drifts shall sort to no happy end: that all their labor
bestowed and employed in dressing and trimming their Vineyards, was to no
purpose or effect. In the day of thy planting shall the wild Vine grow; thou
shall plant a Isai. 7, 11.
fair plant, and thy seed shall flourish in the morning, but the crop shall
be gone in the day of inheritance: As though he should say: albeit thou plant
and set the best vineslips that are to be gotten, and never so carefully commit
them to the ground, whereby thou verily think to receive great profit and
advantage at the time of vintage and ripenes: yet shall thou miss of thy hope:
for thou shall have nothing but wild grapes.

It shall likewise so fall out with the corn and grain: which sprouting up
gaily, and putting thee in hope to grow to ripenes, and to yield thee
commodity at Harvest, shall quayle and come to nothing. For, the day wherein
thou think to reap, shall forreiners and strangers suddenly invade and
spoil it; so that thou shall carry none of all that thou so carefully and
painfully sowedst, into thy barnes. Hereof before has been somewhat more at
large spoken.

The 31. Chapter.
Of Minte, Rue, Anyse and Cumine, which Christ alleges against the Pharisees,
for their extreme covetousness and dissembling hypocrisy.

THese herbs are generally known, and in common use with all manner of
persons of each degree, and each where to be had. Now because Herb sellers
seemed to pick up some piece of a living, and to make some gain by retailing
and selling of their herbs, the greedy Pharisees spared not to exact tithes
Mat. 23, 23. Luke 11, 42.
of them for the same, and thereby couetously to catch unto themselves some
pittance of private lucre.

And because the hypocritical show of fained and counterfaite religion, and
the scraping covetousness of the Scribes and Pharisees was odious unto Christ,
he sharply and severely reprooueth them for being so precise in things tending
to their own gain and private profit (were they never so little and small of
account) omitting (in the mean while) other greater and waightier matters,
which were as they main pillars of Religion, and wherein consisted the chief
substance of godliness and piety.

For they were so straight laced and superstitious in exacting their tithes,
and looked so narrowly to each small point, that by any color might help to
stuff their purse, that they strictly demanded tithes even of common pot
herbs, of Mynt, Anyse and such like, letting pass the weighty points of the
Law, and looking through their fingers, at judgment, mercy, compassion and
fidelity; which virtues were able to admonish and put them in remembrance,
that they should not injuriously deal with any man; that they should help,
succor, and relieve the needy; that they should not by perjury circumuent,
undermine or ouerreach any, but deal truly, faithfully and conscionably with
all men.

Seeing therefore they let these things escape them, which are the chief
effects of Religion, they show themselves to seek nothing else but only how to
enrich and dignifie themselves; being in matters of great importance, blind
and careless, and in cases of small weight, to too quick sighted and
circumspect.

The 32. Chapter.
Of the nature and property of Mustarde seed, whereunto Faith and the word
of God are compared.

HOW precious, wholesome, and comfortable the doctrine of the glorious Gospel is
unto all men in general, faithfully believing the same; and how necessary and
expedient for the instruction of each Christian conscience in the knowledge of
God and undoubted faith in his promises, as there is no man so ignorant that
knows not; so does Christ by many and sundry parables taken from usual and
common things, each where to be found and had, exhort and stir up all men of
what degree or calling soever they be, to the love and study thereof.

He compares the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 13, 24. 31. 33* 45. 47.
that is, the doctrine of the Gospel, (which nourishes, fostereth, cherishes
and feeds faith) unto Seed, unto pearls, unto leaven, unto a draw net, and
to a grain of Mustard seed: which being but a small and the least of all
seeds, yet with his sharp and adust property biteth the tongue, helps
digestion, warmeth the stomach, provoke appetite, and brings a pleasant
relish unto the palate. And all nations use it as a profitable sauce and
expedient condiment unto their meats, being grinded and braied, and mingled
with vinegar or veriuice.

Now, as a Grain of Mustard seed, being Luke 13, 19. and 17, 6. Mark. 4, 31.
the least of all seeds, and sown in the earth, when it grows up, arises
to a great height, and bears great branches, so that the fouls of heaven may
build under the shadow of it: even so the word of God, and faith being not idle
but working; although in outward show it seem small and slender, yet does it
by little and little spread it self, and like a fair fruitful branched tree
receive daily strength and increase.

Again, as an Emplaister or Cataplasme made of the bruised seed of Mustarde,
is known to have singular virtue and effect, being applied to them that have
their members benumbed, and that are fallen into the Letharge or drowsy evil;
or that be troubled with the swimming and giddiness in their head; or that
have the Apoplexy, palsy, falling sickness; and to be short, for all cold
griefs and diseases; because it warmeth, and brings heat, motion and sense
again into the affected parts, and is also good to help leprous, scuruie,
scabbie and vicerous persons: so likewise faith being vpholden, shored up, and
surely anchored unto the word of God, reuiueth, erecteth, cheereth up, and
restores the dull spirits and appalled conscience of man, making it ready and
prompt to execute, atchieue, and exercise the offices and functions of godliness.

Therefore the biting and sharpnes of Mustard, together with his hot and fiery
taste, which is many times seen to make the eater thereof to rub his nose,
and wring out tears; and which also by provoking of neezing, does excellently
purge the head from tough phlegm, and rheumatike substance, is very aptly
compared and resembled to the word of God: which does pearce the conscience,
shake the mind, enkindle and inflame the heart, excite and stir up drowsy,
faint and dull minds to ensue virtue, and perform the duties of piety; and
does many times force and fetch out tears of earnest and hearty repentance.

Again, Christ seeking to draw the hearts and affections of men from careful
seeking after the vain trash, and transitory pelf of this wretched world,
(which most men with anxietie and grief of mind so greedily hunt after)
wills us to consider and behold the Lillies, not those that by art and labor
are Mat. 6, 28.
planted and sown in gardens, but those that of their own accord without the
help of man, grow in the open field.

By whose example, he stirs us up to an assured trust to be reposed in God,
being so liberal and so bountiful a father, who feeding the birds of the
air, will not (doubtless) see us to lack any thing that good is, concerning
our food and sustenance: and since he so gallantly decketh the Lillies of the
field (which be so gorgiously and so richly clothed, that even Solomon in all
his roialtie was not apparelled like one of them) he will not fail, but
assuredly provide for such necessaries of apparel and clothing, as shall be
meet and expedient for us.

Christ his meaning and drift heerin therefore is, that we should seek the
kingdom of heaven, meditate in the doctrine of the Gospel, and delight in the
contemplation of heavenly things: which if we do, his promise is, that we
shall not want any of those things which be needful and necessary for us in
this our frail and transitory life; but that he of his most free and
bountiful liberality will sufficiently provide the same for us.

The 33. Chapter.
Of Iuie.

THe Iuie, which gave shadow unto Jonah against the fervent heat of the Sun,
(albeit some translate it (and that aptly Jonah. 4, 6.
enough) to be a Gourd) is named Hedera, (...) haerendo: for that it claspeth
and catches hold of walls, trees, hedges, or any other thing that it meets
withal. Whereupon Persius the Poet has in effect these words:

Persius in Proaeio.
Mount Helicon and pale Pyrene Well
I leave, as due to those that do excel
In Muses Art and skillful Poetry:
Wearing on head the spreading brave Iuie.
For among the old Painims, this Tree was dedicated unto Bacchus, who is the
President of Poets, as the Olive tree was to Minerua: and for this cause were
Poets wont to be crowned with this, as conquerors were with Baie: as appears
in Virgil:

Eclog. 7.
Ye Shepherds, see with Iuie that ye crown
Your Poet young, in sign of high renown.
And in another place, where he extolleth Augustus Caesar the Monarke of the
world, he prays, that among the Emperors royal triumphs, his verses might
have some place; and that the Iuie (wherewith Poets are dignified) might be
suffered to shuffle in among the Baies, which were peculiarly consecrated to
victorious Emperors: his words be:

Eclog. 8.
At thee (O Prince) my Muse began,
At thee, an end the same shall take:
Receive in glee, the rithmes I scan,
At thy behest, and for thy sake:
And among thy Baies of Conquest, daigne
To suffer Iuie poor to reign.
For the superstitious Gentiles using every third year with great solemnity to
celebrate the feast of Bacchus, made themselves garlands and coronets of Iuie
to wear on their heads. So do we read in the Books of the Machabees, that
Antiochus compelled the 2. Macc. 6, 1
Jews, to renounce their ancient rites, and laws of their fathers, given
unto them by God, and like persons distraught of their wits to range up and
down, keeping revel rex, and using all dissolute behavior as the residue did
that kept the feast of Bacchus, wearing in procession Iuie garlands: and that
whosoever refused so to do, was punished by death.

Now the cause wherefore this tree (which Iuie why dedicated to Bacchus.
is always green and never loses his leaves) was dedicated unto Bacchus,
grew (as I think) heerupon; for that it might^ withstandeth drunkenness, and
purges the brain of slimy tough phlegm and cold humors, engendered by
drunkenness and surfeit. The leaves also and boughs here of being arborwise
platted, or laid to the head, refresh the same (as by the shadow which so
comforted Jonah appeered) and drives away the headache growing by labor and
wearines.

A strange effect and nature is avouched by Cato, to be in the Iuie. For if
wine be put De re rust.
into a pot or dish made of this wood, it will quickly appear whether the same
be mingled and alaied with water or no: for the wine will straightwaies run
out. The natural discord and antipathie between these twain, is so great,
that the one cannot abide to be mingled with the other, nor to come near
together.

But whether the tree which shrouded and shaded Jonah from the heat of the
Sun, (which anon after was worme-eaten and withered, to his no small grief
and discomfort) were an Iuy or no, sundry Interpreters, and namely Augustine do
doubt: seeing the Gourd is fitter for such a purpose, which the Hebrew word
seems also to signify. For the Gourd is full of branches, and bears great
broad leaves, and by the help of tendrels, or capreols quickly claspeth,
catches hold, and climbeth up to a great height, and makes a pleasant Arbor
to sit under, and to defend a man from the heat of the pearching Sun.

Further more it is of a cooling nature, and therefore in hot seasons very fit
to shade and shroud the body. Being received inwardly into the body, being
distempered with heat, it semblably asswageth and temperately cools it: as
also do salades made of Cucumbers, Melons, Pepons, Citruls, Letuce, Orach, and
Purselaine, which are used to be eaten at the beginnings of meals: and some of
them also to be smelled unto, to refresh the weak spirits.

The 34. Chapter.
Of the Mulberie tree, and his fruit.

THe Mulbery tree has a great and large body, a rugged rind, his wood
inwardly of a boxie or yellowish color, his leaves large and snipt about the
edges like a saw, in bigness not much unlike to the fig tree: his fruit is
fashioned longwise, much after the proportion of an egg, and consists of
many berries growing together: being at the beginning of a white color, after
red: and at the last when they be ripe, blackish. He bloometh last of all other
trees: neither brings he forth any flowers and leaves, unless the spring be
calm and temperate, as though it were unwilling to abide any injury of nipping
frost, or sharp winterly weather: again, it brings forth the first of all
others, a ripe and nourishable fruit.

The Mulberie being ripe, tanneth and dies a man's fingers with a bloody
color. When it is unripe, (that is, being white before it grow to be red) it
scowreth out spots, and filth from the skin, as well as water.

The fruit of this tree is of right wholesome ^ cooling and refrigerating,
namely in the Summer season: and is best before or at beginning of meals. For
being eaten after dinner or supper, it putrifieth, and engenders corrupt
diseases, like as Cherries, Plums, Damsons, Cornell berries, Beaches, young
grapes, and such like do. All these taken after meat, do cool, and
refrigerate, quench thirst, and conveniently qualify the heat of the liver.
Neither am I greatly squeymish or scrupulous to allow and admit the same to be
eaten after meats, so that only the juice of the fruits be sucked and
swallowed. For being so taken, they keep down and repress fumes in them that
have drunken wine somewhat largely.

The same effect also have other moist and succulent fruits, as pomegranates,
orenges, lymons, and Pomecitrons, which being taken after meats, have virtue,
meruellously to preserve a man from being overtaken with wine, or easily
overcome with drunkenness. And therefore the saying of the Poet Horace touching
this matter, may seem neither disagreeing to natural reason, nor yet hurtful
to bodily health:

At end of meals who Mulberries does eat,
Shall healthful be in parching summers heat.
Of Mulberies and likewise of brier berries there is made an excellent
confection or medicine, called Dia^oron, which has singular virtue to stay
the Vuula, and to help the swellings of the tongue, and the (...) or kernels of
the jaws or throat.

These sovereign helps and comfortable cordials, which God the author of
nature bestows upon man, are sometimes taken from him, as a punishent for his
sin and vickednes, when as either he forgets to acknowledge and to be
thankful for this his divine bounty, or otherwise lew dly abuses his good
gifts and benefits: as David in many places of his Psalms witnesses: namely
where he reckons up these among other delicacies and stays of this life,
saying: that the Lord gave their fruits unto the Caterpillars, Psalm. 78. 47.
and their labors unto the Grasshopper: That he destroyed their vines with
hailstones, and their Mulberie trees with the frost. For it is often seen, that
through unseasonable weather, the flourishing vines, Mulberies, corn, olyues
and other fruits be so sharply nipped, blasted, and frost bitten, that no
profit or commodity at all comes of them.

But ^ith we are now grown to discourse of the Mulbery, it shall not be amiss
(as it were by the way) to show an history thereof, written in the Books of the
Maccabees. For, when as Antiochus king of Syria warred with a deadly hatred
against the Jews, and gave the onset upon them with all manner of weapon and
munition that could be devised: among other furniture and martial
habilimentes, he brought into the battle 32. elephantes, carieng strong towers
of wood on their backs, wherein were put armed sould^ 1. Macc. 6, 30. 34. 37.
and warlike fellows, well appointed. And to provoke the elephants to be the
more fierce in fight, they held before them red clothes, died and dipped in
the iuic^ of red (...) and Mulberies. For elephants are enraged and exasperated
at the sight of any red or bloody Elephants cannot abide the fight of red
color.
color, and thereby run they the more e^grely and fiercely among the thickest
of their enemies.

The 35. Chapter.
Of the Sycomor^, and wild Fig tree.

THe Sycomore is a tree, whose compounded name shows it to be jointly derived
from the fig tree, and from the mulberie tree. The fruit of it is called
Sycaminos. It is described by Dioscorides and Pliny to be a great large tree,
like a Fig tree, and having leaves much like to the leaves of the mulberie
tree. The fruit which it bears, is nothing pleasant in taste, but rather
unsavory, vnrelishie, sowrish and unripe: the which grows not upon the
branches and boughs, as other fruits do, but upon the stock or stem, and in
form is like to the wild fig; it never waxes ripe, albeit it is somewhat
sweeter than the unripe green Fig; neither has it within it any such store of
small kernels.

This true served in steed of a pulp^^ to Zach^, being desirous to see Christ.
For ^e Luke 19, 4.
being of a low stature, climbed up into a sycomore or wild Fig tree,
withdrawing himself (as it were) from vain and transitory things, to the
intent he might behold and have a sight of Jesus. So that in this Zac^, we have
a lively type of the Gentiles expressly set down unto us: For that the Gentiles
by faith have free access unto Christ, and are reckoned in the number and
fellowship of the faithful.

The power, force, efficacy and effect of this faith, Christ himself by
commanding the sudden withering of a Fig tree, mightily Mat. 21, 19.
and strangly deciphereth. By example whereof, he stirs up his Apostles, to
seek the same, and having it daily to feed and nourish it: assuring them,
that if they have faith, and should say unto a Sycomore tree, Pluck Luke 17, 6.
up thy self by the roots, and plant thy self in the sea, it should even
obey them. And that if they should say to a mountain: Remove thy self Mat.
17, 20.
hence to ^onder place, so that the same necessarily serve to the advancement
of the Gospel, Mark. 4, 31.
it shall forthwith remove: their faith being surely and vnmooueably grounded
in Christ without any manner of wavering or doubting, and having such operation
and working quality, as has a grain of Mustard seed. L^k. 13, 19.
Which albeit it be small and little, yet being ground and bruised, it shows
forth his sharp nature, biteth the nose, and shakes the whole body by
provoking neesing. Faith therefore and the doctrine of the Gospel is fitly
resembled to this little grain, for that it enflameth the heart and mind of
man, and entirely draws it unto the unfeigned love and obedience of God. But
of this has been spoken before.

Now to return our speech eftsoons to the Sycomore. The Prophet Isaiah
sharply inueigheth against Ephraim and the inhabitants of Samaria, for their
malapert and rebellious contempt of God.

For when as the Lord had sundry ways afflicted them, with intent to bring
them unto repentance, yet they stubbornly in the pride and presumption of their
hearts, despised his correction, and acknowledged not his handie work: but
rather became worse and more insolent. Yea, they so lightly accounted of the
calamities, burnings, overthrows and spoils made upon their goods and houses,
that they seemed in their hearts thus scoffingly and flowtingly to say: Our
Isaie. 9, 9.
bricks and tile work is fallen down, but we will build it again with
squared stones: The Sycomore (or wild fig) trees are cut down, but we will
change them into Cedars. As though they should have thus said: The loss and
hinderance which we have received, is but a trifle, and a thing of nothing: we
will repair and reedifie it again with little ado and small cost: yea we will
new build every thing in far br^ sort than before they were. In steed of b^
work, we will set us up gorgeous houses of Marble. In steed of the Sycomore,
which is a common and base kind of wood, we will wainscot our roofes with
Cedar, and (...) thing shall be far more sumptuous and magnificent than erst
it was.

Thus therefore they turning the deaf ear to all the fatherly admonitions and
gentle corrections of the Lord their God, and wantonly (not without scoffing
terms) despising his chastisements; provoked his further wrath to be extended
against them, and far more grievous plagues to be woorthily inflicted upon them.

There is also mention made of this Tree by the Prophet Amos: who being neither
a Prophet, nor a Prophets son, neither brought up in any points of learning,
but a plain herdman, and a Country hind, was extraordinarily called by God
to a prophetical function, and inioined to thunder out dreadful sentences
against king Jeroboam and Amazia the Priest. And when Amazia withstood him,
Amos first of all purges and excuses himself, for that he was enforced to
execute this charge, albeit he were neither Prophet nor Prophetically trained
up from his youth. And therefore since this office and function was laid upon
him by God himself, he protests that he ought and must obey him, rather than
either the king or the priest. Yet did not Amazia thus leave him, but
importunely urged and persuaded him to desist from Prophecieng against the
king, and to depart and flee into the land of Judah out of the precinct and
jurisdiction of Israel, and so by flight to save his life, least otherwise he
should be imprisoned, and afterward put to death.

Amos never a whit dismayed with all these threats, boldly and constantly
avouched his vocation, flatly protesting and directly affirming, that he
neither meant to forsake his calling, nor to leave one jot of his commission and
embassage unexecuted. And therefore he plainly confesses himself to have
been neither Prophet nor Prophets son, but only an Amos. 7, 14.
herdman, and a gatherer of wild Figs, or Sycamines. But the Lord took me
(says he) as I followed the flock, and said unto me: Go, Prophecy unto my
people Israel. Not waighing therefore either the Kings commandment, or the
Priest Amazia his menaces, he frankly discharged his office, and freely uttered
his message, boldly and without fear denouncing destruction unto them both.

The like undaunted boldness used also the Apostles, when as they were
threateningly charged and commanded by the Pharisees, that they should not in
any wise speak or teach any more in the name of Iosus. But Peter Act. 4, 18.
and John boldly (yet modestly and without contumelious reproach) answered them,
saying: Whether it be right in the sight of God, to obey your commandments
rather than Gods judge ye, that know the precepts of the Law. For me cannot but
speak the things which we have seen and heard.

The 36. Chapter.
Of the Pomegranate.

THe Pomegranate Tree is named Granata, for the great number of grains,
berries or kernels that are in the Apple or fruit thereof. And it grows most
plentifully in the Realm of Granado. The Tree is not very great nor tall: the
leaves straight and narrow, like unto Willow leaves, but smooth and green.

Of this Tree there be two sorts; the tame, and the wild. The flower of the
tame is called Citinus: and of the wild, Balaustium. The which be of a scarlet
or Vermilion color. The Apple which it bears, is roud, and within full of
red kernels or grains. The rind, which is called Sydion or Malicorium, before
it be dry, is thin and tender, but being dried, it waxes hard and in a
manner wooddish.

This fruit is in taste somewhat sweetish, of (...)
an astringent quality, and good to alaie thirst: sometime in relish like Wine,
and has a kind of sowerish taste, which is very commodious and good to cool
the liver, and by reason of his astriction, is of great effect to stop the
laske and bloody flixe.

Often mention is made of this Apple in the Scriptures, and thereby is signified
the honorable titles and ornaments of virtue, integrity, and also chaste,
sweet, comely, and pure speeches. So the Bridegroom speaking to his spouse,
and with sweet persuading words, alluring her unto him, says thus: I will
give thee drink of spiced wine, and the sweet Cant. 8, 2.
new juice of the Pomegranate: that is, I will recreate thee with my pleasant
talk and conference: I will refresh thee with my wholesome doctrine, and cheer
thee with a spiritual compotation.

Again, in another chapter; where the Bridegroom utters his tender love and
surpassing delight which he takes in his spouse the Church, and in her
beauty, eyes, locks, teeth, lips, and cheeks, he says, that her cheeks Cant.
4, 3.
are like a piece of a Pomegranate: which is, as though he should have said:
Even as a Pomegranate being cut in the midst, shows forth his delicate and
goodly scarlet colored kernels: so likewise thy cheeks being of a most comely
and gracious ruddy constitution, are amiably delightful. Thereby is also
signified, chastity, modesty, shamefastnes, and honesty, for that persons
furnished with these virtues will quickly blush. And a little after in the same
Chapter, The fruits that are Verse. 13.
planted in thee, are like a very paradise of Pomegranates, with sweet fruits
and other fragrant herbs, which growing near hand, make all the rest the
sweeter and more odoriferous. By all which, he signifies all manner of
pleasant, delightful, and comfortable things, serving to refresh the mind
and spirits of man.

And whereas in this Song or Canticle the Bridegroom and his Spouse, do
continually and every moment almost testify their mutual affection, and with
pleasant conference delight themselves, qualifieng and driving away the
languishing passions that usually (...) found in love: the one therefore
oftentimes inuiteth the other to come for recreation into the gardens, to see
whether the vines budded and whether the Pomegranates flourished. For Cant. 6,
10. and 7, 12.
the one cannot abide to be separated from the company of the other; but desire
to keep continual company together, and the one still to enjoy the others
familiar conference.

And because Pomegranates be delectable to the eye, yielding a pleasant taste
and toothsome relish, therefore does God command (for a further beauty to the
Temple) Pomegranates and Bells to be made, to the end, that the blockish and dull
Jews beholding the Exo. 28, 33. and 39, 24.
same (which yield such abundance of goodly 1. King. 7, 18 20. 2. Kings. 25,
17. 2. Chr. 3, 16. Iere. 52, 22 Hag. 2, 20. Joel. 1, (...) Eccle. 45, 9.
read and sappie kernels, being enclosed within a hard skin or rind) should
retain in their memories the hard bark of the Law, under which they lived:
and that afterward there should ensue through the bright shining light of the
Gospel, the most sweet, pleasant, and comfortable juice of the Evangelical
doctrine.

The 37. Chapter.
Of the Citron, Orange and Lymontrees, and of their fruits.

THe old people of the Jews were not without the use of Orenges, Citrones and
Lymons, as well for delight and pleasure, as for condiment and sauce. They be
of color yellow, tawnie, saffronlike or palish, and for the most part, round,
and sometime longwise, fashioned like to an egg; specially Citrons, and
Lymons, which yield forth a gallant smell, and do singularly recreate and
comfort the heart.

Of the pills or rindes of these fruits, being cut into small and thin pieces,
or slices, and condited in honey, or preserved in sugar, there is ordinarily
made certain delicate innkets and dainty bankerting dishes, called Sucket, not
only toothsome and pleasant in taste, but comfortable and restoratiue also to
the heart. For which purpose also some do use to preserve in honey the flowers of
this tree, before they be full blown: which be very sovereign and cordial to
restore the spirits being weakened, to comfort the heart, stomach, and inward
faculties, and to be given to such as be wasted, or fallen into consumptions.

And albeit the trees that bear Cytrones, Orenges and Lymons, be several and
distinct one from another: yet were they all three by the ancient writers,
contained and comprehended under this one name of the Citron tree.

There is another tree, not the same with this, but much differing from it, and
is called also Citrus, which bears not any such brave yellow fruit as this
does. And it is not much unlike to the wild Cypress or Cedar tree; insomuch
that many hold opinion, that it is the very same tree, which is called in the
Bible Exodus 25, 5. 10. 23. 28. and 35. 7. 24. and 37, 1. and 38, 1.
Shittim wood: whereof God commanded the bars, beams, tables, and offering
altars of the Tabernacle to be made. For the wood hereof is precious, and will
not rot and putrify, neither will any woormes breed therein.

And being plained and smoothed, it has a most excellent grain, full of brave
running veins all along, much like as we see in our common Motley cloth, or in
braunched Chamlet, Durance, Mockadoe, or Damask.

There are used to be made of this Wood in some places, fair and costly
folding Tables; of Ioiners work, which for the natural variety of the
pleasant strakes, and amiable color, and also of the eeuennesse and slicke
smoothness, be to the eye of the beholder, right gallant and delectable.

Wherefore I judge that God would have such things as served for the building
of the Exodus 35, 7. 24. and 37, 1. and 38, 1.
Arc of the Covenant, and use of the Priests in the Temple, among the Jews,
to be wrought and made of Cedar and Citron wood.

For, the Jews being drawn and allured (like children) with the outward
glittering show of external things: it pleased the Lord, for the better
bringing of them forward in the race of Religion, and true worship; and also
the better to keep them in dutiful awe and obedience, to appoint all things
in their Rites, Sacrifices and Ceremonies, gorgeous, sumptuous, magnificent,
curious and maiesticall.

The 38. Chapter.
Of Saffron.

SAffron has a round root like to an Onion; and leaves or blades long and
narrow like grass, or small Rushes, growing upward, of a watchet or pale
blewe color; from out of the middle whereof, there hangs down the Saffron
blades or threads of a red color, and fragrant smell, and of so strong a sent,
that with his soporous quality, it much affects and preiudiceth the brain.

But it is so comfortable for the heart, that if it be tied to the ring finger
of the left hand, it presently pearceth and sends his virtue to the heart. The
agreement and sympathy between it and the heart is so great, that being either
taken inwardly, or applied outwardly, it foorthward works by the Arteries,
and cease not till it get access unto it. Whereby it both procures beauty
to the body, and causes a fresh color in the face, so that it be moderately
and measurably used: for immoderate use thereof will cause a man to laugh
excessiuely, and (as learned Physicions affirm) does so ouerioy him, that it
puts him in danger of his life, if but the weight of three drachmes thereof
at once be Diosco. lib. 1.
taken.

The virtue therefore of Saffron being so sovereign and comfortable to the
heart of man, it is not without good reason, that the same is so often mentioned
among other odorifetous and sweet herbs, in the Garden and Orchards of the
Spouse, in the Canticles: Cant. 4, 13.
so that for the greater fragrancie, there are bound up together (as it were
into one Nosegay) Camphire, Spikenard, Saffron, Calamus, Cynamom, with all the
soote trees and herbs in Lebanon, of Incense, Myrrh, Aloe, and sweet spices.
By the which is both signified the beauty, honor, comeliness and ornament of
all the Virtues, and also the Prayers of the Church, and of the godly, which be
as the Prophet Psalm. 40, 6. Eccl. 45, 2.
David says, as the incense and sacrifice of a sweet smell.

Moreover, as liquors, linen, woollen, or other wares whatsoever, be of color
light, or deep, yellow, brown, watchet, or red, according to the nature of
the stuff, and mind of the Dier, so has the same his name given unto it from
Saffron. Physicions also in judging of Vrines, and marking such as be Saffron
colored or reddish, do note the same for a token of a burning Ague, and hot
distempered liver. So is there a notable unguent made of the dregs of the oil
of Saffron, called Crocomagm^, of great effect and use in Physic.

But as touching Garments of Saffron, scarlet, and purple colors, there is
often mention found in the sacred Bible, as there is also in other Writers, in
whose Books we read of Emperors Scarlet robes, and of the Purple and croceous
or Saffron colored garments of other high personages.

So does the Prophet Jeremiah in his Lamentations bewail the miserable estate
of Jerusalem, being ruinated and brought to nothing, dispoiled of all her
honorable ornaments, and each way pitifully deformed and ransacked. They (says
he) that were wont to fare delicately, do perish and sterue in the streets.
Lam. 4, 5.
They that before were clad in cloth of Raines, Scarlet and Purple, make now
much of doong.

The 39. Chapter.
Of the Myrtle tree, which retains the same name, and is so called in all
countries: and of the wild Myrtle.

THE Myrtle is a small Tree, always green, dedicated by the Poets to Venus,
and consecrated to Wedlock, wherein is required chastity and concord. It
bears leaves much like to the Olive or Priuet, but that they be narrower, and
in color of a dark or deep green: the berries be black and like to the
berries of Juniper, of a winish taste, out of the which (as also out of the
leaves thereof which be soft) there is drawn an excellent princely Ol^
Myrtinum. Esth. 2, 12.
Oil, wherewith Esther anointed her self, when she was married unto king
Ahasuerus.

There is also made of the berries of this Tree an excellent kind of Wine,
called Uinum Myrtiles, which is endued with an astringent quality or binding
virtue; and singularly comfort and strengthens the stomach being weak.
The same is also good to wash such members as have been bursten or out of
joint, and them that be bruised with any great fall.

With the boughs of this tree, the Scripture records how the Hebrews were
accustomed to trim up their houses, and to garnish the utter parts of their
doors at their solemn feasts of Tabernacles and others, which they celebrated
and kept for joy of Leu. 23, 40. 1. Esdr. 4. 47 1. Macc. 10, verse. 21. 2. Mac.
10, 7 John. 7, 2. Nehe. 8, 15.
the restoration of the Temple, after their carrieng into exile by the
Persians.

So did Nehemiah the restorer of the City, of the Temple, and of the Law,
command the people, after their return home to Jerusalem out of captivity and
banishment, that they should (every one of them) go forth into the mountains
and woods, and thence bring (as in an high and festival solemnity) Olive
branches, Pyne branches, Myrtle branches, Palm branches, and branches of
thick trees to make boothes, for the further furniture of that merry day of
common joy. Which custom also other Regions and countries do yet observe,
when as either any royal solemnity for the coronation or receiving of the
prince, or for some victory against the enemy, or delivery from some long and
dangerous siege, or some other token of joy and gladness, is offered to be
solemnized and testified. Thus did the Trojans (as Uirgil writes) when they
thought their City should have been delivered from the long siege, and the
Greeks expulsed out of their country.

We wretched souls in forlorn plight Aeneid. 2.

To see this dismal day,
To strew the Churches all along
With boughs and flowers assay.
But Isaiah the Prophet (who shows himself most skillful in the nature and
quality of Plants and herbs, and who most often with the same uses to
garnish and illustrate his prophetical writings) pronounces them happy and
blessed that put their trust in the Lord, and only depend upon his divine
goodness and providence; in so much that no harm shall touch them, but that
rather all such things as seemed any way to threaten their harm, shall (the
case being altered) work to their profit and benefit: which he brings in
and shows, where he says, that in steed of low thorns there shall grow
high Isai. 55, 13.
fur trees, and in steed of nettles and weeds, which are stinging and
noisome, there shall grow Myrtle trees, which are goodly, beautiful and
sweet^ smelling shrubs. Whereby he notes that in lieu of grievous and hurtful
things, there should be those that are wholesome, fruitful and amiable: that
is, for vices there should be virtues; for bondage liberty; for banishment,
restitution and return unto our heavenly Country.

Again, where the Lord shows his merciful kindness to the afflicted,
comfortless, and distressed Israelites, promising that he will help, relieve
and succor them in their extreme and intolerable misery. I will (says he)
open the rivers in the tops of the hills: I will turn Isai. 41, 19.
the wilderness to waters, and the dry hungry ground to fruit full soil. I will
plant in the waste ground the Cedar tree, Pyne tree, and Myrtle; the Fur
tree, the Olyue, the Elm, and the Box. Whereby he shows, that he will alter
the course of nature, and beyond all hope or expectation of man, will help his
people in their distress; so that in a desert and fruitelesse country, there
shall grow goodly, fair, and beautiful trees; that is to say, the barren and
dry minds of men should bring forth the most flourishing buds of renowned
virtues.

A little after, he prosecuting the same argument, promises to his people
consolation and tranquillity of conscience, and that he would eftsoons gather
together his dispersed Church; and that the same should be restored again
after a while, to her former hue and ancient beauty: the which his gracious
promise he confirms in these figurative terms: The glory of Lebanon shall
came Isai. 60, 13.
unto thee, the Fir tree, the Elm and the Box tree together, to beautify the
place of my Sanctuary. Whereby his meaning is, that his Church should be
builded not only with the excellent trees of Lebanon, but also that what else
soever in the world, was magnificent, heroical and renowned, should be brought
to the building and garnishing of the same. And that not only the poor,
simple, and seely people, (whom the world least esteems) should be called
thither: but also Kings, Princes, Dukes, Lords and Nobles should be
incorporated into this fellowship, and endenizoned into this faithful company.

But, for that there is mention also made of Myrtle trees by the Prophet
Zachary, in a vision appeering to him, I will deliver my judgment breefely,
and what I think of the same; for fully and thoroughly to discuss it,
requires further diligence, and exceeds the reach of my simple understanding.

Woods and Groves are often denominated of such herbs and trees as most
plentifully grow therein, as namely of Arund^, (...) reed, is the place where
it grows, termed Arundinetum, which is used for the reeds or stubble it
self: whereupon in the Book of Wisdom it is said, The just shall shine and
run Wisd. 3, 7.
through, as sparks among stubble: that is, the brightness and shining of the
Saints shall burn up the ungodly, even as stubble or dry reeds with the flaming
force of vehement fire. And so is the place where store of Date trees grow,
called Palmetum; and where any Myrtle trees be, Myrtelum. In this green plot
was the vision exhibited to Zachary, the which he reports and makes known
to the people, that his prophecy being conjoined and accompanied with a
vision, should be had in the greater account and estimation among them, pearce
the deeper into their dull understandings, and the sooner stir up and awaken
their drowsy, slothful and careless minds. I saw (says he) by night,
Zach. 1, 8.
and behold a man riding upon a red horse; and he stood among the Myrtle trees
that were in a bottom, and behind him were there red horses, speckled and
white: and I said, O my Lord, what are these? And the Angel that talked with
me which was he that stood among the Myrtle trees, (by whom, as I think,
Christ is meant, whose desire is to see his Church being emblemished with sins,
to be repolished and amended) answered me and said; these are they whom the
Lord has sent to go through the world. By which words he shows, that in the
dark and blind valley of this world, wherein the evil are mingled with the
good, the Lord god by his wonderful providence has a special care of al
things, turning all to the best, for the behoof of his children, directing,
comforting and guiding by his holy spirit, the Church, by his Christ, by the
Apostles and other faithful ministers, that carefully execute their offices and
functions, according to the dispensation of such gifts as they have received.
Upon whom the charge specially lies, by wholesome exhortation (as Paul warns
Timothy) to exhort 1. Tim. 6, 2.
the people (yea and sometimes by threats to stir them) to amendment of life,
and to return and be reconciled to God, from whom they have departed. Which
thing if they will do, his plagues and punishments shall cease, and their
afflictions shall have an end.

The Prophet therefore, declaring this his vision unto the people, provoke
them to repentance, whereby God would be appeased and agreed with them, and
would withdraw his censures and chastisements, and that they should be as
highly in his favor as ever they were. And thus much of this amiable and
sweet shrub, Myrtle.

Like unto this, is there also another sort of Myrte or Myrtle which is wild,
whose berries Wild Myrtle.
the Mauisses, Throssels, Owsels and Thrushes, delight much to eat, insomuch
that the flesh of these birds does yield a sweet (and as it were a spiced)
relish, like to the taste of the berries.

Like also and of kin to this wild Myrtle, is another kind of shrub or low
plant, called Pseudomyrtus, of a pleasant smell and somewhat Pseudomyrtus,
called also Rhus, or Sumach.
strong withal, whose leaves and wood being dried, are used to be laid in
wardrobs and presses to perfume clothes and keep them from Moths.

Among these wild Myrtles is reckoned also the Huluer, whose leaves (indeed)
be like the Myrtle, saving that they be broader and so prickly pointed, that if
a man take not heed in the handling of it, he may quickly prick his hand:
the berries grow on the leaves without any stalk, of the bigness of a pease,
and less than Myrtle berries; of a red corally color, and the root thereof
is said to be good to provoke Urine, and to drive out gravel.

The 40. Chapter.
Of the Pine tree, and of the Pine Apple.

THE Pine is an high, straight and great tree, with thin, round, and sharp
pointed leaves. The fruit or Nut being well enough known needs no long
description: the kernel with all nations is reputed as well nourishable as
medicinable: the fruit is called a Pine Apple, whereas it is indeed, a Nut, but
withal so hard, that being hurled at a man, and hitting him, it overthrows
and felleth him. Whereupon there is in Macrobius a pretty witty jest,
ascribed unto Casellius the lawier, which grew upon this occasion. One Vatinius
Lib. 2. Sa^urna l. ca. 2.
a Roman that had founded and set out certain Fence games and sword plays,
being pelted with stones by the people, made this suit to the masters of the
revels, and so far prevailed with them, that at his request they set down an
order, and caused the same by the public crier to be proclaimed; that no man
should be so bold to throw any thing into the lists or plaieng place, unless
it were an Apple. It fortuned that this Casellius being sought unto by a
certain fellow, for his counsel and advise in this matter, whether this fruit
of the Pine were a nut or an Apple, merrily and wittily thus answered him,
saying: if thou will hurl it at Vatinius head, it is an Apple. So deadly did
the people hate such a pernicious Citizen, that they desired rather to have him
rid out of the way than to have him live any longer, to the infection and ill
example of the Country and Common wealth.

But the Prophets (as before has been showed) do often use in their
prophesies to insert this Pine tree, and other memorable plants and herbs.
Among others, the Prophet Isaiah in displaieng the detestable abomination of
the Heathen in forging unto themselves Idols and Images, beautifieth and
garnisheth his oration with a learned and artificial recital of sundry Trees:
showing the great care and diligence, which the Smithes, Carpenters and other
Artificers take to make and fashion these blockish toies, and ridiculous
bables, which neither serve to any use, neither can any way help, Isaie. 44,
12.
defend, protect, or save them that bow thereunto.

Yea he so precisely sets down the Smithes senseless folly, that he
omitteth not so much as the fyle, hammer and fire, wherewith they toil till
they be even weary and thirsty, about the fashioning thereof. And for the
Carpenters trade, he reckons up in a beadroll, his line, his red thread, his
rule, his axe, his saw, his compass, and such other tools, as serve for the
polishing and plaining of wood: insomuch that with some of them he heweth down
Cedars, Pine trees, Oaks and Firres: with the chips thereof, he makes a fire,
warmeth himself, baketh bread, and seetheth his meat: with the rest, he
fashioneth and makes a god, before whom he kneeleth, worshipping it, praieng
unto it, and saying: Deliver me, for thou art my God.

This and much more does the Prophet Isaiah at large, and with sundry
repetitions set down in that Chapter, to the end men should remember; of whom
and from whence they ought to seek all help, aid, assistance, succor and
salvation: before whom only they are to bow their knees, and to whom they
ought to lift up their hands, eyes and hearts, namely, unto almighty God, to
whom only all honor and glory is due, and who through his dear son Jesus
Christ our Redeemer and Savior, abundantly strengthens us with his holy
Spirit, that none evil or adversity can either daunt or overcome us.

The 41. Chapter.
Of Box.

AMeruell it is to consider, how far many that would feign seem to have
knowledge in Plants and Herbs, are deceived and ouerseen in their terms and
appellatio^s touching the same. So some there be, that take the herb Anethum
(which signifies Dill) and is used by Christ in his sharp Sermon against the
auaritious Pharisees, to be Anise. Whereas Mat. 23, 23.
Anise is a distinct herb by it self, and brings forth a seed that is
excellent good to dissolve windiness. So also do we use the leaves of Dil in
condiments, broths and decoctions, but not the seed. Whereas the seed of Anise
and Fenell is by proof and practice found to be wholesome, effectuous, and to
give a pleasant taste, as well to Beer and Ale, as unto bread, iunkets, roasted
or boiled fruits, etc.

So also the Fir tree called Abies, is not (as some ignorantly and erroniously
have affirmed) the white Popler, but a Tree which the Prophets for the better
and plainer instruction of the people, use in their prophesies, whenever they
either beat down pride and arrogancy, or raise up and comfort the weak and
comfortless.

The Fur tree is ever green, and has leaves growing all along the stem
like unto a comb, and directly standing opposite one against another; the
flower which it bears, is of a Saffron color, and very pleasant and
delectable to the eye.

As the Larch or Larix tree is like to the Pine, so is the Pitch tree like unto
this: of the timber whereof, they make Masts and Saileyards for ships.

But to come again to the Box tree. They that take the Box to be all one
with the Palm tree, are greatly deceived, since the one altogether and in each
respect differs from the other, saving that they both be ever green, and
never shed their leaves. This error grew (as I think) at the first, for that
the common people in some Countries use to deck their Churches with the
boughs and branches thereof, on the Sunday next before Easter, commonly called
Palmesunday: for at that time of the year all other trees for the most part
are not blown or bloomed.

Here abouts wheresoever the Box tree grows, we see it to bear a holowish
and somewhat round leaf, smooth and still green, with a tender flower, and
having a strong sent and fulsome smell, which neither men nor beasts take
delight to smell unto, but loath and turn from it: his wood is hard, ponderous
and weighty, insomuch that being put into the water, it sinketh to the bottom:
his color pale, inclining to some yellowe, whereupon we use to call such
persons as be tawnie colored and weasell faced, by the name of Boxie
co^plexioned. Some there be that bear men in hand, that the powder and
shauings of this tree is medicinable and good to cure the french pockes, and
that it matcheth in goodness Eben or Guiacum, and the wood called Lignum
Indicum: whose opinion (as false and erroneous) I utterly mislike. For Lignum
Indicum, has a sweet and pleasant smell, an oily or gummy juice, and a
reasonable good taste: whereas Box is naturally dry, iuicelesse, fulsomely and
loathsomely smelling, unpleasant in taste, endued with a venomous quality,
which he that is disposed to taste it, shall find true.

Of this wood there are wont to be made by Turners, combs, writing and
plaieng tables, handles for tools and instruments, pipes, boxes, tops, bowls
and such like, for which purpose it is fitter, than to be ministered any way in
medicine.

I once knew a foolish cockbrained Priest, which ministered to a certain young
man the ashes of Box, being (forsooth) hallowed on Palmesunday, according to
the superstitious order and doctrine of the Romish church, which ashes he
mingled with their unholy holy water, using to the same a kind of
fantastical, or rather fanaticall, doltish and ridiculous Exorcisme. Which
worthy worshipful medicine (as he persuaded the standers by) had virtue to
drive away any Ague, and to kill the worms. Well, it so fell out, that the Ague
(indeed) was driven away; but God knows, with the death of the poor young
man. And no marvel. For, the leaves of Box be deletorious, poisonous,
deadly, and to the body of man very noisome, dangerous and pestilent: as the
strong and loathsome smell, and the fulsome bitter taste thereof, does evidently
bewray and discover.

And now to continue my former argument; namely, to show some Similitudes
taken from hence by the Prophets, which they aptly and fitly have inserted into
their Sermons and sentences. First, seeing this (...) is of such an horny or
ironlike hardness, that whatsoever is engraven into it, will not easily be
blotted out and taken away, the Lord commanded Isaiah to amplify and
exaggerate the heinousnes of the Jews sins, who trusted to the aid and
protection of the Egyptians: and to notify unto them all, how beastly and
shamefully they had forsaken and departed from their good and gracious God, and
sought help else where than of him. And by the way he gives unto him this
strait charge, that he should so surely describe and write out their
offenses, and so firmly set down the same in noting tables and lasting
monuments, that they might never be forgotten.

For as one greatly provoked and thoroughly angered for their abominable
treachery and shameful revolt, he says thus: Now therefore Isai. 30, 8.
go thy way, and write this prophecy before them upon Box, or in a hard and
Boxie table, that it may finally remain, and be kept still for ever. As though
he should say, look that thou so diligently from point to point set down
this their heinous offense, that it may never be scraped out or forgotten, by
process of any time or length of any years: but that it may remain as an
everlasting memorial of their wickedness, and always be set before their eyes
for a sign of infidelity to them, and a warning or example to others, least
they also run into the same mischief and impiety.

Jeremiah also uses the like metaphor, and proclaims aloud, saying: that the
sin of Judah Iere. 17, 1.
is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a Diamond, and graven
upon the table of their heart, and upon the horns of their altars, at the which
they daily stand, and on which both they and their children do sacrifice. He
names an iron pen, and the point of a Diamond, for that nothing is harder, and
therefore he requires their sin to be written with such tools, because they
should not lightly fade away, but continue for ever. And the horns of the
altars be specified, as the first entry of the temple, that whenever they did
any sacrifice, they might have in fresh memory before their eyes, the lewdnes
of their fact and disobedience.

So says David: My sin is ever before me: Psalm. 51, 3.
that is, presents it self continually to mine eyes, and lies as a burden
upon my conscience, so that I have no way to disburden my self of these
inward garboiles and torments of mind, but only by the mere mercy of my
gracious God, to be extended and showed unto me a most vile (yet heartily
sorrowful and truly repentant) sinner.

Job also being grievously plunged in miseries, and (as it were) overwhelmed
with the waves and surges of calamity, yet hoping in the end to be delivered,
breaks out into terms of vehemency, and taking a Simitude from the like
things as before, wishes that his words might remain for ever, and be known
to all ages. For that he was undoubtedly persuaded, that in the end God would
remember his misery, and make an end of his affliction. Oh (says he) that my
Job. 19, 23.
words were now written! oh that they were written even in a Book! and graven
with an iron pen (...) lead, or in stone to continue for ever! That they
might always remain, and be still seen, read and thought upon of all men.
For I am sure that my Redeemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the earth
in the last day, and shall be covered again with my skin, and shall see God in
my flesh: whom I my self shall see, and my eyes shall behold, and none other
for me; this my hope is laid up in my bosom.

By which words beside the proouing of the true resurrection of the body,
(which as it is already fulfilled in Christ our head, so also shall it be in us
his members) he testifies in the hearing of his friends (which were unto him
more grief than comfort) and so would he all others to know, that he should
one day be rid out of all those his troubles and adversities.

For, albeit God had laid great affliction and trouble upon him, and had
almost brought him to nothing: yet rested he fully assured and undoubtedly
persuaded, that the same God, in his good time would take away the same again
from him, and raise him up out of that filthy and loathsome dunghill wherein he
was bemoyled; unto his old estate and former dignity: so that of an heavy and
mournful beginning, should ensue a joyful and merry end, with fruitful
supply of children, and plentiful increase of worldly wealth. Which thing
proves the Job. 42, 12.
Book of Job not to be a devised history, but a true matter, and such as
ought not in any sort to be discredited: so that in the same, as by a true
history, done and suffered according to the tenor of the text and letter, we
have set down unto us, a pattern of patience and sufferance of all
adversities, as both the Apostle Iam. 5, 11. Ezec. 14, 14
James witnesses, and before him the prophet Ezechiell.

The 42. Chapter.
Of the Nut.

WHen as the Spouse (under which name is signified the Church, and the soul of
every godly christian, being engraffed and married unto Christ) sought all
manner of delightful smells, and pleasant odours issuing from the best and
fairest fruits, thereby to recreate and please her Bridegroom, She went down
into the garden of Nuts, to look about, and see the fruits of Cant. 6, 10.
the valley, and to look if the vine budded, or if the pomegranates
flourished. Under which metaphor is shadowed and meant the whole troop of
virtues.

But it is not the hasell or filberd Nut, that is here meant, but the Walnut,
which is an high and great tree, full of many arms, branches and boughs, having
leaves large, broad and long, and of a strong sent or smell; the fruit is
fenced and covered on the uttermost part with a green husk or tender shel,
under which there is another hard shell of a wooddish substance, containing
within it the kernel, quartered and divided as it were into four parts, with
a soft tender pill, filme or skin growing between them.

This Nut is termed Basilica, that is royal, for that it was translated and
brought by kings out of Persia into Europe: but commonly it is called Iuglans,
as though a man should say Iouis glans, for that Jupiter is said to be the
first that showed the use thereof unto men.

They are better to be eaten and with less danger to health, when they be new,
green and moist, than when they be dry and parched. For being long kept, they
grow hoar and vinewed, cause headache, and are hurtful both to the stomach,
and to them that are trobled with the cough and shortness of breath.

With the green shel of this Nut, there is used to be made a special medicine
against al tumors and ulcers, arising in the mouth and throat, and the almonds
or kernels under the tongue. They use also to condite and preserve these nuts
when they be green, and before the shells wax hard, in honey and sugar: by
which way they may a long while be kept: and the same so used, be not only
pleasant, but very good also to strengthen the stomach; and are used to be
served in at the end of meals, for a iunket or banketting dish, as Sucket, and
other dainty conceits likewise are.

There is also to be distilled out of these Nuts while they be green and
tender shelled, an excellent Water of great effect and sovereign virtue
against the plague, ulcers of the jaws and palate, wheales, scabs, spots,
pimples and freckles. For the which purpose the Water that droppeth out of the
new pruned spraie of the Vine in the Spring tide, is of like effect and
efficacy: whereof I do not remember, that any of the Ancients have made any
mention at all.

But forasmuch as the Walnut is outwardly hard rinded, and wooden shelled,
containing inwardly a pleasant and sauourie kernel; the life of a Christian
man or woman, and the state also of the Church may right fitly be thereunto
resembled.

For, in this world we see fair with foul; hard with soft; rough with smooth;
bitter with mild; sweet with sower; mirth with sorrow; and comfort with
chastisement, interchangeably mingled and interlarded.

It is painful now and then, and hard to break or crack this Nut; insomuch
that many times the teeth thereby be much endangered. Whereunto alludeth that
saying of Plautus: He that desires the kernel, must not In Gurgul.
refuse to crack the Nut. Thereby signifieng, that whosoever would gladly
enjoy the sweet, must partake and taste of the sower: and that whosoever
desires to attain commodity, or releasement of troubles, must not think
scorn to take pains, and endure travel.

The 43. Chapter.
Of Apples and fruits in general.

THe differences and kinds of Apples and Fruits be innumerable; insomuch that
the age wherein we now live far surpasses the times before. For the general
delight that men take in graffing and planting, increases daily the number of
sorts and kinds.

Among the which, there be some that as they wax soon ripe, but so again
wax they soon rotten, as all Spring and Summer Hastings.
fruits do.

But the Winter and Autumn fruit will Winter fruit.
last long, and continue sound till far in the Winter, yea till the next
Spring or longer.

Of these some be sweet, some sower, some sharp, some winish, some watrish,
and some of a mixed or diverse relish: with the which for their gallant form,
color, quantity, proportion and taste (as also with pears, which be likewise
of sundry sorts) man's eye, palate and nose be woonderfully delighted: insomuch
that he is thereupon brought into the memory and admiration of Gods bountiful
liberality; who has so largely, and with such variety heaped his blessings
and benefits upon us.

And although all the differences hereof (by reason of the sundry sorts of
them) are impossible to be reckoned up, neither skilleth it greatly for this
our purpose, to stand upon any such precise recital thereof: yet may this by
the way be noted, that those fruits which be reckoned among Apples, be of round
proportion and making, whereas Pears, for the most part, be longwise, and
turbinated; that is to say, narrow and sharp at the one end, and broad (like
a top) at the other.

Omitting therefore Quinees, Medlars, Citrons, Orenges, Peaches, Wardens,
Pomegranates, Abrecocks, and such like, let it suffice to admonish thus much by
the way, that God has graciously and frankly bestowed these delicate fruits
upon man, partly for his nourishment, and partly for preservation of his
health. And that the same God, does sometime for man's ingratitude, take away
again these his gifts from him.

In the Prophet Amos there is alleged a notable and elegant Metaphore, taken
from Summer fruit that are rathe ripe, which for their prematuritie and soon
ripenes, are greatly desired of many; howbeit, they will not long last, but
quickly rot and putrify, The Lord (says he) showed me a basket Amos. 8, 1.
of Summer fruit, and said, What see thou, Amos^ and I said, a basket of
summer fruit. Then said the Lord unto me: The end is come upon my people.

By this metaphor of rath ripe fruit or summer apples, which will not long
continue without rotting, he shows that destruction is near at hand, and
even ready to fall upon the heads of the people, and that their corruption and
spoil stands even at the doors, ready to consume them, as rottennes does
ripe summer apples: which being any whit long kept do putrify, as plums,
damsons, cherries, peaches, cornels, etc. that will not last till winter.

So that the sense and meaning of this his Similitude is, that their iniquity
is ripe, and that for the same they are forthwith to be consumed, spoiled, and
destroyed.

The like saying is there in the Revelation, where utter destruction is
threatened and denounced to the whore of Babylon, and that all her delites,
wanton devises, honor and magnificence shall be taken away from her. The
apples (says he) that thy soul lusted after, Reave. 18, 14
are departed from thee; and all things which were fat and excellent are
departed from thee, and thou shall find them no more. Signifieng thereby that
all those dainty conceits, stately pomps, and sumptuous banketring dishes,
wherewith at full she used to solace her self (among the which were dainty and
delicate fruits, as Apples, Plums, Peaches, and such other like) should be
quite taken away from her.

The 44. Chapter.
Of the Oak, and other trees that bear mast.

Many and sundry be the sorts of plants and trees, whereof the holy
Scripture makes mention: the which, exactly to reckon up, were an infinite
wolke. The indifferent and gentle Reader therefore shall take it well in
worth, although I have not precisely set down each particular.

Now, for so much as the holy Prophets for the beautifieng and garnishing of
their Sermons, have inserted into their writings sundry plants and trees, not
only of such as grow and are planted in gardens, but of others also that be
wild, which for the more part are higher and taller than those that grow in
the gardens, I will (by the way) touch and set down some of them.

Men well enough know the Beech, ^^me, Oak, Quickbeame, Maple, Cork, (whose
rind or bark is used in sandals, slippers, and shoes for warmth and
dryness) and other mast trees, which in the old time (before the invention of
tillage and the use of corn) ministered competent food and nourishment.
Whereupon afterward grew a proverb; It is a mere folly, when we have Corn,
still to eat Acorns.

By these trees, the prophets do signify stout, hautie, mighty, lofty and
proud persons, which do oppress and ouercrowe the poor and needy: and yet
(notwithstanding all their stately and big looks) the Lord can and will
quickly confound, and with a trice Isai. 1, 29. and 2, 13. and 44, 14. Psalm.
144, 5. Psalm. 29, 5.
bring them down. For; He touches the mountains, and they smoke. Yea, The
Lord breaks the high Cedars, and brings them to nothing.

So also the Lord by his Prophet Amos says: I have destroyed the Amorite
before thee, Amos. 2, 9.
whose height was like the height of the Cedars, and whose strength was as the
Oaks. Whereby he means and signifies, pride, loftines, arrogancy and
contempt of God.

Likewise the prophet Zachary daunteth the stately looks and proud minds of
the lofty, provoking them in respect of their forlorn estate, to howling,
weeping, and lamentation; Howl ye, O Oaks of Basan (says he) for the Zach.
11, 2.
mighty strong wood is cut down: that is, al their strength, power and might
wherein they trusted, is taken from them: the which their lofty sail, and big
bragging might, he there very aptly resembles and compares unto Oaks.

For as the Oak is a very hard tree, insomuch that some of them can uneath be
cleft asunder with wedges, nor cut with axe or saw, even so they being
advanced to great honors, and dignities, shrouded with multitudes of clientes
attending upon them, and wallowing in wealth at their own desire, seemed to
be placed in such safety, that they should never miscarrie, but continue in
their iollitie, as surely and as strongly as Oaks. But against the power and
might of God, nothing is able to stand.

The 45. Chapter.
Of the Rose, and of Metaphores taken from it.

THe Rose among all Nations and in all countries, is accounted a most gallant,
beautiful, and sweet smelling flower, comfortable both for the brain and
also the heart. Being inwardly received it eases the pains and greefes of such
members as be affected, and comfort also, by reason of the astringent
quality which is in it.

The juice, decoction or infusion thereof is reckoned among the kinds of
gentle and soft medicines: for it mildly loses and opens the belly,
purges downward yellow Choler, opens the obstructions of the liver,
strengthening and cleansing the same. For which purpose serves that noble
Electuarie or solutiue Sirupe thereof, called Rhodopharmacum, which without any
danger makes the belly soluble, and purges all such cholerike excrements, as
engender the Tertian Ague.

There be of this amiable flower sundry sorts. The most common and best known
be the white Roses: next, the Red, and the Purple Roses, which be as it were of
a mixed color between white and red. Then the Milesian Rose, yielding a most
soote smell, and gallant deep red color. There be also Roses of Province,
Carnations, Rose campions, Musk Roses, Damask Roses, and Caneel Roses, which
yield forth an excellent smell, the small white leaued Rose called Eglantine,
Hep or Brierbush, whose leaves be small and sweet smelling, which is a
property that the prickly leaves have, otherwise than the common Roses, whose
leaves yield not forth any such sweet smell.

Now, for that nothing sooner fades away and withers than does the Rose,
therefore is the frail, brittle, transitory, and momentanie life of man, with
all the gay glory, pomp, pride and magnificence thereof, which quickly passes
away, very aptly thereunto resembled.

And the Scripture notes some, that nicely dandle themselves, and wantonly
take their delight in sweet and fragrant odours. As where they daintily and
lasciuiously confer together, alleging that when they be gone out of this
world, all is gone, and that nothing of a man remains after death. Go Wisd.
2, 1.
to (say they) our life is short and tedious, passing away as a shadow, and
after our end there is no returning: Come on therefore, let us enjoy the
pleasures that are present, and let us cheerfully use the creatures as in
youth. Let us fill our selves with costly wine and ointments, and let not the
flower of ^th pass by us. That is, let us not suffe^ pleasan^est time of our
age, which is (...) youth, to pass away in carking and caring but let us live
all upon the hoigh, and b^ merry. Let us crown our selves with Rose (...)
before they be withered. Let there be no fair ^dow, but our lust go through
it: let us leave s^ tokens in every place of our wantonness, let (...) one of
us be partakers of our voluptuousnes: for th^^ is our portion, and this is our
lot. These things (says the Wise man) do they imagine, and go astr^ for their
own wickedness has blinded them, (...) do they understand the mysteries of
God. He therefore reprooueth their vanities, and mistaking of matters, for that
they nothing at all respect the use of the thing, but go on still and dandle
themselves in their dissolute life, and riotous prodigality, never regarding
the Creator and Workmaister.

In Ecclesiasticus, purity, virtue and integrity is resembled unto Roses, and
other fragrant and odoriferous Plants. Where the Wisdom of God the father
eternal, in commendation of it self says: I am set up (...) Eccl. 24, 15.
high like a Cedar in Libanus, and as a Cypers tree upon the mountains of
Hermon: I am exalted (...) a Palm tree in Cades, and as a Rose plant in
^^richo. For in these places grew the best sorts of these above rehearsed.

Again, where he exhorts all men to embrace and seek Wisdom, he says:
Har^ Eccl. 39, 13.
unto me ye holy children, and bring forth fruit, (...) the Rose that is
planted by the brooks of the field. Give ye a sweet smell as incense, and
bring forth flowers as the Lilly.

And after, entering into the commendation of Simeon the high Priest, he
exceedingly amplifieth his praises by comparisons taken from natural things:
saying, That he was as Eccle. 50, 6.
the morning Star in the midst of a cloud, and as the Moon when it is
full: as the flower of the Roses in the Spring of the year, and as Lillies by
the springs of waters, etc.

Consider hereby (gentle Reader) what shifts he shall be put unto, and how
raw he must needs be in the explanation of Metaphors, Resemblances and
Comparisons, that is ignorant of the nature of herbs and plants, from whence
these Similitudes be taken, for the inlightening and garnishing of Sentences.

But, for that I call now to remembrance, a saying of Horace the Poet, where he
says:

In penning of matters who two things can hit, In art Poet.

Namely to please and to profit with all:
Delighting and training his Reader to wit,
The prick and price rightly to him does befall;
I will here therefore add a common country custom, that is used to be done
with the Rose: whereby by interlacing things of pleasance and disport, with
matters of gravity and seriousnes, the Reader shall think himself the less
accloied.

In some Countries there is a custom used, when pleasant and merry companions
do friendly meet together to make good cheer, that as soon as their feast
or b^ is ended, they give faithful promise mutually one to another, that
whatsoever has been merrily spoken by any in that assembly, should be wrapped
up in silence, and not to be carried out of the doors. For the assurance and
performance whereof, the term which they use, is, that all things there said
must be taken, as spoken, Under the Rose.

Whereupon, they use in their parlours and dining roumes to hang Roses over
their tables, to put the company in memory of secrecy, and not rashly or
indiscreetly to clatter and blab out what they hear. Likewise, if they chance
to show any tricks of wanton, unshamefast, immodest or vnreuerent behavior
either by word or deed, they protesting that all was spoken, Under the Rose, do
give a strait charge, and pass a covenant of silence and secrecy with the
hearers, that the same shall not be blown abroad, nor tatled in the streets
among any others.

To this effect also is that old beaten proverb; I hate that guest or companion
that re^ br^th what is spoken at the table. Which ancient sentence is appliable
unto such as having kept company with pleasant mates, when some fanciful words
have escaped unawares, or by the way of merriment, do call the same into fresh
memory the next day after, and make (as it were) public proclamation thereof:
whereas all such escapes and rashly uttered terms at bankets, ought to be
forgotten, and to be written in the Wine.

So also the Lacedaemonians, by an old statute law left unto them by Lycurgus,
had written in the entry or porch of their houses this sentence; Out at the
door let no tale be carried. Now from whence this custom first grew, of
hanging Roses, and strawing them in parlours and dining chambers, as a simbole
or token of secrecy and silence of all words there passed and spoken, these
verses plainly and lively display:

The Rose (a sign of secrecy) pertaines
To Venus, as dame Regent of the same:
By Cupide then assignd (as Poet faines)
To silent God, Harpocrates by name.
And thereupon at feasts where friends do meet
They use above their Boords, to hang the Rose,
In token each should other friendly greet,
And not to tattle tales abroad, as foes.
And this is to be understood, that the Myrtle and the Rose be plants, which
antiquity dedicated to Venus: for that, at brideales the houses and chambers
were wont to be strawed with these odoriferous and sweet herbs: to
signify, that in wedlock all pensive sullennes, and lowering cheer, all
wrangling strife, iarring variance and discord ought to be utterly excluded
and abandoned, and that in place thereof, al mirth, plea^antnes, cheerefulnes,
mildnes, quietness and love should be maintained, and that in matters passing
between the husband and the wife, all secrecy should be used.

And this is the reason, why Cupide, the son of Venus is said of Poets to have
dedicated the Rose unto Harpocrates the God of silence, (who is painted and
purtraited holding his finger upon his mouth) and that therefore the Rose
served as a sign of silence and token of secrecy, to such persons as be
tatling talecariers. And as Harpocrates was invested with the title of the God
of silence, among the Greeks; so was Angerona assigned lady and goddess of
the same, among the old Romans.

The 46. Chapter.
Of Cockle, Darnell, Drawke, Raye and other noisome weeds.

UNDER the name of Cockle and Darnell is comprehended all vicious, noisome and
unprofitable grain, encombring and hindering good Corn; which, being heerby
choked and despoiled of convenient moisture, either prospers not as it
should, or else is utterly killed and comes to no proof at all.

Darnell therefore, Cockle, and Drawke, being noisome enemies unto good corn,
specially unto wheat, are reckoned among the chief weeds, and baggage that
requires to be plucked up. It grows among other corn, and has a narrow
small leaf, and many small ears growing upon the sides at the top of the
straw, in the which small ears the seed is contained, the flower somewhat
enclining to a dark purple, like wall barley, or red Ray called Phaenix,
whereof Dioscorides speaks. With this may be joined another kind of weed
called Githago, Nigelweede or field Nigella, having long narrow leaves like
unto a Leeke, a long slender hairy stalk or stem, a brown purple flower
inclining toward red, and his seed (being black, round, and unpleasant in
taste) enclosed within certain round bolleins or cups, like Poppie, and the
meal thereof white. Theophrastus says, that Darnell and Cockle comes of the
seeds of wheat and barley, being corrupted, drowned and accloied with
overmuch wet and rain.

The seed thereof being ground with other corn, and baked into bread,
causes headache, and dimnes of sight, by reason of the vaporous humors which
it sends up into the brain: whereupon such persons as have dazeling eyes and
dim sight, are said by a common proverb, Lolio victitare, to live Plaut. in
Mil.
by Darnell.

But because under these names of Darnell and Cockle are generally understood
(not themselves only) but also all harmefull encumbrances, lets, hurtes and
annoiances, which do any way hinder the growth of corn; therefore are all
manner of weeds whatsoever, comprehended and contained under the same. Virgil
approouing the same where he says:

Dame Ceres taught how first to till Geor. 1.

The land for man's avail:
When acornes, wildings, berries, fruits
In Dodon began to fail.
And how by toil of husbandry
Each danger to prevent,
Least blasting should the crop destroy
Or with annoiance teint.
Or Thistels ouergrow the same:
For where such things remain,
The corn decaies and goes to wrack
And yields but slender gain.
Sometimes there sproutes abundant store
of baggage noisome weeds,
Burres, Brembles, Darnel, Cockle, Drawke
Wild Otes and choking seeds.
Ovid also mentioning these foresaid annoyances, Lib. 1. fast.
wills diligent care and husbandry to be used for the extirping, weeding and
banishing of them, out of arable grounds and fields employed to tillage.

In respect of the nature and quality of these noisome weeds, which choke up
the good corn, and spoil fruitful fields, our Savior Christ takes
occasion thereby to signify and paint out as well dangerous, hurtful,
pernicious, corrupt and insincere doctrine, as also the wicked authors and
setters forth of the same; who through the instigation of satan with their
pestilent gloses and subtle expositions, infect and poison the minds and
consciences of men, and corrupt the pure word of the Gospel, by obtruding of
falsehoode in steed of truth, and doting dreams in place of sindere doctrine;
lewdly profaning the sound word of God, and infecting the food whereon our
souls should feed.

Which perilous and wicked persons although the Lord wills charitably for
some while to be tolerated and borne with all, in hope of amendment and
repentance after due admonition; yet does he not forbid (as Chrysostom says)
but that the conuenticles Cap. 13. in Matthew.
of heretics should, and ought, to be put down, their mouths stopped, and
their impudency of speech inhibited. To the same end and purpose also tends
that sentence of the apostle Paul unto Titus: A man that is an heretic, that
is, one that wilfully and maliciously maintains false doctrine, and erroneous
opinions; After once or twice Tit. 3. 10.
admonition, avoid; knowing that he which is such an one, is perverted and
sins, being damned of his own self; because he wilfully perishes through
his own folly and fault, in that he being admonished per^isteth still in his
obstinacy and error.

And although Christ would not that the Tares and Cockle should be plucked up,
yet for due punishment does he subject and teferre to the authority of the
magistrate, all those that be factious disturbers of the peace and
tranquillity, both of the Church and Romans 13. 1.
Common wealth.

The 47. Chapter.
Of Rosemarie.

ROsemarie, called (...)notis, (for that it yields forth a soote smell, like
to Frankincense) was used of the Jews, as Hysope in their ceremonial
purifications, Sacrifices, and sprinklings. It is commonly growing in every
garden, having a wooddish stem, with many small (...) ches and slender
boughs of the like hard and wooddie substance, bearing great store of small,
long and thick set leaves, white (...) the side next the ground, and green
above. The flowers whitish, and mixed with a little blew, of a strong and
pleasant smell, and full of a certain oilie juice, so that being distilled,
the oil will appear swimming on the top of the water. And this same is a
sovereign help, Water of Rosemary.
and of great effect for them that have the Palsy and Apoplexy, anointing
therewith the nucha or nape of their neck.

The smell of this Plant greatly comfort the brain, memory and inward
senses, refreshes all the vital powers, is of excellent virtue in curing the
Iaundice: and not a little Iaunders.
recreateth and cheereth both the heart and mind of man.

It is good also against the falling sickness; Falling sickness.
the savor or smell thereof preserves from the plague, and is a very
excellent perfume to burn in houses, to drive away infectious and contagious
smells.

There is made also of the flowers thereof, a noble medicine or Conserve, which
has very great virtue to comfort this brain, being pestered or surcharged
with superfluity of humors: it woonderfully restores (...) morie being
decayed, and is of no less efficacy to keep a man or woman from the ^alling
sickness, Apoplexy, Palsy, Crampe, dazeling eyes and dim sight.

And as the Jews offered the sweet perfume of Incense, and in their rites and
ceremonies used this Herb: so let us Christians (now in the time of the
Gospel, wherein all such shadows are vanished) offer up our pure and fervent
prayers unto God, through an assured faith in his Christ, which service and
sacrifice is far more acceptable to him, than all material Incense, Suffiments
or Perfumes in the world.

And yet is there nothing to the contrary, but that we may adorn and straw our
churches, with sweet smells and comfortable green herbs for the comforting of
our senses, so that all manner of superstition therein be utterly and flatly
secluded, and no mite of any holiness therein reposed.

For these and such like indifferent and Adiaphorall things, ought none
otherwise to be used, than for decency, and tolerable delectation to recreate
the spirits of the people withal.

So did Christ accept and graciously receive the grateful hearts of the willing
Children, and loiall people, which with such cheerful Matt. 21. 8.
acclamations, testified their joy for his coming, and by strawing the boughs
of Palms, and branches of other trees in the way, made apparent their inward
affections and the unfeigned love which they bare toward Ioh. 12. 13.
him.

The 48. Chapter.
Of the Almond tree, whereof there is often mention made in the Scriptures:
namely, in the last Chapter of the Preacher.

THe Almond tree has a great, strong and high body: otherwise not much unlike
to the Peach tree, saving that his leaves be bigger, and his flower white. The
fruit of the Peach is round, pulpie, succulent, sauourie, well relished,
winish-tasted, carrieng a foft mossie down on the utter side of the pill or
rind, and within a hard rugged nut: but the Almond nut is smoother, and
nothing so rugged and hoalie as is the Peach.

The rind or shell of the Almond is not at all to be eaten, but is covered
over with a small thin filme or skin, and has within it the kernel, which
is sometime bitter, and sometime sweet. The bitter, being eaten fasting,
Bitter Almonds.
keep a man or woman from being easily droonken, through the heat and dry
nature which is in them. Whereby they dispatch the moistnes and fumes of wine,
and stop the same from striking up into the brain. And by reason of their
bitterness, and also for that they be of a cutting and extenuating quality,
they do open the obstructions of all the inward parts; that is to say, they
cleanse the liver, milt and kidneies from all corrupt and gross humors: they
provoke urine, and be excellent good against the gravel and stone, as the
Peach kernels also be. They be likewise abstersive, and cleanse the face and
utter skin from all spots, pimples and lentils.

And for that, all hot and dry things be mortiferous and deadly to Foxes, it
comes to pass, that if they use to eat bitter Almonds, they presently
thereof die, unless they by and by lap some water, and therewith alay and
qualify the bitterness thereof, which wastes up and consumes their vital
juice.

Sweet Almonds (such as the Patriarch Jacob furnished his sons withal, when
in the Genesis 43, 11. Sweet Almonds.
time of dearth, he sent them for corn into Egypt) do nourish the body,
mollify the belly, cleanse the breast, provoke sleep, by sending up to the
brain pleasant, gentle and soporiferous vapors: and also for them that be
wasted they are restoratiue.

The Gum which sweateth out of the Almond tree, through the clefts of the
bark Gum of Almonds.
or rind in the Summer season, helps them that have the flixe, or that spet
blood.

From this beautiful, fair and fruitful Tree, which flowreth betimes, and
bears a whitish flower, does Solomon take a notable Metaphor in the last
Chapter of his Book entitled Ecclesiastes or the Preacher, wherein he uses
so many dark translated terms, and so many intricate and metaphorical Eccl.
12.
speeches, that (without some familiar exposition) carry no small difficulty
and obscurity.

In all which Chapter, by fetching Comparisons and Similitudes from common and
well known things, he puts man in memory of his duty, and that he ought
to remember God, and take care for his souls health, while he is yet young and
lusty, and not to defer the small till age and decrepicie.

And by a most elegant Periphrasis or circumlocution he shows, how man, being
in his best flourishing time, does by little and little decay, and (as Job
witnesses) vanish away Job. 14, 2.
as a shadow, or vapor: so that every moment he draws nearer and nearer
unto his end, grows daily weaker and weaker, and in short space loses the
use of his limbs, and is deprived of the function of all his members.

For in process of years, and continuance of time (for Solomon prosecuteth
and goes through all the members of the body) the eyes wax dim; the ears
grow to be thick of hearing; the tongue fumbleth in pronounciation, and
foltereth in speech; the nose is not so perfect in smelling; the hands shake
and tremble; the legs and feet shrink; the shoulders stowpe; the back
bends: and finally, each part of the body by little and little is brought to
decay and dissolution.

With these words therefore begins he his discourse, in that place: Remember
thy Maker in the days of thy youth, before the days of affliction come, that
is, before sickness, diseases, and the discommodities of old age catch hold on
thee: wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them. Before the Sun, the
light, the Moon, and the stars be darkened, and ere the clouds return
again after the rain: that is, before dimnesse, dazeling, dropping and
blearednes of thine eyes come upon thee: When the keepers of the house shall
tremble, that is, before the hands (which be the keepers of the body,
apparelling, feeding and defending it from inconveniences) do shake: When the
strong men shall bow themselves, that is, the legs and feet, which bear up
the body: and the millers or grinders shall cease, being few in number, that
is, when thy teeth shall be rotten, blunt, and fallen out, so that thou can
not grind and chaw thy meat: And they that look out at the windows, wax
dark: that is, the eye lids, which are as the windows, and the eyes looking
out at those windows. And when the doors in the street shall be shut: to
wit, the lips and mouth: and when the voice of the millers shall be laid down:
that is, when the passage and way, by which the meat should descend into the
stomach, shall scarcely open, and be able to chaw: And when they shall wake and
rise up at the voice of the bird: that is, when they shall sleep so little,
that the crowing of a cock, or chirping of a small bird shall awake them: and
all the daughters of music be deaf: that is, when the ears be dull and
dunch, and not able to hear or discern the tunes of harmony. The high ones
also shall be afraid and shake in the way: that is, when they stoop down, as
though they feared least somewhat should hit them, and be afraid to climb,
for fear of falling. Before the Almond tree should blossom, that is, before
thou be gray headed: for by the Almonde tree is meant the head, and by the
blossoms the gray hairs: And the Grasehoppers stick up: to wit, the
shoulders: for as the legs of the Grasshoppers stick up and appear above the
body, so do the shoulders in lean and aged persons; And the Capers shall be
wasted, that is, when lust and concupiscence shall be ended, and appetite to
meat taken away. Before the silver coarde be lengthened, and the golden caul
do shrink: that is, before the sinews, which be white like silver, and which
stretch out in length at the time of death: and before the thin skin which
encloseth the brain, and is yellow like gold, do decay. Before the Pitcher be
broken at the Well, and the wheel broken at the cesterne: that is, before the
veins and arteries, (by which be conveyed from the fountain or well being the
heart, all the vital spirits into each part of the body) be perished: and before
the liver wax faint and unable to digest the meat in the stomach. And dust
shall be turned to the earth, from whence it came, and the spirit shall
return to God, who gave it, that is, the body, consisting of flesh and bones
shall die and rot in the earth: but the soul shall incontinently go either to
joy or torment.

By these speeches being partly allegorical, and partly metaphorical, Solomon
awaketh and stirs up the drowsy minds of men, being careless of their
salvation, to remember their Lord and Creator: and not to defer their
repentance till they arrive to old age, but to do it even in their best prime
and flourishing youth. He vehemently and pithilie therefore calls upon them,
to begin this their godly exercise, from their first and tender age, before
old age draw on, and evil days, full of greefes, troubles and afflictions,
come upon them.

For, when a man is stricken in great years, the delights of this life be
loathsome and unpleasant unto him, pleasures, dauncings, singing, laughing,
pastime, jesting, merry conceits and daliance be gone: yea all delicate
dishes, curious bankets, dainty iunkets, and costly viandes be loathed;
finally, all former iollities, disports and recreations of lusty youth, be
utterly forsaken and abandoned. This occasion therefore takes Solomon, to stir
them up out of their natural sluggishnes, and ordinary forgetfulness, wishing
all men not to forslow and let slip opportunity being offered: for that, in
decrepite and stowping age, not only the body, but the mind also is empaired;
and reason, memory, understanding, with all the inward faculties over clowded.

For then do the eyes dazzle, become dim sighted, and bleared, so that they can
scarcely discern Sun and Moon. Then be the hands (whose agilitie and
ministry we necessarily use in exploiting our business) become trembling,
shaking, unable and unfit for any handy labors. Then do stitches and coughes
grow upon us, and shortness of breath en^^mber us. Then do the legs and feet
(which as bases and maine pillars underprop and bear up the weight of the
whole body) shrink and double under us, that we be not able to go without the
stay of a^ staff. Then are the teeth (which grind, break, and by help of
the jaws, champe, minse, bruise and shred our meat and nourishment) either
blunted and dulled, or else loosed and fallen out.

Then does sight fail, and the eyes (which look out of their holes (as it
were) out at two windows) become pooreblinde, and through weakness of the
muscles and lids, do see very little, and as it were through a cloud,
scarcely able to discern, who they meet in the street. Then is the throat
scarcely and with much ado able to swallow down any food, by reason of the
drines that is in the meat pipe, whereby the nourishment can not conveniently
be sent and conveyed into the stomach. Then is sleep very little and short,
by reason of the drines of the brain: insomuch that a man or woman in that
age, is easily awaked, even with the chirping of a bird. Then is the voice
squekish and whining, through drines, exasperating the vocal Artery, and is
utterly unfit to sing. Then is he ready to startle and fear, at every wagging
of a leaf, fearing as it were, least some thing should fall on him, insomuch
that many times walking alone in the streets, he looks back for fear of
danger.

Then does the Almond tree flourish, that is, the head is then hoary and white,
and may a great way of, be perceived and espied, even as the Almond tree
bears white flowers and blossoms in the top, which may be seen and
discerned a great way of. Then will the voice be small, childish, weak,
buzzing and imperfect. Then will every light thing seem heavy, insomuch that
the smallest burden will be enough to load and surcharge him. Then will
appetite to meat, (which commonly is irrited and provoked with capers) be
taken away, and al lust, desire, and concupiscence of carnal things, quite
abolished.

These and other discommodities does Solomon reck on up, and show to be
naturally incident unto man, when he is once old and laden with years. And
therefore laieng them down before all men's eyes and considerations, he wills
them to call themselves home, to reine and qualify their affections, and in
their green and fresh years to think upon God, and according to his word to
direct their lives, manners, and behauiours; Before the silver coarde be
lengthened, whereby he signifies the sinews and the marrow of the back bone,
which being derived from the substance of the brain, and of a bright silver
color (as it is also to be perceived and seen in brute Beasts) begins and
is stretched from the hinder part of the head by 34. Spondyles of the back,
unto the fundement. This (backbone, whereunto are tied the ribs) is resembled
to the keele of a ship; whereinto are peeced the rest of the maine timber. And
as the strongest plankes of the whole ship are fastened unto the keele, so does
the strength of man's body consist in the pith and marrow of his back bone: so
that (as Solomon aptly here says) if this silver lace or coarde be wasted,
despoiled, broken or dissolved, it is an evident token and certain sign of
death not far off.

Going forward in this his figurative kind of speech, he further says; Before
the golden caul shrink or be broken, meaning thereby the Heart, which is the
fountain and velspring of life, and from whom the arteries (as the veins from
the liver) are issued: the which do convey the vital spirits and blood, and
cherish, comfort, moisten and relieve each of the members.

By The Pitcher broken at the Well, may be understood the reins, bladder, and
conduites of urine, which in old men commonly be so much decayed, that they do
weakly and slenderly execute their appointed functions, whereby also death is
hastened.

It follows, and, Before the wheel be broken at the cesterne, meaning
thereby the Head, which in men drawing near to death, inclines and falls
down upon the shoulders. For the head is round, turning and moving each way,
like a rolling wheel, now on the right side, now on the left, now upward, now
downward: from whom the animal spirits taking their beginning, are diffused
and distributed through the whole body, and give both motion and sense to the
sinews. The head thereof (I say) first of all commonly drowpeth, shrinketh and
hangs down, (as may appear by the eyes, which first of all others die, or
at least show plain tokens of imminent death) carrieng with it for company
all the members to apparent ruin: and overthrows the state of the whole
body, even as a chariot, wagonne, or cart, cannot but fall, when the Axletree
is broken. This to be Solomon's meaning, the words following plainly show.
For then (says he) Shall dust turn again to the earth from whence it was
taken, and the spirit return to God that gave it.

But to return to the Almond tree. The Patriarch Jacob (who afterward, of
wrestling Genesis 32, 28.
and prevailing with God, was called Israel) being unkindly, unconscionably,
and churlishly dealt withal at the hands of his father in law Laban, used a
marvelous policy, (not with any intent of fraud or deceit, as at the first
show, some may think, but upon the warrant and appointment of almighty God so
commanding it) that he might thereby recover his due wages and hire, which that
covetous carle miserably denied him. The way whereby he compassed and brought
the same to pass was physical, and in this sort Genesis 30, 37.
did he it. He took rods of Accepit virgas populeas, amygdalinas, plata^, etc
vt Vulg. lat. habet Musc.
Almond, popular, hasel and chestnut trees, and pilled white strakes in them,
and put the rods so pilled in the gutters and watering troughes when the sheep
came to drink: that being in heat in ramming time, they might the sooner
conceive. For by a certain hidden and secret force in nature, all creatures
(yea women also) earnestly fixing their imagination at the time of conception
in the forms, shapes and representations of things object to their eyes and
senses, imprint the same in their young, which they bring forth. And so in
this case of Jacob: the sheep beholding the same speckled and pilled rods,
brought forth (by Gods appointment) speckled and party colored lambs,
whereby Jacob had to his share, such reasonable number, as was proportionable
and agreeable to his pains and labor sustained.

But there is in the holy Bible a notable and miraculous thing set down, of
Aarons rod, which brought forth buds, and bare blossoms and Almonds. Whereby
the Lord Number. 17, 8.
gave the stubborn and rebellious people plainly to understand, whom he would
have to minister about holy things, and to execute the Priests office.

For after that Corah, Dathan and Abiram, together with other Captains of
their confederacy, conspiring against Moses and Aaron, and presuming to
intermeddle in cases of divine ministration, without any commandment or
calling of God, were swallowed down quick into the earth, that Number. 16. ver.
32. and 49.
claue asunder and opened: and that of the common multitude 14700. were
destroyed with the plague, God commanded Moses to take twelve rods, according
to the number of their princes, with every ones name written upon his rod,
among the which there was Aarons rod, being of the tribe of Leui. And Moses
laid the rods before the Lord in the Tabernacle of the Testimony. And when
Moses on the next day went into the Tabernacle of the Testimony, he found the
rod of Aaron for the house of Leui, to be budded, and to bear ripe Almonds.
And Moses brought forth all the rods from before the Lord unto all the
children of Israel, and they looked upon them, and took every man his rod.
But Aarons rod was brought again into the Tabernacle, to be kept for a token
of the late rebellion: which mutiny and murmuring being quieted, the rude
multitude might ever afterward, by beholding that rod, take warning, how they
rebelled any more against God and his Ministers.

This history yields a notable lesson to all persons in general, namely,
that no man usurp any office, or intrude himself into any function, unless
he be thereunto called by God, or by the assent and appointment of such, which
have authority from the spirit of God, to deal therein. As the Apostle to the
Hebrews witnesses, saying: that Christ Heb. 5, 5.
took not this honor unto himself to be made the high Priest, but had the
same given him, by his heavenly father, who appointed him a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedech.

To whomsoever therefore this rod, that is, the cure and charge of governing
and teaching the flock of Christ, by the preaching of the Gospel, is
appointed, let him cheerfully follow his vocation, and courageously execute his
function.

And as Aarons rod (being before withered and dry) by divine virtue became
green again, budded and brought forth good and wholesome fruit: so likewise
it is meet, that such as be called to the office of the Ministry in the
Church of God, should show forth the fruits of virtue and good works in
themselves, and by wholesome doctrine also instruct others under their charge,
to do the like, and to show forth their sound and lively faith by good and
Christian actions.

And this did Christ earnestly require, and vehemently inculke, in his thrice
asking of Peter whether he loved him, and in inioining him to diligent feeding
of the flock. Furthermore, me thinks the Almond may very aptly and
conveniently serve for a Symbol or Cognizance of a Christian man's life:
wherein (as before has been said of the Walnut) be interchangeably mingled
sower with sweet, rough with smooth, hard with soft, affliction with welfare,
and adverse hap with prosperous state. For by the wooddish and hard shell of
the Almond, are signified adversities, troubles, miseries, afflictions,
discommodities and missehaps. Again, by the sweet and pleasant kernel, may
be meant prosperity, comfort, joy, delectation, release and mitigation of
greeues, sorrows and all calamities.

The 49. Chapter.
Of the Plane tree, and the nature thereof.

THe Plane is a foreign and strange tree brought out of Asia hither into
Europe, for the goodly shade that it gives; as appears in Pliny, who Lib.
12. ca. 1.
writes, that it was found growing as far as Turwaine in France, which was
sometime the furthest bounds and limits of the Roman Empire. It spreads his
branches and boughs very broad and wide, his rind is thick, and his leaves
large, much like in shape to the Vine, or of that Plant, which (for the
resemblance that it has to an hand stretched out, and spread open) is called
Palma Christi; and of some Cataputia mayor, the seed whereof has a purging
quality. But the Plane tree leaves be not altogether so big and large, as
the leaves of this Palma Christi are, and do hang by long reddish stemmes. The
flowers be small, pale, and grow in small tuffets. The fruit or berries be
round, rough, and somewhat downish or woollie.

This tree by reason of his great, large and broad branches stretching out
themselves every way most pleasantly, is very fit and commodious to make cool
arbours and shadowy boothes, to sit under, in hot seasons. Some are of opinion
that because the Tilia or Linden tree, serves for the same purpose, therefore
to be the same that the Plane tree is. And some think no less of the Beech,
for that Virgil gives commendation of it, for the like use and purpose, saying:

Under the shade of broad beech tree Eclog. 1.

Thou Tityrus take thine ease:
Recording in fine Oaten pype
Old clownish country Lays.
But (doubtless) they be much deceived, sithence in leaves there is no manner
of resemblance or affinity between them and the Plane. Those trees (indeed)
defend the Sun beams, and yield very brave and recreatiue arbours to sit
under, as the Plane tree does: but there is not that beauty, proportion, form,
and sise in their leaves, neither such delightsome smell and comfortable sent.

Moreover, the Plane tree has such virtue, that no venomous thing will come
near it, neither will any serpents approach where it is; yea, it is so loath
some and dreadful to Nature of the Plane tree.
Flitter Mice and Backs, that they dare neither build their nests under it,
neither can abide the shadow of it.

Holy and sacred writers therefore use this same tree in their divine writings
and heavenly narrations; and take from it pithy and elegant Similitudes. As
namely, where Wisdom, extolling, dignifieng, aduauncing and Eccl. 24, 16.
commending her self, using for the same many proper terms encomiasticall,
and reckoning up sundry excellent and precious trees, proves thereby her
self to be fully furnished and richly adourned with all manner of virtues. For
she confesses her self to flourish, fructify and spread forth her
beautiful branches, as the goodly Plane tree that grows by the water side.
For this tree greatly loves moisture, and is of nature so dry, that it
requires watering: yea we do read in Macrobius, how Hortensius for the
Saturn. lib. 3
love that he bare unto this tree, did use to bedew and water it with wine,
thereby to make it continue the longer, and to show the beautifuller.

And as the Plane spreads his boughs and branches so wide, and gives such
pleasant shadow, that Xerxes the king of Xerxes king of Persia.
Persia took singular delight to sit under it, whole days together: so
likewise Wisdom, coming out of the mouth of the most High, with heavenly
comfort protecteth, shadoweth, recreateth and defends all those that commit
themselves under the shadow thereof from all harm and danger.

And so did David pray, saying; Keep me O Psalm. 17, 8.
Lord as the apple of the eye, hide (...) under the shadow of thy wings.

And likewise Jeremy; The breath of our nosethrils, Lam. 4, 20.
the anointed of the Lord was taken in their nets, of whom we said: Under his
shadow we shall be preserved alive among the Heathen: that is, under his
protection we shall be safe from all invasion, danger, and hostility.

Now for so much as in Judea, Syria, and all along the region of Arabia felix, by
reason of the fruitful soil, and temperate air, there does grow great store
of most pleasant and tall trees: the Prophets therefore taking Similitudes from
such usual and common things, do resemble and compare Emperors, Kings,
Princes and Potentates compared to Trees.
kings, princes and potentates; with their majesty, honor, magnificence,
dignity, power, and authority, unto high trees, as Cedars.

And such peers, nobles, and honorable personages, as be not equal in
dignity with monarchs and kings, nor of such power as emperors and princes,
but in degree inferior unto them; be not compared to the Cedar, being an high
and very tall tree, but to the Fur or Plane, or other trees not altogether so
high, beautiful and excellent.

God therefore by his Prophet Ezechiel, uses a most excelent metaphor, in
describing the stately majesty of Pharao, and of his prosperous, flourishing,
and royal proceedings, insomuch that he there pronounces no king to surmount,
no, nor yet to match him: and yet that all his glory, pomp, majesty, and
royalty should easily and with a trice be brought down, overthrown, and
turned topsie turuie, even as the highest trees are hewn and cut down with an
axe.

For thus does the Prophet begin his matter: that forasmuch as that proud,
hawtie and insolent king had forgotten God, and cruelly handled his people,
therefore destruction should come upon him, and he should not be able to
avoid it. The word of the Lord Ezec. 31, 1.
(says Ezechiel) came unto me, saient: Son of man, speak unto Pharao king
of Egypt, and to his people: whom art thou like unto, ingreatnes? Behold,
Asshur was like a Cedar in Lebanon, with fair branches, and thick shadowing
boughs, and shot up very high, so that his top was among the thick boughs:
the waters nourished him, and the deep exalted him on high with her rivers,
running round about his plants. His height was exalted above all the trees of
the field, and his boughs were multiplied, and his branches were long, because
of the multitude of the waters, which the deep sent out. All the fowls of the
heaven made their nests in his boughs, and under his branches did all the
beasts of the forest bring forth their young, and under his shadow dwelt all
mighty nations.

By which Metaphor, he means that many nations were subject and tributarie
unto Pharao; who in the largeness of dominions, surmounted other Princes. And
his root was near to the plentiful waters, which did conveniently (yea
abu^dantly) moisten it. Signifieng that his wealth and riches was increased
infinitely and inestimably, by reason of the great intercourse and traffike to
and fro of Merchants from all quarters. The Cedars in the garden of God were no
higher than he: the For trees did not match him in height, and the Plant trees
were not like to his boughs. Whereby he signifies, that no Province in the
world was like unto his: no, not Iudaea, wherein was published the holy
Religion and true worship of God, nor any other nation whatsoever.

For this his surpassing beauty and incomparable excellency, all the trees of
Eden, that were in the garden of God envied him: that is, his neighbors
bordering upon him, and worshipping God aright, were moved with a kind of
envy and emulation toward him for the same. For the godly be sometimes
greatly grieved in conscience to see It greeueth the godly to see the wicked
still to flourish and prosper in their wickedness.
the wicked still to flourish and flaunt in all welfare and prosperity,
insomuch that they are almost ready to give over their hold, and to shrink
from their tackling. Which thing the Prophet David witnesses, saying: My Psalm.
73, 2.
feet were almost gone; and my steps had welneere slipped: for I fretted at the
foolesh, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.

Jeremiah also greatly moved with indignation heereat, disputes with God
about Iere. 12, 1.
the same: and expostulateth in a manner with him, for that the way of sinners
did so prosper, and that the open workers of wickedness had good success, and
enioied welfare in all their attempts and dealings.

Upon the same argument dwells the Prophet Habacuc, reasoning, and almost
chiding with God for the same, saying: Wherefore, Lord, do thou look upon
the transgressors, Hab. 1, 13.
and hold thy tongue, when the wicked deuoureth the man that is more
righteous tha^ he? As though he should say, Lord, why winkest thou at this
gear; why hold thou thy peace, at the horrible enormities and wicked
dealings of blasphemous and indurate sinners?

Job also is inwardly vexed in spirit to see the wicked so advanced in pride,
and so laden with prosperity, that they contemn and despise all the godly and
virtuous. Wherefore Job. 21, 7.
(says he) do the wicked live, and wax old, and grow in wealth. Their
houses are peaceable without fear, and the rod of God is not upon them, etc.
These felicities, welfares, prosperities, successes and iollities of the
wicked, although at the first sight they may seem to be reckoned as things of
great happiness, insomuch that the minds and consciences of the godly be
therewith sometime maruellously mated and amazed, and almost ready to fall:
yet the end thereof does evidently declare, how frail, vain, transitory,
brittle, uncertain, and momentanie the same pleasures of those worldlings are,
when as God does suddenly ouerturne and bring to nothing all the pomp thereof:
so that no iotte, nor appeerance thereof be finally left, as the Prophet in
another place plainly shows: Yet a little while (says he) and the wicked
shall not appear: and Psalm. 37, 10.
thou shall look after his place, and he shall not be found. And a little
after; I have seen the wicked strong, and spreading himself like a green^ Bay
tree, and he passed away, and lo he was gone, and I sought him, but he could
not be found. Signifieng thereby, that the wicked, roysting in their ruffling
pride, and bragging in their high huffing state, are brought down from their
insolent hautines, and vanish away even as smoke, with all their pomp and
glory, not leaving their stately houses, revenues and inheritance, in
succession to their offspring and posterity, as by experience in many noble
families of ancient, decent, and honorable parentage is daily seen, who, not
acknowledging from whom all their dignity and preeminence comes, and whom
only they are to thank for the same, are for their ingratitude by the Lord
thus condignly punished.

And this is the meaning of Ezechiel in this metaphore: wherein God threatens
destruction Cap. 31, 11.
and desolation to a most mighty king, for that his heart was lifted up against
the Lord: and that not only he himself should taste these miseries, and
become a pray unto his enemies, but others also his accomplices and confederates
should be cast into the like doleful calamity, and receive many other
detriments, afflictions and corosiues, which the Prophet in that Chapter by
many metaphores recites.

Like unto this, is that commination of God by his Prophet Isaiah, against the
arrogancy, pride, tyranny, cruelty and oppression of the king of Babylon: for
whose destruction, and fall, even The Fur trees and the Cedars Isai. 14, 8.
of Lebanon reioiced, as the Prophet there sets down. Under which metaphor
he shows, how that all the Nobles, Dukes, Peers and others, subject to his
authority, and oppression, reioiced and were heartily glad for the fall and
destruction of such a cruel and bloody Tyrant.

This tyrant (Nabuchadnezzar) is compared for the great magnificence and
glorious pomp of his huge empire, unto the goodly Planet and glittering
morning star, Lucifer: which being seen after the Sun is gone down, is
called Vesperugo and Hesperus, and hereof speaks Virgil where he says,
Eclog. vlt.
Trudge, trudge apace home, full fed Goats,
The Evening Star appeeres.
But in the morning, preceding and going before the Sun, it is called
Lucifer, and Phosphorus: and (of the glittering brightness and amiable beauty,
and shining color which it has) named also Venus.

To this goodly, bright, and glittering Planet is the king of Babylon
resembled, for that, in the pride of his mind, and insolency of his estate,
he so far now forgot himself to be a man, that he suffered divine honors to
be done unto him, oppressing the true and sincere religion of God, and with
outrageous cruelty, suppressing the ministers and true believers. For arrogant
pride and rebellious disloialtie the Lord so impatiently took, that he tumbled
him down out of his high throne of majesty, wherein he gloried, and quite
stripped him (as an angel of Satan, ambiciously affecting a divinity, and
the next place to God) out of all his pomp, glory, and royalty: yea, threw
him into that degree of ignominy, that the honor of burial was denied unto
him: and besides, the whole kingdom of Babylon and all the inhabitants
thereof, lamentably otherwise afflicted. Which great fall and sudden change of
such an high and magnificent king, emboldened those that before (maugre their
wills) were wont to behold and reverence his statelines and pomp, now to rail,
taunt, rate, scoff, mock, frumpe, and insult upon him, as on a dead carcass,
or one out of the world. They flouted (I say) and derided him, for that of a
king a little while before, so mighty and wealthy, that with a beck or a
countenance only, he made all the world afraid, he was now degraded from so
high sublimitie, thrown headlong into such miserable and servile condition,
that he was not permitted after any princely manner to be solemnly enterred, but
(as Jeremy threateneth Iere. 22, 19.
to Iehoiakim king of Judah) should be buried at an Ass. Meaning, that his
body should be cast out to be devoured of the Fowls and wild beasts, even as
the carcass of an Ass, or an Horse is.

To this end is also that ironicall insultation of Isaiah: All the Princes of
the nations shall cry and say: Thy pomp and thy pride is laid down into the
pit: and so is the melody of thy instruments, that is, all thy magnificence,
roialtie, pleasures and delicacies are ceased. The woorme is spread under thee,
and the woormes cover thee. That is to say; Thy dead body shall not be
embaulmed, as noble kings are wont to be, to preserve them from rottennes, but
shall be gnawen and eaten by woormes, even as the body of the poorest and
basest pezant in the world. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Isaie. 14, 10.
Lucifer, thou fair morning child? How have thou gotten a fall, even to the
ground, which did weaken the nations? For thou saidest in thine heart, I
will climb up into heaven, and exalt my throne beside the stars of God: I
will sit also upon the mount of the Congregation toward the North. I will ascend
above the height of the clouds, and I will be like the most High. But thou
shall be brought down to the grave, to the sides of the pit.

Whereby he notes, how that he forgetting his frail estate, and exalting
himself above the condition of an humane creature, by usurping the honor due
unto God only, was woorthily deprived both of life, wealth and dignity; and
finally, swallowed up by a most shameful end and confusion. Which variable
intercourse, and fickle mutabilitie of worldly prosperity, may serve as a
document or lesson, not only for all Kings and Potentates, but even in
general, for all estates of men besides, to teach them to keep themselves
within their bounds, and to remember how soon the case of worldly iollitie is
altered, specially when a man in the arrogant bravery of an hawtie stomach,
disdainfully swells against men, and rebelliously opposes himself against
the Lord God.

So does the Apostle Paul denounce an unhappy, dreadful and horrible end
unto that Wicked son of perdition, that exalts himself 2. These. 2, 3.
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, insomuch that he sits
as God in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God, practicing
cruelty, and exercising all manner of tyranny against the Saints, that would
live godly in Christ Jesus: Whom God in his time will consume with the breath
of his mouth, and abolish with the brightness of his coming: wherein all his
deceiueablenesse and iugling tricks shall be revealed, and all his pestilent
doctrine, and counterfeite religion vanish away as smoke to the great wonder
of many that were e^ sotted with his fraudulent devises, and del^ ded by his
lieng woonders.

The 50. Chapter.
Of Shrubs, Shootes, Slippes, Graffes, Sets, Sprigges, Boughs, Branches,
Twigs, young Imps, Spray and Buds: from the which are fetched by the Prophets
in their divine writings, sundry Metaphors and Similitudes.

IN the sacred scriptures is plentiful store of Metaphors and Similitudes,
taken not only from the Trees, Plants and Herbs themselves, but also from their
parts and appertinents, as namely, from the root, from which they are
nourished; from the trunk and stem, by which the sap is diffused and
distributed; from the rind, bark or pill, wherewith they be covered; from the
boughs, leaves, blossoms and flowers, wherewith they are adorned and
beautified; and from their seed, by the which they are increased, multiplied
and propagated.

So by the Fig tree, which had nothing but Matt. 21, 19 Mar. 11, 13.
leaves, we are taught, how odious and displeasant to God, the outward show
and painted appeerance of godliness is, without an inward working faith,
producing the fruits of Christian life and honest conversation.

So also by those unprofitable trees that bring forth no good fruit, but are
to be cut down Matt. 3, 10. Matt. 7, 19. Luke 3, 9, Jude ver. 12
with the Axe, and cast into the fire, are meant the wicked and obstinate, that
persevere in their malicious blindness and indurate disobedience.

So also Christ in another place, by a Similitude taken from the Fig tree when
his boughs Matt. 24, 32
be yet tender, and his leaves newly springing out, whereby men know that
Summer is nigh at hand: armeth and warns all men of the approaching of the
latter day.

And even so likewise the Apostle most divinely discoursing of the natural and
of the wild Olive tree, with the root and branches Romans 11, 17
thereof, beats down all arrogancy and hawtie pride of such, as insolently
glory in the pretended excellency of their holiness, and prerogative of
their estate, despising and contemning others in respect of themselves.

So also the Prophet Isaiah speaking of Christ and his ministry, and setting
him down after a most excellent manner, and in most heavenly terms, to the
view and consideration of all men, describes him not as any honorable or
beautiful personage, but as an abject and outcast, despised and rejected of
men, full of Isai. 53, 3.
sorrows, and having experience of infirmities: not regarded, not esteemed and
accounted of, nor any ways entertained with any favorable kind of courtesy:
but every way judged and deemed as plagued and smitten of God, and humbled. And
he resembles him to a Spring coming Isai. 11, 1.
forth of the stem of Iesse, and to a young Graffe or shoot growing out of
his root: as it were out of a dry, barren, vnfertile and unmanured field; so
that to man, it should seem to be of no renown, hope or likelihood ever to be
advanced into any high sublimitie, or by his coming and doctrine to bring men
to salvation. Yea many were so offended at his baseness and humility, that
scarcely one among a great number, would give any credit to the prophesies and
predictions of the holy Writers concerning him.

For so long as they looked no further than into his outward poverty and base
estate, it was no marvel though very few embraced his doctrine, since they
accounted him scarcely worthy to be looked on, or to be kept company withal.

It would be to long, to repeat all that the Prophet in that Chapter at large
sets down, concerning the propagation and enlargement of the kingdom of
Christ: and therefore I refer the Reader to the words of the text it self, and
to the godly expositions of such as have learnedly written upon the same.
Wherein (doubtless) every good Christian ought diligently to exercise
himself, and zealously to search out the sense and meaning of this Prophet,
who most lively and effectually displaieth both the glory and also the
humility of Christ: and what benefits each way we receive by and through him.

The blessed Apostle Paul also calls us back to the example of Christ,
exhorting and animating us, to be Of the same mind Phil. 2, 6.
that was in Christ Jesus. Who being in the form of God, thought it no
robbery to be equal with God: But made himself of no reputation, taking on
him the form of a servant, and was made like unto men, and was found in shape
as a man. He humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of
the cross. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a Name,
above every name; that at the name of Jesus should every knee bow, both of
things in heaven, and of things in earth, and of things under the earth: which
is as much to say, as that no power, or strength was so great, but that it
should submit it self under Matt. 28, 18 John. 17, 2.
his empire and dominion.

But to come again unto my first purposed argument. The Prophet Isaiah most
plentifully and largely every where throughout his prophecy amplifieng Christ's
kingdom, and advancing his glory, comfort the afflicted and sorrowful, which
think themselves forsaken and destitute of all relief and succor, and
encourages them to lift up their hearts, and to stay themselves in assured hope
of Gods infinite mercies, undoubted providence, and infallible deliverance.

For, (by taking a metaphor from a young graffe or slip) he shows that the
spiritual kingdom of David shall be restored by Christ, and that all the
godly which think themselves forsaken, should have one that should be their
deliverer and redeemer out of the thraldom and tyranny of Satan. For There
shall come forth (says he) a Spring, rod, shoot, or set, out of the stock
of Iesse, and a graffe Isai. 11, 1.
shall grow out of his root. And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him:
the spirit of wisdom and understanding: the spirit of counsel and
strength: the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord. Whereby he
signifies Christ, being without measure inestimably furnished with all gifts,
and whereof he gives by measure to those that be his.

The same Similitude does he afterward continue and prosecute, eftsoons
repeating it, and saying, that in That day the root of Verse. 10.
Iesse, which seemed in that decayed state of the Jews, to be in a manner
rotten and like a dry stick; Shall stand and be set up for a sign unto the
people, and all nations shall seek unto it: that is, all people and kindreds
of the earth shall fix their eyes upon Christ, as on a token or mark, and al
nations shall come flocking to him, and do unto him homage.

But from the Root of trees and Plants, (which draineth moisture out of the
earth, and diffuseth vital sap and juice proportionablie throughout all the
branches and boughs) be taken and borrowed in the holy Bible, sundry very
proper and apt Similitudes, applied by the Prophets, partly to prosperity, and
flourishing seasons: partly to adversity and desperate times, as namely when
desolation, death and destruction is threatened and denounced to the graceless
and wicked.

So, the holy Patriarch Job, mentioning what wealth, power, dignity and
abundance, he had aforetime enioied, when the princes and peers of the
Country did unto him honor and reverence, says; My root was spread out by the
water side: and the dew lay upon my corn. Job. 29, 19.
By which metaphores, taken from trees conveniently and holesomely watered, and
from fields comfortably moistened with the sweet dew of heaven, he means that
all things went prosperously forward with him, and that no loss or hinderance
did betide him.

And as the Root is the foundation, whereon trees are stayed, and whereby they
receive their nourishment: so does God by his prophet Hosea promise unto all
those that are penitent and sorrowful for their sins, and lean only unto his
mercy and protection, the continuance of all prosperous and happy success; I
will be (says he) as the dew unto Hos. 14, 5.
Israel: he shall grow as the Lilly, and fasten his roots as the trees of
Lebanon. Signifieng that their felicity should not be fading and vanishable,
but (as strong trees) perdurable and lasting.

Solomon also describing the vain and transitory hope of the wicked, which
shall be disappointed of their desires, and miss their wished welfare, says,
that The desire of Pro. 12, 12
the ungodly, is a net of evils: that is to say, they imagine and devise such
things as bring destruction and breed their own mischief; But the root of
the righteous brings forth fruit.

So does Wisdom, pronounce and say of her self, that She took root in an
honorable Eccl. 24, 14.
people, even in the portion of the Lords inheritance: and that she is exalted
on high as a Cedar in Libanus, and as a Cypers tree upon mount Hermon: that is,
she distributeth and disperseth her virtues far and wide, comfortably shadowing
and refreshing all her loving children.

Contrariwise, when God denounces destruction to the wicked, and protests
that all their power (be it never so strong and mighty) shall not continue, he
pronounces that their Root shall be plucked up. As in that saying of Job; I
have seen my self when the Job. 5, 3.
foolish was deep rooted, and suddenly I cursed his habitation. Whereunto
also agrees that, which he says in another place; The ungodly Job. 15, 20.
man sorroweth all the days of his life, and the number of a tyrants years
are unknown. He shall not Verse. 29.
be rich, neither shall his substance continue, neither shall his prosperity
take deep root upon earth. The flame shall dry up his branches: and he shall
go away with the breath of his mouth. Al these words and terms do show that all
the pomp, glory, insolency and pride of the wicked shall be quite turned
vpside down, and brought to nothing.

No less terrible plagues does the Prophet David denounce against the wicked,
who trusting in his worldly wealth and uncertain riches, oppresses the
innocent; God (says he) shall destroy thee for ever; he shall take Psalm. 52, 5.
thee and pluck thee out of thy tabernacle, and root thee out of the land of
the living. Thereby signifieng, that he should utterly be rooted out, and
plucked up even by the roots: and there should be left no hope to him of any
posterity.

The same metaphor used Christ, when as he rebuked the Pharisees and Scribes,
for transgressing the commandments of God by their own hypocritical
traditions, and appeased his disciples, who were offended at him for speaking
so plainly and freely unto those high Rabbines: for he says; Every plant
which my heavenly father has not planted, shall be Matt. 15, 13 John. 15, 2.
rooted up. Signifieng, that all doctrine, religion and institution of life,
that is not warranted and stayed upon the sure and sound foundation of Christ,
but sauoreth more of fantastical superstition, than of sincere and true 1.
Cor. 3, 11.
holiness, shall be destroyed and plucked up. Al such things as are attempted
and undertaken either for ostentation or lucre, by the adle devise of man's
foolish brain, without the warrant of Gods holy word, and authority of the
sacred Scriptures, never attain to any good effect, but are scattered and come
to naught.

Of the Plant it self, and of the young sprigs, buds or slips may the like be
said. For, from thence are there Similitudes borrowed and taken, appliable
either to the good or evil part. So (says Isaiah;) The house of Israel is
Isai. 5, 7.
the vineyard of the Lord, and the men of Judah are his pleasant plant. Again,
in the same Chapter it is used in the worse part; As the flame of Verse. 24.
fire deuoureth the stubble, and as the chafe is consumed of the flame; even
so the root of the wicked shall be as corruption, and their bud shall rise up
like dust. That is, the wicked shall be destroyed, and never grow to any bigness.

Again, where the same Prophet comfort the people, and assures them that
the grace of their Redeemer shall not fail them, he says; In that day shall
the bud of the Isai. 4, 2.
Lord be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be
excellent. Whereby he shows, that great honor, glory and dignity shall
befall to them that continue steadfast in faith and hope, through the mercy and
favor of Christ to obtain salvation.

To this purpose also tends that surpassing joy, which the godly inwardly in
spirit enioieth, and for the which he so exceedingly reioiceth, that he is
adorned and enriched with so many and so great blessings. For he ascribes all
and every the good gifts, wherewith he is endued, unto Almighty God, with
humble and hearty giving of thanks for the same. I will greatly rejoice in the
Lord (says he) Isaie. 61, 10.
and my soul shall be joyful in my God. For he has clothed me with the
garments of salvation, and covered me with the robe of righteousness: he has
decked me like a Bridegroom, and as a Bride attireth hirselfe with her Jewels.
For as the earth brings forth her bud, and as the garden shoots forth his
seed: so will the Lord God cause righteousness and praise to flourish forth
before all the heathen. In which words he shows, how he is graciously adorned
with all kinds of virtues, and that through the free mercy and benefit of God;
to whom for the same is due all praise and glory.

For as the earth being fertile and fruitful, and beautified with the gallant
verdure of Iere. 33, 11.
fresh flowers and green herbs, is an argument of the bountiful goodness of
God toward us: even so, righteousness, peace, tranquillity, and other virtues
wherewith the mind and soul of man is garnished, declare the exceeding great
goodness and love of God toward mankind: so that these most gracious gifts of
God, woorthily ought to provoke and stir us up to al praise and thankfulness.

The Vine branches, which spread themselves abroad, and give comfortable
shadow against the heat of the Sun, signify in the Scriptures felicity,
honor, dignity, magnificence, worship and renown.

So does the princely Prophet David by an elegant Allegory of the Vine and her
branches, reckon up the prosperous estate of the Hebrews, which was afterward
sauced with sower and bitter calamities. For thus does he reason with God; Thou
have brought a Vine Psalm. 80, 8.
out of Egypt: to wit, the people of the Jews: thou have cast out the heathen,
and planted it: that is, thou bestowedst great diligence in trimming, manuring
and dressing it: She stretched out her branches unto the sea, and her boughs
unto the river: that is, she enlarged the bounds and limits of her dominion.
Why have thou then broken down her hedge? So that all they which go by, pluck
off her grapes. That is, do despoile, ransacke, tear asunder, and dismember
the royal power of the Jewish nation, and that because they want thy defense
and protection. The very same argument handles Isaiah, in a Similitude taken
from the Vineyard, and the Isaie, 5, 7.
buds or branches of the Vine.

There is in Ezechiel a notable place shadowed under an aenigmatical Parable of
a great ^auenous Egle, (by the which, the Lord means the king of Babylon, who
greedily gaped Ezec. 17, 3.
^or the kingdom of Israel) and of a flourishing Vine with great and wide
spreading branches. Whereof the whole drift is, to show, that there is in this
world nothing steadie, permanent, durable, or of continuance: and that there is
no trust to be reposed in any mortal creature, or worldly Potentate: for
that the leagues, amities, and pacts of Kings and Princes, and all their
societies, confederacies, and flourishing principalities be liable to ruin,
and subject to mutabilitie.

For, God at his pleasure, somewhile subuerteth and ouerturneth them: even as a
Vine is pruned and lopped, when it is too rank of leaves, branches and
boughs: and many times extolleth, dignifieth and aduanceth those things, that
in sight seem to be abject, base and contemptible: as in the end of that
Chapter he plainly affirms, in these words; And all the trees of the field
shall know: that is, all the proud, stately and pompous Verse. 24.
Kings shall well understand, that I the Lord have brought down the high
tree, and exalted the low tree: that I have dried up the green tree, and made
the dry tree to flourish. I the Lord have spoken it, and have done it. Heerby
signifieng, that the Lord exalts the humble and contemptible, and brings
down the proud and arrogant.

The self same thing did the blessed Virgin also acknowledge, leaving it in
memory in that her most godly and heavenly Hymn to all posterities; that God
extends his mercy Luke. 1. 50.
unto all them that fear him, but scatters the proud and arrogant in their
own wicked imaginations: that he fills the hungry with good things, and
suffers the rich to continue hungry.

A little after, the same Ezechiel prosecuting still the same argument, thundreth
out a prophecy against the proud, perjured, and cruel princes, Iehoas,
Iehoiakim, and Zedechiah. For he does depaint them in their right colors, and
lively set them down according to their peevish dispositions, so that in them
was verified the old proverb, Mali corui, Ezec. 19, 2.
malum ouum. Wherefore lay thy mother that Liones, among the Lions? she
nourished her young ones among the Lions whelps. One of her whelps she
brought up, and it became a Lion: it learned to catch the pray, and to devour
men. The heathen heard of him, and caught him in their nets. The Mother seeing
her self disappointed of her hope and expectation, took another of her
whelps, to wit, Iehoiakim, and made him a Lion, that is, a tirant; Who went
among the Lions and became a fierce Lion, and learned to catch the pray, and to
devour men: and to make widows, and destroy cities; who at last was caught
and brought in chains to the king of Babylon.

And the more to exaggerate the heinousnes of this thing, and to amplify the
cruelty of the king, which he had sucked (as it were) from his mothers breast,
he goes to the very groundworke of the matter, using a Physical metaphor,
thus; Thy mother is like a vine in thy blood. Which metaphor and the other that
immediately follow, no man can rightly expound that is not skilled in Physic,
and the works of nature. For he there alludeth to the natural manner of a
child being yet within the mothers womb: which is nourished with a menstrous
blood. His meaning therefore is, that his mother (from whom he sucked cruelty)
was exceeding fruitful and abounding with blood, as a plentiful vine,
planted by the water side: whereby it came to pass that by reason of his rank
nourishment wherewith he was franked and glutted, he became to have great
strength and robusteous might. As that which follows does witness; She brought
forth fruit and branches by the abundant waters: that is, through the
abundance of nourishing humors in her womb; And she had strong rods for the
Scepters of them that bare rule: thereby meaning his regal dignity, princely
preeminence, and courtly pomp; And her stature was exalted on high among the
branches, and she appeered in her height with the multitude of her branches:
meaning his power and majesty, which should stretch and extend very far: and
His stature exalted on high among the branches, signifies, that in
magnificence he far surmounted any of his neighbor kings and princes,
bordering upon him, and that he victoriously enlarged the limits of his
kingdom and jurisdiction.

But when; As he being thus advanced to honor, began to forsake the Lord his
God, he (although 2. Kings. 23, 32, 33, 34. and 24, 19. Iere. 52, 2.
he were as a goodly and broad spread Vine) yet was he plucked up, and his rods
withered, and it self transplanted in a dry, thirsty, and desert place; to
wit, into miserable thraldom, and servile banishment, into the which he was
carried away captive, and entierly deprived of al his estate and Roialtie,
which is showed in these next words; He has no more any strong rod to be as a
scepter to rule: that is, he shall be lest utterly without any majesty, honor,
magnificence, dignity, or authority to protect or countenance him from
contempt.

Thus far of the root and of the branches of the Vine, from whence our Savior
takes Similitudes: resembling the godly (which are graffed into him by faith,
and do bring forth the fruits of good works) unto fruitful branches: And the
wicked, (void of faith and charity) he compares unto dry, withered, and
unprofitable slips, which are accordingly to be cast into the fire. Whereof we
spoke before, in the Chapter of the Vine, wherein was explaned that place of S.
John the Ioh. 15, 2.
Evangelist.

The Boughs also, which (like arms) proceed and spread out from the trunk or
body of the trees, are (by the like metaphore, as branches be) used in the
Scriptures.

And under this word is signified might, strength, firmitie, safety, health,
beauty, honor and ornament of the whole race or family, together with the
propagation of posterity, and continuance of the stock and kindred in one
ligne and pedagrew.

So does the Wiseman use it, whereby he promises felicity and prosperous
years to him that ensues and embraces Wisdom; The fear of the Lord (says
he) is the root of Eccle. 1, 24.
Wisdom, and her branches are long life: that is, the date of his days shall
be prolonged, and his life shall be lengthened.

The Apostle uses also a notable metaphorical speech, taken from the boughs
broken off from the natural Olive tree, and others graffed into their place:
whereby by a most strong argument, he proves and shows, that the Jews are
not so entirely cut away, and broken off, that no manner of hope is left for
their recovery; but rather, that they shall again be graffed in, if they
abide Romans 11, 23
not still in unbelief. For if the first fruits be holy, so is the whole
lump: and if the root be holy, so are the boughs and branches. If Abraham
Verse. 16.
the father of believers believed God, and it was Gal. 3, 6. Romans 4, 11. Iam.
2, 23.
imputed to him for righteousness: why should not his successors and posterity
express their fathers faith, and imitate him in his godly example?

But as fair spreading boughs do sometime signify felicity and prosperous
successet so sometimes again in the Scriptures they are applied to the
contrary; that is to say, to adversity: and do signify calamity, misery
and trouble that shall light upon the wicked. And in this sense does holy Job
use them, saying; The wicked man is all the days of his life, Job. 15, 20. 29,
30.
as one traveling of child: but he shall neither be rich, neither shall his
substance continue: neither shall the prosperity thereof be prolonged upon
earth. The flame shall dry up his boughs, and devour his branches: that is
to say, all things shall go backward with him, and turn to his confusion. And
although the wicked seem for a while to flourish, and lustily to spread out
their branches, yet shall sudden destruction in the end overtake them, and all
their iollitie in a moment be turned topsituruie.

The same (as the Wiseman pronounces) shall befall to the froward and perverse
generation of the wicked, saying; Bastard plants Wisd. 5, 3.
shall take no deep root, nor lay any fast foundation. And though they bud
forth in the branches for a time, yet they shall be shaken with the wind; they
stand not fast, and therefore shall they be rooted up, and pulled out of their
places. Their imperfect branches shall be broken, because they have not
strength and firmitie, neither are come to any just growth: and their fruit
shall be unprofitable, and sower to eat, yea meet for nothing. Meaning (as by
the course of the text may plainly be perceived) that neither such fathers,
nor yet such children and posterity commonly bring any benefit or commodity
to the Commonwealth: but as he immediately afterward says; Children borne of
the wicked bed, are witnesses Verse. 6.
of the wickedness against their parents.

In the 23. Chapter of Ecclesiasticus is the same Argument handled, wherein be
reckoned up sundry sins proceeding of Adultery, and the shameful crime of
her, that plaieng the Whore, gets her children by another Eccl. 23, 22.
man than her own husband. Which crime he so earnestly and vehemently there
displaieth, that first he shows, how she is justly to be smutted with open
infamy, that she shall be brought out into the congregation, to be a gazing
stock to the world, and that examination shall be made of her children: which
shall not succeed in the inheritance of their supposed father, but live in
contempt, without any honor or estimation: and finally, that they shall not
take root, nor their branches bring forth any fruit.

A like saying has he also in another place; The children of the ungodly shall
not obtain many Eccl. 40, 15.
branches, and the unclean roots as upon the high rocks shall be rooted out.
Meaning (as Christ said Matt. 13, 5. Mark. 4, 5. Luc. 8, 6.
of the seed, which fell in hard and stony ground) that the issue begotten in
uncleanness, cannot take root, nor arise to any hope of posterity, but that
as soon as any of the stock and progeny begins to sproute and come up, it
anon again withers away, and is brought to nothing.

Much like to this, is that saying of Isaiah: Before the harvest when the flower
is finished, and the fruit is riping in the flower, the Lord shall cut down
the branches with hooks, and shall take away and cut off the boughs. By which
Metaphor he shows, that all things go prosperously forward for a while, with
the wicked; their corn ripeth, and their harvest draws on, their fruits
prosper, and are timely: but even when all things seem to be at their full
ripenes, and they themselves hoping even now to enjoy their fruits; both corn
and grain, crop and fruit, bough and branch are sweeped away, and the great
show of former benefit, with a trice defeated and frustrated.

The Flower, is the joy, beauty, and delight Flower.
of the trees, in the Spring time of the year, feeding the beholders eye with
pleasure, and refreshing his nose with comfortable sent and smell. Now Plants
and Herbs, do blossom and flower, some at one time, and some at another: for
some there be that burgeine and shoot out in the Spring, some in Summer, some
in Autumn, and some (in temperate climates and mild air, where the biting
frost nippeth not) in Winter.

And under the name of Flower, there is meant, as well in the Scriptures as in
other writers, every such thing as is in his excellent prime, and gallant
bravery. So is the lusty time of youth and adolescencie, termed by the name
of the flower of age. For then is the body in his perfectest comelines, beauty
and proportion. In the same sense are used also, leaves, green grass, ^aie,
stubble, and other things of small continuance, which quickly and suddenly
pass and fade away.

So does the Apostle Paul resemble and compare doctrine that is corrupt,
unsound, dangerous, counterfaite, superstitious, and hypocritall, unto Timber,
Haie, and Stubble. 1. Cor. 3, 12
For, whosoever are without the sound and sincere truth, comprised and
warranted in the volumes of the sacred and Canonical Scriptures, mouldre and
vanish away as smoke, and cannot abide the trial when the storms of temptation
begin to blow, even as dry sticks and rotten wood cannot abide the force of
the burning flame, but are straightwaies consumed.

But most commonly the pleasant gallantise and amorous beauty of the Flower,
in the Scriptures is usually applied to such things as be frail, transitory,
fading, ruinous and momentanie. As in Job. Man that is borne of a woman is of
short continuance, and full of trouble. He shoots forth as a flower, and
vanishes away as a shadow. Wherewith agrees that which the Prophet David
writes; The days of man Psa. 103, 15
are as grass: as a flower of the field, so florisheth he. By which words he
means such a thing as quickly perishes and passes away, albeit for the time
it seem to the eye, gallant, beautiful and amiable.

And to the intent, every man should on the one side, have daily before the
eyes of his mind his frail estate and brittle condition: and on the other
side, the power, efficacy and eternity of the word of God, Isaiah is
commanded with a loud voice to proclaim and cry out, that All flesh is
grass, and all the grace thereof as the flower of the field. The gras withers
Isai. 40, 7. Eccl. 14, 17.
the flower fades: because the spirit of the Lord blows upon it: surely the
people is grass. The grass is withered, and the flower is faded: But the word
of our God endures for ever. Notifieng thereby that all pomp, glory, dignity,
magnificence, or whatsoever else in man is admirable and highly set by, whether
they by gifts inward of the mind, or outward of the body, at the breath of God
fade and vanish away.

Let every man therefore stand upon his guard, and take heed that he repose
not any confidence in these brittle, transitory, and momentanie gifts, or in
these vain goods of the world, but that he stay himself upon the sure and
infallible word of God, which is only permanent, wholesome, solid and
comfortable.

To the consideration of these eternal and aie during riches, the two blessed
Apostles 1. Pet. 1, 4. Iam. 1, 21.
of our Lord, Peter and James do earnestly exhort us: that we should leave
seeking after the vain vanities of this wicked world: and study to attain
the eternal and everlasting ioies of heaven, whereunto Christ in his blessed
word inuiteth us.

There be many mo the like metaphores and Similitudes taken from leaves and
flowers, which to the conscience and mind of each zealous Christian, depainteth
and sets forth the transitory trash and fickle hold that by daily
experience is known to rest in these worldly things, wherewith men are usually
puffed up into such insolent pride and arrogancy.

And thus does the Prophet Isaiah compare the pride and loftines of Ephraim
(and under them, all others, infected with the like vices) unto fading flowers,
and falling leaves. For thus threateneth he destruction unto them; Woe be unto
the crown of pride, even to the Isai. 28, 1.
Drunken people of Ephraim, whose great pomp is as a flower that falls away.
The crown of the pride of the drunken Ephraemites, shall be trodden under
foot. For his glorious beauty shall be a fading flower, and as the hasty
fruit before Summer. For as rath ripe fruits and Apples are not long lasting,
nor of any great continuance: so likewise shall not their felicity continue
in any long prosperity.

Nahum the Prophet likewise by the same Similitude shows that there is
nothing in the world so brave, gallant, beautiful, and amiable, but that God
can and will destroy and bring it to nothing, when his wrath is kindled against
the obstinate and wicked: insomuch that all the flowers and buds, that is, the
pomp and glory of huffing Roysters be with a trice dispatched, dispersed,
defeated, and adnihilated: which in these words he sets down and
describes; Basan is Nah. 1, 4.
wasted, and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon is wasted: that is, all the
power and strength is decayed, and all the bravery brought to nothing.

After flowers, are the Fruits and Seeds Seed.
next to be spoken of: whereof, for that there be thence Similitudes usually
fetched and borrowed, we must note this by the way: That Seed (as also the
Fruit) in the Scriptures is taken for the tribe, kindred, stock, pedagrew and
offspring, from whence a man is issued and descended: the which God in his word
promises to bless with all welfare and prosperity, in those that follow his
laws and observe his commandments. As the Prophet David in one of his Psalms
witnesses, saying; I have been young, and now am old: Psalm. 37, 25.
and yet saw I never the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread.
His seed shall be blessed: and the righteous shall inherit the land: as for
the seed of the ungodly, it shall perish, and be rooted out.

So, Eliphaz one of Job his friends that came to reason with him, and to
comfort him, commends the chastisement of the Lord, proouing the same to be
very beneficial and profitable for man; for that thereby he is taught and
schooled to submit himself under his mighty hand, and thankfully to receive
his fatherly correction: being certainly persuaded that the same is sent unto
him for his amendment, to try his constancy and patience; and thereby
therefore does man receive singular blessing and commodity. Thou shall see
(says he) that thy seed shall be great, and thy posterity as the grass of
the earth. Job. 5, 25.
Thou shall go to thy grave in a full age, as a ricke of corn comes in due
season into the barn: that is, thou shall (as a man of noble calling and high
parentage) be honorably buried, with a great assembly of Nobles, solemnizing
thy funerals.

Again, for that both herbs and trees do bear and bring forth seed, which
afterward produces the like plant according to his kind, and so from one to
another infinitely: therefore the holy Prophets do also use it, for the
garnishing and illustrating of their Arguments and Sermons.

Seed therefore signifies success, increase, plenty, foison and abundance.
As in the Prophet Isaiah we may evidently see, where the Lord promises to al
them that trust in him, and embrace his laws, all felicity, success and
abundance. The Lord (says he) shall give Isai. 30, 23.
rain to thy Seed, when thou shall sow the ground, and bread of the increase
of the earth, which shall be fat and very plentious. In that day also shall thy
cattle be fed in large pastures. The Oxen also and the young Asses that till
the ground, shall eat clean prouender, which is winnowed with the shouell and
the fan. Signifieng that his worldly wealth and temporal goods should be
maruellously increased, and all things should prosper according to his hearts
desire.

The same reason is for the Fruit: for in Fruit.
the Bible, the Fruits of herbs and trees do betoken and signify plenty,
abundance, fertility, blessedness, prosperity, works good and evil,
scarcity, dearth, penury, justice, integrity, wickedness, impiety, loosenes,
dishonestie, and lewd manners, which are also signified under the name of Corn
or Grain. So, the Prophet Hosea, exhorting men going astray, and forgetting
themselves, to virtue, integrity of life, and righteous dealing, says thus;
Sow to your selves in righteousness and reap Hos. 10, 12.
after the measure of mercy: Break up your fallow ground, for it is time to
seek the Lord. In which words he counsels and advises them to forsake
their woonted manner of life, and to live in such sort as may be acceptable and
pleasant to God. For hitherto (says he) you have plowed wickedness, you have
reaped iniquity, you have eaten the fruit of lies. By the which metaphore he
shows how, that they practiced nothing else than fraud, quarrels, wrangling,
suttletie, falsehoode, deceit, and how to entrap, circumuent, undermine,
deceive, and oppress the innocent. Now here therefore he admonishes them to
leave their filthy practizes, and to pluck up by the roots all the wicked
weeds and noisome tares out of their hearts; and in lieu thereof to sow in the
furrows of a pure conscience, honest and Christian dealing, mildenes, lenity,
courtesy, righteousness, and true neighborhood.

The self same thing does the Lord likewise by his Prophet Jeremy, earnestly
command Ierem. 4, 4.
and strictly enioine, saying; Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among
the thorns: that is, see that your hearts be manured and garnished with the
godly seeds of integrity, righteousness, innocence and goodness, having the
thorns and briers of wickedness quite plucked up by the roots.

And this is further manifestly witnessed by the Prophet Isaiah, where as the
Lord by a most notable kind of consolation, assures the mind and conscience
of the godly, that he shall not miss to obtain salvation. For thus
proclaims he safeguard and health unto them, in their great afflictions and
almost desperate troubles; Say to the righteous that it Isai. 3, 10.
shall go well with them, for they shall eat the fruit of their works and
studies. Assuring him thereby of assistance, and willing him to be of good
comfort and cheer: because in the extremity of famine or war, (when others
shall be surprised in calamities and afflictions) he shall quietly and safely
enjoy the things which he has received from the Lord God, by the work and
travel of his own hands. But woe be unto the wicked (says he) for it shall be
evil with him: and the reward of his own hands shall be given unto him.

But Fruit is also sometimes taken in the Scriptures for children, issue and
posterity: which the princely Prophet David, testisieth to be an especial
blessing of God, as by his words it plainly appears; Behold (says he)
children and the fruit of the womb, are an heritage Psalm. 127, 3.
and gift that comes of the Lord.

Again, where God, under the name of David, pronounces that the kingdom of
Christ shall be everlasting. The Lord (says he) has sworn in truth unto
David, and he will not Psa. 132, 11.
shrink from it, saying, of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy
throne. There will I make the horn of David to flourish: For I have ordained a
light for mine anointed. As for his enemies, I will cloth them with shame; but
on him shall his crown flourish.

In which words he meruellously aduaunceth the honor, strength, and majesty of
his empire, which should far and wide be extended. And under the type and
person of David he signifies how the kingdom of Christ our Savior (which is
spiritual) and his church (which is the congregation of the faithful,) shall
never be quite overthrown and oppressed, nor with any length of years or
iniquity of time abolished: although the enemies thereof never so fiercely
rage against it, and bloody persecutors (maligning and deadly hating the light
of the Gospel, and the doctrine of salvation, seek all means in the world to
deface and quench it. And to this effect is that sweet and comfortable saying
of our Savior Christ himself, touching a firm and immovable faith, and
vnexpugnable profession of his name, promising, that The gates of hell shall
not prevail against Mat. 16, 18.
it.

For, whosoever is surely ankored upon this sound and immovable foundation,
stands fast and needs not to fear any harm to betide him: but is sure to
be protected and guarded from all manner of mischief whatsoever.

And this thing Christ also in another place witnesses, by bringing in a
Similitude of a Wiseman, that Builded his house not upon the Matt. 7, 24.
sand, but on a sure rock; so that although the rain fall, the floods come,
and the winds blow, and beat upon that house, yet falls it not, because it
is surely grounded upon a Rock. By which Similitude he signifies, that such
as have a ^ounde and lively faith, and testify the same in their lives and
conversation, have their consciences inuincibly armed against all storms and
tempests, that daily and howerly assail each true Christian.

This assurance and safety, which all they do enjoy that constantly repose
themselves upon the mercies of God by faith, and wholly refer themselves unto
his divine will and protection, is notably also described and set out by the
Prophet David in his 91. Psalm. Psalm. 91.
Wherein he pronounces safety and protection from all perils and mishaps that
may any ways betide him, namely, from the noisome pestilence and plague, and
from any other danger whatsoever, as well privy as apert, by night as by day.

All which comes to pass, for that he rests under the defense of the most
High, and dwells under the shadow of the Almighty, and being covered under
his wings, and protected under his feathers, it is impossible that he should in
any wise miscarrie.

Thomas Newtonus, Cestreshyrius.

FINIS.
The Table.
A
AArons rod, 244 Abrecocks, 215 Agalochum, vide Lignum Aloes. Almond tree, 233
Aloe, 122. 193 All hope in the Lord alone, 40 Ambregrice, 122 Ammoniack, 122
Angerona, 226 Anyse, 169. 204 Antiochus, 176. 180 Apples, 214
B
BAal Paeor, the same that Priapus, 113. 163 Babylon, 137 Bacchus feast, 176
Balm, 123. 127 Baptism, 28 Barlie, 74 Bastards, 275 Beech, 218. 248 Benzewin,
122 Berberies, 71 Bough, 274 Box tree, 197. 204 Borith, 56. 59. 60. 62 Branch,
269. 275 Broom, 130 Bubble of water, 161 Bud, 259. 267 Burre, 228
C
CAmphyre, 193 Capers, 237. 240 Cassia, 122 Cedar tree, 127. 222. 250 Cherries,
179. 216 Chafe, 156. 26^ Cockle, 226 Coloquintida, 47 Condisi, vide Borith.
Corn, 283 Crimsin, 62. 64 Crocomagma, 194 Crowtoes, vide Hyacynth. Cucumber,
161 Cummine, 74. 169 Cinamome, 193 Cypress tree, 127. 190. 222 Cyrus king of
Persia, 80 Cytron, 179. 189. 215
D
DIamoron, 179 Damsons, 179. 216 Daniell the Prophet, 83 Darnell, vide Cockle.
Date tree, vide Palm tree.
E
EGlantine, 221 Elephantes, 180 Elm tree, 197. ^18
F
FEnell, 204 Fig tree, 111. 112. 259 Fir tree, 205. 250 Fi^ches, 75 Flax, 154
Flower, 278 Frankincense, 122. 193 Fruit, 283 Fruits of the spirit, 55
Fullers weed, 56. 60. 62 Furze 67
G
GAll, 103. 105 Garlic, 162 Gilead, a Sanctuary, 136 Gith, 72. 73. 227
Githago 227 Gourd, 164* 175* 177 Graffe, ^61 Grain to die silk with all, etc.
62. 67 Grass, 178 G^iacum vide Hebenus.
H
HArpocrates, 226 Hasting fruit, 216 Haie, 278 Heath, 130 Hebenus, 120
Hortensius his delight in the Plane tree, 249 Hyacinth an herb, 88. 90. A
precious stone, 90. 93 Hysope, 146. 230
I
Idolatry resembled to whooredome, 66. 93 Juniper, 164 Iuie, 174 Iuorie, 121
K
KIngs, studious of Physic, 1 Kingdom of Christ, 262
L
LArch tree, 205 Leekes, 162 Lentiske tree, 83. 85 Letuce, 27. 177 Lignum
Aloes, 123 Lignum Indicum, 206 Lilly, 173. 2^3. 264 Lymons, 179 Lynden tree,
248 Lycurgus law for secrecy, 225
M
MAndrake, 10. much paltry used therewith, ibid. his nature, 13. the time when
it is gathered, 16 Manna, 23. 25. 26 Maple, 218 Masticke, 83. 85 Maidenhaire,
148 Malt, 48. 74 Meal, 48 Medlars, 215 Melanthion, vide Gith. Millet, 75
Mint, 169 Misselto, 87 Mulberie tree, 178 Musk, 122 Mushromes, 15
Mustardseede, 171. 182 Myrtle wine, 194 Myrtle tree, 194. 199. 22^ Myrrh, 121.
19^ Mythridate, 2
N
NEbuchadnezzar, 25^ Nettles, 166. 197 Nigella vide Gith. Nitre, 58 Nut, 211
O
Oak, 217 Olive, 34. 82. 260. 274 Olive beries, 37 Olive, the ensign of peace,
34 Oil, 34. 35. 36. 134 Onions, 162 Oppressors whereunto compared, 67. 69. 70
Orenges, 179. 189. 215
P
PAliurus, 67 Palma Christi, 247 Palm, 232 Palm tree, the ensign of
victory, 34. 115. 116 Paper rush, 96 Paschall lamb eaten with sower herbs,
30 Passover, 30 Peaches, 179. 215. 233 Pears, 215 Pepons, 177 Pine Apple, 202
Pine tree, 201 Plane tree, 247. 250 Plant, 267 Plums, 216 Pomegranates, 179.
186. 215 Potion consolidatiue, 37 Prime tree, 83. 85. 87 Prophets, most
skillful Herbarists, 6 Pseudomyrtus, 201 Purple, 62. 63. 89 Purselane, 177
Q
Quinces, 215
R
REbellion punished, 244 Reed, 149 Rhamnus or Christ's thorn, 43
Rhodopharmacum, 220 Rock, 286 Root, 263. 274 Rose, 220 Rosen, 132 Rosemarie,
230 Rue, 169 Rushes, 94. 98
S
SAcraments why ordained, 28 Saffron, 192 Saliunca, 53 Sedge, 94. 98 Seed, 282
Shittim wood, 190 Shrubbe, 259 Slips, 259 Solomon a most skillful Herbarist, 3
Summer fruit, 216 Soap woort, 56. 60. 62 Soap, 60. 61 Spikenard, 193 Spondyles
of the back, 241 Stacte, 122 Straw, 156 Struthion, vide Borith, Stubble, 155.
199. ^78 Sucket, 190 Superstition odious, 59 Supper of the Lord, 28 Sycomore,
181
T
Tale carriers, 224 Tamariske, 130 Terebinth tree, 124 Thistles, 106 Thorn,
43. 67. 69. 106. 108. 197 Timber, 278 Tow, 157 Trichomanes, 148 Turpentine, 124
Twigge, 259
V
Vine, 108. 138. 213. 271
W
WAlnut, 212. 246 Wardens, 215 Wedlock, 225 Wheat, 75 Wild fig tree, 181
Wild myrt, 200 Wild vine, 166 Willow, 49. why the Jews hanged their Harpes
thereon, 50. 51. 52 Wicked, overtaken in the midst of their pride, 38. 45. 97.
Wine, 35. 134 Winter fruit, 215 Works of the flesh, 55 Woormewood, 100. 101.
102. 103. 105
X
Xerxes, delighted in the Plane tree, 249
Z
ZAchaeus, 182 Ziuet, 122
FINIS.

