Those. Iolley Esqr. F.S.A.


THE YOUNG GALLANTS WHIRLIGIGG: OR YOVTHS REAKES. Demonstrating the inordinate
affections, absurd actions, and profuse expenses, of unbridled and affectated
Youth: With their extravagant courses, and preposterous progressions, and
aversions. Together with The too often dear bought experience, and the rare,
or too late regression and reclamation of most of them from their habitual ill
customs, and vnqualified manners.

Vsitatum peccatum, peccatum non videtur.

Compiled and written by F.L.

Nemo laeditur nisi aseipso. Ergo: Iam vitulos hortare, viamque insiste domandi,
Dumfaciles animi juvenum; dum mobilis aetas.
Virg.

LONDON, Printed by M.F. for Robert Bostocke, at the sign of the Kings head in
Paul's Churchyard. 1629.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Sir JULIUS CAESAR Knight, Master of the Rolls, and
one of his Maties most Honorable Privy Counsel.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
Observing the bypath of this prodigal generation, and having contracted my
self within a smaller, and narrower compass, then the loosnes of too many do
admit, I thought it not amiss (seeing examples take no impression in the lives
of lascivious youths) to venture upon a check to their follies, by way of
precept, in some brief impolisht Numbers; suiting with the common enormities
of these times. And in regard that I once belonged to the Innes-of-Court, and
have a long time as well by general reports, as my own particular knowledge)
been an eye witness of your Loyalty in your Place, Piety in your Family,
Clemency toward poor Clyents, Charity to the Needy, and Courtesy to All: I
have presumed (under your Honors favor) to present you with a piece of an
hours recreation, licensed by good Authority. I am no usual Poetizer, but to
bar Idleness have employed that little talent the Muses have conferred upon
me, in this little Tract. If it shall please your Honor but to warm it under
your Noble wings, no doubt but it will grow bigger and better, and encourage me
to write a more large and solid Labor. Accept it then, Right Honorable, and
peruse it but with the tithe of that respect which my duty and devotion
presents it, and none shall be more truly grateful to your so much honored
Gravity, then

Your Honors most humbly obliged FRA: LENTON.

To three sorts of Readers.
YOu homebred Dotards wonted to relate
The tedious stories of a quondam State,
Tie up your tongues, and now with admiration,
Behold the times preposterous alteration:
If your experience will find out the truth
Like Aeson your old age must turn to youth.
You gilded Snow-balls, and aspiring Sprights,
That naught discern but sensual delights,
That throw away your days before you can
Truly deserve the Epithete of Man:
Observe these Numbers, and impolisht Lays,
Which though they cannot merit any Bays,
May (if you please) as in a looking-glass,
Show you the follies of a golden Ass.
I do not Satyrize; but still desire
In loving zeal, and true fraternall fire,
T'informe your judgments by some men's decay,
And by their wandering point you perfect way.
Precepts are good, but if you them refuse,
Your own example may make good my Muse.
You tender Blades, not ripened by the Times,
That know, nor Virtue, nor the modern Crimes,
Whose understandings cannot apprehend
How far your Will, your Reason does extend:
Whose softer minds, and young progressions,
Are apt for any fair impressions:
Behold foul Vice clad in a gorgeous ray,
And pined Virtue patcht in poorest gray:
Take heed in time, be happy if you can;
See, and forsake by this unhappy Man.
But if according to your youthful days,
You will be mad, and memorate your praise
By your loose Actions; spinning out your thread
In vanity, until your fatal bed
Surprise you unawares; and take you hence
Before your souls have thought of penitence:
Know, when your Ignorance has had full scope,
You Will curse your selves if ere your eyes be open,
And think too late, of what I find too true,
As more have done, as well as I, or you.
A Fiction by way of Argument on this Book.
POndering the paths of this polluted age,
And viewing every Scene upon the Stage
Of this vile orb; me thought I did behold
A giddy spirit in an Isle of Gold;
His head me thought was like a Windmill, big,
In which ten thousand thoughts run Whirligigg,
Enclosed he was (not by delusiue dreams)
With real luftre of Pactola's streams;
In which he proudly sails with glorious deckes,
Until the frigide Zone his passage checkes
By hard congealed Rocks, by which he split
His goodly Bulk; shipwrackt himself, and it.
But Neptune tendering his unhappy goare,
Commands the waves to cast him on the shore,
Where when a while in mind he had forecast
His finne against the gods by times ill past,
Jove sent his messenger to tell him yet,
Pallas had promised wisdom, to his wit;
This raised his spirits, and twixt grief* and zeal,
By bright Apollo's aid, rings youth a Peale.
THE WHIRLIGIGG.
Leaving the learned Axioms of old,
Which grave Philosophers have wisely told,
And left behind them in a moral book,
For childish youth and crooked age to look;
I do intend to explicate some Crimes,
Now perpetrated in these modern times,
Which differ from the olderne days as far,
As is the Artique from the Antartique Star.
And thou Caliope thou noble Muse,
Into my brains thy Coelique power infuse,
That I may plainly point out my intent,
For youth to know, and knowing to prevent;
And though some Critiques may suppose me vain
To write these Numbers in heroicke strain;
They being used at sad Obsequies,
By weeping lines in doleful Elegies:
To satisfy their pregnant wits in this,
I tell them I was one of those remiss
And giddy Youths which wandered in the air
Of vain opinion, and excluding Care;
But when my riper years began to spy
The end thereof to be but misery;
And when I saw their fond, and idle crashes
To be like Meteors only spent in flashes,
I did retire then from that deep abyss,
Where horrid Gorgons do both sting, and hysse,
And dying from that life, as on my Hearse,
I wrote these Numbers in heroic Verse.
But now my Gallants Age I mean to skan,
Of Infancy, of Childhood, Youth and Man:
The former two I will but only touch,
Lest his two following Ages prove too much.
When at his Mothers tender paps he lay,
How did she wait upon him every day,
Tyring her self by tossing in her arms
His grisly body, keeping it from harms.
And when his growth has lent him legs to go,
Reeling and tottering then both to and fro,
How often did she watch, and cry, and call;
Take heed the little Boy there does not fall:
Her ardent Care, joined with her constant Eye,
Did still attend his imbecilitie.
Her womb and breasts, in which he did delight,
He never shall be able to requite.
His Childhood next (unless he was a fool)
Required them, to put him unto School:
Where in process of time he grew to be
A pretty Scholar; after took degree
In The University, as it was fit,
Whose Tutor said he had a ready wit,
And well could argue by old Ramus lays,
And is the thirteen Fallacies had praise;
He well could skill upon brave Kickerman,
And argue soundly ore a Pipe or Can:
For Scholars sometime to an Alehouse creeping,
Increase their wits more then in books by peeping*
Now all this while he had not his full scope,
Therefore they did conceive of him great hope,
His Tutor was the man that kept him in,
That he ran not into excess of Sin.
His literature filled his Parents hearts
With joy, and comfort, hoping his deserts
Might purchase credit and a good report,
And therefore send him to the Innes of Court,
To study Laws, and never to surcease,
Till he be made a Justice for the peace.
Now here the ruin of the Youth begins,
For when the Country cannot find out sins
To fit his humor, London does invent
Millions of vices, that are incident
To his aspiring mind; for now one year
Does eleuate him to a higher sphere;
And makes him think he has achieved more,
Then all his fathers ancestors before.
Now thinks his father, here is a goodly Son,
That has approached unto Littleton,
But never looked on it; for in stead of that
Perhaps he is playing of a game at Cat.
No, no, good man, he reads not Littleton,
But Don Quix Zot, or else The Knight o'th Sun:
And if you chance unto him put a Case,
He Will say perhaps you offer him disgrace,
Or else upon a little further pawse,
Will swear he never could abide the Laws:
That they are harsh, confused: and to be plain,
Transcend the limits of his shallow brain.
Instead of Perkins pedlers French, he says
He better loves Ben: Iohnsons book of Plays,
But that therein of wit he finds such plenty,
That he scarce understands a Jest of twenty;
Nay keep him there until the day of doom,
He Will never read out Natura Breuium;
But Ouid-like against his fathers mind,
Find pleasant studies of another kind.
Now twice the Sun his annual course has flitted
Since first this goodly Gallant was admitted,
And now as he approaches toward the Bar,
His friends, and parents, very iocund are;
And to encourage him in the Laws lore,
He spends much money, and they send him more.
He ruffles now in Satin, Silk, and Plush,
And oftentimes soliciteth the bush,
Imbroydred suits, such as his father never
Knew what they meant; nor he knows how to wear,
This golden Ass, in this hard Iron age,
Aspireth now to sit upon the stage,
Looks round about, then viewes his glorious self,
Throws money here and there, swearing hang pelf;
As if the splendour of his mightiness
Should never see worse days, or feel distress.
His quoyne expended by alluring hooks,
His parents him supply to buy him books,
As he pretends: but stead of Cokes Reports,
He Is fencing, dancing, or at other sports.
Thus he affects himself in these fond ways,
To gain an outward superficial praise
Amongst a crew, of sense so much bereft,
They scarcely know the right hand from the left*
His dancing Master he supposes can
Make him a right accomplished Gentleman,
Although his birth abridg'd it; therefore he
Now learnes the postures of the cap and knee,
Carrying his body in as curious sort,
As any Revellor in the Innes of Court,
That Ladies do behold him with some pleasure
Capring Corantoes, or some smooth-faced Measure,
And in the end of his so active dance,
Some crooked Lady claps her hands by chance,
Which adds such fuel to his kindled fire,
That he outstrips proud Phaetons desire.
And should great Juno but approach so nie,
He durst presume to court her Deity.
Now Venus has him in her lovely arms,
And the blind Boy prouokes him with his charms,
Casting from beauteous objects piercing darts,
Which strike fond Lovers to their fiery hearts;
Which being once inflamed still does burn,
Until their fuel unto ashes turn.
He now courts every thing he hears or sees,
With more delight then Lawyers take their fees.
And when he is far distant from his Fair,
(Through ardencie) he complements with air,
VVishing (Camelion-like) that he might live
Enclosed within the breath which she does give:
All amorous conceits he now commends,
And for the same his money vainly spends:
He now scorns Prose, and on his Mistress Name
Writes an Acrostique* or some Anagramme,
To show his wit: and therefore he has got
Some Poetaster for a double pot,
To lend his aid unto his thin-sculd brain,
To paint her praises in a lofty strain,
By some Encomiastique Adulation,
To which she has or small, or no relation:
The Poet undertakes it on condition,
He spends a quart of Sack for expedition:
And then he sends it unto Mistress Tit,
In his own name, though by another wit.
Thus when in streets he shall be seen to pass,
The Poet says, There goes a simple Ass,
And makes it unto his Associates known,
He writes good lines, but never writes his own.
Your Theaters he daily does frequent
(Except the intermitted time of Lent)
Treasuring up within his memory
The amorous toys of every Comedy,
With deep delight; whereas he does appear
Within Gods Temple scarcely once a year,
And that poor once more tedious to his mind,
Then a years travel, to a toiling Hynd.
Plays are the Nurseries of vice, the Bawd,
That through the senses steals our hearts abroad,
Tainting our ears with obscaene Bawdery,
Lascivious words, and wanton Ribaulry.
Charming the Casements of our Souls, the Eyes,
To gaze upon bewitching vanities,
Beholding base loose actions, mimick gesture,
By a poor boy clad in a princely vesture.
These are the only tempting baits of hell,
Which draw more youth unto the damned Cell
Of furious Lust, then all the Devil could do
Since he obtained his first overthrow.
Here Idleness, mixed with a wandering mind,
Shall such variety of objects find,
That ten to one his Will may break the fence
Of Reason, and embrace Concupiscence.
Or if this miss, there is another ginne
Close linckt unto this taper-house of Sin,
That will entice you unto Bacchus feasts,
Among Gallants that have bin his ancient guests,
There to carouse it till the welkin roar,
Drinking full boles until their bed's the floare:
Among these it is a customary fashion,
To drink their Mistress health with adoration
On bended knees, tossing whole flagons up,
Until their bellies fill again the cup;
And when for more they throw down pots and yall,
Their bladders kindness is reciprocal;
Swear, lie, stab, kill, adore their Mistress eyes,
More then the Master of the Olympicke skies.
Thus more like beasts then men, deuoid of reason,
They please their pallates, by committing treason
Against their God, whose Image they deface,
Obscuring Reason, and abhorring Grace,
Till Bacchus growing hornd, enlarged with fury,
Takes Atrapos his place without a Jury;
And who can tell whether Elysium
Receives their fowls, or the infernal tomb?
What is not apt unto a drunken soul?
Even any thing that is or base or foul;
From no absurdity it is exempt,
As daring any action to attempt.
The five great crying Sins of this our Land,
Which daily draws down Gods heavy hand,
Are incident to this vile watery sin,
That sticks so fast where it does once begin.
To swear, to lie, to kill, to steal, to whore,
With thousand other petty vices more.
Mark but the horrid oaths, that men do swear,
As if from heaven their Maker they would tear,
Adorning as they think their forged lies
With hellish Rhetorique of blasphemies;
Rejecting that which once the Lord did say,
Let yea be yea, and let your nay be nay:
Forgetting what a curse, and fatal blame,
Shall wait on them that crucify his name.
Lying the next, in which vain youths delight;
But such never tarryed in David's sight:
For they that do invent and frame such evil,
Are of their damned father, called the devil;
And if in time they look not well about,
Shall keep them company that are shut out.
The third is homicide, that cruel Crime,
That seld or never does at any time
Outline its punishment; for the Law is good
And just, that does require blood for blood:
But most of all when done on such false ground,
As in ebrietie is often found.
The fourth is Theft, the droane of Commonwealths
That never favors the goods or healths
Of Brethren, neighbors, that desire to thrive,
And by hard labor have increased their hiue,
No sooner got, but straight this crafty droane
By rapine takes, and spends it as his own.
The Law condemns, the Gall-house is prepared,
Many are trussed for this, but few deterred.
The fifth is Whoredom, and Adultery,
Daughters of Drunkenness, and Gluttony*
By these and Laziness they are begot,
As once appeared by the righteous Lot:
O! would but once that act had ever bin,
Then we had escaped, and Lot had borne that Sin.
And now my lusty Gallant still resolved
Into the middle region is inuolu'd,
Which thought it coldest be of constitution,
Yet does it not allay his resolution.
Old Daedalus his father being dead,
He now begins to take a greater head;
With Icarus he purposes to fly
As high as heaven, but mark and presently,
Great Phoebus by his power melts his wings,
And headlong to the Sea his body flings.
His fortunes drowned, his corpse the fishes prey,
His fiery brains quenched in the brinish Sea.
For now his fathers lands, bonds, golden bags,
Buys him a coach, four Flanders Mares, two nags,
A brace of geldings, and a brace of whores,
The one for pockes, the other plains, and moors:
Viewing his Chariot and his rich attire,
Makes him believe the world is all on fire.
He courts it now even at the Court indeed,
Sometimes on Gennet, sometimes English Steed,
Pacing with Lacques in the paued streets,
In glory bowing to each friend he meets,
(Too prodigal of his feigned Courtesy,
Which may be termed a proud humility)
The Estridge on his head with Beauer rare,
Upon his hands a Spanish Sent to wear,
Hairs curled, ears pearl'd, with Bristows brave and bright
Bought for true Diamonds, in his false sight;
All ore perfumed, and, as for him it is meet,
His body's clad in the Silk worms winding sheet.
Now thus accoutred, and attended to,
In Court and City there is no small ado
With this young Stripling, that obraids the gods,
And thinks twixt them, and him, there is no ods:
A haughty look, a more superbious mind,
And yet amongst his equals too-too kind.
A wanton eye, and a lascivious heart,
That sees no danger, till he feels the smart.
Now as where tamest feathered fowls abound,
Foxes keep station, and walk that round,
So when a raw young heir is come to land
He shall have foxes wait on every hand;
When wealth increases to a prodigal,
Who will profusely waste and spend it all,
There is vainglory; and without all doubt
The Flatterer will find that fellow out,
To soothe him in his gross and humorous ways,
That neither do deserve nor love nor praise:
For when such men do in applause delight,
They presently beget a Parasite,
Who by insinuating adulation
Debase themselves to others elevation:
This cringing Serpent I Will no longer smother,
But give the knave to him, and fool to the other.
The Cockpit heretofore would serve his wit,
But now upon the Friars stage he will sit,
It must be so, though this expensiue fool
Should pay an angel for a paltry stool.
The largest Tauernes of the neatest fashion
He does frequent; he drinks for recreation.
Your Ordinaries, and your Gaming-schooles,
(The gain of Mercuries, the Mart of fools)
Do much rejoice when his gold does appear,
Sending him empty with a flea in's ear;
And when he is gone to one another laugh,
Making his means the subject of their scoff,
And say, it is pity he is not better taught,
He Is a fair Gamester, but his luck is naught.
In the mean time, his pockets being scant
He finds a Lurcher to supply his want,
One that ere long by playing In-and-in,
Will carry all his Lordship in a skin:
Yet as insensible of that device,
As minding more his pleasure, Cards and dice,
Before the Sun has run his circle round,
He in the center of his game is found,
Hazarding that which late was lent unto him,
Not dreaming any course can quite undo him.
Thus by degrees his patrimony wastes,
Whilst he nor sees, hears, feels, or smells, or tastes,
His folly, shame, abuse, deceit, or woe,
That future times may force him undergo;
But makes progression in his wonted course,
With as much understanding as a horse;
Burning the cards, damning the dice that lost,
Swearing and cursing, never was man thus crossed,
Drinking out sorrow, whiffing sighs away,
Converting day to night, and night to day,
As if good Nature had abused this wight,
And done him wrong, that did himself no right.
O most insensible and sensual beast,
How are thy intellectual powers decreast,
Whose understanding is so much condense
That one would think his Soul within his Sense;
For any object that the Sense does move,
Draws on affection, and affection love;
Love being settled by its powerful might
Upon or good, or bad, attracts delight,
Delight breeds custom, and by times progress
Engenders a foul Monster, called Excess:
Excess joys in extremes, whose violence
Is always opposite to permanence:
Thus giving way to appitituall guile,
They force poor Reason to a far exile.
But stay my Muse, you must not dare to fly
Into the secrets of Morality,
But still proceed in the path you have begun,
Until the setting of this rising Sun,
Who in his highest Sphere now seated is,
In the Solstitium of his ayrie bliss.
Bent to his bar, through prodigal expense,
Luxury, drunkenness, incontinence,
Pride of apparel, and vainglorious acts,
Painted delusions, ignominious facts,
Seducing Harlots, sucking Parasites,
Bewitching Sirens, and lascivious nights,
Abusiue cheatings, and illusiue friends,
That seemed to love him for sinister ends,
Unfruitful plots, matches unfortunate,
Nocturnall reuellings intemperate,
With millions of deceiving vanities,
Thrown in our ways by Satan's treacheries;
Depriving men of rich celestial joys,
For wretched hopes in momentary toys.
Now being aspired to his utmost pride,
Each full must have a wane, as ebb, a tide,
For having by a thousand subtle hooks,
Squeezed for friends, scribled in Mercers books,
Perceiving his decay, they summon straight
Their wits together, and do lie in wait
(By the devils engines) to deprive him quite,
Both of his liberty, and his delight;
And ere he can behold his woeful case,
He is immured in some wretched place.
This Butterfly with all his garish tire,
Now melts like the snow against the fire;
This Grasshopper, that the other day was seen
Capring within his curious silken green,
Singing shrill notes unto the summers praise,
Never expected crabbed winter days,
Till chilling Autumn, with his falling leaves,
Shriuels his body, and his hope deceiues.
His silken garments, and his satin robe
That has so often visited the Globe,
And all his spangled rare perfumed attires,
Which once so glistred in the Torchy Friars,
Must to the Broakers to compound his debt,
Or else be pawned to procure him meat.
Now debt on debt they do accumulate
Upon his careful body and estate;
Vowing revenge upon his carcass there,
Sorrowing only that they did forbear
So long a time, but now the very stones
Will pity him, before they hear his moanes.
Nor are his Creditors alone obdure,
But even his Copesmates, whom he thought so sure
Shall shrink like slimy snailes into the shell,
Whilst he his plaints unto the walls does tell,
Whose friendship was engendered by the Sun
Reflecting on their base corruption.
Nay more, his bosom friends (whose near relation
Should never admit of any separation)
Come slowly on, as sorry for his grief,
But have not wherewithal to yield relief.
And as the nature of the world is such,
To give the needless, and the needy grutch,
So this dejected man, borne to this fate,
(As if thereto he were predestinate)
Is now denied, who in his prosperous days
Did winter them that wink at his decays:
For now the equal Justice of the Time,
Requires each man to keep within his clime;
For if he straggle from his limits far,
(Except the guidance of some happy star
Do rectify his steps, restore his loss)
He may perhaps come home by weeping cross.
Now does his soul begin to gather light,
Which makes his understanding far more bright,
Now does the filme of his obscured soul,
Wear off; and manly Reason does control
The vagrant Will, and thirsting Appetite,
Yielding unto the Soul* her due, and right.
Now is his brain more solid and more dry,
By apprehension of his misery,
And not so apt to fancies wandering,
That never remains firm in any thing.
Now with his heart he wishes that he had
But two full years of those which were so bad;
But all too late, for time does always pass,
But never imployes a retrograding glass.
Now he commends the Be (though void Reason)
That hoards in summer, for the winter season,
Admiring much the fabric of their Cell,
And how they fortify that Cittadell:
A wonder it is to see what they invent,
Both for their lodging, food, and government;
For, as some grave Philosophers have shown,
Each Be eats naught but that which is her own.
O! thinks he now, had I but kept my store,
I needed not my carelessness deplore,
Or had my younger days afforded wit,
To spend no more, then what I now think fit;
Had no insinuating Droanes come near
My plentious hiue, I never had come here.
Another while he looks upon the Ant,
Sees her great plenty, feels his greater want,
Admires her providence that labored still
Her winter barnes in summer time to fill:
Wonder of Nature, hater of all sloth,
The most laborious, though of smallest growth.
Lastly, looks back with a dejected eye
Upon his pampred days, sports, liberty,
His midnight revels, and abundant wine,
He sacrificed unto Bacchus shrine,
His bowls of Nectar, filled up to the brim,
In which he to his Marmosite did swim;
His Oysters, Lobstars, Cauiare, and Crabs,
With which he feasted his contagious drabs*
Oringoes, Hartichoakes, Potatoe pies,
Prouocatiues unto their luxuries;
His Musickes Consort, and a cursed crew,
That used drink, until the ground looked blew,
Among painted Sepulchers, that love excess,
Who inwardly are full of rottenness.
Thus when he viewes with a more perfect sight,
His shining morn turned to a gloomy night,
And all his glory, pomp, and vain expense,
To have their due reward, and recompense;
Then bursting forth with acclamation,
He blames this wicked generation,
Cursing his follies, and the subtle snares,
That in his darkness caught him unawares,
Being forced now through his own decay,
To wish the fragments, erst he threw away,
To quench his thirst with that inebrious cup,
Which indigested he had belched up:
As if the heavenly power had thus ordained,
Profuse expense should be with want restrained.
And mark the unresisted hand of heaven,
That whatsoever Talent it has given
Of wit or wealth, it is to some good end,
To praise his God, or to relieve his friend:
But he that still in idle waste is found,
Is worse then he that hid it in the ground.
I that have sense of blessings, and of woe,
In my life's compass yet did never know
An Epicurious, and disordred mind
Want his affliction in the selfsame kind.
For drunkenness, they* thirsting have acquired;
And wanted meat, when they have much desired;
In stead of health, by Fevers they shall melt;
For wandering, want of liberty is felt.
Thus every act has its opposing ill,
Inflicted on it by the Highest will.
This Gallants circuit, and Itineration,
Is almost finished in a lower station,
Whose meagre body pinde away with grief,
(For want of seasonable friends relief.)
Howerly watches when the day shall come,
To lay his body in an earthly tomb:
Yet oftentimes hope does awake his spirit,
And tells him one day yet he shall inherit
His freedom, and release; which being done,
Another course he does intend to run,
So moderate, and grave, that by the power
Of him that sits in the immortal tower,
His second life hatched by supernall fire,
Cooperating with a true desire
To rectify his former follies past,
Shall make him shine a brighter star at last.
Epilogue.
YOu blyth young Rufflers, that do look so big,
Laugh at the precepts of this Whirligigg;
Mock on with fasetie both your selves and me,
Foster your pleasures whilst the golden tree
Bears fruit enough; glory in what you may,
Till lusty youth is vanished away;
Sport like the wanton Fly about the light,
Until your glorious wings be burned quite;
Dance like the fish upon the gentle brook,
Until you swallow both the bait and hook;
Play with the Pitfall till you unaware
Are clapped up fast, or tangled in a snare.
Do what you please, no counsel I Will bestow
On those whose pregnant wits do ouer-flow:
But leave them to the mercy of their Fate,
To know themselves before it be too late:
For this by true experience I do find,
Misery, the salve to cure a haughty mind.
This Epitaph if any do deny,
May one day prove his weeping Elegy.
Desine plura puer; and quod nunc instat, agamus,
Carmina tum melius, cum venerit ipse, canemus.
-- nam quis iniquae
Tam patiens vrbis; tam ferreus vt teneat se.
FINIS.

