A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, the. xiiii. day of December, by Thomas
Lever.

Anno. M. D. L.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Per septennium

Unto the right honorable Lords, and others of the Kings Magestie ^ys priuye
Counsel, Thomas Leauer wysheth increase of Grace and godly honor.
MErcy, grace, and peace from God the father almighty, unto your honors, with
my most humble and reuerente comendacions.

The enemy of God and man always se king like a rorynge lion whom he may
devour, is much at al times, but then especially to betaken head unto, when as
he him self being transformed into the angel of light, does cloak the
ministers of his myschiefe in a pretensed show of godliness and virtue, so that
there by they be suffered of al men, and maynteined of many men, to work and
bring unto pass a deuilli she dysorder, and shameful dyshonestye in a
Christen commen wealth.

Wherefore, seeing that in this realm preachers, officers, merchants, crafts
me^, laborers, and such like, be displaced of their roumes, and dysapoynted of
their lyuinges by those which through a pretensed name, and outward apperance,
seem to be necessary and profitable ministers in a common wealth, (how beit in
their own doings may be evidently tried and known for to be sp^ylers and
disturbers of any commonwealth) suredly you of the kings most honorable
counsel, being the chief maiestrats and rulers in this realm, had need to be
ware, circumspect and diligent, lest that Satan banyshyng al faithful
Christians, which should and would provide to help one an other, do fyl this
realm full of crafty flatterers, which can and will deceive, begyle, and spoil
one another.

Truly there be no men more against Christ then those which by profession of
Christen relygyon, and bearyng of a Christen name, do rob Christ of his honor,
and Christ's ministers of their liuyngs: nor none more parilous ennemies unto
the kings majesty, and unto this realm, the^ those which have the names of
Englishmen, and the kings subjects with y^ conditions and manners of enemies,
and traitors.

Most gracious good lords and masters, for your reverent love toward God,
and the king, for your charitable pytye of miserable spoiled people, and for
the necessary regard of your own honors, and the state of this realm, se
and consider how that ambicious covetous men, do bye and sell, take and abuse
personages, prebendes, offices, fees, marchaundyse, fermes, lands, and goods,
so that prowlyng for them selves, they be neither afraid, nor ashamed to
spoil this realm of preaching of Gods gospel, of justice and equity, of
cheap and plenty, and of every thing that should save, keep, or profytte a
commune wealth.

Wherefore most gracious good lords, and masters, for the tender mercies of
God in our Savior Jesus Christ, take heed that neither servant, nor friend,
reteyner, nor youreselues do deceive you with flatterye.

For seeing that ambicious covetous men do take, keep, and enjoy the roumes
and lyuynges of every man's vocacion, both you and we be in far more
danger, then if blockehouses and bulwarks made and kept of the kings
faithful subjects for the sauegarde of this realm, were taken and abused of
such Scotts or Frenchemen, as making spoil for their own profit, would not
spare to dystroye this realm.

There is very many rowmes and lyuynges, belonging both unto the ecclesia
stical mynisterye, and also unto civil policye, in the which be no fayethful
subjects, godly diligente ministers and officers, whi che by doing of their
duties, do save, keep and comfort the people: but covetous Idolatours, which
neglectyng their dutye^, and taking commodities, do dysorder, spoil and
dystroye the people.

Suerly^ if there be any men that goo about to persuade the Kings Majesty,
or you of his honorable Council, that things in this realm for the
mostparte be honorably, godly, or charitably reformed, they be but flaterers.

For papistry is not banyshed out of England by pure religion, but ouerrunne,
suppressed and kept under within this realm by covetous ambicion. Papistrye
abused ma ny things, covetousness has distroyed more: papistry is supersticion,
covetousness is Idolatry. Papistrye before time did obscure the Kings honor,
and abuse the wealth of this realm, covetousness at this time does more abuse
and decay them both, making the king bare, the people poor, and the
realm miserable.

The Kings procedynges to be red in his laws, statutes, and Iniunc^ions be
good and godly: but to be seen and known in the deeds and practices of his
officers, servants, and subjects, be ungodly, shameful, wicked. For in their
doings appears no re^ournynge from evil unto good, by a godly reformacio^:
but a procedyng from evil unto worse, by an uncharitable spoil, and deuyllyshe
destruccio^.

Lands and goods be spoiled: prouysyon made for learning and poverty, is
destroyed. Ye know in whose hands this rich spoil remains, then ca^ ye
not be ignorant by whose means the wealth of this realm is spoiled and
decayed.

If ye will have a godly reformacion (...) to proceed, trust not the
servants of Mammon, enemies unto God, and traitoures unto the king, and
spoylers of the people, with the setting forth of your godly laws, statutes
and ordynaunces, which be most contrary unto their covetous minds, and wicked
deeds.

Their minds are always evil, and their deeds be well known, when as you
geu^ frelye, or suffer them by brybrye to by unto them selves authorytye: for
then, being trusted to make better provision for the pore, to erect mo Grammar
schools, to increase and augment the vnpuersities, and to se the people taught
louyngly, to reverence, serve, and obey God, the king, and you: they take
prouisyon from the poor, they sell away Gra^mer scoles, they dec^i the
universities, and they use such practices, as makes God to be unknown, the
king dysobeyed, and you suspected, hated, and enuyed of the people.

Take these false flatterers which have enryched them selves, making the
king bare, and the people poor, restore their lands and goods unto the
king, their rowmes and offices unto faithful and true officers and ministers:
and then shall the king be enryched, the realm unspoiled, and the people
delivered from miserable captivity under cruel extorcioners, unto an honest
lybertye under Godly gouernoures, which shall so dyspose the hearts and
minds of all people, that they wyllynglye shall be ready, not only to serve
the markettes with corn, but also to serve God and the king with lands and
gooddes, bodies and lives, when and where so ever you shall command it.

Marvel not though a faith full heart, with humble obedyence and reuerente
love toward the kings Majesty, and you of his honorable Godly counsel, do
barst and pour forth a lamentable complaynte of grievous sorrow conceived in
seeing the king shamefully begyled, you sore dishonored, and the wealth of
this realm utterly spoiled.

For men do hye offices unto them selves, and lands from the king: and by
the only spoil that is made in common offices and upon the kings lands,
both these bargens be paid for, and furthermore all such bargeyners
wonderfullye enryched.

O merciful Lord, what a grief is it unto a faithful heart, having just
occasyon to suspecte, that you lack faithful counsel to adueriyse you of the
gracious workynge of the Lord being God, and of the freyle fautes of your
selves being men^e, in all your doings: for Gods grace woorkynge in you,
causes you to do honorable and Godly service to God, the king, and the
common wealth, when as ye cause an ungodly bishop to be deposed. And yet shall
god, the king, and the people be grievously offended, and your honors and sowles
so a^ indaungered, if a bishops lands or goods be divided amongst you that be
godly magys^rates to punysh evil doers, as Christ's cote was divided amongst
wicked soldyers, which did cruelly torment a righteous person.

Alas most gracious reuerente Lords and masters, if ye use the seruyse, or
hear the advise of false crafty flatterers, ye shall therewyth be so blinded
that ye can neither perceive by your selves, nor believe when as ye be plainly
and faithfully told, that many of your own doings, coming of man's
freyltye, do tend much unto the displeasure of God, dishonor of the king,
and dyscredyt of your selves, being most contrary to that reverent zele and
faithful love toward God, the king, and the common wealth, which zeleand love
god of his goodness has graffed in your hearts, and the devil by man's freyl
deeds covered in silence or colored with praise of flatterers, laboreth to
deface, pervert and destroy.

As God which searches the secrets of man's heart, does bear me record, I do
suppose, and think that you do so loving lie dread God, reverence the king,
and regard this realm, and your own honors, that being charged with the
oversight and provision of castles, holds, and fortes, made and kept for the
safegarde of this realm, ye could not wyttyngly be hired to sell one of them
unto the kings enemies, for all the treasures in the world. And yet being
craftelye deceived with ^attery, ye use a dangerous practyse in very many of
them.

Forther be some of them sclenderly assauted at certain times of feeble
enemies: and other continuallye beseged either with open forse or craftye
conueyaunce of fearce, cruel, and perylous enemies. And now crafty flatterers
which have once served for their wages in time and place of the sclender
assalte, do afterward require and persuade you for that seruyse to give them
the spoil of other holds remaining continuallye in more danger Truly
Frenchmen and Scotts be but feeble enemies, and at certain times do
sclenderly assalt castles, towers, and such manner of holds: The devil seking
like a to ryng Lion, whom he may devour, night and day, winter and summer,
with a wonderful forse of wicked spirits, does ever besyege by shopryckes,
shyres, towns, and parishes.

If these places be not well furnished with stout and true soldiers of both the
sorts (I mean both officers in ciuyle polycy, and also Prelates in
Ecclesiastical ministry) or if those souldyers be unprovided of necessary
liuyngs and dew wages, then must the people needs peryshe and be destroyed for
their own sins, and the blood of their bodies and souls required at your
hands, which be charged and trusted of both God, and the king to provide
soldiers to those places, and also wages and liuinges to maintain those
soldyers continually.

How be it now many personages, benefyces, offices, and fees be sold unto
covetous brybers for money, which seek nothing but the vantage of extorcion,
robbry and spoil, and few of them be freely given unto faithful ministers and
officers for their woorthynes, which could and would by diligent doing of
their duty, govern, instruct and cheryshe gods people, the kings subjects.

And therefore now the most part of men lackyng teachers and rulers, do
without grief of conscience, or fear of punishment, abuse every thing unto
the ruin and destruction, which God has ordained unto the vpholdyng and
increase of a christian commune wealth.

As for example, now bying and sellyng is not used as a provision for good
cheap and great plenty, but made the most occasyon of dearth and scarsitie.
Wealth and wit be not ryghtly used unto a common confortable pro fyt, but
shamefully abused unto a wicked pri uate gain. Many offices with authority be
not duly disposed unto faithful worthy men nor to do good unto other, but
unlawfully bought and sold amongst covetous, ambicious men, to get gaynes
unto them selves. So this realm is spoiled, the king is made bare, and his
faithful true subjects be many of the^ very poor: but crafti deceivers,
covetous Extorcioners, brybynge officers, and such false flatterers be
wondrous rich and welthy.

These Flatterers be wonders perilous fellows, having two faces under one
hoode. For they bear a face and show toward the people, as though by
Commyssion and commandment from you, there must be more required and taken
of the people the ever you did mean or think: And toward you they show
another face semy^g that so much can not be found in any men's hands as
must needs be procured: but that therefore the kings lands must needs be
sold, which they are redye to by for their own aua^tage, with those goods
which they them selves have in their own hands, or rather with the spoil
which they intend to make upon those lands. These subjects that be not ashamed
to procure unto them selves such riches, that they may be biers, and unto
their liege Lord and king such need, that he must be a seller of his lands.
These be in deed servants unto Mammo^, enemies unto god, traitores unto the
king, and disturbers of a commonwealth turning all your godly, wise, and
charitable deuyces for ^ecessary prouysyon, unto douylish deceytes, for to
cause and maynteyne uncharitable spoils. And suredly when as occasions do
serve for any men to practice their pleasures, many men of al sorts, and of
the lowest sort, the most part do show them selves the worst infected with
this* im^yety, treason, and rebellyon, the greuousnes and danger of the which
with occasyons and means how to avoid the same, I preaching at Paul's Cross
the. xiiii. day of December last past, did there openly declare unto mine
audience. And as I did then preach that Sermon as an exhortacion to* mo^e the
people, by the acknowledgyng, lamentyng and ame^dynge their own fautes, to
dese^ and receive the pardon of mercy offered unto them of both god and the
king, in this long pacient sufferaunce, so do I now here offer unto your
honors, that same Sermon as an earnest complaynte, to procure of you that be
Gods officers, spedyly correccion for them that refuse to hear, regard, and
obey Gods word.

Be not dyscouraged in this matter, with your own freylty being great, or
with the number of offenders, being many. For it is not your worthynes, but
Gods grace, that has placed you in high authority, and in the same
aucthoritye not your own powers and polcy, but the might and wisdom of God,
^al so strengthen and confyrme you, thatyf ye will be dyltgent, ye shall be
made able to deliver Gods people, the kings subjects, ou^e of the haudes of
such as be Gods and the kings en nemyes.

I beseech the almyghtye God indue you with grace, that begyunyng wythyoure
selves, ye may spedely proceed unto the necessary, and godly correccion of
other men's fautes, so that ye may be establyshed in your rowmes, and
increased in honor, to serve god and the king, providing for his real me in
holiness and righteousness al (...) days of yourlyues.

By me humbly subject and faithful obedient unto your honors, Thomas Lever.

Jesus Christus
The grace of the holy ghost, procedyng from God the ^ather, by the interces^ion
and mean of Jesus Christ, so prepare your herts, and open my mouth, that I may
declare, and show, and that you may hear, understand, remember, and practice
in your living, his lively word as may be most to his honor and glory and to
your souls health and comfort.

YOu Citizins of London, and all other that be here prefe^t mark, note, and
remember what ye hear of me this day: for if I shall say or speak any thing
that is evil, you must bear record against me of that evil. But if I do
preach well and truly, then you shall understand and know your selves to
be in great danger of heinous treason toward god and the kings majesty of
this realm, which be by you spoiled, and robbed: god of his glory, the king of
his honor, and the realm of his wealth. How beit the merciful goodness of
both god and the king has sent me hither this day, to proclaim a general
pardon, intending thereby to try out and save them that have offended by
simple ignorance, because the force of their mighty power is now ready and
coming utterly to destroy all other that continue in wylfull stobe^es and
rebellyous treason. Wherefore before the reading of my commyssion, I will
declare that piece of scriptur which appointed to be ^d in the church as this
day, will certyfye you that God by his scriptures has showed the king, who
be his fay^thfull servants, and who be his enemies. This scripture is
written in y^. iiii. Chapter of the first epistle of. S. Paul unto the
Corinthians. Sic nos estimet homo ut ministros Christi, (...) dispensatores
ministrorum d^i. etc.

Filioli ^ei quos iterum parturio. Albeit I use not scrupulouslye the same
terms, yet conuenyently following the manner and phrase of scripture, I say unto
you as Paul writes unto the Galathyans: My dear children of whom I travel
in brythe again until Christ be facyoned in you, I would I now being with
you might change my voice, which heretofore I have used: declarynge by the
word of God, that you here in England which will receive no mercy, shall
feel sore vengea^nce, which will ^ot be ^aued, shall be destroyed. This voice
used here before of me, now would I feign change. For now (...) I doubt I am
paste hope and allmooste in utter dyspayre of you. Tell me you that through
covetousness desire the ^yches and wealth of this world. Have ye not heard how
that he which would be a friend unto the world is made an enemy unto God, doethe
not Paul teach that covetousness is the root of all evil? Is it not written
that covetousness is Idolatry? Have ye not red i^ the prophet Ezechiel how that
he which keeps his Idolles, meaning covetousness in his heart and comes to
hear gods word, does thereby provoke gods vengeance to his utter destruction.
Paul says and testifyeth that every man which is circumcysed, has no profyt
by Chrys^e, is gone quite from Christ, is fallen from grace. I say and
testyfye unto you in the word of the Lord, y^ so many of you as be covetous,
have no profit by the preaching of gods word. the mynistracion of his
sacraments and the setting forth of pure religion within the realm: no ye be
clean from God framyng your selves unto the fassion of this world, ye can
bring forth no good fruits of charitable works nourishyng the rote of all
evil in your hearts, ye must needs provoke the wrath and indignacion of god
to your utter destrucion, when as ye keep the ydoll of covetousness still in
your minds to be honored and served in all your doings, and yet pretend a
zele and love unto the religion of Christ in your works and sayings. I would
feign have had just occasion to have spoken at this time such things as might
have been confortable and pleasant for you to hear.

But I must needs show the causes of gods wrath and indignacion kyndled
against us, least that those plages should be ascribed unto the word and
religion of Christ set forth amongst v^, which be procured by the wickedness
of them that seruyng covetous Mammon, have forsaken, offended, and slaundered
both Christ, and Christ's word and religion. No man can serve two masters, why
then do ye pr^tend that ye be the servants of Christ, seeing that ye will
not forsake the service of wicked Mammon? if ye be ashamed to be named, and
afraid to continue the wicked servants of wicked mammon. now show and prove
by your ordinarye calling, faythf^ll dealyng, and godly judgment according to
this example of Paul plainly painted and set forth in this epistle unto the
Cor^thia^s, that ye be Christ's mynysters, the servants and disposers of gods
mysteries and treasures: for Paul showing him self as a good example of
Christ's servants, says: Sic nos existi^et homo, ut ministros Christi. etc. So
let a man esteem us, as the mynisters of Christ, and the dysposers of the
secrets of god. No man can come unto Christ Jesus to be his mynister* except
he be drawn of the father. The father draws not by force viole^tlye them
that be stuborne and froward, but by love the^ that be ge^ till, and come
wyllyngly* For when the father shows in Christ forgeuenes of sins, grace
of amendment* iustificacion, and everlasting life, the^ those that make fast
them selves with the band of love by desire of the same be drawn unto Christ.

As contrary wise when the devil shows in fleshlye lusts and worldly
vanytyes, many voluptuous pleasures, then they that there with be entangled
and delyted be drawn of the temptour away from Christ. Take heed therefore how
ye have entered into religion, professed christ* and received the gospel. For
if ye be drawn by love of mercy, grace and ^yghteousnes, ye come unto Christ:
But by the desire of riches, wealth, and voluptuousnes, men be drawn and ^ysed
away from Christ.

He therefore that by the profession of Christ, the zele of his word, the
favor of the gospel, seeks covetous gain, or a carnal liberty, surely he
is a servant of Mammon, ennemy unto Christ, and a sclaunde^er of the gospel.
For he that will be the servant of Christ, must follow the example of Christ.
He that will follow Christ in example of living, he must forsake himself,
take his cross upon his back daily and follow Christ. So Christ's servant
shall be delivered from the bondage of sin, y^ he may freely and wyllyngly
contemnyng y^ vanities of the world, and mortifying y^ lusts of y^ flesh, serve
christ in bearyng the cross of paynful diligence, to do the duty of his
vocacion.

But all those that delight in a carnal liberty, or seek unlawful geynes,
although they be named Chrystians and favorers of the gospel, yet be they in
deed not mynisters of Christ, but enemies unto Christ: not lovers of the
Gospel b^ sclaunderers of the Gospel, not iustyfied by liuelye faith to be
of that ryghteouse sort for whose sakes GOD spares and favors a common
wealth, but deceived with a dead faith to be of that ungodly sort, for whose
cause God plageth and destroys many a commonwealth. And now undoubtedly be we
in great miseries and danger of destruction, for that we have many that be
hearers, readers, and talkers of Gods word, and few or none that do walk and
live according to gods word: we ought truly to esteem and take them only to
be mynysters of Christ which for the love of mercy, grace, and ryghtuousnes
showed of the father unto them in Christ, do kill the lusts of their own
flesh, despise the vanytyes of the whole world, and forsakyng their own
pleasures and commodities do take the cross of paynfull diligence and walk
after Christ in doing of their duties.

All other that have the name and profession of Christ without living and
conue^sacio^ according th^rto, be feigned brethren, in feasts with Christen
men to take part of their good chere, unclean spots amongst honest company,
feedyng them selves without fear of god, clouds without any moisture of gods
grace, tossed about with contrary wyndes of strange doctrine, trees passing
summer time without any fruits of good works, twyse dead without feeling the
corrupcion of sin, or lokynge to be graffed in the stock of grace, yea
rooted up from amongst y^ vynes of the Lord, wild waves of the sea frothyng
forth unshame fast brags, and wandryng ^arres without constancy in judgment
and opinion unto who^ the dungeon of darkness is ordained for everlasting
dampnacion.

What marvel is it the^ though the vengeance of God be poured forth among^
the^ of such iniquity, yea and most habunda^tly when as his word plainly
preached, is of them most wickedly abused and shamefully slandered, which
say: Lord, Lord, and do not as they be commanded of the Lord. Wherefore let
us say: Non nobis domine, non nobis. Not unto us o Lord, not unto us, but unto
thy name give glory, not for that we by our deeds have deserved, but y^ thy
name O Christ amongst us christians may behonored, pardon our tauts, amend
our lives, and indue us with grace, that the light of our good works before
men upon the earth, may cause thee to be gloryfyed O Lord in heaven. Dearlye
beloved in Christ for the tender mercyes of god, when as ye se carnal
gospellers, covetous ydolaters, greuyng your consciences, slaunderynge
Christ's religion, and damnynge their own souls, do not of malice contempne
disdain and renyle the^, but of charitable pitye, lament, sorrow, and pray for
them, which blinded with ygnoraunce know not them selves, deceived with the
devil, be drawn from Christ, comfort and salvation, unto everlasting
death and damnacion. Say and pray for them: O lord suffer not the enemy thus
to lead into captiuitye our fellows thy servants, our brethren thy
children, O Christ restore unto lyberty the^ that y^ have redeemed with thy
precious blud, so y^ we may alto^ether drawn of y^ father, received of the
son, and gided of the holy ghost, be ministers of Christ in liberty of the
gospel, delivered from sin fre lie to delight and take pleasure in a godly
conversation all the days of our life. Now let us after this taking of the
mynisterye of Christ, wyich pertains generally unto all christians, speak
of the dysposers of Gods mysteryes, wherein we may consider severally every
ma^s vocacio^.

Paul did dyspose the secrets of God by the preaching of the Gospel, which
was ever secretly hid from the wyttye, wise, and learned in the world. Other
men in other vocacions must dyspose other treasures of God by other means. As
the magistrate by authorytye must dyspose the punyshmente of vice, and the
mayntenaunce of virtue.

The rych man by liberalytye, must dyspose relief and comfort unto the poor
and nedye. The Merchant by byinge and selling, and the crafts man by his
occupacion, must provide unto the common wealth of necessary wares,
suffyciente plentye. The landelorde by lettyng of fermes must dyspose unto the
tenants necessary lands, and houses of an indifferent rent. The houshandme^ by
tyllyng of the ground and keeping of cattle, must dyspose unto their landlordes,
dew rentes, and unto them selves and other, both corn, and other vytals. So
every man by doing of his duty must dyspose unto other that commodytye and
benefyte, which is committed of god unto them to be dysposed un to other, by
the faithful and diligent doing of their du^yes.

The treasures of the Lord be unmeasurable, his heart is lyberall, there can be
therefore no lack among his people, if his stewards unto whom the dysposing
of his gifts be committed, be true and faithful. This therefore says Paul,
is required in a steward, y^ he be faithful. Who thynk* ye, says Christ, is a
faythefull and a wise stewa^de whom the Lord sets over his hous^holde to
give them a due measure of the wheat of necessaryes in time conuenyente?
Blessed is that servant whom the Lord when he comes, shall find so doing:
verelye* I say unto you that he will make him lord of all that ever he has.
Behold the faythfulnes of the Lords steward consysteth in dylygente
prouydynge and mynistrynge unto the Lords famylye any such things as be
necessary. The reward of such faythfulnes is to be put in trust with all that
his Lord and master has. Then who can delyre a better master then the Lord
God or a higher room then a stewardshyppe in the house of Christ, or a greater
reward then to have all the treasures of God which be an hundred fold passing
any man's deseruyng here, and farthermore everlasting life. O that men would
consider the goodness of God, the worthiness of their offices, the comfortable
fellowship of the household of Christ, and the joyful reward of the croune of
glory, and so be faithful stewardes and dysposers of the manyfold gyfts of God:
And not being bleared and blinded with covetousness, deserve to be cut of
from the company of christians, and to have their por^ion with hypocrites,
whereas shall be wayl^ng and gnashing of teeth. For that y^ gredy worm gnawyng
^he conscience never dies, and the flamynge fire of intolerable vengeance
shall be never quenched.

O brethren, God has given great plentye, and we in England find great
lack: therefore the st^wards of God be vnfeythfull. Who be gods stewardes? They
that have gods gifts. Suerly no man has all the gyfts of God, and every man
has some gyfts of God. Then if all things be lackyng, yet can no one man
deserve all the blame, but every man shall be found fauty for that which is
amysse, for lack of his duty.

Do ye perceive that the laytie is either altogether ygnoraunte and blind, or
else having knowledge to speak fayer, has no learning to do well? Then
suerlye the cleargye has not ben faithful in preaching of gods word
earnestly, in s^son and out of season to reprove, beseech and blame, in all
patience and token, or dyscyplyne. Do ye see the cleargye has not wherwithall
to maintain learning, to relieve the pore, to keep hospytalytye, and too find
them selves? Then trewly has not the lay itye sufficientlye provided that
they which preach the Gospel, should live on the Gospel, and that they
which sow spiritual treasures, might repe corporal necessaryes.

Do ye se y^ they which be in authority have not ben regarded and obedientli
served? Then y^ common people have not done their duties, dysobeying any man
placed in authoryty by gods ordinance. Do ye se the people have had injuries
and ye^ the^r co^plaintes negly gentlye heard and long delayed? then have the
higher powers omytted ryghteousnes and judgment, which will be required at
their hands of the Lord.

Do ye se that in all manner of things there is some lack of that which is very
necessary? Then be ye sure that all manner of men do leave or mysuse some part
of their duty.

Q^is potest dicere: mundum est cor meum, purus sum a peccato.

No man can say: my heart is clean, I am pure without fautes. Therefore
s^ynge that w^ be all gyltye, Let us not envy, grudge, or (...)* dayne one
an others faults, but every one acknowledge, lament, and (...) own fautes.

Do not triumph and be glad when ye (...) that other men's fautes be noted or
rebuked, but be most certain and suer, that except ye ^de ye repent and
amend, ye shall every one be likewise served. If ye have not those same
faults which ye hear by the preacher noted and rebuked, yet if you take
pleasure and be glad to hear other men's e^vis, he sure that even that pleasure
taking is a fault, which God hates and will punysh.

Therefore when ye hear any mann^ fautes spoken of, be sorye for them, and
take heed to your selves: so shall you thereby get good and they have no
harm. If ye so do at this time, I may the more boldly examyne and try the
faythfulnes of some stewardes and disposers of Gods gifts.

And for the better trial and assurance of their fydely^e I note two things
to be required: first that a steward or disposer be, Quem constituit dominus,
whom the Lord assigns and makes: and secondarily, Vt det cibu^ in tempore,
that he use to feed and cheryche, and not to deuou^e and hurt them of the
lords familye. For the first part it is to be noted, that every man in the
time of his admyssion, when he shall be put into his office, is set on the hill
of consyderacion and aduysement: where as the Lord Christ to those which he
admits, shows that the harvest is great, the laborers b^fewe, great
pains must be taken that much good may be done: vile rebukes and grievous
affliccions here to be suffered, be the signs and tokens of great rewards in
heaven for them prepared. The ennemy of Christ Sa^a^ unto those which he would
deceive shows all the glory of the world, promysyng to give it a reward
presently unto all the that will worship him falling down at his feet, in
flattery, craft, and iniquitye.

Christ the Lord indueth with will and habily^ye to take pains to do good,
those which he brings in at the door to be shepherdes of the fold and
stewardes of the house: the devil the ennemy of Christ cloketh in sheep
skynnes of solemn titles to get gaynes, those which he con^yeth not in at
the door, but over an other way to dystroye the flock, and rob the house.

Therefore if thy room be benefyce prebende, office or authorytie in a christen
comminaltye within Gods house, and if thou be brought in at the door of
ordynarye and lawefull calling, by paynefull dyligence to do good, thou may
be a faithful steward in that place: but if thou be brought in over and
besides all ordinarye and lawful calling, by covetous ambycyon to get gaynes,
then must thou needs be a thief and robber: for Christ which so says can be
no liar. I mean if thou by money or fryndshyp have boughte either benefyce or
office, thou can^ not be of Christ's iustitucion, but of the Dyuylles
intrusion, not a fayethful dysposer, but a theuysh extorcioner of Gods gyfts.
For Christ says plainly that he which enters not in at the door, but
clymeth over an other way, is a thief and a robb^r, and the thief comes not
but to steal, murder, and to destroy.

The door which is Christ him self, can never be entered in at ^y either
^rendshyd or money.

Sum peraue^tur^ will be offended not because I speak against the bi^ge of
benefices, which be spiritual charges, but for that I also include the bying
and selling of offices, which as they say, be temporal promocions. As for
benefyces ye know so well, that I need not to stand about the declaracion or
proof in them.

No, I am sure that ye perceive how that through the abuse of one benefyce,
the Devil often times is sure to have many souls.

First the patron for his presentacion, then the Bishop or admission, the
person for his unworthiness and a great many of the paryshe that be lost for
lack of a good Persons duty.

But now as conce^nyng the biynge of offices, to come thereby unto the room of
an auditour, Suru^our Chauncelloure, or any such like, surely no man will
attempt it, but he which is so couetouse and ambyciou^e that he does neither
dread God nor love man. Whereof comes the byinge of offices but of
covetousness how then can that be a good fruit which (...) out of the
root of all evil? Is not every Christen common wealth the fold of Christ's
sheep, the house of his famylye? be not then all officers in a Christen common
wealth named by Gods word sheppeherdes of the fold, and stewardes of the
famylye of Christ? O Lord what shall we then say to excuse them that by
and sell offices wythyn England? Shall we say those offices be no roumes and
places ordained of God for his faythefull stewardes, therein to dyspose his
treasures and benefytes? or that the vile slaves of wicked Ma^mon for their
brybery may lawfully be promoted unto those roumes which be ordained of God to
his holy servants for their fydelytye? If we say that the offices be not
meet for Gods servants, then we confess that the officers which be in them
be gods enemies. If we say that they be ordained for the fayethfull
servants of God, how can we think that they may be bought unto the bryb^nge
servants of wicked mammon? Let us not seek excuses to cloak sin, no let
every manne be known to be a ly^ and specyallye, they that say: One manne can
serve two masters, Mammon in geuynge or taking of brybes, and GOD in
faithful dooynge of duty. Let God be justified when ye find his word true,
which plainly affyrmeth that they which clyme into a common office of
Christ's fold by the help of Mammon in at the wyndowe of bryberye, be thieves
and robbers, coming to steal, murder and destroy.

O that no man in this fault were gilty, then might I be sure y^ no man would be
offended. But and if any man be grieved because his sore is touched, let him
remember the saying of the wise man: Meliora sunt uulnera diligentis, quam
fraudulenta oscula odientis: the wounds of the lover be better then the
deceytefull kysses of the hater. For the wounds which the frinde opens, be
to ^le old sores: and the dysceytfull kysses of the enemies be to make new
wounds. I speak playnelye to open the ^ounde* ^o root out and heal the
disease of covetousness, which would be to the wounded and to every man,
c^mfort. They that by flattery do covet, kiss, and plaster this deep wound,
do seek their own gain to the utter dampnacyon of the wounded, and to good
men's great grief, yea and to the great dysquyetinge of a commune wealth:
making no dyfference betwixt the Lords servants, and the Lords enemies. For
without dout, Non (...) quem constituit dominus.

He is none of the Lords appoyntmente or admyssion, which (...) in to an
office by brybyng, Monye, or flattering frendeshyp. Byinge of an office is an
eu^dente token of vnfayeth^uines. He that is once known by that token and
mark, should be thrust out of the Lords foulde, Ne furetur, mactet, et
perdat, least that he rob, kill, and destroy. But now by the second note
to try whether that the steward and dysposer of gods treasures be faithful
or not, se whether that he be (...) feder o^ deuourer. He that fedeth, is
fayethfull: he that deuoureth, is unfaithful. What does he which is
unfaithful? devour gods sheep, Christen people, the kings subjects, A
dangerous matter, which if it be spoken of, will procure dyspleasure: and if
be it not remedyed, will procure Gods vengeance. Surely brethren, I thyncke
God would never have caused me to have meddeled with this dangerous matter,
but that he will give me grace m^e pacyentlye to suffer the loss of mine own
life, then the damnacyon of your souls.

For if I lose my life here, I shall find* it in heaven. But if you be
dampened, and I being a watcheman, and saying your dampnacyon coming, do not
give warning, you shall be taken in your own sins, and your blood required
at my hands. If I give warnyng, and you take heed, gods indignacion shall be
appeased, and both we saved. Therefore I being a watcheman and by the light
of gods word spying that the abominacion of ydolatrous covetousness has
kyndled the indygnacyon of God, to consume and destroy the people of this
realm, do c^ye out against England by the voice of the Prophet: Abiecerunt
^egem domini, they have cast away the law of the lord, every one framyng him
self unto the fashyon of this world: ^loquium sa^cti Israel blasphem auerunt.
They have blasphemed the word of the holy one of Israel, by their ab ominable
living. Ideo incensus est furor domini in populum suum: therefore is the
indignacion of God kindled against his people. Therefore does all run at six
and seven, from evil unto worse: therefore does gods word take no place to
do good, but is unthankfully refused, which causes more harm. Is gods word
received in England because it is plainly preached and taught, or refused
and forsaken because it is not obeyed and followed? Be we in better case then we
have been before time because papistry amongst us is kept under, or else
worsethen ever we were because covetousness raygneth at lybertye? That which
papystry abused, has not covetousness destroyed? is not papistry supersticion,
and covetousness ydolatrye? Then I b^ch you be not we well amended y^ be come
from abusyng to destroying, from supersticion to idolatry? And has not God
given unto us at the bynyshyng of supersticion, comfortable plenty of his holy
word, and by the suppressyng of abbeyes exceeding abundance of all manner of
lands, riches, and treasures? And now where is it all become? Surely it is
much spent, wasted and lost by evil officers, unfaithful disposers, which be
in deed deuourers. S^ therefore howeye have offended god, begyled the king,
spoiled the realm, and indau^ger^d your selves to be accused, condemned, and
suffer as most vile heinous traitors to God, the king, and to y^ commonwealth.
Wherefore whiles ye have time, before ye be condemned, Sacrificate sacrificium
iu^itie, and sperate in domino. Off^ a sacrifyce of ryghteousnes, makig
restitu^io^ of y^ which ye have wrongfullye gotten: then trust in the Lord,
and he will show mercy, prouydynge you pardon and safegarde, unto every man's
comfort. Here I namynge no man, do mean almost every man: for every man has
some treasures of the lords to dyspose, and none is so faithful that he may
be able to stand unto the trial, entryng with the Lord in to judgment.
Therefore I advertise both mynisters of the clergy, officers in authority,
and other people of every degree, to acknoweledge their faults, and make
restitucion to y^ vtterm^st of their power. First unto the clergy, I say: there
is none of you al having so much learning, wit, and dylygence, as is possible
to be in one man, that can do more then one m^ns duty: why then do ye take and
keep, some four or five men's lyuynges? I do not thyncke that every man is
worthy blame that has a great living, nor to be praised that has a little
living. For as God has given some more excellent gifts of learning, wit
and polycy, so has he provided for the same better living with higher
authority: howbeit no man may promote him self to proceed from a mean living
unto a better, quia nemo sibi su^ met honorem, for no man may prefer him
self unto honor, nisi qui a deo uocatus est, but he which for his fyd^lytie
in a little, is called of God to be trusted with more. But it is not a good
reason to say that because an honest man for his fydelyty is called of God from
the less unto the more, therefore a covetous manne through gredynes, may
keep less and take more, and so join three or four of them together to make
diverse paryshes in diverse shyres, all one man's living. The Prophet cries: ue
uobis qui coniungitis domum ad do mum, and agrum agro copulatis. Woe be unto you
that yoine house to house and knyt fyled unto fylde. What reherseth he no more
but houses and fyeldes? No, for there was never such abominacion in the
prophets times as to join paryshe to parysh, prebend to benefyces, and
Dean^yes unto knights lands. I pray God that some of them if they be worthy
men in wisdom, learning and judgment, may be promoted unto worthy roumes,
and that those meaner lyuynges which they have heaped together to fill one
purse, being so far dystante in place and conditions that they can never be
well served of one man's duty, may be divided and dysposed unto meaner men:
which being more fit for these lyuynges, may do more good with them.

I hear some complain and say that all things be now so chargeable that
one benefyce is not able to find one honest man. And if ye inquire of the same
men whom they k^pe and find in tehyr benefyce they them selves being absent,
they will say a learned curate, and a dyligent farmer both honest men. O
wicked worldlings condemned by your own words. The whole benefi^e if you should
therwyth be content lying upon it, and look for no more, would not find one
man.

But when ye have gotten other promotions besides that, to lie in another place
from it, then a small porcyon of it does serve two honest men which ye leave
in your absence. Herke you that have three or four benefyces, I will say the
best for you that can be spoken: Thou lie always at one of thy benefyces,
thou art absente always from three of thy benefyces: thou kepest a good house
at one of thy benefyces, thou kepest no house at three of thy benefyces, thou
do thy deutye at one of thy benefyces, thou do no duty at three of thy
benefices. Thou semest to be a good manne in one place, and in deed thou art
found naught in three places. Woe be unto you worse then Scrybes and Phariseis
Hypocrytes, which shut up the kyngedome of heaven before men, keeping the
paryshe so that neither you enter in your self, neither suffer them that would
enter in and do their duty, to have your roumes and commodities. Woo be unto
you dumme Dogs, choked with benefyces, so that ye be not able to open your
mouths to barcke against pluralytyes, improperacio^s, bying of vouso^s, nor
against any evil abuse of the cleargies lyuynges. No, for you your selves
might go a beggynge yt livings that be ordained for the clergy were not
abused, but restored and bestowed upon them only that does the cleargyes
duty. Therefore you be the inuenters and procurers of ungodly statutes, and
deuelyshe deuyses, to give Lords chaplaynes whyehe ought to live upon their
masters wages, authorytye to live upon the spoil of diverse paryshes. Ad (...)
u^stram dico, I speak to make you ashamed of your selves. If gentylmenne that
be lords servants might obtain of the king and his counsel placardes or
warrantes to keep a standy^g upon shoters hill, Salesbury plain, or n any
theuyshe place, to take men's purses by the way, should not this be robbery and
shamfull abhomina cion to be mayntayned by laws, statutes and authority? What
should a young ge^telman be ashamed to rob one rych man's purse of forty
shyllinges once in his life? and an ancient prelate not once blushe which
robs diverse pore paryshes of forty pounds yearly all the days of his life.
You pestilent prelates which by flattery poison the high powers of authorytye,
be ye neither afraid nor ashamed to make the Kings majesty, his laws and
your lords and masters which should be the ministers of justice and equitye, to
be the defenders and maynteyners of your ungodly robbery, Your example and
flattery has caused the great men and rich men to take to them selves the
vauntage and profytes, and give unto their children being ignoraunte babes, the
names and lytles of Personnages, Prebendes, Archedeaconryes, and of all manner
of offices. For even as well may the Lord that cannot, as the Doctoure that
will not do his duty, take the profits to himself, and leave a hyrelyng unto
the parysh: and yet both be naught. O that it would please God to open the
eyes of the higher powers too perceive what good doctrine, nay what deuylyshe
dysorder is taught by them that be double and tryple benefyced. For their
example teaches, and their preaching can never diswade, to set and ordeyne
rich robbers and ignorant teachers over the Christen congregation, gods
people, the kings subjects: yea and as for civil order in all offices,
ambicious covetous me^ learning at them, take the solemn tytles and good
fees unto the^ selves, and leave their duties unto other, so to be neglected
and abused, as causes al discord and disobedyence. For who but officers.
should set good order, and make quietness? And how can he set any good order,
which places him self in ten men's roumes? or make other to be quiet with
nothing, that will never quiet him self with any one living? Yea how can
he be but a maker of busynes y^ thrusts many men out of their lyuynges?
But for all this the flatterer wy^ say that there is a great number of them
that has* many men's lyuynges in their hands, which do much good with them,
yea and be liberal gentlemen, very good officers and godly preachers. But
wotte ye what the scripture says: they be Canes impudentissimi, nescientes
saturitatem, Unshamefaste dogs, knowing no measure of gredye getting.

Der^linquentes rectam uiam err^uerunt secuti uiam Baalam filii Bosor, Leauyng
the right way of procedynge unto greatefees by faithful diligence in doing
worthy duties, do straye in covetousness, following Baalam the son of Bosor.
Leaving the reward of cursed in wyeked craft, O take heed of Balaam you
that love the reward of iniquitye, a reward for ^ntsyng the people, whom god
would have blessed. A fee for ke pyng those offices unto your selves which god
amongst y^ people would have executed. Can ye say any more for yourselues then
Balam did? S^ dederit michi Balaac domum suam* (...) argenti and ^uri, If
Balaac would give unto me his housefull of silver and gold, I cannot change the
word of the lord my God, to speak more or les. Can ye do any better in the
sight of the world then Balaam did upon the hills, even as the lord did
command him and none otherwise? and yet loving the reward of iniquitye being
a Prophet, was rebuked of a bruyt beast: as you being wise men ought to learn
at a folysh Ass not to ouerburden and lode your selves with far more th^ye a^
able to bear. Suerlye it is an ungodly and wicked desire of you, to look for a
reward both of god for doing of your duty and also of Mammon for taking upon
you far more then ever ye be able for to dyscharge. Balaa^ sought how too
get thanckes of God and a reward of Baala^, and in so doing he lost the
favor of God, the reward of Balaac, and caused the people too sin, so that
the vengeance of God did sore plague the Israelites, and utterly destroyed
Baalam and Balaac and al their sort. And when as you by heapynge of lyuynges
together, do seek to get the welthe of the world, and also the favor of god
by pretendynge to do so many duties as no man is able to perform, ye lose the
favor of god, and ye shall be deceived of the world, and bring such iniquity
amongst y^ people as shall provoke y^ indignacion of god to plage them, and
to distroy you. O for the tender mercies of god in our savior Jesus Christ,
although I rushe and fret your legs upon the hedge and pales of gods
vencyarde, and speak plainly be inge but a very ass in comparyson of your
wisdom, conning, and experience, yet I beseech you dear brethren be assured y^
I speak not of malice but of pyty, not of envy, but of fear: for I se
euydently the angel of the Lord with a sword of vengeance red ye to
destroy you if ye do not stay, but proceed in this ungodly way: Se and
behold, Nisi conuersi fueri it is, gladium suum acuit, arcum suum tetendit et par
auit illum, except ye turn, he the Lord has whet his sword, he has bente
his bow, and made it ready with deadlye darts. Suerlye brethren this
heapynge together of lyuynges makes you to have so many things to do, that ye
can do no thing well: it is the ready way not to edify but to destroy.
Wherefore if ye cannot espy your own fautes in your selves, yet look one at
another: look you of the layty at them of the cleargye, that seeing the motes in
their eyes, ye may learn to pull the boames out of your own eyes. Do ye not
se how that they of ^he clergy by heapyng together many lyuynges, have caused
many poor parishes to pay their tithes y^ lack their persons? Do ye not se
how that prebendes which were godly founded as most convenient and necessary
lynyngs for preachers to healp the bishops and the persons too enstructe the
people, be now ungodly abused to corrupt the bishops and the persons that
rather seek the vauntage of good prebends to enryche them selves, then the
healp of godly preaches, to enstruct Gods people? Do ye not se how these pro
uiders of pluralities having the cure of Christen souls in the paryshe, and
shepefolde of Christ, do leave the flock and take the spoil to spend in
Noble men's houses* where as they do se that the keeper of horses in the
stable, of cattle in the fyelde, and of dogs in the kenell, does live on
his masters wages, and not on the Pyllage of his ^re. O ye noble men do ye
give unto the kepers of your horses, cattle, and dogs, wages, least that
they should sell your horses, kill your cattle, or ^eye your dogs to
live upon the skynnes: and will ye allow your Chapleynes no wages, but cause
cheym to live upon the murder and spoil of the innocente Lambs of God, redeemed
and boughte with Christ's precious blood? Do ye se how by these servants of
Mammon, enemies of Christ, gredy wolves in Lamb skynnes, the paryshes be
spoiled, the people vntaughte, God unknown, his lyuelye word set
gracy^uslye forth by the kings procedynges, is vngracyously suspected, hated,
and abhorred of the ignorant people?

You of the laytye, when ye see these small motes in the eyes of the clargye,
take heed too the great beams that be in your own eyes. But alas I fear
least y^ ye have no eyes at all. For as hypocrisy and supersticion does
bleare the eyes:

So covetousness and ambycyon does put the eyes clean out. For if ye were
not stark blind ye would se and be ashamed that where as fyfty ^unne belyed
Monckes given to glotony filled their pawnches, kept ^p their house and ^elyued
the whole country round about them, there one of your gredye gu^es deu^wrynge the
whole house and making great pyllage throughouce the country, cannot be
satisfied.

If ye had any eyes, ye should se and be ashamed to confess that if some of
you should not have many offices, there would not be men enough found,
to put in every office one manne, mete and able by doing of their dewtyes to
serve the king, and take good order amongst the people, where as there is a
great number too many of your sort which thyncke your selves mete and
worthy by taking many Offices in hand, too burden the king and the people
with all fees and charges belongyng unto every office: yea and fu^ermore to
require personages, prebendes, Dean^yes and any manner of living due unto the
Ecclesiastycall ministry, to be given unto you for serving the King in
taking the vauntage of many, and doing the duties of few offices belongyng
unto ciuyll pollycye.

If ye had any eyes ye should se and be ashamed that in the great
aboundannce of lands and goods taken from Abbeies, Colleges and Chauntryes for
to serve the king in all necessaryes, and charges, especially in provision of
relyefe for the pore, and for mayntenaunce of learning the king is so
dysapoynted, that both the pore be spoiled, all mayntenance of learning
decayed, and youonly en ryched. But for because ye have no eyes to se with, I
will declare that you may hear with yours cares* and so perceive and know,
that where as God and the king has been most liberal to give and bestow;
there you have been most vnfayethfull to dyspose and deliver. For according
unto gods word and the knges pleasure, the universities which be the schools of
all god lines and virtue, should have been nothing decayed, but much incresed
and ameuded by this reformacion of religion.

As concerning gods word for the vpholdyng and increase of y^ universities,
I am sure that no man knowing learning and virtue does doubt. And as for the
kings pleasure it did well appear in that he establyshed (...) the
vnyu^rsityes all Priuileg^ granted before his time, and also (...) all manner
of paymentes requyr^d of the cleargye, as tithes, and first fruytes, the
vnyuersities be ex^ted. Yea and the kings mayesty (...) that dead is, did give
unto the universities of Cambryge ^t one time, two hundred pounds yearly to
the exibition and finding of five learned men, to read and teach
dyuynitye, law, Physycke, Greek and Ebrue.

At an other time. xxx. pound yearly In liberam et puram (...). In fre and
pure alms. And finally for the fust dacion of a new College so much as
should serve to build it, and replenyshe it with mo Scholars and (...) ^nges
the any other College in the university before that time ha^.

By the which every man may perce^ue that (...) ^yng ^nye things* and ^nge
nothing from the vni^* was very d^ sirous to have (...) increased and a ^nded
(...) all (...) that have know^n the vnyuersitye of (...) sense* that time that
it did first begin to r^ue these great and manyefolde benefytes from the
kings majesty, at your hands, have ^uste occasion to suspecte that you have
deceived boeth the king and university, to enryche your selves. For before
that you did begin to be the disposers of the kings liberalitye toward
learning and poverty, there was in houses be longing unto the vnynersytye o^
Cambryge, two hundred students of dyuynytye, many very well learned: which
be now all clean gone, house and manne, young toward scholars, and old
fatherly^ Doctors, not one of them left: one hundred also of an other sort
that having rych friends or being benefyced men did live of them selves in
Ostles and Innes be either gone away, or else feign to crepe into Colleges,
and put poor men from bare lyuynges. Those both be all gone, and a small
number of poor godly dylygent students now remaining only in Colleges be
not able to tarry and continue their study in y^ university for lack of
exibicion and healpe. There be diverse there which rise daily betwixt four and
five of the clock in the morning, and from five until six of the clock,
use common prayer with an exhortacion of gods word in a common chapel, and
from sixth unto ten of the clock use ever either pryuate study or commune
lectures. At ten of the clock they go to dynner, where as they be content*
with a penye pyece of byefe amongst. iiii. having a few porage made of the
brothe of the same byefe, with salt and otemell, and nothing else.

After this slender dinner they be either teaching or learning until v. of
the clock in the euenyng, when as they have a supper not much better then
their dinner. Immedyat^lye after the which, they go either to reasonyng in
problemes or unto some other study, until it be nine or ten of the clock,
and there being without fire are feign to walk or run up and down half an
hour, to get a heat on their feet when they go to bed.

These be men not werye of their pains, but very sorye to leave their study:
and sure they be not able some of them to continue for lack of necessary
exibicion and relefe. These be the living saints which serve god taking
great pains in abstinence, study, labor and dylygence, with watching and
prayer. Wherefore as Paul, for the Sayn tes and brethren at Jerusalem, so I
for your brethren and Saynctes at Cambrydge most humblye beseech you make
your colleccions amongst you tych Marchaunies of this city, and send them
your oblacions unto the vnyuersytye, so shall ye be sure to please God, to
comfort them, and provide learned men to do much good throughout all this
realm. Yea and truly ye be detters unto them: For they have sown amongeste
you the spiritual treasures of gods wdrde, for the which they ought to
repe of you again corporal necessaries. But to return unto them that should
better have provided for learning and pouertye in all places, but especyally
in the universities.

Look whether that there was not a great number of both learned and pore that
might have been kept, mayntayned, and relyeued in the vuiuersities: which
lackyng all bealpe or comfort, were compelled to forsake the vniueclitye, leave
their books, and seek their living abroad in the country? Yea and in the
cuntry many Gra^mer Schools founded of a godly intent to bring up poor
men's sons in learning and virtue, now be taken awye by reason of the
gredye covetousness of you that were put in trust by God, and the king to
erecte and make gra^mer schools in many places: And had neither commandment
nor permission to take away the scholmasters living in any place, moreover
much charitable alms was there in many places yearly to be bestowed in pore
towns and parishes upon gods people, the kings subjects: which alms to
y^ great dyspleasure of god and dyshonoure of the king, yea and contrary to
gods word and the kings laws, ye have taken away. I know what ye do say
and brag in some places: that ye have done as ye were commanded with as
much charytye and lyberalitye toward both pouertye and learning, as your
commission would bear and suffer.

Take heed whom ye slander, for Gods word, and the kings laws and
statutes be open unto every man's eyes, and be every commission directed
according unto the^, ye both might and should have given much where as ye have
taken much away.

Take heed unto the kings statutes, the acts of parliament, there ye shall
find that the Nobles and commons do give, and the King does take into his
hands Abbeyes Colleges and Chauntryes, for erectynge of Gramer schools, the
godly brynging up. of youth, the farther augmentynge of the vnyuersytyes, and
better prouisyon for the poor. This shall ye find in the, Acts of parliament,
in the Kings statutes: but what shall be found in your practyse and in your
deeds? Surely the pullyng down of gramer schools, the deuylishe drownynge of
youth in ignorance, the utter decay of the universities, and most
vncha^table spoil of prouysion, that was made for the pore.

Was it not a godly and charitable prouysion of the King to give unto the
university two hundred pounds yerelye for excellent Readers? three hundred
pounds ye elye in pure alms, and many hundred pounds also to the foundacyon
and ereccion of a new College? And was it not a deuilishe deuyse of you to
turn all this the kings bountuouse liberalitye into improperacions of
benefices, which be papysticall and vncharytable spoils of most necessary
prouysion for pore paryshes? Intelligite insipientes in popu^ lo, et stulti
aliquando s^pite.

Learn understanding you that play unwise parts amongeste the people, and
you fools once wax wise. Qui plantauit aurem non audiet?

He that set the ears, shall h^ not hear the sorrowful complaynte of pore
paryshes, against you that have by improperacions clean taken away
hospitalitye, and much impared the due livings of gods mynysters, the peoples
instructoures and teachers Qui figur at ^culum non considerat? he that
fashioned the eye, does he not behold how that the best lands of abbeyes,
colleges and chaunteries be in your hands, and evil improperacions conveyed
to the king and to the universities and Byshopes lands? Qui corripit gentes
non arguet?

He that corrected and punysheth the heathen lackyng the light of gods word for
the only abuse of natural reason, will he not reprove and condemn you which
have good reasonable wyts, gods only word, the kings laws, and statuts: and
much power and authority given unto you to edifye and do good, saying it is
abused of you to destroy and do hurt? Should not you have amended the provision
for the pore, the educacyon of youth, and the condition of the universities?
And be they not by you sore hurt and dekayed? The king should and would have
reformed religion. The first part of reformacion is to restore and give again
all such things as have been wrongfullye taken and abused. Surely the
Abbeyes did wrong fullye take and abuse nothing so much as the improperacions
of benefices. Nothing is so papystycall as improperacions of benefices be:
they be the Popes darlings and paramors, which by the dyuely she deuyce of
wicked Balaamytes, be set a broad in this realm to cause the learned men of the
vnyuersities and all bishops that be godly men, the Popes enemies, to
commyt spiritual fornicacion with them. Why did God destroy the Madianytes
but for their sin? Why did he plage the Israelyt^s but for (...) same (...)?
Why did God cause the Abeyes to be d^stroyed, but for papystycall abuses? And
why should not god plage the vnyuersityes and Bishops keeping and meddelynge
with improperacions, that be the same papysticall and deuelysh abuses?

O what a bloudye day shall it be: when as for this abhomynacion this
spiritual fornicacyon, God shall command his faithful servant Moses the
kings mayesty to take and hang all the rulers of the people that have
wit^ynglye suf^ed th^se whoryshe Madyanytes these Popysh abuses? And cause a
zealous Phinees to shed the heart blood of him that before Moses and many
Israelites* before a high justice and many people, takes a Madianite into his
tent, an improperacion into his inheritance? But now brethren as Peter
preached unto the Jews: Nunc fr^res scio quod per ignorantiam (...). Now
brethren I know that you have done this through ignorance: for the Lord
which forseeth all things, knows that if you had not been blinded with
ignorance, ye could never for pitye have executed his indignacyon and wrath
in making such destruccyon. Seeing therefore that it was Gods pleasure thus
by one evil to punyshe an another, now repent, and amend, that your fautes
may be pardoned. It pleased God by the blind malice of the Jews, to nail
Christ Jesus upon the cross: and yet as many of them as hearing that mart^r
opened by Peter were grieved and pr^ted in conscience, so many said unto Peter,
and to the other Apostles What shall we do? The Apostoli^al counsel was: Agite
pen^, recipiscite. Repent and amend. So dear brethren hearing and knowing that
God has used your gredy covetousness to destrye Abbeyes* Colleges, and
chauntryes* and to plage all this realm, be grieved and sorry in your hertes,
seeing that ye have been* ^saire, instruments of wrath to execute vengeance:
and purge your selves of this vile covetousness, then shall ye from henceforth
be (...) honoris vessels of honor, to serve God, in (...) et iusticia in
holiness and ryghteousnes all the days of your life.

And now on the other part, you that be of the comynaltye, when ye feel that
any plague or punyshement comes by thiem that be ^ette over you in office,
and aucthory^ye, know that they do it not of them selves, but be moved and
styred of God, to work his wrath upon you. For when as God was dyspleased with
the Israelytes, then his dysple sure caused Dauyd their king to take that way
that brought a pestilence amongst the people, whereon dyed. lxx. thousand:
Addidit* furor domini ^ras ci contra Israel, commou^tque david. The indignacion
of the Lord waxed whot against Israel, and he stired up Dauyd. What kyndled
the indignacion of God, but the sins of the people? The sins of the peo ple
did kyndle the indignacyon of the Lord: the Lords indignacyon stired up Dauyd
in presumpcyon. David's presumptuousnes caused the people to dye on the
pestylence. And even as then God ordained y^ christ should be crucified by y^
malicious blyndnes of the Jews, the Israelites plaged by the presumption of
Dauyd:

So has he ordained that England should be spoiled with gredy couetouse
officers. Look then, what has made this great spoil in England? gredye
couerousnes of officers. What did make in them such gredy couerousnes? the
indignacion of God. What kyndled gods indignacion? the sins of the people.
What was the sin of the people? Eloqu^um sancti Israel, blasphe^auerunt.
They have blasphemed the holy word of GOD, calling it new learning and
heretycall doctrine: Ideo iratus est furor domini. And therefore is the wrath
of the Lord kyndled. Now you people which ^ry and say that you are robbed and
spoiled of all that ye have: Would ye have this which ye call robbyng and
spoiling to be ceased? Then quench the indignacion of god which does cause and
make it. If ye will quench the indignacion of God, Hodie si uo^m ^ius ^dieritts.
To day, even now if ye shall hear his voice, harde^ not your hearts, as in
the prouocacion in the day of temptacyon. Hard hearts, stay^e necks,
dysobediente minds, provoke, tempte, and styre up the indignacion of God.

Truly the indignacion of God shall never be quenched, until that you with
tender hearts, humble, obedyente, and thankful minds, receive, embrace, and
conform your selves unto the holy word of God set forth by the Kings
Majesty his gracious procedynges.

There is as yet more styffe necked stubburnes, dieuellysh disobedience, and
gredye couerousnes in one of you of the commune sort that keeps this great
swellynge in the heart, having no occasion to set it forth in exercise,
then is in ten of the worst of them that being in office and aucthoritye,
have many occasions to open and show them selves what they be.

When did ever any officers in authorytye show such rebellyous proud minds,
as was of late plain lie perceived in very many of the co^munaltye? I put the
case that they be so couetouse, that one of their gredi guts has swalowed up a
whole Abbey, house, lands and goods, And if you had had powers unto your
wylles, ye had devoured whole countries, houses and goods, men and beasts,
corn and cattle, as ye did begin.

Some of them keeps their fermes in their own hands, and many of you keep
your own Corn in your own barnes. Yea marrye, why should we not keep our
corn in our own barnes? Forsooth ye no we may not keep it for dread of
God, obedience to the Kings majesty, and pity of your poor neighbors: For
God says: Qui abscondi^ frumenta, maledic^tur in populis: benedictio autem
super caputuendencium: He that hydeth up corn, shall be accursed amongst the
people: but blessing shal^e upon their heads that brings it forth to the
Markettes to sell. Here ye hear the ^lessynge and curse of God.

Ye know the kings gracious Proclamacyon, ye may perceive your neighbors
need, by their miserable complaynt. And yet neither God by blessyng and
cursynge, neither the king by proclamacion and co^missio^, nether the ^ore by
praiyng and paying, can cause you to serve y^ Markets with corn. But let
gods word, the Kings laws, honest order, and charytable prouysyon be put
forth of all marketts towns by wicked Mammon, and let him only keep the
Markets and set pryses for your purposes, and without doubt every market
shall be full of al manner of Corn and vytayles coming in on all sides.

O wicked servants of Mammon* always both enemies and traytoures to GOD
and the king and the common wealth. Is it God or Mammon that has made the
Corn to spring, and given you plentye? If ye say Mammon, then ye confess
plainly whose servants ye be, what Idolatrye ye use. If ye say God, How dare
ye confess him in your words and deny him in your deeds? Why do ye not
bring forth gods corn unto gods people, at gods commandment? Why be
ye not faithful disposers of Gods treasures? Well, he y^ has no corn
thinks he has no part, nor is not gyltye in this matter: but I ca^ tell that
there is many of them, that neither has nor will have corn, which make corn
most dear. I have heard how that even this last year, there was certain Acres
of corn growyng on the ground bought for. viii. pounds: he that bought it
for. viii. sold it for. x. He that gave. x. pounds, sold it to an other above.
xii. pounds: and at last, he that carried it of the ground, paid. xiiii.
pounds. Likewise I heard, that certain quarters of malte were boughte after
the price of. iii. shyllynges. iiii. pence a quarter to be delivered in a
certain markette town upon a certain day. This bargayne was so often bought
and sold before the day of delyueraunce came, that the same Malte was sold
to him that should receive it there and carrye it away, after. vi. s. a.
quarter. Look and se how much a crafts man or any other honest man that
must spend corn in his house, by this manner of bargaynynge, pays, and how
littel the housbande manne that tylleth the ground, and paieth the rent,
receives: Te^ ye may se and perceive it must needs be hard for either of
them to keep a house, the crates man pay^ so much, and the husbandma^ taking
so little.

There is a like manner of barganyng of them that be leasemongers, for
leasemongers make the tenaunts to pay so much, and the landlord to take so
little* that neither of the^ is well able to keep house. I hear say that wit^ a
few miles of London an honest ge^tleman did let his ground by lease unto pore
honest me^ after. ii. s. iiii. d. an (...): the^ comes a lesemounger, a thief,
an extorcioner, deceiuyng y^ tenaunts, bieth their leases, put them from the
grounds, and causes the^ y^ have it at him now, to pay after ix. s. or as I
hard say. ^ix. s. but I am ashamed to name so much. How be it, covetous
extorcioners be ashamed of no deed be it never so evil. And as I hear say,
there be many lose mongers in London, that heyghthen the re^t of bare houses:
and as corn, lan des, teneme^tes and houses, so in all manner of wares, there be
such bi^rs and sellers as cause y^ prouyders and mak^rs of y^ wares to take so
little, and the occupiers of the wares too pay so much, that neither of them
both is able too live. All the Merchants of myschyefe that go betwixt the
bark and the tree, Betwixt the housband man that gets the corn, and
householder that occupyeth Cor^e, betwix the Landlord^, that sets fermes, and
the tennauntes that dwell in the fermes. And betwixt the crafts man that
makes, or the marchaunte that prouydeth wares, and other men that occupies
wares. I say these merchants of mischief coming betwixt the bark and
the tree, do make all things dear to the buyers: and yet wonderful vile and of
small price to many, that must needs set or sell that which is their own
honestlye come bye. These be far worse than any other that has been mencyoned
heretofore: for although benefyced men and officers have many men's livings,
yet they do some men's duties. But these have every man's living, and do no
man's duytye. For they have that which is in deed the living of crafts men,
Marchauntmenne, husbandmen, landelordes and tennauntes, and do never a one of
these men's duties. These be idle vacaboundes, living upon other men's labors:
these be named honest barginers, and be in deed craftye couetouse extorcioners.
For they that be true marchauntemen to by and sell in deed, should and do
provide great plentye and good chepe by honest byenge and selling of their
wares. But these having the names of true merchants, and being in deed
crafty thieves, do make a scarsitye and dearth of all things that comes
through their hands.

Take away all marchauntmen from any town or city, and ye shall leave
almost no prouysyon of things that be necessary. Take away leasmongers,
regrators and all such as by byinge and selling make things more dear, and
when they be gone, all things wylbe more plen tie and better chepe. Now may ye
se who they be that make a great dearth in a great plentye. For who is it,
that heygtheneth the price of Corn, the housbandman that gets plentye of
corn by tyllynge of the ground? No: the regrator that byeth corn to make it
dear, growing upon the grownde. Who reyseth rentes, joins house to house,
and heapeth fermes together? The Gentle manne, that by geuynge of leases,
lets forth his own lands into other men's hands? No, the leasemongers,
that by selling leases, byeth and brings other men's Lands into their own
hands. Who makes all manner of wares and marchandyses to be very dear? the
merchant venterer, which with fayethfull dylygence to provide for the commune
wealth, caryeth forth such things as may well be spared, and brings home
such wares as must needs be occupied in this realm? No, the Merchant of
myschyefe that by craftye conueyaunce for his own gain, caryeth away such
things as may not be spared* and brings again such wares as are not
needful. Take heed you Merchants of London that y^ be not Merchants of
myschyefe, conueying away to much old lead, wol, lether and such substanciall
wares as would set many Englyshme^ to work, and do every manne good service, and
bringing home sylkes and sables, cattayls, and folyshe feathers to fill the
realm full* of such baggage as will never do rich or poor good, and necessary
service. Be ye sur^, if this realm be rych, ye shall not need to be poor: if
this realm be poor, you shall not be able to keep and enjoy your riches. Take heed tha^ that your marchau^dise be not a serving of folysh men's sansies,
which will destroy the realm: but let it be a prouydyng for honest
discrete men's commodities, which will be the vpholdyng and enrychyng of you and
the whole realm. Take heed unto your vocacions prelates and preachers,
Magystrats and officers, la^d lords and tenaunts, crafts men and merchants,
all manner of men take heed unto your selves and to your conversation and
living: yea dear brethren at the reverence of god, for a general comfort to al
parts with out gredye covetousness toward our selves, or malicious envy
toward other, with a syngle eye, of a pure heart, let us consider and
acknowledge how that the bountiful liberalitye of almyghtye God has given
unto this realm wonderful plenty of personnages, prebe^ds, benefyces,
offices, and all manner of lyuynges: with great abundance of corn, cattle,
lands, goods, and all wares that be good and profitable: and how that it is
certeynly the unfaithful disposers which cause a great scarsyty, dearth and
lack of all these gifts and treasures of God, therefore dominus de celo
prospexit, ut uideat si est intelligens aut requirens deum.

The Lord looked down from heaven to se if there were any that had under standing
and sought to please God in faithful dysposynge of Gods treasures: but
saying that Omnes student auaritie, a maiore usque ad minorem. All be given
unto coueteousnes from the hyeste unto the loweste, so that pore people can
have no houses to dwell in, ground to occupye, no nor corn for their money.
The Lord him self speaking unto the earth, shows where is the fault:
principes tui infideles. Thy head rulers and of fycers be unfaithful
disposers. ^ocii furum, theuishe fellows.

Omnes diligunt muner^, they all love brybes, ^t sequuntur retributiones, and
hunte for promocyons. What then o Lord shall be the end of all this? Viuo ego
dicit do minus. As truly as I live says the Lord, propterea quod facti sunt
greges mei in rapinam, Because that my flock have (...) spoiled, et oues me in
deuorationem omniu^ be^tiarum agri, and my sheep devoured of all wyld beasts
of the fyelde, quia non esset pastor, Because there was no keeper, Neque ^nim
quesiuerunt pastores mei gregem meum, For these which were named my pastors,
did take no heed unto my ^cke, Sed pastores pascebant semetipsos, But those
pastors did feed them selves prowlyng for profit, et greges meos non
pascebant, and my flock thy did not feed by dooyng of their duties. Propterea
pastores audite ^erbum domini.

Therefore ye keepers hear the word of the Lord. What word? that the flock
shall be delivered, and you shall be destroyed: That is a true word: for qua
mensura mensi fueritis, remecietur uobis: By the same measure that you have
served other, ye your selves shall also be served: for as ye have served
super^tycious papists, so shall you your selves be served, being covetous
Idolaters: yea and have as much vauntage at the metynge, as is betwixt
supersticion and Idolatrye. How be it, God geuynge you respite to look for
amendmente: offers more gentelnes, if ye will take it. For in the. xx. of Jeremy
he says: Ecce ego do cord uobis uiam uit^ et uiam mortis: Behold I set before
you the way of life and the way of death: if ye repe^d and amend, life: If ye
be still stifnecked* death: for the Lord by Esaye. i. say eth: Si uolueritis
et audieritis: If ye will hear to repent and amend, Bona terre comedetis, ye
shall eat the good fruits y^ the earth shall bring forth, to your co^sort. Si
nolueritis, et me ad iracundi^ pro uocaueritis, if ye will not, but provoke me
to anger, gladius deuorabituos. The sword shall eat you up. Quia os domini
locutum est. For it is Gods own mouth that has spoken it. For Gods sake
believe it: And do not by a ^harde heart void of repentance heap unto your
selves the wrath of god against y^ day of vengeance.

But thankfullye enbrasynge the riches of gods goodness, pa^ience and long
sufferyng, acknowlegyng that gods kyndnes draws you unto repentance, if ye
have so little spyrituall felyng and ghostlye understanding that ye can nothing
be persuaded or moved by the comfortable promyses, and terrible thretenynges of
the invisible God: yet having corporal eyes and natural reason, consider the
decay of this Realm, and the towardnes of the kings majesty. Note the
decay of this realm, and thereby ye shall learn to know that nothing can
make a realm wealthye, if the inhabitauntes thereof be couetouse: for if
lands and goods could have made a realm happy notwyth standing men's
covetousness, then should not this realm so vnhappylye have decayed, when as
by the suppressio^ of Abbeies, Colleges and Chaunteries, innumerable lands and
goods were gotten.

If gods word were ordained by any other mean then by the converting of
covetous men, to make that realm happy where covetous men be, then suerlye
should England now be most happy, where gods word is freely set forth in the
mother tongue, plainly preached in sole^pne congregacions, and commonly used in
daily co^municacion. But undoubtedly whereas couetouse men be, there neither
lands or goods, no not gods holy Gospel can do so much good as
covetousness does harm. Wherefore seeing this realm by covetousness is soore
decayed, least it should also by the same be destroyed, away with your
covetousness, all you y^ love this realm. Or if ye will not do it for love of
the realm, yet for the reuerente obedience which ye owe unto God and the
kings majesty, away with covetousness which makes men servants of Mammon,
and enemies unto god and the king. Be ye well assured that the kings Majesty
which now is, God save his noble grace, dreadeth god, loves his people, and
abhors covetousness, which in this realm offends God, dishonors y^
king, anoyeth the people.

Therefore he does partly now perceive and consider, and will do better
hereafter, that prelates with pluralities, and magystrates with many offices,
do burden him and his people with paying tithes, fees, and many great
charges, and yet keep so many roumes vacant of prechers and officers, that his
magesty cannot be duly served, nor his people well instructed by the preaching
of gods word, nor yet well ordered by the mynistracion of justice and equitye.

He knows that regratours of corn vyttals and of all manner of wares, make
such dearthe and scarcity, that no diligence of good merchants by honest
byinge and selling can provide any things to be either good cheap or
plentiful. It is well known to his gracious majesty, or at the least unto his
honorable council that leasemu^gers taking much of tenauntes and paying
little unto the landlordes, have both their lyuynges, and does the duties of
neither. For to their own pryuate luker they take rentes of tenauntes, and
fermes of land lords: but when by occasyon they shall be required to serve the
King for a common wealth, then they will have neither lands nor ^erme to do
the king service. Do not therefore imagyn you that be either of the cler gye or
of the laytye in high or low degree, that the Kings Gracious Magestie and
his honorable council be so negligent that they do not espy, or so parcyall
that they will not punyshe those which in this realm hinder the prechyng of
gods word, stop the adminystracion of justice and equitye, cause of all
things a dearthe and scarsytye, and bring Gentlemenne too poouertye, and
husbandmen unto beggerye. It is spyed and must be punyshed, although it be
delayed for a time, to se if you of your selves wyllynglye will amend it.

Beware therefore that ye stay not your self unto a bryttell staff, for it
will brast in spylles and perce through your* hands. Do not stay your self
upon this ymaginacion to think that although craftelye contrary to law and
conscience ye do invade other men's roumes, livings and goods, yet for
because ye be so many in number that do it, therefore the king and his
council either cannot or will not be against you in it: For truly even
therefore must they now neades without delay reform and amend it. For as
sedicious rebellion, so couetouse treason being in a few may be suffered at
the first in hope o^ ame^dment, so long as they few by clokynge it secretelye,
seem to be ashamed of their own evil doings, or afraid of the rulers power
and authorytye: but being so many that they all together without shame and
fear, fall to open spoylynge of the realm, then without delay must they
needs be repressed, although they both say and swear, that they be the kings
subjects, and break no laws. If y^ spoil be found in their hands, it is
neither saying nor swearynge that can excuse them. Open spoil has been made
of personages, prebendes, offices, fermes, wares, vyctuals, and of all manner
of men's liuinges. Therefore there is no long delay to be taken in hope o^
amendment, but spedye provision for redres must be made for fear of a
general destruccio^. You then that for wasting and abusing of the Lords
goods be worthy and like ly sone to be displaced, yet in y^ mean time whiles
ye have respyte, play the part of a wise steward. Restore unto preachers and
officers, benefyces and offices: let landelordes have their rentes, and
fermoures their leases: cause byinge and sellyng to be a prouysyon of good
chepe and plentye, and not an occasyon of dearthe and scarsytye. So shall both
God and the king perceyuyng your wise prouysion, allow your well doing, pardon
your fautes, and confirm you in your offices.

O refuse the service, restore the iniuryes of wicked Mammon, that ye may from
hencefoorthe serve God and the king, prouydyng for the people in holiness and
ryghtousnes all the days of your life: take heed when ye go from a meaner
living unto a better, from a lower office unto a higher, that ye goo as men
called of Christ, not as bewitched and allured by Mammon, se that God by
higher authority perceyuyng^ your faythfulnes in a little, do in at the
door of worthynes and honestye, admytte and receive you to be trusted with
more: beware least that the devil by flatteryng frendshyppe and covetous
ambycion, perceiving your world lines in a little, do in at the wyndow of
wicked bryberye convey and receive you, to abuse and be abused with more. Se
that ye obey the commandment of God, taking pains in your duty e to feed
and do good. Do not consent unto the temptacion of the Deuell, worshyppynge
him in worldlynes, for to get gaynes. These things observed, ye shall be
esteemed and taken as worthy minysters of Christ, and ^ruaunts of God, for so
much as appertains unto the lawful calling and admission of you into your
rowmes, and also the fayethfull dylygence in vsyng of your selves in your
roumes. Furthermore Paul gives example of a lowly mind which does not
iustifye a man's self, and judge evil of other. For so it becomes the
servants of God, and the mynysters of Christ, even when they have done as
they be commanded, to acknowledge them selves unprofitable seruau^ts. And not
as proud Pha^iseis, prayinge in the presence of the Lord, to make boast of
them selves, and find fautes with other men. No, for if other men praise
the^, they must not regard it, no nor if their own conscience commend the^,
except God also allow it. There fore Paul says. Mihi pro minimo est ut a
nobis iudicer. It is one of the least things with me too be judged of you that
be with me, either in time or place. Vel ab humano die, either of man's day,
by the experience of them that shall have further trial in contynuaunce of
time. Sed neque me ipsum iudico. No nor I do not judge my self. Mihi enim
nihil conscius sum, sed non ide^ instificatus sum. For there is nothing that I
know my self gylty of, yet through that am I not justified, no not through the
judgment of you or of other, or of mine own conscience. Qui uero iudicat me
dominus est. He truly y^ iugeth me, is y^ lord judge of all men. Quare, nihil
ante tempus iudicate, wherefore judge ye nothing before the time of judgment.
Quand* dominus uenerit, when the Lord shall come to judge. Qui et illustrabit
occult^ tenebrarum, which also shall make bryghte the couertes of darkness
and craftye clokynge of fautes. Et manifestabit concilia cordis, and shall open
the thoughts of the hearts, which he only searches. Et tunc laus erit
unicuique a deo. And then praise shall be unto every one of God, that gives
praise to the praise worthy. If Paul, being a mynyster of Christ, and a
disposer of Gods mysteryes, was so faythefull in his doing that neither all
the world nor his own conscience could in any thing reprove him, and yet to
continue his careful dylygence had evermore a great respect unto the coming
and judgment of the Lord: How shall we think that they read and take this
place, which being known both to them selves and unto the whole world to do
very evil in many things, yet without care of amendment, do forget them
selves, the Lord, and his iudgeme^te? Surely they understand it as Peter says:
that many places of Paul be understand of them which being indocti (...)
unlearned and unsettled in judgment, (...) wrast or wring until a wrong pin in
suam ipsorum perniciem, unto their own destruccyon, many places of Paul, et
reliquas scripturas, and the other scriptures. For whereas this place of Paul
should be applied to make men careful and diligent, they wrast and wring it to
make for them that be careless and negligent. For Paul says that he does very
little regard what any man does judge of him, menyng thereby that though all the
world would commend him, yet would he not be vain glorious, of his well
doing. They say, they pass little what any man says by them, meaning thereby
that though all men find fautes with them, yet will they never be ashamed of
their evil doing. Paul says that no man should judge, meaning that no
man as concerning secrets of the mind, should judge other to be yuell, and
them selfs to be just: and so take occasion to speak shamefully of other,
and to glory in them selves: they say that no man should judge, meaning
that neither preacher nor friend* should so rebuke their manifest evil
deeds, as might give them occasion to be ashamed of them selves, and leave
judging of other. Let us not wrest the places of Paul and of other
scripturs unto a wrong purpose. They wrest the saying of Paul unto a wrong
meaning, when as the mercy of God, which passes all his works is denied of
them unto any penytente synnet, by their allegynge of the tenth of Paull unto
the Ebrues. Then is that place not well applied but wrong wrested. For when it
is said that if we sin wylfullye after that we have received the know ledge
of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful
lookynge for judgment and violente fire, it is a meante that there is
remaining and leafte in the scriptures no mencyon of sacrifyce for the
forgiveness of sins, but terrible threatenings of vengeance to punyshe
sinners, too be preached unto wylfull sinners.

Howbeit there is no condemnacion but always mercy to be preached unto them
that grafted in Christ Jesus, be penitent sinners, how sore and often soever
they fall* For his mercy is above all his works. Therefore whenever he
suff^eth the Devil to tempte men to ^o sin, or too plage them for sin,
or whenever by his word written or preached he does aggrauate sin, all is
done to drive men unto mercy. The devil has caused here in England much
sin and abhominacion, grievous plages, and sore miseries, God has sent
wondrous plenty of his confortable word. And now brethren all this is even the
work of god: for it is God that works al things in all men. Deus est qui
operatur omnia in omnibus. And yet take good head to ^he true interpretacion of
this place least that ye make God to be the author of syn, Qui non nouit
peccatum, nec est inuentus dolus in ore eius, which know^th no sin by
experience of doing it, nor has no gyle found in his mouth. But even as it
was God that did both give and take away Jobs goods: So is it God that does
al things both good and evil. And as he did make Job rich, by geuinge him
goods, and poor b^ suffering the d^uill to destroy those goods: so doethe he
good deeds of his own goodness, and evil deeds in sufferynge the devil to do
them. Yea it is even God that has concluded al me^ under sin, that has
suffered the devil to tempt al men to do sin, yea and scriptura conclusit
omnia sub peccato, y^ scriptur of God has concluded al me^ vndersyn, or as
^aul speaks in a another place more plan li, (...). We have concluded or
proved, allegynge good reason, that both the greeks and the Jews be under
sin. So now all ye by GOD be concluded underneath sin, that is by gods
suffraunce the devil has caused you to commit sin. By Gods ordinance the
scriptures and the preachers of God, do open and declare that ye be all sinners.

And this is all done, ut omnium mis^riarctur, that he might have mercy upon
all, that all might receive the pardon of his mercy without y^ which none can
be saved, none ca^ escape ve^geaunce. For non est in aliquo alio salus, there
is no health in any other, ^ec aliud nomen datum sub Celo, in quo opor^ nos
s^luos fieri, nor none other name geu^ under heaven, in the which we should be
saved. So y^ he which will have any health must come unto Christ, showing
him self wounded with sin, to stand in need of a Phisic^ on. He y^ will be
saved must show him self a penytente sinner unto Christ which came not to call
the righteous but sinners to amendmente. But he y^ regards the flattery of
the world or the parcialitie of his own conscience, and thereby takes
occasion to glory in his own doings, he shall find no mercy, he ca^ receive no
pardon or for geuenes sent from god to be delivered only unto those y^ feel and
acknowledge them selves to be sickely and unrighteous siners. They therefore that
feel and acknowledge y^ greatest sins wickedness and abhominacio^s in them
selves* being sorry therefore, and entend amendme^t, be most wortht and sure to
receive y^ great pardon of gods mercy, which certainly will deliver the^ out of
all danger, keep the^ in safti and bring the^ to prosperity. Hear therefore
and I will now read my co^missio^, by y^ which ye shall well perceive y^ I
speak nothing upon my own head, but every thing according to the commandment
of the Lord your god, which has sent me unto you his people. The example of
this proclamacio^. Es. lviii. Clama. Make proclamacio^ openly. y^ al me^ may
hear: n^ cesses. Ceas not for fear of the^ that may kill the body, and can
not hurt the soul, quasi (...) exalta uoc^ tu^, Lift up thy voice as a
trumpet, geuinge men knowledge of the coming of the enemies in the time of
war. So give the^ knowledge of the swerd of vengance, which shall follow
immediatli after this warnig Et annuncia populo meo scelera ^oru^. And show
the^ their fautes yt in bering of my name, and professinge my religion will be
my people. Et domui Jacob peccat^ sua, and unto the house of Jacob their own
sins: unto all sorts of men eue^ those syns which they the^ selves do use.
Unto the clergy, the sins of y^ clergy, unto the laitye, the sins of the
layte: and unto every degree, y^ sin nes y^ be of that degree used. Show y^
clergi that they feed the^ selves fat with many livings, and let my flock be sca
tered and unfed, because there is few pre ching pastors y^ can and will feed them.

Show the clergy that they ca^ neither teach, nor require the king and la itye
to provide new livings for pre chers, until they do restore forth of their own
hands those which be pro uided already: show such of the clergy as be fatlings
puffed up with pluralities, that they neither have fed, do feed, or can feed my
flock, yet have spoiled, do spoil and will spoil my la^ bes, y^ kings
subjects, and their own brethren, so long as they use their pluralities. Show
the laity y^ they have robbed me their lord and god of double honor due unto
my mynisters: for they have taken away the fodder that was prepared for the
laboring ox, and been disobedyent unto my law, pronounced by them that sat
in Moses cheire.

Show the nobility that they have oppressed the comminaltye, Keeping them
under in fear and ignorauce, by power and aucthoritye, which might and should
have been louyngly learned their obedience and duty to both God and the king by
preaching of the gospel. Show the nobility y^ they have extorted and famished
the co^mynalty by the heigthening of fynes and rentes of fermes, and decaying
of hospitality and good house keeping. Show the co^minaltye y^ they be both
traytoures and rebels, murmuryng and grudgyng against mine ordinances: tell
the co^ minalty yt the ox draws, the horse bears, y^ tree brings forth
fruits and the earth corn and grass to the profit and comfort of man, as I
have ordained them: but they of the comminaltye in England bye and sell, make
bargaynes, and do al thyn ges to the grefe and hynderaunce of man, contrary
to my commandment. Tell the commynaltye that they take one another ferme
over their heads, they thruste one an other out of their houses, they take
leases unto them selves, and let them dearer unto other: they bye corns
and wares to make other pay more dear for it: they hurt and trouble, eat up
and devour one an other. Tell all England hye and low, rich and poor that
they every one prowlynge for them selves, be servant unto Mammon, enne ^es
unto god, disturbers of common wealth, and destroyers of them selves. And for
all this let them know that I have no pleasure in y^ death of a siner. Sed
magis ut c^uer t^tur et uiuat, but rather I give him respit and send him
warning y^ he may turn and live, comfortably here upon earth, and ioifully in
heaven for ever. Therefore if any in England do turn and amend, he shall
save him self. But they which will not repent and amend shall not be saved by
their fathers or friends, which by repentance be as sure them selves to be
accepted unto me as was Noe Danyel and Job: but and if all or the most part
of the^ in England, turn and amend the^* say unto England: delectaberis super
domino, From ^enceforth y^ shall have delight and pleasure in y^ lord, et
sustoll^ te super altitudines terre, and I will lift the higher in honor wealth
and power, then any other realm in or upon the earth, et albabo te heredita^e
Iacobi p^tris tui, and so will I feed the with the inheritance of Ia cob thy
^ather. I will restore unto y^ whatsoever land or holds in Scotland or in
France did at any time be long unto Jacob thy father, unto the kings of this
realm, os enim domini locutum est, for the Lords own mouth has spoken it,
which is a better assurance unto this commission, the^ though it were signed
and seled with ten thousand men's hands.

Now al you y^ ente^d to be saved by the mercies of God in our savior Jesus
Christ, come when ye be calle^ from gredy covetousness wherwyth ye have been
blinded to wreake Gods wrath: receive mercy and grace which be now freely offered
to make you from henceforth holy ministers of Christ, and faithful disposers
of y^ manifold gifts of Gods grace and goodness: and now for fere of
forgetful negligence, when ye depart hence, replenish your minds with y^
comfortable reme^branc^ of your own grievous myseries, and of gods great
mercies, in secret meditacion of the lords prayer, here tarying together in
quyetnes a littell for to receive the Lords blessyng.

The god of peace that brought again from death our Lord Jesus the great
shepeheard of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting testament, make
you perfect in all good works, to do his will, workyng in you that which is
plesa^t in his sight, through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
God save the King.
Imprynted at London by Ihon Day dwelling over Aldersgate. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum. Per septennium.


