NOVA FRANCIA: Or the DESCRIPTION OF THAT PART OF NEW FRANCE, which is one
continent with VIRGINIA.

Described in the three late Voyages and Plantation made by Monsieur de Monts,
Monsieur du Pont-Graue, and Monsieur de Poutrincourt, into the countries called
by the French men La Cadie, lying to the Southwest of Cape Breton.

Together with an excellent several Treaty of all the commodities of the said
countries, and manners of the natural inhabitants of the same.

Translated out of French into English by P. E*

LONDINI, Impensis GEORGII BISHOP.

1609.

TO THE BRIGHT STAR OF THE NORTH, HENRY Prince of Great BRITAIN.
MOst excellent Prince:
my Author (knowing that there are someworks so naturally great of themselves,
that they challenge the gracious protection of Princes) has offered this his
History to the Royal patronage of the most Christian King, two Queens, and
the Dauphin, to the end it might stir them the more to prosecute the
populating of the lands herein described, to bring the Naturals thereof
(Savage and miserable people) to civility and right knowledge of God, and so
to the salvation of their souls. Assuming the like presumption, I have hoped
(notwithstanding the defects which necessarily attend a stranger, who can never
attain the natural Idiome of this eloquent language) that it might not be an
injury to your Highness; but an addition of Honor, and safety of tbis work,
if I should dare to inscribe your Princely name on the forehead thereof Which
boldness, the noble undertaking of the English Nation has nourished, who
have so lately begun (by the permission, and under the protection of his
excellent Majesty, your most Royal Father) to plant Christianity in
Virginia, being one continent, and next adioining land to these. For who may
better support, and manage magnanimous actions, such as be the peopling of
lands, planting of Colories, erecting of civil Gouernementes, and propagating
of the Gospel of Christ, (which are Royal and Princely foundations) then
those whom the King of Kings, has established as Atlasses of kingdoms and
Christian commonweals? God has necessitated in his Prophecy, Kings and
Queens to be nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers of his Church: so that he
has not only committed the government of a ripe and strong body, able to
subsist, but has imposed the care of the tenderness and infancy thereof upon
them. Alexander being yet young, would have run in the Olympian games if
kings had run there; now Kings do run; now Princes do work in the Lords
harvest, to spread that name which must gather the elect from the utmost ends
of the world, if not in their persons, yet with their authority and means. I
know your Highness would not be inferior, but rather excel in so noble an
action: such an emulation is pleasing to God; your birth leads unto it;
Christian charity inuiteth you to be chief worker in the saving of millions
of souls: The necessity of your Country of Great BRITAIN, (over populous)
does require it: And lastly your poor Virginians do seem to implore your
Princely aid, to help them to shake off the yoke of the devil, who has
hitherto made them live worse then beasts, that henceforth they may be brought
into the fould of Christ, and (in time) to live under your Christian
government: So then having thus run, you shall obtain an everlasting Crown
of glory, being as well planter, as defender of the Faith.

Your Highness humblest servant, P. ERONDELLE.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader:
The whole volume of the Nauigations of the French nation into the West Indies
(comprised in three books) was brought to me, to be translated, by M. Richard
Hackluyt, a man, who for his worthy, and profitable labors, is well known to
most men of worth, not only of this kingdom, but also of foreign parts: and
by him this part was selected and chosen from the whole work, for the
particular use of this Nation, to the end, that comparing the goodness of the
lands of the Northerly parts herein mentioned with that of Virginia, which
(though in one, and the self same continent and both lands adjoining) must be
far better, by reason it stands more Southerly, nearer to the Sun, greater
encouragement may be given to prosecute that generous and godly action, in
planting and peopling that Country, to the better propagation of the Gospel of
Christ, the salvation of innumerable souls, and general benefit of this land,
too much pestred with over many people. Which translation (as I have said) is
but a part of a greater volume. If therefore you find that some references of
things mentioned in the former part of the said volume are not to be found in
this translation, do not think it strange, in as much as they could not well be
brought in, except the whole volume should be translated, which of purpose was
left undone, as well to avoid your farther charges, as because it was thought
needless to translate more then concerns that which adioyneth to Virginia.
What good the English Nation may reap of this work, by the only description
that is found therein of Nations, Islands, Harbors, Bays, Coasts, Rivers,
Rocks, Shoulds, Sands, Banks, and other dangers, which the Sailors into those
parts may now the more easily find, and avoid, by the knowledge that this
translation gives them of it, let the Nauigators judge thereof, who (for want
of such knowledge) have found themselves in evident peril of death, and many
altogether cast away. If a man that shows forth effectually the zealous care
he *has to the welfare, and common good of his country, deserves praises of
the same, I refer to the judgment of them that abhor the vice of ingratitude
(hateful above all to God, and goodmen) whether the said M. Hackluyt (as well
for the first procuring of this translation, as for many works of his, set out
by him for the good, and everlasting fame of the English Nation) deserves not
to reap thanks. As for this my labor, if it be censured favorably, and my
good affection (in undertaking the translating of this work, for the benefit
of this land) taken in good part, it will encourage me to endeavor my self to
do better hereafter.

The Table of the contents of the Chapters.
The first Book.
WHerein are described the three late Voiages, Nauigations, and Plantation of
New France (otherwise called La Cadia) by Monsieur de Monts, Monsieur du
Pont-graue, and Monsieur de Poutrincourt.
CHAP. I. The Patent, and Commission of the French king to Monsieur de Monts
for the inhabiting of the Countries of La Cadia, Canada, and other places in
New France, from the 40. degree to the 46. CHAP. II. The voyage of Monsieur de
Monts into New France: accidents happened in the said voyage: the causes of the
Isie banks in new found lands: the imposing of names to certain Ports: the
perplexity wherein they were by reason of the staeie of their other ship.
CHAP. III. The leaving of Port du Mouton: the accidents of a man lost in the
woods the space of 16. days: Baie Francoise, or the French Baie: Port Royal:
the River of l'Equille: a Copper Mine: the mischief of golden Mines: of
Diamonds: Turkey stones. CHAP. IIII. The description of the river Saint John:
and of the Isle Saint Croix: the man lost in the woods found out 16. days
after: examples of some strange abstinencies: the discords of the Savages
deferred to the judgment of Monsieur de Monts: the fatherly authority among
the said Savages: what husband they choose to their daughters. CHAP. V. A
farther description of the Island Saint Croix: the enterprise of Monsieur de
Monts difficult and generous, yet prosecuted through envy: thereturne of
Monsieur de Poutrincourt into France: the perils of the voyage. CHAP. VI. The
buildings of the I Will Saint Croix: the Frenchmens discommodities in the said
place: unknown sicknesses: of their causes: of the people that be subject to
it: of Diets, badde Waters, Aires, Winds, Lakes, corruption of Woods, seasons,
disposition of bodies, of young, of old: the Authors advise touching the
government of health, and cure of the said diseases. CHAP. VII. The discovery
of new lands by Monsieur de Monts: fabulous tales and reports of the river and
fained town of Norombega: the refuting of the Authors that have written
thereof: fish banks in New found land: Kinibeki: Chouacoet: Malebarre:
Armouchiquois: the death of a French man killed: mortality of Englishmen in
Virginia. CHAP. VIII. The arrival of Monsieur du Pont to Saint Croix: the
habitation transferred into Port Royal: return of Monsieur de Monts into
France: the difficulty of hand Milles, the furniture of the said Monsieur du
Pont, for the discovery of new lands beyond Malebarre: Shipwreck: Forecast for
the return into France: Comparison of these voiages with them of Florida: the
blame of those that dispraise the tillage of the land. CHAP. IX. The first
motive and acceptance of the voyage by Monsieur de Poutrincourt, together with
the Author into New France: their departure from Paris to go into Rochell.
CHAP. X. The name of our ship called the Jonas: the shallow water of Rochell
is the cause of the hard going out: Rochell a reformed town: the common people
is insolent: Croquans: the accident of the shipwreck of the Jonas new
preparation: weak Soldiers are not to be placed upon frontiers: the Ministers
of Rochell do pray for the couersion of the Savages: the small zeal of ours:
the Eucharist carried in voiages by the ancient Christians: the diligence of
Monsieur de Poutrincourt at the very point of shipping. CHAP. XI. Their
departure from Rochel: Sundry meetings of ships and Pirates: stormy sea about
the Acores, and whence it proceeds: Why the West-windes are frequent in the
West-sea: From whence the winds do come: Porpeses do prognosticate storms:
Means to take them: The describing of them: Of storms: Their effects: Of
calmes; What is a Gust of wind: How it is made: The effects thereof: The
boldness of Mariners: how reverence is given to the Kings ship: The
supputation of the voyage: Hot sea, then coold: The reason of it: And of the
Banckes of Ise in New Foundland. CHAP. XII. Of the great Bancke of Morues or
Coddes: Of the sound: Our coming to the said Bancke: The description thereof:
The fishing of New-land-fish: And of birds: The greediness of the birds
called by Frenchmen: Happe-foyes: Diverse perils: Gods favors: The causes of
frequent and long mistes in the Westerne-sea: Land marks: The sight of it:
Marvelous odours: The boording of two Shaloupes: The landing at the Port Du
Mouton: The coming to Port Royal: Of two Frenchmen remaining there alone
among the Savages. CHAP. XIII. The happy meeting of Monsieur du Pont: His
return to Port Royal: Rejoicing: Description of the confines of the said
Port: Conjectures touching the head and spring of the great river of Canada:
Sowing of corn: Monsieur du Ponts return into France: Monsieur de
Poutrincourts voyage unto the country of the Armouchiquois: Fair Rye sprung
forth without tillage: The exercises and manner of living in Port Royal: The
Meadows of the river de l'Equille. CHAP. XIIII. Their departing from the I Will
Saint Croix: The bay of Marchin: Chouakoet: vines and grapes: The liberality of
the Savages: The land and people of the Armouchiquois: The cure of an
Armouchiquois wounded: The simplicity and ignorance of that people: Vices of
the Armouchiquois: Suspicion: People not caring for clothes: Cornesowed, and
Vines planted in the Armouchiquois country: Quantity of grapes: Abundance of
people: dangerous sea. CHAP. XV. Dangers: unknown language: The making of
aforge and of an oven: Crosses set up: Plenty: A conspiracy: Disobedience:
Murder: The flight of three hundred against ten: The agility of the
Armouchiquois: Bad company dangerous: The accident of a musket that did burst:
The Savages insolency: Their timorosity, impiety, and flight: The fortunate
Port: A bad sea: revenge: The counsel and resolution for the return: New
perils: Gods favors: Monsieur de Poutrincourts arrival at Port Royal: How he
was received. CHAP. XVI. The Condition of the corn which they sowed: The
institution of the order of bon-temps: The Savages behavior among the
Frenchmen: The state of Winter: Why raines and fogges be rare in this season:
Why rain is frequent between the Tropiques: Snow profitable to the ground:
the state of January: Conformity of weather in the ancient and New France: Why
the spring is slow: The tilling of gardens: Their crop: A water mill: A Manna
of Herrings: Preparation for the return: Monsieur de Poutrincourts invention:
The Savages admiration: News from France. CHAP. XVII. The arrival of the
French: Monsieur de Monts his society is broken, and why: The Covetousness of
them that rob the dead: Bonfires for the Nativity of the Duke of Orleans: The
departing of the Savages to go to wars: Sagamos Membertou: Voyages upon the
Coast of the French Bay: Base traficke: The town of Ouigoudi: How the Savages
do make great voyages: Their bad intention: A steel Mine: Sea woules (or
seals) voices: The state of the I Will Saint Croix: The Savages love toward
their children: the return into Port Royal. CHAP. XVIII. The Port de
Campseau: our departure from Port Royal: Fogges of eight days continuance: A
Rainbow appearing in the water: The Port of Saualet: Tillage an honorable
exercise: The grief of the Savages at Monsieur De Poutrincourt his going away:
Return into France: Voyage into Mount S. Michell: The fruits of New France
presented to the King: A voyage into New France after the return of the said
Monsieur De Poutrincourt into France.
The second Book.
COntaining the customs and manners of life of the West Indians of New France,
compared to them of the ancient people of these parts; and specially to them
that be in one and the self same parallele and degree.
CHAP. I. Of the Nativity: custom of the Hebrews, Cimbres, Frenchmen and
Savages. CHAP. II. Of the imposing of names: the abuses of them that give the
names of Christians to Infidels: Names have not been given without occasion.
CHAP. III. Of the bringing up of children: of the Women of our time: of the
ancient Germain Women. CHAP. IIII. Of the love toward Children: the Savage
Women love their children more then the Women of these parts use to do: and the
cause why: wherein New France is profitable to the ancient France: Possession
of the land. CHAP. V. Of Religion: the origin of Idolatry: he which
worshipeth nothing is more capable of Christian Religion than an idolater: the
Canadians Religion: People easy to be converted: the Astorgie and impiety of
the Christians of this day: the giving of food and teaching of Arts is the
means to convert Savage people: of the name of God: of certain Savages
already Christians in mind: the Religion of the Savages in Virginia: fabulous
tales concerning the Resurrection: the Simulachers of gods: the Floridians
religion: the error of Belle-forest the Cosmographer: the worshipping of the
Sun: the kissing of hands: the Brasilians vexed by the devil: they have some
obscure knowledge of the general flood: and of some Christian which anciently
has been among them. CHAP. VI. Of the Soothsaiers, and Aoutmoins: of
Priesthood: the Idols of the Mexicans: the Indian Priests are Phisicions
withal: pretense of Religion: the Aoutmoins subtilties: how they call upon
devils: songs to the praises of the devil: the Sabbath of the Savages:
Bonefiers upon Saint John's days: Vrim and Thummim: the office of Priesthood
successiue: of the Caraibes, deceivers like to the sacrificers of the Idol
Bell. CHAP. VII. Of the Language: the Indians be all divided in languages: time
brings an alteration in the toungs: the conformity of them the causes of the
change of tongues: since when the trade of Beuers has been: the Savages
pronunciation: of the ancient Hebrews, Greeks, Latins, and of the Parisians:
the Savages have particular tongues, not understood by New found land men: the
Savages manner of reckoning. CHAP. VIII. Of learning: the invention of letters
is admirable: the ancient Germains were without letters: the letters and
Sciences were among the Gaullois, before that either the Greeks or Latins had
them: the Sarronides were in the old times Divines and Philosophers among the
Gaullois: the Bardes were Poets: thereuerence that was used toward them: the
reverence of Mars toward the Muses: the king his eldest daughter: the
Basilicke fastened in the temple of Apollo. CHAP. IX. Of Clothes and of Hairs:
to what end Garments were made: the nakedness of the ancient Picts: of the
modern Aethiopians: of the Brasilians: the Savages of New France more honest:
their Cloakes of skins: the ancient Hercules his garment, of the ancient
Germains, of the Goths: the Shooing and Hoseing of the Savages: the covering
of the head: the Hairs of the Hebrews, Gaullois, Goths: the Ordinance for
the Priests to wear Hats: Shaven men. CHAP. X. Of the shape and dexterity of
the Savages: Man's form is the most perfect: the violence done to Nature; the
Brasilians be short nosed: The rest of the Savages be handsome men: half
dwarfes: the Patagons be Giants: The favor of the Savages: the description of
the Westerly flies: Why the Americans are not black: From whence proceeds the
heat of Africa: And the coolness of America being in the selfsame degree:
Of the color of the hairs and of the beard: When the Romans began to wear
beardes: ihe Savages are not hairy: Hairy women: The ancient Gaullois and
Germans had their hairs yellow like gold: Their looks, voices, eyes: The
women shrew: The eyes of the men of Taprobane, of the Savages, and Scythians:
Of the lips: Monstrous bodies: The agility of the body: What the Naires of
Malebaris do for to be nimble: What people have agility: The Indians
skilfulnesse in swimming: A sharp sight: The Savages sense of smelling: Their
hatred against the Spaniards. CHAP. XI. Of the ornaments of the body: Of the
painting of the Hebrews, Romans, Affricans etc. ancient Englishmen, Picts,
Goths etc. West-Indians: Of the marks, razings, and incisions on their flesh:
Of the marks of the ancient Hebrewe, Tyrons and Christians: The reproouing of
the painting of the face, and other paintings of the body. CHAP. XII. Of the
outward ornaments: The two Tyrants of our life: The superfluity of the ancient
Rome: The excess of Ladies, of their wiers and periwigges: Coloring of
hairs: Eare-rings: Bracelets, garters, buskins and shoes: What pearls are,
Matachiaz, Vignols, Esurgni: Carkanets of iron, and of gold. CHAP. XIII. Of
marriage: The Jews custom: The widows do blacken their faces: the
prostituting of Maidens: the continency of the Souriquois women: the manner to
make suit to a maid for marriage: the prostituting of maidens in Brasill: of the
Pox: the cure thereof: the chastity of the ancient German women: reason for
the Savages continency: the Floridians do love women: Ithyphalles: Degrees of
consanguinity: The Gaulloise women fruitful: Poligamy without Jealousy:
Divorce: What a man ought to do having a bad wife: Abstinency of the widows:
The Infidels have whoredom in abomination. CHAP. XIIII. Of the Savages
Tabagie, or banquet: The manner of living of the Savages of the hither lands:
How the Armouchiquois use and serve themselves with their Corn: the ancient
Italians did the like: the assembly of the Savages, making their Tabagy: the
women eat by themselves: the honor given to women amongst the ancient Gaullois
and Germans: the bad condition of them among the Romans: What they have been
that have established the Roman Empire: the manner of living of the ancient
Romans, Tartarians, Moschouites, Getulians, Germans, Aethiopians, of Saint John
Baptist, of Aemilian, Traian, Adrian: and of the Savages: Salt not altogether
necessary: the Savages do sometimes suffer want: their superstition: Of their
gluttony and of Hercules: the Brasilians food: Anthropophagy: Strange
prostituting of maidens: communalty of life: the Savages Hospitality, of the
Gaullois and Germans: Of drinking, the sirst Romans had no vines: the Beer of
the ancient Gaullois, and Egyptians: the ancient Germans did hate wine: How
wine is necessary: Tobacco: the drinking one to another: the drink of the
Floridians and Brasilians: Hidromel. CHAP. XV. Of dances and songs: The
origin of dances in the honor of God: dances and songs in the honor of
Apollo, Neptune, Mars, of the Son, of the Salians: Praesul: Socrates dance:
The dances turned into bad use: How much dangerous: All Savages do use
dancing: To what end: Orpheus his foolish song: Why we sing to God: The songs
of the Souriquois: Of holy people: Of the Gaullois Bardes: Sonnets made by the
commandment of Charolus Magnus: The song of the Lacedaemonians: The dances and
songs of the Savages: The orations of their Captains. CHAP. XVI. Of the
disposition of the body: Phthisie: The sweatinges of the Savages: the
Physicians and Chirurgions of the Floridians, Brasilians and Souriquois: Cures
made by Charms: A marvelous report of the despising of grief: Trial of
constancy: Suffering of torments for the honor of Diana and of the Sun: the
long lives of the Savages: the causes thereof, and of the shortning of our
days. CHAP XVII. The men's exercices: of Bows and arrows, Maces, Bucklers,
fishing lines, Rackets: the Savages Canowes, or boats, and their fashion:
Canowes made of willowes, of paper, of leather, of hollowed trees: the
original of the fables of the Sirens, or Mermaidens; long travels through the
woods; pottery of Earth; the tillage of the ground; the ancient Germans had no
lands proper or peculiar to them; the Savages are not laborious; how they
manure the land; double sowing, and double Harvest; How they live in Winter;
the Savages towns* of the original of towns; the first builders in the
Gaulles; of the word Magus: Philosophy has been first found out by the
Barbarians; the plays and games of the Savages. CHAP. XVIII. The women's
exercices; the woman is called pierced or hollowed; the women are saved in
bringing forth of Children; of purification; the hard condition of the women
among the Savages; ges; of mattes, currying and dressing of leather; their
making of Baskets, Purses, Dies, Dishes, Matachiaz, Canowes; the love of the
Savage women toward their husbands; their chastity; A fair observation upon
the Hebrew names of the man, and of the woman. CHAP. XIX. Of Civility; the
first Civility, is the obedience to God and to the parents; the Savages be
Slouenly at their Banquets, for want of linen; the repast of the ancient
Gaullois and Germains; of the arriving of the Savages into any place; their
Greetings; likewise of the Greeks, Romans, and Hebrews; of the saluting in
Sneezing; Item in the beginning of Letters; of the Farewell; the Savages
reverence to their Fathers and Mothers; Curse to him which honoreth not his
Father and his mother. CHAP. XX. Of the Virtues and Vices of the Savages; the
Principles of Virtue are invs, even from our birth; of force, and greatness of
courage; the ancient Gaullois were without fear; the Savages are reuengefull;
wherein temperance consists; whether the Savages are endued therewith; wherein
Liberality consists; the Savages Liberality; they disdain the covetous
pelting Merchants; their Magnificence, Hospitality, Piety toward their Fathers
and Mothers; of their Justice; the execution of Justice; the incredible evasion
of two Savages, prisoners, wherein the Savages be diligent and slothful. CHAP.
XXI. Of Hunting; the original thereof; to whom it belongs; to what end Kings
are chosen; hunting the image of War; the first end thereof; the interpretation
of one verse of the 32. Psalm; all Savages do hunt; when and how; the
description of the hunting of the Ellan or Stagge; the Savages hounds; the
Savages have Rackets at theirfeet when they hunt; their continuance in hunting;
fair invention of them for the Kitching; their women's duty after the hunting;
the fishing or hunting of the Beuer; the description of the same; her admirable
building; how she is taken; from whence anciently the Beuers did come; Of
Bears; Leopards; the description of the beast called Nibaches; Wolves; Conies
etc. the Cattle of France do profit well in New France; Marvelous
multiplicatin of Beasts; of the beasts of Florida, and of Brasill; the Savages
are truly noble. CHAP. XXII. Of Hauking; the Muses do delight in hunting;
hawking is a noble exercise How the Savages take their foul; Islands swarming
with birds; the fowls of Port Royal; Of a bird called Niridau: of glistering
flies; Turkey or Indian Cocks; the fowls of Florida, and of Brasill. CHAP.
XXIII. Of Fishing; a comparison between Hunting, Hauking and Fishing; an
Emperor delighting himself in Fishing; Plato his absurdity; Fishing permitted
to Churchmen; the feeding upon fish is the best and wholesomest food: every
Fish dreads the Winter, and withdraws himself, they return in the Spring
time; a manna of Smelts, Heerings, Pilchers, Sturgeons and Salmons; the manner
of taking of them by the Savages; the abuse and superstition of Pythagoras; the
Sanctorum of New found land fishermen; of the shell Fish of Port Royal; the
fishing of the Codde; whether Cods do sleep; the cause why fishes sleep not;
fishes having stones in their heads (as the Codde) do fear Winter; Oil (or
train) of fish; the fishing of the Whale; wherein the hardiness and
boldness of the Savages is to be admired; Hippopotames: the infinite
multitude of Mackerels; the Idleness of the people of this day. CHAP. XXIIII.
Of the Land: which is the good ground: Terra Sigillata, is in New France: the
fructifying of Monsieur de Poutrincourts Sowings: which is the good Dung: of
Turkey (or Indian) Wheat, called Mahis: how the Savages do mend their grounds:
how they Sow; the temperature of the Air does serve to production; Barnes
under ground: the cause of the slothfuluesse of the Savages of the hither lands
near unto us; Hemp; of Vines; when they were first planted in Galia; of
Trees, Tobacco, and the manner and use of it; the foolish greediness after
Tobacco; the Virtues thereof; the error of Belle-forest: of the roots called
Afrodiles, or ground Nuts; a consideration upon the misery of many people: the
tilling of the ground is a most innocent exercise; Gloria adorea: of the Fruit
trees, and others of Port Royal, of Florida, and of Brasill; the despising of
Mines; Fruits to be hoped in new France. CHAP. XXV. Of the war: to what end the
Savages do make war: The Orations of the Savages Captains: their surprises:
the manner to foretell the event of the war; the succession of Captains; the
Savages arms; of excellent Archers; from whence comes the word Militia: the
cause of the Savages fear: their manner of marching in War: a warlike dance;
how the Savages do use the victory; of the Victime, sacrifice; Punishment; the
Savages will not fall into their enemies hands: the trophies of their enemies
heads: of the ancient Gaullois; of the modern Hungarians. CHAP. XXVI. Of
Funerals; the lamenting for the dead; the burying of them is a work of
humanity; the custom of the Savages in this respect; of the preserving of the
dead bodies; of the mourning of the Persians, Egyptians, Romans, Gascons,
Brasilians, Floridians, Souriquois, Hebrews, Queens of France, Thracians,
Locrians, ancient Christians; the burning of the moveable goods of the
deceassed, a fair lesson to the Covetous; the customs of the Phrigians,
Latins, Hebrews, Gaullois, Germains, and Savages for this respect; the burying
of the dead; What people do bury them: who burn them, and who preserve them;
Of the funeral gifts shut up in the sepulchers of the dead; the same
reproved; the covetousness of the Infringers of Sepulchers.
Noua Francia.
The three late voyages and plan tation of Monsieur De MONTS, of Monsieur Du
Pont grave, and of Monsieur De Poutrincourt, into the Countries called by the
Frenchmen La Cadia, lying to the Southwest of Cap Breton; together with an
excellent several Treaty of all the commodities of the said Countries: and
manners of the natural inhabitants of the same.

CHAP. I.
The Patent of the French King to Monsieur DE MONTS, for the inhabiting of the
Countries of La Cadia, Canada, and other places in new France.

HENRY by the grace of God King of France and Naturre. To our dear and
well-beloved the Lord of Monts, one of the ordinary Gentlemen of our Chamber,
greeting. As our greatest care and labor is, and has always been, since our
coming to this crown, to maintain and conserve it in the ancient dignity,
greatness and splendour thereof, to extend and amplify, as much as lawfully
may be done, the bounds and limits of the same. We being, of a long time,
informed of the situation and condition of the lands and territories of La
Cadia, moved above all things, with a singular zeal, and devout and constant
resolution, which we have taken, with the help and assistance of God, author,
distributor, and protector of all kingdoms and estates, to cause the people,
which do inhabit the Country, men (at this present time) barbarous,
Atheists, without faith or religion, to be converted to Christianity, and to
the belief and profession of our faith and religion: and to draw them from the
ignorance and unbelief wherein they are. Having also of a long time known by
the relation of the sea Captains, Pilots, Merchants and others, who of long
time have haunted, frequented and trafficked with the people that are found in
the said places, how fruitful, commodious and profitable may be unto us, to
our estates and subjects, the dwelling, possession, and habitation of those
countries, for the great and apparent profit which may be drawn by the greater
frequentation and habitude which may be had with the people that are found
there, and the traffic and commerce which may be, by that means safely
treated and negotiated. We then for these causes fully trusting on your great
wisdom, and in the knowledge and experience that you have of the quality,
condition and situation of the said country of La Cadia: for the diverse and
sundry nauigations, voiages and frequentations that you have made into those
parts, and others near and bordering upon it: Assuring our selves that this
our resolution and intention, being committed unto you, you will attentively,
diligently, and no less courageously and valourously execute and bring to such
perfection as we desire: Have expressly appointed and established you, and by
these Presents, signed with our own hands, do commit, ordain, make,
constitute and establish you, our Lieutenant general, for to represent our
person, in the countries, territories, coasts and confines of La Cadia. To
begin from the 40 degree unto the 46. And in the same distance, or part of it,
as far as may be done, to establish, extend and make to be known our name,
might and authority. And under the same to subject, submit and bring to
obedience all the people of the said land and the borderers thereof: And by the
means thereof, and all lawful ways, to call, make, instruct, provoke and
incite them to the knowledge of God, and to the light of the faith and
Christian Religion, to establish it there: And in the exercise and profession
of the same, keep and conserve the said people, and all other inhabitants in
the said places, and there to command in peace, rest and tranquillity, as well
by sea as by land: to ordain, decide, and cause to be executed all that which
you shall judge fit and necessary to be done, for to maintain, keep and
conserve the said places under our power and authority, by the forms, ways
and means prescribed by our laws. And for to have there a care of the same
with you, to appoint establish, and constitute all officers, as well in the
affairs of war, as for Justice and policy, for the first time, and from
thence forward to name and present them unto us: for to be disposed by us, and
to give letters, titles, and such prouisoes as shall be necessary. And
according to the occurrences of affairs, yourselfe with the advice of wise and
capable men, to prescribe under our good pleasure, laws, statutes and
ordinances conformable, as much as may be possible, unto ours, specially in
things and matters that are not provided by them: To treat and contract to the
same effect, peace, alliance and confederacy, good amity, correspondencie and
communication with the said people and their Princes, or others, having power
or command over them: To entertain, keep, and carefully to observe, the
treatises and alliances wherein you shall covenant with them: upon condition
that they themselves perform the same of their part. And for want thereof to
make open wars against them, to constrain and bring them to such reason, as
you shall think needful, for the honor, obedience and service of God, and
the establishment, maintenance and conservation of our said authority amongst
them: at least to haunt and frequent by you, and all our subjects with them, in
all assurance, liberty, frequentation and communication, there to negociate
and traffic lovingly and peaceably. To give and grant unto them favors and
privileges, charges and honors. Which entire power abouesaid, we will likewise
and ordain, that you have ouerall our said subjects that will go in that
voyage with you and inhabit there, traffic, negociate and remain in the
said places, to retain, take, reserve and appropriate unto you, what you will
and shall see to be most commodious for you, and proper to your charge,
quality and use of the said lands, to distribute such parts and portions
thereof, to give and attribute unto them such titles, honors, rights, powers
and faculties as you shall see necessary, according to the qualities,
conditions and merits of the persons of the same country or others. Chiefly
to populate, to manure, and to make the said lands to be inhabited, as
speedily, carefully and skilfully, as time, places and commodities may permit.
To make thereof, or cause to be made to that end, discovery and view along the
maritime coasts and other countries of the maine land, which you shall order
and prescribe in the foresaid space of the 40 degree, to the 46 degree, or
otherwise as much and as far as may be, along the said coast, and in the
firm land. To make carefully to be sought and marked all sorts of mines of
gold and of silver, copper, and other metals and minerals, to make them to be
dug, drawn from the earth, purified and refined, for to be converted into
use, to dispose according as we have prescribed by Edicts and orders, which we
have made in this realm of the profit and benefit of them, by you or them whom
you shall establish to that effect, reserving unto us only the tenth penie, of
that which shall issue from them of gold, silver, and copper, leaving unto you
that which we might take of the other said metals and minerals, for to aid
and ease you in the great expenses that the foresaid charge may bring unto you.
Willing in the mean while, that as well for your security and commodity, as
for the security and commodity of all our subjects, who will go, inhabit,
and traffic in the said lands: as generally of all others that will
accommodate themselves there under our power and authority; you may cause to
be built and frame one or many forts, places, Towns, and all other houses,
dwellings and habitations, Ports, Havens, retiring places and lodgings, as you
shall know to be fit, profitable and necessary for the performing of the said
enterprise. To establish garrisons and soldiers for the keeping of them. To
aid and serve you for the effects above said with the vagrant, idle persons
and masterlesse, as Idle and banished men employed in this business.
well out of towns as of the country: and with them that be condemned to
perpetual banishment, or for three years at the least out of our Realm:
Provided always that it be done by the advice, consent, and authority of our
officers. Over and besides that which is above mentioned (and that which is
moreover prescribed, commanded and ordained unto you by the commissions and
powers, which our most dear cosen the Lord of Ampuille Admiral of France has
given unto you, for that which concerns the affairs and the charge of the
Admiraltie, in the exploit, expedition, and executing of the things above said)
to do generally whatsoever may make for the conquest, peopling, inhabiting and
preservation of the said land of La Cadia, and of the coasts, territories
adioining, and of their appurtenances and dependencies, under our name and
authority, whatsoever our selves would and might do, if we were there present
in person, although that the case should require a more special order, then we
prescribe unto you by these Presents: To the contents whereof we command,
ordain, and most expreslie do enioine all our Iusticers, officers and
subjects, to conform themselves: And to obey and give attention unto you, in
all and every the things abouesaid, their circumstances and dependencies. Also
to give unto you in the executing of them, all such aid and comfort, help and
assistance, as you shall have need of, and whereof they shall be by you
required; and this upon pain of disobedience and rebellion. And to the end no
body may pretend cause of ignorance of this our intention, and to busy
himself in all, or in part of the charge, dignity and authority which we
give unto you by these presents: We have of our certain knowledge, full power
and regal authority, revoked, suppressed and declared void, and of none
effect hereafter, and from this present time, al other powers and commissions,
letters and expeditions given and delivered to any person soever, for to
discover, people and inhabit in the foresaid extention of the said lands,
situated from the said 40 degree, to the 46, whatsoever they be. And
furthermore we command and ordain all our said officers, of what quality and
condition soever they be, that after these Presents, or the duplicate of them
shall be duly examined by one of our beloved and trusty Counselors, Notaries
and Secretaries, or other Notarie Royal, they do upon your request, demand
and suit, or upon the suit of any our Atturneis, cause the same to be read,
published, and recorded in the records of their Jurisdictions, powers and
precincts, seeking, as much as shall appertain unto them, to quiet and appease
all troubles and hindrances which may contradict the same. For such is our
pleasure. Given at Fountain-Bleau the 8 day of November: in the year ofour
Lord 1603: And of our reign the 15. Signed HENRY: and underneath, by the King,
Potier; And sealed upon single labell with yellow wax.

CHAP. II.
The voyage of Monsieur De Monts into New France: what accidents happened in the
said voyage: The causes of the Icie banks in New found land: The imposing of
names to certain Ports: The perplexity wherein they were by reason of the
stay of the other ship.

MOnsieur De Monts having made the Commissions and Prohibitions before said, to
be proclaimed through the Realm of France, and especially through the Ports and
maritime towns thereof, caused two ships to be rigged and furnished, the one
under the conduct of captain Timothy of New-hauen, the other of captain
Morell of Honfleur. In the first, he shipped himself, with good number of men
of account, as well Gentlemen as others. And forasmuch as Monsieur De
Poutrincourt was, and had been of a long time, desirous to see those countries
of New France, and there to find out and choose some fit place to retire
himself into, with his family, wife and children, not meaning to be the last
that should follow and participate in the glory of so fair and generous an
enterprise, would needs go thither, and shipped himself with the said
Monsieur De Monts, carrying with him some quantity of armours and munitions of
The setting forth out of New-hauen.
war; and so weighed anckers from New-hauen the seventh day of March, 1604.
But being departed somewhat too soon, before the Winter had yet left off her
frozen weed, they found store of Icie banks, against the which they were in
danger to strike, and so to be cast away: But Danger.
God, which hitherto has prospered the navigations of these voiages, preserved
them.

One might wonder, and not without cause, why, in the same parallel, there is
more Ice in this sea than in that of France. Whereunto I answer, that the Ices
that be found in those seas are not originary from the same climate, but rather
come from the Northerly parts, driven without any let through the vast of this
great sea by the waves, storms, and boisterous floods, which the Easterly and
Northerly winds do cause in Winter and Spring time, and drive them toward
the South and West: But the French seas are sheltered by Scotland, England and
Ireland: which is the cause that the Ices cannot fall into it. An other reason
also might be alleged, and that is the motion of the sea, which bears more
toward those parts, because of the larger course that it makes toward
America A perilous storm.
than toward the lands of these our parts. The peril of this voyage was, not
only in the meeting of the said banks of Ice, but also in the storms that
vexed them: One of them they had that brake the galleries of the ship: And in
these turmoiles, a Ioyner was carried away by a sea or flash of water to the
next door of death, ouerboord, but he held himself fast at a tackling, which
by chance hung out of the said ship.

The voyage was long by reason of contrary winds, Wind commonly good in
March for the New found lands. The I Will of Sablon or Sand.
which seldom happens to them that set out in March for the New found lands,
which are ordinarily carried with an East or Northren wind, fit to go to
those lands. And having taken their course to the South of the I Will of Sand or
Sablon, or Sand, for to shun the said Ices, they almost fell from Caribdis
into Scylla, going to strike toward the said I Will, during the thick mists that
are frequent in that sea.

In the end, the sixth of May they came to a certain Port, where they found
captain Rossignol of New-hauen, who did trucke for skins with the Savages,
contrary to the Kings inhibitions, which was the cause that his ship was Port
du Rossignol.
confiscated. This Port was called Le Port du Rossignol, having (in this his
hard fortune) this only good, that a good and fit Harborough or Port, in those
coasts bears his name.

From thence coasting and discovering the lands, they arrived at another Port,
very fair, which they named Le Port du Moutton, by reason that a Mutton or
Wether Le Port da Moutton.
having leaped ouerboord and drowned himself came aboard again, and was taken
and eaten as good prize. By such accidents many names have anciently been
given on the sudden, and without any great deliberation. So the Capitol.
Capitol of Rome had his name, because that in digging there, a dead man's head
was found. So the city of Milan Milan.
has been called Mediolanum, that is to say, half wool, for that the Gauls,
casting the foundation thereof, found a Sow half covered with wool: and so
of sundry others.

Being at the Port du Moutton, they cabaned and lodged themselves after the
savage fashion, expecting news of the other ship, wherein was the victuals and
other necessary provision for the food and entertainment of them About 100.
Planters.
that were to Winter there, being about an hundred men in number. In this Port
they tarried a month in great perplexity, for fear they had that some
sinister accident had happened to the said other ship, who set out the tenth of
March, wherein was Monsieur Du Pont of Honfleur, and the said Captain Morel.
And this was so much the more important, for that of the coming of the said
ship depended Deliberation upon the return into France.
the whole success of the business. For even upon this long tarying, it was in
question whether they should return into France or no. Monsieur De
Pourtrincourt was of advice that it were better to die there; whereto the said
Monsieur De Monts conformed himself. In the mean while many went a hunting,
others to fishing, for to store the kitchen. Near the said Moutton Port there
is a place Store of Conies.
so replenished with Rabbets and Conies, that they almost did eat nothing else.
During that time Monsieur Champlein was sent with a shalloup to seek farther
off a fitter place to retire themselves, at which exploit he tarried so long,
that deliberating upon the return, they thought to leave him behind: for there
was no more victuals: and they served themselves with that, that was found in
the said Rossignols ship, without which they had been forced to return into
France, and so to break a fair enterprise at the very birth and beginning
thereof; or to starve, having ended the hunting of Conies, which could not
still continue. Now the causes of the stay of the said Monsieur Du Pont, and
Captain Morel, were two; the one, that wanting a Cocke-boate, they employed
their time in the building of one, in the land where they arrived first, which
The English Port. Campseau Port.
was the English Port: The other, that being come at Campseau Port, they found
there four ships of Baskes, or men of Saint John de Luz, that did trucke with
the Savages, contrary to the said Inhibitions, from whom they took their
goods, and brought the Masters to the said Monsieur De Monts, who used them
very gently.

Three weeks being expired, and the said Monsieur De Monts having no news of
the ship he looked for, he deliberated to send along the coast to seek for
them, and Note here the good nature and diligence of the Savages.
for that purpose dispatched some Savages, to whom he gave a French man for
company with letters. The said Savages promised to return at the time
prefixed, being eight days, whereof they failed not. But as the society of
man and wife, agreeing well together, is a powerful thing; so these Savages
before their departure, had a care of their wives and children, and required
victuals for them; which was granted. And having hoised up sails, within few
days after they found those that they sought for, at a place La Baye des Isles.
called La Baye des Isles, who were themselves in no less fear or grief for
the said Monsieur De Monts, than he of them, because they found not, during
their voyage, those marks and signs that were agreed upon between them,
which is, that Monsieur De Monts should have left at The Ice comes farther to
the South than Campseau.
Campseau, some cross on a tree, or letter there fixed, which he did not,
having far ouer-shot the said Campseau, by reason that for the said Iced
banks, he took his way somewhat far on the South, as we have said. So
having read the letters, the said Monsieur Du Pont, and Monsieur Du Pont goes
to Canada, to trade for Furs.
Captain Morel gave up the victuals and provision that they had brought for
them that should Winter there, and so returned back toward the great river of
Canada, for the trade of skins or furs.

CHAP. III.
The leaving of Port du Moutton: the accident of a man lost in the woods the
space of sixteen days: Baye Francoise, or French Baye: Port Royal: The river
of L'Equille, a Copper mine: The mischief of golden mines: of Diamonds: Turkey
stones.

AL New France in the end being contained in two ships, they waighed ankers
from Port Du Moutton, for to employ their time, and to discover lands as much
as might before Winter. We came to Cape de Sable, Cap De Sable, or the Sandy
Cape. Saint Mary's Baye. Fair place to inhabit. Mines of Iron and Silver.
or the Sandy Cape; and from thence we sailed to the Baie of Saint Marie, where
our men lay at anchor fifteen days, whilst the lands and passages as well by
sea as by river might be descried and known. This Baye is a very fair place
to inhabit, because that one is readily carried thither without doubling.
There are mines of Iron and Silver; but in no great abundance, according to the
trial made thereof in France. Having soiorned there some 12 or 13 days, a
strange accident happened, such as I will tell you. There was a certain
Churchman of a good family in Paris, that had a desire to perform the voyage
with Monsieur De Monts, and that against the liking of his friends, who sent
expressly to Honfleur to divert him thereof, and to bring him back to Paris. The
ships lying at anchor in the said Baye of Saint Marie, he put himself in An
accident of a man lost in the woods the space of 16. days.
company with some that went to sport themselves in the woods. It came to
pass, that having stayed to drink at a brook, he forgot there his sword,
and followed on his way with his company: which when he perceived he returned
back to seek it: but having found it, forgetful from what part he came, and
not considering whether he should go East or West, or otherwise (for there was
no path) he took his way quite contrary, turning his back from his company,
and so long traveled that he sound himself at the sea shore, where no ships
were to be seen, (for they were at the other side of a nooke of land far
reaching into the sea) he imagined that he was forsaken, and began to bewail
his fortune upon a rock. The night being come, every one being retired, he is
found wanting: he was asked for of those that had been in the woods, they
report in what manner he departed from them, and that since they had no news of
him. Whereupon a Protestant was charged to have killed him, because they
quarrelled sometimes for matters of Religion. Finally, they sounded a trumpet
through the forest, they shot off the Canon diverse times, but in vain: for the
roaring of the Sea, stronger than all that, did expel back the sound of the
said Canons and trumpets. Two, three and four days pass, he appears not.
In the mean while the time hastens to depart, so having tarried so long that
he was then held for dead, they weighed ankers to go further, and to La Baye
Francoise.
see the depth of a Baye that has some 40 leagues length, and 14 (yea 18) of
breadth, which was named La Baye Francoise, or the French Baye.

In this Bay is the passage to come into a Port, whereinto our men entered, and
made some abode, during the which they had the pleasure to hunt an Ellan, or
Stagge, that crossed a great lake of the Sea, which makes this Port, and did
swim but easily. This Port is environed with mountains on the North side:
Toward the South be small hills, which (with the said mountains) do power out
a thousand brooks, which make that place pleasanter than any other place in
the world: there are very fair falls of waters, fit to make Mils of all sorts.
At the East is a river between the said mountains and hills, in the which
Ships may sail fifteen Leagues and more, and in all this distance is nothing
of both sides the River but fair meadows, which river was named L' Equille,
because that the The river of L' Equille.
first fish taken therein was an Equille. But the said Port, for the beauty
thereof was called Port Royal. Monsieur Port Royal.
De Poutrincourt having found this place to be to his liking demanded it, with
the Lands thereunto adjoining, of Monsieur De Monts, to whom the King had by
commission, before inserted, granted the distribution of the lands of New
France from the 40. degree to the 46. Which place was granted to the said
Monsieur De Poutrincourt, who since has had letters of confirmation for the
same of his Majesty, intending to retire himself thither with his family,
and there to establish the Christian and French name, as much as his power shall
stretch, and God grant him the means to accomplish it. The said Port
contains eight leagues of circuit, besides the river of L' Equille. There is
within it two Isles very fair and pleasant: the one at the mouth of the said
river, which I deem to be of the greatness of the City of Beauuais: The
other at the side of the mouth of an other river, as broad as the river of
Oise, or Marne, entering within the said Port: The said I Will being almost of the
greatness of the other: and they both are woody. In this Port, and right
over against the former I Will, we dwelt three years after this voyage. We will
speak thereof more at large hereafter.

A Copper Mine. In the 28. and 29 chap. of the second book of the whole volume
untranslated.
From Port Royal they sailed to the Copper mine* whereof we have spoken before
else where. It is a high rock between two Bays of the Sea, wherein the
Copper is conjoined with the stone, very fa^re and very pure, such as is that
which is called Rozette Copper. Many Goldsmithes have seen of it in France,
which do say that under the Copper Mine there might be a golden Mine: whch is
very probable. For if those excrements that nature expels forth be so pure,
namely, small pieces that are found upon the gravel at the foot of the Rock,
when it is low water, there is no doubt that the metal which is Things first
to be provided in new Plantation.
in the bowels of the earth is much more perfect, but this is a work that
requires time. The first mining and working is to have bread, wine and
cattle, as we have said else where. Our felicity consists not in Mines,
specially of gold and silver, the which serve for nothing in the tillage of the
ground, nor to handicrafts use. Contrariwise, the abundance of them is but a
charge and burden, that keeps man in perpetual unquiet, and the more he
has thereof, the less rest enjoys he, and his life lesser assured unto him.

Nota.
Before the voyages of Peron great riches might have been set up in a small
place, in stead that in this our age by the abundance of gold and silver the
same is come at no value nor esteem: One has need of huge chests and coffers
to put in that, which a small budget might have contained. One might have
traveled with a purse in ones sleeue, and now a Cloake-bag and a horse must
expressly be had for that purpose. We may justly curse the hour that greedy
avarice did carry the Spaniard into the West, for the woeful events that have
ensued thereof. For when I consider that by his greediness he has kindled and
maintained the war through all Christendom, and his only study has been
how to destroy his neighbors (and not the Turk) I cannot think that any other
but the devil has been the author of their voyages. And let not the pretense
of religion be alleged unto me: for (as we have said elsewhere) they have
killed all the offspring of the Country with the most inhumaine torments that
the devil has been able to excogitate. And by their cruelties have rendered
the name of God odious, and a name of offense to those poor people, and have
continually and daily blasphemed Esaiah 52. verse. 5.
him in the midst of the Gentiles, as the Prophet reprocheth to the people of
Israel. Witness him that had rather be damned, then to go to the Paradise of
the Spaniardes.

The Romans (whose covetousness has been insatiable) have made cruel wars
to the nations of the Earth, but the Spanish cruelties are not to be found out
in their histories. They have contented themselves to ransacke the nations
which they have ouercommed, and not to deprive them of their lives. An ancient
heathenish author, Patronius Arbiter.
making trial of his poetical humor, finds no greater crime in them, but
that if they found out or discovered some people that had gold, they took them
for their enemies. The verses of this Author have so good a grace that I must
needs insert them here, though I intend not to allege much Latin.

Orbem iam totum Romanus victor habebat,
Quamare, quaterra, qua sidus currit vtrumque,
Nec satiatus erat. grauidis freta pulsa carinis
I am peragrabantur: siquis sinus abditus vltra,
Si quaforet tellus quae fulvum mitteret aurum,
Hostis erat: fatisque in tristia bella paratis
Quaerebantur opes. --
But the doctrine of the wise Son of Sirach teaches us a contrary thing. For
knowing that the riches which Ecclesiast. 31. ver. 8. 9. 10.
are dug up, even from as deep as Plutoes dens, are that which some one
has said, irritament a malorum, he declared That man to be happy that has
not run after gold, and has not put his hope in silver and treasures;
adding, that he ought to be esteemed to have done wonderful things among all
his people, and to be the example of glory, which has been tempted by gold,
and remained perfect. And so by a contrary sense the same to be unhappy that
does otherwise.

Now to return to our Mines. Among these Copper rocks there is found
sometimes small rocks covered with Diamons fixed to them. I will not assure
them for fine, but Diamonds.
that is very pleasing to the sight. There are also certain shining blew
stones, which are of no less value or worth than Turkey stones. Monsieur De
Champdore our guide Turkey stones.
for the nauigations in those countries, having cut within a rock one of those
stones, at his return from New France he brake it in two, and gave one part of
it to Monsieur De Monts, the other to Monsieur De Poutrincourt, which they made
to be put in gold, and were found worthy to be presented the one to the King
by the said Poutrincourt, the other to the Queen by the said De Monts, and
were very well accepted. I remember that a Goldsmiths did offer fifteen
crowns to Monsieur De Poutrincourt for that he presented to his Majesty.
There be many other secrets, rare and fair things within the ground of those
Countries, which are yet unknown unto us, and will come to the knowledge and
evidence by inhabiting the province.

CHAP. IIII.
The description of the river Saint John: and of the I Will Saint Croix: The man
lost in the woods found out 16. days after: Examples of some strange
abstinences: The discord of the Savages deferred to the judgment of Monsieur
De Monts: The fatherly authority amongst the said Savages: What husbands they
choose to their Daughters.

Having viewed the said Mine, the company passed to the other side of the
French Baye, and went Saint John's River.
toward the bottom of the same: Then turning back came to the river of Saint
John, so called (as I think) because they arrived thither the sour and
twentieth of June, Dangerous coming in.
which is S. John Baptists day. There is a fair Port, but the entry or mouth
is dangerous to them that know not the best ways, because that before the
coming in there is a long bank of rocks, which are not seen nor discovered,
The fall of a River.
but only at low water, which do serve as for defense to this Port, within
which, when one has gone about a league, there is found a violent fall of the
said river, which falls down from the rocks, when that the sea does ebb,
with a marvelous noise: for being sometimes at an ker at sea, we have heard it
from above twelve leagues off. But at full sea one may pass it with great
ships. This river is one of the fairest that may be seen, having store of
Islands, and swarming with fishes. This last year 1608. 1608.
the said Monsieur de Champdore, with one of the said Monsieur De Monts his men,
has been some 50 leagues up the said river: and do witness that there is
great quantity Vines.
of Vines along the shore, but the grapes are not so big as they be in the
country of the Armouchiquois: There are also Onions, and many other sorts of
good herbs. As for the trees they are the fairest that may be seen. Great
grapes among the Armouchiquois. Abundance of fishes. The Commodity of voyaging
by the river.
When we were there we saw great number of Cedar trees. Concerning fishes the
said Champdore has related unto us, that putting the kettle over the fire,
they had taken fish sufficient for their diner before that the water was hot.
Moreover this river, stretching it self far within the lands of the Savages
does maruellously shorten the long travels by means thereof. For in six days
they go to Gashepe coming to the bay or gulf of Chaleur, or heat, when they
are at the end of it, in carrying their Canowes some few leagues. And by the
same river in eight days they go to Tadoussac by a branch of the same which
comes from the North-West. In such sort that in Port Royal one may have
within 15. or 18. days news from the Frenchmen dwelling in the great river of
Canada, by these ways: which could not be done in one month by sea, nor
without danger.

The I Will of S. Croix, 20. leagues from S John's river.
Leaving Saint John's river, they came following the coast 20. leagues from that
place, to a great river (which is properly sea) where they fortified
themselves in a little Island seated in the midst of this river, which the
said Champlein had been to discover and view. And seeing it strong by nature,
and of easy defense and keeping, besides that the season began to slide away,
and therefore it was behouefull to provide of lodging, without running any
farther, they resolved to make their abode there. I will He that will possess
a land ought to place himself in the maine or firm land.
not sift out curiously the reasons of all parts upon the resolution of this
their dwelling; but I will always be of opinion, that whosoever goes into a
country to possess it, must not stay in the Isles, there to be a prisoner.
For, before all things, the culter and tillage of the ground must be regarded.
And I would feign know how one shall till and manure it, if it behooves at
every hour in the morning, at noone and the evening, to cross a great passage
of water, to go for things requisite from the firm land. And if one fears
the enemy, how shall he that husbandeth the land, or otherwise busy in
necessary affairs, save himself if he be pursued? for one finds not
always a boat in hand, in time of need, nor two men to conduct it. Besides,
out life requiring many commodities, an Island is not fit for to begin the
establishment and seat of a Colony, unless there be Currents and streams of
sweet water for to drink, and to supply other necessaries in household, which
is not in small Islands. There needs wood for fuel, which also is not there.
But above all, there must be shelters from the hurtful winds and cold: which
is hardly found in a small continent, environed with water of all sides.
Nevertheless the Company soiorned there in the midest of a broad river, where
the North wind and North-West blows at will. And because, that two leagues
higher there be brooks that come crosse-wise to fall within this large branch
of sea, the I Will of the Frenchmens retreat was called Saint Croix, 25. leagues
distant from Port Royal. Whilst that they begin to cut down Cedars and other
trees of the said I Will to make necessary buildings, let us return to seek out
Master Nicolas Aubri, lost in the woods, which long time since is holden for
dead.

As they began to visit and search the Island, Monsieur de Champdore (of whom we
shall henceforth make mention, by reason he dwelt four years in those parts,
conducting the voyages made there) was sent back to the Bay of Saint Mary,
with a Mine-finder, that had been carried thither for to get some Mines of
silver and Iron, which they did. And as they had crossed the French Baie, they
entered Return to the Baie of Saint Marie, where the lost man was found again.
The long I Will.
into the said Baie of Saint Marie, by a narrow strait or passage, which is
between the land of Port Royal, and an Island called the Long I Will: where after
some abode they going afishing, the said Aubri perceived them, and began with a
feeble voice to call as loud as he could; and for to help his voice he advised
himself to do as Ariadne did heretofore to Theseus, Candidaque imposui
longae velamina virgae,
Scilicet oblitos admonitura mei.


For he put his handkercher, and his hat on a staves end, which made him better
to be known. For as one of them heard the voice, and asked the rest of the
company, if it might be the said Monsieur Aubri, they mocked and laughed at
it. But after they had ipied the moving of the handkercher and of the hat, then
they began to think that it might be he. And coming near, they knew
perfectly it was himself, and took him in their Bark with great joy and
contentment the sixteenth day after he had lost himself. Diverse in this later
age have stuffed their books and histories with many miracles, wherein is not
to be found so great cause of admiration as in this. For during these sixteen
days he fed himself but by (I know not Cheries.
what) small fruits, like unto Cheries, without kernel, (yet not so delicate)
which are scarsly found in those woods. And indeed in these last voyages a
special grace and favor of God has been evident in many occurrences, which
we will mark as occasion shall be offered. The poor Aubri (I call him so by
reason of his affliction) was, as one may easily think, maruellously weakened.
They gave him food by measure, and brought him back again to the company at
the Island of Saint Croix, whereof every one received an incredible joy and
consolation, and especially Monsieur De Monts, whom it concerned more than any
other. Do not allege unto me the Histories of the Maid of Confolans, in the
Country of Poictou: which was two years without eating, some six years ago,
nor of an other near Berne in Swisser-land, which lost (not yet full ten
years ago) the desire and appetite of eating, during all Plin. lib. 7. Cap. 2.
her life time, and other like examples: for they be accidents happened by the
disordering of nature. And concerning that which Pliny recites, that in the
remotest parts of the Indies, in the inferior parts of the fountain and
spring of the river Ganges, there is a nation of Astoms, that is to say,
Mouthlesse people, that live but with the only odor and exhalation of
certain roots, flowers and fruits which they assume through their noses: I
would hardly believe it, but would think rather that in smelling they might
bite very well of the said roots and fruits: As also those that James Quartier
mentions to have no mouths, and to eat nothing, by the report of the Savage
Donnacona, whom he brought into France to make recital thereof to the King,
with other things as void of common sense and credit as that. But imagine it
were true, such people have their nature disposed to this manner of living, and
this case is not alike. For the said Aubri wanted no stomach nor appetite, and
has lived sixteen days, partly nourished by some nutritive force, which is
in the air of that country, and partly by those small fruits before spoken:
God having given him strength to endure this long want John Wier in the treaty
De ieiuniis comment.
of food, preserving him from the step of death. Which I find strange, and is
so indeed. But in the Histories of our time there be found things of greater
marvel. Among other things of one Henry de Hasseld, merchant trafficking from
the Low Countries to Berg in Norwege: who having heard a belly-god Preacher
speaking ill of the miraculous fasts, as though it were not in Gods power to
do that which he has done in times past, provoked by it, did assay to fast,
and abstained himself three days from eating: At the end whereof, being
pinched with hunger, took a morsel of bread, meaning to swallow it down with
a glass of Beer: but all that stuck so in his throat, that he remained
forty days and forty nights without either eating or drinking. That time being
ended, he vomited out by the mouth that which he had eaten and drunk, which
all that while remained in his throat. So long an abstinence weakened him in
such sort, that it was needful to sustain and restore him with milk. The
Governor of the country having understood this wonder, called him before
him, and inquired of the truth of the matter: whereof being incredulous, would
make new trial of it, and having made him carefully to be kept in a chamber,
found the thing to be true. This man is praised for great piety, specially
toward the poor. Sometime after being come for his private affairs to
Bruxelles in Brabant, a Creditor of his, to bereave him of his due, accused him
of heresy, and so caused him to be burned in the year 1545.

Ibidem.
And since one of the Chanons of the city of Liege, making trial of his
strength in fasting, having continued the same even to the seventeenth day,
felt himself so weakened, that unless he had been suddenly succored by a good
restoratiue, he had quite perished.

Ibidem.
A yongue Maid of Buchold, in the territory of Munster in Westphalia,
afflicted with grief of mind, and unwilling to stir or go abroad from
home, was beaten by her mother for the same, which redoubled her dolor, in
such sort, that having lost her natural rest, was four months without either
drinking or eating, saving that sometimes she did chaw some roasted apple, and
washed her mouth with a little Ptisane.

Euagrius lib. 1. of the Ecclesiastical history. cap. 3. Baronius upon the
Martyrol. Romans 9. Ian^.
The Ecclesiastical Histories, among a great number of fasters, make mention
of three holy Hermites, all named Simeon, which did live in strange austeritie
and long fasts, as of eight days, and fifteen days continuance, yea longer,
not having for all their dwelling but a Column or Hermitage where they dwelt
and led their lives: by reason whereof they were named Stelites, that is to
say, Columnaries, as dwelling in Columns.

But all these before alleged, had partly resolved themselves to such fasts,
and partly had by little and little accustomed themselves to it, so that it was
not very strange for them to fast so long: which was not in him of whom we
speak. And therefore his fast is the more to be admired, by so much as that he
had not in any wise disposed himself thereto, and had not used these long
austerities.

After he had been cherished, and they soiourned yet sometime, to order the
business, and to view the lands round about the I Will Saint Croix, motion was
made to send back the ships into France before Winter, and so they that went
not thither to Winter, prepared themselves for the return. The mean while the
Savages from about all their confines came to see the manners of the Frenchmen:
The Savage submit themselves to the censure of Monsieur De Monts in in their
variances.
and lodged themselves willingly near them: also in certain variances happened
amongst themselves, they did make Monsieur De Monts Judge of their debates;
which is a beginning of voluntary subjection, from whence a hope may be
conceived, that these people will soon conform themselves to our manner of
living.

Amongst other things happened before the departing of the said ships, it chanced
one day, that a Savage called Bituani, The fathers authority in marriage.
finding good relish in the kitchen of the said Monsieur De Monts, settled
himself therein, doing there some service: And yet did make love to a Maid,
by way of marriage; the which not being able to have with the good liking and
consent of her father, he ravished her and took her to wife. Thereupon a great
quarrel ensues. And in The cause the of Sauagespleaded before Monsieur De
Monts.
the end the Maid was taken away from him, and returned to her fathers. A very
great debate was like to follow, were it not that Bituani complaining to the
said Monsieur De Monts for this injury, the others came to defend their cause
saying, (to wit* the father assisted with his friends) that he would not give
his daughter to a man, unless he had some means by his industry to nourish
and maintain both her and the children that should proceed of the marriage: As
for him he saw not any thing that he could do: That he loitered about the
kitchen of the said Monsieur de Monts, not exercising himself ahunting.
Finally, that he should not have the maid, and ought to content himself with
that which was passed. The said Monsieur De Monts having heard both parties,
told them, that he detained him not, and that the said Bituani was a diligent
fellow and should go ahunting to make proof of what he could do. But yet for
all that they did not restore the maid unto him, until he had showed
effectually that which the said Monsieur De Monts had promised of him. Finally,
he goes Store of Salmons. Beuers. Matachias be laces, beads, bracelets, or
such trinckets
afishing, takes great store of Salmons, the maid is redeliuered him, and the
next day following he came, clothed with a fair new gown of Beuers well set
on with Matachias, to the fort which was then a building for the Frenchmen,
bringing his wife with him, as triumphing for the victory, having gotten her,
as it were by dint of sword: whom he has ever since loved dearly, contrary
to the custom of the other Savages: giving us to understand, that the thing
which is gotten with pain, ought to be much cherished.

By this action we see the two most considerable points in matter of marriage to
be observed among these people, guided only by the law of nature: That is to
say, the fatherly authority, and the husbands industry: A thing which I have
much admired, seeing, that in our Christian Church, by I know not what abuse,
men have lived many ages, during which the fatherly authority has been
despised and set at naught, until that the Ecclesiastical conuentions have
opened their eyes, and known that the same was even against nature it self:
And that our Kings by laws and Edicts have reestablished in his force this
fatherly authority: which notwithstanding in spiritual marriages and vows of
religion has not yet recovered his ancient glory: And has (in this respect)
his proppe but upon the Courts of Parlaments orders, the which oftentime^ have
constrained the detainers of Children, to restore them to their parents.

CHAP. V.
The description of the Island of Saint Croix: The enterprise of Monsieur De
Monts difficult and generous, yet persecuted through envy: The return of
Monsieur De Poutrincourt into France: the perils of the voyage.

BEfore we speak of the Ships return into France, it The description of the
I Will of Saint Croix.
is meet to tell you how hard the I Will of Saint Croix is to be found out, to
them that were never there. For there are so many Isles and great Baies to go
by, before one be at it, that I wonder how ever one might pierce so far for to
find it. There are three or four mountains, imminent above the others, on the
sides: But on the North side, from whence the river runs down, there is but
a sharp pointed one, above two leagues distant. The woods of the maine land
are fair and admirable high and well grown, as in like manner is the grass.
There is right over against the Island fresh water brooks, very pleasant and
agreeable, The fruitfulness of the Soil.
where diverse of Monsieur De Monts his men did their business, and builded
there certain Cabanes. As for the nature of the ground it is most excellent
and most abundantly fruitful. For the said Monsieur De Monts having caused
there some piece of ground to be tilled* and the same sowed with Rye (for I
have seen there no wheat) he^ was not able to tarry for the maturitie thereof
to reap it: and notwithstanding, the grain, fallen, has grown and increased
so wonderfully that two years after we reaped and did gather of it as fair,
big and weighty, as any in The Island half a league in compass.
France, which the soil had brought forth without any tillage: and yet at this
present it does continue still to mulltiply every year. The said Island
contains some half a league of circuit, and at the end of it on the sea
side, there is a Mount or small hill, which is (as it were) a little I Will
severed from the other, where Monsieur de Monts his Canon was placed: There is
also a little Chapel built after the savage fashion. At the foot of which
Chapel there is such store Store of Mussels.
of mussels as is wonderful, which may be gathered at low water, but they are
small: I believe that Monsieur De Monts people did not forget to choose and take
the biggest, and left there but the small ones to grow and increase. As for the
exercise and occupation of our Frenchmen, during the time of their abode there,
we will mention it briefly, having first conducted back our ships into France.

The Sea and maritime charges in such enterprises as that of Monsieur De Monts,
be so great, that he who has not a good stock and foundation shall easily
sink under such a burden, and for to supply, in some sort, those expenses,
one is forced to suffer and bear infinite discommodities, and put himself in
danger to be discredited among unknown people, and which is worse, in a land
which is unmanured, and all over grown with forests. Wherein this action is
the more generous, by so much as the peril is more evidently dangerous; and
notwithstanding all this, fortune is not left unattempted, and to tread down
so many thorns that stop the way. Monsieur De Monts his shipes returning into
France, he remains in a desolate place, with one bark and one boat only.
And though he is promised to be sent for home at the end of the year, who may
assure himself of Aeolus and Neptunes fidelity, two evil, furious,
unconstant and unmerciful Masters? Behold the estate whereunto the said
Monsieur De Monts reduced himself, having had no help of the King, as have
had al those voiages that have been heretofore described (except the late
Lord Marquis de la Roche) and yet it is he that has done more than all the
rest, not having yet lost his hold. But in the end I fear he shall be
constrained to give over and forsake all, to the great shame and reproach of the
French name, which by this means is made ridiculous and a by word to other
nations. For (as though one would of set purpose oppose himself to the
conversion Envy upon the privilege granted to Monsieur De Monts upon Beuers.
of these poor Westerly people, and to the setting forward of the glory of God
and the Kings) there be men start up, full of Avarice and Envy: men which
would not give a stroke, or draw their swords for the Kings service (as
Monsieur De Poutrincourt showed one day to his Majesty) men which would not
endure the least labor in the world for the honor of God, which do hinder
that any profit be drawn from the very province it self, to furnish to that
which is necessary to the establishment of such a work, having rather that
Englishmen and Hollanders reap the profit thereof than Frenchmen, and seeking
to make the name of God unknown in those parts of the world. And such men,
which have no fear of God (for if they had any they would be zealous of his
name) are heard, are believed, and carry things away at their pleasure.

Now let us prepare and hoise up sails. Monsieur De Poutrincourt made the
voyage into these parts with some men of good sort, not to winter there, but as
it were to seek out his seat, and find out a land that might like him. Which
he having done, had no need to soiorne there any The return of Monsieur De
Poutrincourt into France.
longer. So then the Ships being ready for the return, he shipped himself,
and those of his company, in one of them. The mean while the fame was from all
sides in these parts, of the wonders made in Ostend, then besieged by their
Highness of Flanders, already three years passed. The voyage was not without
storms and great perils: for amongst others, I will recite two or three which
might be placed among miracles, were it not that the Sea-accidents are frequent
enough, not that I will, for all that, darken the special favor that God has
always showed in The first peril.
these voyages.

The first is of a gust of wind, which in the midst of their navigations came
by night instantly to strike in the sails, with such a violent boistrousnesse
that it ouerturned the ship in such manner, that of the one part the keele was
on the face of the water, and the sail swimming upon it, without any means or
time to right it, or to loose the tackles. On the sudden the sea is all afire,
and the Mariners themselves, all wet, did seem to be all compassed with
flames, so furious was the Sea (the Sailers call this fire Saint Goudrans fire)
and by ill fortune, in this sudden surprise, there was not a knife to be found
for to cut the cables or the sail. The poor ship, during this casualtie,
remained ouerturned, carried continually, one while upon Mountains of waters,
then another while suncken down even to hell. Briefly, every one did prepare
to drink, more than his belly full, to all his friends, when a new blast of
wind came, which rent the sail in a thousand pieces, ever after unprofitable
to any use. Happy sail! having by his ruin saved all this people; for if it
had been a new one they had been cast away, and never news had been heard
of them. But God does often try his people, and brings them even to deaths
door, to the end they may know his powerful might, and fear him. So the ship
began to stur and rise again by little and little: And well was it for them
that she was deep keeled, for if it had been a fliboate with a flat bottom
and broad belly, it had been quite ouerturned up side down, but the ballast,
which remained beneath, did help to stir her upright.

The second danger.
The second was at Casquet (an I Will or rock in the form of a Caske, between
France and England, on which there is no dwelling) being come within three
leagues of the same, there was some jealousy between the Masters of the ship
(an evil which oftentimes destroieth both men and fair enterprises) the one
saying that they might double well enough the said Casket, an other that they
could not, and that it behooued to cast a little from the right course for to
pass under the Island. In this case the worst was that one knew not the hour
of the day, because it was dark by reason of mistes, and by consequent they
knew not if it did ebb or flow. For if it had been flood they had easily
doubled it: but it chanced that it was turning water, and by that means the
ebb did hinder it. So that approaching the said rock they saw no hope to save
themselves, and that necessarily they must go strike against Necessity makes
us seek to God. The diuellishnesse of reuengefull desire.
it. Then every one began to pray to God, to crave pardon one of another, and
(for their last comfort) to bewail one another. Hereupon Captain Rossignol
(whose Ship was taken in New France, as we have said before) drew out a great
knife, to kill therewith Captain Timothy, Governor of this present voyage,
saying to him, Do thou not content thy self to have undone me, but will thou needs yet cast me here away? but he was held and kept from doing of that
he was about to do. And in very truth it was in him great folly, yea rather
madness, to go about to kill a man that was going to die, and he (that went
to give the blow) in the same peril. In the end as they went to strike upon
the rock Monsieur De Poutrincort, who had already yielded his soul and
recommended his family to God, asked of him that was at the top if there were
any hope; who told him there was none: Then he bad some to help him to change
the sails, which two or three only did, and already was there no more water
but to turn the Ship, when the mercy and favor of God came to help them, and
turned the ship from the perils wherein they saw themselves. Some had put off
their doublets for to seek to save themselves by climbing upon the rock, but
the The third danger.
fear was all the harm they had for that time: saving that some few hours
after, being arrived near to a rock called Le nid a L'aigle, the Eagles nest,
they thought to go board it, thinking, in the darkness of the mist, it had
been a Ship, from whence being again escaped they arrived at New Their return
at New haven.
haven, the place from whence they first set out. The said Monsieur De
Poutrincourt having left his armours and provisions of war in the I Will of Saint
Croix, in the keeping of the said Monsieur De Monts, as a gage and token of the
good will he had to return thither.

The fourth peril.
But I may yet well set down here a marvelous danger, from which the same
vessel was preserved, a little after the departing from Saint Croix, and this
by a bad accident, which God turned to good. For a certain tippling fellow,
being by night stealingly come down to the bottom of the ship, for to drink
his belly full, and to fill his bottle with wine, he found that there was but
too much to drink, and that the said ship was already half full of water: in
such sort, that the peril was imminent, and they had infinite pains to stanch
her by pomping. In the end being come about they found a great leake, by the
keele, which they stopped with all diligence.

CHAP. VI.
The buildings of the I Will Saint Croix: The French-mens discommodities in the
said place: Unknown Sicknesses: of their causes: of the people that be subject
to it: of diets, bad waters, air, winds, lakes, corruption of woods, seasons,
disposition of bodies, of yongue, and old: the Authors advice upon the
government of health, and cure of the said diseases.

The building at the I Will of S. Croix.
DVring the foresaid Navigations, Monsieur De Monts his people did work about
the Fort; which he seated at the end of the Island, opposite to the place where
he had lodged his Canon. Which was wisely considered, to the end to command the
river up and down. But there was an inconvenience, the said Fort did lie
toward the North, and without any shelter, but of the trees that were on the
I Will shore, which all about he commanded to be kept, and not cut down. And out
of the same Fort was the Switzers lodging, great and large, and other small
lodgings, representing (as it were) a Suburb. Some had housed themselves on
the firm land, near the brook. But within the Fort was Monsieur De Monts his
lodging, made with very fair and artificial Carpentrie work, with the Banner
of France upon the same. At another part was the storehouse, wherein consisted
the safety and life of every one, likewise made with fair Carpentry work,
and covered with reeds. Right over against the said storehouse, were the
lodgings and houses of these Gentlemen, Monsieur D'oruille, Monsieur Champlein,
Monsieur Champdore, and other men of reckoning. Opposite to Monsieur De Monts
his said lodging, there was a gallerie covered for to exercise themselves,
either in play, or for the workmen in time of rain. And between the said Fort
and the Platform, where lay the Canon, all was full of gardens, whereunto
every one exercised himself willingly. All Autumn quarter was passed on
these works, and it was well for them to have lodged themselves, and to manure
the ground of the Island, before Winter; whilst that in these parts pamphlets
were set out under the name of Maistre Guillaume, stuffed with all sorts of
news: By the which, amongst other things, this Prognosticator did say, that
Monsieur De Monts did pull out thorns in Canada: and all well considered, it
may well be termed the pulling out of thorns, to take in hand such
enterprises, full of toiles and continual perils, with cares, vexations, and
discommodities. But virtue and courage that over comes all these things,
makes those thorns to be but Gilliflowers and Roses, to them that resoule
themselves in these heroical actions, to make themselves praiseworthy and
famous in the memory of men, despising the vain pleasures of delicate and
effeminated men, good for nothing but to coffer themselves in a chamber.

Three disco^modities in wintering at S. Croix.
The most urgent things being done, and hoarie snowie father being come, that
is to say, Winter, then they were forced to keep within doors, and to live
every one at his own home: during which time, our men had three special
discommodities in this Hand, videlicet, want of wood, (for that which was in
the said I Will, was spent in buildings) lack of fresh water, and the continual
watch, made by night, fearing some surprise from the Savages, that had lodged
themselves at the foot of the said Island, or some Wickedness of many
Christians.
other enemy. For the malediction and rage of many Christians is such, that one
must take heed of them much more than of Infidels. A thing which grieueth me to
speak: would to God I were a liar in this respect, and that I had no cause to
speak it! When they had need of water or wood, they were constrained to cross
over the river, which is thrice as broad of every side, as the river of Seine.
The river of Roan.
It was a thing painful and tedious, in such sort that it was needful to keep
the boat a whole day, before one might get those necessaries. In the mean
while the cold and snowes came upon them, and the Ice so strong, that the Sider
was frozen in the vessels, and every one his measure was given him out by
weight. As for wine it was distributed but at certain days of the week. Many
idle sluggish companions drank snow-water, not willing to take the pains to
cross the river. Briefly, the unknown Unknown Sicknesses*
sicknesses like to those described unto us by James Quartier, in his relation,
assailed us. For remedies there was none to be found. In the mean while the
poor sick creatures did languish, pining away by little and little, for want
of sweet meats, as milk or spoon-meat for to sustain their stomachs, which
could not receive the hard meats, by reason of let, proceeding from a rotten
flesh, which grew and ouer-abounded within their mouths: And when one thought
to root it out, it did grow again in one nights space more abundantly than
before. As for the tree called Annedda, mentioned by the said Quartier, the
Savages of these lands know it not. So that it was most pitiful to behold
every one, very few excepted, in this misery, and the miserable sick folks
to die, as it were full of life, without any possibility to be succored.
There died The number of the dead and sick. Dangerous months.
of this sickness 36, and 36 or 40 more, that were stricken with it, recovered
themselves by the help of the Spring, as soon as the comfortable season
appeared. But the deadly season for that sickness is in the end of January,
the months of February and March, wherein most commonly the sick do die,
every one at his turn, according to the time they have begun to be sick: in
such sort, that he which began to be ill in February and March, may escape,
but he that shall ouer-haste himself, and betake him to his bed in December
and January, he is in danger to die in February, March, or the beginning of
April, which time being passed, he is in good hope, and as it were assured of
his safety. Notwithstanding some have felt some touch thereof, having been
sharply handled with it.

Monsieur De monts being returned into France, did consult with our Doctors of
Physic upon the sickness, which (in my opinion) they found very new and
unknown, for I do not see, that when we went away, our Pothecarie was charged
with any order for the cure thereof: and notwithstanding Hippocrates.
it seems that Hippocrates has had knowledge of it, or at least of some that
was very like to it. For in the Book De internis affect. he speaks of a
certain malady, where the belly, and afterward the spleen do swell and
harden it self, and feel grievous and sharp gripes; the skin becomes
black and pale, drawing toward the color of a green Pomgranet: the ears
and gums do render and yield a bad sent, the said gums disioining themselves
from the teeth: the legs full of blisters: Northerly people subject to the land
disease of New France.
the limbs are weakened, etc.

But specially the Northerly people, are more subject to it than other more
Southerly nations. Witness the Hollanders, Frizeland men, and other
thereabout, amongst whom the said Hollanders do write in their nauigations,
that going to the East Indies, many of them were taken with the same disease,
being upon the coast of Guinie: a dangerous coast, bearing a pestiferous air a
hundred leagues far in the sea. And the same (I mean the Hollanders) being,
in the year 1606, gone upon the coast of Spain, to keep the same coast, and
to annoy the Spanish Navy, were constrained to withdraw themselves, by reason
of this disease, having cast into the sea two and twenty of their dead. And if
one will hear the witness of Olaus magnus, writing of the Northerly Olaus
magnus, Lib. 16. cap. 5^.
Nations, of which part himself was, let him hearken to his report, which is
this: There is (says he) yet an other martial sickness (that is, a sickness
that afflicts them which follow the wars) which tormenteth and afflicts
them that are besieged, such whose limbs thickened by a certain fleshy
heaviness, and by a corrupted blood, which is between the flesh and the
skin, dilating it self like wax: they sink with the least impression made
on them with the finger; and disioineth the teeth as ready to fall out:
changes the white color of the skin into blew: and causes a benumming,
with a distaste to take Physic, and that disease is called in the vulgar
tongue of the country Sorbut, in Greek (...), per adventure because of this
putrefying softness, which is under Evil disposition of the body corrupts
the meats.
the skin, which seems to proceed of indigesting and salt meats, and to be
continued by the cold exhalation of the walls. But it shall not have so much
force where the houses are inward wainscotted with boords. If it continue
longer, it must be driven out by taking every day wormwood, as one expels A
medicine for the stone.
out the root of the stone, by a decoction of stale Beer drunk with butter.
The same Author does yet say in an other place, a thing much to be noted: In
the beginning It is in the 9. book, ca. 38*
(says he) they sustain the siege with force, but in the end, the Soldier
being by continuance weakened, they take away the provisions from the inuaders,
by artificial means, subtilties This is to be noted.
and ambushments, specially the sheep, which they carry away, and make them to
grase in grassie places of their houses, for fear that through want of fresh
meats they fall into the lothsomest sickness of all sicknesses, called in the
country language, Sorbut, or Scoruie.
Sorbut, that is to say, a wounded stomach, dried by cruel torments, and long
anguishes: for the cold and indigesting meats, greedily taken, seem to be the
true cause of this sickness.

I have delighted my self to recite here the very words of this Author,
because he speaks thereof as being skillful, and sets forth sufficiently
enough the land disease of New France, saving that he makes no mention of the
stiffening of the hammes, nor of a superfluous flesh which grows and
abounds within the mouth, and that if one think to take it away, it
increases still; but well speaks The opening of a dead body.
he of the bad stomach. For Monsieur De Poutrincourt made a Negroe to be
opened, that died of that sickness in our voyage, who was found to have the
inward parts very sound, except the stomach, that had wrinckles, as though
they were vlcered.

Causes of the said disease.
And as for the cause proceeding from salt meats, it is very true, there are
many other causes concurring, which feed and entertain this sickness: Amongst
which I will place in general the bad food, comprehending with it the drinks;
then the vice of the air of the country, and after the evil disposition of
the body: leaving the Physicians In the beginning of the book De aere, aquu,
and loc.
to sift it out more curiously. Whereunto Hippocrates says, that the Physicion
ought also carefully to take heed, in considering the seasons, the winds, the
aspects of the Sun, the waters, the land it self, the nature and situation
of it, the nature of men, their manner of living and exercise.

What food causes the land disease.
As for the food, this sickness is caused by cold meats, without juice, gross
and corrupted. One must then take heed of salt meats, smokie, mustie, raw, and
of an evil sent, likewise of dried fishes, as Newfound land fish, and
stinking Rays: Briefly, from all melancholy meats, which are of hard
digesting, are easily corrupted, and breed a gross and melancholy blood. I
would not (for all that) be so scrupulous as the Physicians, which do put in
the number of gross and melancholy meats, Beeuesflesh, Bears, wild Bores
and Hogs flesh (they might as well add unto them Beuers flesh, which
notwithstanding we have found very good) as they do amongst fishes the Tons,
Dolphins, and all those that carry lard: among the birds, the Hernes, Duckes,
and all other water birds: for in being an over curious obseruator of these
things, one might fall into the danger of staruing, and to die for hunger. They
place yet among the meats that are to be shunned, biscuit, beans and pulse, the
often using of mi^ke, cheese: the gross and harsh wine, and that which is too
small, white wine, and the use of vinegar: Beer which is not well sodden, nor
well scummed, and that has not hoppes enough. Also waters that run through
rotten Bad waters.
wood, and those of lakes and bogges, still and corrupted waters, such as is
much in Holland and Frizeland, where is observed that they of Amsterdam are
more subject to paulfies and stifning of sinews, than they of Roterdam, for
the abouesaid cause of still and sleepie waters: which besides do engender
dropfies, dysenteries, fluxes, quarten agues, and burning fevers, swellings,
ulcers of the lights, shortness of breath, ruptures in children, swelling in
the veins, sores in the legs: finally, they wholly belong to the disease
whereof we speak, being drawn by the spleen, where they leave all their
corruption.

Sometimes this sickness does also come by a vice, which is even in waters of
running fountains, as if they be among, or near bogges, or if they issue from
a muddie ground, or from a place that has not the Suns aspect. So Pliny
recites that in the voyage which the prince Plin. li. 25. (...)
Caesar Germanicus made into Germany, having given order to his army to pass
the river of Rhine, to the end to get still forward in the country, he did set
his camp on the sea shore, upon the coast of Frizeland, in a place where was
but one only fountain of fresh water to be found, which notwithstanding was
so pernicious, that all they that drank of it lost their teeth in less than
two years space, and had their knees so weak and disiointed, that they could
not bear themselves. Which is verily the sickness whereof we speak, which
the Physicians do call Stomaccace. Scelotyrbe.
Stomaccace, that is to say, mouths sore, and Scelotyrbe, which is as much to
say, as the shaking of thighs and legs. And it was not possible to find any
remedy, but by the Britannica, an herb.
means of an herb called Britannica, or Scuruie-grasse, which besides is very
good for the sinews, against the sores and accidents in the mouth: against the
Squinancie, and against the biting of serpents. It has long leaves, drawing in
color to a dark green, and produces a black root, from which liquor is
drawn, as well as from the leaf. Strabo says, that the like case happened to
the army that Strabo. Monsieur d^ Ioinuille. The Gouitres of Sauoye.
Aelius Gallus brought into Arabia, by the commission of Augustus the Emperor.
And the like also chanced to king S. Jews his army in Egypt, as the Lord de
Ioinuille reports. Other effects of bad waters are seen near unto us, to
wit, in Sauoy, where the women (more than men, because they are of a colder
constitution) have commonly swellings in their throats, as big as bottels.

What air is against health.
Next to waters, the air is also one of the fathers and ingenderes of this
sickness, in boggy and watrish places, and opposite to the South, which is most
often rainy. But there is yet in New France another bad quality of the air, by
reason of lakes that be thick there, and of the great rottennes in the woods,
whose odor the bodies having drawn up, during the raines of Autumn and
winter, easily are engendered the corruptions of the mouth, and swelling in the
legs before spoken, and a cold enters vnsensibly into it, which benummeth
the limbs, stifneth the sinews, constrains to creep with cruches, and in
the end to keep the bed.

Winds.
And for as much as the winds do participate with the air, yea are an air
running with a more vehement force than ordinary, and in this quality have
great power over the health and sicknesses of men, we will speak some thing of
it, not (for all that) straying ourselves from the sequel of our history.
What winds be healthful and unhealthful.


The Easterly wind, called by the Latins Subsolanus, is held for the
healthfullest of all, and for that cause, wise builders give advice to set
their buildings toward the aspect of the East. The opposite to it, is the wind
called Fauorinus, or Zephirus, which our Seamen do name West, which in these
parts is mild and fructifying. The Southern wind (called Auster by the
Latins) is in Africa hot and dry: But in crossing the Mediterranian sea, it
gathers a great moistnes, which makes it stormy and putrefying in Prouence
and Languedoc, The opposite to it is the Northern wind, otherwise called
Boreas, Bize, Tramontane, which is cold and dry, chaseth the clouds and
sweepeth The winds have not one and the self same quality in all places.
the airie region. It is taken for the holsommest next to the East wind. But
these qualities of the wind, found and noted in these parts, make not one
general rule through over all the earth. For the North-winde beyond the
Equinoctial line is not cold as in these parts, nor the South-winde hot,
because that by a long crossing, they borrow the qualities of the regions
through which they pass: besides that the South-winde at his first issue is
cooling, according to the report of those that have traveled in Africa. In
like manner there be regions in Perou (as in Lima and the plains) where the
North-winde is unwholesome and noisome. And through all that coast, which is above
500. leagues in length, they take the South-winde for a sound and fresh cooling
wind, and which more is, most mild and pleasant: yea also that it does never
rain by it (according to that which Joseph Acosta writes of it) clean
contrary to that we see in this our part of Europe. And in Spain the
East-winde, which we have said to be sound, Lib. 3 cap. 3.
the same Acosta says, that it is noisome and unsound. The wind called
Circius, which is the North-west, is so stormy and boistrous in the Westerly
shores of Norwege, that if there be any which undertakes any voyage that way,
when that wind blows, he must make account to be lost and cast away: And
this wind is so cold in that region, that it suffers not any tree, small or
great to grow Olam magnus Lib. 1. Cap. 10.
there: So that for want of wood they must serve themselves with the bones of
great fishes, to sees or roast their meats, which discommodity is not in these
parts. In like sort we have had experience in New France that the North-winds
are not for health: And the North-east (which are the Sick folks and beasts
do feel the wind and weather a^omming.
cold, strong, sharp and stormy Aquilons) yet worse: which our sick folks,
and they that had wintred there the former year, did greatly fear, because
that likely, some of them drooped away, when that wind blew, for indeed they
had some sensible feeling of this wind: As we see those that be subject to
ruptures endure great pangs when that the South-winde does blow: And as we see
the very beasts to prognosticate by some signs the change of weather. This
noisome quality of wind proceeds (in my judgment) from the nature of the
country through which it passes, which (as we have said) is full of lakes, and
those very great, which be (as it were) standing and still waters. Whereto I
add the exhalation of the rottenness of woods, that this wind brings, and
that in so much greater quantity, as the North-west part is great, large and
spacious.

Seasons.
The seasons are also to be marked in this disease, which I have not seen nor
heard of, that it begins to work, neither in the spring time, Summer nor
Autumn, unless it be at the end of it, but in Winter. And the cause thereof
is, that as the growing heat of the Spring, makes the humors closed up in the
winter to disperse themselves to the extremities of the body, and so clears
it from melancholy, and from the noisome humors that have been gathered in
Winter: so the Autumn, as the Winter approaches, draws them inward, and does
nourish this melancholy and black humor, which does abound specially in this
season, and the Winter being come shows forth his effects at the costs and
grief of the poor patients. Galen Galen. Com. 35. lib. 1. de not. hum.
yeldeth a reason for the same, saying that the humors of the body, having
been parched by the burning of the Summer, that which may rest of it, after
the heat is expulsed, becomes forthwith cold and dry: That is to say,
cold by the privation of the heat, and dry in as much as in the drying of
these humors, all the moistness that was therein has been consumed. And
thereby it comes that sickenesses are bred in this season, and the farther
one goes, the weaker nature is, and the intemperate coldness of the air
being entered into a body already thereto disposed, does handle it (as it
were) at a beck and at will, without pity.

I would add willingly to all the foresaid causes the bad Bad food and
discommodities of the Sea.
food of the sea, which in a long voyage brings much corruption in man's body.
For one must of necessity, after four or five days, live of salt meat, or to
bring sheep alive, and store of poultry; but this is but for Masters and
Commanders in ships: and we had none in our voyage but for to reserve and
multiply in the land whither we did go. The mariners then and passengers do
suffer discommoditie as well in the bread, as in meat and drink, the biskit
becomes dampish and rotten, the fishes that are given them alike, and the
waters stinking; they which carry sweet meats, be it flesh or fruits, and
that use good bread, good wine and good brothes, do easily avoid those
sicknesses; and I durst (in some sort) be answerable unto them for their
healthes, unless they be very unhealthful by nature. And when I consider that
this disease is as well taken in Holland, Frizeland, in Spain and in Guinie,
as in Canada, I am brought to believe that the chief cause thereof is in that
which I have said, and not peculiar nor particular to New France.

Disposition of body.
After all these causes and considerations, it is good in every place to have a
well disposed body, for to be in health and live long. For those which naturally
gather cold and gross humors, and have the mass of their body pory. Item
they that be subject to the oppilations of the spleen, and they that use not a
sturring life, but sitting and without frequent motion, are more apt and
subject to these sicknesses. Therefore a Physician might say that a student is
not fit for that Country, that is to say, he shall not live there in health:
nor those which ouertoile in labors, nor melancholy people, men which have
drowsy dreaming spirits, nor those that be often visited with agues, and such
other sort of people. Which I might easily believe, because that these things
do heap much melancholy, cold and superfluous humors. Notwithstanding I have
tried the contrary, both by my self and by others, against the opinion
Sagamos is a Savage word which Signifies a Lord, a ruler, or a Captain.
of some of ours, yea of Sagamos Membertou himself, which plaieth the
Soothsaier among the Savages, who (arriving in that country) said that I
should never return into France, nor Monsieur Boullet (sometimes captain of
Monsieur De Poutrincourt his regiment) who for the most part of the time has
had agues there (but he did farewell.) And they themselves did advise our
laborers to take but small labor in their work (which counsel they could
The author his exercise in New France.
very well observe). For I may say (and that truly) that I never made so much
bodily work, for the pleasure that I did take in dressing and tilling my
gardens, to enclose and hedge them, against the gluttony of the hogs, to make
knots, to draw out allies, to build arbours, to sow wheat, rye, barley, oats,
beans, pease, garden herbs, and to water them; so much desire had I to know
the goodness of The labor of the mind.
the ground by my own experience. So that Summers days were unto me too
short, and very often did I work by Moonelight. Concerning the labor of the
mind, I took a reasonable part of it; for at night, every one being retired,
among the pratings, noises, and hurliburlies, I was shut up in my study,
reading or writing of something. Yea I will not be ashamed to speak, that
being requested by Monsieur De Poutrincourt, our Commander, to bestow some
hours of my industry, in giving Christian instructions The piety of the
Author of this History.
to our small company, for not to live like beasts, and for to give to the
Savages an example of our manner of life, I have done it, according to the
necessity, and being thereof requested, every Sunday, and sometimes
extraordinarily, almost during all the time we have been there; And well was
it for me that I had brought my Bible, and some books unawares: for otherwise
it had been very difficult for me, and had been cause to excuse me of that
work. It has not been without fruit, many witnessing unto me that they had
never heard so much good talk of God, not knowing before, any principle of
that which belongs to Christian doctrine: And such is the state wherein live
the most part of Christendom. And if there were any edifying of one part,
there was backbiting on the other, by reason, that using a French liberty, I
willingly spoke the truth. Whereupon I remember the saying of the Prophet Amos,
They have hated (says he) him that reproved them Amos. 5. verse. 10.
in the gate, and have had in abomination him that spoke in integrity. But in
the end we became all good friends; And amongst these things God gave me
always a sound and a perfect health, always a good taste, always merry and
nimble, saving that having once laien in the woods, near to a brook in snowey
weather, I was touched with a Crampe or Sciatika in my thigh a fortnights
space, not loosing my appetite nor stomach for the same; for indeed I took
delight in that which I did, desiring to confine there my life, if it would
please God to bless the voyages.

Of Children.
I should be over tedious, if I would set down here the disposition of all
persons, and to speak concerning children that they are more subject to this
sickness then others, for that they have very often ulcers in the mouth and
gummes, because of the thin substance that abound in their bodies: and also
that they gather many crude humors by their disorder of living, and by the
quantity of fruits they eat, being never filled with it, by which m eans they
gather great quantity of waterish blood, and the spleen being stopped cannot
soake up those moisturs. Of aged folks.
And as for old folks that have their heat weakened, and cannot resist the
sickness, being filled with crudities, and with a cold and moist temperature,
which is the quality proper to stir up and nourish it: I will not take the
Physicians office in hand, fearing the censuring rod: and notwithstanding (with
their leave) not touching with their orders and receipts of Agaric, aloes,
rubarbe, and other ingrediens, I will write here that which I think more
ready at hand for the poor people, which have not the ability and means to
send to Alexandria, as well for the preservation of their health, as for the
remedy of this sickness.

Advice for the sicknesses of New France.
It is a certain axiom that a contrary must be healed by his contrary. This
sickness proceeding from an indigestion of rude, gross, cold and melancholy
meats, which offend the stomach, I think it good (submitting my self to
better Judgment and advice) to accompany them with good sawces, be it of
butter, oil, or fat, all well spiced, to correct as well the quality of the
meat, as of the body inwardly waxen cold. Let this be said for rude and
gross meats, as beans, pease, and fish: for he that shall eat good capons,
(...) ^^^^^idges, good duckes and good rabets, he may be ^^sured of his health,
or else his body is of a very bad constitution. We have had some sick that
have (as it were) raised up from death to life: for having Good Wine.
eaten twice or thrice of a coolice made of a cock, good wine taken according
to the necessity of nature, is a sovereign preservative for all sicknesses,
and particularily for this. Master Macquin and Master Georges, worshipful
Merchants of Rochel, as associates to Monsieur De Monts, did furnish us with
45. toones of wine, which did us very much good. And our sick folks
themselves, having their mouths spoiled, and not being able to eat, have never
lost the taste of wine, which they took with a pipe. The same has preserved
many of them from death. The young buds of herbs in the Spring time be also
very sovereign. And besides that reason requires to believe it, I have tried
it, Herbs in the spring time.
being my self gone many times to gather some for our sick people, before that
those of our garden might be used, which restored them to their taste again,
and comforted their weak stomachs.

And as for that which concerns the exterior parts of the body, we have found
great good in wearing wooden pantaphles, or patins with our shoes, for to
avoid the moistness. The houses need no opening, nor windows on the
Northwest side, being a wind very dangerous: but rather on the East side, or
the South. It is very good to have good bedding (and it was good for me to have
carried things necessary to this purpose) and above all to keep himself
Stooues.
neat. I would like well the use of Stooues, such as they have in Germany, by
means whereof they feel no Winter, being at home, but as much as they please.
Yea they Stooues in gardens.
have of them, in many places, in their gardens, which do so temper the
coldness of winter, that in this rough and sharp season, there one may see
Orenge-trees, Limon-trees, Figge-trees, Pomgranet-trees, and all such sorts of
trees, bring forth fruit as good as in Prouence. Which is so much the more
easy to do in this new land, for that it is all covered over with woods,
(except when one comes in the Armonchiquois country, a hundred leagues further
of The country of the Armouchiquois 100. leagues distant from Port Royal.
then Port Royal) And in making of winter a summer one shall discover the land:
Which not having any more those great obstacles, that hinder the Sun to court
her, and from warming it with his heat, without doubt it will become very
temperate, and yield a most mild air: and well agreeing with our humor, not
having there, even at this time, neither cold nor heat that is excessive.

The Savages that know not Germany, nor the customs thereof, do teach us the
same lesson, which being subject to those sickness (as we have seen in the
voyage of James Quartier) use sweatings often, as it were every month, The
Sweatings of the Savages.
and by this means they preserve themselves, driving out by sweat all the
cold and evil humors they might have gathered. But one singular preservative
against this perfidious sickness, which comes so stealingly, and which
having once lodged it self within us, will not be put out, is to follow the
counsel of him that is wise amonst the wise, who having considered all the
afflictions that man give to himself during his life, has found nothing
better Ecclesi. 3. verse. 12. and 22.
then to rejoice himself, and do good, and to take pleasure in his own
works. They that have done so, in our company, have found themselves well by
it: contrawise some always grudging, repining, never content, idle, have been
Means of mirth.
found out by the same disease. True it is, that for to enjoy mirth it is good
to have the sweetness of fresh meats, fleshes, fishes, milk, butter, oils,
fruits, and such like, which we had not at will (I mean the common sort: for
always some one, or other of the company did furnish Monsieur De Poutrincourt
his table with wild foul, venison or fresh fish) And if we had had half a
dosen kyne, I believe that no body had died there.

It rests a preservative, necessary for the accomplishment Necessity of
having women into the country.
of mirth, and to the end one may take pleasure on the work of his hands, is
every one to have the honest company of his lawful wife: for without that, the
cheer is never perfect; ones mind is always upon that which one loves and
desires; there is still some sorrow, the body becomes full of ill humors,
and so the sickness does breed.

And for the last and sovereign remedy, I send back the Tree of life.
patient to the tree of life (for so one may well qualify it) which James
Quartier does call Anneda, yet unknown in Sasafras.
the coast of Port Royal, unless it be, peradventure the Sasafras, whereof
there is quantity in certain places. And it is an assured thing, that the
said tree is very excellent. But Monsieur Champlain, who is now in the great
river of Canada, passing his winter, in the same part where the said Quartier
did winter, has charge to find it out, Monsieur Champlein is now this present
year 1609. in Canada.
and to make provision thereof.

CHAP. VII.
The discovery of new Lands by Monsieur De Monts: fabulous tales and reports of
the river and fained town of Norombega: The refuting of the authors that have
written thereof: Fish banks in New found land: Kinibeki: Chouacoet:
Mallebarre: Armouchiquois: The death of a French man killed: Mortality of
Englishmen in Virginia.

THe rough season being passed, Monsieur De Monts wearied with his badde
dwelling at Saint Croix, determined to seek out another Port in a warrner
country, and more to the South: And to that end made a Pinnesse to be armed
and furnished with victuals, to follow the coast, and discovering new
countries, to seek out some happier Port in a more temperate air. And because
Monsieur De Monts his voyage for the discovery of new Lands.
that in seeking, one cannot set forward so much as when in full sails one
goes in open sea, and that finding out baies and gulfes, lying between two
lands, one must put in, because that there one may as soon find that which is
sought for, as else where, he made in this voyage but about six score leagues,
as we will tell you now. From Saint Croix to 60. leagues forward, the coast
lies East and West; at the end of which 60. leagues, is the river called by
the Savages Kinibeki. From which place to Malebarre Kinibeki 60. legues from
Saint Croix,
it lies North and South, and there is yet from one to the other 60. leagues,
in right line, not following the baies. So far stretches Monsieur De Monts
his voyage, wherein he had for Pilot in his vessel, Monsieur De Champdore. In
all this coast so far as Kinibeki there is many places where ships may be
harbored amongst the Islands, but the people there is not so frequent as is
beyond that: And there is no remarkable thing (at least that may be seen in
the outside of the lands) but a river, whereof many have* written fables one
after another, like to those that they (who grounding themselves upon Hannos
Plin*. lib. 3. cap. 1.
his Commentaries, a Carthaginian captain) have fained of Towns built by him in
great number upon the coasts of Africa, which is watered with the Ocean sea,
for that he played an heroycall part in sailing so far as the Isles of Cap
Vert, where long time since no body has been, the Navigations not being so
secure then, upon that great sea, as it is at this day by the benefit of the
Compass.

Therefore without alleging that, which the first writers (Spaniards and
Portingals) have said, I will recite that which is in the last book,
entitled, The universal History of the West Indies, Printed at Douay the
last year 1607. in the place where he speaks of Norombega: For in reporting
this, I shall have also said that which the first have written, from whom they
have had it.

Fabulous tales of the river Norombega.
Moreover, toward the North (says the Author, after he had spoken of
Virginia) is Norombega, which is known well enough by reason of a fair town,
and a great river, though it is not found from whence it has his name: for the
Barbarians do call it Agguncia: At the mouth of this river there is an Island
very fit for fishing. The region that goes along the sea, does abound in fish,
and toward New France there is great number of wild beasts, and is very
commodious for hunting; the Inhabitants do live in the same manner as they of
New France. If this beautiful Town has ever been in nature, I would feign
know who has pulled it down: For there is but Cabanes here and there made
with pearkes, and covered with barks of trees, or with skins, and both the
river and the place Pemtegoet.
inhabited, is called Pemtegoet, and not Agguncia. The river (saving the tide)
is scarce as the river of Oyse. And there can be no great river on that coast,
because there are not lands sufficient to produce them, by reason of the great
river of Canada, which runs like this coast, and is not foure-score leagues
distant from that place in crossing the lands, which from elsewhere received
many rivers falling from those parts which are toward Norombega: At the
entry whereof, it is so far from having but one Island, that rather the
number thereof is almost infinite, for as much as this river enlarging it self
like the Greek Lambda L, the mouth whereof is all full of Isles, whereof there
is one of them lying very far off (and the foremost) in the sea, which is high
and markable above the others.

But some will say that I aequiuocate in the situation of Norombega, and that
it is not placed where I take it. To Oiection. Answer*
this I answer, that the author, whose words I have a little before alleged, is
in this my sufficient warrant, who in his Geographicall Map, has placed in
the mouth of this river in the 44. degree, and his supposed town in the 45.
wherein we differ but in one degree, which is a small matter. For the river that
I mean is in the 45. degree, and as for any town, there is none. Now of
necessity it must be this river, because that the same being passed, and that
of Kinibeki, (which is in the same height) there is no other river forward,
whereof account should be made, tell one come to Virginia. I say furthermore,
that seeing the Barbarians of Norombega do live as they of New France, and
have abundance of hunting, it must be, that their province be seated in our New
France: For fifty leagues farther to the Southwest there is no great game,
because the woods are thinner there, and the inhabitants settled, and in greater
number then in Norombega.

True it is that a sea Captain, named John Alfonse, of Xaintonge, in the
relation of his aduenturous voiages, has An other Fabulous report of the River
of Norombega.
written, that, having passed Saint John's Island (which I take for the same that
I have called heretofore the I Will of Bacaillos) the coast turns to the West,
and West Southwest, Note this well.
as far as the river of Norombergue, newly discovered (says he) by the
Portugais and Spaniards, which is in 30. degrees: adding that this river has,
at the entire thereof many Isles, banks, and rocks, and that fifteen or
twenty leagues within it, is built a great town, where the people be small and
blackish, like them of the Indies, and are clothed with skins, whereof they
have abundance of all sorts. Item, that the bank of New found land ends
there: and that that river being passed, the coast turns to the West, and
West Northwest, above 250. leagues toward a country where there is both
towns and castles. But I see very little or no truth at all, in all the
discourses of this man: and well may he call his voiages aduenturous, not for
him, who was never in the hundredth part of the places he describes (at least
it is easy so to think) but for those that will follow the ways which he
wills mariners to follow. For if the said river of Norombega be in thirty
degrees, it must needs be in Florida, which is the contrary to all them that
ever have written of it, and to the very truth it self.

Concerning that which he says of the bank of Newfound The great Bancke of
Newfoundland. Banquereau. banc Iacquet.
land, it ends (by the report of mariners, about the I Will of Sablon, or Sand)
about Cap Breton. True it is, that there is some other banks, that be called
Le banquereau, and Le banc Iacquet, but they are but five or six, or ten
leagues, and are divided from the great bank of New found land. And touching
the men in the land of Norombega, they are of fair and high stature. And to
say, that this river being passed, the coast lies West, and West Northwest,
that has no likelihood. For from Cap Breton, so far as the point of Florida,
that lies over against the I Will De Cuba, there is not any coast standing West
Northwest, only there is in the parts joining upon the true river called
Norombega, some fifty leagues coast, that stands East and West. Finally, of
all that which the said John Alfonse does report, I receive but that which he
says that this river, whereof we speak, has at the coming in many Islands,
banks and rocks.

Kinibeks.
The river of Norombega being passed, Monsieur De Monts went still coasting,
until he came to Kinibeki, where a river is, that may shorten the way to go
to the great river of Canada. There is a number of Savages Cabaned there, and
the land begins there to be better peopled. From Kinibeki going farther, one
finds the baie of Marchin, named by the Captain his name that The bay of
Marchin. 1607. Chouakoet. The ground manured.
commands therein. This Marchin was killed the year that we parted from New
France 1607. Farther is an other baie called Chouakoet, where (in regard of the
former countries) is a great number of people: For there they till the ground,
and the region begins to be more temperate, and for proof of this, there is
in this land store of Vines. Yea even there be Islands full of it, (which be
more Vines.
subject to the injuries of the wind and cold) as we shall say Malebarre.
hereafter. There is between Chouakoet and Malebarre many baies and Isles, and
the coast is sandy, with shallow ground, drawing near to the said Malebarre,
so that scarce one may land there with barks.

The people that befrom Saint John's river to Kinibeki (wherein are comprised
the rivers of Saint Croix and Norombega) are called Etechemins: And from
Kinibeki as far as Malebarre, and farther, they are called Armouchiquois. The
Armouchiquois traitors and theefes.
They be traitors and theefes, and one had need to take heed of them. Monsieur
De Monts, having made some stay at Malebarre, victuals began to be scarce with
him, and it was needful to think upon the return, specially seeing all the
coast so troublesome that one could pass no further Shoulds stretching far
into the sea. Violent death of a Frenchman of Saint Mallos.
without peril, for sholds that stretch far into the sea, in such wise that
the farther one goes from the land, lesser depth there is. But before
departing, a Carpenter of Saint Mallos died casually, who going to fetch water
with some kettles, an Armouchiquois seeing fit opportunity to steal one of
those kettles, when that the Frenchman took no heed, took it, and ran away
speedily with his booty. The Malouin running after, was killed by this wicked
people: And although the same had not happened, it was in The swiftnes of the
Armouchiquois.
vain to pursue after this thief: for all these Armouchiquois are as swift in
running as Gray-houndes: as we will yet further say in speaking of the voyage
that Monsieur De Poutrincourt made in the same Country, in the year 1606.
1606. It grieved sore Monsieur De Monts to see such a thing, and his men were
earnest for revenge (which they might do, for the other Barbarians were not so
far from the Frenchmen but that a musket shot might have skared them, which
they had already on, rest to level every one at his man) but the said Monsieur
De Monts, upon some considerations, which many other of his place and dignity,
might have missed to consider, made every one to put down their musket cocks,
and left them alone, not having hitherto found a fit place to make a settled
dwelling. And so the said Monsieur De Monts caused all things to be in a
readiness for the return to Saint Croix, where he had left a good number of
his men, yet weak by the winter sickness, of whose health he was careful.

Monsieur DeMonts difficulty in his enterprise.
Many that know not what belongs to the sea, do think that the setting of
an habitation in an unknown land is easy; but by the discourse of this
voyage, and others that follow, they shall find that it is far easier to say
than to do, and that Monsieur de Monts has exploited many things this first
year, in viewing all the coast of this land even to Malebarre, which is 400.
leagues, following the same coast, and searching to the bottom of the Baies:
besides the labor he was forced to, in causing houses to be made at Saint
Croix, the care he had of those which he had brought thither, and of their
return into France, if any peril or ship-wracke should come to those that had
promised him to fetch him at the end of the year. But one may run and take
pain to seek Ports and Havens where fortune favors: yet she is always
like to herself. It is good for one to lodge himself in a sweet mild Climat,
when one may choose, notwithstanding death follows us every where. I have heard
of a Pilot of New Haven The mortality of the English in Virginia, like that of
the Frensh in New France. Virginia is in 36. 37. 38. degrees of latitude.
Praise of the temper of Virginia. Bad fare the chief cause of the sickness.
Things needful.
that was with the Englishmen in Virginia 24. years ago, that being come
thither, there died 36. of them in three months. Nevertheless Virginia is taken
to be in the 36. 37. and 38. degrees of latitude, which is a good temperate
country. Which considering, I yet believe (as I have already said before) that
such mortality comes by the bad fare. And it is altogether needful to have
in such a country, at the very beginning, household, and tame cattle of all
sorts, and to carry store of fruit trees and grafts, for to have there quickly
recreation necessary to the health of them that desire to people the land.
That if the Savages themselves be subject to the sickness, whereof we have
spoken, I attribute that, to the same cause of evil fare. For they have
nothing that may correct the vise of the meats which they take: and are
always naked amongst the moistures of the ground, which is the very means to
gather quantity of corrupted humors, which cause those sicknesses unto them,
as well as to the strangers that go thither, although they be borne to that
kind of life.

CHAP. VIII.
The second voyage made by Monsieur Du Pont-Graue.
The arrival of Monsieur Du Pont to Saint Croix: The habitation transferred in
Port Royal: return of Monsieur De Monts into France: the difficulty of hand
Milles: The furniture of the said Monsieur Du Pont for the discovery of new
lands beyond Malebarre: shippe-wracke: forecast for the return into France:
Comparison of these voyages with them of Florida: the blame of those that
dispraise the tillage of the land.

THe Spring time season being passed in the voyage of the Armouchiquois,
Monsieur De Monts did temporise at Saint Croix for the time that he had agreed
upon, in the which if he had no news from France, he might depart and come to
seek some ship of them that come to New found land for the drying of fish,
to the end to repasse in France within the same, he and his company, if it
were possible. This time was already expired, and they were ready to set
sails, not expecting more any succor The arrival of Monsieur Du Pont. 1605.
nor refreshing, When Monsieur Du Point, surnamed Grave, dwelling at Honfleur,
did arrive with a company of some forty men, for to ease the said Monsieur De
Monts and his troop, which was to the great joy of all, as one may well
imagine: and canon shots were free and plentiful at the coming, according to
custom, and the sound of trumpets. The said Monsieur Du Pont, not knowing yet
the state of our French men, did think to find there an assured dwelling, and
his lodgings ready: but considering the accidents of the strange sickness
whereof we have spoken, he took advice to change place. Monsieur De Monts was
very desirous that the new habitation had been about 40. degrees, that is to
say, 4. degrees farther then Saint Croix: but having viewed the coast as far
as Malebarre, and with much pain, not finding what he desired, it was
deliberated to go and make their dwelling in Port Royal, until means were
had to make an ampler Transmigration from S. Croix to Port Royal.
discovery. So every one began to pack up his things: That which was built with
infinite labor was pulled down, except the Storehouse, which was too great
and painful to be transported, and in executing of this, many voyages are
made. All being come to Port Royal they found out new labors: the abiding
place is chosen right New buildings.
over against the Island, that is at the coming in of the river L' Equille, in a
place where all is covered over and full of woods, as thick as possible may
be. The Month of September did already begin to come, and care was to be taken
for the vnlading of Monsieur Du Pont his ship, to make room for them that
should return back into France. Finally there is work enough for all. When
the ship was in a readiness to put to sails, Monsieur De Monts having seen
the beginning of the new habitation, shipped himself for his return with them
that would follow him. Notwithstanding many of good courage (forgetting the
griefs and labors passed) did tarry behind, amongst whom were Monsieur
Champlain and Monsieur Champdore, the one for Geographie, and the other for the
conducting and guiding of the voyages that should be necessary to be made by
sea. Then the said Monsieur De The return of Monsieur de Monts into France.
Monts hoised up sails, and leaves the said Monsieur Du Pont as his
Lieutenant and deputy in these parts, who wanting no diligence (according to
his nature) in making perfect that which was needful for to lodge both
himself and his people, which was all that might be done for that year in
that country. For to go far from home in the Winter, and after so long a
toil, there was no reason. And as for the tillage of the ground, I believe
they had no fit time to do it: For the said Monsieur Du Pont was not a man to
be long in rest, nor to leave his men idle, if there had been any means for
it.

Traffike with the Savages.
The Winter being come, the Savages of the country did assemble themselves,
from far to Port Royal, for to truck with the Frenchmen, for such things they
had, some bringing Beauers skins, and Otters (which are those whereof Beuers,
Otters, and Stagges.
most account may be made in that place) and also Ellans or Stagges, whereof
good buffe may be made: Others bringing flesh newly killed, wherewith they made
many good Tabagies or feasts, living merrily as long as they had Tabaguia is a
Savage term, signifying banquet.
wherewithal. They never wanted any bread, but wine did not continue with them
till the season was ended. For when we came thither the year following, they
had been above three Months without any wine, and were very glad of our
coming, for that made them to take again the taste of it.

Hand Mils.
The greatest pain they had, was to grind the corn to have bread, which is
very painful with hand-mils, whereall the strength of the body is requisite:
And therefore it is not without cause that in old time, bad people were
threatened to be sent to the Mill, as to the painefullest thing that is: to
which occupation poor slaves were set to, before the use of water and
winde-mils was found out, as the Profane histories make mention: and the same
of the Exodus 11. ver. 4. 5.
coming of the people of Israel out of the land of Egypt, where, for the last
scourge that God will send to Pharao, he declares by the mouth of Moises, that
about midnight he will pass through Egypt, and every first borne shall die
there, from the first borne of Pharao, that should sit upon his throne, to the
first borne of the maid Servant which grindeth at the Mill. And this labor is
so great, that the Savages (although they be very poor) cannot bear it, and
had rather to be without bread, then to take so much pains as it has been
tried, offering them half of the grinding they should do, but they chused
rather to have no corn. And I might well believe that the same, with other
things, has been great means to breed the sickness spoken of, in The number
of the dead.
some of Monsieur Du Pont his men: for there died some half a dosen of them
that winter. True it is, that I find a defect in the buildings of our
Frenchmen, which is, they Fault in their buildings.
had no ditches about them, whereby the waters of the ground next to them did
run under their lower-most rooms, which was a great hindrance to their
health. I add besides the bad waters which they used, that did not run from
a quick spring, but from the nearest brook.

The furniture of Monsieur Du Pont to go to the discovery of new lands.
The winter being passed, and the sea nauigable, Monsieur Du Pont would needs
atchieue the enterprise begun the year before by Monsieur De Monts, and to go
seek out a Port more Southerly, where the air might be more temperate,
according as he had in charge of the said Monsieur De Monts. He furnished then
the bark which remained with him to that effect. But being set out of the
port, and full ready, hoisted up fails for Malebarre, he was forced by
contrary wind twice to put back again, and at the third time the said Bark
struck against the rocks at the The wrack of their Bark.
entire of the said Port. In this disgrace of Neptune, the men were saved with
the better part of provision and merchandise; but as for the Bark it was rent
in pieces. And by this mishap the voyage was broken, and that which was so
desired intermitted. For the habitation of Port Royal was not judged good. And
notwithstanding Causes of delay in establishing the dwelling place of the
French men.
it is, on the North and North-west sides, well sheltered with mountains,
distant some one league, some half a league from the Port and the river
L'Equille. So we see how that enterprises take not effect according to the
desires of men, and are accompanied with many perils. So that one must not
wonder if the time be long in establishing of Colonies, specially in lands so
remote, whose nature, and temperature of air is not known, and where one must
fell and cut down forests, and be constrained to take heed, not from the
people that we call Savages, but from them that term themselves Christians,
and yet have but the name of it, cursed and abominable people, worse then
woolues, enemies to God and humane nature.

This attempt then being broken, Monsieur Du Pont knew not what to do, but to
attend the succor and supply that Monsieur De Monts promised, parting from
Port Royal at his return into France, to send him the year following. Yet
for all events he built an other Bark and a Shaloup for to seek French
ships in the places where they use to dry fish, such as Campseau Port,
English Port, Misamichis Port: the Baie of Chaleur (or heat,) the Baie of
Morues or Coddes, and others in great number, according as Monsieur De Monts
had done the former year, to the end to ship himself in them, and to return
into France, in case that no ship should come to succor him. Wherein he did
wisely, for he was in danger to hear no news from us, that were appointed to
succeed him, as it shall appear by the discourse following.

The comparing of these later voiages.
But in the mean while we must consider that they, which in these voyages
have transported themselves in these parts, have had an advantage over those
that would plant in Florida, which is in having that refuge beforesaid, of
French ships that frequent the New found lands for fishing, not being forced
to build great ships, nor to abide extreme famines, as they have done in
Florida, whose voyages have been lamentable for that respect, and these by
reason of the sicknesses that have persecuted them, but they of Florida have
had a blessing for that they were in a mild and fertile country, and more
friendly to man's health then New France, spoken of else where. If they have
suffered famines, there was great fault in them, for not having tilled the
ground, which they found plain and champion: Which before all other thing is
to be done, of them that will lodge themselves so far The blame of them who
at this day despise the manuring of the ground.
from ordinary succor. But the Frenchmen, and almost all nations at this day
(I mean of those that be not borne and brought up to the manuring of the
ground) have this badde nature, that they think to derogate much from their
dignity in addicting themselves to the tillage of the ground, which
notwithstanding is almost, the only vocation where innocence remains. And
thereby comes that every one shunning this noble labor, our first Parents
and ancient Kings exercise, as also of the greatest Captains of the World,
seeking to make himself a Gentleman at others costs, or else willing only to
learn the Gods punishments.
trade to deceive men, or to claw himself in the Sun, God takes away his
blessing from us, and beats us at this day, and has done a long time with an
iron rod, so that in all parts the people languisheth miserably, and we see
the Realm of France swarming with beggars and vagabonds of all kinds, besides
an infinite number, groaning in their poor cottages, not daring, or ashamed to
shewfoorth their poverty and misery.

CHAP. IX.
The first motive and acceptance of the voyage by Monsieur De Poutrincourt,
together with the Author, into New France: their departure from Paris to go
into Rochel.

The third voyage made by Monsieur de Poutrincourt.
ABout the time of the before mentioned shipwreck, Monsieur De Monts being in
France, did think carefully upon the means how to prepare a new supply for
new France. Which seemed hard and difficult to him, as well for the great
charges that that action required, as because that Province had been so
discredited at his return, that the continuing of these voyages any longer did
seem vain and unfruitful. Besides, there was some reason to believe that no
body would adventure himself thither. Notwithstanding, knowing Monsieur De
Poutrincourt his desire (to whom before he had given part of the land,
according to the power which the King had given him) which was to inhabit in
those parts, and there to settle his family and his fortune, together with the
name of God, he wrote unto him, and sent a man of purpose to give him notice of
the voyage that was in hand. Which the said Monsieur De Poutrincourt accepted
Monsieur De Poutrincourt accepts the voyage of New France.
of, leaving all other affairs, to attend on this action, though he had suits
in law of great weight; to the prosecuting and defense whereof, his presence
was very requisite: And that at his first voyage he had tried the malice of
some, which during his absence prosecuted against him with rigor, and at his
return gave over and became dombe. He was no sooner come to Paris, but that he
was forced to depart, not having scarce time to provide for things necessary.
And I having had that good hap to be acquainted with him some years before,
asked me if I would take part in that business? whereunto I demanded a days
respit to answer him. Having well consulted with my self, not so much desirous
to see the country (for I The causes of the Authors voyage.
knew well that there was woods, lakes and rivers, and that one must go over
seas (which I had before done in the Straights) as to be able to give an eye
judgment of the land, whereto my mind was before inclined: and to avoid a
corrupted world I engaged my word unto him, being induced thereto specially for
the injustice done to me a little before, by some Presidiall Judges, in favor
of a Parsonage of eminent quality, whom I have always honored and reverenced:
Which sentence at my return has been recalled, by order and sentence of the
Court of Parliament, for which I am particularly obliged to Monsieur Seruin,
the King his Advocate General, to whom does belong properly this Eloge,
attributed according to the letter, to the most wise and most magnificent of
all Kings. Psalm. 5. 4.
Thou have loved Justice and hated iniquity.

So it is that God awakeneth us sometimes, to stir us up to generous actions,
such as be these voiages, which (as the world does vary) some will blame,
other some will approve. But without answering any body in this respect, I
care not what discourses idle men, or those that cannot, or will not help me,
may make, enjoying contentment in my self, and being ready to render all
service to God and to the King in those remote lands, that bear the name of
France, if either my fortune or condition call me thither, for there to live in
quiet and rest, by an acceptable pleasing labor, and to shun the hard and
miserable life, whereto I see reduced the most part of men in this part of the
World.

To return then to Monsieur De Poutrincourt, as he had dispatched some
businesses, he inquired in some Churches if some learned Priest might be found
out, that would go with him, to relieve and ease him, whom Monsieur De Monts
had left there at his voyage, whom we thought to be yet living. But because it
was the Holy week, in which time they are employed, and wait on confessions
and shriuings, there was none to be found; some excusing themselves upon the
troubles and discommodities of the sea, and the length of the voyage, other
deferring it till after Easter. Which was cause that none could be had out of
Paris, by reason the season hasted on, time and tide tarry for no man, so then
we were forced to depart.

There rested to find out fit and necessary workmen for the voyage of New
France, whereunto was speedily provided, price agreed upon for their wages,
and money given before hand in part thereof, to bear their charges to Rochell,
where the rendes vous was, at the dwelling houses of Master Macquin, and Master
Georges, worshipful Merchants of the said Town, the associates of Monsieur De
Monts, which did provide our furniture and provision.

The parting from Paris.
Our meaner people being gone, three or four days after we took our way to
Orleans, upon Good Friday, for there to solemnise and pass our Easter, where
every one accomplished the duty usual to all good Christians, in taking the
spiritual food, that is to say, the holy Communion, seeing we did undertake,
and were going on a voyage. From thence we came down the river Loyre to
Saumur, with our carriage: and from Sawmur we went by Touars and Maran to
Rochell, by hackney horses.

CHAP. X.
The name of our Ship called the Jonas: The shallow water at Rochell is the
cause of the hard going out: Rochell a reformed Town: the common people is
insolent: Croquans: the accident of ship-wracke of the Jonas: new preparation:
weak soldiers are not to be placed upon the frontiers: The Ministers of
Rochell do pray for the conversion of the Savages: the smalzeale of ours: the
Eucharist carried in voiages by the ancient Christian: the diligence of Monsieur
De Poutrincourt at the very point of Shipping.

BEing come to Rochell, we found there Monsieur De Monts, and Monsieur De
Poutrincourt, that were come in Post, and our ship called the Jonas, of the
burden of 150. tonnes, ready to pass out of the chains of the Town, to
tarry for wind and tide. The tide I say, because that a great ship laden,
cannot come to sea from Rochell, but in spring tides, upon the new and full
moon, by reason that in the town road there is no sufficient depth. In the
mean while we made good cheer, yea so good, that we did long to be at sea to
make diet: which we did but too soon, being once come thither: for during two
whole months we saw not a whit of land, as we will farther tell anon. But
the workmen, through their good cheer (for they had every one two shillings a
days hire) The praises of Rochell.
did play marvelous pranckes in Saint Nicholas quarter, where they were lodged,
which was found strange in a town so reformed as Rochell is, in the which no
notorious riots nor dissolutions be made; and indeed one must behave himself
orderly there, unless he will incur the danger either of the censure of the
Mayor, or of the Ministers of the Town. Some of those disordered men were put
in prison, which were kept in the Towne-house till the time of going, and had
been further punished, had it not been upon consideration of the voyage,
where they knew they should not have all their eases, but should afterward pay
dear enough their mad bargen, in putting the said Master Macquin and Master
Georges to so much trouble, to keep them in order. I will not, for all that,
put in the number of this disordred people, all the rest, for there were some
Croquans (Signifying hooks) why so called.
very civil and respective. But I will say that the common people is a
dangerous beast. And this makes me remember the Croquans war, amongst whom I
was once in my life, being in Querci. It was the strangest thing in the world
to see the confusion of those wooden shooed fellows, from whence they took
the name of Croquans (that is to say Hookers) because that their wooden
shoes, nailed before and behind, did hook or stick fast at every step.
This confused people had neither rhyme nor reason among them; every one was
Master there; some armed with an hedge-hooke at a stafes end, others with some
rusty sword, and so accordingly.

Negligence in the keeping of the Jonas.
Our Jonas having her full load, was in the end rowed out of the Town into
the road, and we thought to set out the 8. or 9. of April. Captain Foulques
had taken the charge for the conducting of the voyage. But as commonmonly there
is negligence in men's businesses, it happened that this Captain (who
notwithstanding I have known very diligent and watchful at sea) having left
the ship ill manned, not being in her himself, nor the Pilot, but only 6. or
7. mariners good and bad, a great South-east wind arose in the night, which
brake the Jonas cable, fastend with one only ancker, and drives her against a
forewall which is out of the town, backing and proping the Tower of the
chain, against which she struck so many times, that she brake and sunk down;
and it chanced well that it was then ebbing, for if this mishap had come in
flowing time, the ship was in danger to be overwhelmed with a far greater
loss then we had, but she stood up, and so there was means to mend her, which
was done with speed. Our workmen were warned to come and help in this
necessity, Hired workmen negligent.
either to draw at the pomp, at the Capestane, or to any other thing; but few
there were that endeavored themselves to do any thing, the most part of them
going away, and most of them made a mock of it. Some having gone so far as to
the oar, went back complaining that one had cast water upon them, being of
that side that the water came out of the pomp, which the wind did scatter
upon them. I came thither with Monsieur De Poutrincourt, and some other willing
men, where we were not unprofitable. Almost all the inhabitants of Rochell
were beholding this spectacle upon the rampires. The sea was yet stormy, and we
thought our ship would have dashed oftentimes against the great Towers of the
town. In the end, we came in with less loss then we thought of. The ship
was all unladen, being forced to tackle and furnish her anew. The loss thereby
was great, and the voyages almost broken off for ever: for I believe, that
after so many trials, none would have ventured to go plant Colonies in those
parts; that Country being so ill spoken of, that every one did pity us,
considering the accidents happened to The courage of Monsieur De Monts and his
associates.
them that had been there before. Notwithstanding Monsieur De Monts and his
associates, did bear manfully this loss. And I must needs be so bold as to
tell in this occurra^ce that if ever that country be inhabited with Christians
and civil people, the first praise thereof must of right be due to the Authors
of this voyage.

This great trouble hindered us above a month, which was employed in the
vnlading, and lading again of our ship. During that time, we did walk
sometimes unto the places near about the town, and chiefly unto the Convent
of the Cordeliers, which is but half a league off from The frontiers ought to
be furnished with good Soldiers.
the town: where being one Sunday, I did marvel how in those places of
frontier, there is no better garrison, having so strong enemies near them. And
seeing I take in hand to relate an history of things, according to the true
manner of them: I say that it is a shameful thing for us, that the Ministers of
Rochell, pray to God every day in their Congregations The Ministers do pray
for the conversion of the Savages.
for the conversion of the poor Savage people, and also for our safe
conducting, and that our Churchmen do not the like. In very truth we never
required neither the one nor the other to do it, but therein is known the
zeal of both sides. In the end, a little before our departing, it came to my
mind to ask of the Parson or Vicar of Rochell if there might be found any of
his fraternity that would come with us, which I hoped might easily be done,
because there was a reasonable good number of them: and besides, that being in
a maritime town, I thought they took delight to haunt the seas: but I could
obtain nothing: and for all excuses, it was told me, that none would go* to
such voyages, unless they were moved with an extraordinary zeal and piety:
And that it would be the best way to seek to the fathers* Jesuits for the
same. Which we could not then do, our ship having almost her full lading.
Whereupon I remember to have heard oftentimes of Monsieur De Poutrincourt, that
after his first voyage, being at the Court, an Ecclesiastical person, esteemed
very zealous in the Christian religion, demanded of him what might be hoped for
in the conversion of the people of New France, and whether there were any great
number of them. Whereunto he answered* that a hundred thousand souls might be
gotten to Jesus Christ, (naming a number certain for an uncertain.) This
Clergy man making small account of such a number, said thereupon by admiration,
is that all! as if that number did not deserve the labor of a Churchman.
Truly though there were but the hundredth part of that, yea yet less, one must
not suffer it to be lost. The good Shepherd having among Math. 18. verse. 12.
132.
an hundred sheep one astray, left the 99. for to go and seek out the one that
was lost. We are taught and) I believe it so) that though there were but one
man to be saved, our Lord Jesus Christ had not disdained to come, as well for
him, as he has done for all the world. In like manner, one must not make so
small account of the salvation of these poor people, though they swarm not in
number as within Paris or Constantinople.

Custom of the ancient Christians, carrying the Eucharist in their voyages.
Seeing it auailed me nothing in demanding for a Churchman, to administer the
Sacrament unto us, be it during our navigations, or upon the land: The ancient
custom of the Christians came into my mind, which going in voyage did carry
with them the holy bread of the Eucharist, and this did they, because they
found not, in all places, Priests to administer this Sacrament unto them, the
world being then yet full, either of Heathens or Heretics. So that it was not
improperly called Viatic, which they carried with them traveling on the way:
yet notwithstanding I am of opinion that it has a spiritual meaning. And
considering that we might be brought to that necessity, not having in New
France but one Priest only, (of whose death we heard when we came thither) I
demanded if they would do unto us, as to the ancient Christians, who were as
wise as we. I was answered that the same was done in that time for
considerations which are not now at this day. I Saint Ambrose in his funeral
oration for his brother.
replied that Satirus Saint Ambroses brother, going on a voyage upon the sea,
served himself with this spiritual Physic (as we read in his funeral
oration made by his said brother Saint Ambrose) which he did carry in Orario,
which I take to be a lynnen cloth, or taffita: and well did it happen unto him
by it. For having made ship-wracke, he saved himself upon a board, left of his
vessels wrack. But I was as well refused in this as of the rest. Which gave
me cause of wondering: seeming to me a very rigorous thing to be in worse
condition then the first Christians. For the Eucharist is no other thing at
this day then it was then: And if they held it precious, we do not demand it
to make lesser account thereof.

Let us return to our Jonas. Now she was laden and brought out of the town
into the road: there rests nothing more than fit weather and tide: which was
the hardest Hardness to come forth from a Port.
of the matter. For in places where is no great depth, as in Rochell, one must
tarry for the high tides of the full and new Moons, and then paraduenture the
wind will not be fit, and so one must defer, till a fortnights time. In the
mean while the season goes away: as it was almost with us. For we saw the
hour that after so many labors and charges, we were endanger to tarry for
lack of wind, because the Moon was in the waine, and consequently the Bad
suspicion of Captain Foulques.
tide. Captain Foulques did not seem to affect his charge, making no ordinary
stay in the ship: and it was reported that other Merchants, not being of
Monsieur De Monts his society, did secretly solicit him to break off the
voyage. And indeed it has been thought that he caused us to make wrong
courses: which kept us two months and a half at sea, as hereafter we shall
see. Which thing the The diligence and care of Monss-De Poutrincourts.
said Monsieur De Poutrincourt perceiving, himself took upon him the charge of
Captain of the ship, and went to lie in her, the space of five or six days,
for to get out with the first wind, and not to loose the opportunity. In the
end, with much a do the eleventh day of May 1606. by the favor of a small
Easterly wind, he went to sea, and made our Jonas to be brought to the
Palisse, and the next * A place so called near Rochell.
day being the 12. of the same month, came again to Chef de bois (which be the
places where ships put themselves for shelter from winds) where the hope of
New France was assembled. I say the hope, because that of this voyage, did
depend the continuance or total breach of the enterprise.

CHAP. XI.
Their departure from Rochell: Sundry meetings of ships, and Pirates: Stormy Sea
about the Acores, and whence it proceeds: Why the West winds are frequent in
the West sea: From whence the winds do come: Porpeses do prognosticate
storms: means to take them: the describing of them: of storms: their
effects: of Calmes: what is a gust of Wind: how it is made: the effects
thereof: the boldness of mariners: how reverence is given to the Kings ship:
the supputation of the voyage: hot sea: then cold* the reason of it: and of the
banckes of Ice in Newfound Land.

13. of May. 1606.
THe Saturday, Whitsoneue 13. of May, we weighed our anckers, and sailed in
open sea, so that by little and little we lost the sight of the great towers
and town of Rochell, then of the Isles of Rez and Oleron, bidding France
farewell. It was a thing fearful for them that were not used to such a dance,
to see them carried upon so moveable an ellement, and to be at every moment (as
it were) within two fingers breadth to death. We had not long sailed, but that
many did their endeavor to yield up the tribute Meetings of ships.
to Neptune. In the mean while we went still forward, for there was no more
going back, the plancke being once taken up. The 16. of May we met with 13.
Holanders, going for Spain, which did inquire of our voyage, and so held their
course. Since that time we were a whole month, seeing nothing else out of our
floting town, but Sky and Meeting of a Pirate or outlawed.
water, one ship excepted, near about the Acors, well filled with English and
Dutchmen. They bare up with us, and came very near us. And according to the
manner of the sea, we asked them whence their ship was. They told us they were
New Foundland men, that is to say going a fishing for New-found-land-fish. And
they asked us if we would accept of their company: we thanked them: thereupon
they drank to us, and we to them, and they took another course. But having
considered their vessel all set with green moss on the belly and sides, we
judged them to be Pirates, and that they had of a long time beaten the sea, in
hope to make some prise. It was then that we began to Neptunes sheep.
see, more than before, Neptunes sheep to skip up (so do they call the frothy
waves, when the sea begins to sturand to feel the hard blows of his
Trident. For commonly Why is the sea stormy about the Acores.
in that place before named the sea is stormy. If one ask me the cause why: I
will answer, that I think it to proceed of a certain conflict between the East
and westerly winds, which do encounter in that part of the sea, and
especially in Summer, when the West winds do rise up, and with a great force
pierce and pass through a great distance of sea, until they find the winds
of these parts, which do resist them; Then it is dangerous for a ship to be at
these windy encounters. This reason seems the more probable unto me, in this,
that until we came near the Acores we had the wind fit enough, and
afterward, we had almost always either South-west or Norweast, little North
and South, which were not good for us, but to sail with the bowline: For
Easterly winds we had none at all, but once or twice, Westerly winds ordinary
in the Western Sea.
which continued nothing with us (to speak of.) Sure it is that the Westerly
winds do reign much a long that sea, Whether it be by a certain
repercussion of the East wind which is stiff and swift under the Equinoctial
line, whereof we have spoken elsewhere, or because that this Western land,
being large and great, also the wind that issues from thence does abound the
more. Which comes especially in Summer, when the sun has force to draw up
the from whence the winds do come.
vapors of the earth, for the winds come from thence, issuing from the dens
and Caves of the same. And therefore the Poets do feign that Aeolus holds
them in prisons, from whence he draws them, and gives them liberty when it
pleases him. But the spirit of God does confirm it unto us yet better, when he
says by the mouth of the Prophet, that Almighty God, among other his maruels,
draws Psalm. 135.
the winds out of his treasures, which be the Caves whereof I speak. For the
word treasure fignifieth in Hebrew, secret and hidden place.

He brings forth the clouds from the earthes furthest parts,
the lightnings with the raines he makes, and them impartes,
on some in his anger, on others for pleasures:
The winds he draws forth out of his deep treasures.
And upon this consideration, Christopher Columbus, a Genwaie, first nauigator
of these last ages unto the Islands of Amerika, did judge that there was some
great land in the West, having observed, sailing on the sea, that continual
winds came from that part.

Continuing then our course, we had some other storms and hindrances procured
by winds, which we almost had always contrary, by reason we set out too late:
but they that set out in March have commonly good winds, because that then the
East, Noreast, and Northern winds do reign, which are fit and prosperous for
these voiages. Porpeses do prognosticate storms.
These tempests were very often foretold us by Porpeses, which did haunt about
our ship by thousands, sporting themselves after a very pleasant manner. Some of
them did The way to take them.
pay for their so near eapproaching. For some men waited for them at the beke
head (which is the forepart of the ship) with harping Irons in their hands,
which met with them sometimes, and drew them in abord with the help of the
other sailers, which, with iron hooks (which they call Gaffes) tied at the end
of a long powle, pulled them up. We have taken many of them in that sort, both
in going and coming, which have done us no harm. There be The description of
the Porpese.
two sorts of them, some which have a blunt and big nose, others which have it
sharp; we took none but of these last, but yet I remember to have seen in
the water some of the short-nosed ones. This fish has two fingers The Porpeses
hot blood does comfort the sinews.
breadth of fat, at the least, on the back When it was cut in two, we did wash
our hands in his hot blood, which, they say, comfort the sinews. He has a
marvelous quantity of teeth along his Jaws, and I think that he holds fast
that which he once catches. Moreover the inward parts have altogether the
taste of hoggs flesh, and the bones not in form of fish bones, but like a
four footed creature. The most delicate meat of it, is the finne which he has
upon the back, and the tail, which are neither fish nor flesh, but better
then that, such as also is in substance of tail, that of the Beuers, which
seems to be scailed. A Beauers tail is dainty meat.
These Porpeses be the only fishes we took, before we came to the great bancke
of Morues or Codfish. But far off we saw other great fishes, which did show,
out of the water, above half an akers length of their backs, and did thrust
out in the air above a spears height of great pipes of water, through the
holes they had upon their heads.

Storms, and their effects.
But to return to our purpose of storms: during our voyage, we had some which
made us strike down sail, and to stand our arms a cross, carried at the
pleasure of the waves, and tossed up and down after a strange manner. If any
coffer or chest was not well made fast, it was heard to roll from side to
side, making a foul noise. Sometimes the kettle was ouerturned; and in dyning
or supping, our dishes and platters flew from one end of the table to the
other, unless they were holden very fast. As for the drink, one must carry his
mouth and the glass, according to the motion of the ship. Briefly it was a
sport, but somewhat rude, to them that cannot bear this iogging easily. For
all that, the most of us did laugh at it: for there was no danger in it, at
least evident, being in a good ship, and strong to withstand the waves. We had
also sometimes Calmes wearisome.
calmes, very tedious and wearisome, during which, we washed our selves in the
sea, we danced upon the deck, we climbed up the maine top, we sang in muficke.
Then Whirlewinde, what it is, how it is made: the effects thereof.
when a little small cloud was percerued to issue from under the Horizon, we
were forced to give over those exercises, for to take heed of a gust of wind,
which was wrapped in the same cloud, which dissoluing it self, grumbling,
snorting, whistling, roaring, storming, and buzing, was able to over turn our
ship vp-side down, unless men had been ready to execute that which the
Master of the ship (which was Captain Foulques, a man very vigilant) commanded
them. There is no harm in showing how these gusts of wind, otherwise called
storms, are formed, and from whence they proceed. Pliny speaks of them in
his Plin. lib. 2. cap. 48.
natural history, and says, that they be exhalations and light vapors raised
from the earth to the cold region of the air: and not being able to pass
further, but rather forced to return back, they sometimes meet sulphury and
fiery exhalations, which compass them about, and bind so hard, that there
come, thereby a great combat, motions and agitation, between the sulphury heat,
and the airy moistness, which being constrained by the stronger enemy to run
away, it opens it self, makes it self, way, whistleth, roareth and
stormeth, briefly becomes a wind, which is great or lesser according that
the sulphury exalation which wrappeth it, breaks it self and gives it way,
sometimes all at once, as we have showed before, and sometimes with longer
time, according to the quantity of the matter whereof it is made, and according
as, either more or less, it is moved by his contrary qualities.

The marvelous assurance of the good Mariners, in their sea-labours.
But I cannot leave unmentioned the wonderful courage and assurance that good
sailers have in these windy conflicts, storms and tempests, when as a ship
being carried and mounted upon mountains of waters, and from thence let down,
as it were, into the profound depthes of the world, they clime among the
tacklings and cords, not only to the maine top, and to the very height of the
maine mast, but also, without ladder steps, to the top of another mast,
fastened to the first, held only with the force of their arms and feet,
winding about the highest tacklings. Yea much more, that if, in this great
tossing and rolling, it chances that the maine sail (which they call Paphil
or Papefust) be untied at the higher ends, he, who is first commanded, will put
himself stradling upon the maine yard (that is the tree which crossed the
maine mast) and, with a hammer at his girdle, and half a dosen nails in his
mouth, will tie again and make fast, that which was untied, to the The boldness
of a Switzer, at Laon.
peril of a thousand lives. I have sometimes heard great account made of a
Switzers boldness, who (after the siege of Laon, and the city being rendered
to the Kings obedience) climbed and stood stradling upon the thwart branch of
the cross of our Ladies church steeple of the said town, and stood there
forked wise, his feet upward: But that, in my judgment, is nothing in regard
of this, the said Switzer being upon a firm and solid body, and without
motion, and this contrariwise hanging over an unconstant sea, tossed with
boistrous winds, as we have sometimes seen.

After we had left these Pirates spoken of before, we were until the 18. of
June, tossed with diverse, and almost contrary The 18. of June.
winds, without any discovery, but of one ship far off from us, which we did
not board, and yet notwithstanding A ship.
the very sight thereof did comfort us. And the same An other ship.
day we met a ship of Honfleur, wherein Captain La Roche did command, going for
New-found-landes, who had no better fortune upon the sea then we. The custom
is at The vailing of Marchands ships to a ship Royal.
sea, that when some particular ship meets with the King his ship (as ours
was) to come under the lee, and to present herself, not side by side, but bias
wise: Also to pull down her flagge, as this Captain La Roche did, except the
flagge, for she had non, no more had we, being not needful in so great a
voyage, but in approaching the land, or when one must fight. Our sailers did
cast then their computation, Computatiof the voyage.
on the course that we had made. For in every ship, the Master, the Pilot, and
Masters Mate do write down every day of their courses, and winds that they
have followed, for how many hours, and the estimation of leagues. The said La
Roche did account that they were then in the Forty five degrees, and within a
hundred leagues of the Bancke. Our Pilot, called Master Oliver Fleuriot, of
Saint Maloe, by his computation said that we were within 60. leagues of it: And
Captain Foulques within 120. leagues. I believe he gave the best judgment. We
received much contentment by the meeting of this ship, and did greatly
encourage us, seeing we did begin to meet with ships, seeming unto us that
we did enter in a place of acquaintance.

Sea water milk warm, then cold.
But by the way a thing must be noted, which I have found admirable, and which
gives us occasion to play the Philosophers. For about the same 18. day of
June, we found the seawater, during three days space, very warm, and by the
same warmth, our wine also was warm in the bottom of our ship, yet the air
was not hotter then before. And the 21. of the said month, quite contrary we
were 2. Great cold.
or 3. days so much compassed with mistes and coldes, that we thought our
selves to be in the month of January, and the water of the sea was extreme
cold. Which continued with us until we came upon the said Bancke, by reason
of the said mistes, which outwardly did procure this cold The reason of this
Antiperistase, and the cause of the Ices of New-found-lande.
unto us. When I seek out the cause of this Antiperistase, I attribute it to
the Ices of the North, which come floating down upon the coast and sea
adjoining to New Foundland, and Labrador, which we have said elsewhere is
brought thither with the sea, by her natural motion, which is greater there,
then elsewhere, because of the great space it has to run, as in a gulf, in
the depth of America, where the nature and situation of the universal earth
does bear it easily. Now these Ices (which sometimes are seen in banckes of
ten leagues length, and as high as Mountains and hills, and thrice as deep
in the waters) holding, as it were, an Empire in this sea, drive out far from
them, that which is contrary to their coldness, and consequently do bind and
close on this side, that small quantity of mild temperature that the Summer
may bring to that part, where they come to seat and place themselves. Yet for
all that, I will not deny but this region in one and the selfsame parallel is
somewhat colder then those of our part of Europe, for the reasons that we will
aleage hereafter, when we shall speak of the fowlnesse of In the 16. chapter.
Second experience.
seasons. Such is my opinion: being ready to hear another man's reason. And
being mindful hereof, I did, of purpose, take heed of the same, at my
return from New France, and found the same warmenesse of water (or very near)
though it was in the Month of September, within five or six days sailing on
this side of the said bancke, whereof we will now entreat.

CHAP. XII.
Of the great Bancke of Morues or Coddes: of the Sound: our coming to the said
Bancke: the description thereof: the fishing of New-found-land-fish: and of
birds: the greediness of birds, called by Frenchmen Hap-foyes, that is to say,
liuer-catchers: diverse perils: the favors of God: the causes of frequent and
long mistes in the Western sea: Land-markes: the sight of it: marvelous
odours: the boording of two Shaloupes, the landing at the Port du Moutton: the
coming into Port Royal: of two Frenchmen remaining there alone amongst the
Savages.

BEfore we come to the Bancke, spoken of before, which is the great Bancke
where the fishing of green Cod-fishes is made (so are they called when they
are not dry, for one must go alande for the drying of them) the
sea-faring-men, besides the computation they make of their course, have
warnings when they come near to it, by Warnings near the great Bancke. Birds
called by Frenchmen, Gods, Fouquets, Happefoies.
birds, which are known: even as one does them of these our parts, returning
back into France, when one is within 100. or 120. leagues near it. The most
frequent of these birds, toward the said Bancke, be Gods, Fouquets, and other
called Happe-foyes, for a reason that we will declare anon. When these birds
then were seen, which were not like to them that we had seen in the midst
of the great sea, we began to think our selves not to be far from the said
Bancke. Which made us to sound with our lead upon a Thursday the 22. of June,
but then we found no bottom. What the sound is, and how it is cast.
The same day in the evening, we cast again with better success: for we found
bottom at 36. fadams. The said sound is a piece of lead of seven or eight
pound weight, made piramidall wise, fastened at one or diverse lines: and at the
biggest end, which is flat, one puts some grease to it, mingled with butter:
then all the sails are stricken down, and the sound cast: and when that the
bottom is felt, and the lead draws no more line, they leave off leting down
of it. So our sound being drawn up, brought with it some small stones, with a
white one, and a piece of shell, having moreover a pit in the grease, whereby
they judged The arrival to the fish Bancke.
that the bottom was a rock. I cannot express the Joy that we had, seeing us
there, where we had so much desired to be. There was not any one of us more
sick, every one did leap for Joy, and did seem unto us to be in our own
country, though we were come but to the halse of our voyage, at least for the
time, that passed before we came to Port Royal, whther we were bound.

Of the word Bancke: and description of the fishing Bancke.
Here I will, before I proceed any further, decipher unto you, what means
this word (Bancke) which paraduenture puts some in pain to know what it is.
They sometimes call Banckes a sandy bottom which is very shallow, or which is a
dry at low water. Such places be mortal for ships that meet with them. But
the Bancke whereof we speak, are mountains grounded in the depth of the
waters, which are raised up to 30. 36. and 40. fadams, near to the upper face
of the sea. This Bancke is holden to be of 200. leagues in lenght: and 18. 20.
and 24. leagues broad, which being passed there is no more bottom found out,
then in these parts, until one come to the land. The ships being there
arrived, the sails are rolled up, and there, fishing is made of the green
fish, as I have said, whereof we shall speak in the book following. For the
satisfying of my reader, I have drawn it in my Geography call Map of
New Foundland, with pricks, which is all may be done to represent it. There
is, farther off, other banckes, as I have marked in the said Map, upon the
which good fishing may be made: and many go thither that know the places. When
that we parted from Rochel, there was (as it were) a forest of ships lying at
Chef de Bois, (whereof that place has taken his name) which went all in a
company to that country, preventing us (in their going) but only of two days.

Having seen and noted the Bancke, we hoisted up sails and bare all night,
keeping still our course to the West. But the dawne of day being come, which
was Saint The fishing of Cod.
John Baptists Eve, in Gods name we pulled down sails, passing that day a
fishing of Cod-fish, with a thousand mirthes and contentments, by reason of
fresh meats, whereof we had as much as we would, having long before wished for
them. Monsieur De Poutrincourt, and a young man of Retel named Le Feure, who, by
reason of the seasicknesse were not come out from their beds nor cabanes, from
the beginning of the Navigations, came upon the hatches that day, and had the
pleasure, not only of fishing of Cod, but also of those birds, that be called
by French mariners, Happe-foyes, that is to say Liuer-catchers, because
Happe-foyes Why so called.
of their greediness to devour the livers of the Cod-fishes that are cast into
the sea, after their bellies be opened, whereof they are so covetous, that
though they see a great powle over their heads, ready to strike them down, yet
they adventure themselves to come near to the ship, to catch some of them, at
what price soever. And they which were not occupied in fishing did pass their
time in that sport. And so did they, by their diligence that we took some
thirty of them. But in this action one of our shipwrights fell down in the
sea. And it was good for him that the ship went but slow, which gave him means
to save himself by taking hold of the rudder, from which he was pulled in a
board, but for his pains was well beaten by Captain Foulques.

Sea-dogges skins.
In this fishing we sometimes did take sea-dogges, whose skins our Ioyners
did keep carefully to smooth their work withal. Item, fishes called by
Frenchmen Merlus, which be better then Cod, and sometimes another kind of fish
called Bars: which diversity did augment our delight. They which were not busy
in taking neither fishes nor birds, did pass their time in gathering the
hearts, guts, and other inward parts (most delicate) of the Cod-fish, which
they did mince with lard and spices, and Excellent sawsiges made with the
inwards of Codd.
with those things did make as good Bolonia sausiges, as any can be made in
Paris, and we did eat of them with a very good stomach.

On the evening we made ready to continue our course, having first made our
Canons to roar, as well because of Saint John his holy day, as for Monsieur De
Poutrincourts sake, which bears the name of that Saint. The next day some of
our men told us they had seen a Bancke of Ice. And thereupon was recited unto
us, how that the year before, Men saved upon a banck of Ice.
a ship of Olone was cast away, by approaching too near to it, and that two men
having saved themselves upon the Ice, had this good fortune, that another ship,
passing by, the men took them in aboard them.

The weather in those seas contrary, then in ours.
It is to be noted that from the 18. of June until we did arrive at Port
Royal, we have found the weather quite otherwise to that we had before. For
(as we have already said) we had cold mistes or fogges, before our coming to
the Bancke (where we came in fair sunshine) but the next day, we fell to the
fogges again, which (a far off) we The causes of mists on the West sea.
might perceive to come and wrappe us about, holding us continually prisoners
three whole days, for two days of fair weather that they permitted us: which
was always accompanied with cold, by reason of the Summers absence. Yea even
diverse times we have seen our selves a whole sennight, continually in thick
fogges, twice without any show of Sun, but very little, as I will recite
hereafter. And I will bring forth a reason for such effects which seems
unto me probable. As we see the fire to draw the moistness of a wet cloth,
opposite unto it, likewise the sun draws moistness and vapors both from
the sea and from the land. But for the dissoluing of them, there is here one
virtue, and beyond those parts another, according to the accidents and
circumstances that are found. In these our countries it raises up vapors
only from the ground, and from our rivers: which earthly vapors, gross and
weighty, and participating less of the moist ellement, do cause us a hot
air, and the earth discharged of those vapors, becomes thereby more hot and
parching. From thence it comes, that the said vapors, having the earth of the
one part, and the Sun on the other, which heateth them, they are easily
dissolved, not remaining long in the air, unless it be in winter, when the
earth is waxen cold, and the Sun beyond the Equinoctial line, far off
from us. From the same reason proceeds the cause, why mistes and fogges be
not so frequent, nor so long in the French seas, as in New Foundland, because
that the Sun, passing from his rising, above the grounds, this sea, at the
coming thereof, receives almost but earthly vapors, and by a long space
retains this virtue to dissolve very soon the exhalations it draws to it
self. But when it comes to the midst of the Ocean, and to the said new
found land, having elevated and assumed in so long a course a great abundance
of vapors, from this moist wide Ocean, it does not so easily dissolve them, as
well, because those vapors be cold of themselves, and of their nature, as
because the Element which is nearest under them, does simpathize with them, and
preserves them, and the Sun beams being not helped in the dissoluing of
them, as they are upon the earth. Which is even seen in the land of that
country, which (although it has but small heat, by reason of the abundance of
woods) notwithstanding it helps to disperse the mistes and fogges, which be
ordinarily there, in the morning, during summer, but not as at Sea, for about
eight aclocke in the morning they begin to vanish away, and serve as a dew to
the ground.

A small bancke,
I hope the reader will not dislike these small digressions, seeing they serve
to our purpose. The 28. day of June, we found our selves upon a little small
bancke (other then the great Bancke whereof we have spoken) at forty fadams:
and the day following, one of our Sailers fell by night into the sea, which had
been lost if he had not met with a cable, A Mariner fallen by night in the
sea. Land marks.
hanging in the water. From that time forward, we began to descrie land*markes
(it was New Foundland) by herbs, mosses, flowers, and pieces of wood, that
we always met, abounding the more, by so much we drew near to it. The 4. day
of July, our sailors, which were appointed The discovery of S. Peter's Islands.
Plain discovery of the Land.
for the last quarter watch, descried in the morning, very early, every one
being yet a-bed, the Isles of Saint Peter. And the Friday the seventh of the
said Month, we discovered, on the Lar-boord, a Coast of land, high raised up,
appearing unto us, as long as ones sight could stretch out, which gave us
greater cause of Joy, then yet we had had, wherein God did greatly show his
merciful favor unto us, making this discovery in fair calm weather. Being
yet far from it, the bouldest of the company went up to the maine top, to the
end to see it better, so much were all of us desirous to see this land, true
and most delightful habitation of Man. Monsieur De Poutrincourt went up
thither, and my self also, which we had not yet done. Even our dogs did
thrust their noses out of the ship, better to draw and smell the sweet air of
the land, not being able to contain themselves from witnessing, by their
gestures, the joy they had of it. We drew within a league near unto it, and
(the sails being let down) we fell a fishing of Codde, the fishing of the
Bancke beginning to fail. They which had before us, made voyages in those
parts, did judge us Cap. Breton. The Bay of Campseau. Eight days.
to be at Cap-Breton. The night drawing on, we stood off to the sea-ward: the
next day following, being the eight of the said month of Iulj, as we drew
near to the Bay of Campseau, came, about the evening, mists, which did
continue eight whole days, during the which we kept us at sea, hulling still,
not being able to go forward, being resisted by West and South-West winds.
During these eight days, which were from one Saturday to another, God (who
has always guided these voyages, in the which not one man has been lost by
sea) showed us his special favor, in sending unto us, among the thick fogs,
Gods favor in danger.
a clearing of the Sun, which continued but half an hour: And then had we
sight of the firm land, and knew that we were ready to be cast away upon the
rocks, if we had not speedily stood off to sea-ward. A man does sometimes
seek the land, as one does his beloved, which sometimes repulseth her sweet
heart very rudely. Finally, upon Saturday the 15. of Iulj, about two aclocke in
the after noone, the sky began to salute us, as it were, with Cannon shots,
shedding tears, as being sorry to have kept us so long in pain. So that fair
weather being come again, Calm weather.
we saw coming straight to us (we being four leagues off from the land) two
Shaloupes with open sails, in a sea yet wrathed. This thing gave us much
content. But whilst Marvelous odours cumming from the land.
we followed on our course, there came from the land odors incomparable for
sweetness, brought with a warm wind, so abundantly, that all the Orient parts
could not procure greater abundance. We did stretch out our hands, at it were
to take them, so palpable were they, which I have admired a thousand times
since. Then the two shaloups did approach, The boording of two shalopes.
the one manned with Savages, who had a Stagge painted at their sails, the
other with Frenchmen of Saint Maloes, which made their fishing at the Port of
Camseau, but the Savages were more diligent, for they arrived first. Having
never seen any before, I did admire, at the first The Savages goodly men.
sight, their fair shape, and form of visage. One of them did excuse himself,
for that he had not brought his fair beuer gown, because the weather had
been foul. He had but one red piece of frize upon his back, and Matachiaz
Matachiaz be carkanets, necklaces, bracelets, and wrought girdles.
about his neck, at his wristes, above the elbow, and at his girdle. We made
them to eat and drink. During that time they told us all that had passed, a
year before, at Port Royal (whither we were bound. In the mean while, them
of Saint Maloe came, and told us as much as the Savages had. Adding that the
wensday, when that we did shun the rocks, they had seen us, and would have
corn to us with the said Savages, but that they left off, During the mists at
sea, it is fair wether on land* A discommoditie brings a commodity.
by reason we put to the sea: and moreover that it had been always fair
weather on the land: which made us much to marvel: but the cause thereof has
been showed before. Of this discommodity may be drawn hereafter a great
good, that these mists will serve as a rampire to the country, and one shall
know with speed what is passed at sea. They told us also that they had been
advertised, some days before, by other Savages, that a ship was seen at Cap
Breton. These French men of S. Maloe were men that did deal for the associates
of Monsieur De Monts, and did complain that the Baskes, or men of Saint John
De Lus (against the King his Inhibitions) had trucked with the Savages, and
carried away above six thousand Beauers The care of the savages for their wives.
skins. They gave us sundry sorts of their fishes, as Bars, Marlus and great
Fletans. As for the Savages, before to depart, they asked bread of us, to carry
to their wives, which was granted and given them, for they deserved it well,
being come so willingly to show us in what part we were. For since that time
we sailed still in assurance, and without doubt.

The departing of some of our company going aland.
At the parting, some number of ours went aland at the Port of Campseau, as
well to fetch us some wood and fresh water, whereof we had need, as for to
follow the Coast from that place to Port Royal in a shaloup, for we did fear
lest Monsieur De Pont should be at our coming thither already gone from
thence. The Savages made offer to go to him through the woods, with promise to
be there within six days, to advertise him of our coming, to the end The
Savages do travel much way in small time.
to cause his stay, for as much as word was left with him to depart, unless he
were succored within the 16. day of that month, which he failed not to do:
notwithstanding our men desirous to see the land nearer, did hinder the same
which promised us to bring unto us the next day the said wood and water, if we
would approach near the land, which we did not, but followed on our course.

Mistes. Calmes.
The Tuesday, 17. of July, we were, according to our accustomed manner,
surprised with mistes and contrary wind. But the Thursday we had calm weather,
so that whether it were mist or fair weather we went nothing forward. During
this calm, about the evening, a Shipwright, The peril of many Mariners.
washing himself in the sea, having before drunk too much Aqua-vitae, found
himself overtaken, the cold of the sea water striving against the heat of this
spirit of wine. Some Mariners, seeing their fellow in danger, cast themselves
Drunkenness causes diverse perils.
into the water to succor him, but his wits being troubled, he mocked them, and
they not able to rule him. Which caused yet other Mariners to go to help; and
they so hindered one another, that they were all in danger. In the end there was
one of them, which, among this confusion, heard the voice of Monsieur De
Poutrincourt, who did say to him, John Hay look toward me, and with a rope
that was given him, he was pulled up, and the rest withal were saved. But the
Author of the trouble fell into a sickness, that almost killed him.

Port du Rossignoll.
After this calm we had two days of fogges. The Sunday 23. of the said
month, we had knowledge of the Port Du Rossignoll, and the same day in the
afternoon, the Port au Mouton.
Sun shining fair, we cast anchor at the mouth of Port Du Mouton, and we were
in danger to fall upon a should, being come to two fathams and a half depth. We
went aland seventeen of us in number, to fetch the wood and water, whereof we
had need. There we found the Cabins and lodgings, yet whole and unbroken, that
Monsieur De Monts made two years before, who had soiourned there by the space
of one month, as we have said in his place. What grows in the land at Port au
Monton.
We saw there, being a sandy land, store of Oaks, bearing acornes,
Cypresse-trees, Firre-trees, Bay-trees, Muske-roses, Goose-beries, Purslen,
Raspies, Fernes, Lysimachia (a kind of Sammonee) Calamus odoratus, Angelica,
and other simples, in the space of two hours that we tarried there. We brought
back in our ship wild peaze, which we found good. We had not the leisure to
hunt after rabets that be there in great number, not far from the Port, but we
returned aboard as soon as we had laden our selves with water and wood: and so
hoised up sails.

Le Cap de Sable. Long Island. The Bay S. Mary. The arriving to Port Royal.
Tuesday the 25. day we were about the Cap De Sable, in fair weather, and made
a good iourny, for about the evening we came to sight of Long I Will, and the Bay
of Saint Marie, but because of the night we put back to the seaward. And the
next day we cast anchor at the mouth of Port Royal, where we could not enter by
reason it was ebbing water, but we gave two Cannon shot from our ship to salute
the said Port, and to advertise the Frenchmen that we were there.

Difficulties in coming in.
Thursday the 27. of July we came in with the flood, which was not without much
difficulty, for that we had the wind contrary, and gusts of wind from the
mountains, which made us almost to strike upon the rocks. And in these
troubles our ship bare still contrary, the Poupe before, and sometimes turned
round, not being able to do The beauty of the Port.
any other thing else. Finally, being in the Port, it was unto us a thing
marvelous to see the fair distance and largeness of it, and the mountains
and hills that environed it, and I wondered how so fair a place did remain
desert, being all filled with woods, seeing that so many pine away in the
world, which might make good of this land, if only they had a chief governor
to conduct them thither. By little and little we drew near to the Island, which
is right over against the fort where we have dwelt since: An Island I say, the
most agreeable thing to be seen in her kind, that is possible to be desired,
wishing in our selves to have brought thither some of those fair buildings
that are unprofitable in these our parts, that serve for nothing, but to retire
wildefowle in, and other birds. We knew not yet, if Monsieur Du Pont was gone
or no, and therefore we did expect that he should send some men to meet us; but
it was in vain: for he was gone from thence 12. days before. And whilst we
did hull in the midst of the Port, Membertou, the greatest Sagamos of the
Souriquois (so are the Sagamos signifies Captain.
people called with whom we were) came to the Frenchfort, to them that were left
there, being only two, crying as a madde-man, saying in his language; What! You
stand here a dining (for it was about noone) and do not see a great ship that
comes here, and we know not what men they are: Suddenly these two men ran
upon the bulwark, and with diligence made ready the Canons, which they
furnished with pellets and touch powder. Membertou, without delay, came in a
Conow made of barks of trees, with a daughter of his, to view us: And having
found but friendship, and knowing us to be Frenchmen, made no alarm.
Notwithstanding one of the two Frenchmen left there, called La Taille, came to
the shore of the Port, his match on the cock, to know what we were (though he
knew it well enough, for we had the white Banner displaied at the top of the
mast) and on the sudden four volly of canons were shot off, which made
innumerable echoes: And from our part, the fort was saluted with three Canon
shots, and many musket shots, at which time our Trumpeter was not slack of his
duty. Then we landed, viewed the house, and we passed that day in giving God
thanks, in Praises of the two Frenchmen left alone in the fort of Port-Royall.
seeing the Savages cabins, and walking through the meadows. But I cannot but
praise the gentle courage of these two men, one of them I have already named,
the other is called Miquelet: which deserve well to be mentioned here, for
having so freely exposed their lives in the conservation of the welfare of New
France. For Monsieur Du Pont having but one bark and a shaloupe, to seek out
toward New Foundland, for french ships, could not charge himself with so
much furniture, corn, meat and marchandises as were there; which he had been
forced to cast into the sea (and which had been greatly to our prejudice, and
we did fear it very much) if these two men had not adventured themselves to
tarry there, for the preserving of those things, which they did with a willing
and joyful mind.

CHAP. XIII.
The happy meeting of Monsieur Du Pont: his return unto Port Royal:
rejoicing: description of the confines of the said Port: conjecture touching
the head and spring of the great River of Canada: sowing of Corn: the return
of Monsieur Du Pont into France: the voyage of Monsieur De Poutrincourt unto
the country of the Armouchiquois: fair Rye sprung up without tillage: the
exercises and manner of living in Port Royal: the Meadows of the river De
L'Equille.

The tilling of the ground.
THe Friday, next day after our arrival, Monsieur De Poutrincourt affected to
this enterprise, as for himself, put part of his people to work in the
tillage and manuring of the ground, whilst the others were employed in making
clean of the chambers, and every one to make ready that which belonged to his
trade. In the mean time those people of ours that had left us at Campseau, to
come along the coast, met (as it were miraculously) The meeting with Monsieur
Du Pont.
with Monsieur Du Pont, among Islands, that be in great number in those parts. To
declare how great was the joy of each side, is a thing not to be expressed. The
said Monsieur Du Pont, at this happy and fortunate meeting, returned back to
see us in Port Royal, and to ship himself in the Jonas, to return into
France. As this chance was beneficial unto him, so was it unto us, by the
means of his ships that he left with us For without that, we had been in such
extremity that we had not been able to go nor come any where, our ship being
once returned into France. He arrived there, on Mondy the last of July, and
tarried yet in Port Royal until the 28. of August. All this month we made
merry. Monsieur De Poutrincourt did set up and opened a Hogshed of wine, one of
them that was given him for his own drinking, giving leave to all comers to
drink as long as it should hold, so that some of them drunk until their caps
turned round.

At the very beginning, we were desirous to see the country up the river, where
we found meadows, almost continually above twelve leagues of ground, among
which, brooks do run without number, which come from the hills and mountains
adjoining. The woods very thick on the water shoares, and so thick, that
sometimes, one cannot go through them. Yet for all that, I would not make them
such as Joseph Acosta recites those of Peru to be, Joseph Acosta lib. 4. ca.
30.
when he says: One of our brethren, a man of credit, told us, that being gone
astray, and lost in the Mountains, not knowing what part, nor which way he
should go, found himself among bushes so thick, that he was constrained to
travel upon them, without putting his feet on the ground, a whole fortnights
space. I refer the believing of that to any one that will; but this belief
cannot reach so far, as to have place with me.

Land like to that which God promised to his people. Deuteronomy 8. verse. 7. 8.
Now in the land whereof we speak, the woods are thinner far off from the
shoares and watrish places: And the felicity thereof is so much the more to be
hoped for, in that it is like the land, which God did promise to his people, by
the mouth of Moses, saying: The Lord thy God does bring thee into a good land,
of rivers of waters, with fountains and depthes, which do spring in fields,
etc. A land where thou shall eat thy bread without scarsitie, wherein nothing
shall fail thee, a land whose stones are of Iron, and from whose Mountains
thou shall dig brass. And further in another place, confirming the promises
for the goodness and state of the land that he would give them. The country
(says he) wherein Deuter. 11. verse. 10.
you are going for to possess it, is not as the land of Egypt, from whence
you are come forth, where thou did sow thy seed, and wateredst it with the
labor of they feet, as a garden of herbs. But the country through which you
are going to pass, for to possess it, is a land of mountains and fields, and
is watered Hereupon the 3. chap.
with waters that raineth from heaven. Now according to the description that
heretofore we have made of Port Royal, and the confines thereof, in
describing the first voyage of Monsieur De Monts, and as yet we do mention it
here, brooks do there abound at will, and (for this respect) A bundance of
brooks.
this land is no less happy than the country of the Gauls (now called France)
to whom King Agrippa (making an oration to the Jews recited by Josephus in his
war of the Jews) attributed a particular felicity, because Iron stones.
Mountains of Brass.
they had store of domestical fountains: And also that a part of those
countries is called Aquitaine, for the same consideration. As for the stones
which our God promises that should be of iron, and the mountains of Brass,
that signifies nothing else, but the Mines of Copper, of Iron, and of steel,
whereof we have already heretofore spoken, and will speak yet hereafter. And
as for the fields (whereof we have not yet spoken) there be some on the West
side Lakes and brooks upon the mountains.
of the said Port Royal. And above the Mountains there be some fair ones,
where I have seen lakes and brooks, even as in the valleys. Yea even in the
passage to come forth from the same fort, for to go to sea, there is a brook,
which falls from the high rocks down, and in falling disperseth it self
into a small rain, which is very delightful in Summer, because that at the
foot of the rock, there are caves, wherein one is covered, whilst that this
rain falls so pleasantly: And in the cave (wherein the rain of this brook
falls) is made (as it were) a Rainbow, when the Sun shines: which has
given me great cause The form of a Rain bow, under a cave. They travel three
leagues in the woods.
of admiration. Once we went from our fort as far as the sea through the woods,
the space of three leagues, but in our return we were pleasantly deceived, for
at the end of our iourny, thinking to be in a plain champion country, we found
our selves on the top of a high Mountain, and were forced to come down with
pain enough, by reason of snowes. But Mountains be not perpetual in a
country. Within 15. leagues of our dwelling, the country, through which the
River L' Equille passes, is all plain and even. I have seen in those parts
many countries, where the land is all even, and the fairest of the world. But
the perfection Country well watered.
thereof is, that it is well watered. And for witness whereof, not only in
Port Royal, but also in all New France, the great river of Canada is proof
thereof, which at the end of 400. leagues is as broad as the greatest rivers
of the world, replenished with Isles and rocks innumerable: taking Conjecture
upon the spring of the great River of Canada.
her beginning from one of the lakes which do meet at the stream of her course
(and so I think) so that it has two courses, the one from the East toward
France: the other from the West toward the South sea: which is admirable, but
not without the like example found in our Europe. For the river which comes
down to Trent and to Verone proceeds from a lake which produces another
river, whose course is bent opposite to the river of Lins, which falls into
the river Danube. So the Nile issues from a lake that brings forth other
rivers, which discharge themselves into the great Ocean.

Which is the first mine.
Let us return to our tillage: for to that must we apply our selves: it is the
first mine that must be sought for, which is more worth than the treasures of
Atabalipa: And he that has corn, wine, cattle, woollen and linen, leather,
iron, and afterward Codde-fish, he needs no other treasures, for the
necessaries of life. Now all this is (or may be) in the land by us described:
upon the which Monsieur De Poutrincourt Sowing of corn.
having caused a second tillage to be made, in fifteen days after his arrival
thither, he sowed it with our French corn, as well wheat and rye, as with
hemp, flax, turnep seed, redish, cabidges and other seeds: And the eight day
following, he saw that his labor had not been in vain, but rather a fair
hope, by the production that the ground had already made of the seeds which
she had received. Which being showed to Monsieur Du Pont, was unto him a fair
subject to make his relation in France, as a thing altogether new there.

20 Of August.
The 20. day of August was already come, when these fair shows were made, and
the time did admonish them, that were to go in the voyage, to make r^^dy.
Whereunto they began to give order, so that the 25* day of the same month,
after many peales of ordinance, they waighed anchor to come to the mouth of the
Port, which is commonly the first days iourny.

Cause of the voyage made into the country of the Armou. thiquois.
Monsieur De Monts being desirous to reach as far into the South as he could,
and seek out a place very fit to inhabit, beyond Malebarre, had requested
Monsieur De Poutrincourt to pass farther than yet he had done, and to seek a
convenient Port in good temperature of air, making no greater account of Port
Royal than of S. Croix, in that which concerns health. Whereunto the said
Monsieur De Poutrincourt being willing to condescend, would not tarry for the
spring time, knowing he should have other employments to exercise himself
withal. But seeing his so wings ended, and his field green, resolved himself
to make this voyage and discovery before winter. So then he disposed all things
to that end, and with his Bark ankered near to the Jonas, to the end to get
out in A whale in Port Royal.
company. Whilst they lay there for a prosperous wind the space of three
days, there was a Whale of mean bigness (which the Savages do call Maria)
who came every day into the Port, with the morning flood, playing there within
at her pleasure, and went away back again with the ebb. And then, taking
some leisure, I made, in French verses, a farewell to the said Monsieur Du Pont
and his company, which I have placed among the Muses of New France.

Parting from Port Royal.
The 28. day of the said month each of us took his course, one one way, and
the other another, diversely to Gods keeping. As for Monsieur Du Pont he
purposed by the way to set upon a Merchant of Rone, named Boyer, who (contrary
to the Kings inhibitions) was in those parts to trucke with the Sanages,
notwithstanding he had been delivered out of prison in Rochell, by the consent
of Monsieur De Poutrincourt, under promise he should not go thither; but the
said Boyer was already gone. And as for Monsieur De Poutrincourt, he took his
course for the I Will of S. Croix, the Frenchmens first abode, having Monsieur De
Champdore for master and guide of his Bark: But being hindered by the wind,
and because his bark did leake, he was forced twice to put back again. In
the end he quite passed the Bay Francoise, and viewed the said I Will, Fair Rye
found at S. Croix.
where he found ripe Corn, of that which two years before was sowed by
Monsieur De Monts, which was fair, big, weighty, and well filled. He sent unto
us some of that Corn to Port Royal, where I was requested to stay, to look
to the house, and to keep the rest of the company there, in concord. Whereunto
I did agree (though it was referred to my will) for the assurance that we had
among our selves, that the year following we should make our habitation in a
warmer country beyond Malebarre, and Their meaning is to plant beyond Malebarre
to the Southward. A ditch profitably made.
that we should all go in company, with them that should be sent to us out of
France. In the mean while I employed my self in dressing the ground, to make
enclosures and partitions of Gardens, for to sow Corn and kitchen herbs. We
caused also a ditch to be made all about the fort, which was very needful to
receive the waters and moistness, that before did run underneath among the
roots of trees, What store of workmen and laborers in New France.
that had been fallen down: which paraduenture did make the place
unhealthful. I will not stand in describing here, what each of our other
workmen and laborers did particularly make. It suffices that we had store of
Ioyners, Carpenters, Masons, Stone-caruers, Locke-smithes, Taylers, Their
exercise and manner of life.
Boord-sawyers, Mariners, etc. who did exercise their trades, which (in doing
their duties) were very kindly used, for they were at their own liberty for
three hours Mussels, Lapsters, Crabs.
laboura day. The overplus of the time they bestowed it, in going to gather
mussels, which are at low water in great quantity before the fort, or Lapsters,
or Crabs, which are in Port Royal under the Rocks in great abundance, or
Cockles, which are in every part in the Oase, about the shores of the said
Port: All that kind of fish is taken without net or boat. Some there were
that sometimes took Good provision of wilde-fowle.
wilde-fowle, but not being skillful, they spoiled the game. And as for us, our
table was furnished by one of Monsieur De Monts men, who provided for us in
such sort that we wanted no foul, bringing unto us, sometimes half a dosen of
birds, called by French men, Outards (a kind of wild geese) sometimes as
many mallardes, or wild geese, white and gray, very often two or three dosen
What quantity of bread and wine.
of larkes, and other kinds of birds. As for bread, no body felt want thereof,
and every one had three quarts of pure and good wine a day. Which has
continued with us as long as we have been there, saving that, when they, who
came to fetch us, in stead of bringing commodities unto us, helped us to spend
our own (as we shall have occasion hereafter to deelare) we were forced to
reduce that portion to a pint; and notwithstanding there was very often some
thing more of extrordinary. This voyage (for this respect) has been the best
voyage of all, whereof we are to give much praises to the said Monsieur De
Monts, and his associates Monsieur Macquin and Monsieur Georges Preservative
against the sickness of New France.
of Rochel, in providing so abundantly for us. For truly I find that this
Septembrall liquor (I mean wine) is, among other things, a sovereign
preservative against the sickness of that country: And the spiceries, to
correct the A clear and pure air.
vice that might be in the air of that region, which nevertheless I have always
found very clear and pure, notwithstanding the reasons that I may have
alleged for the same, Allowance.
speaking heretofore of the same sickness. For our allowance, we had Pease,
Beans, Rice, Prunes, Raisons, dry Codde, and salt flesh, besides Oil and
Butter. But whenever the Savages, dwelling near us, had taken any quantity
of Sturgions, Salmons, or small fishes; Item, any Beuers, A kind of stagge or
red Dear. The liberal nature of the Savages.
Ellans, C^^abous, (or fallow Dear) or other beasts, mentioned in my farewell
to New France, they brought unto us half of it: and that which remained they
exposed it sometimes to sale publicly, and they that would have any thereof
did trucke bread for it. This was partly our manner of life in those parts. But
although every one of our workmen had his particular trade or occupation, yet
for all that it was necessary to employ himself to all uses, as many did. Some
Masons and Stone-caruers applied themselves to baking, which made us as good
bread as is made in Paris. Also one of our Sawyers, diverse times made Ch^rcoale
made in New France.
us Coals in great quantity.

Wherein is to be noted a thing that now I remember. It is, that being
necessary to cut turffes to cover the piles of wood, heaped to make the said
coals, there was found in What earth is in the meadows.
the meadows three foot deep of earth, not earth, but grass or herbs mingled
with mudde, which have heaped themselves yearly one upon another from the
beginning of the world, not having been moved. Nevertheless the green
thereof serves for pasture to the Ellans, which we Ellans in the Meadows.
have many times seen in our meadows of those parts, in herds of three or
four, great and small, suffering themselves sometimes to be approached, then
they ran to the woods: But I may say moreover, that I have seen, in crossing
two leagues of our said meadows, the same to be al trodden with trackes of
Ellans, for I know not there any other cloven footed beasts. There was killed
one of those beasts, not far off from our fort, at a place where Monsieur De
Monts having caused the grass to be mowed two years before, it was grown
again the fairest of the world. Some might marvel how those meadows are made,
seeing that all the ground in those places is covered with woods. For
satisfaction whereof, let the curious reader know, that in high spring tides,
specially in March and September, the flood covers those shores, which
hinders the trees there to take root. But every where, where the water
ouerfloweth not, if there be any ground, there are woods.

CHAP. XIIII.
Their departing fromthe I Will of S. Croix: the baye of Marchin: Chouakoet: vines
and grapes: the liberality of the Savages: the land and people of the
Armouchiquois: the cure of an Armouchiquois wounded: the simplicity and
ignorance of the people: vices of the Armouchiquois: suspicion: people not
caring for clothes: cornesowed, andvines planted in the country of the
Armouchiquois: quantity of grapes: abundance of people: dangerous Sea.

LEt us return to Monsieur de Poutrincourt, whom we have left in the I Will Saint
Croix. Having made there a reuiew, and cherished the Savages that were there,
he Pemptegoet.
went in the space of four days to Pemtegoet, which is that place so famous
under the name of Norombega. There needs not so long a time in coming
thither, but he tarried on the way to mend his bark: for to that end he had
brought with him a Smith and a Carpenter, and quantity of boordes. He crossed
the Isles, which be at the Kinibeki.
mouth of the river, and came to Kinibeki, where his bark was in danger, by
reason of the great streams that the nature of the place procures there. This
was the cause why he made there no stay, but passed further to the Baie of The
bay of Marchin.
Marchin, which is the name of a Captain of the Savages, who at the arrival
of the said Monsieur De Poutrincourt, began to cry out aloud He He: whereunto
the like answer was made unto him. He replied, asking in his language, What are
ye? They answered him, Friends: And thereupon Monsieur De Poutrincourt
approaching, treated amity with him, and presented him with knives, hatchets,
and Matachiaz, that is to say, scarfes, karkenets and bracelets made of beads,
or quils made of white and blew glass; whereof he was very glad, as also for
the confederacy Confederacy.
that the said Monsieur De Poutrincourt made with him, knowing very well that
the same would be a great aid and support unto him. He distributed to some men
that were about him, among a great number of people, the presents that the said
Monsieur De Poutrincourt gave him, to whom he brought store of Orignac, or
Ellans flesh (for the Baskes do call a Stagge, or Ellan, Orignac) to refresh
the company with victuals. That done, they set sails toward Chouakoet, where
the river of Captain Olmechin The river of Olmechin. Port De Chouakoet.
is, and where the year following was made the war of the Souriquois and
Etechemius, under the conduct of the Sagamos Membertou, which I have described
in verses, which verses I have inserted among the Muses of New-France. At the
entry of the Bay of the said place of Chouakoet An Island of vines.
there is a great Island, about half a league compass, wherein our men did
first discover any vines (for, although there be some in the lands nearer to
Port Royal, notwithstanding there was yet no knowledge had of them) which they
found in great quantity, having the truncke three and four foot high, and as
big as ones fist in the lower part, the grapes fair and great, and some as
big as plummes, other lesser: but as black, that they left a stain where
their liquor was spilled: Those grapes, I say, lying over bushes and brambles
that grow in the same Island, where the trees are not so thick as in other
where, but are six or seven rods distant a sunder, which causes the grapes to
be ripe the sooner; having besides a ground very fit for the same, grauelly and
sandy. They tarried there but two hours: but they noted, that there were no
vines on the North-side, even as in the I Will Saint Croix are no Cedar-trees, but
on the Westside.

The river of Olmechin.
From this Island they went to the river of Olmechin, a Port of Chauakoet, where
Marchin and the said Olmechin brought to Monsieur De Poutrincourt a prisoner of
the Souriqouis (and therefore their enemy) which they gave unto him freely. Two
hours after there arrived two Savages, The galantnesse of the Savages. Port de
la Heve.
the one an Eteshemin, named Chkoudun, Captain of the river Saint John, called
by the Savages Oigoudi: The other a Souriquois, named Messamoet, Captain or
Sagamos of the river of the Port De La Heve, where this prisoner was taken.
They had great store of Merchandises trucked with Frenchmen, which they were
coming to utter, that is to say, great, mean, and small kettles, hatchets,
knives, gowns, short cloakes, red wast coats, biscuit, and other things:
whereupon there arrived twelve or fifteen boats, The Savages do paint their
faces.
full of Savages of Olmechins subjection, being in very good order, all their
faces painted, according to their wonted custom, when they will seem fair,
having their bow The Oration of Messamoet
and arrow in hand, and the quiver, which they laid down a board. At that hour
Messamoet began his Oration before the Savages: Showing them, how that in times
past, they often had friendship together: and that they might easily overcome
their enemies, if they would have intelligence and serve themselves with the
amity of the Frenchmen, whom they saw there present to know their Country, to
the end to bring commodities unto them hereafter, and to succor them with
their forces, which forces he knew, and he was the better able to make a
demonstration thereof unto them, by so much that he which spoke, had before
time been in France, and dwelt therewith Monsieur De Grandmont, Governor of
Bayonne. Finally, his speech continued almost an hour with Messamoets
affection to the French men. The largess and liberality of Messamoets.
much vehemence and affection, with a gesture of body and arms, as is requisite
in a good Orator. And in the end he did cast all his merchandises (which were
worth above 300. crowns, brought into that country) into Olmechin his boat, as
making him a present of that, in assurance of the love he would witness unto
him. That done the night hasted on, and every one retired himself. But
Messamoet was not pleased, for that Olmechin made not the like oration unto
him, nor requited his present: For the Savages have The Savages be liberal.
that noble quality, that they give liberally, casting at the feet of him whom
they will honor, the present that they give him: But it is with hope to receive
some reciprocal kindness, which is a kind of contract, which we call,
without name, I give thee, to the end thou should give me. And that is done
through all the world. Therefore Messamoet from that day had in mind to make
war to Olmechin. Notwithstanding A Corne*country, beans, pumpions and grapes.
the next day in the morning, he and his people did return with a boat laden
with that which they had, to wit, Corn, Tobacco, Beans and Pumpions, which
they distributed here and there. Those two Captains Olmechin and Marchin have
since been killed in the wars. In whose stead was chosen by the Savages one
named Bessabes, Bessabes* Englishmen.
which since our return has been killed by Englishmen: And in stead of him
they have made a Captain to come from within the lands, named Asticou, a grave
man, valiant Asticou.
and redoubted, which, in the twinkling of an eye, will gather up 1000. Savages
together, which thing Olmechin and Marchin might also do. For our Barks being
there, presently the Sea was seen all covered over with their boats, laden
with nimble and lusty men, holding themselves up straight in them: which we
cannot do without danger, those boats being nothing else but trees hollowed
after the fashion that we will show you in the book following. From thence
Monsieur De Poutrincourt following on his course, found a certain Port very
delightful, which A very good Port.
had not been seen by Monsieur De Monts: And during the voyage they saw store
of smoke, and people on the shore, which invited us to come aland: And seeing
that no account was made of it, they followed the bark along The agility of
the Armouchiquois. Happy people if they had the knowledge of God.
the sand, yea most often they did outgoe her, so swift are they, having their
bows in hand, and their quiuers upon their backs, always singing and
dancing, not taking care with what they should live by the way. Happy people!
Yea, a thousand times more happy than they which in these parts make themselves
to be worshipped; if they had the knowledge of God and of their salvation.

Fifes.
Monsieur De Poutrincourt having landed in this Port, behold among a multitude
of Savages a good number of fifes, which did play with certain long pipes,
made as it were with canes of reeds, painted over, but not with such an
harmony as our Shepherds might do: And to show the excellency of their art,
they whisled with their noses in gambolling, according to their fashion.

A Savage wounded.
And as this people did run headlong, to come to the Bark, there was a
Savage which hurt himself grievously in the heel against the edge of a rock,
whereby he was enforced to remain in the place. Monsieur De Poutrincourt his
Surgeon, at that instant would apply to this hurt that which was of his art,
but they would not permit it, until they had first made their mouths and mops
about Their mouths and mops about him that was hurt.
the wounded man. They then laid him down on the ground, one of them holding
his head on his lap, and made many baulings and singings, whereunto the wounded
man answered but with a Ho, with a complaining voice, which having done they
yielded him to the cure of the said Surgeon, and went their way, and the
patient also after he had been dressed: but two hours after he came again,
the most iocund in the world, having put about his head, the binding cloth,
wherewith his heel was wrapped, for to seem the more gallant.

The day following, our people entered farther into the The presents of a Savage
woman. Hemp very fair. Beans. Quantity of grapes.
Port, where being gone to see the Cabins of the Savages, an old woman of an
hundred or six score years of age, came to cast at the feet of Monsieur De
Poutrincour, a loaf of bread, made with the wheat called Mahis, or Mais, and
in these our parts, Turkey or Saracin wheat, then very fair hemp of a long
growth; Item beans, and grapes newly gathered, because they had seen French
men eat of them at Chauakoet. Which the other Savages seeing, that knew it not,
they brought more of them than one would, emulating one another* and for
recompense of this their kindness, The simplicity and ignorance of people.
there was set on their foreheads a filler, or band, of paper, wet with spittle,
of which they were very proud. It was showed them, in pressing the grape into a
glass, that of that we did make the wine which we did drink. We would have
made them to eat of the grape, but having taken it into their mouths, they
spitted it out, so ignorant is this people of the best thing that God has
given to man, next to bread. Yet notwithstanding they have no want of wit, and
might be brought to do some good things, if they were ciuilized, and had the
use of handy crafts. But they are subtle, theeuish, and traitorous, and
though they be naked, yet one cannot take heed of their fingers; for if one
turn never so little his eyes aside, and that they spy the opportunity to
steal any knife, hatchet, or any thing else, they will not miss nor fail of
it; and will put the theft between their buttockes, or will hide it within the
sand with their foot so cunningly, that one shall not perceive it. Indeed I The
bad nature of the Armouchiquois.
do not wonder if a people poor and naked be theeuish; but when the heart is
malicious, it is inexcusable. This people is such that they must be handled
with terror: for Note how the Armouchiquois must be dealt withal.
if through love and gentleness, one give them too free access, they will
practice some surprise, as it has been known in diverse occasions
heretofore, and will yet hereafter beseene. And without deferring any longer,
the second day after our coming thither, as they saw our people busy awishing
linen, they came some fifty, one following another, with bows, arrows and
quiuers, intending to play some bad part, as it was coniectured upon their
manner of proceeding; but they were prevented; some of our men going to meet
them, with their muskets and matches at the cock, which made some of them run
away, and the others being compassed in, having put down their weapons, came
to a Peninsule, or small head of an Island, where our men were, and making a
friendly show, demanded to trucke the Tobacco they had for our merchandises.

The next day the Captain of the said place and Port, came into Monsieur De
Poutrincourts bark to see him: we Suspicion for the coming of Olmechin.
did marvel to see him accompanied with Olmechin, seeing the way was marvelous
long to come thither by land, and much shorter by sea. That gave cause of bad
suspicion, albeit he had promised his love to the Frenchmen. Notwithstanding
they were gently received. And Monsieur De Poutrincourt gave to the said
Olmechin a complet garment, wherewith being clothed, he viewed himself in a
glass, and did laugh to see himself in that order. But a The trouble of
garments.
little while after, feeling that the same hindered him, although it was in
October, when he was returned unto his Cabins, he distributed it to sundry of
his men, to the end that one alone should not be ouerpestered with it. This
ought to be a sufficient lesson to so many finnical, both men and women, of
these parts, who cause their garments and brest-plates to be made as hard and
stiff as wood, wherein their bodies are so miserably tormented, that they are
in their clothes unable to all good actions. And if the weather be too hot they
suffer in their great bummes with a thousand folds, unsupportable heats, that
are more intolerable, than the torments which felons and criminal men are
sometimes made to feel.

Now during the time that the said Monsieur De Poutrincourt was there, being in
doubt whether Monsieur De Monts would come to make an habitation on that coast,
as Corn sowed, and vines planted.
he wished it, he made there a piece of ground to be tilled, for to sow corn
and to plant vines, which they did, with the help of our Apothecary Master
Jews Hebert, a man, who, besides his experience in his art, takes great
delight in the tilling of the ground. And the said Monsieur De Poutrincourt may
be here compared to good father Noah, who after he had made the tillage most
necessary for the sowing of corn, he began to plant the vine, whose effects
he felt afterward.

As they were a deliberating to pass farther, Olmechin came to the Bark to
see Monsieur De Poutrincourt, where having tarried certain hours, either in
talking or eating, he said that the next day 100. boats should come,
containing 100. boats of Savages.
every one six men: but the coming of such a number of men, being but
troublesome, Monsieur De Poutrincourt would not tarry for them; but went away
the same Malebarre. Peril of sholdes.
day to Malebarre, not without much difficulty, by reason of the great streams
and sholds that are there. So that the Bark having touched at three foot of
water only, we thought to be cast away, and we began to unlade her, and put
the victuals into the Shaloup, which was behind, for to save us on land: but
being no full sea, the bark came aflote within an hour. All this Sea is a
land ouerflowed, as that of Mount Saint Michels, a sandy ground, in which, all
that rests is a plain flat country as far as the Mountains, which are seen
15. leagues off from that place. And I am of opinion, that as far as Virginia,
it is all Note. Great quantity of grapes.
alike. Moreover, there is here great quantity of grapes, as before, and a
country very full of people. Monsieur De Monts being come to Malebarre in an
other season of the year, gathered only green grapes; which he made to be
preserved, and brought some to the King. But it was our good hap to come
thither in October, for to see the Hereupon chap. 7.
maturity thereof. I have here before showed the difficulty that is found in
entering into Malebarre. This is the cause why Monsieur De Poutrincourt came
not in with his Bark, but went thither with a shaloup only, which thirty or
forty Savages did help to draw in: and when it was full tide (but the tide
does not Two fadames tide only.
mount here but two fadames high, which is seldom seen) he went out, and
retired himself into his said bark, to pass further in the morning, as soon
as he should ordain it.

CHAP. XV.
Dangers: unknown languages: the making of a forge, and of an oven: Crosses
set up: plenty: a conspiracy: disobedience: murder: the flight of three
hundred against ten: the agility of the Armouchiquois: bad company dangerous:
the accident of a Musket that did burst: the insolency of the Savages: their
timorosity, impiety, and flight: the fortunate Port: a bad sea: revenge: the
counsel and resolution for the return: new perils: Gods favors: the arrival
of Monsieur De Poutrincourt at Port Royal: and how he was received.

THe night beginning to give place to the dawning of the day, the sails are
hoised up, but it was but a very perilous navigations. For with this small
vessel Danger.
they were forced to coast the land, where they found no depth: going back to
sea it was yet worse: in such wise that they did strike twice or thrice, being
raised up again only by the waves, and the rudder was broken, which was a
dreadful thing. In this extremity they were constrained to cast anchor in the
sea, at two fadams deep, and three leagues off from the land. Which being
done, Daniel Hay (a man which takes pleasure in showing forth his virtue in
the perils of the sea) was sent toward the Coast to view it, and see if there
were any Port. And as he was near land he saw a Savage, which did dance,
singing yo, yo, yo, he called him to come nearer, and by Oigoudi, or S. John's
river. Savages of sundry nations, understand not one another.
signs asked him if there were any place to retire ships in, and where any
fresh water was. The Savage having made sign there was, he took him into his
shaloup, and brought him to the Bark, wherein was Chkoudun Captain of the
river of Oigoudi, otherwise Saint John's river; who being brought before this
Savage, he understood him no more than did our own people: true it is, that by
signs he comprehended better than they what he would say. This Savage showed
the places, where no depth was, and where was any, and did so well indenting
and winding here and there, always the led in hand, that in the end they came
to the Port showed by him, where small depth is: wherein the bark being
arrived, diligence was used to make a forge A forge and an oven made.
for to mend her with her rudder, and an oven to bake bread, because there was
no more biscuit left.

Fifteen days were employed in this work, during the which Monsieur De
Poutrincourt, according to the laudable A cresse set up.
custom of Christians, made a Cross to be framed and set up, upon a green
bancke, as Monsieur De Monts had done two years before at Kinibeki and
Malebarre. Now among these painful exercises they gave not over making good
cheer, with that which both the sea and the land might furnish in that part.
For in this Port is plenty of foul, in taking of which many of our men
applied themselves: specially the sea larkes are there in so great flights that
Monsieur De Poutrincourt killed 28. of them with one Abundance of larkes and
fishes.
Caliuer shot. As for fishes, there be such abundance of Porpeses, and another
kind of fish, called by Frenchmen Soufleurs, that is to say, Blowers, that the
sea seems to be all covered over with them. But they had not the things
necessary for this kind of fishing, they contented themselves then with
shellfish, as of Oysters, Skalops, periwincles, Shellfish.
whereof there was enough to be satisfied. The Savages of the other side did
bring fish, and grapes within Grapes. Rush-baskets.
baskets made of rushes, for to exchange with some of our wares. The said
Monsieur De Poutrincourt seeing the grapes there, maruellously fair, commanded
him that waited on his chamber, to lay up in the Bark a burden of the vines
from whence the said grapes were taken. Our Apothecary M. Jews Hebert,
desirous to inhabit in those countries, had pulled out a good quantity of them,
to the end to plant them in Port Royal, where none o^ them are, although the
soil be there very fit for vines. Which nevertheless (by a dull
forgetfulness) was not done, to the great discontent of the said Monsieur De
Poutrincourt and of us all.

After certain days, the said Monsieur De Poutrincourt, seeing there great
assembly of Savages, came ashore, and to give them some terror, made to march
before him one The trial of French weapons before the Savages.
of his men, flourishing with two naked swords. Whereat they much wondered, but
yet much more when they saw that our Muskets did pierce thick pieces of wood,
where their arrows could not so much as scratch. And therefore they never
assailed our men, as long as they kept watch. And it had been good to sound
the Trumpet at every Good instruction.
hours end, as Captain James Quartier did. For (as Monsieur De Poutrincourt
does often say) One must never lay bait for thieves, meaning that one must
never give cause to an enemy to think that he may surprise you: But one must
always show that he is mistrusted, and that you are not asleep, chiefly when
one has to do with Savages, which will never set upon him that resolutely
expects them; which was not performed in this place by them that bought the
bargain of their negligence very dear, as we will now tell you.

See in the next book.
Fifteen days being expired, the said Monsieur De Poutrincourt seeing his
bark mended, and nothing remaining Signs of conspiracy.
to be done, but a batch of bread, he went some 3. leagues distant within the
land, to see if he might discover any singularity: But in his return he and
his men perceived the Savages running away through the woods in diverse troops
of 20. 30. and more; some bowing themselves as men that would not be seen:
others hiding themselves in the grass not to be perceived: others carrying
away their stuff, and Canowes full of corn, for to betake them to their
heels: Besides the women transporting their children, and such stuff as they
could with them. Those actions gave cause to Monsieur De Poutrincourt to think
that this people did plot some bad enterprise. Therefore being arrived he
commanded his people, which were a making of bread, to retire themselves into
their Bark. But as young people do Young men disobedient.
often forget their duty, these having some cake, or such like thing, to make,
had rather follow their likerish appetite, than to do that which was commanded
them, tarried till night without retiring themselves. About midnight Monsieur De
Poutrincourts care.
Monsieur De Poutrincourt thinking upon that which had passed the day before,
did ask whether they were in the bark; and hearing they were not, he sent the
shaloupe unto them, to command and bring them aboard, whereto Disobedience.
they disobaied, except his Chamberlain, who feared his master. They were five,
armed with muskets and swords, which were warned to stand still upon their
guard, and yet (being negligent) made not any watch, so much were they addicted
to their own wills. The report was, that they had before shot off two muskets
upon the Savages, because that some one of them had stolen a hatchet. Finally,
those Savages, either provoked by that, or by their bad nature, came at the
break of day without any noise (which was very easy to them, having neither
horses, wagons nor woodden-shooes) even to the place where they were asleep:
And seeing a fit opportunity to play a bad part, Murder done by the Savages.
they set upon them with shots of arrows, and clubs, and killed two of them.
The rest being hurt began to cry out, running toward the sea shore. Then he
which kept watch within the bark, cried out all affrighted, O Lord! our men
are killed, our men are killed. At this voice and cry, every one rose up, and
hastily, not taking leisure to fit on their clothes, nor to set fire to their
matches, ten of Succor*
them went into the shaloup, whose names I do not remember, but of Monsieur
Champlein, Robert Grave (Monsieur Du Pont his son) Daniel Hay, the
Surgeon, the Apothecary, and the Trumpeter: All which (following the said
Monsieur De Poutrincourt, who had his son with him) came aland unarmed. But
the Savages ran away as fast as ever they could, though they were above three
hundred, besides them that were hidden in the grass (according to their
custom) which appeared not. Wherein is to be noted how God fixes, I know not
what terror in the face of the faithful, against infidels and miscreants,
according to his sacred word, when he says to his chosen people: Deutero. 11.
verse. 25.
None shall be able to stand before you. The Lord your God shall put a terror
and fear of you over all the earth, upon which you shall march. So we see that
135000. Madianites, Judges 7. 8.
able fighting men, ran away and killed one another before Gedeon, which had but
300. men. Now to think to follow after these Savages, it had been but labor
lost, for they Armouchiquois be swift.
are too swift in running: But if one had Horses there, they might pay them home
very soundly, for they have a number of small paths, leading from one place to
another (which is not in Port Royal) and their woods are not so thick, and
have besides store of open land.

Whilst that Monsieur De Poutrincourt was coming ashore, there was shot from
the Bark some small cast pieces upon some Savages, that were upon a little
hill, and some of them were seen fall down, but they be so nimble in saving
their dead men, that one knew not what judgment The burying of the dead.
to make of it. The said Monsieur de Poutrincourt, seeing he could get nothing
by pursuing of them, caused pits to be made to bury them that were dead, which
I have said to be two, but there was one that died at the waters side, thinking
to save himself, and a fourth man which was so sorely wounded with arrow
shots, that he died being brought to Port Royal; the fifth man had an arrow
sticking in his breast, yet did escape death for that time: But it had been
better he had died there: for one has lately told us that he was hanged in
the habitation that Monsieur De Monts maintains at Kebeck in the great river
of Conspiracy.
Canada, having been the author of a conspiracy made against his Captain
Monsieur Champlein, which is now there. And as for this mischief it has been
procured by the folly and disobedience of one, whom I will not name, because he
died there, who played the cock and ringleader Leaud company casts young
men away.
among the young men that did too lightly believe him, which otherwise were of a
reasonable good nature; and because one would not make him drunk, he swear
(according to his custom) that he would not return into the Bark, which
also came to pass. For the selfsame was Rash oaths take sometimes effect to
the costs of the swearers. Accident by a Musket burst.
found dead, his face on the ground, having a little dog upon his back, both
of them shot together, and pierced through with one and the selfsame arrow.

In this bad occurrence, Monsieur Du Ponts Son, above named, had three of his
fingers cut off, with a splint of a musket, which being over charged did burst,
which troubled the company very much, that was afflicted enough by other
occasions: Nevertheless the last duty toward the dead was not neglected,
which were buried at the foot of the Cross that had been there planted* as is
before said. The insolency of the Savages.
But the insolency of this Barbarous people was great, after the murders by
them committed; for that as our men did sing over our dead men, the funeral
service and prayers accustomed in the church, these raskals, I say, did dance
and howled a far off, rejoicing for their traitorous treachery, and therefore,
though they were a great number, they The timorousness of the Savages.
adventured not themselves to come and assail our people, who, having at their
leisure done what we have said before, because the sea waxed very low, retired
themselves unto the Bark, wherein remained Monsieur Champdore, for the guard
thereof. But being low water, and having no The impiety of the Savages.
means to come aland, this wicked generation came again to the place where
they had committed the murder, pulled up the Cross, dug out and unburied
one of the dead corpse, took away his shirt, and put it on them, showing their
spoils that they had carried away: And besides all this, turning their backs
toward the Bark, did cast sand with their two hands betwixt their buttockes
in derision, howling like woolues: which did maruellously vex our people, which
spared no cast pieces shots at them; but the distance was very great, and they
had already that subtilty as to cast themselves on the ground when they saw the
fire put at it, in such sort that one knew not whether they had been hurt or
no, so that our men were forced, nill or will, to drink that bitter potion,
attending for the tide, which being come, and sufficient to carry them aland,
as soon as they saw our men enter into the shaloup, they ran away The Savages
slight. The courage of the Sagamos Schkoudun.
as swift as gray-hounds, trusting themselves on their agilitie. There was with
our men a Sagamos named Schkoudun, spoken of before, who much disliked their
prankes, and would alone go and fight against all this multitude, but they
would not permit him, so they set up the Cross again with reverence, and the
body which they had dug up was buried again, and they named this Port, Port
Fortune.
Port Fortune.

The next day they hoised up sails, to pass further and discover new lands,
but the contrary wind constrained them to put back, and to come again into
the said Port. The other next day after, they attempted again to go farther,
but in vain, and they were yet forced to put back until the wind should be
fit. During these attempts, the Savages (thinking, I believe, that that which
had passed between us was but a jest and a play) would needs come again
familiarly unto us, and offered to truck, dissembling that they were not them
that had done those villainies, but others, which, they said, were gone away.
But they were not aware of the fable, how the Storke being taken among the
Cranes, which were found doing some damage, was punished as the others,
notwithstanding she pleaded that she was so far from doing any harm, that
contrariwise she did purge the ground from Serpents, which she did eat.
Monsieur De Poutrincourt then suffered The shelles of mother of pearls.
them to approach, and made as though he would accept of their wares, which were
Tobacco, Carkenets and bracelets made with the shells of a fish called Vignaux
(and Esurgni by James Quartier in the discovery of his second voyage) of great
esteem among them: Item of their Corn, beans, bows, arrows, quiuers, and
other small trash. And as the society was renewed the said Poutrincourt
commanded Stratagem.
to nine or ten that were with him, to make the matches of their Muskets round,
like to a round snare, and that when he should give a sign, every one should
cast his string upon the Savages head that should be near him, and should
catch him, even as the hangman does with him that he has in hand: And for the
effecting of this, that half of his people should go aland, whilst the
Savages were busy a trucking in the shaloup: which was done; but the execution
was not altogether according to his desire. For he intended to serve himself
with them that should be taken, as of slaves to grind at the hand-mill and to
cut wood; wherein they failed by over much haste. Nevertheless six Revenge.
or seven of them were cut in pieces, which could not so well run in the water
as on the land, and were watched at the passage, by those of our men that were
aland.

That done, the next day they endeavored to go farther, although the wind was
not good, but they went but a little forward, and saw only an Island six or
seven leagues off, to which there was no means to come, and it was called
L'ile douteuse, the doubtful I Will, which being considered, L'ile douteuse.
and that of one side the want of victuals was to be feared, and of the other
that the winter might hinder their course, and besides they had two sick men,
of whom there was no hope of recovery; counsel being taken it was resolved
Resolution for the return.
to return into Port Royal: Monsieur De Poutrincourt besides all this, being
yet in care for them whom he had left there, so they came again for the third
time into Port Fortune, where no Savage was seen.

Upon the first wind, the said Monsieur De Poutrincourt weighed anchor for the
return, and being mindful of the Their return. Peril.
dangers passed he sailed in open sea: which shortened his course, but not
without a great mischief of the rudder, which was again broken: in such sort
that being at the mercy of the waves, they arrived in the end, as well as they
could among the Islands of Norombega where they mended it. And after their
departure from the said Islands they came Menane.
to Menane, an Island about six leagues in length, between S. Croix and Port
Royal, where they tarried for the wind, which being come somewhat favorable,
parting from Peril.
thence new mischances happened. For the shaloup being tied at the Bark, was
stricken with a sea so roughly, that with her nose, she brake all the hinder
part of the said bark, wherein Monsieur De Poutrincourt and others were. And
moreover not being able to get to the passage of the A very swift current.
said Port Royal, the tide (which runs swiftly in that place) carried them
toward the bottom of Bay Francoise, from whence they came not forth easily,
and they were in as great danger as ever they were before, for as much as
seeking to return from whence they came, they saw themselves Peril.
carried with the wind and tide toward the Coast, which is high rocks and
down fales, where, unless they had doubled a certain point that threatened
them of wrake they had been cast away. But God will, in high enterprises, try
the constancy of them that fight for his name, and see if they will waver: He
brings them to the door of death, and yet holds them by the hand, to the
end they Deuteronomy. 32. ver. 39.
fall not into the pit, as it is written: It is I, it is I, and there is none
other God with me. I kill, and make a live: I wound, and I heal: and there is
no body that may deliver any out of my hand. So we have said heretofore, and
seen by effect, that although in those Nauigations a thousand dangers have
presented themselves, notwithstanding not one man has been lost by the sea,
although that of them, which do only go for fishing, and to trade for skins,
many there be that perish there: witness four fisher men of S. Maloe, that
were swallowed up in the waters, being gone afishing, Good considerations.
when as we were upon our return into France: God being willing that we should
acknowledge to hold this benefit of him, and to manifest by that means his
glory, to the end that sensibly men may see that it is he, which is the author
of these holy enterprises, which are not made of couetonsnes, nor by unjust
effusion of blood, but of a zeal to establish his name and his greatness
among nations that have no knowledge of him. Now after so many heavenly
favors, it is the part of them that have received them, to say as the Kingly
Psalmist, well beloved of God:

Psalm. 73. verse. 23. 24.
Yet nevertheless by thy right hand thou holdst me ever fast:
And with thy counsel do me guide to glory at the last.
What thing is there that I can wish but thee in Heaven above?
And in the Earth there is nothing like thee that I can love.
After many perils (which I will not compare to them of Ulysses, nor of Aeneas,
fearing to defile our holy voyages The arrival of Monsieur De Poutrincourt.
with profane impurity) Monsieur De Poutrincourt arrived in Port Royal the 14.
day of November, where we received him joyfully, and with a solemnity
altogether new in that part. For about the time that we expected his return
(with great desire, and that so much the more, that if any harm had happened
him, we had been in danger to have confusion among our selves) I advised my
self to show some iollity going to meet him, as we did. And for as much as it
was in French verses made in haste, I have placed them with the Muses of Noua
Francia by the title of Neptunes Theater, whereunto I refer the Reader.
Moreover to give greater honor to the return, and to our action, we did place
over the gate of our Fort, the Arms of France, environed with Laurel Crowns
(whereof there is great store along the woods sides) with the Kings poesy, Duo
protegit vnus. And under, the Arms of Monsieur De Monts, with this
inscription, Dabit Deus his quoque finem: And those of Monsieur De
Poutrincourt, with this other inscription, Inuia virtuti nulla est via, both of
them also environed with garlands of Bays.

CHAP. XVI.
The condition of the corn which they sowed: the institution of the order of
Bon temps: the behavior of the Savages among the Frenchmen: the state of
winter: why raines and fogges be rare in this season: why rain is frequent
between the tropicks: snow profitable to the ground: the state of January:
conformity of weather in the ancient and New France: Why the spring is slow:
the tilling of gardens: their Crop: a water Mill: a Manna of Herrings:
preparation for the return: Monsieur De Poutrincourts invention: the Savages
admiration: News from France.

THe public rejoicing being finished, Monsieur De Poutrincourt had a care to
see his corn, the greatest part whereof he had sowed two leagues off from our
Fort, up the river L' Equille: and the other part about our The state of Corn.
said Fort: and found that which was first sown very forward, but not the last,
that had been sowed the sixth and ten days of November, which notwithstanding
did grow under the snow, during Winter, as I have noted it in my sowings. It
would be a tedious thing to particularise all that was done amongst us during
Winter: as to tell how the Coals. The use of the compass in land voiages.
said Monsieur De Poutrincourt caused many times coals to be made, the
forge-coale being spent: That he caused ways to be made through the woods: That
we went through the Forests by the guide of the Compass, and other things of
such nature. But I will relate that, for to keep us merry and cleanly,
concerning victuals, there was an order The institution of the order of Bon
temps.
established at the table of the said Monsieur De Poutrincourt, which was named
L' order de bon temps, the order of good time (or the order of mirth) at first
invented by Monsieur Champlein, wherein they (who were of the same table) were
every one at his turn and day (which was in fifteen days once) Steward and
Cater. Now his care was that we should have good and worshipful fare, which
was so well observed, that (although the Belly-Gods of these parts do often
reproach unto us that we had not La Rue La Rue aux Ours, or Bear street, is, as
Pie-corner, or such a Cook place in London.
aux Ours of Paris with us) we have ordinarily had there, as good cheer as we
could have at La Rue aux Ours, and at far lesser charges. For there was none,
but (two days before his turn came) was careful to go ahunting or fishing,
and brought some dainty thing, besides that which was of our ordinary
allowance. So well, that at breakfast we never wanted some modicum or other, of
fish or flesh: and at the repast of dinners and suppers, yet less; for it was
the great banquet, where the Governor of the feast, or Steward (whom the
Savages do call Atoctegi) having made the Cook to make all things ready, did
march with his napkin on his shoulder, and his staff of office in his hand,
with the colar of the order about his neck, which was worth above four
crowns, and all them of the order following of him, bearing every one a dish.
The like also was at the bringing in of the fruit, but not with so great a
train. And at night after grace was said, he resigned the Colar of the order,
with a cup of wine, to his successor in that charge, and they drank one to
another. I have heretofore said that we had abundance of foul, as Mallards,
Outards, Geese, gray and whit, Partriges and other birds: Item, of Ellans (or
stagge flesh) of Caribous (or Dear) Beuers, Otters, Bears, Rabbets,
Wilde-cats (or Leopards) Nibaches and such like, which the Savages did take,
wherewith we made as good dishes of meat, as in the Cooks shops that be in La
rue aux Ours (Bear street) and greater store: for of all meats none is so
tender as Ellans flesh (whereof we made good pasties) nor so delicate as the
Beuerstaile. Yea we have had sometimes half a dosen Sturgions Store of
Sturgions.
at one clap, which the Savages did bring to us, part whereof we did take,
paying for it, and the rest was permitted them to sell publicly, and to truck
it for bread, Before in chap. 13.
whereof our people had abundantly. And as for the ordinary meat brought out of
France, that was distributed equally, as much to the least as to the biggest.
And the like with wine, as we have said. In such actions we had always 20. or
30. Savages, men, women, girls and boys, The usage of the Savages.
who beheld us doing our offices. Bread was given them gratis, as we do here
to the poor. But as for the Sagamos Membertou and other Sagamos (when any came
to us) they sat at table eating and drinking as we did: and we took pleasure
in seeing them, as contrariwise their absence was irksome unto us: as it came
to pass three or four times that all went away to the places where they knew
that game and Venison was, and brought one of our men with them, who lived some
six weeks as they did without salt, without bread and without wine, lying on
the ground The Savages have care of the Frenchmen.
upon skins, and that in snowy weather. Moreover they had greater care of him
(as also of others that have often gone with them) than of themselves, saying,
that if they should chance to die, it would be laid to their charges to have
killed them: And hereby it may be known that we were not (as it were) pent up
in an Island as Monsieur De Villegagnon was in Brafill. For this people love
Frenchmen, and would all, at a need, arm themselves for to maintain them.

But, to use no digression, such government as we have spoken of, did serve us
for preservatives against the country Mortality.
disease. And yet four of ours died in February and March, of them who were of
a fretful condition, or sluggish. Bad wind.
And I remember I observed that all had their lodgings on the West side, and
looking toward the wide open Port, which is almost four leagues long, shaped
ouale-wise, besides they had, all of them, ill bedding. For the former
sicknesses, and the going away of Monsieur Du Pont, in that manner as we have
said, caused the quilt beds to be cast away, for they were rotten. And they
that went with the said Monsieur Du Pont carried away the sheets and blankets,
challenging them as theirs. So that some of our people had sore mouths, and
swollen legs, like to the Phthisiques: Phthisies. Numbers. 11. verse. 33. and
Psalm. 106. verse. ^5.
which is the sickness that God sent to his people in the desert, in punishment
for that they would fill themselves with flesh, not contenting themselves with
that whereof the desert furnished them by the divine providence.

The state of Winter weather. Why raines and mists be scarce in winter.
We had fair weather almost during all the Winter. For neither raines nor
fogges are so frequent there as here, whether it be at sea or on the land: The
reason is, because the Sun beams, by the long distance, have not the force
to raise up vapors from the ground here, chiefly in a country all woody. But
in Summer it does, both from the sea and the land, when as their force is
augmented, and those vapors are dissolved suddenly or slowly, according as one
approaches to the Equinoctial line. For we see that Why it raineth between the
Tropiques.
between the two Tropiques it raineth in more abundance both at sea and on the
land, specially in Peru and Mexico, than in Africa, because the Sun by so
long space of sea, having drawn up much moistnes from the maine Ocean, he
dissolueth them in a moment by the great force of his heat; where contrariwise
toward the New found lands they maintain themselves along time in the air,
before they be turned into rain or be dispersed: which is done in Summer (as
we have said) and not in winter: and at sea more than on the land. For on the
land the morning mists serve for a dew, and fall about eight a clock: and at
sea they dure two, three, and eight days, as oftentimes we have tried.

Seeing then we are speaking of Winter, we say that raines being in those
parts rare, in that season, the Sun likewise shines there very fair, after
the fall of snowes, which we have had seven or eight times, but it is easily
melted in open places, and the longest abiding have been Snow is profitable.
in February. How so ever it be, the snow is very profitable for the fruits of
the earth, to preserve them against the frost, and to serve them as a
fur-gowne. Which is done by the admirable providence of God for the
preservation of men, and as the Psalm says,

Psalm. 147. verse. 16.
He gives Snow like wool, hoar frost
Like ashes he does spread,
Like morsels casts his Ice.
And as the sky is seldom covered with clouds toward New found lands in
Winter time, so are there morning Frosts when they are.
frostes, which do increase in the end of January, February and in the
beginning of March, for until the very time of January, we kept us still in
our dublets: And I remember The state of January.
that on a Sunday, the 14. day of that Month, in the afternoon, we sported our
selves singing in music upon the river L' Equille, and in the same month we
went to see the Corn two leagues off from our fort, and did dine merrily in the
Sunn-shine: I would not for all that say, that all other Conformity of weather
in East and West France.
years were like unto this. For as that winter was as mild in these parts,
these last Winters of the years 1607. 1608. have been the hardest that ever
was seen; it has also been a like in those countries, in such sort that many
Savages died through the rigor of the weather, as in these our parts many poor
people and travelers have been killed through the same hardness of Winter
weather. But I will say, that the year before we were in New France, the
Winter had not been so hard, as they which dwelt there before us have
testified unto me.

Let this suffice for that which concerns the winter season. But I am not yet
fully satisfied in searching the cause, why in one and the selfsame parallel
the season is in those Wherefore is the season late.
parts of New France more slow by a month than in these parts, and the leaves
appear not upon the trees but toward the end of the Month of May: unless we
say that the thickness of the woods and greatness of Forests do hinder the
Sun from warming of the ground: Item, that the country where we were is
joining to the sea, and thereby more subject to cold, as participating of Peru,
a country likewise cold, in regard of Africa: And besides that, this land
having never been tilled is the more dampish, the trees and plants not being
able easily to draw sap from their mother the earth. In recompense whereof the
Winter there is also more slow, as we have heererofore spoken.

Dressing of gardens.
The cold being passed, about the end of March the best disposed amongst us
striued who should best till the ground, and make gardens, to sow in them, and
gather fruits thereof. Which was to very good purpose, for we found great
discommodity in the Winter for want of garden herbs. When every one had done
his sowing, it was Good crop from the ground.
a marvelous pleasure in seeing them daily grow and spring up, and yet greater
contentment to use thereof so abundantly as we did: so that this beginning of
good hope made us almost to forget our native country, and especially when the
fish began to haunt fresh water, and came abundantly Abundance of fishes.
into our brooks, in such innumerable quantity that we knew not what to do
with it. Which thing when I consider, I cannot wonder enough how it is possible
that they which have been in Florida have suffered so great famins,
considering the temperature of the air, which is there, almost, without
Winter, and that their famine began in the months of April, May and June,
wherein they could want for no fish.

The care of Monsieur De Poutrincourt in providing for them that should come
after him. The building of a water-Mill.
Whilst some labored on the ground, Monsieur De Poutrincourt made some
buildings to be prepared, for to lodge them which he hoped should succeed us.
And considering how troublesome the hand mill was, he caused a water-mill to be
made, which caused the Savages to admire much at it. For indeed it is an
invention which came not into the spirit of men from the first ages After that,
our workmen had much rest, for the most part of them did almost nothing. But I
may say that this Mill, by the diligence of our Millers, did furnish us with
three times more Herrings Abundance o^ Herrings. Pilchers.
then was needful unto us for our sustenance. Monsieur De Poutrincourt made
two Hogsheads full of them to be salted, and one hogshead of Sardines, or
Pilchers to bring into France for a show, which were left in our return at S.
Maloes, to some Merchants.

Among all these things the said Monsieur De Poutrincourt did not neglect to
think on his return. Which was the part of a wiseman, for one must never put
so much trust in men's promises, but one must consider that very often many
disasters do happen to them in a small moment Preparation for the return.
of time. And therefore, even in the Month of April, he made two Barks to be
prepared, a great one and a small one, to come to seek out French-ships
toward Campseau, or New Foundland, if it should happen that no supply should
come unto us. But the Carpentry-worke being finished, one only inconvenience
might hinder us, that is, Great oversight. Monsieur De Poutrincourt his
invention.
we had no pitch to calke our vessels. This (which was the chiefest thing) was
forgotten at our departure from Rochel. In this important necessity, the said
Monsieur De Poutrincourt advised himself to gather in the woods quantity of
the gum issuing from Firre-trees. Which he did with much labor, going
thither himself, most often with a boy or two: so that in the end he got some
hundred pounds weight of it. Now after these labors, it was not yet all, for
it was needful to melt and purify the same, which was a necessary point and
unknown to our ship-Master Monsieur De Champ-dore, and to his Mariners, for as
much as, that the pitch we have, comes from Norwege, Suedland, Brick made in
New France.
and Danzick. Nevertheless the said Monsieur De Poutrincourt found the means
to draw out the quintessence of these gummes and Firre-tree barks: and caused
quantity of brickes to be made, with the which he made an open furnance,
wherein he put a limbecke made with many kettles, joined one in the other,
which he filled with those gums and barks: Then being well covered, fire was
put round about it, by whose violence the gum enclosed within the said
lembeckemelted, and dropped down into a basin; but it was needful to be very
watchful at it, by reason that if the fire had taken hold of the gum, all had
been lost. That was admirable, especially in a man that never saw any made.
Whereof the Savages being astonished did say, in words borrowed from the Basques,
Endia chaue Why the Savages call all French men Normands.
Normandia, that is to say, that the Normands know many things. Now they call
all Frenchmen Normands, except the Basques, because the most part of fishermen
that go afishing there, be of that nation. This remedy came very fitly unto
us, for those which came to seek us were fallen into the same want that we
were.

Now, as he which is in expectation has neither contentment nor rest until he
has that which he desires; likewise our men, in this season had often their
eyes upon the great compass of Port Royal, to see if they might discover any
ship a coming; wherein they were oftentimes deceived, imagining sometimes they
had heard a Canonshot, other while to perceive a sail: and very often taking
the Savages boats, that came to see us, for French shaloups. For at that time
great number of Savages assembled themselves at the passage of the said Port to
go to the wars against the Armouchiquois, as we News out of France.
will declare in the book following. Finally, that which was so much expected
and wished for, came at length, and we had news out of France, on the
Ascension day in the forenoone.

CHAP. XVII.
The arrival of the French: Monsieur De Monts his society is broken, and why:
the covetousness of them that do rob the dead: bonfires for the nativity of
the Duke of Orleans: the departing of the Savages to go to wars: Sagamos
Membertou: voyages upon the coast: Bay Francoise: base traffic: the town of
Ouigoudi: how the Savages do make great voyages: their bad intention: a steel
Mine: The voices of Sea woolues or Seals: the state of the I Will S. Croix: the
love of the Savages toward their children: the return into Port Royal.

THe Sun did but begin to cheer the earth, and to behold his Mistres with an
amorous aspect, when the Sagamos Membertou (after our prayers solemnly made to
God, and the breakfast distributed to the people, according to the custom)
came to give us aduertisment that he had seen a sail upon the lake, which
came toward our The old Savages have good sight.
Fort. At this joyful news every one went out to see, but yet none was found
that had so good a sight as he, though he be above 100. years old;
nevertheless we spied very soon what it was. Monsieur De Poutrincourt, caused
in all diligence the small Bark to be made ready for to go to view further.
Monsieur De Champ-dore and Daniel Hay went in her, and by the sign that had
been told them, being certain that they were friends, they made presently to
Salutations by Canonshots.
be charged four Canons and 12. fawkonnets, to salute them that came so far to
see us. They on their part did not fail in beginning the joy, and to discharge
their pieces, to whom they rendered the like with usury. It was only a small
bark under the charge of a young man of Saint Maloes, named Cheualier, who
being arrived at the Fort, delivered his letters to Monsieur De Poutrincourt,
which were read publicly. They did write unto him, that for to help to The
co^tents of the letters written to Monsieur De Poutrincourt.
save the charges of the voyage, the ship (being yet the Jonas) should stay at
Campseau Port, there to fish for Coddes, by reason that the Merchants associate
with Monsieur De Monts, knew not that there was any fishing farther than that
place: Notwithstanding if it were necessary he should cause the ship to come to
Port Royal. Moreover, that the The Society of Monsieur De Monts broken, and
why.
society was broken, because that contrary to the King his Edict, the
Hollanders, conducted by a traitorous Frenchman, called La Ieunesse, had the
year before taken up the Beuers and other Furs, of the great river of
Canada; a thing which did turn to the great damage of the Society, which for
that cause could no longer furnish the charges of the vnhabiting in these
parts, as it had done in times past. And therefore did send no body for to
remain there, after us. As we received joy to see our assured succor, we felt
also great grief to see so fair and so holy an enterprise broken: That so
many labors and perils past should serve to no effect: and that the hope of
planting the name of Monsieur De Poutrincourt. his resolution.
God and the Catholic faith should vanish away. Notwithstanding, after that
Monsieur De Poutrincourt, had a long while mused hereupon, he said, that
although he should have no body to come with him, but only his family, he
would not forsake the enterprise.

It was great grief unto us to abandon (without hope of return) a land that
had produced unto us so fair Corn, The English nation going to Virginia with
a zealous intent to plant true religion and so to (...)se Christ's blessed
flock, no doubt he will be their leader.
and so many fair adorned gardens. All that could be done until that time, was
to find out a place, fit to make a settled dwelling, and a land of good
fertility. And that being done, it was great want of courage to give over the
enterprise, for another year being passed, the necessity of maintaining an
habitation there, should be taken away, for the land was sufficient to yield
things necessary for life. This was the cause of that grief which pierced the
hearts of them which were desirous to see the Christian Religion established in
that country. But on the contrary, Monsieur De Monts, and his associates,
reaping no benefit, but loss, and having no help from the King, it was a
thing which they could not do, but with much difficulty to maintain an
habitation in those parts.

Monsieur De Monts is envied.
Now this envy for the trade of Beuers with the Savages, found not only place
in the Hollanders hearts, but also in French Merchants, in such sort that the
privilege which had been given to the said Monsieur De Monts for ten years,
was revoked. The insatiable avarice of men is a strange thing, which have no
regard to that which is honest, so that they may rifle and catch by what means
soever. Robbing from the dead.
And thereupon I will say moreover, that there have been some of them that came
to that country to fetch us home, that wickedly have presumed so much as to
strip the dead, and steal away the Beuers, which those poor people do put,
for their last benefit, upon them whom they bury, as we will declare more at
large in the book following. A thing that makes the French name to be odious,
and worthy disdain among them, which have no such sordide quality at all, but
rather having a heart truly noble The Savages be of a noble mind.
and generous, having nothing in private to themselves, but rather all things
common, and which ordinarily do present gifts (and that very liberally,
according to their ability) to them whom they love and honor. And besides this
mischief, it came to pass that the Savages, when that we were at Campseau,
killed him that had showed them the Sepulchers of their dead. I need not to
allege here what Herodote recites of the vile baseness of King Darius, who
thinking to have caught the old one in the nest (as says the proverb) that is
to say, great treasures, in the Tomb of The fair deceit of Semiramis.
Semiramis, Queen of the Babylonians, went away altogether confounded, as wise
as he came thither, having found in it a writing, altogether contrary to the
first he had read, which rebuked him very sharply for his avarice and
wickedness.

Let us return to our sorrowful news, and to the grief thereof. Monsieur De
Poutrincourt having propounded to some of our company, whether they would tarry
there for a year, eight good fellows offered themselves, who were promised
that every one of them should have a hogshead of wine, and corn sufficiently
for one year, but they demanded so great wages that they could not agree. So
resolution was taken for the return. Toward the evening Bonfires made for the
nativity of the Duke of Orleans.
we made bonfires for the nativity of my Lord the Duke of Orleans, and began
afresh to make our Canons and falconets to thunder out, accompanied with store
of Musket shots, having before sung for that purpose, Te Deum Laudamus.

The said Cheualier bringer of the news had borne the office of Captain in
the Ship that remained at Campseau, Refreshings sent to Monsieur de
Poutrincourt.
and in this condition there was given to him, for to bring unto us six
Weathers, 24. Hens* a pound of Peper, 20. pounds of Rice, as many of Raisens,
and of Prunes, a thousand of Almonds, a pound of Nutmegs, a quarter of Cinnamon,
two pounds of Maces, half a pound of Cloves, two pounds of Citron rindes, two
dozen of Citrons, as many Orenges, a Westphalia gamon of Bacon, and six other
gamons, a hogshead of Gascoine wine, and as much of Sack, a hogshead of
poudred Beef, four pottles and a half of oil of Olive, a Iar of Olives, a
barrel of Vinegar, and two Sugarloaues: but all that was lost through
Gutter-lane, and we A likorish trick played to Monsieur De Poutrincourt.
saw none of all these things to make account of: Nevertheless I have thought
good to name here these wares, to the end that they which will travel on the
seas may provide themselves therewith. As for the Hens and Weathers it Sea
provision
was told us that they died in the voyage, which we easily believed, but we
desired, at least, to have had the bones of them: they told us yet, for a
fuller answer, that they thought we had been all dead. See upon what ground the
consuming of our provision was founded. For all that, we gave good
entertainment to the said Cheualier and his company, which were no small
number, nor drinkers like The Marquis of Pisani a most sober man in drinking.
to the late deceased Monsieur Le Marquis de Pisani. Which made them like very
well of our company: for there was but Cider well watered, in the ship wherein
they came, for their ordinary portion. But as for the said Cheualier, even the
very first day he spoke of a return, Monsieur De Poutrincourt kept him some
eight days in delays, at the end whereof, this man willing to go away, the
said Cheualiers bad speeches told to Monsieur De Poutrincourt.
Monsieur De Poutrincourt put men in his Bark, and detained him, for some
report, that he had said, that being come to Campseau, he would hoise up sails
and leave us there.

Fifteen days after, the said Monsieur De Poutrincourt sent a bark to
Campseau, with part of our workmen, for to begin to pull down the house. In
the beginning of June The Savages go to the wars.
the Savages, about 400. in number, went away from the dwelling that the Sagamos
Membertou had newly made, in form of a town, compassed about with high pales,
for to go to wars against the Armouchiquois, which was at Chouakoct some 80.
leagues distant from Port Royal; from whence they returned victorious, by the
stratagems which I will declare in the description that I have made of this war
in French verses. The Savages were near two months in the assembling
themselves thither. The great Sagamos Membertou had made them to be warned
during, and before the Winter, having sent unto them men of purpose, namely his
two sons Actaudin and Actaudinech, to appoint them there the randez-uous, or
place of meeting. What man Membertou is.
This Sagamos is a man already very old, and has seen Captain James Qartier
in that country, at which time he was already married and had children, and
notwithstanding did not seem to be above 50. years old. He has been a very
great warrier in his young age, and bloody during his life: which is the cause
why he is said to have many enemies, and he is very glad to keep himself
near the French men, to live in security. During this gathering of people, it
behooued to make presents unto him, and gifts of Corn and Beans, yea of some
barell of wine, to feast his friends. For he declared to Monsieur De
Poutrincourt Membertou his declaration.
in these words: I am the Sagamos of this country, and am esteemed to be thy
friend, and of all the Normands (for so call they the French men, as I have
said) and that you make good reckoning of me: It would be a reproach unto me if
I did not show the effects of this love. And notwithstanding, whether it be
through envy, or otherwise, another Sagamos, named Shkoudun, who was a good
friend to Bad report against Membertou.
the French, and unfeigned, reported unto us, that Membertou did plot some thing
against us, and had made an Oration to that purpose. Which being understood by
Monsieur De Poutrincourt, he sent suddenly for him, to astonish him, and to see
if he would obey. Upon the first Membertous obeisance.
sending he came alone with our men, not making any refusal. Which was the
cause that he was permitted to return back in peace, having first been
kindly used, and had some bottell of wine, which he loves, because (says he)
that when he has drunk of it, he sleeps well, and has no more fear nor
care. This Membertou told us, at our Membertou his liberality. A Copper Mine.
first coming thither, that he would make the King a present of his Copper
Mine, because he saw we make account of Mines, and that it is meet that the
Sagamos be Courteous and liberal one toward the other. For he, being Sagamos,
esteems himself equal to the King, and to all his Lieutenants: And did say
often to Monsieur De Poutrincourt The Savages praise themselves.
that he was his great friend, brother, companion and equal, showing his
equality by joining the two fingers of the hand, that be called indices, or
demonstratiue fingers. Now although this present which he would give to his
Majesty was a thing that he cared not for, notwithstanding that proceeds from
a generous and good mind of his, which deserves as great praises as if the
thing had been of greater value. As did the Persian King, who received with as
good a will a handful of water from a poor Country man, as the greatest
presents that had been made unto him. For if Membertou had had more, he would
have offered it liberally.

Monsieur De Poutrincourt being not willing to depart thence, until he had
seen the issue of his expectation, that is to say, the ripeness of his Corn,
he deliberated, after that the Savages were gone to wars, to make voyages along
Voyages upon the Coast of the French Bay.
the Coast. And because Chaualier was desirous to gather some Beuers, he sent
him in a small bark to the River of S. John, called by the Savages, Ouigoudi,
and to the I Will Saint Croix: And he, the said Monsieur De Poutrincourt, went in
a shaloup to the said Copper Mine. I was of the said Cheualier his voyage: we
crossed the French Bay to go Salmons.
to the said river, where, as soon as we arrived, half a dosen Salmons newly
taken, were brought to us: we soiourned there four days, during which, we
went into the Assembly of Savages a feasting.
Cabins of Sagamos Chkoudun, where we saw some 80. or 100. Savages, all naked,
except their privy members, which were a making Tabagy (that is to say,
abanquetting) with the meal that the said Cheualier had trucked with Filthy
trading.
them for their old skins full of lice (for they gave him nothing but that
which they would cast away:) So made he there a traffic which I little
praise. But it may be that the odor of lucre is sauory and sweet, of what
thing so ever it be, and the Emperor Vespasian did not disdain to receive in
his own hands, the tribute which came unto him from the pissing vessels of
Rome.

Being among those Savages, the Sagamos Chkoudun would needs give us the
pleasure, in seeing the order and gesture that they hold going to the wars,
and made them all to pass before us, which I reserve to speak of in the
Ouigoudi town.
book following. The Town of Ouigoudi (so I call the dwelling of the said
Chkoudun) was a great enclosure upon an hill, compassed about with high and
small trees, tied one against another, and within it many Cabins, great and
small, one of which was as great as a Market hall, wherein many households
retired themselves: And as for the same where they made their Tabagie, it was
somewhat less. A good part of the said Savages were of Gachepe, Gachape is the
beginning of the great river of Canada. How the Savages do make great voiages.
which is the beginning of the great river of Canada; and they told us, that
they came from their dwelling thither in six days, which made me much to
marvel, seeing the distance that there is by sea, but they shorten very much
their ways, and make great voiages by the means of lakes and rivers, at the
end of which being come, in carrying their Canowes three or four leagues, they
get to other rivers that have a contrary course. All these Savages were come
thither to go to the wars with Membertou against the Armouchiquois.

But because I have spoken of this river of Ouigoudi, in Monsieur De Monts
voyage, I will not at this time speak more of it. When we returned to our
Bark, which was at the coming in of the Port, half a league off from thence,
sheltered by a causie that the sea has made there, our men, and specially
Captain Champ-dore, that conducted us, were in doubt, lest some mischance
should happen unto us, and having seen the Savages in arms, thought it had
been to do us some mischief, which had been very easy, for we were but
two, and therefore they were very glad of our return. After which, the next
day come the wizard The subtilty of an Autmoi^ or Savage Soothsaier.
or Soothsaier of that quarter, crying as a madman toward our bark. Not
knowing what he meant, he was sent for in a Cock boat, and came to parley with
us, telling us that the Armouchiquois were within the woods, which came to
assail them, and that they had killed some of their folks that were ahunting:
And therefore that we should come aland to assist them. Having heard this
discourse, which according to our judgment, tended to no good, we told him
that our iournies were limited, and our victuals also, and that it was
behouefull for us to begone. Seeing himself denied, he said that before two
years were come about, they would either kill all the Normands, or that the
Normands should kill them. We mocked him and told him that we would bring our
Bark before their Fort to ransacke them all; but we did it not, for we went
away that day: And having the wind contrary, we sheltred our selves under a
small Island, where we were two days: during which, some went a shooting at
Mallards for provision; others attended one the Cookery: And Captain Champdore
and my self, went along the rocks with hammers A Mine of Steel.
and chisels, seeking if there were any Mines. In doing whereof we found
quantity of steel among the rocks, which was since molten by Monsieur De
Poutrincourt, who made wedges of it, and it was found very fine steel, whereof
he caused a knife to be made, that did cut as a razor, which at our return
he showed to the King.

From thence we went in three days to the I Will S. Croix, being often contraried
with the winds. And because we had a bad conjecture of the Savages, which we
did see in great number, at the river of S. John, and that the troop Menane.
that was departed from Port Royal was yet at Menane (an I Will between the said
Port Royal and S. Croix) which Good watch. Seals voices.
we would not trust, we kept good watch in the night time: At which time we did
often hear Seals voices, which were very like to the voice of Owls: A thing
contrary to the opinion of them that have said and written that fishes have no
voice.

The arrival in the I Will of Saint Croix. The state of the same.
Being arrived at the I Will Saint Croix, we found there the buildings, left there
all whole, saving that the Storehouse was uncovered of one side. We found
there yet Sack in the bottom of a pipe, wereof we drank, and it was not much
the worse. As for gardens, we found there Coaleworts, Sorrel, Lettuces, which
we used for the kitching. Turtles.
We made there also good pasties of Turtle Doves, which are very plentiful in
the woods, but the grass is there so high that one could not find them when
they were killed and fallen in the ground. The court was there, full of whole
caskes, which some ill disposed Mariners did burn for their pleasures, which
thing when I saw, I did abhor, and I did judge, better than before, that the
Savages were (being The Savages of better nature than many Christians.
less ciuilized) more humane and honester men, than many that bear the name of
Christians, having, during three years, spared that place, wherein they had
not taken so much as a piece of wood, nor salt, which was there in great
quantity, as hard as a rock.

A number of Isles.
Going from thence, we cast anchor among a great number of confused Isles, where
we heard some Savages, and we did call to make them come to us. They answered
us with the like call. Whereunto one of ours replied, Oven Kirau? that is to
say, What are ye? they would not discover themselves. But the next day
Oagimont, the Sagamos of this river, came to us, and we knew it was he whom we
heard. He did prepare to follow Membertou and his troop to the wars, where
he was grievously wounded, as I have said in my verses upon this matter. This
Oagimont has a daughter about eleven years old, who is very comely, which
Monsieur De Poutrincourt desired to have, and has The love of the Savages
toward their children.
oftentimes demanded her of him to give her to the Queen, promising him that he
should never want Corn, nor any thing else; but he would never condescend
thereto.

Being entered into our Bark he accompanied us, until we came to the broad
sea, where he put himself in his shaloup to return back; and for us we bent
our course for Port Royal, where we arrived before day, but we were Arrival
into Port Royal.
before our Fort, just at the very point that fair Aurora began to show her
reddy cheeks upon the top of our woody hills; every body was yet asleep, and
there was but one that rose up, by the continual barking of dogs; but we
made the rest soon to awake, by peales of Musket shots and trumpets-sound.
Monsieur De Poutrincourt was but the day before, arrived from his voyage to the
mines, whither we have said that he was to go: and the day before that, was
the Bark arrived that had carried part of our workmen to Campseau. So that all
being assembled, there rested nothing more than to prepare things necessary for
our shipping. And in this business our Water-Mill did us very good service, for
otherwise there had been no means to prepare meal enough for the voyage, but
in the end we had more than we had need of, which was to the Savages, to the
end to have us in remembrance.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Port de Campseau: our departure from Port Royal: fogs of eight days
continuance: a Rainbow appearing in the water: the Port De Saualet: tillage
an honor able exercise: the Savages grief at Monsieur De Poutrincourts going
away: return into France: voyage to Mount Saint Michael: fruits of New France
presented to the King: a voyage into New France after the said Monsieur De
Poutrincourt his return.

Upon the point that we should take our leave of Port The description of the
Port De Campseau.
Royal, Monsieur De Poutrincourt sent his men, one after another, to find out
the ship at Campseau, which is a Port being between seven or eight Islands,
where ships may be sheltered from winds: and there is a Bay of above 15.
leagues depth, and 6. or 7. leagues broad. The said place being distant from
Port Royal above 150. leagues. We had a great Bark, two small ones, and a
shaloup. In one of the small Barks some men were shipped that were sent
before. And the 30. of July the other two went away. I was in the great one,
conducted by Monsieur De Champ-dore. But Monsieur De Poutrincourt, desirous to
see an end of our sowed corn, tarried till it was ripe, and The parting from
Port Royal. Eight days mist.
remained there eleven days yet after us. In the mean time, our first iourny
having been the passage of Port Royal, the next day, mistes came and spread
themselves upon the sea, which continued with us eight whole days: during
which, all we could do was to get to Cap De Sable, which we saw not.

In these Cimmerian darknesses, having one day cast anchor in the sea, by reason
of the night, our anchor driued in such sort, that in the morning, the tide had
carried us among Islands; and I marvel that we were not cast away, Peril.
Abundance offaire Cod.
striking against some rocks. But for victuals, we wanted for no fish, for in
half an hours fishing we might take Codde enough for to feed us a fortnight,
and of the fairest and fattest that ever I saw, being of the color of Carpes;
which I have never known nor noted, but in this part of the said Cap De Sable;
which after we had passed, the tide (which is swift in this place) brought us
in short time as far as to the Port De La Heue, thinking that we were no Port
De la Heue.
further than the Port Du Mouton. There we tarried two days, and in the very
same Port we saw the Coddes bite at the hook. We found there store of red
Gooseberies, and a Marcassite of Copper Mine: we also made there some trucking
with the Savages for skins.

From thence forward we had wind at will, and during that time it happened
once, that being upon the hatches, I cried out to our Pilote Monsieur De
Champdore, that we were ready to strike, thinking I had seen the bottom of
the sea; but I was deceived by the Rainbow which did The Rainebow appeaing in
the water.
appear with all his colors in the water, procured by the shadow, that our
boarespright sail did make over the same, being opposite to the Sun, which
asembling his beams, within the hollownesse of the same sail, as it does
within the clouds, those beams were forced to make a reuerberation in the
water, and to show forth this wonder. In the end we arrived within four
leagues of Campseau, at a Port, where a good old man of Saint John De Lus,
called Captain Saualet, received us with all the kindness in the world. And
for as much as this Port (which is little, but very fair) has no name, I have
qualified it in my Geographicall Port Saualet. 42. voyages made in New found
land.
Map, with the name of Saualet. This good honest man told us that the same
voyage was the 42. voyage that he had made into those parts, and nevertheless
the New-found-land-men do make but one in a year. He was maruellously pleased
with his fishing; and told us moreover that he took every day fifty Crowns
worth of fish, Good fishing.
and that his voyage would be worth 1000. pounds. He paid wages to 16 men, and
his vessel was of 80. tons, which could carry 100000. dry fishes. He was
sometimes Savages vnportunate.
vexed with the Savages that did cabine there, who too boldly and impudently
went into his ship, and carried away from him what they listed. And for to
avoid their troublesome behavior, he threatened them that we would come
thither, and that we would put them all to the edge 150. Leagues off ^hey fear
the Frenchmen, inhabited beyond that.
of the sword, if they did him wrong. This did fear them, and they did him not
so much harm, as otherwise they would have done. Notwithstanding whenever
the Fishermen came with their shaloups full of fish, they did choose what seemed
good unto them, and they did not care for Codde, but rather took Merlus, or
Whitings, Barses or fletans, a kind of very great Turbots, which might be worth
here in Paris above four crowns apeece, and paraduenture six or more, for it
is a marvelous good meat, specially when they be great, and of the thickness
of six fingers, as are those that be taken there. And it would have been very
hard to bridle their insolency, because that for to do it, one should be
forced to have always weapons in hand, and Saualet his kindness.
so the work should be left undone. The good nature and honesty of this man was
extended, not only to us, but also to all our people that passed by his Port,
for it was the passage to go and come from Port Royal. But there were some of
them that came to fetch us home, who did worse than the Savages, using him as
the Soldier does the poor peasan, or country Farmer, here: a thing which was
very grievous for me to hear.

We were 4. days there, by reason of the contrary wind. Then came we to
Campseau, where we tarried for the other Bark, which came two days after us.
And as for Monsieur De Poutrincourt, as soon as he saw that the corn might be
reaped, he pulled up some Rye, root and all, for to show hear the beauty,
goodness and unmeasurable height of the same. He also made gleanes of the
other Exceeding fair Corn.
sorts of seeds, as Wheat, Barley, Oats, Hemp, and others, for the same
purpose: which was not done by them that have heretofore been in Brasill and
in Florida. Wherein I have cause to rejoice, because I was of the company and
of the first tillers of that land. And herein I pleased my self the more,
when I did set before mine eyes our ancient father Noah, a great King, great
Priest, and great Prophet The tillage of the ground is an honorable exercise.
, whose occupation was to husband the ground, both in sowing of Corn and
planting the Vine: And the ancient Roman Captain, Seranus, who was found
sowing of his field, when that he was sent for, to conduct the Roman Army:
And Quintus Cincinatus, who all dusty did plough four akers of lands, bare
headed and open stomackt, when the Senats Harold brought letters of the
Dictatorship unto him; in sort, that this messenger was forced to pray him to
cover himself, before he declared his Embassage unto him. Delighting my self
in this exercise, God Fair Wheat
has blessed my poor labor, and I have had in my garden as fair wheat as any
can be in France, whereof the said Monsieur De Poutrincourt gave unto me a
gleane, when he came to the said Port De Campseau.

The Savages return from the wars.
He was ready to depart from Port Royal, when Membertou and his company
arrived, victorious over the Armouchiquois. And because I have made a
description of this war in French Verses, I will not here trouble my paper
with it, being desirous rather to be brief, than to seek out new matter. At
the instant of the said Membertou he tarried yet one day. But it was pitious to
see at his departing The Savages tears at the going away of the French men.
, those poor people weep, who had been always kept in hope that some of
ours should always tarry with them. In the end promise was made unto them,
that the year following, households and families should be sent thither, wholly
to inhabit their land, and teach them trades for to make them live as we do,
which promise did somewhat Meal left behind.
comfort them. There was left remaining ten hogsheads of Meal, which were given
to them, with the Corn that we had sowed, and the possession of the Manor,
if they would use it, which they have not done. For they cannot be constant in
one place, and live as they do.

Monsieur De Poutrincourt his going away.
The eleventh of August the said Monsieur De Poutrincourt departed, with eight
in his company, from the said Port Royal, in a Shaloup to come to Campseau: A
thing maruellously dangerous to cross so many baies and seas in so small a
vessel, laden with nine persons, with victuals necessary for the voyage, and
reasonable great quantity of other stuff. Being arrived at the Port of
Captain Saualet, he received them all as kindly as it was possible for him:
And from thence they came to us, to the said Port of Campseau, where we tarried
yet eight days.

The departing from New France.
The third day of September, we weighed ankers, and with much ado came we from
among the rocks, that be about the said Campseau. Which our Mariners did with
two shaloups that did carry their ankers very far into the sea, for to uphold
our ship, to the end she should not strike against the rocks. Finally, being
at sea, one of the said shaloups was let go, and the other was taken into the
Jonas, which besides our lading, did carry 100000. of fish, as well dry as
green. We had reasonable good wind until we came near to the lands of
Europe: But we were not ouercloied with good cheer, because that (as I have
said) they who came to fetch us, presuming we were dead did cramme themselves
with our refreshing commodities. Our workmen drank no more wine, after we had
left Port Royal: And we had but small portion thereof, because that which did
over abound with us, was drunk merrily in the company of them that brought us
news from The sight of the Sorlingues.
France.

The 26. of September we had sight of the Sorlingues, which be at the lands end
of Cornwall in England, and the 28. thinking to come to Saint Maloes, we were
forced Then of France.
(for want of good wind) to fall into Roscoff in Base Bretaigne, where we
remained two days and a half, refreshing our selves. We had a Savage who
wondered very much, seeing the buildings, steeples, and Wind-mils in France: yea
also of the women, whom he had never seen clothed after our manner. From
Roscoff (giving thanks to God) we came with a good wind unto Saint Maloes.
Wherein I cannot but praise the watchful foresight of our Master, Nicolas
Martin, in having so skilfully conducted us in such a navigations, and among so
many banks and dangerous rocks, wherewith the coast, from the Cap of Vshant to
Saint Maloes, is full. If this man be praise worthy, in this his action;
Captain Foulques deserves no less praises, having brought us through so many
contrary winds, into unknown lands, where the first foundations of New France
have been laid.

The voyage unto S. Michael.
Having tarried three or four days at Saint Maloes, Monsieur De Poutrincourts
son, and my self, went to Mount Saint Michael, where we saw the relikes,
all, saving the Buckler of this holy Archangell. It was told us that the Lord
Bishop of Auranches, had, four or five years ago, forbidden to show it any
more. As for the building, it meriteth The eight wonder of the world.
to be called the 8. wonder of the world, so fair and great is it, upon the
point of one only rock, in the midst of the waves, at full sea. True it is,
that one may say that the sea came not thither when the said building was made.
But I will reply, that howsoever it be, it is admirable. The complaint that
may be made in this respect, is, that so many fair buildings are unprofitable
in these our days, as in the most part of the Abbeys of France. And would to
God that by some Archimedes means, they might be transported into New France,
there to be better employed to Gods service and the Kings. At the return we
came to see the fishing of Oysters at Cancale.

After we had soiorned eight days at Saint Maloes, we Monsieur De Poutrincourt
his industry.
came, in a Bark, to Honfleur, where Monsieur De Poutrincourt his experience
stood us in good stead, who seeing our Pilots at their wits end, when they saw
themselves between the Isles of Ierzy and Sare (not being accustomed to take
that course, where we were driven by a great wind, East South-East,
accompanied with fogs and rain) he took his sea-chard in hand, and played the
part of a Pilot, in such sort that we passed the Raz Blanchart (a dangerous
passage for small Barks) and we came easily, following the coast of Normandy,
to Honfleur; for which, eternal praises be given to God. Amen.

Harvest of New France, showed to the King.
Being at Paris, the said Monsieur De Poutrincourt presented the King with the
fruits of the land from whence he came, and especially the Corn, Wheat, Rye,
Barley and Oats, as being the most precious thing that may be brought from
what country soever. It had been very fit to vow these first fruits to God,
and to place them in some church among the monuments of triumph, with more just
Plin. lib. 18. cap. 2.
cause than the ancient Romans, who presented to their country Gods and
Goddesses Terminus, Seia, and Segesta the first fruits of their tillage, by the
hands of the Priests of the fields, instituted by Romulus, which was the first
order in new Rome, who had for Blason, a hat of the ears of Corn.

Outardes, or wild Geese, presented to the King.
The said Monsieur De Poutrincourt had bred ten Outards, taken from the
shell, which he thought to bring all into France, but five of them were lost,
and the other five he gave to the King, who delighted much in them; and they
are at Fonteine Belleau.

Upon the fair show of the fruits of the said Country Privilege of Beauers
confirmed to Monsieur De Monts. Three ships sent 1608.
the King did confirm to Monsieur De Monts the privilege for the trade of
Beuers with the Savages, to the end to give him means to establish his
Colonies in New France. And by this occasion he sent thither in March last,
Families, there to begin Christian and French Commonwealths, which God
vouchsafe to bless and increase.

The said ships being returned, we have had report by News from New France
since our coming from thence.
Monsieur De Champ-dore, and others, of the state of the Country which we had
left, and of the wonderful beauty of the Corn that the said Monsieur De
Poutrincourt had sowed before his departure, together of the grains that be
fallen in the gardens, which have so increased that it is an incredible thing.
Membertou did gather six or seven barrels of the corn that we had sowed: and
had yet one left, which he reserved for the Frenchmen, whom he looked It is
very dangerous to teach the Savages the use of gunnes.
for, who arriving he saluted with three Musket shots and Bonfires. When it was
laid to his charge that he had eaten our Pigions, which we left there, he fell
aweeping, and embracing him that told it him, said, that it was the Macharoa,
that is to say, the great birds which are Eagles, Eagles.
which did eat many of them, while we w^^^ there. Moreover, all great and small,
did inquire how we did, naming every one by his own name, which is a witness
of great love.

From Port Royal, the said Champ-dore went as far as Chouakouet, the
beginning of the Armouchiquois land, where he pacified that nation with the
Etechemins, which was not done without solemnity. For as he had begun to speak
of it, the Captain, who is now instead of Olmechin, named Astikou, a grave man
and of a goodly presence, how savage soever he be, demanded that some one of
the said Etechemins should be sent to him, and that he would treat with him.
Oagimont, Sagamos of the river S. Croix, was appointed The Savages wisdom.
for that purpose, and he would not trust them, but under the assurance of the
Frenchmen he went thither. Some presents were made to Astikou, who, upon the
speech of peace, began to exhort his people and to show them the causes that
ought to induce them to hearken unto it. Whereunto they condescended, making an
exclamation at every article that he propounded to them. Some five years ago
Monsieur De Monts had likewise pacified those nations, and had declared unto
them, that he would be enemy to the first of them that should begin the war,
and would pursue him. But after his return into France, they could not
contain themselves in peace. And the Armouchiquois did kill a Souriquois
Savage, called Panoniac, who went to them for to trucke merchandise, which he
took at the storehouse of the said Monsieur De Monts. The war above
mentioned happened by reason of this said murder, under the conduct of Sagamos
Membertou: the said war was made in the very same place, where I now make
mention, that Monsieur Champlein is now in the river of Canada. Cattle. Fruit
trees. Vines. Hemp.
Monsieur de Champdore did treat the peace this year. Monsieur Champlein is
in another place, to wit in the great river of Canada, near the place where
captain James Quartier did winter, where he has fortified himself, having
brought thither households, with cattle and diverse sorts o^ ^ite-trees. There
is store of vines, and excellent hemp, in the same place where he is, which
the earth brings footh of it self. He is not a man to be idle, and we expect
shortly news of the whole discovery of this great and incomparable river, and
of the countries which it washes on both sides, by the diligence of the said
Monsieur De Poutrincourt his resolution
Champlein.

As for Monsieur De Poutrincourt, his desire is immutable, in this resolution
to inhabit and adorn his Province, to bring thither his family, and all sorts
of trades necessary for the life of man. Which, with Gods help he will 1609.
continue to effect all this present year 1609. And, as long as he has vigor
and strength, will prosecute the same, to live there under the Kings obeisance.

The second Book of the History of Noua Francia, containing the fashions and
manners of life of the people there, and the fertility of the Lands and Seas
mentioned in the former Book.
THE PREFACE.
ALmighty God, in the creation of this world, has so much delighted himself
in diversity, that, whether it be in Heaven, or in the Earth, either under the
same or in the profound depth of waters, the effects of his might and glory do
shine in every place. But the wonder that far exceeds all others, is, that in
one and the self same kind of Creature, I mean in Man, are found more variety
than in other things created. For if one enters into the consideration of his
face, two shall not be found who in every respect do resemble one another: If
he be considered in the voice, the same variety shall be found: If in the
speech, all Nations have their proper and peculiar language, whereby one is
distinguished from the other. But in manners and fashion of life, there is a
marvelous difference, which (without troubling our selves in crossing the Seas
to have the experience thereof) we see visibly in our very neighborhood. Now
forasmuch as it is a small matter to know, that people differ from us in
customs and manners, unless we know the particularities thereof; a small thing
is it likewise to know, but that, which is near to us: but the fair Science
is to know the manner of life of all Nations of the World, for which reason
Ulysses has been esteemed, because he had seen much and known much. It has
seemed necessary unto me to exercise my self in this second book upon this
subject, in that which touches the Nations spoken of by us, seeing that I have
tied my self unto it, and that it is one of the best parts of an History,
which without it would be defective, having but slightly and casually handled
here above those things that I have reserved to speak of here. Which also I
do, to the end, if it please God to take pity of those poor people, and to
work by his holy spirit, that they be brought into his fold, their children
may know hereafter what their Fathers were, and bless them that have employed
themselves in their conversion, and reformation of their vnciuility. Let us
therefore begin with man from his birth, and having in gross marked out what
the course of his life is, we will conduct him to the grave, there to leave him
to rest, and also to repose our selves.

CHAP. I.
Of the Nativity of Man.
THe author of the book of Wisdom, called Solomon, witnesses unto us a most
true thing, that All men have a like entrance into the world, and the like
going out. But each several people has brought some ceremonies, after these
were accomplished. For some have wept, seeing the birth of man upon this
worldly Theater. Others have rejoiced at it, as well because Nature has given
to every creature a desire to preserve his own kind, as for that, Man having
been made mortal by sin, he desires to be in some sort restored again to
that lost right of immortality, and to leave some visible image issued from
him, by the generation of children. I will not here discourse upon every
Nation, for it would be an infinite thing. But I will say that the Hebrews at
the nativity of their children did make some particular ceremonies unto them,
spoken of by the Prophet Ezechiel, who having Ezech. 16. verse. 23. 4.
in charge to make a demonstration to the City of Jerusalem of her own
abomination, does reproach unto her, saying, that she is issued and borne out of
the Cananaeans Country, that her father was an Amorite, and her mother an
Hittite. And as for thy birth (says he) in the day that thou wast borne thy
navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water to soften thee, nor
salted with salt, nor any wise Julian. imp. Sidon. Car. 7. Claudian. in Ruffin.
lib. 2.
swadled in cloutes. The Cimbres did put their newborn children into the snow
to harden them: And the Frenchmen did plunge theirs into the river Rhine, to
know if they August. epist. ad Maxim. Philos.
were legitinate: for if they did sink unto the bottom they were esteemed
bastards, and if they did swim on the water they were legitimate, meaning (as
it were) that Frenchmen ought naturally to swim upon the waters. As for our
Savages of New France, when that I was there, thinking nothing less than on
this History, I took not heed of many things which I might have observed: But
yet I remember, that as a woman was delivered of her child they came into our
Fort, to demand very instantly for some grease or oil to make the child to
swallow it down before they give him the dugge or any food: they can render no
reason for this, but that it is a custom of long continuance. Whereupon I
conjecture that the devil (who has always borrowed ceremonies from the
Church, as well in the ancient as in the new law) would, that his people (so
do I call them that believe not in God, and are out of the Communion of
Saints) should be anointed like to Gods people: which unction he has made to
be inward, because the spiritual unction of the Christians is so.

CHAP. II.
Of the imposition of names.
AS for imposition of names, they give them by tradition, that is to say, they
have great quantity of names, which they choose and impose on their children.
The dignity of eldership or first borne.
But the eldest son commonly bears his fathers name, adding at the end some
diminutiue: as the eldest of Membertou shall be called Membertouchis, as it
were the lesser, or the younger Membertou. As for the younger Son, he bears not
the Fathers name, but they give him such name as they list: And he that is
borne after him shall bear his name, adding a syllable to it: as the younger of
Membertou is called Actaudin, he that comes after is called Actaudinech. So
Memembourre had a son named Semcoud, and his younger was called Semcoudech. It
is not for all that a general rule, to add this termination each. For
Panoniacs younger Son (of whom mention is made in Membertous war against the
Armouchiquois, which I have described in the Muses of New France) was called
Panouiagues: so that this termination is done according as the former name
requires it. But they have a custom The changing of names.
that when this elder brother, or father, is dead, they change name, for to
avoid the sorrow that the remembrance of the deceassed might bring unto them.
This is the cause why, after the decease of Memembourre, and Semcoud, (that
died this last Winter) Semcoudech has left his brothers name, and has not
taken that of his father, but rather has made himself to be called Paris,
because he dwelt in Paris. And after Panoniacs death, Panoniagues forsook his
name, and was, by one of our men, called Roland: which I find evil and
indiscreetly done, so to profane Christians names, and to impose them upon
Infidels: as I remember of another that was called Martin. Alexander the Great
(though he was an Heathen) would not that any should bear his name, unless he
should render himself worthy thereof by virtue. And, as one day a soldier,
bearing the name of Alexander, was accused before him to be voluptuous and
lecherous, he commanded him, either to forsake that name, or to change his life.

The Brasiliens (as John De Leri says, whom I had rather follow in that which
he has seen, than a Spaniard) impose names to their children of the first
thing that comes before them, as if a bow and string come to their
imagination, they will call their child Ourapacen, which signifies a bow and a
string, and so consequently. In regard of our Savages, they have at this day
names without signification, which peradventure in the first imposing of them,
did signify some thing, but as the tongues do change the knowledge thereof is
lost. Of all the names of them that I have known, I have learned none, saving
that Chkoudun signifies a Trowt: and Oigoudi the name of the river of the said
Chkoudun, which signifies to see. It is very certain, that names have not
been imposed, to what thing soever, without reason. For Adam gave the name to
every living creature, according to the property and nature thereof, and
consequently names have been given to men signifying something: As Adam
signifies* Man, or that which is made of earth: Euah signifies, the Mother of
all living: Abel, weeping: Cain, possession: Jesus, a Savior: Devil, a
Slanderer: Satan, an adversary etc. Among the Romans, some were called Lucius,
because they were born at the break of day; Others Caesar, for that the
Mothers belly was cut at the birth of him that first did bear this name: In
like manner Lentulus, Piso, Fabius, Cicero, etc. all nicknames, given by reason
of some accident, like our Savages names, but with some more judgment.

CHAP. III.
Of the feeding of their Children.
Esaias 49. verse. 15.
ALmighty God, showing a true Mothers duty, says by the Prophet Esaias: Can a
woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the Son of her womb? This
pity which God requires in Mothers, is to give the breast to their children,
and not to change the food which they have given unto them before their birth.
But at this day the most part make their breasts to serve for alurements to
whoredom, and being willing to set themselves at ease, free from the childrens
noise, do send them into the Country, where peradventure they be changed or
given to bad nurses, whose corruption and bad nature they suck with their
milk. And from thence come the changelings, weak and degenerate from the
right stock whose names they bear. The Savage women bear a greater love than
that toward their young ones: for none but themselves do nourish them: And
that is general thorowout all the West Indies: likewise their breasts are no
baits of love, as in these our parts, but rather, love in those lands is made
by the flame that nature kindles in every one, without annexing any arts to
it, either by painting, amorous poisons or otherwise. And for this manner of
nursing their children, are the ancient German women praised by Tacitus,
because that every one did nurse their Children with her own breasts, and would
not have suffered that another besides themselves should give suck to their
children. Now our Savage women do give unto them, with the dugge, meats which
they use, having first well chawed them: and so by little and little bring them
up. As for the swaddling of them, they that dwell in hot Countries and near the
Tropicks, have no care of it, but leave them free unbound. But drawing toward
the North, the mothers have an even smooth board, like the covering of a drawer
or cupborod, upon which they lay the child wrapped in a Beauer fur, unless it be
too hot, and tied thereupon with some swaddling band, whom they carry on their
backs their legs hanging down: then being returned into their Cabins they
set them in this manner up straight against a stone or some thing else. And as
in these our parts, one gives small feathers and gilt things to little
children, so they hang quantity of beads and small square toies, diversely
colored, in the upper part of the said board or plancke, for the decking of
theirs.

CHAP. IIII.
Of their love toward their children.
THat which we have said even now, is a part of true love, which does shame the
Christian women. But after the Children be weaned, and at all times, they love
them all, observing this law that Nature has grafted in the hearts of all
creatures (except in leaud slippery women) to have care of them. And when it is
question to demand of them some of their children (I speak of the S^^riquois,
in whose land we dwelt) for to bring them into France, they will not give them:
but if any one of them does yield unto it, presents must be given unto him,
besides large promises. We have already spoken of this at the end of the 17.
chapter. So then I find that they have wrong to be called Barbarous, seeing
that the ancient Romans were far more Brabarous than they, who oftentimes sold
their The cause why the Savages love their children more than we do in these
parts.
children for to have means to live. Now that which causes them to love their
children more than we do in these parts is, that they are the maintenance of
their fathers in their old age, whether it be to help them to live, or to
defend them from their enemies: And nature conserueth wholly in them her right
in this respect. By reason whereof that which they wish most is to have number
of children, Gens. 2. verse. 28.
to be thereby so much the mightier, as in the first age of the world, when
virginity was a thing reproouable, because of Gods commandment to man and
women to increase, multiply and replenish the earth: but after it was filled,
this love waxed marvelous cold, and children began to be a burden to fathers
and mothers, whom many have had in disdain, and have very often procured
their Means to ease the families of France.
death: Now is the way open for France to have a remedy for the same. For if it
please God to guide and prosper the voyages of New France. whosoever in these
parts shall find himself oppressed may pass thither, and there end his days
in rest, and that without feeling any poverty: or if any one finds himself
ouerburthened with children, he may send half of them thither, and with a
small portion they shall be rich and possess the land, which is the most
assured condition of this life. For we see at this day, labor and pain in all
vocations, yea in them of the best sort, which are often crossed through envy
and wants: others will make a hundred cappings and crouchings for to live, and
yet they do but pine away. But the ground never deceaueth us, if we earnestly
cherish her. Witness the fable of him, who by his last will and testament, did
declare to his children that he had hidden a treasure in his Vineyard, and as
they had well and deeply dug and turned it they found nothing, but the
year being come about, they gathered so great a quantity of grapes, that they
knew not where to bestow them. So through all the holy Scripture, the promises
that God makes to the Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and afterward to
the people of Israel, by the mouth of Moses, is, that they shall possess the
To possess the land is a rich heritage.
land, as a certain heritage that cannot perish, and where a man has wherewith
to sustain his family, to make himself strong and to live in innocence:
according to the speeches of the ancient Cato, who did say, that commonly Plin.
lib. 18. cap. 5.
Husbandmen, or Farmers Sons be valiant and strong, and do think on no harm.

CHAP. 5.
Of their Religion.
MAn being created after the image of God, it is good reason that he
acknowledge, serve, worship, praise and bless his Creator, and that therein he
employ his whole desire, his mind, his strength and his courage. But the
nature of man having been corrupted by sin, this fair light that God had
first given unto him, has been so darkened, that he is become thereby to lose
the knowledge of his beginning. And for as much as God shows not himself unto
us by a certain visible form, as a father or a King might do; man finding
himself overcome with poverty and infirmity, not settling himself to the
contemplation of the wonders of this Almighty workman, and to seek him as he
ought to be sought for, with a base and brutish spirit, miserably has he
forged to himself gods, according to his own fancy: And there is nothing
visible in the world, but has been deified in some place or other: yea even
in that rank and degree, imaginary things has also been put, as Virtue,
Hope, Honor, Fortune, and a thousand such like things: Item infernal gods,
and sicknesses, and all sorts of plagues, every one worshipping the things that
he stood in fear of. But notwithstanding, though Tuliie has said, speaking of
the nature of the gods, that there is no nation so savage, or brutish nor so
barbarous, but is seasoned with some opinion of them: yet there have been
found, in these later ages, nations that have no feeling thereof at all: which
is so much the stranger that among them, there Idolaters in Virginia.
were, and yet are, Idolaters, as in Mexico and Virginia. If we will we may add
heereunto Florida. And notwithstanding, all being well considered, seeing the
condition both of the one and of the other is to be lamented, I give more
praise to him that worshippeth nothing, than to him who worshippeth creatures
without either life or sense, for at least, as bad as he is, he blasphemeth
not, and gives not the glory due to God to an other, living (indeed) a life
not much differing from brutishness: but the same is yet more brutish that
adoreth a dead thing, and puts his confidence in it. And besides, he which
is not stained with any bad opinion, is much more capable of true adoration,
than the other: being like to a bare table, which is ready to receive what
color soever one will give to it. For when any people has once received a bad
impressio^ of doctrine, one must root it out from them before another may be
placed in them. Which is very difficult, as well for the obstinacy of men,
which do say, our fathers have lived in this sort: as for the hindrance that
they give them which do teach them such a doctrine, and others whose life
depends thereupon, who do fear that their means of gain be taken from
them: even as that Demetrius the siluersmith, Act. 19. verse. 24. The Savages
easy to be converted to the Christian religion. James Cartier.
mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles. This is the reason why our Savages of
New France will be found more easy to receive the Christian doctrine, if once
the Province be thoroughly inhabited. For (that we may begin with them of Canada)
James Quartier, in his second relation, recites that which I have said a
little before, in these words, which are not here laid down in the former
Book.

This said people (says he) has not any belief of God The Savages religion
in Canada.
(that may be esteemed) for they believe in one, whom they call Cudouagni, and
say, that he often speaks to them, and tells them what weather shall fall
out. They say that when he is angry with them he casts dust in their eyes.
They believe also, that when they die they go The state of souls after death.
up into the stars, and afterward they go into fair greenefields, full of
fair trees, flowers and rare fruits. After they had made us to understand
these things, we showed them their error, and that their Cudouagni is an evil
Spirit that deceives them, and that there is but one God, which is in Heaven,
who does give unto us all, and is Creator of all things, and that in him we
must only believe, and that they must be baptized, or go into hell. And many
other things of our faith were showed them: which People easy to be converted.
Agoiuda signifies wicked.
they easily believed, and called their Cudouagni, Agoiuda. So that many times
they requested our Captain to cause them to be baptized, and the said Lord
(that is to say, Donnacona) Taiguragni, Domagaia, with all the people of their
town came thither for that purpose: but because we knew not their intent and
desire, and that there was no body to instruct them in the faith, we excused
our selves to them for that time, and bad Taiguragni and Domagaia to make them
understand that we would return another voyage, and would bring Priests with
us and Chreme, telling them, for an excuse, that one cannot be baptized without
the said Chreme, which they did believe. And they were very glad of the promise
which the Captain made them to return, and thanked them for it.

Monsieur Champlein, having of late made the same voyage which the Captain
James Quartier had made, did discourse with Savages, that be yet living, and
reports the speeches that were between him and certain of their Sagamos,
concerning their belief in spiritual and heavenly things, which I have
thought good (being incident to The Savages belief and faith.
this matter) to insert here; his words are these: The most part of them be
people without law, according as I could see and inform my self, by the said
great Sagamos, who told me that they verily believe there is one God, who has
created all things. And then I asked him, seeing that they believe in one only
God: by what means did he place them in this world, and from whence they were
Of the creation of man.
come? He answered me, that after God had made all things, he took a number of
arrows, and did stick them into the ground, from whence men and women sprung
up, which have multiplied in the world until now, and that mankind grew by
that means. I answered him, that what he said was false: But that indeed there
was one only God, who had created all things both in Heaven and Earth. Seeing
all these things so perfect, and being no body that did govern in this world,
he took slime out of the Earth, and created thereof our first father Adam: And
while he did sleep, God took one of his ribes, and formed Euah thereof, whom
he gave to him for company, and that this was the truth that both they and we
were made They believe one God, one Son, one Mother, and the Sun.
by this means, and not of arrows, as they did believe. He said nothing more
to me, but that he allowed better of my speech than of his own. I asked him
also if he believed not that there were any other but one only God? He said
unto me that their belief was: There was one only God, one Son, one Mother,
and the Sun, which were four. Notwithstanding, that God was over and above
all; but that the Son was good, and the Sun, by reason of the good which
they received of them: As for the Mother, she was naught and did eat them; and
that the Father was not very good. I showed him his error according to our
faith, whereunto he gave some credit. I demanded of him if they never saw nor
heard their ancestors say that God was come into the world: He told me he had
not seen him: but that anciently there were five men, who traveling toward
the setting of the Sun, met with God, Of five men whom the Savages believe to
have seen God. Men transformed into stones:
who demanded of them, Whither go ye? They answered, We go to seek for our
living: God answered them, You shall find it here. But they passed further,
not making any account of that which God had said unto them; who took a stone
and therewith touched two of them, who were turned into stones: And he said
again to the three others, Whither go ye? and they answered as at the first
time: and God said unto them a gain, Pass no further, you shall find it
here: and seeing that they found no And into staves.
food they passed further: And God took two staves, and touched therewith the
two foremost, who were transformed into staves. But the fifth man stayed and
would pass no further: And God asked him again, Whither go thou? Who made
answer, I go to seek for my living: and God told him, Tarry and thou shall
find it: and he stayed without passing any further: And God gave him meat, and
he did eat of it: and after he had made good cheer he returned among the other
Savages, and told them all that you have heard. He also told me, that at
another time there was a man who had store of Tobacco (which is an herb Of an
other Man whom the Savages believe to have spoken with God. Tobacco.
the smoke whereof they take) and that God came to this man and asked him where
his pipe was: The man took his Tobacco pipe and gave it to God, who drank
very much Tobacco. After he had taken well of it, God brake the said
Tabacco-pipe into many pieces, and the man asked him, Why have thou broken my
Tabacco-pipe, and thou see well that I have none other? And God took one
which he had, and gave it him, saying unto him: Lo, here is one which I give
to thee, carry it to thy great Sagamo, let him keep it; and if he keep it
well, he shall not want any thing, nor any of his companions: The said man took
the Tabacco-pipe, which he gave to his great Sagamo, who (whilst he had it)
the Savages wanted for nothing in the world: But that since the said Sagamo had
lost this Tabacco-pipe, which is the cause of the great famine which sometimes
they have among them. I demanded of him, whether he did believe all that; he
told me, yes, and that it was true. Now I believe that that is the cause why
they say that God is not very good. But I replied and said unto him, that God
was all good, and that without doubt it was the Devil that had showed himself
to those men, and that if they did believe in God as we do, they should want
nothing that should be needful for them: That the Sun which they saw, the
Moon and the Stars, were created by the same great God, who has made both
Heaven and Earth, and that they have no power, but that which God I do not
think that this Theology may be expounded to these people, though one could
perfectly speak their language.
has given them: That we believe in that great God, who by his goodness did
send unto us his dearly beloved Son, who being conceived by the Holy Ghost,
took humane flesh within the virgin womb of the Virgin Mary, having been 33.
years on earth working infinite miracles, raising up the dead, healing the
sick, driving out Devils, giving sight to the blind, showing unto men the will
of God his Father, for to serve, honor and worship him, has spilled his
blood, and suffered death and passion for us, and for our sins, and redeemed
mankind, being buried and risen again, went down into hell, and ascended up
into Heaven, where he sits at the right hand of God his father. That this
was the belief of all Christians, which do believe in the Father, in the
Son, and in the holy Ghost, which be not for all that three Gods, but are one
selfsame and one only God, and one Trinity, wherein there is nothing before
nor after, nothing greater nor lesser. That the Virgin Mary, Mother to the
Son of God, and all men and women that have lived in this world, doing Gods
commandments, and suffered Martyrdom for his name, and who, by the permission
of God, have wrought miracles, and are Saints in Heaven in his Paradise, pray
all for us unto this great divine Majesty, to pardon us our faults and sins,
which we do against his law and commandments: And so by the Saints prayers in
Heaven, and by our own that we make to his divine Majesty, he gives us what
we have need of, and the Devil has no power over us; and can do us no hurt.
That if they had this belief they should be eve as we are. That the Devil
should not be able to do them any more harm, and they should not want what
should be needful for them. Then the said Sagamo said unto me, that he
granted all that I said. I demanded of him what ceremony they used in praying
to their God: he told me that they used no other ceremony, but that every one
did pray in his heart as he would. This is the cause why, I believe, there is
no law among them, neither do they know what it is to worship or pray to God,
and live the most part as brute beasts: And I believe that in short time they
might be brought to be good Christians, if one would inhabit their land, which
most of them do desire. They have among them some Savages whom What Savages
speak to the Devil.
they call Pilotoua, who speak visibly to the Devil, and he tells them what
they must do, as well for wars as for other things: And if he should command
them to go and put any enterprise in execution, or to kill a French man or any
other of their nation, they will immediately obey to The Savages do believe
firmly in dreams.
his command. They believe also that all their dreams are true; and indeed,
there be many of them which do say that they have seen and dreamed things
that do happen, or shall come to pass: but to speak thereof in truth they be
visions of the Devil, who does deceive and seduce them. So far Monsieur
Champleins report. As for our Souriquois, and other their neighbors, I can say
nothing else, but that they are destitute of all knowledge of God, have no
Adoration, neither do they make any divine service, living in a pitiful
ignorance; which ought to touch the hearts both of Christian Princes, and
Prelates, who very A lesson for Christian Princes and Prelates.
often do employ upon frivolous things that which would be more than sufficient
to establish there many Colonies, which would bear their names, about whom
these poor people would flock and assemble themselves. I do not say they
should go thither in Person, for their presence is here more necessary, and
besides every one is not fit for the Sea: but there are so many persons well
disposed that would employ themselves on that, if they had the means: They
then that may do it are altogether inexcusable. To all sorts and degrees of
people.
Our present age is fallen, as one might say, into an Astorgie, wanting both
love and Christian charity, and retain almost nothing of that fire which
kindled our Fathers either in the time of our first Kings, or in the time of
the Croisades for the holy land; yea contrariwise if any venture his life, and
that little means he has, upon this generous Christian work, the most part
do mock him for it, like to the Salamandre, which does not live in the
midst of flames, as some do imagine, but is of so cold a nature that she
kills them by her coldness. Every one would run after treasures, and would
carry them away without pains taking, and afterward to live frolike; but they
come too late for it, and they should have enough if Luke 12. verse. 31.
they did believe, as is meet to do, in him that has said: Seek first the
kingdom of God, and all these things shall be given unto you over and above.

Let us return to our Savages, for whose conversion it rests unto us to pray
to God that it will please him to open the means to make a plentiful harvest
to the further manifestation of the Gospel: for ours, and generally all those
people even as far as Florida inclusiuely, are very easy to be brought to
the Christian religion, according as I may conjecture of them which I have not
seen, by the discourse of Histories. But I find that there shall be more
facility in them of the nearer lands, as from Cap-Breton to Malebarre, because
they have not any show of religion (for I call not religion unless there be
some Latria and divine service) nor tillage of ground (at least as far as
Chouakoet) which is the chiefest thing that may draw men to believe as one
would, by reason-that out from the Earth comes all that which is necessary
for the life, after the general use we have of the other Elements. Our life
has chiefly need of meat, drink and clothing. These people (as one may say)
have nothing of all that, for it is not to be called covered, to be always
wandering and lodged under four stakes, and to have a skin upon their back:
neither do I call eating and living, to eat all at once and starve The right
means to bring the Savages to ones devotion. Genesis 28. 20.
the next day, not providing for the next day. Whosoever then shall give bread
and clothing to this people, the same shall be, as it were, their God, they
will believe all that he shall say to them. Even as the Patriarch Jacob did
promise to serve God if he would give him bread to eat and garments to cover
him. God has no name: for all that we can say, cannot comprehend him. But we
call him God, because he gives. And man in giving may by resemblance be
called God. Cause (says S. Gregory Nazianzene) Greg. Nazian in the oration of
the care for the poor.
that thou be a God toward the needy, in imitating Gods mercifulness. For
man has nothing so divine in him as benefits. The heathen have known this,
and amongst others Pliny, when he says, that it is a great sign Plin. lib. 2.
7.
of divinity in a mortal man, to help and aid an other mortal man. These
people then enjoying the fruits of the use of trades and tillage of the ground,
will believe all that shall be told them, in auditum auris, at the first voice
that shall sound in their ears: and of this have I certain proofs, because I
have known them wholly disposed thereunto by the communication they had with
us; and there be some of them that are Christians in mind, and do perform
the acts of it, in such wise as they can, though they be not baptized: among
whom I will name Chkoudun, Captain (alias Sagamos) of the river of Saint John,
mentioned in the beginning of this work, who, whenever he eats, lifts up
his eyes to heaven, and makes the sign of the cross, because he has seen
us do so: yea at our prayers he did kneel down as we did: And because he
has seen a great cross planted near to our fort, he has made the like at
his house, and in all his cabins; and carries one at his breast, saying, that he
is no more a Savage, and acknowledging plainly, that they are beasts (so he
says in his language) but that he is like unto us, desiring to be instructed.
That which I say of this man, I may affirm the same almost of all the others:
And though he should be alone, yet he is capable, being instructed, to bring
in all the rest.

The Armouchiquois are a great people, which have likewise no adoration: and
being settled, because they manure the ground, one may easily make a
congregation of them, and exhort them to that which is for their salvation.
Lib. 1. chap. 7.
They are vicious and bloody men, as we have said heretofore: but this
insolency proceeds for that they feel themselves strong, by reason of their
multitude, and because they live more at ease than the others, reaping the
fruits of the earth. Their country is not yet well known, but in that small
part that we have discovered, I find A conformity between the Armouchiquois
and the natural Virginians. The religion of the Virginians.
they have conformity with them of Virginia, except in the superstition and
error, in that which concerns our subject, for as much as the Virginians do
begin to have some opinion of a superior thing in nature, which governs here
this world. They believe in many gods (as an English Historian that dwelt there
reports) which they call Montoac, but of sundry sorts and degrees. One alone
is chief and great, who has ever been, who purposing to make the world, made
first other gods, for to be means and instruments, wherewith he might serve
himself in the Creation and in the government. Then afterward the Sun, the
Moon and the Stars, as demi gods, and instruments of the other Principal
order. They hold that the woman was first made, which by conjunction with one
of the gods had children. All these people do generally believe the
immortality of the soul, and that after death good men are in rest, and the
wicked in pain: Now them that they esteem to be the wicked are their enemies,
and they the good men: In such sort that, in their opinion, they shall all
after death be well at ease, and specially when they have well defended their
country, and killed many of their enemies. And as touching the resurrection of
the Fabulous tales of the resurrection.
bodies, there are yet some nations in those parts that have some glimpse of it.
For the Virginians do tell tales of certain men risen again, which say
strange things: As of one wicked man, who after his death had been near to
the mouth of Popogusso (which is their Hell) but a god saved him, and gave him
leave to come again into the world, for to tell his friends what they ought to
do for to avoid the coming into this miserable torment. Item, that year
that the English men were there, it came to pass within 60. leagues off from
them (as said the Virginians) that a body was unburied, like to the first, and
did show, that being dead in the pit, his soul was alive, and had traveled
very far, through a long and large way, on both sides of which did grow very
fair and pleasant trees, bearing the rarest fruits that can be seen: and that
in the end he came to very fair houses, near to the which he found his
father, which was dead, who expressly commanded him to return back and to
declare unto his frinds the good which it behooued them to do for to enjoy the
pleasures of this place: And that after he had done his message Hist. genesis of
the Indies. 4. book, the 124. chap.
he should come thither again. The general History of the West Indies
reports, that before the coming of the Spaniards into Perou, they of Cusco
and thereabout, did likewise believe the resurrection of the bodies. For seeing
that the Spaniards, with a cursed avarice, opening the sepulchers for to have
the gold and the riches that were in them, did cast and scatter the bones of
the dead here and there, they prayed them, not to scatter them so, to the end
that the same should not hinder them from rising again: which is a more
perfect belief than that of the Sadduces, and of the Greeks, which the
Gospel and the Luc. 20. verse. 27. Act. 17. verse. 32.
Acts of the Apostles witness unto us that they scoffed at the resurrection, as
also, almost all the heathen antiquity has done.

Some of our Western Indians, expecting this resurrection, have esteemed that
the souls of the good did got into heaven, and them of the wicked into a great
pit or hole, which they think to be far off toward the Sun setting, which
they call Popogusso, there to burn for ever: and such is the belief of the
Virginians: The others (as the Brasilians) that the wicked go with Aignan,
which is the evil spirit that tormenteth them: but as for the good, 4. Esdras
7. ver. 31. 32. S. Paul to the Heb. chapter 11. at the end. Orig. 2. book of
principles.
that they went behind the Mountains to dance and make good cheer with their
fathers. Many of the ancient Christians, grounded upon certain places of
Esdras, of S. Paul, and others, have thought that after death our souls were
sequestered into places under the earth, as in Abraham's bosom, attending the
judgment of God: And there Origin has thought that they are as in a School
of souls, and place of instruction, where they learn the causes and reasons
of the things they have seen on the Earth, and by reasoning make judgments of
consequences of things past, and of things to come. But such opinions have
been rejected by the resolution of the Doctors of Sorbone in the time of King
Philip the fair, and since by the Council of Florence. Now if the Christians
have held that opinion, is it much to these poor Savages to be entered in
those opinions that we have recited of them?

As concerning the worshipping of their gods, of all them that be out of the
Spanish dominion, I find none but the Virginians that use any divine service
(unless we will also comprehend therein, that which the Floridians do, which
we will recite hereafter) They then represent their gods in the shape of a
man, which they call Kevuasovuock. One only is named Kevuas. They place them
in houses and Temples, made after their fashion, which they call Machicomuck,
wherein they make their prayers, singing and S. Aug. 4. de Ciuitate Dei cap. 31.
offering to those gods. And seeing we are fallen to speak of infidels, I
praise rather the ancient Romans who were above 173. years without any images
of Gods, as S. Augustine says. Numa Pompilius having wisely forbidden to make
any, because that such a foolish and senseles thing made them to be despised,
and from this contempt came, that the people did cast out all fear, nothing
being better than to worship them in spirit seeing they are spirits. And Plin.
lib. 2. cap. 7.
indeed Pliny says: That there is nothing which shows more the weakness of
man's wit, than to seek to assign some image or figure to God. For in what
part soever that God shows himself he is all sense, all sight, all hearing,
all soul, all understanding: and finally he is all of himself, without using
any organe. The ancient Germans instructed in this doctrine, not only did
admit no images of their gods (as says Tacitus) but also would not that they
should be drawn or painted against the walls, nor set in any humane form,
esteeming that to derogate too much from the greatness of the heavenly power. It
may be said among us that figures and representations are the books of the
unlearned: but leaving disputations aside, it were fitting that every one
should be wise and well instructed, and that no body should be ignorant.

The Savages have the industry both of painting and caruing.
Our Souriquois and Armouchiquois Savages, have the industry both of painting
and caruing, and do make pictures of beasts, birds and men, as well in stone
as in wood, as prettily as good workmen in these parts; and notwithstanding
they serve not themselves with them in adoration, but only to please the
sight, and the use of some private tools, as in Tabacco-pipes. And in that (as
I have said at the first) though they be without divine worship, I praise them
more than the Virginians and all other sorts of people, which more beasts than
the very beasts worship and reverence senseless things.

The Floridians.
Captain Laudonniere in his History of Florida, says that they of that
Country have no knowledge of God, nor of any religion, but of that which
appears unto them, as the Sun and the Moon; to whom, nevertheless, I
find not in all the said History that they make any adoration, saving that
when they go to wary, the Paracousi makes some prayer to the Sun for to
obtain victory, and which being obtained he yields him praises for it, with
songs to the honor of him, as I have more particularly spoken in my first
book the 10. chapter. And notwithstanding Belleforests false report.
Monsieur De Belleforest writes to have taken from the said History that which
he mentions of their bloody sacrifices, like to them of the Mexicains,
assembling themselves in one field, and setting up there their lodges, where
after many dances and ceremonies, they lift up in the air and offer to the
Sun, him upon whom the lot is fallen to be sacrificed. If he be bold in this
thing, he presumes no less where he writes the like of the people of Canada,
whom he makes sacrificers of humane bodies, although they never thought on it.
For if Captain James Quartier has seen some of their enemies heads, dressed
like leather, set upon pieces of wood, it does not follow that they have been
sacrificed, but it is their custom to do so, like to the ancient Gaulois,
that is to say, to take off the heads of their enemies whom they have killed,
and to set them up in, or without their Cabins as a Trophee: which is usual
through all the West Indies.

To return to our Floridians, if any one will call the honor they do to the
Sun, to be an act of religion, I will not contrary him. For in the old time
of the golden age, when that ignorance found place amongst men, many
(considering the admirable effects of the Sun and of the Moon, wherewith God
uses to govern things in this low world) attributed unto them the reverence
due to the Creator: And this manner of reverence is expounded unto Job 31. verse.
26. 27.
us by Job, when he says: If I have beholden the Sun in his brightness, and
the Moon running clear: and if my heart has been seduced in secret, and my
mouth has kissed my hand: this also had been an iniquity to be condemned: for
I had denied the great God above. As for the hand kissing it is a kind of
reverence which is yet observed in doing homages. Not being able to touch the
Sun, they stretch forth their hands toward it, then kissed it: or they
touched his Idol, and afterward did kiss the hand that had touched it. And
into this idolatry did the people of Israel sometime fall, as we see in
Ezechiel. Ezech 8. ver. 16. Brasilians.


In regard of the Brasilians, I find by the discourse of John De Leri (whom I
had rather follow than a Spanish Author, in that which he has seen) that not
only they are like unto ours, without any form of religion or knowledge of
God, but that they are so blind and hardened in their anthropophagie, that they
seem to be in no wise capable of the Christian doctrine. Also they are visibly
tormented and beaten by the devil (which they call Aignan) and with such
rigor, that when they see him come, sometimes in the shape of a beast,
sometimes of a bird, or in some strange form, they are as it were, in
despair. Which is not with the other Savages, more hitherward, toward
New Foundland, at least with such rigor. For James Quartier reports that he
caseth earth in their eyes, and they call him Cudouagni: and there, where we
were (where they call him Aoutem) I have sometimes heard that he had scratched
Membertou, being then, as it were, a kind of Soothsaier of the Country. When
one tells the Brasilians that one must believe in God, they like that advice
well enough, but by and by they forget their lesson and return again to their
own vomit, which is a strange brutishnes, not to be willing at the least to
redeem themselves from the devils vexation, by religion Which makes them
inexcusable, seeing also they have some memory remaining in them of the
general flood, and of the Gospel (if it be so that their report be true) for
they make mention in their songs that the waters being once overflowed, did
cover all the earth, and all men were drowned, except their Grandfathers, who
saved themselves upon the highest In the first book third Chapter.
trees of their Country. And of this flood other Savages, mentioned by me else
where, have also some tradition. As concerning the Gospel, the said de Leri
says, that having once found occasion to show unto them the beginning of the
world, and how it is meet to believe in God, and their miserable condition,
they gave ear unto him with great attention, being all amazed for that which
they had heard: and that thereupon, an ancient man, taking upon him to speak,
said, that in truth he had recited wonderful things unto them, which made him
to call to mind, that which many times they had heard of their Grandfathers,
that of a long time sithence a Mair (that is to say, a stranger, clothed and
bearded like to the Frenchmen) had been there, thinking to bring them to the
obedience of the God which he declared unto them, and had used the like
exhortation unto them: but that they would not believe him. And therefore there
came another thither, who, in sign of acurse, gave them their armours,
wherewith since they have killed one another: and that there was no likelihood
they should forsake that manner of life, because that all their neighbor
Nations would mock them for it.

But our Souriquois, Canadians and their neighbors are not so hardened in
their wicked life, no neither the Virginians nor Floridians, but will receive
the Christian doctrine very easily, when it shall please God to stir up them
that be able to succor them, neither are they visibly tormented, beaten and
torn by the Devil, as this barbarous people of Brasil, which is a strange
malediction, more particular unto them, than to other Nations of those parts.
Which makes me believe that the voice of the Apostles may have reached so
far, according to the saying of the said old ancient man, to which having
stopped their ears, they bear a particular punishment for it, not common to
others, which peradventure have never heard the word of God, since the
universal flood, whereof all those Nations, in more than three thousand
leagues of ground have an obscure knowledge, which has been given them by
tradition from father to son.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Sooth-saiers and Masters of the Ceremonies among the Indians.
I Will not call (as some have done) by the name of Priests, them that make the
ceremonies and inuocations of devils among the West Indies, but in as much as
they have the use of sacrifices and gifts that they offer to their Gods, Hebr.
8. verse. 3.
for as much as (as the Apostle says) every Priest or Bishop is ordained to
offer gifts and sacrifices: such as were them of Mexico, the greatest whereof
was called Papas, who offered incense to their Idols, the chief of them was
that of the god whom they did name Vitzilipuztli, although nevertheless, the
general name of him, whom they held for supreme Lord and author of all
things, was Viracocha, to whom they attributed excellent qualities, calling him
Pachacamac, which is, Creator of Heaven and Earth: and Vsapu, which is,
admirable, and other such like names. They had also sacrifices of men, as them
of Perou have yet, which they sacrificed in great number, as Joseph Acosta
Joan. Acosta, lib. 5. chapter 20. 21.
discourses thereof at large. Those may be called Priests or Sacrificers: But
in regard of them of Virginia and Florida, I do not see any sacrifices they
make, and therefore I will qualify them with the name of Wisards, or Masters
of the Ceremonies of their religion, which in Florida I find to be called
Iarvars, and Ioanas: in Virginia, Vuiroances: in Brasill Caribes: and among
ours (I mean the Soriquois) Autmoins. Laudonniere, speaking of Florida: They
have (says he) their Priests, unto whom they give great credit, because they
be great Magicians, great Soothsaiers and callers on devils. These Priests do
serve them for Physicians and Chirurgians, and carry always with them a bag
full of herbs and drugges to physic them that be sick, which be, the most
part, of the great pockes: for they love women and maidens very much, whom they
call the daughters of the Sun. If there be any thing to be treated, the King
calls the Iarvars, and the ancientest men, and demands their advice. See
moreover what I have written heretofore in the sixth Chapter of the first
Virginia.
book. As for them of Virginia, they are no less subtle than them of Florida,
and do procure credit to themselves, making them to be respected, by tricks or
show of religion, like to them that we have spoken of in the last chapter,
Atosta 6. book chapter 19.
speaking of some dead men risen up again. It is by such means, and under
pretect of religion that the Inguas made themselves heretofore the greatest
Princes of America. And them of these parts that would deceive and blind the
people have likewise used of that suttelty, as Numa Pompilius, Lisander,
Sertorius, and other more recent, doing (as says Plutarke) as the plaiers of
tragedies, who desirous to show forth things, ouerreaching the humane
strength, have refuge to the superior power of the Gods.

The Aoutmoins of the last land of the Indies which is the nearest unto us, are
not so blockish but that they can make the common people to attribute some
credit unto them. For by their impostures they live and make themselves
esteemed to be necessary, playing the part of Physicions and Chirurgions as
well as the Floridians. Let the great The Physicions and Chirurgions of the
Savages.
Sagamos Membertou be an example thereof. If any body be sick, he is sent for,
he makes inuocations on his devil, he blows upon the part grieved, he
makes incisions, sucketh the bad blood from it: if it be a wound he heals it
by the same means, applying a round slice of the Beauers stones. Finally, some
present is made unto him, either of venison or skins. If it be question to
have news of things absent, having first questioned with his spirit, he
renders his oracles commonly doubtful, very often false, but sometimes true:
as when he was asked whether Panoniac were dead, he said, that unless he did
return within fifteen days, they should not expect him any more, and that he
was killed by the Armouchiquois. And for to have this answer he must be
presented with some gift. For there is a triuiall proverb among the Greeks,
which bears, That without money Phoebus Oracles are dumb. The same Membertou
rendered a true Oracle of our coming to Monsieur du Pont, when that he parted
from Port Royal, sor to return into France, seeing the 15. day of July
passed without having any news. For he did maintain still, and did affirm
that there should come a ship, and that his devil had told it him. Item when
the Savages be a hungered they consult with Membertous Oracle, and he says unto
them, Go ye to such a place and you shall find game. It happens sometimes
that they find some, and sometimes none. If it chance that none be found, the
excuse is, that the beast is wandering and has changed place: but so it comes
to pass, that very often they find some: And this is it which makes them
believe that this devil is a god, and they know none other, to whom
notwithstanding they yield not any service nor adoration in any form of
religion.

How the Aoutmoins invoke the Devil.
When that these Aoutmoins make their mowes and moppes, they fix a staff in a
pit, to which they tie a cord, and putting their head into this pit, they make
inuocations or coniurations in a language unknown to the others that are
about, and this with beatings and howlings, until they sweat with very pain:
yet I have not heard that they some at the mouth as the Turks do. When this
devil is come, this master Aoutmoin makes them believe that he holds him
tied by his cord, and holds fast against him, forcing him to give him an
answer before he let him go. By this is known the subtilty of this enemy of
nature, who beguileth thus these miserable creatures, and his pride withal, in
willing that they which do call upon him, yield unto him more submission then
ever the holy Patriarchs and Prophets have done to God, who have only prayed
with their faces toward the ground. A song to the praise of the Devil.


That done he begins to sing some thing (as I think) to the praise of the
devil, who has discovered some game unto them: and the other Savages that are
there do answer, making some concordance of music among them. Then they
dance after their manner, as we will hereafter say, with songs which I
understand not, neither those of ours that understood their speech best. But
one day going to walk in our Meadows along the river, I drew near to
Membertous cabine, and did write in my table book part of that which I
understood, which is written there yet in these terms; haloet ho ho he he ha
ha haloet ho ho he, which they did repeat diverse times. The tune is in my said
table book in these notes: re fa sol sol re sol sol fa fa re re sol sol fa fa.
One song being ended, they all made a great exclamation, saying E! Then began
again another song, saying: Egrigna hau egrigna he he hu hu ho ho egrigna hau
hau hau. The tune of this was, fa fa fa sol sol fa fa re re sol sol fa fa re fa
fa sol sol fa. Having made the usual exclamation they began yet another song
which was: Tameia alleluia tameia dou veni hau hau he he. The tune whereof was:
sol solsolfafarererefafasolfasolfafarere. I attentively harkned upon this word
alleluia repeated sundry times, and could never hear any other thing. Which
makes me think that these songs are to the praises of the devil, if
notwithstanding this word signify with them that which it signifies in
Hebrew, which is, Praise ye the Lord. All the other Nations of those Countries
do the like: but no body has particularily described their songs, saving John
de Leri, who says that the Brasilians do make as good agreements, in their
Sabbaths. And being one day at their solemnity he does report that they said,
He he he he he he he he he he; with this note: fa fa sol fa fa sol sol sol sol
sol. And that done they cried out and howled after a fearful manner the space
of a quarter of an hour, and the women did skip violently in the air until
they fomed at the mouth: then began again their music, saying: Heu heur aure
heur a heur aure heura heura ouech: the note is, fa mi re sol solsolfa mire
mire mi vt re. This author says that in this song, they bewailed their
deceassed fathers, which were so valiant, and nevertheless they comforted
themselves for that after their death, they were assured to go to them behind
the high Mountains, where they should dance and be merry with them. Likewise
that they had, with all vehemence, threatened the Ouetacas their enemies to be
in very short time taken and eaten by them, according as the Caraibes had
promised them: and that they had also made mention of the flood spoken of in
the former chapter. I leave unto them that do write of Demonomanie to
philosophize upon that matter. But moreover, I must say that whilst our
Savages do sing in that manner before said, there be some others which do
nothing else but say He or Het (like to a man that cleaves wood) with a
certain motion The daunces of the Savages.
of the arms: and dance in round, not holding one another, nor moving out of
one place, striking with their feet against the ground, which is the form of
their daunces, like unto those which the said De Leri reports of them of
Brasill, which are above 1500. leagues from that place. After which things our
Savages make a fire and leap over Leuit. 20. ve 2. 3. Deuter. 12. verse. 31. and
18. verse. 10. and 4. of Kin. 17. ves. 17. 31. Psalm. 106.
it, as the ancient Cananites, Ammonites, and sometimes the Israelites did: but
they are not so detestable, for they do not sacrifice their Children to the
devil, through the fire. Besides all this, they put half a pole out of the top
of the Cabin where they are, at the end whereof there is some Matachias, or
some thing else tied, which the devil carries away. Thus have I heard the
discourse of their manner of doing in this matter.

S. John's bonfire.
There may be here considered a bad use to leap over the fire, and to make
the children to pass through the flame in the fire made upon S. John Baptists
day; which Theod. upon the 16. chap. of the forth book of Kings.
custom indureth yet to this day among us, and ought to be reformed. For the
same comes from the ancient abominations that God has so much hated, whereof
Theodoret speaks in this wise: I have seen (says he) in some Towns piles
of wood kindled once a year, and not only children to leap over them, but
also men, and the mothers bearing their children over the flame, which did
seem unto them to be as an expiation and purification. And this in my
judgment was the sin of Achaz.

These fashions have been forbiddeen by an ancient Can. 65. Synod. 6. in
Trullo.
Council holden at Constantinople. Whereupon Balsamon does note that the 23.
day of June (which is Saint John Baptist eve) men and women did assemble
themselves at the Sea shore and in houses, and the eldest daughter was dressed
like a bride, and after they had made good cheer and well drunk, daunces were
made, with exclamations and fires all the night, prognosticating of good and
bad luck. These fires have been continued among us, upon a better subject.
But the abuse must be taken away.

The devil will be served as God.
Now as the devil has always been willing to play the ape, and to have a
service like to that which is given to God, so would he that his officers
should have the mark of their trade, to the end to deceive the simple people
the better. And indeed Membertou, of whom we have spoken, as a learned
Aoutmoin, carries hanged at his neck the mark of this profession, which is a
purse trianglewise, covered with their imbrodery work, that is to say with
Matachiaz, within which there is I know not what as big as a small nut, which
he says to be his devil called Aoutem, which they of Canada do name
Cudouagni, as says James Quartier. I will not mingle sacred things with
profane, but according as I have said that the devil plaieth the ape, this
makes me to remember of the Rational or Pectoral of judgment, which the high
Priest did carry before him in the ancient law, on the which Moses had put Vrim
and Thummim. Now Rabbi David says that it is not known what these Vrim and
Thummim were, and it seems that they were stones. Rabbi Selomoh says that it
was the name of God Jehovah, an in effable name, which he did put within the
foldes of the Pectoral, whereby he made his word to shine. Josephus does think
that they were Twelve precious stones. S. Hierome does interpret these two
words to signify Doctrine and Truth.

And as the Priestly office was successiue, not only in the house of Aron, but
also in the family of the great Priest of Memphis, whose office was assigned to
his eldest son after him, as Thyamis says in the Ethiopian History of
Heliodorus: Even so among these people this office is successiue; and by
tradition they do teach the secret thereof to their eldest sons. For
Membertous eldest son (who was named Judas, in jest, for which he was angry,
understanding it was a bad name) told us, that after his father, he should be
Aoutmoin in that precinct: which is a small matter: for every Sagamos has his
Aoutmoin, if himself be not so, but yet they covet the same, for the profit
that comes thereof.

The Brasilians have their Caraibes, who travel through the villages, making
the people believe that they have communication with spirits, through whose
means they can, not only give them victory against their enemies, but also,
that of them depends the fertility or sterility of the ground. They have
commonly a certain kind of belles or rattles in their hands, which they call
Maraca, made with the fruit of a tree, as big as an Estriches egg, which
they make hollow, as they do here the bottels of the Pilgrims that go to
Saint James: And having filled Those bottles, or ratties are made of Pompions.
them with small stones, they make a noise with them, in their solemnities, like
the bladders of hogs: and going from town to town they beguile the world,
telling the people that their devil is within the same. These Maracas or
Rattles well decked with fair feathers, they stick in the ground the stafe
that is through it, and do place them all along and in the midst of the
houses, commanding that meat and drink be given to them. In such wise that
these The imposture of the Caraibes.
cogging mates, making the other poor idiots to believe (as the Sacrificers of
the idol Bell did heretofore, of whom mention is made in the History of
Daniel) that those fruits do eat and drink in the night: every householder
giving credit thereto, does not fail to set near these Maracas, meal, flesh,
fish, and drink, which service they continue by the space of fifteen days or
three weeks: and during that time they are so foolish as to persuade
themselves that in sounding with these Maracas, some spirit speaks unto them,
and attribute divinity unto them. In such sort that they would esteem it a
great misdeed to take away the meat that is presented before those fair
belles, with which meats those reverend Caraibes do merely fatten
themselves. And so under false pretexts, is the world deceived.

CHAP. 7.
Of their Language.
THe effects of the confusion of Babel are come in as far as to those people
whereof we speak, as well as in the hither world. For I see that the Patagons
do speak another language than them of Brasil, and they otherwise than the
Perouans, and the Perouans are distinct Sundry languages.
from the Maxicans: the Isles likewise have their peculiar speech: they speak
not in Florida as they do in Virginia: Our Souriquois and Etechemins
understand not the Armouchiquois: nor these the Iroquois: briefly, every
Nation is divided by the language: yea in one and the self same Province there
is difference in language, even as in Gallia the Fleming, they of Basse
Bretaigne, the Gascon and the Basque do not agree. For the Author of the
History of Virgnia says, that there every Wiroans, or Lord, has his peculiar
speech. Let this be for example, that the chief man or Captain of some
precinct (whom our Historians James Quartier and Laudonniere, do call by the
name of King) is called in Canada, Agohanna; among the Souriquois, Sagamos; in
Virginia, Wiroans; in Florida, Paracussi; In the Isles of Cuba, Cacique: the
Kings of Perou, Inguas, and so forth. I have left the Armouchiquois and
others, which I know not. As for the Brasilians they have no Kings, but the old
ancient men, whom they call Peoreroupichech, because of the experience they
have of things past, are they which do govern, exhort and dispose of all
things. The very tongues are changed, as we see, that with us we have not the
language of the ancient Gaullois, nor that which was in Charolus Magnus time
(at least it does differ very much) the Italians do speak no more Latin, nor
the Grecians the ancient Greek, specially in the sea coasts, nor the Jews the
ancient Hebrew. In like manner James Quartier has left unto us a kind of
Dictionary of the language of Canada, wherein our Frenchmen that haunt there,
in these days, understand nothing: and therefore I would not insert it here:
only I have there found Caraconi which signifies bread, and now they say
Caracona, which I esteem to be a word of Basque. For the satisfaction of some
I will set here some numbers of the ancient and new language of Canada.

The old. The new. 1 Segada. 1 Begou. 2 Tigeni. 2 Nichou. 3 Ash. 3 Nichtoa. 4
Homacon. 4 Rau. 5 Oniscon. 5 Apateta. 6 Indaic. 6 Coutouachin. 7 Ayaga. 7
Neouachin. 8 Addegue. 8 Nestouachin. 9. Madellon. 9 Pescouadet. 10 Assem. 10
Metren.

The Souriquois do say. The Etechemins. 1 Negous. 1 Bechkon. 2 Tabo. 2 Nich. 3
Chicht. 3 Nach. 4 Neou. 4 Iau. 5 Nan. 5 Prenchk. 6 Kamachin. 6 Chachit. 7
Eroeguenik. 7 Coutachit. 8 Meguemorchin. 8 Erouiguen. 9 Echkonadek. 9
Pechcoquem. 10 Metren. 10 Peiock.

Conformity of languages.
For the conformity of languages, there are sometimes found words in these
parts, which do signify some thing there, as John de Leri says, that Leri
signifies an Oister in Brasil: but very few words are found which come in one
and the selfsame signification. In Maffeus his Orient all Sagamos does also
signify a King in the East Indies.
History I have read Sagamos in the same signification as our Souriquois do
take it, to wit, a King, a Duke, a Captain. And they that have been in Guinee
say, that this word Babougic signifies there a little child, or a fawn of a
beast, in that sense as the said Souriquois take that word, as this French word
Moustache, which comes of Mistax, and that which we say in French boire a
tire-larigot, which I construe in English to drink till ones eyes be out,
comes of Larygx Lariggos etc. And the Greek words Paradeisos, Bosphoros,
come from the Hebrew (...) and (...).

The cause of the change of languages.
But concerning the cause of the change of the language in Canada, whereof we
have spoken, I think that it has happened by a destruction of people. For it
is some eight years*, since the Iroquois did assemble themselves to the number
of 8000. men, and discomfited all their enemies, whom they surprised in their
enclosures. To this I add the traffic which they make from time to time for
their skins, since the French men came to fetch them: for in the time of
James Quartier Beuers were not cared for. The hats that be made of it are in
use but since that time: not that the invention thereof is new: for in the
ancient orders Beuer-hats.
of the Hat-makers of Paris, it is said that they shall make hats of fine Beuers
(which is the Castor) but whether it be for the dearness, or otherwise, the
use thereof has been long since left off.

Of the pronounciation.
As for the Pronounciation, our Souriquois have the Greek (ou) which we call
(v), and their words do commonly end in (a) as Souriquois, Souriquoa:
Captain, Capitaina: Normand, Normandia: Basque, Basquoa: vne Martre (a Marten)
Martra: a banquet, Tabaguia: etc. But there are certain letters which they
cannot well pronounce, that is to say, an (v) consonant, and (f) in stead
whereof they put (b) and (p) as for fevre (which is a smith) they will say
(pebre.) And for (Sauvago, which signifies Savage) they say Chabaia, and so
call they themselves, not knowing in what sense we take that word. And yet they
pronounce the rest of the French tongue better than our Gascons, who, besides
the turning of (v) into (b) and of the (b) into (v,) were yet discerned in the
last troubles and badly handled in Prouence, by the pronouncing of In the book
of Judges chapter 12. verse. 6.
the word (Cabre, in stead whereof they did say (Crabe,) as aforetime the
Ephraiimtes having lost the battle against the Galaadites, thinking to escape
away, were well known in passing the river Jordan, in pronouncing the word
Shibboleth, which signifies an ear of Corn, in stead whereof they did say
Sibboleth, which signifies the foord of a river, asking if they might well
pass. The Greeks had also a sundry pronunciation of the selfsame word,
because they had four distinct tongues, varying from the common speech. And in
Plautus we read that the Peaenestins not far distant from Rome did pronounce
Konia, in stead of Ciconia. Yea even at this day the good wives of Paris do
yet say, mon Courin, for mon Cousin, which is my Cozen: and mon Mazi, for mon
Mari, which signifies husband.

The Savages have a particular tongue.
Now to return to our Savages: although that by reason of traffic many of
our Frenchmen do understand them, notwithstanding they have a particular
tongue, which is only known to them: which makes me to doubt of that which I
have said, that the language which was in Canada in the time of James Quartier
is no more in use. For to accommodate themselves with us, they speak unto us
in the language which is to us more familiar, wherein is much Basque mingled
with it: not that they care greatly to speak our languages: for there be some
of them which do sometimes say, that they come not to seek after us: but by
long frequentation they cannot but retain some word or other.

Their manner of numbering.
I will farther say, that concerning the numbers (seeing we have spoken of it)
they do not reckon distinctly as we do, the days, the weeks, the months,
the years; but do declare the years by number of sums, as for 100. years,
they will say Cachmetren achtek, that is to say 100. Sons, bitumetrenague
achtek 1000. Sons, that is to say 1000. years: metren knichkaminau, ten
Months, tabo metren guenak 20. days. And for to show an inumerable thing, as
the people of Paris, they will take their hairs or hands full of sand: And
after that manner does the holy Scripture like wise use sometimes to number,
comparing (Hiperbolicalie) armies to the sand that is on the Sea shore. They
also signify the seasons by their effects, as for to make a man to understand
that the Sagamos Poutrincourt will come at the spring time, they will say,
nibir betour, Sagmo (for Sagamos, a word shortened) Poutrincourt betour
kedretch; that is to say, the leaf being come, then will the Sagamos
Poutrincourt come certainly. Therefore as they have no distinction neither of
days nor of years, so be not they persecuted, by the ungodliness of their
Creditors, as in these parts: neither do their Aoutmoins shorten, nor
lengthen, the years for to gratify the Brokers and Bankers, as did, in
ancient time, the Idolatrous Priests of Rome, to whom was attributed the
government and disposing of Solin* Politi. List. cap. 5.
times, ofseasons and of years, as Solin writes.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the use of letters.
Of letters.
IT is well known that these Western Nations have no use of letters, and it
is that, which all them that have written of them do say they have most
admired, to see that by a piece of paper I give knowledge of my will from one
end of the world to the other* and they thought that there should be
enchantment in this paper. But that is not so much to be wondered at, if we
consider that in the time of the Roman Emperors, many Nations of these parts
knew not the secrets of letters, amongst whom Tacitus Dutch men.
puts the Germans (who at this day do swarm with men of learning) and he
adds a notable sentence, that good manners are in more credit there, then good
laws elsewhere.

Gaullois.
As for our Gaullois, it was not so with them. For even from the old time of
the golden age they had the use of letters, yea (by the leave of those godly
doctors who do call them Barbarous) before the Greeks and Latins. For
Xenophon (who speaks largely of them, and of their beginning in his
Aequiuoques) does witness unto us, that the letters which Cadmus brought to
the Greeks were not so much like to the Phaenicien letters, as the Galatees
were, that is the Gaullois. Wherein Caesar did Aequiuocate in saying that the
Druides did use of Greek letters in private matters: for contrariwise the
Greeks have used of the Sea hereafter the 17. Chapter.
Gaullois letters. And Berose says that the third King of the Gaullois, after
the flood, named Sorron, did institute Universities in these parts: and
Diodorus does add that there was in the Gaulles Philosophers and Divines
called Saronides (much more ancient then the Druides) which were greatly
reverenced, and unto whom all the people did obey. The same Authors do say,
that Bardus, first King Diodor. lib. ^. Biblioth.
of the Gaullois did invent both rymes and music, brought in Poets and
Rhethoricians, who were called Bardes, whereof Caesar and Strabo make mention.
But the same Diodore writes, that Poets were among them in such reverence,
that when two armies were ready to strike, having their swords drawn, and the
iauelins in hand to give the onset, those Poets coming, every one did surcease
and put up their weapons: so much does wrath give place to wisdom, yea among
the wildest Barbarians, and so much does Mars reverence the Muses, says the
Author, So I hope that our most Christian, most August, and most victorious
king Henry the Fourth, after the thundering of besieging of towns and battles
is ceased, reuerencing The Kings eldest Daughter is the University of Paris.
Gesnerus in the treaties of Serpents.
the Muses, and honoring them, as he has already done, not only he will
reduce his eldest daughter to her ancient glory, and give unto her being a
royal daughter, the propriety of that Basilic, fastened to the temple of
Apollo, who, by an hidden virtue, did hinder that the Spiders should weaue
their web along his walls: But will also establish his New France, and bring
to the bosom of the Church so many poor souls which that country bears,
al starued for the want of the word of God, who are as a pray unto hell: And
that for to do this he will This French zeal should stir up the English
courage for Virginia.
give means to conduct thither, Christian Sarronides and Bardes, bearing the
Flower-deluce in their hearts, who will instruct and bring to civility those
barbarous people, and will bring them to his obedience.

CHAP. IX.
Of their clothing and wearing of their hairs.
GOd in the beginning did create man naked, and innocent, made all the parts of
his body to be of honest sight. But sin has made the members of generation to
become shameful unto us, and not unto beasts which have no sin. It is the
cause why our first parents having known their nakedness, destitute of
clothes, did Gens. 3.
sow fig leaves together for to hide their shame therewith: But God made unto
them coats of skins, and clothed them with it; and this before they went out
of the garden of Eden. Clothing then is not only to defend us from cold, but
also for decency, and to cover our shame. And nevertheless many nations have
anciently lived, and at this day do live naked, without apprehension of this
shame, decency, and honesty. And I marvel not of the Brasilien Savages that
are such, as well men as women, nor of the ancient Picts (a nation of great
Britain) who (Herodian says) had not any use of clothes, in the time of
Seuerus the Emperor: nor of a great number of other nations that have been
and yet are naked: for one may say of them, that they be people fallen into a
reprobate sense, and forsaken of God: But of Christians which are in Aethiopia
under the great Negus, whom we call Prester-Ihon; Nakedness of the Aethiopians.
which, by the report of the Portingals that have written histories of them, have
not their parts which we call privy members, any ways covered. But the
Savages of New France and of Florida, have better learned and kept in mind the
lesson of honesty, than those of Aethiopia. For they cover them with a skin
tied to a latch or girdle of leather, which passing between their buttocks,
ioineth the other end of the said latch behind. And for the rest of their
garments, they have a cloak on their backs, made with many skins, whether
they be of Otters or of Beauers: and one only skin, whether it be of Ellan, or
Stagges skin, Bear, or Luserne, which cloak is tied upward with a leather
riband, and they thrust commonly one arm out, but being in their cabins, they
put it off, unless it be cold: And I cannot better compare it than to pictures
that are made of Hercules, who killed a lion and put the skin thereof on his
back. Notwithstanding they have more civility, in that they cover their
privy The Women.
members. As for the women, they differ only in one thing, that is, they have a
girdle over the skin they have on: and do resemble (without comparison) the
pictures that be made of Saint John Baptist. But in Winter they make good Beuer
sleeves, tied behind, which keep them very warm. And after this manner were
the ancient Germans clothed, by the report of Caesar and Tacitus, having the
most part of the body naked.

As for the Armouchiquois and Floridians they have no furs, but only
shamois: yea the said Armouchiquois have very often but a piece of matte upon
their back, for fashions sake, having nevertheless their privy members Gods
providence.
covered. God having so wisely provided for man's infirmity, that in cold
countries he has given furs, and not in the hot, because that otherwise men
would make no esteem of them. And so for that which concerns the body. Let
us come to the legs and feet, then we will end with the head.

Of Hosing.
Our Savages in the Winter, going to sea, or a hunting, do use great and high
stockings, like to our boote-hosen, which they tie to their girdles, and at the
sides outward, there is a great number of points without tagges. I do not see
that they of Brasil or Florida, do use of them, but seeing they have leather,
they may as well make of them, if they have need as the others. Besides these
long stockings, Shooing.
our Savages do use shoes, which they call Mekezin, which they fashion very
properly, but they cannot dure long, specially when they go into watrie
places, because they be not curried, nor hardened, but only made after the
manner of Buffe, which is the hide of an Ellan. Howsoever it be, yet are they in
better order then The Gottes clothing.
were the ancient Gottes, which were not thoroughly hosed, but with buskins or
half boots, which came somewhat higher than the anckle of the foot, where
they made a knot, which they bound with horse hairs, having the calfe of the
leg, the knees and thighs naked. And for the rest of their garments they had
leather coats pleated: as greasy as Lard, and the sleeves down to the
beginning of the arm. And on those Ierkins in stead of gold lace, they made
red borders, as our Savages do. Behold the state of those that ransacked the
Roman Empire, whom Sidonius Apollinaris Bishop of Auuergne, Sidon. Ca^m. 7.
and ^p. 20. lib. 4.
does describe after this manner, going to the Council of Auitus the Emperor,
for to treat of peace:

-- Squalent vestes, acsordidamacro
Linteapinguescunt tergo, nec tangere possunt
Altatae suram pelles, ac poplite nudo
Peronem pauper nudis suspendit equinum, etc.
The Savages head-attire.
As for the head attire, none of the Savages have any, unless it be that some
of the hither lands trucke his skins with Frenchmen for Hattes and Cappes:
but rather both men and women wear their hairs flittring over their
shoulders, neither bound nor tied, except that the men do trusse them upon the
crown of the head, some four fingers length, with a leather lace: which they
let hang down behind. But for the Armouchiquois and Floridians, as well men
as women, they have their hairs much longer, and they hang them down lower
than the girdle when they are untrussed: for to avoid then the hindrance that
they might bring to them, they trusse them up as our horse-keepers do a horses
tail, and the men do stick in them some feather that like them, and the
women a needle or bodkin with three points after the fashion of The Savage
Women wear Bodkins.
the french Ladies, who also wear their needles or bodkins that serve them
partly for an ornament of the head. All the ancient had this custom to go
bareheaded, and the use of hats is but lately come in. The fair Absalon was 2.
Sam. 18. verse. 9.
hanged by his hairs at an Oak, after he had lost the battle against his
fathers army, and they did never cover their heads in those days, but when
they did mourn for some misfortune, as may be noted by the example of David,
who having understood his sons conspiracy fled Ibid* 15. ver. 30.
from Jerusalem, and went up the Mountain of Olives Ester. 6. verse. 12.
weeping and having his head covered, and all the people that was with him. The
Persians did the like, as may be gathered by the History of Aman, who being
commanded to honor him whom he would have to be hanged, to wit Mardochee, went
home to his house weeping, and his head covered, which was a thing
extraordinary. The Romans at their beginning did the like, as I gather by the
words which did command the hangman to do his office, recited by Cicero and
Titus Liuius in these terms: Vade lictor, colliga manus, caput obnubito,
arbori infelici suspendito. And if we will come to our Westerly and Northerly
people, we shall find that the most part did were long hairs, like unto them
that we call Savages. That cannot be denied of the Trans-Alpin Gaullois, who
for that occasion gave the name to Gallia Comata; whereof Martial speaking
says; -- Mollesque Flagellant Colla comae.


Our French Kings have been surnamed hairy, because they did wear their
hairs so long that they did beat down to the back and the shoulders, so that
Gregory of Tours speaking of King Clouis hairs, he calls it Capillorum
Flagella. The Goths did the like, and left to hang over their shoulders great
flocks of hairs curled, which the authors of that time do call granos,
which fashion of Council. Braccarens. 1. Can. 29.
hairs was forbidden to Priests, also the secular apparel, in a Council of
the Goths: and Iornandes in the History of the Goths recites that King
Atalaric would that the Priests should were the Thiare, or hat, making two
sorts of people, some whom he called Pileatos, the others Capillatos, which
these took for so great a favor to be called hairy, that they made mention of
this benefit in their songs: and notwithstanding they braided not their hairs.
But I find by the testimony of Tacitus that the Sueuians a Nation of Germany
did wreath, knit, and tie their hairs on the crown of their heads, even as we
have said of the Souriquois and Armouchiquois. In one thing the Armouchiquois
do differ from the Souriquois and other Savages of New Foundland, which is,
that they pull out their hairs before, which the others do not. Contrary to
whom, Pliny recites Plin. 6 book chap. 13.
that at the descent of the Ripheen Mountains anciently was the region of the
Arimpheons, whom we now call Muscouites, who dwelt in forests, but they were
all shaven as well men as women, and took it for a shameful thing to wear
any hairs. So we see that one self same fashion of living is received in one
place and rejected in another. Which is familiarily evident unto us in many
other things in our regions of these parts, where we see manners and fashions of
living, all contrary, yea sometimes under one and the same Prince.

CHAP. X.
Of the form, color, stature, and actiuity of the Savages: and incidently of
the flies in those Western parts: and why the Americans be not black, etc.
AMongst all the forms of living and bodily creatures, that of man is the
fairest and the most perfect. Which was very decent, both to the creature and
to the Creator, seeing that man is placed in this world to command all that is
here beneath. But although that Nature indeuoureth herself always to do
good, notwithstanding she is sometimes short and forced in her actions, and
thereof it comes that we have monsters and ugly things, contrary to the
ordinary rule of others. Yea even sometimes after that nature has done her
office, we help by our arts to render that which she has made, rediculous
and misshapen: As for example, the Brasilians are borne as fair as the common
sort of men, but coming out of the womb, they are made deformed in squizing
of their nose, which is the chiefest part wherein consists the beauty of man.
True it is that as in certain Countries The Brasilians be short nosed.
they praise the long noses, in others the hawke noses, so among the Brasilians
it is a fair thing to be flat nosed, as also among the Moors of Africa, which
we see to be all of the same sort. And with these large nostrils, the
Brasilians are accustomed to make themselves yet more deformed by Art, making
great holes in their cheeks, and under the lower lip, for to put therein
green stones and of other colors, of the bigness of a tester: so that those
stones being taken away, it is a hideous thing to see those people. But in
Florida, and every where, on this side the Tropique of Cancer, our Savages be
generally goodly men, as they be in Europe: if there be any short nosed one it
is a rare thing. They be of a good stature, and I have seen no dwarffes there,
nor any that drew near to it. Notwithstanding (as I have said elsewhere) in
the Mountains of the Iroquois, which are beyond the great fall of the great
river of Canada, there is a certain Nation of Savages, little men, valiant and
feared every where, which are more often assailers than defenders. But although
that where we dwelt the men be of a good height, nevertheless I have seen none
so tall as Monsieur De Poutrincourt, whose talenesse becomes him very well. I
will not speak here of the Patagons, a people which is beyond the river of
Plate, whom Pighafetta in his voyage about the world, says to be of such an
height, that the talest among us could scarce reach to their girdle. The same
is out of the limits of our New France. But I will willingly come to the other
circumstances of body of our Savages, seeing the subject calls us thereunto.

They are all of an Olive color, or rather tawny color, like to the
Spaniards, not that they be so borne, but being the most part of the time
naked, they grease their bodies, The color of the Savages.

The importunity of flies.


and do anoint them sometimes with oil, for to defend them from the flies,
which are very troublesome, not only, where we were, but also through all that
new world and even in Brasil, so that it is no wonder if Beelzebub prince of
flies has there a great Empire. These flies are The description of the flies
of New France.
of a color drawing toward red, as of corrupted blood, which makes me to
believe that their generation comes but from the rottenness of woods. And
indeed we have tried that the second year, being in a place somewhat more open,
we have had fewer of them than at the first. They cannot endure great heat,
nor wind: but otherwise (as in close dark weather) they are very noisome, by
reason of their stings, which they have, long for so small a body: and they be
so tender that if one touch them never so little they are squised. They begin
to come about the 15. When the flies come in and when they go out.
of June, and do retire themselves in the beginning of September. Being in the
Port De Campseau in the month of August I have not seen nor felt any one;
whereof I did wonder, seeing that the nature of the soil and of the woods is
all one. In September, after that this vermin is gone away, there grow other
flies like unto ours, but they are not troublesome, and become very big. Now
our Savages The Savages remodies against the flies.
to save themselves from the stinging of these creatures, rub themselves with
certain greases and oiles, as I have said, which make them foul and of a
tawnish color. Besides that always they lie on the ground, or be exposed to
the heat and the wind.

But there is cause of wondering, wherefore the Brasilians, and other
inhabitants of America between the two Tropikes, are not borne black as they
of Africa, seeing that it seems it is the selfsame case, being under one and
the selfsame parallel and like elevation of the Sun. If the Poets fables
were sufficient reasons for to take away this scruple, one might say that
Phaeton having done the foolish deed in conducting the Charet of the Sun,
only Africa was burned, and the horses set again in their right course,
before they came to the New world. But I had rather From whence comes the
burning of Africa.
say, that the heat of Lybia, being the cause of this blackness of men, is
engendered from the great lands over which the Sun passes before it come
thither, from whence the heat is still carried more abundantly by the swift
motion of this great Heavenly torch. Whereunto the great sands of that Province
do also help, which are very capable of those heates, specially not being
watered From whence proceeds the cooling of America.
with store of rivers, as America is, which abounds in rivers and brooks as
much as any Province in the World: which do give perpetual refreshing unto
it, and makes the region much more temperate: the ground being also there more
fat, and retaining better the dewes of Heaven, which are there abundantly, and
raines also, for the reasons abuesaid. For the Sun finding in the meeting of
these lands those great moistnesses, he does not fail to draw a good quantity
of them, and that so much the more plentifully, that his force is there great
and marvelous: which makes there continual raines, especially to them that
have him for their zenith. I add one great reason, that the Sun leaving the
lands of Africa, gives his beams upon a moist element by so long a course,
that he has good means to suck up vapors, and to draw together with him
great quantity thereof into those parts: which makes that the cause is much
differing of the color of these two people, and of the temperature of their
lands.

Black hairs.
Let us come to other circumstances, and seeing that we are about colors, I
will say, that all they which I have seen have black hairs, some excepted
which have abram color hairs: but of flaxen color I have seen none, and
less of red: and one must not think that they which are more Southerly be
otherwise: for the Floridians and Brasilians are yet blacker than the Savages
of New found land. The beard of the chinne (which our Savages call migidoni) is
with them as black as their hairs. They all take away the producing cause
thereof, except the Sagamos, who for the most part have but a little. Membertou
has more than all the others, and notwithstanding it is not thick, as it is
commonly with Frenchmen. If these people wear no beards on their chinne (at
the least the most part) there is no cause of maruelling. For the ancient
Romans themselves, esteeming that that was a hinderance unto them, did wear
none, until the time of Adrian the Emperor, who first began to wear a beard.
Which they took for such an honor, that a man accused of any crime, had not
that privilege to shave his hairs, as may be gathered by the testimony of
Aulus Gellius, speaking A. Gel. li. 3 c. 4.
of Scipio, the son of Paul. As for the inferior parts, our Savages do not
hinder the growing or increasing of hairs there. It is said that the women
have some there also. And according as they be curious, some of our men have
made them believe, that the French women have beards on their chinnes, and have
left them in that good opinion, so that they were very desirious to see some of
them, and their manner of clothing. By these particularities one may understand,
that all these people have generally lesser hairs than we: for along the body
they have none at all: so far is it then that they be hairie as some think.
This belongs to the inhabitants of the Isles Gorgades, from whence Hanno the
Carthaginien captain brought two women's skins, which he did set up in the
temple of Juno for great singularity: But here is to be noted what we have
said, that our savage people have almost all their hairs black: for the
Frenchmen in one and the selfsame degree are not commonly so. The ancient
authors The corporal qualities of the ancient Gaullois.
Polybius, Caesar, Strabo, Diadore the Cicilian, and particularly Ammian
Marcellin, do say, that the ancient Gaullois had almost all their hairs as
yellow as gold, were of high stature, and fearful for their ghastly looks:
besides quarelsome and ready to strike: a fearful voice, never speaking but
in threatening. At this time those qualities are well changed. For there are not
now so many yellow hairs: nor so many men of high stature, but that other
nations have as tall: As for the fearful looks, the delicacies of this time
have moderated that: and as for the threatening voice, I have scarce seen in
all the Gauls but the Gascons, and them of Languedoc, which have their manner
of speech some what rude, which they retain of the Gotish and of the Spaniard,
by their neighborhood. But as for the hairs it is very far from being so
commonly black. The same author Ammian says also, that the women of the
Gauls (whom he noted to be good shrewes, and to be too hard for their
husbands, when they are in choler) have blue eyes: and consequently the men:
and notwithstanding in that respect we are much mingled: which makes that one
knows not what The beauty of the eyes.
rareness to choose for the beauty of eyes. For many do love the blue eyes,
and others love them green: which were also in ancient time most praised. For
among the Sonnets of Monsieur de Couci, (who was in old time so great a clerk
in love matters, that songs were made of it) green eyes are praised.

The Germans have kept better than we the qualities which Tacitus gives them,
likewise that which Ammian recites of the Gaullois: In so great a number of
men (says Tacitus) there is but one fashion of garments: They have blue eyes
and fearful, their hairs shining as gold, and are very corpulent. Pliny
gives the same bodily qualities to the people of the Taprobane, saying that
they have read hairs, their eyes blue, and the voice horrible and fearful.
Wherein I know not if I ought to believe him, considering the climate, which is
in the 8, 9. and 10. degrees only, and that in the kingdom of Calecute,
farther off than the Aequinoctial line, the men are black. But as for our
Savages, concerning their eyes, they have them neither blue nor green, but
black for the most part, like to their hairs: and nevertheless their eyes
are not small, as they of the ancient Scythians, but of a decent greatness.
And I may say assuredly and truly, that I have seen there as fair boys and
girls, as any can be in France. For as for the mouth, they have no big
moorish lips, as in Africa, and also in Spain; they are well limmed, well
boned, and well bodied, competently strong: and nevertheless we had many in
our company who might have wrestled well enough with the strongest of them: but
being hardened, there would be made of them very good men for the war, which
is that wherein they most delight. Moreover, Monstrous bodies. Plin. 6. book,
cap. 31.
among them there is none of those prodigious men whereof Pliny makes mention,
which have no noses in their faces, or no lips, or no tongue: Item, which are
without mouth, and without nose, having but two small holes, whereof one of them
serves for to breath, the other serves in stead of a mouth: Item, which have
dogs heads, and a dog for king: Item, which have their heads on the breast,
or one only eye in the midst of the forehead, or a flat broad foot to cover
their heads when it raineth, and such like monsters. There is none also of them
which our Savage Agohanna told captain James Quartier that he In this author
his second book, chap. 25.
had seen in Saguenay, whereof we have spoken heretofore. If there be any
blind with one eye, or lame (as it happens sometimes) it is a casual thing,
and comes of hunting.

Being well composed, they cannot choose but be nimble and swift in running. We
have spoken heretofore of the nimblenesse of the Brasilians, Margaias and
Ou-etacas: Nimblenesse of body, lib. 1. cap. 25.
but all nations have not those bodily dispositions. They which live in
mountains have more dexterity than they of the valleys, because they breath a
purer and cleerer air, and that their food is better. In the valleys the air
is grosser, and the lands fatter, and consequently vnholesommer. The nations
that be between the Tropikes, have also more agilitie than the others,
participating more with the fiery nature than they that are farther off. This
is the cause why Pliny speaking of the Gorgones and Isles Gorgonides (which
Gorgones.
are those of Cap Verd) says, that the men are there so light of foot, that
scarce one may follow them by the eyesight, in such manner, that Hanno the
Carthaginian could not catch any one of them. He makes the like relation of
the Troglodytes, a nation of Guinee, whom he says are called Therothoens,
because they are as swift in hunting upon the land, as the Ichthyophages are
prompt in swiming in the sea, who almost are as seldom weary therein as a
fish. And Maffeus in his Histories of the Indies reports, that the Naires (so
the nobles and warriors are called) of the kingdom of Malabaris, are so
nimble and so swift, as it is almost incredible, and do handle so well their
bodies at will, that they seem to have no bones, in such sort, that it is hard
to come to skirmish against such men, forasmuch as with this agilitie, they
advance and recoile as they list. But for to make themselves such, they help
nature, and their sinews are stretched out even Sesame a kind of corn, Plini.
li. 18. ca. 10.
from seven years of age, which afterward are anointed and rubbed with oil of
Sesamum. That which I say, is known even in beasts: for a Spanish Genet or a
Barbe is more lively and light in running, than a Roossin or Germain Curtall;
an Italian horse more than a French horse. Now although that which I have said
be true, yet for all that there be nations out of the Tropikes, who by exercise
Hazael. 2. Samuel 2.
and Art come to such agilitie. For the holy Scripture makes mention of one
Hazael an Israelite, of whom it witnesses, that he was as light of foot as a
Roe bucke of the fields. And for to come to the people of the North, the Heruli
are renouned for being swift in running, by this verse of Sidonius:

Cursu Herulus, iaculis Hunnus, Francusque natatu. And by this swiftness the
Germans sometimes troubled very much Julius Caesar. So our Armouchiquois are as
swift as gray hounds, as we have said heertofore, and the other Savages are
little inferior unto them, and yet they do not force nature, neither do they
use any Art to run well. But as the ancient Gaulois, being addicted to hunting
(for it is their life) and to war, their bodies are nimble, and so little
charged with fat, that it does not hinder them from running at their will.

Their dexterity in swiming.
Now the Savages dexterity is not known only by running, but also in
swimming; which they all can do: but it seems, that some more than others. As
for the Brasilians they are so natural in that trade, that they would swim
eight days in the sea, if hunger did not press them, and they fear more that
some fish should devour them, than to perish through weariness. The like is
in Florida, where the men will follow a fish in the sea, and will take it
unless it be too big. Joseph Acosta says so much of them of Peru. And as
for that which concerns breathing, they have a certain Art to suppe up the
water, and to cast it out again, by which means they will remain easily in
it a long time. The women likewise have a marvelous disposition to that
exercise: for the History of Florida makes mention that they can pass great
rivers in swimming, holding their children with one arm: and they climb very
nimbly up the highest trees of the country. I will affirm nothing of the
Armouchiquois, nor of our Savages, because I took no heed to it: but it is
very certain that all can swim very cunningly. For the other parts of their
bodies they have them very perfect, as likewise the natural senses. For
Membertou (who is above an hundred years old) did see sooner a shaloupe or a
Canow of the Savages, to come afar off unto Port Royal, than any of us: and
it is said of the Brasilians and other Savages of Peru hidden in the
mountains, that they have the smelling so good, that in smelling of the hand,
they know if a man be a Spaniard or a French man: And if he be a Spaniard, they
kill him without remission, so much do they hate him for the harms that they
have received of them. Which the abouesaid Acosta does confess when he
speaks of leaving the Indians Acosta. lib. 6. cap. 1.
to live according to their ancient policy, reproving the Spaniards in that.
And therefore (says he) this is a thing prejudicial unto us, because that
they take occasion to abhor us (note that he speaks of them who do obey
them) as men who in all things, whether it be in good, whether it be in evil,
have always been, and still are, contrary unto them.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Paintings, Marks, Incisions, and Ornaments of their body.
IT is no marvel if the Ladies of our time do paint themselves: for of a long
time and in many places that trade has had beginning. But it is reproved in
the holy books, and made a reproach by the voices of the Prophets, as when
Jeremy threatens the City of Jerusalem: Ierem. 4. verse. 30.
When thou shall be destroyed (says he) what will thou do? though thou
clothest thy self with skarlet, though thou deckest thy self with Ornaments
of gold, though thou paintest thy face with colors, yet shall thou trim thy
self in vain: for thy lovers will abhor thee, and seek thy life. The Prophet
Ezech. 23. verse. 40.
Ezechiel makes the like reproach to the Cities of Jerusalem and Samaria,
which he compares to two leaud harlots, who having sent to seek out men
coming from far, and being come, they have washed themselves, and painted
their faces, and have put on their fair ornaments. The 4. Kings. 9. verse. 30.
Plin. lib. 33. cap. 7.
Queen Iesabel doing the same, was for all that cast down out of a window, and
bare the punishment of her wicked life. The Romans did anciently paint their
bodies with vermillion (as Pliny says) when they entered in triumph into Rome,
and he adds, that the Princes and great Lords of Ethiopia made great account
of that color, wherewith they wholly painted themselves red: also both the one
and the other did serve themselves therewith to make their god fairer: And that
the first expense which was allowed of by the Censors and Masters of Accounts
in Rome was of the moneys bestowed for to color with vermilion the face of
Jupiter. The same author recites in another place, Plin. lib. 6. cap. 30.
that the Anderes, Mathites, Mosagebes and Hipporeens, people of Libya, did
plaster all their bodies over with red chaulke. Briefly, this fashion did
pass as far as to the North. And thereof is come the name that was given to
the Picts, an ancient people of Scythia, neighbors to the Goths, who in the
year 87. after the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, under the Empire of
Domitian made courses and spoils through the Isles which lie North ward, where
having found men who made them resistance, they returned back without doing
any thing, and lived yet naked in their cold Country until the year of our
Lord 370. At which time under the Empire of Valentinian being joined Ammian
lib. 26. and 27.
with the Saxons and Scots they tormented very much them of Great Britan, as
Ammian Marcellin recites: and being resolved to remain there (as they did)
they demanded of the Britons (which now are Englishmen) wives in marriage.
Whereupon being denied, they retired themselves to the Scots, of whom they were
furnished, upon condition that the masculine race of the Kings coming to fail
among them, that then the women should succeed in the Realm. Now these people
were called Picts, because of the paintings which they used upon their naked
bodies, which (says Herodian) they would not cover with Herod. 3. book.
any clothing for fear to hide and darken the fair painting they had set upon
it, where were set out beasts of all sorts, and printed with Iron instruments,
in such sort that it was impossible to take them off. Which they did (as Solin
says) even from their infancy: in manner that as the child did grow, so did
grow those fixed figures, even as the marks that are graued upon the young
pompions. The Poet Claudian does also give us many witnesses of this in his
Panegyriques, as when he speaks of the Emperor Honorius his Grandfather:

Ille Leaves Mauros, nec falso nomine Pictos
Edomuit -- And in the Gothicke war
-- Ferroque not at as
Perlegit exanimes Picto moriente figur as.
This has been noted by Monsieur de Belleforest, and afterward by the learned
Sauaron upon the observation that Sidoine de Polignac makes thereof. And
albeit that our Celtique Poitevins, called by the Latins Pictones, be not
descended from the race of those (for they were ancient Gaullois even in Julius
Caesar's time) nevertheless I may well believe that this name has been given
them for the same occasion as that of the Picts. And as customs once brought
in among a people are not lost but by the length of many ages (as we see yet
the follies of Shroue-Tuesday to continue) so the uses of painting, whereof we
have spoken remains in some Northerly Nations. For I have heard sometimes
Monsieur Le Comte D'Egmond tell, that he has seen in his young years them of
Brunzwich come into his fathers house with their faces greased with painting,
and their visage all blacked, from whence peradventure this word of Bronzer may
be derived, which signifies in Picardy to black. And generally I believe that
all those Northerly people did use painting, when they would make themselves
brave. For the Gelons and Agathyrses, Nations of Scythia like the Picts, were
of this fraternity, and with Iron instruments did color their bodies. The
Englishmen Tertul. de veland. virgin. Iornandes de bello Got. Isidor. lib. 16.
cap. 23.
likewise, then called Britons, by the saying of Tertullian. The Goths, besides
the Iron instruments, did use vermillion to make their faces and bodies red.
Briefly, it was a sport in the old time to see so many Antikes, men and women:
for there are found yet old Pictures, which he that has made the History of
the Englishmens voyage into Virginia has cut in brass, where the Picts of
both sex are painted out, with their fair incisions, and swords hanging upon
the naked flesh, as Herodian describes them.

The West Indians.
This humor of painting having been so general in these parts, there is no
cause of mocking, if the people of the West Indies have done, and yet do the
like: which is universal and without exception among those nations. For if any
one of them makes love, he shall be painted with blue or red color, and his
Mistres also. If they have venison in abundance, or be glad for any thing, they
will do the like generally. But when that they are sad, or plot some
treason, then they ouercast all their face with black, and are hideously
deformed. Touching the body, our Savages apply no painting to it, which the
Brasilians and Floridians do, the most part whereof are painted over the
body, the arms and thighs with fair branches, whose painting can never be
taken away, because they are pricked within the flesh. Notwithstanding many
Brasilians do paint only their bodies (without incision) when they list: and
this with the juice of a certain fruit which they call Genipat, which does
black so much, that though they wash themselves, they cannot be clean in ten
or twelve days after. They of Virginia, which are more of this side, Virginia.
have marks upon their backs, like to those that our merchants do put upon
their packs, by the which (even as the slaves) one may know under what Lord
they live: which is a fair form of government for this people: seeing that
the ancient Roman Emperors have used the like toward their soldiers, which
were marked with the Imperial mark, as Saint Augustine, Saint Ambrose, and
Aug. contra Parmen. lib. 2. cap. 13. Ambros. in the funeral oration of
Valentin.
others do witness unto us. Which thing Constantine the Great did likewise,
but his mark was the sign of the Cross, which he made to be printed upon the
shoulders of his soldiers, as himself says in an Epistle which he wrote to
the king of Persia, reported by Theodoret in the Ecclesiastical history. And
the first Christians, as marching under the banner of Jesus Christ, did take
the same mark, which they printed in their hand, or on the arm, to the end to
know one another, specially in time of persecution, as Procopius says,
expounding this place of Isaiah: One will say, I am the Lords, and the other
will call Isai. 44 5.
himself with the name of Jacob: and the other will write with his hand, I am
the Lords, and will surname himself with the Galat. 6.
name of Israel. The great Apostle S. Paul did bear the marks of the Lord
Jesus Christ in his flesh, but it was yet after another manner, that is to say,
by the bruses, which he had on his body of the stripes that he had received for
his name. And the Hebrews had for mark the Circumcision of the foreskinne, by
the which they are sequestered from other nations, and known for Gods people.
But as for other bodily incisions, such as anciently the Picts did make, and
the Savages do yet make at this day, they have been anciently very expressly
forbidden in the Law of Leu. 19. 28. Deuteronomy. 14. 1.
God given to Moses. For it is not lawful for us to disfigure the image and the
form that God has given unto us. Yea the pictures and paintings have been
blamed and reproved by the Prophets, as we have noted elsewhere. And
Tertullian says, that the Angels which have discovered and taught unto men
their paintings and counterfetted things, have been condemned of God:
alleging for proof of his saying, the book of Enochs prophecy. By these
things above recited, we know that this hither world has anciently been as
much deformed and savage as they of the West Indies: but that which seems
unto me most worthy of wondering, is the nakedness of those people in a
cold country, wherein they delight, even to harden their children in the snow,
in the river, and among the Ice, as we touched heretofore in an other chapter,
speaking of the Cimbres and Frenchmen. Which also has been their chiefest
strength in the conquests that they have made.

CHAP. XII.
Of their outward ornaments of the body, bracelets, Carkenets, Eare-rings, etc.
WE that do live in these parts under the authority of our Princes, and
ciuilised commonwealths, have two great tyrants of our life, to whom the people
of the New world have not been yet subjected, the excesses of the belly, and
the ornament of body, and briefly all that which belongs to bravery, which
if we should cast off, it would be a mean to recall the golden age, and to
take away the calamity which we see in most part of men. For he which
possesses much, making small expense, would be liberal, and would succor the
needy, whereunto he is hindered, willing not only to maintain, but also to
augment his train, and to make show of himself, very often at the costs of
the poor Psalm. 14. ver. 4. and 53. verse. 5.
people, whose blood he sucketh, Qui devorant plebem meam sicut escam panis,
says the Psalmist. I leave that which belongs to food, not being my purpose
to speak Plin. lib. 33. cap. 11.
of it in this Chapter. I leave also the excesses which consists in household
implements, sending the reader back to Pliny, who has spoken amply of the
Roman pompes and superfluity, as of vessels after the Furvienne and Clodienne
fashion, of bed-steades after the Deliaque fashion, and of tables all wrought
with gold and silver imbossed; where also he sets out a slave Drusillanus
Rotundus, who being Treasurer of the higher Spain, caused a forge to be made
for to work a piece of Siluer-plate of five quintals weight, accompanied with
eight other, all weighing half Matuchias be bracelets, carkenets, and other
iollities.
a quintall. I will only speak of the Matachias of our Savages, and say, that
if we did content our selves with their simplicity we should avoid many
troubles that we put our selves unto to have superfluities, without which we
might live contentedly (because Nature is satisfied with little) and the
coveting whereof makes us very often to decline from the right way, and to
stray from the path of justice. The excesses of men do consist the most part
in things which I have said I will omit, which notwithstanding I will not leave
untouched, if it come to purpose. But Ladies have always had this reputation,
to love excesses in that which The first book Padag. cap. 10.
concerns the decking of their bodies: And all the Moralists who have made
profession to repress vices have mentioned them, wherethey have found a large
subject to speak of. Clement Alexandrine making a long numeration of women's
trinckets (which he has the most part taken out of the Prophet Isaiah) says
in the end, that he is weary to speak so much of it, and that he maruelleth
that they are not killed with so great a weight.

Let us take them then by those parts wherein they be Tert. in the book of
women's ornaments.
complained of. Tertullian maruelleth of the audaciousnesse of man, which
sets himself against the word of our Savior, which said: that it is not in
us to add any thing to the measure or height that God has given unto us: and
notwithstanding A lesson for the women of our time.
Ladies endeavor themselves to do to the contrary, adding upon their heads
cages made of hairs, fashioned like to loaves of bread, to hats, to panniers,
or to the hollownesse of scutchions. If they be not ashamed with this
superfluous enormity, at least (says he) let them be a shamed of the filth
which they bear: and not to cover a holy and a Christian head with the
leauings of another head, per adventure unclean, or guilty of some crime, and
ordained to a shameful death. And in the same place, speaking of them which do
color their hairs: That is called Crecuphantia.
I see some (says he) who do change the color of their hairs with saffron.
They are ashamed of their Country, and would be Gauloise women, or German
women, so much do they disguise S. Cypr. in the book of the virgins clothing.

S. Hierom. Epi. to Lata.


themselves. Whereby is known how much red hairs were esteemed in the old
time. And indeed the holy Scripture praises that of David, which was such. But
to seek it out by art, S. Cyprian and S. Hierome, with our Tertullian do say,
that the same does presage the fire of hell. Now our Savages, in that which
consists in the borrowing of hairs, are not reprouable: for their vanity
stretches not so far: but for the coloring of them, for as much as when
they are merry, and paint their faces, be it with blue or with red, they paint
also their hairs with the same color.

Now let us come to the ears, to the neck, to the arms and to the hands, and
there we shall find wherewith to busy our selves: these are parts where
jewels are easily seen: which Ladies have learned very well to observe. The
first men which have had piety in them have made conscience to offer any
violence to Nature, and to pierce the ears for to hang any precious thing at
it: for none is Lord of his own members to abuse them, so says the Ciuilian
Vlpian. And therefore when the servant of Abraham Gens. 24. ver. 22.
went into Mesopotamia for to find out a wife for Isaac, and had met with
Rebecca, he put upon her forehead a jewel of gold hanging down between her
eyes, and also bracelets of gold upon her hands: for which reason it is said in
the Proverbs, that A fair woman which lacks discretion Prou. 11. ver. 22.
is like a golden ring in a swines snout. But men have taken more license than
they ought, and have defaced the workmanship of God in them, to please their
own fancies. Wherein I do not wonder at the Brasilians) of whom we will
hereafter speak) but of ciuilised people, which have called other nations
barbarous, but much more of the Christians of this age. When Seneca did
complain Senec. 7. of benefits.
of that which was in his time; The folly of women (says he) had not made men
subject enough, but it has been yet behouefull to hang two or three
patrimonies at their ears. But what patrimonies? They carry (says Tertullian)
Islands and Farme-houses upon their necks, and great registers in their ears
containing the revenues of a great rich man, and every finger of the left hand
has a patrimony to play withal. Finally, he cannot compare them better than
to condemned men that are in the Caves of Ethiopia, which the more they are
culpable, so much the richer are they, because that the fetters and bolts,
wherewith they are tied, are of gold. But he exhorts the Christian women not
to be such, for as Plin. lib. 9. cap. 35.
much as those things are certain marks of lasciuiousnes, which do belong to
those mischievous oblations of public unchastity. Pliny, albeit he was an
heathen, does no less abhor those excesses. For our Ladies (says he) for to
be brave do bear hanging at their fingers those great pearls which are
called Elenchus, in fashion of pearls, and have two of them, yea three at
their ears. Yea they have invented names to serve themselves therewith in
their cursed and troublesome superfluities. For they call Belles, them which
they carry in number at their ears, as if they did take pleasure to hear
pearls gingling at their ears. And that which*is more, the huswifly women,
yea the poor women also, deck themselves therewith; saying, that a woman
ought to go as seldom without pearls, as a Consul without his Vshers.
Finally, they are come so far as to adorn their shoes with them, and
garters, yea their buskins are yet full and garnished therewith. In such sort
that it is not now any more question to wear pearls, but they must be made
to serve for pauement, Fol. 736.
to the end to tread but upon pearls. The same Author does recite that Lollia
Paulina forsaken by Caligula, in the common feasts of mean men was so
ouerladen with Emeralds and with Pearls, on her Plin. lib. 33. c. 3.
head, her hairs, her ears, her neck, her fingers and her arms, as well in
colars, necklaces, as bracelets, that all did shine at it, and that she had of
them to the worth of a million of gold. The same was excessive: but she was
the greatest Princess of the world, and yet he does not say that she did
wear any on her shoes: as he does yet complain in some other where that the
Dames of Rome did wear gold on their feet. What disorder! (says he) Let us
permit the women to wear as much gold as they will in bracelets, at their
fingers, at their necks, at their ears, and in kark^nets and bridles, etc.
must they for all that deck their feet with it? etc. I should never make an
end, if I should continue this speech.

The Spanish women in Peru do go beyond that, for their shoes are set over
with nothing but plates of gold and silver, and garnished with pearls. True it
is that they are in a country, which God has blessed abundantly with all
these riches. But if thou have not so much of them, do not vex thy self at it,
and be not tempted through envy: such things are but earth, dug and purified
with a thousand troubles, in the bottom of hell, by the incredible labor, and
with the life of men like unto thee: Pearls are but dew, received within the
shell of a fish, which are Pearls what they be.
fished by men that be forced to become fishes, that is to say, to be always
diuing in the depth of the sea. And for to have these things, and to be clothed
in silk, and for to have robes with infinite foldes, we turmoile our selves,
we take cares which do shorten our days, gnaw our bones, suck out our
marrow, weaken our bodies, and consume our spirit. He that has meat and drink
is as rich as all these, if he could consider it. And where those things do
abound, there delights do abound, and consequently vices: and to conclude,
behold what God says by his Prophet: They shall cast their silver out into the
streets, and their gold shall be but dung, and shall not deliver them in the
Ezec. 7. 19.
day of my great wrath. He that will have further knowledge of the
chastisements wherewith God does threaten the woman that abuse carkenets and
jewels, which have no other care but to attire and deck themselves, go with
their breasts open, their eyes wandering, and with a proud gate, let him read
the third chapter of the Prophet Isaiah. I will not for all that blame the
Virgins which have some golden things, or chains of pearls, or other jewels,
also some modest vesture: for that is comeliness, and all things are made for
the use of man: but excess is that which is to be blamed, because that under
that, very often is lasciviousness hidden. Happy are the people which not
having the occasions to sin, do purely serve God, and possess a land which
furnishes them of that which is necessary for life. Happy are our Savage
people if they had the full knowledge of God: for in that case they be without
ambition, vainglory, envy, avarice, and have no care of these braueries,
which we have now described: but rather do content themselves to have
Matachias, hanging at their ears, and about their necks, bodies, arms, and
legs. The Brasilians, Floridians, and Armouchiquois, do make carkenets and
bracelets (called bou-re in Brasill, and by ours Matachias) of the shelles of
those great sea cockles, which be called Vignols, like unto snailes, which they
break and gather up in a thousand pieces, then do smooth them upon a hot
stone, until they do make them very small, and having pierced them, they make
them beads with them, like unto that which we call Pourcelaine. Among those
beads they intermingle between spaces other beads, as black as those which I
Iet.
have spoken of to be white, made with Iet, or certain hard and black wood which
is like unto it, which they smooth and make small as they list, and this has a
very good grace. And if things are to be esteemed for their fashion, as we see
it practiced in our merchandises, these colars, skarffes, and bracelets made of
great periwincles or pourcelaine, are richer than pearls, (notwithstanding
none will believe me herein) so do they esteem them more than pearls, gold
or silver: And this is that which they of Beads much esteemed.
the great river of Canada in the time of Iam. Quartier did call Esurgin (whereof
we have made mention heertofore) a word which I have had much ado to know, and
which Belleforest the Cosmographer understood not, when he would speak of it.
At this day they have not any more of them, or else they have lost the
knowledge to make them: For they use Mattachias very much, that are brought
unto them out of France. Now as with us, so in that country, women do deck
themselves with such things, and will have chains that will go twelve times
about their necks, hanging down upon their breasts, and about their hand
wrests, and above the elbow. They also hang long strings of them at their
ears, which come down as low as their shoulders. If the men wear any, it
will be only some young man that is in love. In the country of Virginia where
Pearls in Virginia. Copper.
some pearls be found, the women do wear carkenets, colars and bracelets of
them, or else of pieces of copper (made round like small bullets) which is
found in their mountains, where some mines of it are. But in Port Royal, and
in the confines thereof, and toward Newfound land, and at Tadoussac, where
they have neither pearls nor vignols, the maids and women do make
Mattachias, with the quilles or bristles of the Porc-epine, which they die with
black, white, and red colors, as lively as possibly may be, for our skarlets
have no better luster Excellent skarlet die.
than their red die: But they more esteem the Mattachias which come unto them
from the Armouchiquois country, and they buy them very dear; and that because
they can get no great quantity of them, by reason of the wars that those
nations have continually one against another. There is brought unto them from
France Mattachias made with small quilles of glass mingled with tin or lead,
which are trucked with them, and measured by the fadam, for want of an ell: and
this kind of Merchandise is in that country, that which the Latins do call
Mundus muliebris. They also make of them small squares of sundry colors, sowed
together, which they tie behind, on the little childrens hairs. The men do
not much care for them, except that the Brasilians do wear about their necks
half moons of bones very white, which they call y-aci of the Moons name: And
our Souriquois do likewise wear some iollities of like stuff, without
excess. And they which have none of that, do commonly carry a knife before
their breasts, which they do not for ornament: but for want of pocket, and
because it is an implement which at all times is necessary unto them. Some have
girdles made of Matachias, wherewith they serve themselves, only when they will
set out themselves and make them brave. The Autmoins or Sooth-saiers do carry
before their breasts some sign of their vocation, as we will hereafter say.
But as for the men of the Armouchiquois they have a fashion to wear at their
hand-wrests, and above the anclebone of the foot, about their legs, plates of
Copper, fetterwise, and about their wastes girdles, fashioned with Copper quils
as long as the middle finger filed together the Herodian the 3. book.
length of a girdle, even just of that fashion which Herodian recites to have
been in use among the Picts, whereof we have spoken, when he says, that they
girded their bodies and their necks with iron, esteeming that to be a great
ornament unto them, and a testimony of their great riches, even Savage Scots.
as other Barbarians do to have gold about them. And there are yet in Scotland
Savage men, which neither ages, nor years, nor the abundance of men could yet
reduce unto civility. And although that (as we have said) the men be not so
desirous of Matachias as the women, notwithstanding the men of Brasill, not
caring for clothing, take great pleasure to deck and garnish themselves with
the feathers of birds, and do use those wherewith we use to fill our beds
whereon we lie, and chop them as small as piemeat, which they die in red, with
their Brasill-wood, then having anointed their bodies with certain gums, which
serve them in stead of paste or glue, they cover themselves with those
feathers, and make a garment at one clap, after the anticke fashion: which has
made (says John de Leri in his History of America) the first of our men that
went thither to believe that the men which be called Savages were hairie over
all their bodies, which is nothing so. For (as we have already said) the
Savages in what part soever, have lesser hairs than we. They of Florida do
also use this kind of down, but it is only about their heads, to make
themselves more ugly. Besides this that we have said, the Brasilians do make
frontlets of feathers, which they tie and fit in order of all colors: those
frontlets being like in fashion to those rackets or periwigges, which Ladies
use in these parts, the invention whereof they seem to have learned of those
Savages. As for them of our New France, in the days that be of solemnity and
rejoicing among them, and when they go to the wars, they have about their
heads as it were a crown made with long hairs of an Ellan or Stagge, painted
in read, pasted, or otherwise fastened, to a fillet of leather of three fingers
breadth, such as James Quartier says he had seen with the King (so does he
call him) and Lord of the Savages, which he found in the town of Hochelaga.
But they do not use so many ornaments of feathers as the Brasilians, which
make gowns of them, cappes, bracelets, girdles, and ornaments for their
cheeks, and targets upon their loins, of all colors, which would be more
tedious than delightful to specify, since it is an easy matter for every one
to supply the same, and to imagine what it is.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Marriage.
Having spoken of the Savages garments, deckings, ornaments and paintings, it
has seemed good unto me to marry them, to the end the generation of them be
not lost, and that the country remain not desert. For the first ordinance
that ever God made, was to increase and multiply, and every creature capable of
generation to bring forth fruit according to his kind. And to This is in the
gloss of the Talmud in the Treaty of Idolatry.
the end to encourage young folks that do marry, the Jews had a custom
anciently to fill a trough with earth, in the which, a little before the
wedding, they did sow barley, and the same being sprung, they brought it to
the Bridegroom and the Bride, saying: Bring forth fruit and multiply as this
barley, which brings forth sooner than all other seeds.

Now to return to our Savages, many thinking (as I believe) that they be some
logges of wood, or imagining a Commonwealth of Plato, do demand if they have
any marriage, and if there be any Priests in Canada to marry them. Wherein they
seem to be very raw and ignorant. Canadians.
Captain James Quartier speaking of the marriage of the Canadians, in his
second relation says thus: They observe the order of marriage, saving that the
men take two or three wives. And the husband being dead the women do never
marry again, but do mourn for his death all their life long, and do daube
their face with coal beaten to powder and with grease, the thickness of a
knife, and thereby are known to be widows. Then he goes further: They have
another bad custom with their daughters: The prostituting of Maidens.
For being come to be marriageable, they are put all in a stewe house, abandoned
to all comers, until they have found out a match: And all this have we seen
by experience. For we have seen the houses as full of these maidens, as is a
School of boys in France. I would have thought that the said James Quartier
had (touching this prostituting of maids) added somewhat of his own, but the
discourse of Monsieur Champlein, which is but six years since, does confirm
the same thing unto me, saving that he speaks not of assemblies: which
keeps me from Souriquois.
contrarying it. But among our Souriquois there is no such thing: not that these
Savages have any great care of continency and virginity, for they do not
think to do evil in corrupting it: But whether it be by the frequentation of
Frenchmen or otherwise, the maids are ashamed to do any unchaste thing
publicly: and if it happen that they abandon themselves to any one; it is in
secret. The first book, chapter 4.
Moreover, he that will marry a Maid it behooves him to demand her of her
father, without whose consent she shall be none of his, as we have already
said heretofore, and brought forth the example of one that had done
otherwise. And if he will marry, he shall sometimes make love, not after the
manner of the Esseens, who (as Josephus Josephus of the wars of the Jews,
lib. 2. cap. 12.
says) did try the maidens by the space of three years, before they married
them, but by the space of six months or a year, without abusing of them: will
paint his face that he may seem the fairer, and will have a new gown of
Beuers or Otters, or of some thing else, well garnished with Matachias guarded
and laid over in form of parchment lace of gold and silver, as the Goths did
use heretofore. It is meet moreover that he show himself valiant in hunting,
and that they know him able to do some thing, for they do not trust in a man's
means, which are none other than that which he gets by his days labor, not
caring any wise for other riches than hunting: unless our manners make them to
have a desire of it.

The prostituting of the Maidens in Brasil.
The Maidens of Brasill have liberty to prostitute themselves as soon as they
are able for the same, even as them of Canada. Yea the fathers do serve for
pandors to their daughters, and they repute for an honor to communicate them
to the men of these parts that go thither, to the end to have of their race.
But to consent unto it, would be too damnable an abomination, and that would
deserve rigorous punishment, as indeed for the slacknesse of men God has
punished this vice in such wise, that the fore has been communicated in these
parts, even to them that have been too much addicted after Christian wenches
and women, The Pox.
by the sickness which is called the pox, which before the discovery of those
lands was unknown in Europe: for these people are very much subject to it, and
even they of Florida: but they have the Guayac, the Esquin, and the Sasafr
Guayac. Esquin. Sasafras. Annida.
as, trees very soueraign for the cure of that leprosy, and I believe that the
tree Annedda, whose wonders we have recited, is one of these kinds.

One might think that the nakedness of this people would make them more
lecherous, but it is not so. For as The chastity of the ancient Germans, and of
the Savages of New France.
Caesar gives the Germans this commendation, that they had in their ancient
Savages life such a continency, as they reputed it a thing most vile for a
yong-man to have the company of a woman before he came to the age of 20.
years: and in their own disposition also, they were not moved thereunto,
although that pell mell, all together men and women, yongue and old did bathe
themselves in rivers: So also may I say for our Savages, that I never saw
amonst them any unseemly gesture or unchaste look, and I dare affirm that
they be lesser given to that vice than we in these parts. I attribute the cause
thereof, partly to this their nakedness, and chiefly to the keeping bare of
their head, from whence the matter of generation has his original: partly to
the want of hot spices, of wine, and of meats that do provoke to that which is
primary sign Itiphalles. Tobacco contrary to Venus.
of unclean desires, and partly to the frequent use which they have of Tobacco,
whose smoke dulleth the senses, and mounting up to the brains hinders the
functions of Venus. John De Leri praises the Brasilians for this continency:
nevertheless he adds, that when they are angry they call sometimes one
another Tiuire, that is to say, So domite, whereby it may be coniectured that
this sin reigns among them, as Captain Laudonniere says it does in
Florida: and that the Floridians love the feminine sex very much. And indeed I
have heard, that for to please the women the more they busy themselves very
much about that which is the primary sign of unclean desires, whereof we
spoke even now; and that they may the better Great store of Ambergris.
do it, they furnish themselves with Ambergris, whereof they have great store,
which first they melt at the fire, then iniect it (with such pain, that it
makes them to gnash their teeth) even so far as to the bone Sacrum, and with
a whippe of nettles, or such like thing, make that idol of Maacha to swell,
which king Asa made to be consumed into ashes, and cast it into the brook
Cedron. On the other side the women use certain herbs, and endeavor
themselves as much as they can to make restrictions for the use of the said
Ityphalles, and to give either party their due.

Contract of marriage.
Let us return to our marriages, which are better than all these rogueries.
The contracters do not give their faith between the hands of Notaries, nor of
their Sooth-saiers, but simply do demand the consent of the parents: and so
they do every where. But here is to be noted, that they keep (and in Brasill
also) three degrees of consanguinity, Degrees of consanguinity.
in the which they are not used to contract marriage, that is to wit, of the
son with the mother, of the father with his daughter, and of the brother with
the sister. These excepted, all things are permitted. As for dowry, there is no
mention of it. Also when any divorce happens, the husband is bound to nothing.
And although that (as it has been said) there is no promise of loialtie given
before any superior power, nevertheless in what part soever, the wives keep
chastity, and seldom is any found that breaks it. Yea I have heard
oftentimes say, that in yielding The Savage women in the venerious action.
the duty to the husband, they make themselves oftentimes to be constrained:
which is rare in these parts. For the Gaulloise women are renowned by Strabo to
be good Porters (I mean fruitful) and breeders: and contrariwise The
fruitfulness of the women of the Gauls.
I do not see that the people do abound as in these parts, although that they
all labor for generation, and that Polygamie is ordinary with them, which was
not among the ancient Gaullois, nor among the Germans, though they be a more
rustike people. True it is that our Savages do kill one an other daily, and
are always in fear of their enemies, keeping watches upon their frontiers.

This frigidity of Venus brings an admirable and incredible thing among these
women, and which was not to be found even among the wives of the holy Patriarch
Jacob, which is, that although they be many wives to one husband (for Polygamie
is received through all that New Polygamie.
world) notwithstanding there is no jealousy among them: which is in Brasill,
a hot Country as well as Canada: But as for the men, they are in many places
very jealous: and if the wife be found faulty she shall be put away, or in
danger to be killed by her husband: And in that (as for the spirit of jealousy)
there needs not so many ceremonies as those that were done amongst the Jews,
recited in the Numbers 5. verse. 12. and so following. S. Aug. against Manicheus
the 19. book, chap. 26.
book of Numbers. And as for diuorcement, not having the use of letters, they
do it not in writing, in giving to the wife a bill signed by a public notary,
As S. Augustine does note, speaking of the said Jews: but are contented to cell
to the parents, and unto her, that she provide for her self: and then she
lives in common with the others, until that some body do seek after her.
This law of putting away has been received almost among all Nations, exexcept
among the Christians, which have kept this precept of the Gspell, that which
God has joined together, let no man put a sunder. Which is most expedient and
less See the Commentor of Ben-Sira.
scandalous: And very wisely did Ben-Sira answer (who is said to have been
nephew to the Prophet Jeremy) being asked of one, who had a leaud wife, how he
should do by her: Gnaw (says he) that bone which is fallen to thee.

As for the widows, I will not affirm that which James Quartier has said of
them in general, but I will say, that where we have been, they stain their
faces with black, when they please, and not always: if their husband has
been killed, they will not marry again, nor eat flesh, until they have seen
the revenge of his death. And so we have seen the daughter of Membertou to
practice it, who after the war made to the Armouchiquois, hereafter
described, did marry again. Except in that case, they make no other
difficulty to marry again, when they find a fit match.

Sometimes our Savages having many wives will give one of them to their friend,
if he has a desire to take her in marriage, and shall be thereby so much
disburdened. Touching maidens that be loose, if any man has abused of
Abominable whore dome among the Infidels.

A note for the English Magistrates in Virginia. Numb. 25. 11. 12. 13.


them, they will tell it at the first occasion, and therefore it is bad jesting
with them: for the chastisement ought to be very rigorous against them that
mingle the Christian blood with the Infidels, and for the keeping of this
justice Monsieur de Ville-gagnon is praised, even by his enemies: And Phinees
the Son of Eleazar the Son of Aron because he was zealous of the law of God
and appeased his wrath, which was about to exterminate the people, for such a
sin, had the covenant of perpetual Priesthood, promised to him and to his
posterity.

CHAP. XIIII.
The Tabagie.
The Savages do say Tabaguia, that is to say, a feast.
THe ancient have said Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus, that is, without
Ceres and Bacchus Venus is cold. Having then married our Savages, it is meet to
make dinner ready and to use them after their own manner. And for to do it one
must consider the times of the marriage. For if it be in Winter they will have
Venison from the woods, if it be in the Spring time or in Summer, they will
make provision of fish. As for bread there is no talk of it from the North of
New Foundland, until one come to the country of the Armouchiquois, unless it
be in What Savage countries have come.
trucking with Frenchmen, for whom they tarry upon the sea shoares, sitting on
their tails like apes, as soon as the Spring time is come, and receive in
exchange for their skins (for they have no other merchandise) biscuit, beans,
peasen and meal: The Armouchiquois and other Nations more remote, besides
hunting and fishing have wheat, called Mais, and beans, which is a great
comfort unto them in time of necessity. They make no bread with it: for they
have neither Millnor Oven, and they cannot knead it otherwise than in stamping
it in a mortar, and in gathering those pieces the best they can they make small
cakes with it, which they bake between two hot stones. Most often they dry
this Corn at the fire, and parch it upon the Plin. lib. 18. cap. 2. and 10.
coals. And after that manner did the ancient Italians live, as Pliny says.
And therefore one must not so much wonder at these people, seeing that they
which have called others barbarous, have been as barbarous as they.

If I had not recited heretofore the manner of the Savages Tabagi (or banquet) I
would make here a larger description: But I will only say that when we went
to the River Saint John, being in the town of Ouigoudi (so may I well call a
place enclosed replenished with people) we saw in a great thicket 80. Savages
all naked, except the middle parts, making Tabaguia with meal they had of us,
whereof they had kettels full. Every one had a dish made with the bark of a
tree, and a spoone as deep as the palm of ones hand, or more: and with this
they had venison besides. And here is to be noted, that he which entertaineth
the others does not dine, but serves the company, as very often the
Bridegroomes do here in France.

The women do not eat with the men.
The women were in an other place apart, and did not eat with the men. Wherein
may be noted a bad use among those people, which have never been used among
the nations of these parts, specially the Gaullois and Germains, which have
admitted the women, not only in their banquets, but also in their public
counsels, (specially with The good condition of the women among the Gaullois.

See yet hereafter in the 16. chapter of the constancy of women.


the Gaullois) after they had pacified a great war which arose between them,
and did decide the controversy with such equity (as Plutarch says) that
thereby ensued a greater love than ever before. And in the treaty that was made
with Annibal, being entered into Gallia, to go against the Romans, itw as said,
that if the Carthaginienses had any difference against the Gaullois, it should
be decided by the advice of the Gaulloise women. It was not so in Rome, where
their condition was so base, that by the law Voconia, the very father could not
make them to inherit more then of the one third part of his goods: And the
Emperor Justinian forbids them in his decrees to accept the awardship which
had been deferred unto them: which shows either a great severity against
them, or an argument that in that country they have a very weak spirit. And
after this sort be the wives of our Savages, yea in worse condition, in not
eating with the men in their Tabagies: and notwithstanding it seems unto me
that their fare is not in their feasts so delicate, which ought not to consist
only in eating and drinking, but in the society of that sex which God has
ordained unto man for to help him and to keep him company.

It will seem to many that our Savages do live very poorly, in not having
any seasoning in those few messes that I have named. But I will reply that it
was not Caligula What men have raised Rome to her greatness.
nor Heliogabalus, nor such like that have raised the Roman Empire to his
greatness: neither was it that Cook who made an imperial feast all with hogs
flesh, disguised in a thousand sorts: nor those likerish companions, who after
they have destroyed the air, the sea, and the land, now knowing what to find
more to assuage their gluttony, go a seeking worms from the trees, yea do
keep them in mew, and do fatten them, for to make thereof a delicate mess:
But rather it was one Curious Dentatus who did eat in wooden dishes, and did
scrape radishes by the fire side: Item those good husbandmen The manner of
living of the ancient Romans and other nations.
whom the Senate did send for, from the plough for to conduct the Roman army:
And in one word those Romans which did live with sodden food, after the manner
of our Savages: for they had not the use of bread but about 600. years after
the foundatio^of the city, having learned in tract of time to make some cakes
grossly dressed and baked under the embres, or in the oven. Pliny author of
this report, Plin. lib. 18. ca. 8. 10. 11.
says, moreover that the Scythians, now Tartares, do also live with sodden
food and raw meal as the Brasilians. And nevertheless they have always been
a warlike and mighty nation. The same says, that the Arympheens (which be the
Moscouites) do live in forests (as our Savages do) with grains and fruits
which they gather from the trees, without mention neither of flesh nor of fish.
And indeed the profane Authors do agree, that the first men did live after
that manner, to wit, of corn, grains, pulse, acornes, and mastes, from whence
comes the Grerke word Phagein, to wit, to eat: some particular nations (and
not all) had fruits: as pears were in use among the Argiues, figs with the
Athenians, almonds with the Medes, the fruit of Cannes with the Ethiopians,
the Cardamuin with the Persians, the dates with the Babilonians, the Treffle or
three leaued grass with the Egyptians. They which have had none of those
fruits have made war against the beasts of the woods and forests, as the
Getulians and all the Northern men, yea also the ancient Germans,
notwithstanding they had also meats made of milk: Others Ichthyophages.
Aethiopians do live of Grasshoppers.
dwelling upon the shores of the sea, or lakes and rivers, lived on fishes, and
were called Ichthyophages: others living of Torteses, were called
Chelonophages. Part of the Aethiopians do live of Grasshoppers, which they salt
and harden in the smoke in great quantity for all seasons, and therein do the
Historians of this day agree with Pliny. For there is sometimes clouds of
them, that is to say, such infinite numbers, that they hide the clouds; and in
the East The food of S. John Baptist. S. Hieroms 2. book against Iouian. S.
Augnstin upon the 14. chap. to the Romans, verse. 15.

Niceph. li. 1. cap. 14.

Ammian. l. 18.


likewise, which destroy all the fields, so that nothing remains unto them to
eat but those grasshoppers, which was the food of Saint John Baptist in the
desert, according to the opinion of Saint Hierome and Augustine: Although
Nicephorus thinks that they were the tender leaves of the tops of trees,
because that the Greek word achrides signifies both the one and the other.
But let us come to the Roman Emperor, best qualified. Ammian Mercellin
speaking of their manner of life, says that Scipio, Aemiliar, Metellus, Traian,
and Adrian, did content themselves ordinarily with the meat of the camp, that
is to say, with Bacon, cheese, and bruvage. If then our Savages have Sturgeons,
Salmons, and other fish.
venison and fish abundantly, I do not think them ill furnished: for many
times we have received of them quantity of Sturgeons, of Salmons and other
fishes: besides their venison, and Beuers which live in ponds, and live partly
on the land, partly in the water. At least one laudable Antropophages
thing is known in them, that they are not men eaters, as the Scythians have
been aforetime, and many other nations of these parts of the world; and as yet
are at this day the Brasilians, Canibals, and others of the new world.

Bred.
The inconvenience which is found in their manner of life is, that they have no
bread. Indeed bread is a food very natural for man, but it is easier to live
with flesh, or with fish, then with bread only. If they have not the use of
salt, the most part of the world do use none. It is not altogether necessary,
and the principal profit thereof consists in preserving, whereunto it is
altogether proper, Notwithstanding if they had any to make some provisions they
would be more happy then us. But What time is hard for the Savages.
for want of that they sometimes suffer some need: which happens when the winter
is too mild, or the latter end of the same. For then they have neither venison
nor fish, as we will declare in the chapter of hunting: and are then
constrained to feed upon the barks of trees, and on the parings of skins,
and on their dogs, which (upon this extremity) they do eat. And the
history of the Floridians says, thas in extremity they eat a thousand
filthes, even to the swallowing down of coals, and to put earth in their
spoone meat. True it is that in Port Royal there is always shell fish, so
that in all cases one cannot die there for hunger. But yet have they one
superstition Superstition of the Savages, and of the Christians.

Plin. lib. 22. ca. 2.


that they will not feed on mussels, and they can allege no reason for it, no
more than our superstitious Christians which will not be thirteen at a table,
or which fear to pair their nails on the Friday, or which have other
scrupulosities, true apish-toies, such as Pliny recites a good number of them
in his natural history. Notwithstanding in our company seeing us to eat of
them they did the like: for we must say here by the way, that they will eat
no unknown meat, but first they must see the trial of it by The Savages
suspicious.
others. As for beasts of the woods they eat of all them, the woolfe excepted.
They also eat eggs, which they go gathering along the shoares of waters, and
they do lade their Ca^owes with them, when the Geese and Outardes have done
laying in the Spring time, and they use all, as The sobriety and gluttony of
the Savages.
well them that be old as new. As for modesty they use it being at table with
us, and eat very soberly: but at home in their own houses (as the Brasilians)
they stretch out their bellies as much as they can, and do not leave eating as
long as there is any meat: And if any of ours be at their Tabagie, they will
bid him do as they do. Notwithstanding Hercules, ox eater.
I see no gluttony like to that of Hercules, who alone did eat whole oxen, and
did devour one from a Paisan called Diadamas, by reason whereof he was called
Butheues, or Buphagos, Oxe-eater. And without going so far, we see in the
Countries of these parts greater gluttonies then that which one would impute to
the Savages. For in the diet of Ausbourg was brought to the Emperor Charles the
fifth, a great whoreson which had eaten a calfe and a sheep, and yet was not
full: And I do not know that our Savages do waxfatte, or that they have great
bellies, but that they are nimble and swift, like to our ancient Gaullois and
high Allemans or Germans, who by their agilitie, did trouble very much the
Roman armies.

The meat of the Brasilians.
The food of the Brasilians are serpents, crocodills, toads and great lizards,
which they esteem as much as we do capons, leverets, and conies. They also
make meal of white roots, which they call Maniel, having the leaves of
Paeoniamas, and the tree of the height of the Elder tree: Those roots as big
as the thigh of a Man, which the woman do crumble very small, and eat them
raw, or else they make them to sees well in a great earthen vessel, sturring
it always as the comfitmakers do make sugar plummes. They are of very good
taste, and of easy disgestion, but they be not fit to make bread, because
they dry and burn themselves, and always return into meal. They have also
with this Mahis or Mais, which grows in two or three months after it is
sowed: and that is a great succor unto them. But A strange prostitution.
they have a cursed and an unhuman costome to eat their prisoners, after they
have well fatted them. Yea (a most horrible thing) they give them in marriage
the fairest maidens they have, putting about their necks as many halters as
they will keep him moons. And when the time is expired they make wine of the
said Mais and roots, wherewith they make themselves drunk, calling all their
friends. Then he that has taken him knocks him on the head with a clubbe,
and deuideth him into pieces, and make carbonnadoes of him, which they eat with
a singular pleasure above all meats in the world.

Commonalty of life.
Furthermore all Savages generally do live every where in common: the most
perfect and most worthy life of man, seeing that he is a sociable creature,
the life of the ancient golden age, which the holy Apostles would have restored
again: But being to establish the spiritual life, they Hospitality.
could not execute that good desire. If it happens then that our Savages have
venison, or other food, all the company have part of it. They have this mutual
charity which has been taken away from us since that Mine and Thine have come
into the world. They have also Hospitality, a virtue peculiar to the ancient
Gaulois (according to the witness of Parthenius in his Erotigues, of Caesar,
Saluian and others) who did constrain travelers and strangers to come into
their houses and there to take their refreshing: A virtue which seems to have
conserved her self only with the Nobility and gentry: for among the other
sort we see her very weak and at the point of death. Tacitus gives the same
praise to the Germans, saying that with them all howses are opened to
strangers, and there they are in such assurance that (as if they were sacred)
none dare do them any injury; Charity and Hospitality which are mentioned
Leuit. 19. ver. 34.
in the law of God who said to his people: The stranger which soiourneth among
you, shall be unto you as he which is borne among you, and you shall love him
as your selves: for you have been strangers in the land of Egypt. So do our
Savages, which, sturred up with an humane nature, receive all strangers (except
their enemies) whom they accept in their commonalty of life.

Of drinking.
But we have spoken enough of eating, let us now speak of drinking. I know not
whether I ought to place among the greatest blindnesses of the West Indians to
have abundantly the most excellent fruit that God has given unto us, and they
know not the use thereof. For I see that the Plin. lib. 18. cap. 4.
ancient Romans were a long time (as Pliny says) without either Vines or
Vine-yards: And our Gaulloas did make beer, the use whereof is yet frequent in
all Gallia Belgica: And this kind of drink did the Egyptians also use in
former times (as says Diodorus) who attributes the invention thereof to
Osiris. Notwithstanding after that the use of wine was come among the Romans
the Guallois took so good a taste in it, in the voyages that they made there
with their Armies, that they continued afterward the same Strabo.
way. And afterward the Italian Merchants did draw much money from the Gaullois
with their wine that they Caesar.
brought thither. But the Germans knowing their own nature subject to drink
more then is needful would have none brought to them, for fear that being
drunk they Tacitus.
might be a pray to their enemies: and contented themselves Wine forbibden among
the Germans.
with beer: And notwithstanding because the continual drinking of water
ingendreth crudities in the stomach, and thereby great indispositions, the
nations have commonly found better the moderate use of wine which Psalm. 104.
verse. 16. 17.
has been given of God to rejoice the heart, as bread for to strengthen him,
as the Psalmist says: And the Apostle S. Paul himself does council his
Disciple Timothy to use it by reason of his infirmity. For wine (says
Oribasius) recreateth Oribasius, in the first book of things commodious and
easy, chapter 12.
and quickneth our heat: whereby, by consequence, the disgestures are made
better, and good blood is engendered, and good nourishment through all the parts
of the body where the wine has force to pierce: and therefore they which be
weakened by sickness do recover by it a stronger being, and do likewise
renew by it an appetite to their meat. It breaks the sleame, it purges
collericke humors by the urine, and with his pleasant odor and lively
substance gladdeth the heart of man, and gives strength to the body. Wine
taken moderatly is the procurer of all those goodeffects, but if it be drunk
vnmeasuably it produces effects quite contrary. And Plato willing Plate in his
Timoeo.
to show forth in one word the nature and property of wine: That which warmeth
(says he) beth body and soul, is that which is called wine. The Savages which
have no use of wine nor of spices, have found out another means to warm the
same stomach, and in some sort to break so many crudities proceeding from the
fish that they eat, which otherwise would extinguish their natural heat: it is
the herb which the Brasilians do call Petun, that is to say, Tobacco, Tobacco.
the smoke whereof they take almost every hour, as we will declare more at
large when we come hereafter to speak of that herb. Then as in these parts
one drinks to another, in presenting the glass to him to whom one has
drunk (which is done in many places) so the Savages willing to feast some body
and to show him sign of amity, after they have well taken of that smoke, they
present the Tobacco pipe to him that they like best. Which custom to drink
one to another is not new, nor particular to the Flemings and Germans: for
Holiodorus in the Holiodor. first book 1. cha. and. 3. book chapter 3.
Ethiopian History of Chariclea witnesses that the same was a custom
altogether used in the Countries whereof he speaks to drink one to the other
in token of friendship. And because it was abused, and men were appointed to
constrain them that would not pledge, Assuerus King of the Persians at a
banquet that he made to all the principal Ester. 1. ver. 8.
Lords and Governors of his Countries, did forbid by an express law to force
any, and did command that every one should be served after his own will. The
Aegiptians did use no forcing, but not withstanding they drunk up all, and
that by great devotion. For after they had found out the invention to apply
painting and Matachiz upon silver they took great delight to see their God
Anubis Plin. lib. 33. cap. 9.
painted in the bottom of their cups, as Pliny says.

Our Savages Canadians, Souriqnois and others are far from these delights, and
having nothing but the Tobacco spoken of by us to warm their stomakes after
the crudities of waters, and to give some smatch to the mouth, having that in
common with many other Nations, that they love that which is biting, such as
the said Tobacco is, which (even as wine or strong beer) taken (as it is said)
in smoke, makes giddy the senses and in some sort, procures sleep: So that
this word drunkard is among them, by this word The Floridians drink.
Escorken*, as well as amongst us. The Floridians have a certain sort of
drink called Casine which they drink all hot, which they make of certain
leanes of trees. But it is not lawful for every one to drink of it, but only
to the Paraousti, and to them that have made proof of their valor in the
wars. And this drink has such virtue that as soon as they have drunken it,
they become all in a sweat which being past, they be fed for 24. hours by
the nourishing The drink of the Brasilians.
force of the same. As for them of Brasil they make a certain kind of drink
which they call Caou-in, with roots and a grain called Mil which they put to
sees and soften in great earthen vessels, made in the manner of a tub, over the
fire, and being softened, it is the office of the women to chaw it all, and to
set them again to sees in other vessels: then having left all to be settled
and skimmed, they cover the vessel until that it must be drunken: and this
drink is as thick as lees, after the manner of the defrutum of the latins,
and of the taste of sour milk, white and red as our wine is: and they make it
in every season, because that the said roots do grow there at all times.
Furthermore they drink this Cou-in somewhat warm, but with such excess that
they never depart from the place where they make their feasts until that they
have drunk all out, though there were of the same a tun for every one. So that
the Flemings, high Duch-men, and Switzers are but yongue nouices in that trade
in regard of them. I will not speak here of the Ciders and Peries of Normandy,
nor of the Hidromels, the use whereof, by the report of Plutarch, was long
before the invention of wine: Plutar. in the 4. of the Symposiaq. Cha. 5.
seeing our Savages use none of it. But I have thought good to mention the fruit
of the vine, by reason that New France is plentifully furnished therewith.

CHAP. XV.
Of their Dances and Songs*
When the belly is full then comes mirth (says the Proverb) it will not be
then unfit to speak of dancing after feasting. For it is also said of the
people of Israel that after they had well filled their bellies Exodus 31. ver.
6. 19.

Dances instituted in divine things.


they arose for to play and dance about their golden Calfe. Dancing is a thing
very ancient among all people. But it was first made and instituted in divine
things, as we did now mark an example of it: and the Cananites who did worship
the fire, did dance about it and sacrificed their children unto it. Which manner
of dancing was not invented by the Idolaters, but rather by the people of God.
For Judges 21. v. 19. 21.

2. King. 6. c.


we read in the book of Judges that there was a solemnity to God in Silo where
the maidens came to dance at the sound of the fluit. And David bringing back
the Arc of Covenant into Jerusalem, went before it in his shirt, dancing with
all his strength.

As for the Heathen they have followed this fashion. For Plutarch in the life
of Nicias says that the Towns of Greece had a custom every year to go into
Dellos for to celebrate the dances and songs in the honor of Apollo. And in
the life of Licurgus the Orator, says that he did ordain a very solemn dance
in the Pyree unto the honor of Neptune, with a wager of a hundred crowns
price to the best dancer, and to the second of 80. crowns, and The muses
Dances.
to the third of 60. The Muses* daughters of Jupiter do love dancing: and all
they that have spoken of them make us to go seek for them upon the Mountain
Parnassus, where (say they) they dance, at the sound of Apolloes Harp.

The College of the Saliens.
As for the Latins, the same Plutarch says in the life of Numa Pompilius that
he did institute the coledge of the Salians (which were Priests dancing and
gamboling, and singing songs in the honor of God Mars) when that a Buckler of
brass fell miraculously from Heaven, which was a gage from that God for the
conservation of the Empire. Ancyle.
And that Buckler was called Ancile, but for fear that it should be stolen away
he caused 12. others to be made a like named Ancilia, which were carried in
the wars, as we did heertofore our Oriflamme, and as the Oriflamme. Labarum.
Emperor Constantine did the Labarum. Now the foremost of those Salians that did
lead the others in the dance Praesul. Festus lib. 16.
was called Praesul, that is to say, first dancer, prae alijs Salians, says
Festus, who takes from that the name of the French-people, which were called
Salians because they did love to dance, to skippe and to gambole: and of
Salique Law.
these Salians are come the laws which we call Saliques, that is to say Laws
of dances.

So then to come again to our purpose, the dances have been first instituted
for holy things. Whereto I Arrian of the gests of Alexander.

Dances profitable for health.


will add the testimony of Arrian, who says that the Indians which did
worship the Sun rising, did not think to have duly saluted him, unless
their songs and prayers were accompanied with dances.

This kind of exercise was since applied to another use, that is to say, for
the government of health, as Plutarche says in the treaty for the same. So
that Socrates himself (howsoever precise and reformed) took pleasure therein,
for which cause he desired to have a house large and spacious, as Xenophon
writes in his bancquet, and the Persians Xenophon. Duris.
did expressly use the same, as Duris writes in the seventh of his histories.

But the delights, lasciviousness, and disorders did convert them since to
their own use, and the dances have served for proxenetes and broakers of
unchastity, as we find it but to much, whereof we have testimonies in the
Gospel, where we find that it cost the life of the greatest that ever arose
amongst men, which is Saint John Baptist. And Arcesilaus said very well, that
dances are venoms, sharper then all the poisons that the Earth brings Plutar.
in the 7. of the Sympose. quest. 5.
forth, for as much as by a certain incitement they insinuate into the Soul,
wherein they communicate and imprint voluptuousness and delectation, which the
bodies properly do affect.

All Savages do dance.
Our Savages, and generally all the people of the west Indies, have time out of
mind the use of dances. But lascivious Pleasure has not yet so far
prevailed against them as to make them dance at the pleasure thereof, a thing
which ought to serve as a lesson to the Christians. The use then of their
dances is for four ends, either to please their gods (let who will call them
devils it is all one to me) as we have marked in two places before, or to
cheer up some body, or to rejoice themselves of some victory or to prevent
sickenesses. In all these dances they sing, and make no dombe shows, as in
those dances whereof the Pythienne Oracle speaks, when he says: It
behooves that the beholder understand the dancing stage plaier, although he be
dombe: and that he hear him though he Dombe gestures.
does not speak: But as in Delos they did sing to the honor of Apollo, the
Salians to the honor of Mars, likewise the Floridians do sing to the honor
of the Sun, to whom they attribute all their victories: not, for all that so
filthily as Orpheus, inuentor of the heathenish diuelishnesles, of whom Saint
Gregory Nazianze mocketh himself in an oration, because that among other
follies, in an A foolish filthy song to Jupiter.
himme he speaks of Jupiter in this wise: O glorious Jupiter! the greatest of
all the gods, which art resident in all sorts of dung, as well of sheep as of
horses and mules, etc. And in another himme that he makes to Ceres, he says,
that she discovers her thighs for to submit her body to her Paramours, and
to make her self to be tilled.

Our Souriquois do make also dances and songs to the The Songs of the
Christians to God.
honor of the devil, which shows them their game, and that they think to
gratify him: whereof one needs not to marvel, because that we our selves,
that be better instructed, do sing Psalms and Songs of praise to our God, for
that he gives us our daily food: And I do not Cicero in the Oration for
Murena.
see that a man who is a hungered have any great lust either in singing or
dancing: Nemo enim saltat fere sobrius, says Cicero.

Also when they will feast any body, they have no fairer The Dances and songs
of the Souriquois Savages.
gesture, in many places then dancing: as in like manner if any one makes them a
feast, for all thanks giving, they betake themselves to dancing, as it has
been seen sometimes when Monsieur de Poutrincourt did give them their dinner,
they did sing songs of praises unto him, saying, that he was a brave Sagamos,
who had made them good cheer, and which was their good friend: which they did
comprehend very mistically under these three words, Epigico iaton edico: I say
mistically: for I could never know the proper signification of every of these
words. I believe that it is of the ancient language of their forefathers which
is out of use, like as the old Hebrew is not the Jews language at this day,
and was already changed in the time of the Apostles.

Praises of the brave Captains.
They sing also in their common Tabagies, the praises of the brave captains
and Sagamos that have killed many of their enemies. Which was practiced
anciently in many nations, and is practiced yet amongst us at this day; and is
found to be approved and of decency, in the holy Scripture, in the Canticle
of Debora, after the overthrow Judges cha. 5.
of king Sisara. And when young David had killed the great Goliath, as the king
did return victorious into Jerusalem, the women came out of all the towns, and
met him 1. Of Samuel, 18. ver. 6. 7.
with tabrets, rebecks, and timbrels, dancing and singing merrily, saying by
course and answering one another; Saul has slain his thousand, and David his
ten thousand. Atheneus Gaullois Diodo. Atheneus in the 6. book of the banquet
of the wise.
says, that the Gaullois had Poets named Bardes, whom they reverenced very
much: and those Poets did sing Viua voce the deeds of virtuous and famous men:
but they did write nothing in public, because that writing makes men
slothful and negligent in learning. Notwithstanding Charolus Magnus was of an
other opinion: For The Songs of the Frenchmen.
he caused songs to be made in the vulgar tongue, containing the deeds and acts
of the ancient, and commanded that the children should be made to learn them
by heart, and that they should sing them, to the end, that their memory should
remain from father to son, and from race to race, and by this means others
should be stirred up to do good, and to write the actions and deeds of valiant
men. I will further say here by the way, that the Lacedaemonians Plutar. in the
life of Lycurgus.

Lacedaemonians


had a certain manner of dancing which they used in all their feasts and
solemnities, which did represent the three ages: to wit, the time past, by the
old men which did say in singing this burden; We were heretofore valorous:
the present, by the young men in the flower of their youth saying: We be so now
at this time: the future, by the children, who did say, We shall be so too,
when our turn comes.

What are the Savages dances.
I will not busy my self in describing all the fashions of the gambols of
their ancient predecessors, but it suffices me to say that the dances of our
Savages are made without remoouing from one place, and notwithstanding they are
all in a round (or very near) and do dance with vehemency, striking with
their feet upon the ground, and lifting themselves up as in half a leap: And
as for their hands they hold them close, and their arms in the air, in form
of a man that threatens, with a motion of them. As for the voice, there is but
one that sings, be it man or woman: all the rest do and say, Het, het, as
some that breaths out with vehemency: And at the end of every song, they all
make a loud and long exclamation, saying Heeee. For to be more nimble, they
commonly put themselves stark naked, because that their gowns made of skins
do hinder them: And if they have any of their enemies heads or arms, they
will carry them about their necks, dancing with this fair jewel, which they
will sometimes bite, so great is their hatred even against the dead. And for to
end this chapter as we began it, they never make any Tabagie or feast, but that
there is a dance after it: And afterward if the Sagamos be disposed, according
to the state of their affairs, he will make an oration of one, two, The
orations of the Sagamos of one 2. or 3. hours continuance.
or three hours continuance, and at every demonstration asking the advice of
the company: if they approve his proposition, every one will cry out aloud
He e e e in sign of allowing and ratifying of the same. Wherein they give him
very attentive audience, as we have seen many times: And also when that
Monsieur De Poutrincourt did feast our Savages, Memberton, after dancing made
an oration with such vehemency that he made the world to wonder, showing the
courtesies and witnesses of friendship that they received of the Frenchmen, what
they might hope of them hereafter; and how much their presence was profitable,
yea necessary unto them, because that they did sleep in security: and had no
fear of their enemies, etc.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the disposition of their bodies: and of their Physike and Cheirurgie.
WE have said in the last Chapter that dancing is profitable for the
preservation of health. Also it is one of the causes why our Savages do delight
so much in it: But they have yet some other preservatives which they use very
often, that is to say, sweates, whereby they prevent sicknesses. For they be
sometimes touched with this Phthisie wherewith the men of Captain Phthisie
first book chap. 16.
James Quartier and Monsieur De Monts were annoied, which notwithstanding is
but seldom. But when it happens they have in Canada the tree called Annedda,
which Annedda.
I term the tree of life for the excellency thereof, wherewith they heal
themselves; and in the country of the Armouchiquois they have Sassafras, and
in Florida Esquine. Sassafras* Esquine.
The Souriquois which have none of these kinds of woods, do use sweats, as we
have said, and they have their Aoutmoins for Physicians, who for that purpose
do dig in the The Savages stowes or hot houses.
ground, and make a pit which they cover with wood and big flat stones over
it: then they put fire to it by a hole, and the wood being burned they make a
raft with poles, which they cover with all the skins and other couerings
which they have, so as no air enters therein, they cast water upon the said
stones, which are fallen in the pit, and do cover them: then they pu
themselves under the same raft, and with motions the Aoutmoin singing, and the
others saying, (as in their dances) Het, het, het, they put themselves into a
sweat. If they happen to fall into sickness (for one must die in the end) the
Aoutmoin does blow, with exercisings, upon the member grieved, does lick it
and suck it: and if that be not sufficient, he lets the patient blood,
scotching his flesh with the point of a knife, or some thing else. If they do
not heal them always, one must consider that our Physicians do not always
cure their patients neither.

The Physicians in Florida.
In Florida they have their Iarvars, who continually carry a bag full of
herbs and drugges hanging about their necks to cure the sick, which are for
the most part sick of the Pox: and they blow upon the parts affected, until
they draw the very blood from it.

The Brasilians Physicians.
The Brasilians Physicians are named among them Pages (they be not their
Caraibes or Southsaiers) who in sucking as aforesaid, they endeavor themselves
to heal diseases. But they have one sickness which is incurable, which they
call Pians, proceeding of lechery, which notwithstanding little children
sometimes have, even as them in these our parts that be full of pock-holes,
which comes unto them (as I think) from the corruption of their Parents.
This contagion does convert it self into boiles broader then the thombe, which
disperse themselves throughout all the body, and even as far as the face,
and being touched therewith they bear the marks thereof all their life time,
fowler then lepers, as well Brasilians as other nations. As for the sick body
his diet, they give him not any thing, unless he asks for it: and without
taking any other care of them, they cease not to make their noise and hurly
burlies before them, drinking, skipping and singing, according to their custom.

The Souriquois cheirurgeons.
As for the wounds, Aoutmos of our Souriquois, and their neighbors, do lick
and suck them, using the Beuers kidney, whereof they put a slice upon the
wound, and so does heal it self with that. The ancient Germans (says
Tacitus) not having yet the Art of Cheirurgie did the like: They bring (says
he) their wounds to their Mothers and to their Wives, who are not afraid
neither to number them, nor to suck them: yea they bring them vittails to the
camp, and exhort them to fight valiantly: so that sometimes armies ready to
run away, have been restored by the prayers of the women, opening their
breasts to their husbands. And afterward they willingly used the women's
aduices and counsels, wherein they esteem some holy thing to be.

And among the Christians, many (not caring for God no longer then they receive
good gifts of him) do seek for the healing of their diseases by charms and
help of Witches: So among our Savages the Aoutmoin having some sore in cure,
inquireth often of his devil to know whether he shall heal or no: and has
never no answer but doubtfully, by if, or and. There be some of them which
sometimes do make incredible cures, as to heal one that has his arms cut
off. Which notwithstanding I know not, why I should find it strange, when I
consider what Monsieur de Busbeque writes in his discourse of his Embassy
into Turkey the fourth Epistle.

Coming near unto Buda, the Basha sent some of his household Servants to meet
us, with many Haraldes and officers: But among the rest a fair troop of young
men on horseback, remarkable for the nouelty of their order. They had their
heads bare and shaven, upon the which they had made a long bloody slash, and
thrust diverse feathers of birds within the wound, from whence the very pure
blood did trickle down: but instead of shrinking at it, they went lifting up
their heads with a laughing countenance. Before me marched some foot men, one
of them had his arms naked and hanging down on his sides: both which arms
above the Elbowe was thrust quite through with a knife that stuck fast in
them. Another was naked from his head to the navel, having the skin of
his-backe so iagged up and down in two places, achwart which he had made to
pass, an hatchet of arms, which he did carry in scarffe wise as we would do
a cuttleaxe. I saw another of them who had fixed upon the crown of his head a
horse shoe with many nails, and of so long continuance that the nails were
so fixed and fast in the flesh, that they stirred not. We entered into Buda in
this pomp, and were brought into the Bashas house, with whom I treated of my
affairs. All this youthly company little caring for their wounds were in the
lower court of the house; And as I was a looking on them the Basha asked of me
what I thought of it: All well said I, except that these men do with the
skin of their bodies, that which I would not do with my coat: For I would
seek to keep it whole. The Basha laughed, and we took our leave.

The trial of the Savages constancy.
Our Savages do very well sometimes make trial of their constancy, but we
must confess that it is nothing in regard of the things above rehearsed. For
all that they do is to put burning coals upon their arms, and to suffer their
skins to burn, so that the marks thereof do remain there for ever: which
thing they do also on other parts of the body, and show these marks to say
that they Romans.
have a great courage. But the ancient Mutius Sceuola did much more then that,
burning courageously his arm in the fire, after he had missed the killing of
king Porsenna. If this were of my purpose I would declare the customs
Lacedaemonians.
of the Lacedaemonians, who did make every year a feast to the honor of Diana,
where the young boys did show their trial by whipping of themselves: Item the
custom of the Persians.
ancient Persians, who worshipping the Sun, which they called Mithra, none
could be received to that fraternity until he had given his constancy to be
known, by fourscore kinds of torments, of fire, of water, of fasting, of
solitariness, and other things.

But let us return to our Savages Physicions and Chierurgeons. Although the
number of them be but small, yet so it is that the hope of their living does
not consist wholly in Healthful Country.
that trade. For as concerning the ordinary sicknesses they are so rare in those
parts, that the verse of Ovid may be very well applied unto them: Si valiant
homines ars tua Phaebe iacet:


In saying Si, pro Quia. For these do also live a great age, which is commonly
seven score or eight score year. Long lives.
And if they had our commodities to live by forecast, and industry to gather up
in summer for the Winter, I believe they would live above three hundred years.
Which may be coniectured by the report that we have made heretofore of an old
man in Florida, who had lived that great age. In such sort that it is no
particular miracle of that which Pliny says that the Pandorians do live 200.
years or that they of Taprobane are lively and nimble at a 100. years old.
For Membertou is above a 100. years old, and yet has not one white hair on
his head, and so ordinarily be the others. And that which is more in every age
they have all their teeth, and go bareheaded, not caring at least to make any
hats of their skins, as the first did that used them in these parts of the
world. For they of Pel^ponesus The first original of hats.
the Lacedaemonians did call a hat Cynen, which Julius Pollux says to signify a
dogs skin. And of these hats do yet the Northerly people use at this day,
but they are well furred.

Concord is a cause of long life.
That which also procures the health of our Savages, is the concord which they
have among them, and the small care they take for the commodities of this life,
for the which we torment and vex our selves. They have not that ambition, which
in these parts gnaweth and fretteth the minds and spirits, and fills them
with cares, making blinded men to go to the grave in the very flower of their
age, and sometimes to serve for a shameful spectacle to a public death.

I dare also, and that very well, attribute the cause of this disposition and
long health of our Savages, to their manner of life, which is after the ancient
fashion, without curiosity. For every one does grant that Sobriety is the
mother of Sobriety.
health. And although they sometimes exceed in their Tabagies or feasts, they
diet themselves afterward well enough, living very often eight days more or
less with the smoke of Tobacco, not returning to hunting until they be a
hungry. And that besides being nimble they want no exercise, some way or other.
Briefly there is no mention amongst them of those short ages which do not out
pass forty years, which is the life of certain people of Aethiopia (as
Pliny says) which do live of Locustes (or grashopers) Multitude of officers
is the sign of a corrupted estate.
salted in the smoke. Also corruption is not among them, which is the fostering
mother of Physicians and of Magistrates, and of the multiplicity of officers,
and of public extortioners, which are created and instituted for to give order
unto it, and to cut off the abuses. They have no suits in law (the plague of
our lives) to the prosecuting whereof we must consume both our years and our
means, and very often one cannot obtain justice, be it either by the
ignorance of the Judge, to whom the case is disguised, or by his own malice,
or by the wickedness of an Attorney that will sell his Clyant. And from such
afflictions do proceed the tears, fretfulnesses, and desolations, which
Ecclesiast. 30. at the end of the chapter.
bring us to the grave before our time. For sorrow (says the wise man) has
killed many, and there is no profit in it. Envy and wrath shorten the life, and
care brings old age before the time. But the joy of the heart is the life of
man: and a man's gladness prolongeth his days.

CHAP. XVII.
The exercises of the Men.
AFter health, let us speak of exercises which be the maintainers and
protectors thereof. Our Savages have no base exercise, all their sport being
either the wars, or hunting (whereof we will speak severally) or in making
implements fit for the same (as Caesar witnesses of the ancient Germans) or a
dancing (and of that we have Bows and arrows.
already spoken) or in passing the time in play. They make then Bows and
Arrows* bows which be strong and without finenesse. As for the arrows it is
an admirable thing, how they can make them so long and so straight with a
knife, yea with a stone only, where they have no knives. They feather them
with the feathers of an Eagles tail, because they are firm, and carry
themselves well in the air: And when they want them they will give a Beauers
skin, yea twain for one of those tails. For the No wise trade to sell any
weapons to them.
head, the Savages that have traffike with Frenchmen do head them with iron
heads which are brought to them. But the Armochiquois and others more remot
have nothing but bones, made like Serpents tongues, or with the tails Sicnau,
or Seekanauk, a fish in Virginia.
of a certain fish called Sicnau, the which fish is also found in Virginia by
the same name (at least the English Historian does write it Seekanauk.) This
fish is like to a Crauise lodged within a very hard shell, which shell is of
the greatness of a dish, a long tail, likewise hard (for it is shell and
sharp). His eyes are upon his back, and is very good meat.

Mases, or clubs, shields.
They also make wooden mases or clubbes, in the fashion of an Abbots stafe, for
the war, and shields which cover all their bodies, as did our ancient
Gaullois. As for the Quiuers that is the women's trade.

Fishing lines. Hemp.
For fishing. The Armouchiquois which have hemp do make fishing lines with
it, but ours that have not any manuring of the ground, do trucke for them with
Bowe-strings made with guts.

Rackets.


Frenchmen, as also for fishing hooks to bait for fishes: only they make
with guts bow-strings, and rackets, which they tie at their feet to go upon
the snow a hunting.

And for as much as the necessity of life does constrain them to change place
often, whether it be for fishing (for every place has his particular fishes,
which come thither in certain season) they have need of horses in their
remove for to carry their stuff. Those horses be Canowes Canowes, or boats.
and small boats made of barks of trees, which go as swiftly as may be without
sails. When they remove they put all that they have into them, wives,
children, dogs, kettles, hatchets, Matachiaz, bows, arrows, quiuers,
skins, and the couerings of their houses. They are made in such sort that one
must not stir, nor stand up when he is in them, but crouching or sitting in
the bottom, otherwise the merchandise would ouerturne. They are four foot
broad or thereabouts, in the midst, and are sharp toward the ends: and the
nose is made rising, for to pass commodiously upon the waves. I have said that
they make them of the barks of trees, for the keeping whereof in measure, they
garnish them within, with half circles of Ceder wood, a wood very souple and
pliable, whereof Noah's Arc was made. And to the end they leake not, they cover
the seames (which join the said barks together, which they make of roots)
with the gum of firretrees. They also make some with willowes very properly,
which they cover with the said gum of Firre-trees: a thing which witnesses
that they lack no wit, where necessity presses them.

Many nations of these parts have had the like in times past. If we seek in
the holy Scripture, we shall find that Moses mother, seeing she could hide
her child no Exodus 2. v. 3.
longer, she did put him in a little Chest (that is to say in a little Canowe:
(for Noah's Arc, and this same small chest is one same word (...) in Hebrew,
made of reed, and Canowes made of willowes.
daubed it with slime and pitch: then put the child in it, and laid it among
the bullrushes by the shore of the River. And the Prophet Isaiah threatening
the Aethiopians and Assyrians: Woe (says he) unto the Country which sends
by sea Ambassadors in paper vessels (or rushes) upon the waters, saying: Paper
Canowes.
Messengers go ye quickly, etc. The Egyptians, neighbors to the Aethiopians
had in the time of Julius Caesar, the same vessels, that is to say, of paper,
which is a rind of a bark of a tree: witness Lucan in these Lucani. 4. book.
verses: Conseritur bibula Memphitis cymba papyro.


Plin. lib. 4. ca. 16.
But let us come from the East and South to the North: Pliny says, that
anciently the Englishmen and Scotishmen, fetched Tin in the land of Mictis,
with Canowes of Willowes sewed in leather. Solin says as much, and Isidore,
Isidor. li. 19. cap. 1.
which calls this fashion of Canowes, Carabus, made of Willowes, and environed
with ox hides all raw, which (says he) the Saxon Pirates do use, who with
those instruments are swift in flight. Sidoneus de Polignac, speaking of Sidon.
Carm. 7.
the same Saxons, says, -- Cui pelle salam sulcare Britannum
Ludus, and assuto glaucum mare findere Lembo.


The Savages of the North toward Labrador, have certain small Canowes of
thirteen or fourteen foot long, and two foot broad, made of this fashion,
all covered with leather, yea over head, and there is but one hole in the
midst, where the man puts himself on his knees, having half his body out,
so that he cannot perish, furnishing his vessels with victuales before he
comes in it. I The original of the Sirens fables.
dare believe that the fables of the Sirenes or Marmaidens come from that, the
dunces esteeming that they were fishes, half men or women, as they have fained
Centaures by seeing men on horseback.

Canowes of holowed* trees.
The Armouchiquois, Virginians, Floridians, and Brasilians, do make another
fashion of Canowes, for having neither hatchets nor knives, (except some copper
ones) they burn a great tree very straight, at the foot, and fall it down,
then they take such length as they will, and use to burn it in steed of sawing
it, scraping the burnt part of the tree with stones: and for the hollowing of
the vessel, they do continue the same. In one of those boats six men will
sail with some stuff, and will make long voiages. But these kind of Canowes
are heavier than the others.

Long voiages in the woods.
They also make long voyages by land, as well as by sea, and they will
undertake (a thing incredible) to go twenty or thirty yea forty leagues
through the woods, without meeting with any path or Inn, and without carrying
any victuales but Tobacco, and a tinder box, with their bow in hand, and their
quiver at their backs. And we in France are much troubled when we have never so
little lost our way in some great forest. If they be pressed with thirst, they
have the skill to suck the trees, from whence They are commonly Birch trees.
do trickle down a sweet and very pleasant liquor, as my self have tried it
sometimes.

In the countries where they use tillage, as in that of the Armouchiquois, and
farther off, the men do make an infinite quantity of Earthen pots, like in
fashion to Potterie of earth.
night caps, in which they sees their meats, flesh, fish, beans, corn,
pompions etc. Our Souriquois did so anciently and did till the ground, but
since that Frenchmen do bring unto them kettles, beans, peason, biscuit and
other food they are become slothful, and make no more account of those
exercises. But as for the Armouchiquois which have yet no commerce with us, and
them that are further of, they till the ground, do fatten it The tilling of
the ground. Germans.
with shells of fish, they have their families distinct* and their plots of
ground about them; contrary to the ancient Germans which (as Caesar says) had
not any field proper, neither did they dwell above a year in one place, having
almost no other living then milk, flesh, and cheese, thinking it too tedious a
thing for them to tarry a whole year of purpose, for to reap a harvest. Which
is also The Savages be not laborious.
the humor of our Souriquois and Canadians, who, and all others (as we must
needs confess) are nothing laborious but in hunting. For, the manuring of the
ground, the women do take the greatest pains in it, who amongst them do not
command at home, and do not make their husbands to go to the Market, as they
do in many provinces in these our parts, and especially in the Country of
Jealousy.

The Floridians tillage. Sowing twice a year.
As for the tillage of the Floridians, hear what Laudomniere says of it: They
sow their corn twice a year, that is to say, in March and in June, and all in
one and the self same land. The said Mill from the time that it is sowed
until it be ready to be reaped, is not above three months in the ground. The
six other months they suffer Plowing.
the ground to rest. They also gather fair Pompians and very good beans. They
do not dung their land: only when they will sow, they set the weeds on fire
which are grown during the six months, and burn them all. They till their
land with an Instrument of wood, which is made like to a broad pickaxe,
wherewith they digg their vines in France: They put two grains of mill
together. When the lands are to be sowed, the king commands one of his men to
call his subjects together every day to come to labor, during the which, the
king causes great store of that drink whereof we have spoken to be made. In
the season that the Corn is gathered, it is all carried into the common
storehouse, where it is distributed to every one according to his quality.
They sow but so Their living during the Winter.
much as they think will serve them for six months, and that very hardly: for
during the winter they retire themselves three or four months of the year
into the woods: where they make little houses of Palm leaves, to lodge
themselves in, and there do live of acornes, of fish which they take, of
oysters, of Stagges, Turkey hens, and other beasts that they take.

The towns of the Savages.
And seeing they have towns and houses, or Cibanes, I may yet well put this
among their exercises. As for the Towns, they be multitudes of Cabins, made
somewhat Piramide wise, others in form of a cottage, others like garden bowres,
compast as it were with high pales of trees joined one near the other, even as
I have set out the town of Hochelaga, in my map of the great river of Canada.
Furthermore, one must not marvel of this shape of a town, which might seem
simple: seeing that the fairest towns of Moscouie have no better enclosure.
The ancient Lacedaemonians would have no other walls then their courage The
beginning of towns.
and valor. Before the general sloud Cain did build a town, which he named
Henoch (I believe it was no otherwise made then those of our Savages) but he
did feel the wrath of God which pursued him, and had lost all assurance. Genesis
4. 20.
Men had but Cabins and Pauillions, and as it is written of Iabal the son of
Hada; that he was the father of the dwellers in Tabernacles and of Shepherds.
After the flood they builded the tower of Babel, but this was folly. Tacitus
writing of the manners of the Germans, says that in his time they had not any
use neither of lime nor stones. The English Britons much less. Our Gaullois
were then, from many ages before, come to ciuility. But yet The first builder
in the Gaulles.
were they along time in the beginning without any other habitations than
Cabins: and the first Gaullois king that built towns and houses, was Magus,
who succeeded his father the wise Samothes, three hundred years after the
flood, eight years after the nativity of Abraham, and the one and fifty
year of the reign of Ninus, as Berosius the Chaldean does say. And although
they had buildings, they lay notwithstanding on the ground upon skins, like
to our Savages. And as in the ancient times the names were given which
contained the qualities and acts of persons, Magus was so called, because he
was the first builder. For in the Scythian and Armenian language (from whence
our Gaullois came shortly after the flood) and in the ancient Gaullois tongue,
Magus signifies a builder, says the same Author, and so has John Annius of
Viterbe very well marked: from whence came our names of the The Gaullois
Philosophers. Diog. Laert. in the beginning of the lives of Philosophers. Games
of the Savages.
Towns of Rothomagus, Neomagus, Nouiomagus. So likewise Samothes signifies
wise, and the old Gaullois Philosophers were (before the Druides) called
Samotheans, as Diogenes Laertius reports, who confesses that Philosophy did
begin from them whom the Greek vanity did call Barbarous.

I will add here for an exercise of our Savages, their play at hazard,
whereunto they are so addicted that sometimes they play out all that they have:
And James Quartier writes the same of them of Canada, in the time that he was
there. I have seen a kind of game that they have, but not thinking then to
write this treaty, I took no heed to it. They put some number of beans
colored and painted of the one side in a platter: and having stretched out a
skin on the ground, they play there upon, striking with the dish upon this
skin, and by that means the beans do skippe in the air, and do not all
fall on that part that they be colored: and in that consists the chance and
hazard: and according to their chance they have a certain number of quils made
of rushes, which they distribute to him that wins for to keep the reckoning.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Women's exercises.
THe woman was given in the beginning unto Man, not only for to aid and
assist him, but also to be the store house of generation. Their first exercise
then that I will attribute unto her, after that she is married is to bring
forth goodly children, and to assist her husband in this work: for this is
the end of marriage. And therefore is she very well and fitly called in hebrew
(...) The woman is called Pierced.
that is to say pierced, because it is meet that she be pierced, if she will
imitate our common mother the Earth, which in the Spring time, desirous to
bring forth, opens her bosom for to receive the rain and dewes which the
Marriage requisite for planters in a new possessed Land.

Great encouragement for the honestly minded that go to inhabit in those
parts.


heaven powers upon her. Now I find that this exercise shall be requisite for
them that will inhabit New France to bring forth there store of creatures,
which shall sing the praises of God. There is land enough to nourish them, so
that they be willing to work: and their condition shall not be so miserable as
it is with many in these parts, which do seek to emploie themselves and do
not find wherein: and albeit they find it, yet very often is their labor
unrewarded and unfruitful. But in that country he that will take pleasure,
and as it were sport himself with sweet labor, he shall be assured to live
out of bondage, and that his children shall yet be in better state then
himself was. The first exercise then of the woman is to work in generation,
which is a labor so fair and so meritorious, ^. Tim. 2. 15.
that the great Apostle. S. Paul, to consolate them in the pains they take in
that labor has said: that the woman shall be saved through bearing of
children, if they remain in faith, and love, and holiness with modesty. That
is to say, If she instruct them in such sort that the godliness of the mother
may be known by the good institution of the children.

This first and chiefest article being mentioned, let us come to the others.
Our Savage women after they have brought forth the fruit of this exercise, by
I know not what practice, do observe without law that which was Leuit. 12.
purification.
commanded in the law of Moses touching purification. For they shut up
themselves a part, and know not their husbands for thirty yea forty days:
during which time they do not leave for all that from going here and there,
where they have business, carrying their children with them, and taking care
for them.

Here above chap. 14.
I have said in the chapter of the Tabagie that among the Savages, the women
are not in as good a condition as they were anciently among the Gaullois and
Germans. For (by the report of James Quartier himself) they labor more then
the men, says he, whether it be in fishing, be it in tilling or in any thing
else. And notwithstanding they are neither forced, nor tormented: but they are
neither in their Tabagies nor in their counsels, and do the servile
businesses, for want of servants. If there be any venison killed, they go to
flay it and to fetch it, yea were it three leagues off: and they must find it
out by the only circumstance that shall be described to them by words. They
that have prisoners do also employ them to that, and to other labors, as to
go fetch wood with wives: which is folly in them to go fetch dry and rotten
wood very far off for to warm them, although they be in the midst of a
forest. True it is that the smoke is very irksome to them: which it may be
is the cause thereof.

Touching their smaller exercises; when the winter does approach they prepare
that which is necessary to oppose themselves against this rigorous adversary,
and make mattes of rushes, wherewith they garnish their Cabins, Mattes.
and others to fit upon, and all very artificially, yea also coloring their
rushes, they make partitions in their works, like to them that our gardeners
do make in their garden knots, with such measure and proportion as nothing is
found amiss therein. And because that the body The currying and dressing of
skins.
must also be clothed, they curry and supple the skins of Beuers, Stagges and
others, as well as can be done here. If they be little they few many together,
and make cloakes, sleeves, stockens, and shoes, upon all which things they
make works which have a very good grace. Item they Panniers.
make Panniers of rushes and roots, for to put their necessities in, as corn,
beans, peason, flesh, fish and other things. They make also purses of leather,
upon which Purses.
they make works worthy of admiration, with the hairs of Porckepines,
colored with red, black, white and blew, which Dies.
be the colors that they make, so lively that ours seem in nothing to be
comparable to them. They also exercise Dishes.
themselves in making dishes of bark to drink, and put their meats in, which
are very fair according to the stuff. Item skarfes, necklaces and bracelets
which they Matachia*
and the men do wear (which they call Matachia) are of their making. When the
barks of trees must be taken off in the Springtime, or in Summer, therewith
to cover their howses, it is they which do that work: As likewise they labor
in the making of Canowes and small boats, when Canowes*
they are to be made: And as for the tilling of the ground (in the countries*
where they use it) they take therein more pains then the men, who do play the
gentlemen, and have no care but in hunting, or of wars. And notwithstanding
all their labors, yet commonly they love their The women's love to their
husbands.
husbands more then the women of these our parts. For none of them are seen to
marry again upon their graves, that is to say presently after their decease,
but rather do tarry a long time. And if he has been killed, they will eat no
flesh nor will condescend to second marriage until they have seen the revenge
thereof made: A testimony both of true love (which is scarce found among us)
and also of chastity. Also it happens very seldom that they have any
diuorcements, but such as are voluntary. And if they were Christians they would
be families with whom God would dwell and be well pleased, as it is meet it
should be so, for to have perfect contentment: for otherwise Fair observation
upon the names of the Man and the woman. Aben Hezra on the 2. cha. of the
Prouer. 17. verse.
marriage is but torment and tribulation. Which the Hebrews great speculators
and searchers into holy things, by a subtle animaduersion, have very well
noted, for Aben Hezra says, that in the name of the man (...) and of the woman
(...) the name of God, Iah, is contained: And if the two letters which do make
this name of God be taken away, there shall remain these two words (...) which
do signify fire and fire, that is to say, that God being taken away it is but
anguish, tribulation, bitterness and grief.

CHAP. XIX.
Of their Ciuility.
Math. 15. v. 2.
ONe must not hope to find in our Savages that ciuility which the Scribes and
Pharisees did require in the Disciples of our Lord. For which their over great
curiosity he made them such answer as they deserved. For they had brought in
ceremonies and customs which were repugnant to Gods commandment, which they
would have straightly to be observed, teaching ungodliness under the name of
Piety. For if a wicked child did give and put into the common box of the temple
that which appertained to his father, or to his mother, they (for to draw this
profit) did justify this wicked Son, against the commandment of God, who
has above all things commended and commanded the childrens obedience and
reverence toward them that have brought them into the world, which are the
image of God, who has no need God will have no oblation made of another bodies
goods.
of our goods, and does not accept the oblation that is made unto him of the
goods of another. The same Scribes and Pharisees did also bring in, a ciuility
to wash hands, which our Lord does not blame but in as much as they made the
not observing of it, to be a great sin.

Savages.
I have no cause to praise our Savages in those kind of ciuilities, for they
wash not themselves at meals, unless they be monstrously foul: and not
having any use of linen, when their hands be greasy they are constrained to
wipe them on their hairs, or upon their dogs hairs. They make no curiosity
of belching, being at meals: which the Germans and others in these parts do as
well as they. Not having the art of ioyners work they dine upon the broad
table of the world, spreading a skin where they eat their meat, and sit on
the ground. The Turks Gaullois.
also do the same. Our ancient Gaullois were no better then they, who (Diodorus
says) did use the same, spreading on the ground dogs skins, or woolues
skins, upon which they did dine and suppe, making themselves to be Germans.
served by yongue boys. The Germans were more rude. For they had not learning,
Philosophy, nor so much delicateness as our Nation, which Caesar says to have
had the use of a thousand things by the means of their Nauigations on the
seas, whereby they helped the bordering people of Germany, who used some small
civility, and more humanity then the others of their Nation, by reason of the
communication they had with our people.

Savages arriving in some place.
As for the complements that they use one toward another coming from far
they may very briefly be recited. For we have many times seen Savage
strangers to arrive in Port Royal, who being landed, without any discourse,
went straight to Membertous cabin, where they sat down, taking Tobacco, and
having well drunken of it, did give the Tabacco-pipe to him that seemed to be
the worthiest person, and after consequently to the others: The Savages
salutations.
Then some half an hour after they did begin to speak. When they arrived at
our lodgings, their salutation was, Ho, ho, ho, and so they do ordinarily: but
for making of courtesies and kissing of hands they have no skill: except some
particulars which endeavored themselves to be conformable unto us, and seldom
came they to see us without a hat, to the end they might salute us with a more
solemn action.

The Floridians Salutations.
The Floridians do make no enterprise, before they assemble their Counsel
diverse times: and in these assemblies when they arrive they salute one another.
The Paraousti (whom Laudonniere calls king) places himself alone upon a
seat which is higher then the others: where, one after another, they come to
salute him, and the eldest begin their salutation, lifting up twice both
their hands as high as their faces, saying Ha, he, ya, ha, ha, and the others
do answer Ha, ha. And they sit every one upon seats which are about the
Counsel chamber.

Now whether the salutation Ho, ho, do signify any thing or no (for I know no
particular signification in it) yet notwithstanding it is a salutation of Joy,
and the only voice Ho, ho, cannot be made but almost in laughing, testifying
thereby that they are glad to see their friends. The Greeks have never had any
thing else in The Greeks salutations. Plato in Charmide.

The salutations of the Latins and Hebrews.


their salutations, but a witnessing of Joy by their word Chair; which
signifies, be ye merry: which Plato disliking was of advice that it were
better to say Sophroney, be ye wise. The Latins have had their Aue, which is a
wish of happiness: sometimes also Salve, which is a wishing of health to him
whom one saluteth. The Hebrews had the verb shalum which is a word of peace
and of health. According unto which Our Savior did command Math. 10. 12.
his Apostles to salute the houses where they should enter in, that is to say
(according to the interpretation of the common translation) to pronounce peace
unto them: which salutation of peace was from the first ages amongst the people
of God. For it is written that Iethro, Moses father in law, coming to rejoice
with him for the graces that God had done unto him and unto his people, by the
delivering of them from the land of Egypt, Moses went Exodus 18. 7.
out to meet his father in law, and having bowed himself kissed him: and they
saluted one another with words of peace. We Frenchmen do say, Dieu vous guard,
that is, God keep you, Dieu vous doint le bon Iour, God give you good morrow;
Item Le bon Soir, good Evening. Notwithstanding there be many, who ignorantly
do say, Ie vous done, Le bon Iour, Le bon Soir, that is to say, I give (or
bid) you good morrow, good evening: A manner of speech which would be more
decent, by desiring and praying to God that it be so. Angels have sometimes
saluted men, as he who did say to Gedeon: Most strong and valiant man, the Lord
is Judge. 6. 12.
with thee. But God saluteth no body: for it belongs to him to give
salvation, and not to wish it by prayer.

Salutation in Sneezing.
The Heathen had yet a civility in saluting them which did sneeze, which
custom we have kept of them. And the Emperor Tiberius, the saddest man in the
world (says Pliny) would be saluted in sneezing, although he were in his Coach
etc. All those ceremonies and institutions (says the same Author) are come
from the opinion of them which think that the gods will assist our affairs.
Out of these words may be easily coniectured that the salutations of the
Heathen were prayers and vows for health, or other felicity, that they made to
the gods.

The ancient fashion in the beginning of letters.
And as they did such things in meetings, so did they use the word Vale (be ye
well, be ye in health, as we use to say in English fare you well) at the
departure: yea in letters and Epistles; which also they began always with
these words: If you be in health, it is well: I am in Senec. ep. 15.
health. But Seneca says that this good custom was broken in his time: As at
this day among us it is to write clownish like to put in the beginning of a
letter, God keep you in health: which was in times past a holy and christian
manner of writing. In stead of this Vale, which is often found in the holy
Scriptures, we say in our language Of A Dieu, God be with you.
A Dieu God be with you, wishing not only health to our friend, but also that
God do keep him.

But our Savages have not any salutation at the departure, but only the A Dieu
which they have learned of us. And to finish this discourse where we began,
they are to be commended for their obedience that they yield The Savages
obedient to their parents.
to their fathers and mothers, to whose commandments they obey, do nourish
them in their old age, and defend them against their enemies. And here with us
(oh miserable thing!) there is often seen the childrens suits in law against
their parents: books of the fatherly power are seen published, concerning the
childrens withdrawing from theit obedience. An unworthy act for children that
be Christians, to whom may be applied the speeches Tit. Lib. 1. Decad. 1. Deuteronomy.
27. 16.
of Turnus Herdonius, recited in Titus Liuius, saying, that there is no speedier
deciding and taking up of any matter, then between the father and the son; a
thing that might be dispatched in few words: for if he would not obey and give
place to his father, undoubtedly evil should come to him. And the word of God
which is a thunder boult says: Cursed be he who honors not his Father and
his Mother, and all the people shall say Amen.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Virtues and Vices of the Savages.
Virtue like unto wisdom, disdaineth not to be lodged under a mean roof.
The Northerly nations are the last that have been brought to civility: And
notwithstanding, before that ciuility, they have done great actions. Our
Savages, although they be naked, are not void of those virtues, that are
found in men of civility, For every one (says Aristotle) has in him, even
from his Arist. 6 Eth* chap. 13.
birth, the principles and seeds of virtue. Taking then the four virtues by
their springs, we shall find that they participate much of them. For first
concerning fortitude and courage, they have thereof as much as any nation of
the Savages (I speak of our Souriquois and of their allied) in such sort, that
ten of them will always adventure themselves against twenty Armouchiquois:
not that they be altogether without fear (a thing which the fore aleaged
Aristotle does reproach to the ancient Celtien-Gaullois, The ancient Gaullois
were without fear.
who feared nothing, neither the motions of the earth, nor the tempests of the
sea, saying, that this was the property of an hairebraine fellow) but with that
courage they have, they esteem that wisdom gives unto them much advantage.
They fear then, but it is that which all wise men do fear, and that is
death, which is terrible and dreadful, as she that rifleth all, through which
she passes. They fear shame and reproach, but this fear is cosen germane to
virtue. They are stirred to do good by What it is that the Savages do
honor, for as much as he, amongst them, is always honored, and gets
renoune to himself that has done some fair exploit. Having these things
proper unto them, they are in a mediocritie, which is the very seat of virtue.
One point makes this virtue of force and courage imperfect in them, that is,
they are too reuengefull, and in that they put their soueraing co^tentment,
which inclines Savages reuengefull.
to brutishness. But they are not alone, for all those nations how far soever
they may stretch themselves from one Pole to the other, are infected with this
vice. The Christian Religion only may bring them to reason, as in some sort
she does with us (I say in some sort) because that we have men very imperfect,
as well as the Savages.

Temperance.
Temperance is another virtue* consisting in the mediocritie in things that
concern the pleasures of the body: for as for that which concerns the mind
he is not called temperate or intemperate, who is moved with ambition, or with
desire to learn, or that emploieth his time in toies. And for that which
concerns the body, temperance or vntemperance, is not applied to all things
that might be subject to our senses, unless it be by accident, as to color,
to a picture: Item to flowers and good sentes: Item to songs and hearing of
orations, or commedies: but rather to that which is subject to feeling, and to
that which smelling seeks by arts, as in eating and drinking, in perfumes, in
the venerian act, to tenise play, to wrestling, to running, and such like. Now
all these things do depend of the will; which being so, it is the part of a man
to know how to bridle his appetites.

Our Savages have not all the qualities requisite for the perfection of this
virtue. For as for meats we must acknowledge their vntemperance, when they
have wherewith, and they do eat parpetually, yea so far as to rise in the
night to banquet. But seeing that in these our parts many are as vicious as
they, I will not be to rigorous a Censurer of them. As for the other actions
there is no more to be reproved in them then in us: yea I will say less, in
that which concerns the Venerian action, whereto they are little addicted: not
comprehending here, Heretofore chap. 13.
for all that, them of Florida, and in hotter countries, of whom we have spoken
heretofore.

Liberality.
Liberality is a virtue as worthy praise, as avarice and prodigality, her
opposites are blame worthy. It consists in giving and receiving, but rather
in giving in time and place, and according to occasion, without excess. This
virtue is proper and befitting great personages, which be as it were Stewards
of the goods of the earth, which God has put into their hands, for to use them
liberally, that is to say to distribute them to him that has none, not being
excessive in needless expenses, nor too sparing where magnifiicencie is to be
showed.

Our Savages are praise worthy in the exercise of this virtue, according to
their poverty. For as we have said before, when they visit one another, they
give mutual presents one to the other. And when some French Sagamos comes to
them, they do the like with him, casting at his feet some bundle of Beuers,
or other furs, which be all their riches: And so did they to Monsieur de
Poutrincourt, but he took them not to his own proper use, but rather put them
into Monsieur de Monts his storehouse, because he would not go against the
privilege given unto him. This custom of the said Savages proceeds but from
a liberal mind, and which has some generositie. And although they be very
glad when the like is done unto them, yet so it falls out, that they begin
the venture, and put themselves in hazard to loose their merchandise. And who
is he amongst us that does more than they, that is to say, which gives but
with intention to receive? the Poet says, Nemo suas gratis perdere vellet opes*
There is no body that gives, intending to loose. If a great personage gives
to a mean man, that is for to draw some service from him. Even that which is
given to the poor, is to receive the hundred fold, according to the promise of
the Gospel. And for to show the galantnesse of our said Savages: they do not
willingly cheapen, and do content themselves with that which is given them
honestly with a willing mind, disdaining and blaming the fashions of our petie
merchants, which be an hour a Heretofore 1 book chap. 17.
cheapning for to buy a Beuer skin: as I saw being at the river Saint John,
whereof I have spoken heretofore, that they called a young merchant of Saint
Maloes Mercatoria, which is a word of reproach among them, borrowed of the
Baskes, signifying as it were, a hagling fellow. Finally, they have nothing in
them but franknesse and liberality in their exchanging. And seeing the base
manners of some of our men, they demanded sometimes, what they came to seek for
in their country, saying, that they came not into ours: and seeing that we
are richer than they, we should give them liberally that which we have,

Out of this virtue, there grows in them a magnificence which cannot appear,
and remains hidden, but for all that they are provoked by it, doing all they
can for to welcome their friends. And Membertou was very desirous that so much
honor should be done unto him as to shoot off our Canons when he did arrive,
because he saw that the same was done to the French Captains in such a case,
saying that it was due unto him, seeing that he was a Sagamos.

Page 224.
Here Hospitality may be mentioned, but having spoken theereof heretofore, I
will refer the Reader to the chapter of the Tabagi, where I give them the
praise attributed to the Gaullois and ancient Frenchmen for this respect. True
it is that in some places there be some which be friends for the time, and take
their advantage in necessity, as has been noted in Laudonniere his voyage.
But we cannot accuse them in that, least we also accuse our The piety of the
Savages toward their parents.
selves, which do the like. One thing I will say that belongs to fatherly
Piety, that the children are not so cursed as to despise their patents in old
age, but do provide for them with venison, as the Storkes do toward them
that have engendered them. A thing which is the shame of many Christians, who
being weary of their Parents long life, do oftentimes strip them before they
go to bed, and so do leave them naked.

They use also humanity and mercy toward their enemies wives and little
children, whose lives they spare, but they remain their prisoners for to serve
them, according to the ancient right of servitude, brought in amongst all the
nations of the other world, against the natural liberty. But as for the men of
defense they spare none, but kill as many of them as they can catch.

As for justice, they have not any Law neither divine nor humane, but that
which Nature teaches them, that one must not offend another. So have they
quarrels very seldom. And if any such thing do chance to happen, the Sagamos
quieteth all, and does justice to him that is offended, giving some bastanadoes
to the wrong doer, or condemning him to make some presents to the other, for to
pacify him, which is some form of dominion. If it be one of their prisoners
that has offended, he is in danger to go to the pot. For after he is killed
no body will revenge his death. The same consideration is in these parts of the
world. There is no account made of a man's life that has no support.

Execution of justice made by the Savages.
One day there was an Armouchiquois woman, prisoner, who had caused a
countryman of hers, prisoner, to escape away: and to the end to travel and
pass on the way she had stolen from Membertous cabin a tinder-box (for
without that they can do nothing) and a hatchet. Which being come to the
knowledge of the Savages, they would not proceed on the execution thereof near
unto us, but they went to Cabin themselves four or five leagues from Port
Royal, where she was killed. And because she was a woman, our Savages wives
and daughters did execute her. Kinibech-coech a young maid of eighteen years
of age, fair and well spotted with colors, gave her the first stroke in the
throat, which was with a knife: An other maid of the same age, handsome
enough, called Metembroech, followed on, and the daughter of Membertou which we
called Membertou-ech-coech made an end. We reproved them sharply for this
cruelty, whereof they were all ashamed, and durst not show themselves any more.
This is their form of Justice.

Another time a man and a women, prisoners, went clean away, without
tinder-box or any provision of meat. Which was hard to be performed, as well
for the great distance of way, which was above 300. leagues by land because it
behooued them to go secretly, and to take heed from meeting with any Savages.
Nevertheless those poor souls pulled off the bark of certain trees, and
made a little boat, with the bark of them, wherein they crossed the Bay
Francoise, and got to the other shore over against Port Royal, shortning
their way above one hundred and fifty leagues: and got home into their Country
of the Armouchiquois.

Wherein the Savages are diligent and slothful.
I have said in some place that they are not laborious, but in hunting and
fishing, loving also the labor taken by sea: sloathfull at all other painful
exercise, as in the manuring of the ground, and in our mechanical trades: also
to grind Corn for their own use. For sometimes they will rather sees it in
grains, then to grind it by handy strength. Yet notwithstanding they will not
be unprofitable. For there will be some means to employ them, to that
whereunto they be inclined by nature: without forcing it, as heretofore did
the Lacedaemonians to the yongue men of their Commonwealth. As for the
children, having yet taken no byas, it will be easier to keep them at home and
to employ them in those things that shall be thought fit. Howsoever it be,
hunting is no bad thing, nor fishing neither. Let us see then how they behave
themselves therein.

CHAP. XXI.
Of their Hunting.
Gens. 1. v. 29.
GOd, before sin, gave for food unto man every herb bearing seed upon all the
earth, and every tree wherein is the fruit of a tree bearing seed: without
making mention of the spilling of the blood of beasts: And notwithstanding
after the banishment from the Garden of pleasure, the labor ordained for the
punishment of the said sin required a stronger and more substantial food
then the former: so man full of carnallity accustomed himself to feed upon
flesh, and did tame certain number of beasts for to serve him to that effect:
though some would say that before the flood no flesh was eaten: for in vain
Genes. 4. verse. 4. 20.
had Abel been a shepherd, and Iabel father of shephards. But after the flood,
God renewing his covenant with man: Genes. 9. Verse. 2* 3.
The fear and dread of you (says the Lord) shall be upon every beast of the
Earth, and upon every foul of the Heaven, with all that moves on the earth,
and upon all the fishes of the Sea: they are given into your hands: all that
moves having The beginning of the right of hunting.
life shall he unto you for meat. Upon this privilege is formed the right of
hunting: the noblest right of all rights that be in the use of man, seeing that
God is the Author of it. And therefore no marvel if kings and their Nobility
Why it appertains to kings and to their nobility*
have reserved it unto them, by a well concluding reason, that if they command
unto men with far better reason may they command unto beasts. And if they
have the administration of Justice to Judge malefactors, to overcome Rebels,
and to bring to humane society wild and Savage men: with far better reason
shall they have it for to do the same toward the creatures of the air, of
the forests and of the fields. As for them of the sea we will For what end
kings have been chosen.
speak of them in another place. And seeing that kings have been in the
beginning chosen by the people for to keep and defend them from their enemies,
whilst that they are at their necessary works, and to make war as much as
need is for the reparation of injury, and recovery of that which has been
wrongfully usurped, or taken away: it is very reasonable and decent that as
well them as the nobility that do assist and serve them in those things, have
the exercise of hunting, which is an Image of war, to the end to rowse up the
mind and to be always nimble, ready to take horse, for to go to encounter
with the enemy, to ly in ambush, to assail him, to chase him, to trample him
under feet. There is another and first aim The first end of hunting*
in hunting, it is the food of Man, whereunto it is destinated, as is known by
the place of Scripture before alleged: yea, I say, so destinated that in the
holy language it is but one and the self same word (...) for to signify
hunting (or venison) and meat: As among a hundred places this of the one
hundred thirty two Psalm. Where our God having chosen Sion for his habitation
and perpetual rest, promises unto her that he will abundantly bless
Interpretation.
her victuals, and will satisfy her poor with bread. Upon which place Saint
Hierome terms Venison, that which the other translators do call Victuals,
better to the purpose then Widow in the common translation.

Hunting then having been granted unto man by a heavenly privilege, the
Savages throughout all the West Indies do exercise themselves therein without
distinction of persons, not having that fair order established in these parts,
whereby some are borne for the government of the people and the defense of the
Country, others for the exercising of arts and the tillage of the ground, in
such sort, that by this fair oeconomie every one lives in safety.

This hunting is made amongst them chiefly in the The winter dwelling.
winter. For all the Spring and Summer time, and part of Autumn, having fish
abundantly for them and their friends, without taking any pains, they do not
much seek for other food. But in winter when that fish goes away, feeling the
cold, they forsake the sea shoars and cabinne themselves within the woods,
where they know to have any pray: which is done as far as the Countries that
approach near to the Tropique of Cancer. In the countries where Beuers are, as
throughout all the great River of Canada, and upon the coasts of the Ocean, as
far as the Country of the Armouchiquois, they do winter upon the shoars of
lakes, for the fishing of the said Beuers, whereof we will speak in due
place: but first let us The descripon of the Ellan or Stagg.
speak of the Ellan, which they call Aptaptou, and our Basques Orignac.

It is the tallest creature that is, next unto the Dromadaire and Camel, for
it is higher then the horse. His hairs be commonly of gray color, and
sometimes of dunne or fallow, almost as long as the fingers of ones hand. His
head is very long and has almost an infinite order of teeth. He bears his
horns double like the Stagge, but as broad as a plancke, and three foot long,
garnished with sprigges growing upward all along upon one side. His feet be
forked as the Stagges but much more flat. His flesh is short and very delicate.
He feeds in the meadows, and lives also of the tender cropes of trees. It is
the plentifullest thing that the Savages have, next to fish.

Fit time to hunt.
We may say then that the best and fittest time for the said Savages, to all
hunting by land is the Winter season, when that the forests be hoarie, and the
snow deep, and especially if upon the snow there comes a hard frost which does
harden it. Then being well clothed with a cloak furred with Beuers, and
sleeves on the arms tied together with a latch: Item stockens made with the
leather of Ellans like to Buffe (which they tie at their girdles) and shoes on
their feet of the same leather, very finely made, they go with their Bow in
hand, and the Quiver on their backs, that way that their Aoutmoin has showed
them (for we have said heretofore that they consult with the Oracle when they
are a hungry) or some where else, where they think they shall not loose their
time and labor. They have dogs or hounds, almost like to foxes in form and
bigness, and of hairs of all colors* which follow them, and although they
do not spend nor call nevertheless they can very well find the haunt of the
beast which they seek for, which being found they pursue her courageously, and
they never give her over until they have her down: And for to f^llow the game
more easily, they tie Rackets at their feet.
rackets (thrice as great as ours) under their feet, with the which they run
swiftly upon that hard snow without sincking. If it be not hard enough, yet
they give not over hunting, but will follow the chase three days together, if
Their constancy in hunting.
need be. Finally, having wounded her to death they so tire her with their
hounds, that she is forced to fall down. Then they cut and rip her belly, give
relief to the hunters, and take their share of it. One must not think that
they eat the flesh raw, as some do imagine, and as James Quartier himself
does write, for they carry always, going The Savages do carry Tinder-box in
the woods.
through the woods, a Tinder-boxe before their breasts, for to make fire when
hunting is done, where the night does force them to tarry.

We went once to the spoil of an Ellan left dead upon the brinck of a great
brook about two leagues and an half within the lands: where we passed the
night, having taken the snowes for to lodge us. We made there a very dainty
feast with this venison, more tender then any other kind of flesh: and after
the roast we had sodden meat, and broth abundantly, made ready at an instant
by a Savage, who did frame with his hatchet a tubbe or trough of the body of a
tree, in which he boiled his Fair invention of a Savage for the kitchen.
flesh. A thing which I have admired, and having propounded it to many, who
thought themselves to have good wits, could not find out the invention of it,
which notwithstanding is but brief, which is, to put stones made red hot in
the fire in the said trough, and to renew them until the meat be sodde. Joseph
Accosta recites that the Savages of Perou do the same.

The chief hunter being returned to the cabines tells the women what he
has done, and that in such a place which he names to them, they shall find
the venison. The woman's duty.
It is the said women's duty to go and flaie the Ellan, the Dear, Stagge,
Bear, or other game, and to bring it home. Then they make good cheer as long
as there is any provision: And he that has hunted, is he that has the lesser
share: for their custom is, that he must serve the others, and eats none of
his own purchase. As long as the winter continues, they lack none of it: and
there has been some one Savage that in a hard season has killed fifty of
them for his part, as I have sometimes heard.

Why the Beuer is not taken in Summer.
As for the hunting of the Beuer, it is also in Winter that chiefly they use
it, for two reasons, one of them we have alleged heretofore, the other
because that after Winter this beast sheddeth her hairs, and has no furre in
Summer. Besides that when in such a season they would seek out for Beuers,
hardly should they meet with any, because this creature is Amphibie, that is to
say, earthly and waterish, Amphibie.
and more waterish then otherwise: And having no invention to take her in the
water, they might be in danger to loose their pains. Notwithstanding if by
chance they meet any in Summer time, Spring time, or Autumn, they fail not to
eat it.

The description and fishing of the Beuer.
Behold then how they catch them in Winter time, and with most profit. The
Beuer is a beast very near as big as a shorn sheep, the young ones be
lesser, the color of his hair is of a chest-nut color. His feet be short,
the forefeet have claws, and the hinder feet with fins, like geese; the tail
is as it were, skailed, almost of the form of a solefish, notwithstanding the
skaile goes not off. It is the best and delicatest part of the beast. As for
the head it is short and almost round, having two ranckes of jaws at the
sides, and before four great sharp teeth one by another, two above and two
beneath. With these teeth he cutteth small trees, and powles in sundry pieces,
wherewith he builds his house. That which I say is an admirable and
incredible The Beuers cabin or den.
thing. This creature lodges himself upon the brinckes of lakes, and there he
first makes his couch with straw or other things fit to lie upon, as well for
him as for his female: raises a vaut with his wood, cut and prepared, which he
covers with turffe, in such sort that no wind enters therein, for as much as
all is covered and shut up, except one hole which leads under the water, and
by that way he goes forth to walk where he lists. And because the waters
of the lakes do sometimes rise, he makes a chamber above the lower dwelling,
for to retire himself, if in case any inundation should happen: In such sort
that some Beuers cabin is above eight foot hight, all made with wood, piramide
wise, and dawbed with mudde. Moreover it is held that being amphibie, as we
have said, he must always participate with water, and that his tail be dipped
in it: which is the cause why he lodges himself so near a lake* But being
subtle he contenteth not himself with that which we have said, but has
moreover an issue into another place out of the lake, without any cabin, by
which way he goes on the land and beguileth the hunter. But our Savages being
aware of it, take order for the same, and stop this passage.

How the Beuer is taken.
When they will, then, take the Beuer, they pierce through the ise of the
frozen lake, about his cabin, then one of the Savages thrusts his arm into
the hole* tarying the coming of the said Beuer, whilst that another goes
upon this ise, striking with a stafe upon it for to astonish him, and make him
to return into his lodging. Then one must be nimble for to seize on his neck,
for if one catch him by any part where he may bite, he will bite very sore.
The flesh thereof is very good, almost as if it were mutton.

And as every Nation has commonly something peculiar that it brings forth,
which is not so common with others; So anciently the Realm of Pontus had the
same for the producing of Beuers, as I learn it out of Virgil, where he says.

-- Virosaque Pontus Castorea.
Sidon. Apol. in carm 5.
And after him of Sidonie de Polignac Bishop of Auvergne in these verses,

-- Fert Indus ebur, Chaldaeus amomum,
Assirius gemmas, Ser vellera, thura Sabaeus,
Attis mel, Phoenix palmas, Lacedaemon olivum,
Argos equos, Epirus equas, pecuaria Gallus,
Arma Calybs, frumentalibes, Campanus iacchum,
Aurum Lydus, Arabs guttam, Panchaia myrrham,
Pontus castorea, blattam Tyrus, era Corinthus, etc.
But at this day the land of Canada bears the bell away for that respect,
although that some of them are brought out of Moscouy, buy they are not so good
as ours.

Our Savages have also made us to eat of Beuers flesh, which was very good and
tender, and like to beef: Item, of Leopards, resembling much the wild cat;
and of a beast which they call Nibathes, which has his paws almost Nibathes.
like to the apes paws, by means whereof he climeth easily upon the trees, yea
he lays his young ones there. He is of graiesh hairs, and his head like to a
foxes. But he is so fat that it is almost incredible. Having described the
principal game, I will not stand to speak of woolues (for they have some, and
yet eat none of them) nor of Lucerns, Otters, Conies, and others which I have
mentioned in my farewell to New France, whereto I refer the reader* and to the
recital of Captain James Cartier.

Hogs.
Nevertheless it is good to show here that our French cattle profits very
well in those parts. We had hogs which have multiplied very much. And
although they had a stigh, they did lie a broad, even in the snow and during
the frost. We had but one weather, which proved A Weather.
very well, although he was not taken in by night, but was in the midst of our
yard in Winter time. Monsieur De Poutrincourt made him twice to be shorn, and
the woll of the second year has been esteemed in France better by two sous
in the pound, than that of the first. We Five Souse make six pence English.

Outards a kind of wild geese.


had no other houshould-cattell, but hens and pigions, which failed not to
yield the accustomed tribute, and to multiply abundantly. The said Monsieur
de Poutrincourt took coming out of the shell small Outards which he did very
will breed, and gave them to the King at his return. When the country is once
stored with those creatures and others, they will increase so much that
Marvelous multiplication of beasts.
one shall not know what to do with them, like as in Perou, where are at this
day, and long since, such quantity of Oxen, kine, swine, horses and dogs,
that they have no more owners, but do appertain to the first that do kill
them. Being killed they carry away the hides to traffic withal, and the
carkases are left there: which I have many times heard of them that have been
there, besides the witnessing of Joseph Acosta.

The beasts of Florida and Virginia.
Coming into the Country of the Armouchiquois, and going farther toward
Virginia and Florida, they have no more Ellans nor Beuers, but only Stagges,
Hindes, Roebuckes, Deeres, Bears, Leopards, Lucernes, Onces, woolues,
wilde-dogges, Hares and Conies, with whose skins they cover their bodies,
making Chamois of them of the biggest beasts. But as the heat is there greater
then in the Countries more Northernly, so they do not use furs, but pluck
out the hairs from their skins, and very often for all garment they have but
half bretches, or a small cushion made with their mattes, which they wear on
that side that the wind does blow.

But they have in Florida Crocodils also, which do assail them oftentimes in
swimming. They kill some of them sometimes, and eat them. The flesh whereof is
very fair and white, but it smells of musk. They have also a certain Lions.
kind of Lions which little differ from them of Africa.

Brasilians.
As for the Brasilians they are so far from New France, that being as it were,
in another world, their beasts are quit Tapirroussou.
differing from those that we have named, as the Tapiroussou, which if one
desires to see, he must imagine a beast half an Ass and half a Cow, saving
that her tail is very short. His hairs draw toward read, no horns, ears
hanging, and an asses foot. The flesh thereof is like to beef.

They have a certain kind of small Stagges and hindes, Stagges.
which they call Seou-assous, whose hairs be as long as Goats hairs.

But they are persecuted with an evil beast which they call Ianou-are, almost
as tall and swift as a Gray-hound, much like to the Once. She is cruel, and
does not spare them if she can catch them. They take sometimes some of them in
snares, and do kill them with long torments. As for their Crocodils they be not
dangerous.

Wilde-boares.
Their wilde-boares are very lean and vnfleshie, and they have a fearful
grunting and cry. But there is in them a strange deformity, which is, that
they have a hole upon the back, through which they blow and breath. Those
three be the biggest beasts of Brasill. As for small ones they have seven or
eight sorts of them, by the taking whereof they live, and also of man's flesh:
and are better and more provident husbands then ours. For one cannot find them
unprovided, but rather having always upon the Boucan (that is to say a wooden
grate somewhat high built upon four forks) some venison or fish, or man's
flesh: and with that they live merrily and without care.

Anthropophages men eaters.

The Savages of New France be truly noble.


Now leaving there those Anthropophages Brasilians, let us return to our New
France, where the Men there are more humane, and live but with that which God
has given to Man, not devouring their like. Also we must say of them that
they are truly noble, not having any action but is generose, whether we
consider their hunting, or their employment in the wars, or that one search
out their domestical actions, wherein the women do exercise themselves, in
that which is proper unto them, and the men in that which belongs to arms,
and other things befitting them, such as we have said, or will speak of in due
place. But here one must consider that the most part of the world have lived
so from the beginning, and by degrees men have been ciuilized, when that they
have assembled themselves, and have formed commonwealths for to live under
certain laws, rule and policy.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Hawking.
SEeing that we hunt on the land let us not ouerstray our selves, least if we
take the sea, we lose out Prou. 1. 17.
fowls: for the wise man says, that in vain the net is spread before the eyes
of all that have wings. If hunting then be a noble exercise, wherein the very
Muses themselves take delight, by reason of silence and solitariness, which
brings forth fair conceits in the mind: in such sort that Plin. second
Epist. 6. of
Diana (says Pliny) does not more frequent the mountains then Minerva. If, I
say, hunting be a noble exercise, hauking the 1. book. Psalm. 8. 9.
is far more noble, because it aymeth at an higher subject, which does
participate of Heaven, seeing, that the inhabitants of the air are called in
the sacred Scripture, Volucres coeli, the fowls of the air. Moreover, the
exercise thereof does belong but to kings, and to the nobles, above which their
brightness shines, as the Suns brightness does above the stars. And our
Savages being of a noble heart, which makes no account but of hunting and
martial affairs, may very certainly have right of usage, over the birds that
their land does afford them. Which they do likewise, but with much
difficulties, because they have not (as we have) the use of guns. They have
enough, and too many birds of pray, as Eagles, Laynards, Faulcons, Tiercelets,
Sparow-haukes, and others, which I have specified in my farewell to New France,
but they have neither the use nor industry to A sport they have in France to
shoot at the picture of a bird, set at a stake.
bring them to service, as the French Gentlemen: and therefore they loose much
good foul, having no other means to seek after them, or to take them but
only with the Bow and arrows, with which instruments they do like unto them
who in France shoot at the Geay in time of middle-lent: or creep along the
grass, and go to assail the Outardes, or wild Geese, which do graze in the
Spring time, and in Summer along the meadows* Sometimes also they carry
themselves softly and without making any noise in their canowes and light
vessels made with barks of trees, even to the shores where the Malards and
other water foul are, and there strike them down. But the greatest abundance
they have, come from certain Islands, where such quantity of them are, to wit,
of Malards, Margaux, Roquettes, Outards, or Great abundance of water foul.
wild Geese, Curlies, Cormorants, and others, that it is a wonderful thing,
yea that which captain James Quartier recites, will seem to some altogether
incredible. When we were upon our return into France, being yet beyond
Campseau, we passed by some of those Islands, where in the space of a quarter
of an hour, we laded our bark with them, we had no need but to strike down
with staves, and not to go about to gather until one were weary a striking.
If any man does ask why they fly not away, one must consider that they be
birds only of two three, or four months old, which have been there hatched
in the spring time, and have not yet wings great enough to take slight, though
they be well fleshie and in good plight. As for the dwelling of Port Royal we
had The foul of Port Royal.
many of our men that furnished us with them, and particularly one of Monsieur
de Monts his household servants, called Francois Addeni, whose name I insert
here to the end he be had in memory, because he always provided for us
abundantly with it. During the winter he made us to live only of Mallards,
Cranes, Hernes, Woodcocks, Partriges, Blackbirds, and some other kinds of that
country birds. But in the spring time it was a sport to see the gray Geese and
the big Outardes (a kind of wild Geese) to keep their Empire and dominion
in our meddowes* and in Autumn the white Geese, of which some did always
remain for a pawn: then the sea Larks flying in great flocks upon the shores
of the waters, which also very often were paid home.

Touching the birds of pray, some of our men took from the nest an Eagle, from
the top of a Pineapple tree, of the monstrousest height that ever I saw any
tree, which Eagle Monsieur de Poutrincourt did breed for to present her to the
king, but she brake her ties, seeking to take her flight, and lost her self in
the sea coming home. The Savages of Campseau had six of them pearched near to
their cabins, at our coming thither, which we would not trucke for, because
they had pulled off their tails to to feather their arrows. There be such a
quantity of them in those parts, that often they did eat our pigeons, and it
did behooue us to look narrowly to them.

The birds that were known unto us, I have enrowled them (as I have said) in
my farewell to New France, but I have omitted many of them, because I knew not
their names. There also may be seen the description of a little Niridau, an
admirable little small bird. Flies.
small bird, which the Savages do call Niridau, which lives but with flowers,
and she did come noising in my ears, passing inuisibly (so small is she) when
in the morning I went to take a walk in my garden. There will be seen also
the description of certain flies, shining in the evening, in the spring time,
which do fly up and down the woods in such a multitude that it is wonder.
For the birds of Canada, I also refer the Reader to the report of Captain
James Quartier.

A wonderful foul.
The Armouchiquois have the same birds, whereof there are many which are not
known unto us in these parts. And particularly there is one kind of water
foul which have their bills made like two knives, having the two edges one upon
another: and that which is worth the wondering at, the uppermost part of the
said bill is shorter by the one half then the lower-most: in such wise that it
is hard to think how this bird takes her food. But in the Spring Turkiecockes.
time the cocks and hens, which we call Indien or Turkey cocks do fly
thither as wandering birds, and soiorne there without passing further
hetherward. They come from the parts of Virginia and Florida. There be yet,
besides Come from Virginia.

Birds and fowls of Virginia and Florida*


these, Partridges, Parrats, Pigeons, Stocke-doues, Turtle-doues, Blacke-birds,
Crows, Tiercelets, Faulcons, Laniers, Hernes, Cranes, Storckes, Wilde-geese,
Mallards, Cormorans, white Aigrets, red, black, and gray ones, and infinite
sorts of foul.

As for the Brasilians they also have store of Turkie-cockes and hens, which
they name Arignan-ouslou, of whom they make no account, nor of their eggs: In
such manner that the said Turkie-hennes breed their young ones as they can,
without so much a do as in these parts. They have also duckes but because they
go heavily they eat none of them, saying that they would hinder them from
running swiftly. Item a kind of Pheasants which they call Iacous: Other fowls
which they name Mouton as big as peacocks: some kinds of Partridges as big
as Geese, called Mocacoua: Parrats of sundry sorts, and many other kinds
altogether unlike unto ours.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of their Fishing.
OPpian, in the book that he has made upon this subject, says, that in the
hunting of beasts and of Comparison between hunting, hauking, and fishing.
birds, besides the facility, there is more contentment and delight then in
fishing, because that a man has many retreats, one may get himself into the
shadow, one may meet with brooks to quench his thirst, one may lie down on
the grass, one may take his repast under some shelter. As for birds one may
take them in the nest and with bird-lime, yea of themselves very often they
fall into the nets. But poor fishermen cast their bait upon an uncertainty;
yea, double uncertainty, as well because they know not what adventure shall
happen unto them, as because they are upon an unconstant and untameable
Element, whose very sight only is fearful: They are always wandering from
place to place, subjects to tempests, and beaten with storms and winds. But
yet in the end he concludes that they are not destitute of all pleasure, but
rather that they have enough, when they are in a Ship well built, well tight,
well closed, and swift in sailing. Then cutting the waves they go to sea,
where the great skulls of devouring fishes are, and casting into the sea a line
well twisted, the weight of it is no sooner in the bottom, but that as soon
the bait is snatched up, and suddenly the fish is drawn up with An Emperor
delighting in fishing.
great pleasure. And in this exercise did Marc Antonia, the Son of the Emperor
Seuerus delight himself very much: notwithstanding Platoes reason, who forming
his commonwealth has forbidden his Citizens the exercise of fishing, as
unnoble, and iliberall, and fosterer of idleness. Wherein he did grossly
aequiuocate, specially when he charge fishermen with idleness. Which is so
evident that I will not vouchsafe to refute him. But I marvel not of that which
he says of fishing, seeing that with the same he also rejects hauking, upon
the same reasons. Plutarch says that it is more laudable to take either a
Heart, a Roebuck, or a Hare, then to buy them: but he wadeth not so far as the
other. Howsoever it be, the Church, which is the first order in humane society,
whose Priesthood is called Royal by the great Apostle Saint Peter, has
permitted fishing to churchmen, and forbidden hunting and hauking. And indeed,
to say that which is most probable, the food of fish is the best and foundest
of Aristotle 8. of the History of beasts. c. 9.
all, for as much (as Aristotle says) that it is not subject to any sickness:
from whence comes the common proverb: Sounder then a fish. So that in the
ancient hieroglyphickes a fish is the simbole of health. Which notwithstanding
I would mean, eaten whilst it is new. for otherwise (as Plautus says) Piscis
nisi recens nequam est, it is nothing worth.

Now our Savages do eat it new enough, as long as it lasts: which I believe
to be one of the best Instruments of their health and long life. When winter
comes, Fishes do retire themselves in Winter.
all fishes are astonished, and shun the storms and tempests, every one where
he may: some do hide themselves in the sand of the sea, others under the
Rocks, others do seek a milder country where they may be better at rest. But
as soon as the mildness of the Spring time does return, and the Sea does
calm it self, as after a long siege of a Town, Truce being made, the people
being before a prisoner, issues forth by troops to go and take the air of
the fields and to rejoice themselves: So those Citizens of the Sea, after the
gusts and furious storms be past, they come to enlarge themselves through the
salted fields, they skippe, they trample, they make love, they approach to the
shore and come to seek the refreshing of fresh water. And then our said The
fishes rendez-vous.
Savages that know the Rendez-vous of every one, and the time of their return,
go to wait for them in good devotion to bid them welcome. The Smelt is the
first fish of all that present himself in the Spring. And to the end we go
no further to seek out examples then at our Smelts in great quantity.
Port Royal, there be certain brooks where such skulls of these Smelts do
come, that for the space of five or six weeks one might take of them sufficient
to feed a whole City. There be other brooks, where after the Smelt Herrings.
comes the Herring, with like multitude, as we have already marked else where.
Item the Pilchers do come in their season, in such abundance that sometimes
willing to have some thing more for our supper then ordinary, in less then the
space of an hour, we had taken enough of them to serve us for three days.
The Dolphins, Sturgeons Dolphins, Sturgions, Salmons.
and Salmons do get to the head of the River in the said Port Royal, where
such quantity of them are, that they carried away the nets which we had laid
for them, by reason of the multitude of them that we saw there. In all places
fish abounds there in like manner, as we our Fishing of the Savages.
selves have seen. The Savages do make a hurdle, or wear, that crosses the
brook, which they hold almost vpstraight, propped against wooden bars,
archwise, and leave there a space for the fishes to pass, which space they
stop when the tide does retire, and all the fish is found stayed in such a
multitude that they suffer it to be lost. And as for the Dolphins, Sturgions
and salmons, they take them after that manner, or do strike them with harping
irons, so that these people are happy. For there is nothing in the world so
good as these fresh meats. And I find by my The abuse of Pithagoras.
reckening that Pythagoras was very ignorant, forbidding in his fair goulden
sentences the use of fishes without distinction. One may excuse him, in that
fish being dumb has some conformity with his sect, wherein dumbness (or
silence) was much commended. It is also said that he did it because that fish
is nourished in an Element enemy to mankind. Item that it is a great sin to
kill and to eat a creature thar does not hurt us. Item that it is a delicious
and luxurious meat, not of necessity (as indeed in the Hieroglyphiques of Orus
Apollo, fish is put for a mark of delicacie and voluptuousness) Item that he
(the said Pythagoras) did eat but meats that might be offered to the gods:
which is not done with fishes: and other such toies recited by Plutarch in his
Convivial questions. But all those superstions be foolish: and I would feign
demand of such a man if being in Canada he had rather die for hunger then to
eat fish. So many anciently to follow their own fancies, and to say these be
we, have forbidden their followers the use of meats that God has given to man,
and sometimes laid yoakes upon men that they themselves would not bear. Now
whatsoever the Philosophy of Pythagoras is, I am none of his. I find better
the rule of our good religious men, which please themselves in eating of flesh,
which I liked well in New France, neither am I yet displeased when I meet with
such fare. If this Philosopher did live with Ambrosia and of the food of the
Gods, and not of fishes, of which none are sacrificed unto them. Our said good
religious, as the Cordeliers, or Franciscans of Saint Maloes, and others of the
maritime towns, together with the Priests, may say that in eating sometimes
fish, they eat of the meat consecrated to God. For when the The French men
that go there a fishing.

Sanctorum.


New found land men do meet with some wonderful fair Codde, they make of it
a Sanctorum, (so do they call it) and do vow and consecrate it to Saint
Frances, Saint Nicholas, Saint Leonard and others, head and all, whereas in
their fishing they cast the heads into the sea.

I should be forced to make a whole book if I would discourse of all the
fishes that are common to the Brasilians, Floridians, Armouchiquois, Canadians,
and Souriquois. But I will restrain my self to two or three, having first told
that in Port Royal there is great beds of Muscles, wherewith Muscles.
we did fill our Shallops, when that sometimes we went into those parts. There
be also Scallops twice as big as Scalloppes.
Oysters in quantity. Item Cockles, which have never Cockles. Sea Chestnuts.
failed us: As also there is Chatagnes demer, sea Chestnuts, the most delicious
fish that is possible to be: Item Crabbes and Lobstarts: those be the shell
fishes. But one Crabbes. Lobstarts. A Port of eight leagues* compass.
must take the pleasure to fetch them, and are not all in one place. Now the
said Port being eight leagues compass, there is (by the abouesaid Philosophers
leave) good sport to row in it for so pleasant a fishing.

The fishing of Codde.
And seeing we are in the Country where the Coddes are taken, I will not yet
leave off work, until I have spoken something thereof. For so many people and
in so great number go to fetch them out of all the parts of Europe every
year, that I know not from whence such a swarm may come. The Coddes that be
brought into these parts are either dry or wet. The fishing of the we fish is
on the bank in the open sea, on this side New found land, as may be noted by
my Geographicall map. Fifteen Bank: See heretofore in the 1. book chap. 12.
or twenty (more or less) mariners have every one a line (it is a cord) of
forty or fifty fathams long, at the end whereof is a hook baited, and a lead
of three pounds weight to bring it to the bottom: with this implement they
fish their Coddes, which are so greedy, that no sooner let down, but as soon
caught, where good fishing is. The fish being drawn a shippe-boord, there are
boords in form of narrow tables along the ship where the fish is dressed.
There is one that cutteth off their heads and casts them commonly in the sea:
Another cutteth their bellies and garbelleth them, and sends back to his
fellow the biggest part of the backe-bone which he cutteth away. That done,
they are put into the salting tubbe for four and twenty hours: then they are
laid up: And in this sort do they work continually (without respecting the
Sunday, which is the Lords day) for the space of almost three months, their
sails down, until the lading be fully made. And because the poor mariners
do endure there some cold among the fogges, specially them that be most
hasty, which begin their voyage in February: from thence comes the saying,
that it is cold in Canada.

Drying of the Codde.
As for the dry Codde one must go a land. There is in New Foundland and in
Bacaillos great number of Ports, where Ships lie at Ancker for three months. At
the very break of day the Mariners do go two or three leagues off in the sea
to take their lading. They have every one filled their shaloupe by one or two a
clock in the afternoon, and do return into the Port, where being, there is a
great Scaffold built one the sea shore, whereon the fish is cast, as one cast
sheaues of corn through a barn window. There is a great table whereon the
fish cast, is dressed as above said. After six hours they are turned, and so
fundry times. Then all is gathered, and piled together; and again at the end
of eight days put to the air. In the end being dried it is laid up. But there
must be no fogges when it is a drying, for then it will rot: not too much heat,
for it would become red: but a temperate and windy weather.

Whether the Codde does sleep.
They do not fish by night because then the Cod will not bite. I durst believe
that they be of the fishes which suffer themselves to be taken sleeping,
although that Oppian is of opinion that fishes, warring and devouring one
another, as do the Brasilians and Canibals, are always Why fishes sleep not.
watchful and sleep not: excepting nevertheless the Sargot only, which he
says puts himself in certain caves to take his sleep. Which I might well
believe, and this fish deserves not to be warred upon, seeing he makes wars
upon none others, and lives of weeds: by reason whereof all the Authors do
say that he chaweth his cudde like the Sheep. But as the same Oppian says
that this fish only in chawing his cudde does render a moist voice, and in
that he is deceived, because that my self have heard many times the Seals, or
Sea woolues, Heretofore first book, chap. 17.
in open sea, as I have said elsewhere: He might also have aequiuocated in this.

The same Cod leaves biting after the month of September is passed, but
retireth himself to the bottom of the broad sea, or else goes to a hotter
country until the Spring time. Whereupon I will here aleadge what Pliny Plin.
lib. 9. c. 16.
notes; that fishes which have stones on their heads do fear winter, and
retire themselves betimes, of whose number is the Cod, which has within her
brains two white stones made gundole wise and iagged about: which Stones in
the Cods head.
have not those that be taken toward Scotland, as some learned and curious man
has told me. This fish is wonderfully greedy, and deuoureth others, almost as
bigg as himself yea even lobsters, which are like big Langoustes, and I
marvel how he may digest those big and hard shells. Of the livers of Cods
our New-found-land-men do make oiles, casting those livers into barels set in
the Sun, where they melt of themselves.

There is great traffic made in Europe of the oil of the fish of
New Foundland. And for this only cause many Fish oil or train.
go to the fishing of the whale, and of the Hippopotames, which they call the
beast with the great tooth or the Morses: of whom some thing we must say.

Fishing of the Whale. Plin* li. 9. ca. 3.
The Almighty, willing to show unto Job how wonderful are his works: will thou
draw (says he) Leuiathan with a book, and his tongue with a string which thou
have cast in the water? By this Leuiathan is the whale meant, and all fishes of
that reach, whose hugeness (and chiefly of the whale) is so great, that it is
a dreadful thing, as we have showed elsewhere, speaking of one that was cast
on the Coast of Brasill by the tide: And Pliny says that there be some found
in the Indies which have four acres of ground in length. This is the cause why
man is to be admired (yea rather God, who has given him the courage to assail
so fearful a monster, which has not his equal on the land.) I leave the
manner of taking of her, described Oppian of fishing the 5. book.

S. Basil 10. Ho. upon the 6. days of creation.

The river where the Whale is fished.


by Oppian, and S. Basil for to come to our Frenchmen, and chiefly the
Basques, who do go every year to the great river of Canada for the Whale.
Commonly, the fishing thereof is made in the river called Lesquemin toward
Tadoussac. And for to do it they go by skowtes to make watch upon the tops of
rocks, to see if they may have the sight of some one: and when they have
discovered any, forth with they go with four shaloupes after it, and having
cunningly borded her, they strike her with a harping iron to the depth of her
lard, and to the quick of the flesh. Then this creature feeling herself
rudely pricked, with a dreadful boisterousnesse casts herself into the
depth of the sea. The men in the mean while are in their shirts, which vere
out the cord whereunto the harping iron is tied, which the whale carries away.
But at the shaloupe side that has given the blow there is a man ready with a
hatchet in hand to cut the said cord, least perchance some accident should
happen that it were mingled, or that the Whales force should be too violent:
which notwithstanding having found the bottom, and being able to go no
further, she mounteth up again leasurely above the water: and then again she
is set upon with glaue-staues, or pertuifanes, very sharp, so hotly that the
salt water pierceing within her flesh she loses her force, and remains
there. Then one tieth her to a cable at whose end is an anchor which is cast
into the sea, then at the end of six or eight days they go to fetch her, when
time and opportunity permits it they cut her in pieces, and in great kettles
do sees the fat which melts it self into oil, wherewith they may fill
400. Hogs-heads, sometimes more, and sometimes less, according to the
greatness of the beast, and of the tongue commonly they draw five, yea six
hogs-heads full of train.

How the Indians do take the Whale.

Joseph Acosta* (...) 5. c. 15.


If this be admirable in us, that have industry, it is more admirable in the
Indian people, naked and without artificial instruments: and nevertheless
they execute the same thing, which is recited by Joseph Acosta, saying that for
to take those great monsters they put themselves in a Canow or Bark, made of
the barks of trees, and bording the Whale they leap nimbly on her neck, and
there do stand, as it were on horseback, attending the fit means to take
her, and seeing their opportunity, the boldest of them puts a strong and
sharp stafe, which he carries with him, into the gap of the Whales nostrils
(I call nostrill the condut, or hole through which they breath) forth with he
thrust it in far with another very strong stafe, and makes it to enter in as
deep as he can. In the mean while the Whale beats the sea furiously, and
raises up mountains of water, diuing down with great violence, then mounteth
up again not knowing what to do through very rage. The Indian notwithstanding
remains still sitting fast, and for to pay her home for this trouble, fixes
yet another like stalk in the other nostrill, making it to enter in, in such
wise that it stops her wind quite, and takes away her breath, and he
comes again into his Canow, which he holds tied at the side of the Whale
with a cord, then retireth himself on land having first tied his cord to the
Whale, which he vereth out on her; which whilst she finds much water,
skippeth here and there, as touched with grief, and in the end draws to
land, where forth with, for the huge enormity of her body, she remains on
the shore, not being able to move or stur herself any more. And then a great
number of Indians do come to find out the Conqueror for to reap the fruit of
his conquest, and for that purpose they make an end of killing of her, cutting
her and making morsels of her flesh (which is bad enough) which they dry and
stamp to make powder of it, which they use for meat, that serves them a long
time.

Morses.
As for the Hippopotames, or Morses, we have said in the voiages of James
Quartier that there be great number of them in the Gulf of Canada, and
specially in the I Will of I Will de Brion.
Brion, and in the seven Isles, which is the river of Chischedec. It is a
creature which is more like to a Cow then to a Hippopotame, or river Horse.
horse. But we have named it Hippopotamus that is to say the horse of the river,
because Pliny does so call them that be in the river Nilus, which
notwithstanding do not altogether resemble the horse, but does participate also
of an ox or a cow. He is of hair like to the seal, that is to say, daple
graie, and somewhat toward the red, the skin very hard, a small head like
to a Barbary Cow, having two ranks of teeth on each side between which there
is two of them of each part hanging from the upper iaw downward, of the form of
a young Elephants tooth, wherewith this creature helps her self to climb on
the rocks. Because of those teeth, our Mariners do call it La best a La
grand' dent, the beast with the great teeth. His ears be short and his tail
also, he loweth as an Ox, and has wings or finnes at his feet, and the
female calls her young ones on the land. And because that he is a fish of the
whales kind and very fat, our Basques and other Mariners do make oil
thereof, as they do with the whale and they do surprise him on the land.

Plin. li. 8. c. 25.
Those of Nil (says Pliny) are cloven footed, the maine, the back, and the
neighing of a horse, the teeth issuing forth as to a wild Boar. And he
adds, that when this creature has been in the corn for to feed, he goes
away backwards, upon his return for fear he should be followed by his traces.

I do not purpose to discourse here of all the sorts of fishes that are in
chose parts, the same being too spacious a subject for my history, because
also that I have specified a good number of them in my farewell to New France.
I will say only that by manner of pastime on the coasts of New France, I will
take in one day fish enough for to serve as food for a longer time then six
weeks, in the places where the abundance of Codde is: for that kind of fish is
there most frequent. And he that has the industry to take Mackrels at sea,
may there take so many that he shall Infinite multitude of Mackerels.
not know what to do with them, for in many places I have seen infinite
numbers of them close together, which did occupy more space there three times
then the market hals of Paris do contain. And notwithstanding I see a The
idleness of people in these days.
number of people in our country of France, so rechlesse, and so idle in these
days, that they had rather die for hunger, or live in slavery, at the least
to languish upon their miserable dunghill, then to endeavor to get out of the
mire, and to change their fortune by some generous action, or to die in it.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of the quality of the Soil.
WE have made provision in the three last chapters of venison, of foul, and
of fish; which is much. But in our old ancient France, bread and wine being our
usual sustenance, it would be hard unto us to make here our aboade, unless
the land were fit for the same. Let us then enter into consideration of it, and
let us put our hands into our bosom, to see if the dugges of this mother will
yield any milk to nourish her children, and as for the rest, we will take
what may be Plin. l. 18. c. 5. Which is the good land.
hoped for of her. Attilius Regulus, twice Consul in Rome, did commonly say,
that one must not choose places over rank, because they are unhealthful;
neither places over barren, although one may live healthily in them. And with
such a modetate soil did Cato content himself. The ground of New France is
such, for the most part of fat sand, under which we have often found clay
ground: and of that earth did Monsieur de Poutrincourt cause a quantity of
bricks to be made, wherewith he builded a furnance to melt the gum of the fur
tree, and chimneies. I will say farther, that one may make with this earth such
operations, The earth of New France having the same effects as terra sigillata.
as with the earth which we call terra sigillata, or Bolus Armenicus, as in many
occasions our Apothecarie master Jews Hebert most sufficient in his Art, has
made trial of it; by the advice of Monsieur de Poutrincourt: yea even when
that Monsieur du Pont his son had three fingers cut off with a musket shot,
which did burst being ouercharged, in the country of the Armouchiquois.

This province having the two natures of Earth that God has given unto man for
to possess, who may doubt but that it is a land of promise, when it shall be
manured? We have made trial of it, and have taken pleasure therein, which
never did all them that have gone before us, The blessing of God upon our
labor.
whether it be in Brasill, whether it be in Florida, or in Canada. God has
blessed our labors and has given unto us fair wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats,
Peason, Beans, Hemp, Turnips, and garden herbs: and this so plentifully that
the Rye was as high as the tallest man that may be seen, and we did fear that
this height should hinder it from bringing forth seed: But it has so well
fructified that 150. ears of corn from one grain.
one french-graine sowed there has yielded one hundred and fifty Ears of
corn, such as by the testimony of my Lord Chancellor, the Island of Cicilia
nor the country of Beausse do yield none fairer. I did sow wheat, without
suffering my land to rest, and without dunging it at all: and nevertheless it
grew up in as fair perfection as the fairest wheat in France, although the
corn and all that we did sow was to long kept. But the new corn which the
said Monsieur de Poutrincourt did sow before his departure from thence grew up
so beautiful that it was wonderful, according to the report of them that have
been there a year after our departure. Whereupon I will say that which was of
mine own doing, that in the month of April in the year 1607 having sowed too
thick and too Monsieur de S. Croix is 25. leagues from Port Royal.
Monts, some twenty five leagues from Port Royal) these grains did multiply
so abundantly that they choked one another, and came to no good perfection.

The fertiity of the ground mended.
But as for the ground mended, dunged with our hogs dung, or with the sweepings
of the kitchinne, shells of fish, or such like things, I would not believe*
unless I had seen it, the excessive loftiness of the plants that it has
produced every one in his kind. Yea the Son of Monsieur de Poutrincourt, a
young Gentleman of great forwardness, having sowed grains of Oringes and of
Citrons in Orenges* Citrons.
his garden, they sprung plants of a foot high at three months end. We did not
expect so much, and notwithstanding we took pleasure therein, emulating one
another. I refer to any man's Judgment if the second trial will be done with
a good courage. And here I must say by the way that the Secretary of the said
Monsieur de Monts, being come into those parts before our departure, did say
that he would not for any thing in the world, but to have made the voyage, and
that unless he had seen The abuse of them that have discredited the country
of Canada.
our corn, he would not have believed it. Behold how continually the country of
Canada has been discredited (under whose name all that land is comprised) not
knowing what it is, upon thereport of some Mariners, who only do go to fish
for Coddes, and upon the rumor of some sicknesses, which may be avoided in
maintaining of mirth. So that men be well furnished of necessaries.

But to continue our purpose of the mending of the ground, whereof we spoke
even now, one certain ancient Author says that the Censors of Rome did let
to farm the dunghils and other uncleanness, which were drawn out of sinckes
for 1000 tallents a year (which is worth 600000 French-crownes) to the
Gardeners of Rome, because that it was the excellentest dung of all: And there
was to that end Commissioners ordained for to cleanse them: Likewise the
bottom and Channel of the River Tybre, as certain ancient inscriptions,
which I have sometimes read, do record.

The land of the Armouchiquois does bear yearly such corn as that which we
call Sarrazen wheat, Turkey Plin. l. 18. c. 7. and. 10.

The Virginians have two haruests in the year.

The manner of fatting, tilling, and sowing the grounds.


wheat, and Indian wheat, which is the Irio or Erysimon fruges of Pliny and
Columella. But the Virginians, Floridians, and Brasilians, more southerly, make
two haruests a year. All these people do till their land with a wooden
picke-axe, weed out the weeds and burn them, fatten their fields with
shellfish, having neither tame Cattle nor dung: then they heap their ground
in small heaps two foot distant one from another. and the month of May being
come, they set their Corn in those heaps of earth as we do plant beans,
fixing a stick, and putting four grains of corn severally one after another
(by certain superstition) in the hole, and between the plants of the said
corn (which grows like a small tree, and is ripe at three months end) they
also set beans spotted with all colors, which are very delicate, which by
reason they be not so high, do grow very well among these plants of corn:
We have sowed of the said corn this last year in Paris in good ground, but
with small profit, having yielded every plant but one ear or two, and yet very
thin: Where in that country one grain will yield four, five and six ears,
and every ear one with another above 200 grains, which is a marvelous
increase. Which Theophrastus in the 8. book of plants.
shows the proverb reported by Theophrastus to be very true, that it is the
year that produced the fruit, and not the field: That is to say, that the
temperature of the air, and condition of the weather, is that which makes the
plants to budde and fructify more then the nature of the earth. Wherein is to
be wondered that our Corn grows Our corn profits better in their ground
then their corn in ours.
better there, then their corn here. A certain testimony that God has
blessed that country, since that his name has been called upon there: Also
that in these parts, since some years, God beats us (as I have said
elsewhere) with rods of iron, and in that country he has spread his blessing
abundantly upon our labor, and that in one parallele and elevation of the
Sun.

This Corn growing high, as we have said, the stalk of it is as big as
Canes, yea bigger. The stalk and Corn taken green, have a sugar taste, which
is the cause why the Mowles and field Rattes do so covet it, for they spoiled
me a plot of it in New France. The great beasts, as Stagges and other beasts,
as also birds do spoil it. And the Indians are constrained to keep them as
we do the vines here.

Barnes under ground.
The Harvest being done, this people lays up their Corn in the ground, in
pits which they make in some descent of a hill, for the running down of
waters, furnishing those pits with mattes: and this they do because they have
no houses with loftes, nor chests to lay it up otherwise: then the corn
conserved after this manner, is out of the way of Rats and Mise.

Sundry nations of those parts have had the same invention to keep corn in
pits. For Suidas makes mention of it upon the word Seiroi. And Procopius in
the second book of the Gothicke war, says that the Goths besieging Rome
fell within the pits, where the inhabitants were wont to lay their Corn.
Tacitus reports also that the Germans had such pits. And without
particularising any farther, in many places of France that keep at this day
^4. chap.
their corn after that manner. We have declared heretofore in what fashion they
stamp their Corn, and make bread with it, and how by the testimony of Pliny,
the ancient Italians had no better industry then they.

The cause why the Canadians have given over their tillage.
They of Canada and Hochelaga, in the time of James Quartier, did also till
after the same manner, and the land did afford them Corn, Beans, Peason,
Milions, Pompions, and Cucumbers, but since that their furs have been in
request, and that for the same they have had bread and other victuals, without
any other pains, they are become sluggish, as the Souriquois also, who did
addict themselves to tillage in the same time.

Hemp.
But both the one and the other nation have yet at this time excellent Hemp,
which the ground produces of it self. It is higher, finer, whiter, and
stronger then ours in these our parts. But that of the Armouchiquois bears at
the top of the stalk thereof a cod, filled with a kind of Cotton.
cotton, like unto silk, in which lies the seed. Of this cotton, or whatsoever
it be, good beds may be made, more excellent a thousand times then of
feathers, and softer than common cotton. We have sowed of the said seed, or
grain in diverse places of Paris, but it did not prove.

We have seen by our History, how along the great Vines and grapes.
river, beyond Tadoussac, Vines are found innumerable, and grapes at the season.
I have seen none in Port Royal, but the land and the hills are very proper for
it. France had none in ancient time, unless peradventure along the Aurel.
Victor in Prob. when the Vine was first planted in France.
coast of the Mediterranean sea. And the Gaullois having done some notable
service to the Emperor Probus, they demanded of him for recompense, permission
to plant Vines: which he granted unto them: But they were first denied by the
Emperor Nero. But why do I aleadge the Gaullois, seeing that in Brasill, being
a hot country, there was none until that the Frenchmen and Portugeses had
planted some there: So there is no doubt but that the Vine will grow
plentifully in the said Port Royal, seeing likewise that at the river Saint
John (which is twenty leagues more Northward than the said Port) there be many
of them: yet for all that not so fair as in the country of the Armouchiquois,
where it seems that Nature did delight herself in planting of them there.

And for as much as we have handled this subject, speaking of the voyage that
Monsieur De Poutrincourt made thither, we will pass further, to declare unto
you that the most part of the woods of this land be Oaks and Walnut-trees,
Oaks. Nut-trees. Plumb-trees.
bearing small-nuts with four or five sides, so sweet and delicate as any thing
may be: And likewise Plumb-trees which bring forth very good Plumbes: As also
Sassafras, a tree having leaves like to Oake-leaues, but Sassafras.
less iagged, whose wood is of very good sent, and most excellent for the
curing of many diseases, as the pox, and the sickness of Canada, which I call
Phthisie, whereof we Phthisie. 1. book. c. 13.
have discoursed at large heretofore.

They also plant great store of Tobacco, a thing most precious with them, and
universally amongst all those nations. It is a plant of the bigness of
Consolida mayor, the Tobacco and the use of it.
smoke whereof they suck up with a pipe in that manner that I will declare
unto you, for the contentment of them that know not the use of it. After that
they have gathered this herb, they lay it to dry in the shade, and have
certain small bags of leather, hanging about their necks or at their
girdles, wherein they have always some and a Tabacco-pipe with all, which is a
little pan hollowed at the one side, and within whose hole there is a long
quill or pipe, out of which they suck up the smoke, which is within the said
pan, after they put fire to it with a cole that they lay upon it. They will
sometimes suffer hunger eight days, having no other sustenance then that
smoke. And our Frenchmen who have frequented them are so bewitched with this
drunkenness of Tobacco, that they can no more be without it, then without meat
or drink, and upon that do they spend good store of money. For the good
Tobacco which comes out of Brasil does sometimes Foolish greediness of some
men after Tobacco.
cost a French-crowne a pound. Which I deem foolishness in them, because that
notwithstanding they do not spare more in their eating and drinking then other
men, neither do they take a bit of meat nor a cup of drink the less by it.
But it is the more excusable in the Savages, by reason they have no greater
deliciousness in their Tabagies, or bankets, and can make cheer to them that
come to visit them with no greater thing, as in these our parts one presents
his friend with some excellent wine: In such sort that if one refuses to take
the Tabacco-pipe, it is a The Savages do think that God has taken Tobacco.
sign that he is not a friend. And they, which among them have some obscure
knowledge of God, do say that he takes Tobacco as well as they, and that it
is the true nectar, described by the Poets.

This smoke of Tobacco taken by the mouth, in sucking, The virtues and
properties of Tabaco.
as a child that sucketh his dugge, they make it to issue through the nose, and
passing through the conduits of breathing, the brains are warmed by it, and the
humiditie of the same dried up. It does also in some sort make one giddie, and
as it were drunk, it makes the belly soluble, mitigateth the passions of
Venus, brings to sleep, and the leaf of Tobacco, or the ashes that remain
in the pan heals wounds. Yea I will say more that this nectar is unto them so
sweet, that the children do sometimes sup up the smoke that their fathers
cast out of their nostrils, to the Belle Forest.
end that nothing be lost. And because that the same has a tart biting taste,
Monsieur de Belleforest, reciting that which James Quartier (who knew not what
it was) says of it, will make the people believe that it is some kind of
pepper. But whatsoever sweetness is found therein I could never use my self
to it, neither do I care for the use and custom to take it in smoke.

Roots Afrodilles.
There is yet in the land of the Armouchiquois, certain kind of Roots as
big as a loaf of bread, most excellent for to be eaten, having a taste like
the stalks of Artichocks, but much more pleasant, which being planted do
multiply in such sort, that it is wonderful. I believe that they be those
which be called Afrodilles, according to the description that Pliny makes of
them: These Roots Plin. l. 21. c. 17.

These seem to be ground* nuts.


(says he) are made after the fashion of small turnips and there is no plant
that has so many roots as this has: for sometimes one shall find four score
Afrodilles tied together. They are good roasted under the imbers, or eaten raw
with pepper, or oil and salt.

Consideration of the misery of many.
Considering all this, it seems unto me that these are men very miserable,
who being able to live a country life in quiet and rest, and take the benefit
of the ground, which does pay her creditor with so profitable an usury, do
pass their age in towns in following of suits in law, in toiling here and
there, to seek out the means how to beguile and deceive some one or other,
taking such pains as do even bring them to their grave, for to pay their house
rent, for to be clothed in silk, for to have some precious moueables: briefly
for to set out and feed themselves with all vanity, wherein contentment is
never to be found. Poor fools! (says Hesiod) which know not Hesiode in the
book of works and days.
how one half of these things with quiet is more worth then all heaped
together with freatfullnesse: nor how great benefit is in the Malous and the
Daffadilles. The Gods certainly have hidden from men the manner of living
happily. For otherwise one days labor would be sufficient for to nourish a
man a whole year, and the day following he would set his Plough upon his
dunghill, and would rest his Oxen, his mules, and himself.

The tilling of the ground full of innocence.
This is the contentment which is prepared for them that shall inhabit
New-France, though fools do despise this kind of life, and the tilling of the
ground, the most harmeles of all bodily exercises, and which I will term the
most noble as that which sustaineth the life of all men. They disdain (I say)
the tillage of the ground, and notwithstanding all the vexations wherewith one
tormenteth himself, the suits in law that one follows, the wars that are
made, are but for to have lands. Poor mother! what have thou done that thou
art so despised? The other Elements are very often contrary unto us, the fire
consumes us, the air does infect us with plague, the water swalloweth us up,
only the earth is that which coming into the world, and dying, receaueth us
kindly, it is she alone that nourishes us, which warmeth us, which lodges us,
which clotheth us, which contrarieth us in nothing, and she is set at naught,
and them that do manure her are laughed at, they are placed next to the idle
and bloud-suckers of the people. All this is done here among us: But in
New-France the goulden age must be brought in again, the ancient Crowns of
ears of corn must be renewed; and to make that to be the first glory Pli. 18.
book chapter 3.
which the ancient Romans did call Gloria adorea, a glory of wheat, to the end
to inuit every one to till well his field, seeing that the land presents it
self liberally to them that have none.

Being assured to have corn and wine, there rests but to furnish the Country
with tame cattle: for they will breed there very well, as we have said in the
chapter of hunting.

Of fruite-trees, there be but few, besides nut-trees, Heretofore chapter 21.
Plumb-trees, and small chery-trees, and some hazellnut-trees. True it is that
all that which is within the land Orenge-trees Fruit Trees.
is not yet discovered, for in the country of the Iroquois there are
Oreng-trees, and they make oiles with the fruit of trees. But no Frenchmen
nor other Christians have been there yet. That want of fruit trees is not to
be found very strange. For the most part of our fruits are come out of other
places: And very often the fruits bear the name of the country from whence
they have been brought. The land of Germany is good, and fruitful: but
Tacitus says, The trees and* fruits of the land in Port Royal.
that in his time there were no fruit trees.

As for the trees of the forests the most common in Port Royal be Oaks,
Elmes, ashes, Birch (very good for Ioiners-worke) Mapels, Sicomores,
Pine-trees, Firretrees, White-thornes, Hazell-trees, Willowes, Baytrees, Bay
trees commonly grow in warm countries.
and some others besides which I have not yet marked. There is in certain
places store of Strawberries, and Raspises. Item in the wooddes small fruit,
blew and read. I have seen there small Pears very delicate: and in the
meddowes all the winter long, there be certain small fruits like to small
apples colored with read, whereof we made Marmelade, for to eat after meat.
There bestore of Gooseberries like unto ours, but they grow read. Item those
other small round gooseberries which we do call Guedres. And Peason in great
quantity along the sea shoares, Guedres be a kind of Corinthes.
the leaves whereof we took in Spring time, and put among our old Peason, and
so it did seem unto us that we did eat green Peason. Beyond the said Baie
Francoise, that is to say, in the river S. John, and Saint Croix, there is
store of Cedar trees, besides those trees that I have named. As for them of the
great river of Canada, they have been specified in the second book, in the
relation of the voyages of captain James Quartier, and of Monsieur Champlein.

Trees of Florida.
Those of Florida be Pyne trees (which bear no kernels in the fruits that they
produce) Oaks, Wall-nut trees, black Cherrie trees, Lentiskes, Chest-nut
trees (which be not natural as in France) Cedar trees, Cypres trees, Palm
trees, Holy trees, and Wild vines, which climb up to the trees, and bring
forth good grapes. There is a kind of Medlers, the fruit whereof is better and
bigger then that of France: there are also Plumbe trees which bear a very
fair fruit, but not very good, Raspises: A small grain which we call with us
bleues (blewes) which are very good to be eaten. Item roots which they call
Hassez, whereof in their need they make bread.

Trees of Brasill.
The province of Brasill has taken her name, as we think, of a certain tree
which we call Bresill, and the Savages of the country Arabouton, it is high,
and as big as our Oaks, and has the leaf like to the Box leaf. Our French
men and others do go into that country for to lade their ships with it.
The fire of it is almost without smoke. But he that would think to whiten
his linen with the ashes of that wood, would far deceive himself. For he
should find it died in read. They have also Palm trees of sundry sorts: And
trees the wood whereof, of some, is yellow, and others violet. They have also
some that have the sent of Roses, and others stinking, whose fruits are
dangerous to be eaten. Item a kind of Guayac which they name Hinourae, which
they use for to cure a disease called among them Pians, as dangerous as the
Pox. The tree which bears the fruit that we call the Indian Nut, is called
among them Sabaucaie. They have also Cotton trees, of the fruit whereof they
make beds, which they hang between two forks or posts. This country is happy
in many other sorts of fruit trees, as Orange trees, Citron trees, Leamon
trees, and others, always green, whereby the loss of that country where the
Frenchmen had begun to inhabit, is so much the more grievous unto them that
love the welfare of France. For it is more than evident, that the dwelling is
there more pleasant and delightful then the land of Canada, for the
temperature of the air. True it is that the voiages thither are long, as of
four and five months, and that in performing of them sometimes wants must be
endured, as may be seen by the The benefit of taking the season of the year.
voiages made thither in the time of Ville-gagnon: But to New France where we
were, when one begins his voyage in due season, the voiages are but of three
weeks, or a month, which is but a small time.

If the sweetness and delicacies be not there, such as they are in Perou, one
must not say therefore that the country is nothing worth. It is much that one
may live there inrest and joyfully without taking care for superfluous things.
The couetuousnesse of men has caused that no country is thought good, unless
there be Mines of gold in it. And sots as they be, they do not consider that
the The despising of gold and silver Mines.
country of France is now unfurnished of the same: And Germany also, whereof
Tacitus said, that he knew not whether the gods in their anger or in their
favor had denied gold and silver to that Province. They do not see that all
the Indians have not any use of silver, and live more contentedly then we. If
we call them fools they may say as much of us, and peradventure with better
reason. They know not that God promising to his people a happy land he says
that it shall be a land of Corn, of Barley, of Vines, of Fig Trees, of
Oliue-trees, and of Honey, where they shall Deuteronomy 8 v. 8 ^.
eat their bread without scarcity, etc. And for all mettels he gives them but
Iron and Copper, least that gold and silver make them to lift up their heart,
and forget their God: And he will not that when they shall have kings they
Deuteronomy. 17 v. 17.
should hoord up much gold or silver. They do not consider that Mines be the
Churchyards of men: That the Spaniard has consumed therein above ten millions
of poor Indian Savages, instead of instructing them in the Christian faith:
That there be Mines in Italy, but that the Plin. l. 33. c. 4.
ancients would not give leave to work in them for the preservation of the
people: That in the Mines is a thick air, gross and infernal, where one
never knows when it is day, or night: That to do such things is to seek to
dispossess the devil of his kingdom. That it is a thing unworthy to a man to
bury himself in the entrails of the earth, to seek out for hell, and
miserably to abase himself under all unclean creatures: He to whom God has
given an upright form, and his face looking upward, for to behold the Heaven,
and to sing praises unto him: That in Countries where Mines be, the land is
barren: That we do not eat neither gold nor silver, and that the same of it
self does not keep us warm in Winter: That he which has Corn in his Barn,
Wine in his seller, Cattle in his Meadows, and afterward Codde-fish and
Beuers, is more assured to have gold and silver, then he which has Mines Mines
in New France.
to find victuals. And nevertheless there be Mines in New France, as we have
mentioned elsewhere. But that is not the first thing that one must seek for,
men do not live with opinion only. And this consists but in opinion, nor
the precious stones neither (which are fools bables) wherein one is most often
deceived, so well art can counterfeit nature: witness him that did sell, some
five or six years since, vessels for fine Emerald, and had made himself rich
by the folly of others, if he could have played his part aright.

Fruits to be hoped for in New France.
Now without making show of any Mines, profit may be made in New France of
diverse furs that be there, which I find are not to be despised, seeing that
we see so much envy against a privilege that the King did grant to Monsieur de
Monts for to help to establish and settle there The like may be to England
from Virginia.
some French Colony. But there may be drawn a general commodity to France,
that in the scarsity, of victuals, one Province may succor the other: which
might be done now if the Country were well inhabited: seeing that since we have
been there the seasons have always been good in it, and in these our parts
rough to the poor, which do die for hunger, and lives but in want and
penury: in stead that there many might live at their ease, who it were better
to preserve then to suffer to perish. Besides fishing being made in New France,
the New-found-land-ships shall Good considerations.
have nothing to do but to lade, arriving thither, in stead that they are
forced to tarry three months there: and shall be able to make three voyage for
one.

Of exquisit woods I know none there, but the Cedar and the Sassafras: but good
profit may be drawn from the Fur and Pruse-trees, because they will yield
abundance of gum, and they die very often through over much liquor. This
gum is very fair like the Turpentine of Venice, and very sovereign for
medicines. I have given some to some Churches of Paris for Frankensence, which
has been found very good. One may moreover furnish the City of Paris and
other places of France with Sope-ashes, Soap ashes.
which at this present be all bare and without woods. They who find themselves
afflicted may have there a pleasant place to retire themselves into, rather
then to yield themselves subject to the Spaniard, as many do. So many families
as be in France ouercharged with Children, may divide themselves, and take
there their portion with those small goods and moueables as they have. Then
time will discover some thing a new: and one must help all the world, if it be
possible. But the chiefest good one must aim at, is the establishment of
Christian religion, in a Country where God is not known, and the conversion of
these poor people, whose damnation cries vengance against them that may, and
ought to employ themselves thereto, and to contribute, at least with their
names, to that effect, seeing that they gather up the fat of the earth, and are
constituted Stewards of the things of this world.

CHAP. XXV.
Of their War.
OF possessing of land comes war: And when one has established himself in
New-France, some greedy fellow peradventure will come to take away the labor
of honest painful men. This is that which many do say. But the state of
France is (God be praised) too well settled, for to be afraid of such tricks.
We are not now in the time of leagues and partialties. There is none that will
begin with our king, nor make aduentuturous enterprises for a small purchase.
And though any one would do it, I believe that the remedies have been thought
upon already. And moreover this action is for religion, and not to take away
another goods. This being so, Faith makes one to march bouldly with
assurance, and to pass through all difficulties. For behold what the
Almighty says by his Prophet Isaiah to them whom he takes in his tuition,
and to the Frenchmen And by consequent to the Englishmen of Virginia.
of New-France: Harken unto me you that follow Justice, and that seek after the
Lord. Behold the rock out of which you were cut, and to the deep of the
Cisterne from whence you have been drawn; That is to say, consider that you
are Frenchmen. Look to Abraham your father and to Sara who has brought you
forth, how I have called him he being all alone, and have blessed and
multiplied him. Therefore assuredly the Lord will comfort Sion etc.

To what end the Savages do make war.
Our Savages do not ground their wars upon the possession of the land. We do
not see that they encroatch one upon another for that respect. They have land
enough for to live and for to walk. Their ambition is limited within their
bounds. They make war as Alexander the great did make it, that they may say I
have beaten you: or else for revenge in remembrance of some injury received,
which is the greatest vice that I find in them, because they never forget
injuries: Wherein they are so much the more excusable, because they do nothing
but that which our selves do also. They follow nature: And if we refrain any
thing of that instinct, it is the commandment of God which makes us to do
it; whereunto many do stop their eyes.

Therefore when they will make wars, the Sagamos who has most credit among
them, makes them to know the cause why, the rendez-vous, and time of the
assembly. The Savages Orations.
Being arrived he makes long orations unto them upon the occasion which is
offered and for to encourage them. At every proposition he demands their
advise, and if they give consent they all make an exclamation, saying Hau: if
not, some Sagamos will begin to speak, and Surprises of the Savages.
say what he thinks good of it: being both the one and the other well heard.
Their wars are made but by surprises, in the dark of the night, or by
Moone-shine, by ambushments or subtlety. Which is general throughout all
those Indies. For we have seen in the first book in what fashion the
Floridians do make war: And the Brasilians do no otherwise, And the
surprises being done they come to handie blows, and do fight very often by
day.

The manner to foretell or* presage the event of the war.
But before they go from home, ours (I mean the Souriquois) have this custom
to make a fort* within which all the yongue men of the army do put
themselves: where being, the women come to compass them about and to keep
them as besieged. Seeing themselves so enuironned they make sailies, for to
shun and deliver themselves out of prison. The women that keep watch do
repulse them, do arrest them, do their best endeavor to take them. And if
they be taken they lay loades at them, do beat them, strippe them, and by
such a success they take a good presage of the war they go to make. If they
escape it is an evil sign.

They have also another custom concerning some one particular man, who
bringing an enemies head, they make great feasts, dances and songs for many
days: and whilst these things be in doing they strippe the Conqueror, and
give him but some bad ragge to cover himself withal. But at the end of eight
days or there about, after the feast, every one does present himself with
some thing, to honor him for his valor.

Succession of Captains.
The Captains amongst them take their degree by succession, as the regalitie
in these our parts (which is to be understood if the Son of a Sagamos
imitateth the virtues of his father) for otherwise they do as in the old time
when that first the people did choose kings: whereof John de Meung Author of the
Roman de la Rose, speaking he says: that, They chused the tallest, that had
the biggest body, and biggest bones amongst them, and made him their Prince and
Lord. But this Sagamos has not an absolute authority among them, but such as
Tacitus reports of the ancient German Kings: the power of their Kings,
says he, is not free, nor infinite, but they conduct the people rather by
example, then by commandment. In Virginia and in Florida they are more
honored then among The natural Virginians do honor their kings. The Savages
arms.
the Souriquois. But in Brasill he that has taken and killed more prisoners
they will take him for Captain, and yet his children may not inherit that
dignity.

Their arms are the first which were in use after the creation of the world,
Clubbes, bows, arrows: for as for slings and Crosse-bowes they have none, nor
any weapons of iron or steel, much less those that humane wit has invented
since two hundred years, to counterfaite the thunder: nor Rams or other
ancient engines of battery.

Heretofore the first book. chap. 15.
They are very skillful in shooting an arrow, and let that be for an example
which is recited heretofore of one that was killed by the Armouchiquois,
having a little dog pierced together with him with an arrow, shot a far
off. Yet I would not give them the praises due to many nations of this hither
world, which have been famous for that exercise, as the Scythians, Getes,
Sarmates, Goths, Scots, Parthians, and all the people of the East, of whom a
great number were so skillful, that they had hit a hair: which the holy
Scripture witnesses of many of Gods people, namely of the Beniamites, who
going to war Judges chapter 10. verse. 15. Eccellent Archers.
against Israel: Of all this people (says the Scripture) there was seven
huudred chosen men, being left handed: all these could fling a stone at an
hairs breadth, and not fail. In Creete there was an Alcon so skillful an
archer, that a dragon carrying away his Son, he pursued after him and killed
him without hurting his child. One may read of the Emperor Domitian that he
could direct his arrow far of between his two fingers, being spread abroad.
The writings of the ancient make mention of many who shot birds through,
flying in the air, and of other wonders which our Savages would admire at. But
notwithstanding they are gallant men and good warriers, who will go through
every place being backed by some number of Frenchmen: and, which is the second
thing next unto courage, they can endure hardenesse in the war, lie in the
snow, and on the ise, suffer hunger, and by intermission feed themselves with
smoke, as we have said in the former chapter. For war is called Militia, not
From whence comes this word malice, or Militia. Vlpian. l. 1.. vlt. D. de.
tistum. mil. Mat. 6. v. 34.
out of the word Mollitia, as Vlpian the lawyer, and others would have it, by an
antiphrasticall manner of speaking: But of Malitia which is as much to say as
Duritia, Kakia: or of Afflictio, which the Greeks do call Kakosis. And so it
is taken in Saint Matthew where it is said that the day has enough of his own
grief Kakia that is to ^^y his affliction, his pain, his labor, his
hardenesse, as Saint Hierome does expound it very well. And the word in S. Paul
Kakopatheson Hierom. opist. ad 247. Amand.
Hos kalos stratiotis Ieson Christion, had not been ill translated Dura, that
is, Suffer affliction as a good soldier of Jesus Christ, instead of Labora,
harden thy self with patience, as it is in Virgill, Durate, and rebus vosmet
seruate secundis*


And in another place he calls the Scipios Duros belli, to signify brave and
excellent Captains: which hardness and malice of war Tertullian does expound
Imbonit as in the book that he has written to the Martirs, for to exhort them
to suffer afflictions manfully for the name of Jesus Christ: A soldier (says
he) cannot come to the wars with pleasures, and he goes not to the fight
coming forth from his chamber, but out oftents and pauillions stretched out,
and tied to stalks and forkes, Vbi omnis duritia and imbonit as and insuauit
as, where no pleasure is.

Now although the war which is made coming forth out of tents and pauilions
is hard, yet notwithstanding the life of our Savages is yet harder, and may be
called a true milicia, that is to say, malice, which I take for hardness. And
after this manner do they travel over great countries through the woods for to
surprise their enemy and to assail Subject of the Savages fear.
him on the sudden. This is that which keeps them in perpetual fear. For at
the least noise in the world, as of an Ellan which passes among branches and
leaves, they Heretofore cha. 17.
take an alarm. They that have towns after the manner that I have described
heretofore, are somewhat more assured. For having well barred the coming in
they may ask quiva la who goes there? and prepare themselves to the combat.
By such surprises the Iroquois being in number eight thousand men, have
heretofore exterminated the Algumequins, them of Hochelaga, and others
bordering upon the great river. Nevertheless when our Savages under the
conduct of Membertou went to the war against the Armouchiquois, they embarked
themselves in shaloupes and Canowes: But indeed they did not enter within the
Country, but killed them on their frontieres in the Port of Chouakoet. And for
as much as this war, the cause thereof, the counsel, the execution, and the end
of it has been described by me in French verses, which I have annexed unto my
poem entitled the Muses of New France I refer the reader to have recourse to
it, because I will not writ one thing twice. I will only say that being at the
river Saint John, the Sagamos Chkoudun a Christian and Frenchman, in will and
courage, made a young man of Retel, called Lesevre, and my self to see how they
go to the wars: And after their feast they came forth some foure-score out
of his Town, having laid down their mantles of furre, that is to say stark
naked, bearing every one a shield which covered all their body over, after the
fashion of the ancient Gaulois, who passed into Greece under the Captain
Brennus, of whom they that could not wade the rivers, did lay themselves on
their Bucklers, Their manner of marching to the wars. A martialldance.
which served them for Boats, as Pausanias says. Besides these shieldes they
had every one his wodden mace, their quiuers on their backs, and their bow in
hand: marching as it were in dancing wise. I do not think for all that, that
when they come near to the enemy for to fight, that they be so orderly as the
ancient Lacedaemonians, who from the age of five years were accustomed to a
certain manner of dancing, which they used going to fight, that is to say with
a mild and grave measure, to the sound of flutes, to the end to come to blows
with a cool and settled sense, and not to trouble their minds: to be able also
to discern them that were courageous from them that were fearful, as
Plutarch says. But rather they go furiously, Plutar. in the treaty of the
refraining of cboler. and in the Apophth.
with great clamors and fearful howlings, to the end to astonish the enemy,
and to give to themselves mutual assurance. Which is done amongst all the
Westerly Indians*

In this mustering our Savages went to make a turn about a hill, and as their
return was somewhat slow, we took our way toward our bark, where our men
were in fear, least some wrong had been done unto us.

How the Savages do use with the victory.
In the victory they kill all that may make resistance, but they pardon the
women and children. The Brasilians contrariwise do take prisoners as many as
they can, and reserve them for to be fatned, to kill and to eat them in the
first assembly they shall make. Which is a kind of sacrifice among those
people that have some form of religion, from whom those men have taken this
inhumane custom. For anciently they that were overcome, were sacrificed to the
gods who were thought to be authors of the victory, whereof it came that they
were called Victimes, because that they were overcome: Victima a Victis: They
were also called Hosties, ab Host, because they were enemies. They that did
set forth the name of Supplice did it almost upon the same occasion, causing
supplications to be made to the Gods of the goods of them whom they condemned
to death. Such has been the custom among many Nations to sacrifice the
enemies to the false gods, and it was also practiced in Perou in the time that
the Spaniards came thither first.

1. Samuel. 15. verse. 33.
We read in the holy Scripture, that the Prophet Samuel cut in pieces Agag king
of the Amalekites, before the Lord in Gilgal. Which might be found strange,
seeing that there was nothing so mild as this holy Prophet was. But one must
consider here that it was by a special motion of the spirit of God which
stirred Samuel to make himself executioner of the the Divine Justice against
an enemy of the people of Israel, in steed of Saul, who had neglected the
commandment of God, which was enjoined to smite Hamaleke and to put all to the
edge of the sword, without sparing any living soul; which he did not: and
therefore was he forsaken of God. Samuel then did that which Saul should have
done, he cut in pieces a man who was condemned of God, who had made many
widows in Israel, and justly did receive the like payment: to the end also to
fulfill the prophecy of Balaam, Number. 24. v. 7.
who had foretold long before that the king of the Israelites should be raised
up above Agag, and his kingdom should be exalted. Now this action of Samuel is
not without example. For when they were to appease Exodus 32. v. 27. 1. King.
18. verse. 40. Act. 5. v. 5.
the wrath of God, Moses said: Put every man his sword by his side: and slay
every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his
neighbor. So Elijah made the Prophets of Baal to be killed. So at Saint Peter's
words Ananias and Saphira fell down dead at his feet.

Now to return to our purpose, our Savages as they have no religion, so make
they no sacrifices: and besides are more humane than the Brasilians, forasmuch
as they eat no man's flesh, contenting themselves to destroy them, that do
annoy them. But they have such a generositie in them, that they had rather die
then to fall into the hands of their enemies. And when Monsieur de Poutrincourt
took revenge of the Armouchiquois, which murdered some of our men, there were
some who suffered themselves rather to be hewed in pieces, then that they
would be carried away prisoners: or if by maine force they be carried away,
they will starve or kill themselves. Yea also they will not suffer the dead
bodies of their people to remain in the possession of their enemies, and in
the peril of their own lives, they take them and carry them away: which
Tacitus does also testify of the ancient Germains, and it has been an usual
thing with all generous nations.

The victory being gotten of one side or other, the victorious cutteth off the
heads of the enemies slain, how great soever the number of them is, which are
divided among the captains, but they leave there the carkase, contenting
themselves with the skin, which they cause to be dried, or do tanne it, and
do make trophies with it in their cabins, taking therein all their
contentment. And some solemn feast happening among them (I call feast whenever
they make Tabagie) they take them, and dance with them, having them hanging
about their necks at their arms, or at their girdles, and with very rage they
sometimes bite at them: which is a great proof of this disordinate appetite of
revenge, whereof we have sometimes spoken.

Diodor. 6. book Biblios. Tit. Live. 1 decad. 10. book.
Our ancient Gaullois did make no less trophies with the heads of their
enemies than our Savages. For (if Diodorus and Titus Liuius may be believed)
having cut them, they bring them back from the field hanging at the petrall
of their horses, and did tie or nail them solemnly, with songs and praises
of the vanquishers (according to their customs) at their gates, as one would
do a wild boares. As for the heads of the nobles Strabo lib. 4. Geogr.
they did enbalme them and kept them carefully within cases, for to make show
of them to those that come to see them, and for nothing in the world they would
restore them, neither to kinsemen nor any other. The Boians (which be the
Bourbonnois) did Idem lib. 3. Decad. 3.
more. For after they had taken out the brains, they did give the skuls to
Goldsmiths for to garnish them with gold, and to make vessels of them to drink
in, which they used in sacred things and holy solemnities. If any man thinks
this strange, he must yet find more strange that which is reported of the
Hungarians by Viginere upon Titus Liuius, of whom he says, that in the year
1566. being near Iauarin, they did lick the blood of the Turks heads which
they brought to the Emperor Maximilian: which goes beyond the barbarousnesse
that might be objected to our Savages.

Yea I must tell you that they have more humanity then many Christians, who
within these hundred years have committed in diverse occurrences, upon women
and children cruelties more then brutish, whereof the histories be full: and
our Savages do extend their mercy to these two sorts of creatures.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of their funerals.
THe war being ended, humanity does inuit us to bewail for the dead, and to
bury them. It is a work wholly of piety, and more meritorious then any other.
For he that gives succor to a man whilst he is a life may hope for some
service of him, or a reciprocal kindness: But from a dead creature we can
expect nothing more: This is that which made that holy man Tobie to be
acceptable to God: And for that good office, they that employed themselves in
the burying of our Savior are praised in the Gospel. As for tears and
mournings Eccles. 38. ve. 16. 17.
behold what says the wise Son of Sirach, My Son power forth tears over
the dead, and begin to mourn as if thou had suffered great harm thy self:
and then cover his body according to his appointment, and neglect not his
burial. Make a grievous lamentation, and be earnest in mourning, and use
lamentation as he is worthy, and that a day or two, least thou be evil spoken
off.

This lesson being come, whether it be by some tradition, or by the instinct of
nature, as far as to our Savages, they have yet at this day that common with
the nations of these parts to weep for the dead, and to keep the bodies of
them after their decease, as it was done in the time of the holy Patriarchs
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and since. But they make strange clamours many days
together, as we saw in Port Royal, some months after our arrival into that
country (to wit in November) where they made the funeral ceremonies for one of
theirs, named Panonic who had taken some marchandises out of Monsieur de Monts
his store house, and went to trucke with the Armouchiquois. This Panoniac was
killed, and the body brought back into the cabins of the River Saint Croix,
where our Savages did both weep for him and enbalmed him. Of what kind this
balm is, I could not know, not being able to enquire of it upon the places. I
believe they iagge the dead corpses and make them to dry. Certain it is that
they preserve them from rottenness: which thing they do almost throughout all
these Indies. He that has written the history of Virginia says that they
Virginia.
draw out their entralles from the body, flea the dead, take away the skin,
cut all the flesh off from the bones, dry it at the Sun, then lay it
(enclosed in mattes) at the feet of the dead. That done they give him his own
skin again, and cover therewith the bones tied together with leather,
fashioning it even so as if the flesh had remained at it.

It is a thing well known that the ancient Egyptians did enbalme the dead
bodies, and kept them carefully. Which (besides the profane Authors) is seen
in the holy Scripture, where it is said that Joseph did command his Servants
and Physicians to embalme the body of Jacob Genes* 50. v. 5
his father. Which he did according to the custom of the country. But the
Israelites did the like, as it is seen in the 2. Paralip* 16 v. 14. and. 21.
verse. 19.
holy Chronicles, where it is spoken of the death of the kings Asa and Ioram.

From the River of Saint Croix the said deceassed Panoniac was brought into
Port Royal, where again he was wept for. But because they are accustomed to
make their lamentations for a long continuance of days, as during a month
fearing to offend us by their cries (for as much as their cabins were but some
five hundred passes off from our forte) Membertou came to entreat Monsieur de
Poutrincourt not to dislike that they should mourn after their wonted manner,
and that they would be but eight days in performing of it. Which he easily
granted them: And then afterward they began the next day following, at the
break of day, their weepings and cryings, which we did hear from our said
fort, taking some intermission on the midst of the day. And they mourn by
intermission every cabin his day, and every person his turn.

It is a thing worthy maruelling that nations so far distant do agree in
those ceremonies with many of the hither world. For in ancient times the
Persians (as we read in many places of Herodotus, and Q. Curtius did make such
lamentation, did rent their garments, did cover their heads, did cloth
themselves with a mourning garment, which the holy Scripture does call
Sackcloth, and Josephus Schema tapeinon. Also they shaued themselves, and their
horses and mules, as the learned Drusius has noted in Ester. 4. v. Drus.
obseru. 12. cap. 6.
his observations, alleging for this purpose both Herodote and Plutarch.

The Egyptians did as much, and peradventure more, in that which concerns
lamentations. For after the death of the holy I Fatriarke Jacob, All the
ancients, men of calling, and the Counselors of the house of Pharao, and of
the Country of Egypt went up in great multitude even as far as to the corn
floor of Atad in Canaan, and did weep for him with great and grievous
complaints: In such sort that the Cananites seeing it did say: This mourning is
grievous to the Egyptians: and for the greatness and nouelty of the same
mourning they called the said floor Abel Misraim, that is to say the mourning
of the Egyptians.

The Romans had hired women to weep for the dead, and to relate their praises
by long mournful complaints: and those women were called Praeficae, as it
were Praefectae, because that they did begin the motion when it was needful
to lament, and to relate the praises of the dead.

Mercede quae conductae flent alieno in funere preficae multo and capillos
scindunt, and clamant magis, says Lucilius by the report of Nonius: Sometimes
the very trumpets were not neglected at it, as Virgill testifies in these
words: It coelo clamor, clangorque tubarum.


I will not here make a collection of all the customs of other nations: for
it would never be at an end: But in France every one knows that the women of
Picardy do lament their dead with great clamors. Monsieur des Accords amongst
other things by him collected recites of one, who making her funeral
complaints, that she said to her deceassed husband: Good God! My poor husband
thou have given us a pitiful farewell! O what farewell! It is for ever. O
what long congie! The women of Bearn are yet more pleasant. For they recount
during the time of a whole day the whole life of their husbands. Lamiamou, la
mi amou: Cara rident, oeil de splendou: Cama leuge bet dansadou: lo me balen
balem, lo m'esburbat: mati de pes: fort tard cougat: and such like things: That
is to say; My love, my love: smiling countenance: bright eye: nimble leg: and
good dancer: mine own valiant, mine own valiant: early up, and late a bed
etc. John de Leri recites that which follows of the Gascoin women: year,
year, o le bet renegadou, o le bet iougadou qu'here, that is to say: o the
brave swaggeren, o what a fair player he was! And thereupon he reports that
the women of Brasill do howl and bawle with such clamors, that it seems
that it be some assembly of dogs and woolues. He is dead (will some women say
drawing their voices) he was so valiant, and who has made us to eat of so many
prisoners: Others making a Quire apart will say: Oh what a good hunter and what
The Tovoupinambaoults are enemies to the Portuges.
an excellent fisher he was! Oh what a brave knocker down of Portuges and of
Margaias he was! of whom he has so well avenged us. And at the pause of every
complaint they will say: he is dead, he is dead for whom we do now mourn!
whereunto the men do answer, saying: Alas it is true! we shall see him no more
until we see him behind The Brasilians believe the resurre. ction.
the mountains where we shall dance with him! and other such things. But the
most part of these people do end their mourning in one day, or some what more.

As for the Indians of Florida, when any of their Paraoustis dies they weep
three days and three nights continually and without eating: And all the
Paraoustis, that be his allies and friends, do the like mourning, cutting
half their hairs as well men as women in token of love. And that done there
be some women ordained, who during the time of six Moons do lamente the death
of their Paraousti three times a day, crying with a loud voice, in the morning,
at noone, and at night: which is the fashion of the Roman Praefices, of whom we
have, not long since, spoken.

For that which is of the mourning apparel, our Souriquois do paint their
faces all with black; which makes them to seem very hidious: But the
Hebrews were more reprouable, who did scotch their faces in the time of
mourning, Ierem. 41. v. 3.
and did shave their hairs, as says the Prophet Jeremy: which was usual
among them of great antiquity: By reason whereof the same was forbidden them by
the Leuit. 19. v. 27. 28.
law of God in Leuiticus: You shall not cut round the corners of your hairs,
neither mar the tufts of your beards, and you shall not cut your flesh for
the dead, nor make any print of a Deuteronomy. 14. 1.
mark upon you. I am the Lord. And in Deuteronomie: you are the children of
the Lord your God, you shall not cut your selves, nor make any baldness
between your eyes for the dead. Which was also forbidden by the Romans in the
laws of the twelve tables.

Herodotus and Diodorus do say, that the Egyptians (chiefly in their Kings
funerals) did rent their garments, and besmeered their faces, yea all their
heads: and assembling themselves twice a day, did march in round, singing the
virtues of their King: did abstain from sodden meats, from living creatures,
from wine, and from all dainty fare during the space of 70. days, without any
washing* nor lying on any bed, much less to have the company of their wives:
always lamenting.

The ancient mourning of our Queens of France (for as for our Kings they wear
no mourning apparel) was in white color, and therefore after the death of
their husbands they kept the names of Roines blanches (white Queens.) But the
common mourning of others is, at this day in black, qui sub personarisus est.
For all these mournings are but deceits, and of a hundred there is not one but
is glad of such a weed. This is the cause that the ancient Soli^, cap. 17.
Valor. li. 2. c. 1*
Thracians were more wise, who did celebrate the birth of man with tears, and
their funerals with joy, showing that by death we are delivered from all
calamities, wherewith we are borne, and are in rest. Heraclides speaking of the
Locrois, says, that they make not any mourning for the dead, but rather
banckets and great rejoicing. And the wise Solon knowing the foresaid abuses
does abolish all those renting of clothes, of those weeping fellows, and
would not that so many clamors should be made over the dead, as Plutarch says
in his life. The Christians yet more wise did in ancient time sing Alleluia at
their burials, and this verse of the Psalm, Reuertere anima mea in requiem
tuam, Psalm. 11^. v. 7
quia Dominus benefecit tibi,

And now my soul since thou art safe,
return unto thy rest:
For largely lo the Lord to thee,
his bounty has expressed.
Notwithstanding because that we are men, subject to joy, to grief, and to
other motions and perturbations of mind, which at the first motion are not in
our power, as says the Philosopher, weeping is not a thing to be blamed,
whether it be in considering our frail condition, and subject to so many
harms, be it for the loss of that which we did love and held dearly. Holy
personages have been touched with those passions, and our Savior himself wept
over the Sepulcher of Lazarus, brother to the holy Magdalein. But one must not
suffer himself to be carried away with sorrow, nor make ostentations of
clamors, wherewith very often* the heart is never a whit touched. Whereupon the
wise son of Sirach does give Ecel. 22. v. 11
us an advertisement, saying: Weep for the dead, for he has lost the light [of
this life] but make small weeping, because he is in rest.

The Savages do burn the moouable goods of the deceased.
After that our Savages had wept for Panoniac, they went to the place where his
cabin was whilst he did live, and there they did burn all that he had left,
his bows, arrows, quiuers, his Beuers skins, his Tobacco (without which
they cannot live) his dogs and other his small mooueables, to the end that no
body should quarrel for his succession. The same shows how little A fair
lesson for the Covetous.
they care for the goods of this world, giving thereby a goodly lesson to them
who by right or wrong do run after this silver devil, and very often do
break their necks, or if they catch what they desire, it is in making
bankerout with God, and spoiling the poor, whether it be with open war, or
under color of justice. A fair lesson I say to those covetous insatiable
Tantalusses, who take so much pains, and murder so many creatures to seek
out hell in the depth of the earth, that is to say, the Luke 16. 9. Hierom.
epist. 2. ad Nepotian.
treasures which our Savior does call the Riches of iniquity. A fair lesson
also for them of whom Saint Hierome speaks, treating of the life of Clearks:
There be some (says he) who do give a little thing for an alme, to the end
to have it again with great usury; and under color of giving some thing,
they seek after riches, which is rather a hunting than an alms: So are
beasts, birds, and fishes taken. A small bait is put to a hook to the end to
catch at it silly women's purses. And in the Epitaph of Nepotian to Heliodore:
Some (says he) do heap money upon money, and making their purses to burst
out by certain kind of services, they catch at a suare the richesse of good
matrons, and become richer being Monks, then they were being secular. And for
this covetousness the regular and secular have been by imperial Edicts,
excluded from legacies, whereof the same does complain, not for the thing, but
for that the cause thereof has been given.

Let us come again to our burning of goods. The first people, that had not yet
covetousness rooted in their hearts, did the same as our Savages do. For the
Phrygians (or Troyians) did bring to the Latins the use of burning, not only
of mooueables, but also of the dead bodies, making high piles of wood for that
effect, as Aeneas did in the funerals of Misenus: Virgil. 6. Aeneid.
-- and robore secto
Ingentem struxere pyram --
Then the body being washed and anointed, they did cast all his garments upon
the pile of wood, frankincense, meats, and they powered on it oil, wine, honey,
leaves, flowers, violets, roses, ointments of good smell, and other things, as
may be seen by ancient histories and inscriptions. And for to continue that
which I have said of Misenus, Virgil does add:

Purpureasque super vestes, velamina nota
Conijciunt: pars ingenti subiere feretro, etc.
-- congesta cremantur
Thura, dona, dapes, fuso crateres oliuo.
Aeneid. 1^.
And speaking of the funerals of Pallas a young Lord, friend to Aeneas:

Tum geminas vestes, ostroque, auroque rigentes,
Extulit Aeneas --
Multaque praeterea laurentis praemia pugnae
Aggerat, and longo praedam iubet ordine duci:
Addit equos and tela, quibus spoliaverat hostem.
And underneath:
Spargitur and tellus lachrimis, sparguntur and arma.
Hinc alij spolia occisis direpta Latinis
Conijciunt igni, galeas, ensesque decoros,
Fraenaque fervent esque rotas: pars munera nota
Ipsorum clypeos, and non faeliciatela,
Setigerosque sues, raptasque ex omnibus agris
In flammam iugulant pecudes --
1. Samuel, last chap.
In the holy Scripture I find but the bodies of Saul and of his Sons to have
been burnt after their overthrow, but it is not said that any of their
mooueables were cast into the fire*

The old Gaullois and Germains did burn with the dead body all that which he
had loved, even to the very beasts, papers of accounts and obligations, as if
by that means they would either have paid, or demanded their Caesar in the 6.
book of the war of the Gaullois.
debts. In such sort, that a little before that Caesar came thither, there was
some that did cast themselves upon the pile where the body was burned, in hope
to live else where with their kindred, Lords, and friends. Concerning the
Germains, Tacitus says the same of them in those terms: Quae viuis cordi
fuisse arbrit antur in ignem inferunt etiam animalia, seruos, and clientes.

These fashions have been common anciently to many nations, but our Savages
are not so foolish as that: for they take good heed from putting themselves
into the fire, knowing that it is to hot. They content themselves then in
burning the dead man his goods: And as for the body they put him honorably in
the grave. This Panoniac of whom we have spoken was kept in the cabin of
Niguiroet, his father, and of Neguioadetch, his mother, until the Spring time,
when that the assembly of the Savages was made for to go to revenge his death:
In which assembly he was yet wept for, and before they went to the wars they
made an end of his funerals, and carried him (according to their custom) into
a desolate Island, toward Cap de Sable, some five and twenty or thirty
leagues distant from Port Royal. Those Isles which do serve them for
Church-yardes are secret amongst them, for fear some enemy should seek to
torment the bones of their dead.

Plin. l. 7. ^. 56.
Pliny, and many others, have esteemed that it was foolishness to keep dead
bodies under a vain opinion that after this life one is something. But one may
apply unto him that which Portius Festus Governor of Caesarea did foolishly
say to the Apostle Saint Paul: Thou art besides Act. 26. v. 34.
thy self: much learning has made thee mad. Our Savages are esteemed very
brutish (which they are not) but yet they have more wisdom in that respect
then such Philosophers.

We Christians do commonly bury the dead bodies, that is to say, we yield them
to the earth (called Humus, from whence comes the word Homo a Man) from which
they were taken, and so did the ancient Romans before the custom of burning
them. Which amongst the West Indians the Brasilians do, who put their dead
into pits dug after the form of a tun, almost upright, sometimes in their
own houses, like to the first Romans, according as Seruius the Commentor of
Virgill does say. But our savages as far as Perou do not so, but rather do
keep them whole in Sepulchers, which be in many places as scaffoldes of nine
and ten foot height. the rooffe whereof is all covered with mattes,
whereuponthey stretch out their dead rancked according to the order of their
decease. So almost our Savages do, saving that their sepulchers are lesser and
lower, made after the form of Cages, which they cover very properly, and there
they lay their dead. Which we call to bury, and not to interre seeing they are
not within the earth.

Now although that many nations have thought good to keep the dead bodies: yet
it is better to follow that which nature requires, which is, to render to the
earth that which belongs unto her, which (as Lucrece says) Omniparens eadem
rerum est commune sepulchrum


Tul. in the 2 book of the laws which Xenophon aleadgeth.
Also this is the ancientest fashion of burying, says Cicero: And that great
Cirus King of the Persians would not be otherwise served after his death then
to be restored to the earth: o my dear children! (said he before he died) When
I have ended my life, do not put my body, neither in gould nor in silver, nor
in any other sepulcher, but render it forthwith to the earth. For what may be
more happy and more to be desired then to join himself with her that
produces and nourishes all good and fair things? So did he esteem for
vanity all the pompes and excessive expenses of the Pyramides of Egypt, of the
Mausolees and other monuments made after that imitation: As the same of
Augustus, the Great, and magnificall mass of Adrian, the Septizone of Seuerus,
and other yet lesser, not esteeming himself after death more then the meanest
of his Subjects.

The Romans did leave the entombing of the bodies, having perceived that the
long wars did bring disorder unto it, and that the dead corpse were unburied,
which Arnob. lib. 8.
by the laws of the twelve Tables it was behoouefull to bury out of the town,
like as they did in Athens. Whereupon Arnobius speaking against the Gentiles: We
do not fear (says he) as you think, the ransacking of our graves, but we
keep the most ancient and best custom of burying.

Pausanias (who blames the Gaullois as much as he can) says in his Phociques,
that they had no care to bury their dead, but we have showed the contrary
heretofore: And though it were so, he speaks of the overthrow of the army of
Brennus. The same might have been said of the Nabateens, Who (according to
Strabo) did that which Pausanias does object to the Gaullois, and buried the
bodies of their kings in dunghils.

Our Savages are more kind then so, and have all that which the office of
humanity may desire, yea even more. For after they have brought the dead to
his rest, every one makes him a present of the best thing he has. Some do
cover him with many skins of Beuers, of Otters and other beasts: others
present him with bows, arrows, quiuers, knives, Matachiaz, and other things.
Which they have in common, not only with them of Florida, who for want of
furs, do set upon the sepulchers the cup wherein the deceassed was
accustomed to drink, and all about them they plant great number of arrows:
Item they of Brasill who do bury with their dead, things made of feathers and
Carkenets: and they of Perou, who (before the coming of the the Spaniardes)
did fill their tombs with treasures: But also with many nations of these our
parts, which did the same even from the first time after the flood, as may be
coniectured by the writing (though deceitful) of the Sepulcher of Semiramis
Queen of Babylon, containing that he of her successors that had need of money
should make it to be opened, and that he should find there even as much as he
would have. Whereof Darius willing to make trial, found in it nothing else but
other letters speaking in this sort: Unless thou were a wicked man and
insatiable thou would not have, through covetousness, so troubled the quiet
of the dead, and broken down their Sepulchers. I would think this custom to
have been only among the Heathen, were it not that I find in Josephus his
history that Joseph. 7. book 12 th. of the antiquity of the Jews.
Solomon did put in the Sepulcher of David his father above three millions of
gould, which were rifled thirteen hundred years after.

This custom to put gould into the Sepulchers being come even to the Romans,
was forbidden by the twelve tables, also the excessive expenses that many did
make in watering the bodies with precious liquors, and other mysteries that we
have recited heretofore. And notwithstanding many simple and foolish men and
women did ordain by will and testament, that one should bury with their bodies
their ornaments, ringes, and jewels (which the Greeks did call entaphia) as
there is a form seen of L. Medico. D de auro, arg. etc. leg. L. feruo alieno.
D. de leg. 1. L. and siquis. D. de relig. and sump. fun.
it, reported by the lawyer Scaeuola in the books of the Digestes. Which was
reproved by Papiniam and Vlpian likewise civil lawyers: in such sort that for
the abuse thereof the Romans were constrained to cause that the Censors of the
women's ornaments did condemn, as simple and effeminated, them that did such
things, as Pluturch says in the lives of Solon and Sylla. Therefore the best
course is to keep the modesty of the ancient Patriarchs, and even of king
Cyrus, whom we have mentioned before, on whose tomb was this inscription,
reported by Arrian.

Thou that passest by, whomsoever thou be, and from what part soever thou
come, for I am sure that thou will come: I am that Cyrus who got the
dominion to the Persians: I pray thee envy not this little parcel of ground
which covers my poor body.

So then our Savages are not excusable in putting all the best ornaments they
have into the Sepulchers of the dead, seeing they might reap commodity by
them. But one may answer for them that they have this custom even from their
fathers beginning (for we see that almost from the very time of the flood the
like has been done in this hither world) and giving to their dead their
furs, Matachias, Bows, Arrows, and Quiuers, they were things that they had
no need of.

And notwithstanding this does not clear the Spaniardes from blame, who have
robbed the Sepulchers of the Indians of Perou, and cast the bones on the
dunghill: nor our own men that have done the like, in taking away the Beuers
skin, in our New-France, as I have said heretofore. Heretofore 1. book.
chapter 17.

I sidor. ad Casium scholasticum, Epist. 146.




For as Isodorus says of Damiette in an Epistle: It is the part of enemies
void of all humanity to rob the bodies of the dead, which cannot defend
themselves, Nature it self has given this to many, that hatred does cease
after death, and do reconcile themselves with the deceassed. But riches make
the covetous to become enemies to the dead, against whom they have nothing to
say, who torment their bones with reproach and injury. And therefore not
without cause have the ancient Emperors made laws, and ordained rigorous
pains against the spoilers and destroiers of Sepulchers.

All praises be given to God.
The Errata.
PAge 8. for I Will of Sand or Sablon, or Sand. read I Will of Sablon or Sand. p. 9.
for Pourtrincourt r. Poutrincourt, p. 14. for Peron r. Perou. p. 42. for have
raised r. have been raised, ib, for toones r. tonnes. p. 52. for Point r. Pont.


