OF THE INTERCHANGEABLE COURSE, OR VARIETY OF THINGS IN THE WHOLE WORLD; AND
THE CONCVRRENCE OF ARMS AND Learning, thorough the first and famousest
Nations: from the beginning of Ciuility, and Memory of man, to this Present.

MOREOVER, WHETHER IT BE true or no, that there can be nothing said, which has
not bin said heretofore: And that we ought by our own Inventions to augment
the doctrine of the Ancients; not contenting our selves with Translations,
Expositions, Corrections, and Abridgments of their writings.

Written in French by Loysle Roy called Regius^ and Translated into English by
R. A.

Inest rebus omnibus quidam velut orbis, vt quemadmodum Temporum vices, ita
Morum vertantur; nec omnia apud priores meliora: sed nostra etiam aetas multa
Laudis, and Artium laudanda Posteris tulit.

Tacitus. AT LONDON Printed by Charles Yetsweirt Esquire. at his house in
Fleetestreete near the Middle Temple gate. 1594.

CVM PRIVILEGIO Regiae Maiestatis

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY SINGVLAR GOOD LORD, Sir John Puckering Knight, Lord
Keeper of the great Seal of England.
Having heretofore (for the great liking which I saw generally conceived of
this work) perused, allowed, and at my better leisure translated it into
English, for the benefit of such as were not sufficiently acquainted with the
French; I was bold, ere the Translation were fully finished, to acquaint your
L. with the Argument: who concurring with the rest in good liking and Judgment;
my intent to publish it under your Ls. Patronage, was thereby fully confirmed.

SO that the Picture, which it pleased your L. to like of heretofore, being in
his first lineaments but rudely shadowed; is now presented with all his
principal colors perfected and accomplished. I have bin careful to perfect it
by the Pattern, and to limme it according to life: yet when I have all don, it
is but a Counterfeit; which wants much of the perfection of the Principal.

THE substance is none of mine; I challenge naught but the shadow: wherein if
the substance be truly represented, I hope it may be allowed of, though it be
not curiously beautified.

I CONFESS, it were better to put forth his own Inventions, for him that has
means to do it: and that, which this Author affirms, namely, that
Translations are more painful then praiseworthy, is by me also acknowledged.
For diligence assisted with judgment is herein chiefly requisite; and not any
excellent knowledge thereunto required: which appears more in inuenting of it
self, then in translating out of others. Which though it be done never so
faithfully and elegantly, yet comes always short of the good grace of the
Original: as this Author acknowledges, notwithstanding Theodore Gaza an
excellent Translator affirm the contrary.

BUT mine own wit and Invention, being unable to write or invent any thing
worth the reading, yet my will being a welwisher to all good Inventions; I
thought it more commendable, to commend and communicate to others, that which
other men have excellently invented (being not able myself to attain to so
much excellency) then in publishing any fabulous fancy of mine own, or matter
of mean account, (as many do now adays) to show some arrogance joined with my
insufficiency.

THIS work is a Comparison of this later age, with all antiquity in Arms, in
Learning, and all other Excellency. There was never any mighty Empire or
Monarchy, Kingdom, or Commonwealth, but is here represented; no famous
Founder or Governor of State, no learned Lawmakers, or worthy Warrior, but is
here mentioned; and each of them to the other in all conueniences and
contrarieties compared: which being don by a man of great learning and
judgment, to men of much business and employment (as to your L. especially)
who have no time to fetch every thing from the Fountain, search all
Antiquity, and read the Histories of all nations, must needs be much
available; and the pleasure thereof to all sorts of men accordingly answerable.

MY duty to your L. (to whom this has bin long intended) has at length
commanded an Intermission of mine ordinary studies and exercises for the
reuiewing and publishing hereof; under whose favorable protection it is now
communicated unto all: who, continually partaking of your L. equity, goodness,
and benignity, are bound with me to pray for the continuance of your honor,
health, and happiness everlastingly.

From the Middle Temple the 6. of October. 1594. Your Ls. in service humbly
devoted Robert Ashley.

THE SVMMARIE OF THIS WORK.
BECAUSE the Discourse following is long, and somewhat difficult to comprehend,
by reason of the diversity of matters contained therein; I have gathered, and
set down, first: The Summarie of the whole work; Then of every Book in
order; to give more light unto the Readers, for the understanding thereof. In
the whole work therefore are represented, the successiue, or rather alternatiue
changes of the whole world, as well in the higher or superior, as lower and
inferior part thereof; and how by the concurrence of Arms and Letters,
thorough the most renowned Nations of the world, all liberal Sciences, and
Mechanical Arts, have flourished together, fallen, and bin restored, diverse
times in process of Age: With a comparison of such Nations as have excelled,
both in power and knowledge; of the great Empires, and renowned Monarkes, under
whom these notable mutations of mankind have happened; and conferring of this our
present, with the famousest former Ages, to know wherein it is either
inferior, superior, or equal to any of them.

THE FIRST BOOK.
THE Enterchangeable course, or Variety observed in the motions of Heaven, and
the Heavenly Spheres, (whereon are depending the Changes which happen in this
inferior World) are declared in the first Book. The Vicissitude which the
four Elements have one with an other, and every one by himself. How all
things in the World are tempered, and conserved by others, that are contrary,
and dislike. The Intercourse of Shadows, Days, and Seasons of the year; and
the Diversity of habitations of the Earth: and other things, according to the
difference of places. The Variety and Vicissitude of Men, of Nations, Cities,
Commonweals, Kingdoms, and Empires.

THE II. BOOK.
THE Variety of Tongues used thorough out the world; both Learned, and Vulgar.
The Beginning of them, Continuance, Perfection, Corruption, Change, and Loss
of the old; Introduction of new; Translation out of one into an other;
Imposition of Names to things; Invention and profit of Letters; Diversity of
Characters, and Writings, Instruments and Matters to write with. Of Printing,
Orthographic, and Pronunciation.

THE III. BOOK.
THE Vicissitude, and Invention of Arts: And how Men from their first
simplicity and rudeness, have attained to the Commodity, Magnificence, and
Excellency of this time.

THE IIII. BOOK.
THe Intercourse of Arms, and of Letters, concurring in the conjunction of
Power and Wisdom, amongst the most renowned Nations of the world: And who have
bin the first, and Auncientest of all, that have excelled in both. The Power,
Knowledge, and other Excellency of the Egiptians, Assyrians, and Persians. A
Comparison of the great Monarchies, the Egiptian, Assyrian, Median, Persian,
and Parthian, in their situations, beginnings, largenes, revenues, riches,
mightines; and of such famous Monarchs as founded them; and under whom they
perished. Of the Egiptian Priests or Prophets; of the Chaldees, Mages,
Brachmanes, Druydes, and others of Religion and Learning amongst the Ancients.
Nobility amongst the Egiptians, Persians, Assyriansi, Indians, Scythians,
Thracians, and other ancient and modern Nations. The exquisite Artisans, and
workmanship of the Ancients.

THE V. BOOK.
OF the Learning, Poesy, Eloquence, Power, and other Excellency of the
Greeks. A Comparison of them with the Egiptians, Assyrians, Persians, Indians.
The Empire of Greece. A Comparison of Alexander the great, with Cyrus,
Agesilaus, Themistocles, Pericles, Achilles, Ulysses, Diomedes, Bacchus,
Hercules, and others. A Comparison of the Grecian Philosophers, with the
Chaldees of Babylon, and the Priests of Egypt. The Nobility of ancient
Greece. The Artisans and works of the Grecians.

THE VI. BOOK.
OF the Power, Warfare, Learning, Eloquence, Poesy, and other Excellency of
the Romans. The fall of their Power, Learning, and Eloquence.

THE VII. BOOK.
A Comparison of the Romans with the Egiptians, Assyrians, Persians, Greeks,
and Parthians; in Power, Warfare, Learning, Language, Eloquence, Poesy; and in
the workmanships of other Arts: of the Romain Empire with the Assyrian, Median,
Persian, Macedonian, and Parthian. The birth of Rome, and continuance thereof,
and conferred with the 4. Ages of man's life. A comparison of Rome with Babylon,
and Constantinople; of the Romain common wealth, with the Lacedemonian, and
Carthaginian: of the power of Alexander the great, with that which the Romans
had in his time: and if when he had conquered Asia, he had turned his forces
against Europe, what might have happened by the judgment of Liuie. Of Pompey the
great with Alexander, Hercules, and Bacchus, according to Pliny: Of Julius
Caesar with Alexander, according to Appianus Alexandrinus; of Julius Caesar and
Augustus, with Romulus, and Numa; of Romulus with Cyrus, Theseus, Arsaces, and
Semiramis, who founded Cities, or Kingdoms, or Monarchies. A Comparison of the
Romain warfare with the Parthian, Carthaginian, and Assyrian: Of the Romain
Learning, and other excellency, with the Grecian, Egiptian, and Chaldean: Of
the Latin Authors with the Greek; namely of Cicero with Demosthenes. The Civil
Law of the Romans. A Comparison of the Latin tongue with the Greek.

THE VIII. BOOK.
OF the Religion, Power, knowledge, and other excellency of the Arabians, or
Sarasens, and other Mahometists. A Comparison of Mahomet with Licurgus, Minos,
Numa, Zoroaster, Charondas, Zaleucus, Trismegistus, and other heathen
Lawmakers, or Founders of Cities and Empires. The Power of the Arabians, or
Sarasens, compared to the Romain, Macedonian, Persian, Parthian, Assyrian, and
Egiptian. A Comparison of the Arabian learning with the Greek, Egiptian,
Chaldean, Persian, Romain, or Latin: Of the Arabian tongue, with the Greek,
Latin, and Hebrew.

THE IX. BOOK.
Contains the sequence of the Power and Religion of the Mahometists; as of
the first Turks, Corasmians, Tartarians; of the Souldan, of the Ottoman, of the
Sophi: where there is mention made of the estates of the great Cham of Cathay,
of the king of Narsingue, of the Moscouite, and of Presbiter John; because they
began, or grew up at that time; notwithstanding they have other Religions.

THE X. BOOK.
HOw that in this age have bin restored the tongues, and knowledges, after they
had surceased about almost twelve hundred years, having newly received great
light, and increase; where are considered, the meruailes of this present age,
thorough Europe, Asia, Afric, The newfound lands, in the East, West, North,
and South: beginning at the great, and invincible Tamberlan, whose power,
valiancy, and felicity is briefly represented. During whose reign began the
restitution of Learning and of Arts: By what persons and means it has bin
continued in diverse nations: The Princes that most have favored it. Moreover
how that many goodly things unknown to antiquity have bin newly found out,
especially Printing, The direction to sail by the needle of steel rubbed on
the Lode-stone, carrying always the point answerable to the place where we
imagine the pole Artique, by means whereof the whole Sea has bin sailed over,
and the whole world known thorough out. Then the skill of Ordinance, and
Artillery, which has made all other ancient military instruments to cease,
which by this one are all surpassed in impetuosity, swiftnes, and violence.
Also how amongst the meruailes of this age have risen new and strange Diseases
unknown heretofore, and diverse Sects have sprung up in all countries, which
have much altered the common quiet, and weakened the mutual charity of men.

THE XI. BOOK.
THis Age is compared* unto the former ages most famous in deeds of Arms,
conduct of States, excellency of Learning, perfection of Workmanship, novelty
of Inventions, Nauigations never attempted heretofore, and discovering of New
lands, unknown to Antiquity: to know wherein we are inferior, or equal to
the Ancients; and wherein we ought to be preferred. First of all is conferred
our modern Warfare, with the ancient Greek, and Romain; Tamberlan is compared
with Ninus, Sesostris, Cyrus, Darius, Alexander, Arsaces, Hannibal, Julius
Caesar, Constantine, Attila, and Charles the great. Then follows the
Comparison of our modern Kingdoms, Empires, Monarchies, and Commonweals,
with the Ancient. Of Military Nations, Armies, Battles by sea and by land,
Sieges, and Assaults of Fortresses. Of Nauigations, and discoueries of
Countries, Peregrinations, and Voiages by land. Of the Wealth of the present
time, with that of the time past. Of the Manners of this Age, with the former.
Finally of the Learning of this age with the Ancient; in Philosophy,
Eloquence, Law, Policy, Physic, Poesy, Astrology, Cosmographie, and the
other Mathematics. Then comes the Conclusion of the work, by the which there
is a vicissitude resolved on in all matters: And how it is to be feared, that
Power, Wisdom, Learning, Sciences, Books, Industry, Workmanships, and the
Knowledge of the world, being now come to so great Excellency, should fall
again: as they have done in times past.

THE XII. BOOK.
COnsidering then, that the variable disposition of humane things, is to be
ready to fall, when they are at the highest; and that virtue and vice are come
to their top, and perfection; doubting least among so many Partialities, and
Heresies (whereof the world is full) and the Wars which threaten us on every
side, that Learning might come to be despised; and be as loosely left off, and
neglected, as heretofore it has bin diligently followed, and regarded: To the
end to prevent such a mischief, and to aduize the studious to remedy it, as
much as they may; I have added an Inquisition on the common speech of men, by
which they have always maintained, and do yet maintain, That nothing can be
now said, which has not bin said heretofore. Wherein I endeavor to show, that
there remains yet much to be said; and that the truth has not bin
thoroughly discovered, neither all knowledge forestalled by our forerunners:
Admonishing the Learned, to add that by their own Inventions, which is
wanting in the Sciences; doing that for Posterity, which Antiquity has done
for us; to the end, that Learning be not lost, but from day to day may receive
some increase.

OF THE VARIETY OF THINGS. The first Book.
INtending to represent according to my ability the interchangeable course and
alteration of all things in the world, together with the causes of the
principal chaunges and varieties, to be perceived as well in the superior, as
in the inferior part thereof, sithence the time that the first memory of man
began even to this present, I most humbly acknowledge the divine providence of
God to be above all, believing assuredly, that God almighty, maker, and
governor of this great work so excellent in beauty, so admirable in variety,
and so singular in continuance, (to whom I pray to aydeme in this so high, so
long, and so difficult an enterprise hitherto never attempted of any) is
careful of all affairs happening therein, even to the least: containing in
himself the beginning, the end, and the means of them all, and pursuing the
order which he has given to the world, from the beginning in creating it, will
that it be tempered by alternatiue chaunges, and maintained by contraries, his
eternal essence remaining always one and unchangeable.

First of all then the heaven, notwithstanding it has received of God the
maker thereof many excellencies amongst other creatures, being round, and
having throughout his extremities or utmost parts distant or removed from the
middle or inmost part, which is the most perfect figure, and most like unto it
self; on which he has also bestowed convenient circular motion, exempted from
the wandering and inconstancy of others, turning it by the same, and in the
same, and to him self; wherein he does persevere: yet nevertheless since it
has a body, it can not wholly warrant or preserve it self from alteration and
change. The Ancients made eight spheres in it; of the firmament, and of the
seven Planets; but since have been observed the ninth, and the tenth: our
later Astrologers affirming that the tenth does turn round about the world in
24. hours, going by the right side from East to West, and by this so swift and
impetous motion, does force and carry with it all the other inferior spheres,
and does make them make the same turn in the self same space of time,
although that their proper motions be contrary unto it, drawing on the left
side from West to East: namely the ninth being the slowest, in 49. thousand
years; The eighth to have two, the one of 36. thousand years; the other of seven
thousand. The sphere of Saturn in 30. years: of Jupiter in 12: of Mars in two:
of the Sun, Venus; and Mercury in one year: of the Moon in 28. days.

Time also was made with heaven, and with the stars, so that having had the
self same beginning they shall also have the same end, when the world shall be
dissolved, returning into their ancient Chaos, and former darkness. For the
days, months, years, and ages, which were not before that the heaven and the
stars were created, incontinently began with them, and number was
distinguished and observed by their course: That is, the intercourse of days
and nights by the daily motion of the firmament; The month, after that the
Moon has gone over her whole circle, and attained to the sun; The ordinary
year, when the sun has accomplished his course; The great year, when the
seven Planets, and the other fixed stars, return to their first places,
representing the same nature which was at the beginning. The lives of all
things and the prefixed time of their continuance, being determined by lesser
or greater numbers, according to the disposition of the matter whereof they are
made: springing, growing, flourishing, diminishing, perishing, in certainetimes,
and by unequal spaces, being reduced to the self same end, every one seeling
his corruption to be the cause of another generation. Insomuch that it seemed
unto Plato that the world was nourished by the consumption, and decay of it
self, producing always new creatures unto the old, and raising up of others
like unto them in the places of those that were perished: without suffering the
kinds to fail, or surcease, which by this means do always remain as it were
immortal. But howbeit the world is round, and has not in it either high or
low; considering that the place which is in the midst ought not to be termed
high or low; nor that which compasses about be called the midst; neither has
in it any part differing from the other, if regard be had unto the midst, and
every other opposite thing: notwithstanding in respect of our selves we say
that it has high and low, right and left: That Pole which we see being termed
low according to Aristotle, and the other which is hidden from us, high: And the
East, whence the first motion proceeds is the right side; The West, is the
left; whence comes a motion contrary to the former: Then the Astrologers and
Philosophers affirm, that from the superior part of the world there
discendeth a certain virtue accompained with light and heat, which some of
them do call the spirit or soul of the world; others say it is nature, which
mingleth it self with the mass of this great body, penetrating, quickening,
norishing, and moderating al these variable things under the Moon, which
being of such efficacy, begins first with the fire and the air, which being
moved by the celestial mouings, do afterward move the water, and the earth,
and consequently the natures compounded of these four Elements, as well men,
beasts, birds, and fishes, as plants, trees, herbs, and metals: That there is
the first moving, whereof do depend all other inferious motions, and al essence
whatsoever. That there hence do proceed diverse temperatures of bodies,
inclinations of minds, manners of men, properties of nations, vices and
virtues, health and sickness, force and feeblenes; shortness and length of life,
mortality, riches and poverty, prosperity and adversity. That there hence al
estates and sects do take their beginnings, their course, continuance, and
their ends: In brief, that all this inferior world does obey the superior,
and is governed by it: Especially that all human affairs do depend thereon,
and yet are to be prevented by deeds: not that such effects do necessarily
come to pass, and inuiolably by a fatal Law: but that they may be avoided by
wisdom, or turned from us by divine prayers, or augmented or diminished, or
moderated by nurture, custom, and instruction.

First that the Sun lightning all things with his beams does give evident
proof thereof, who rising and setting makes the day and the night, by coming
toward us, and going from us, causes the years continually to be renewed, and
by the obliquity or crookednes of the Zodiac with the help of the twelve
signs which are in it, does distinguishe by his Solstices and Equinoxes, the
four seasons of the summer and winter, of the spring and harvest: In the which
consists the vicissitude of life and death, and the change of all things: by
the mediation of the first qualities, hot and cold, dry and moist, being duly
tempered for generation, and vnproportionably distempered for corruption.

Secondly the Moon every month increasing, decreasing, or at full, does
diversely dispose those humors over which she is predominant, showing amongst
other meruailes her manifest power over the ebbing and flowing of the tides in
the Ocean. Then the other stars both wandering and fixed do breed in the air
changes of heat and cold, winds, thunder, rain, hail, and snow; and by their
aspectes, eclipses, oppositions, conjunctions, distances, apparences,
obscurities, greatness, swiftness, slownesse, do bring forth great, and
diverse general, and particular events; of wars, dearthes, famines, plagues;
of inundations, of drouthes, and heates; according to the correspondency of the
parts of heaven and earth, the disposition of the matter which they meet with
all, and diversity of the time in which they work their effects. So the causes
both of these cotidian, menstruall, annual, and other the rarest mutations
happening here below, are attributed to the celestial motions, and to the
quality of the matter whereon they work. Considering, that in the world, the
elements, and their compounds are as the matter; the celestial bodies, and
superior intelligences, as efficient causes which by their heat, and light in
proceeding, give motion to all inferior things. First the daily motion which
the firmament makes is cause both of living and of dying; and the annual
course of the Sun assisted with the Moon and other stars, of the
continuation and successiue change: But the most rare and admirable mutations
in states, sects, and arts, ought to be referred to the ninth and eight
sphere: the diversity which is found in them proceeding of the variable motion
of that sphere, sometimes to the East, sometimes to the West, now to the South,
then to the North which is called the motion of trepidation. The Arabians also
have divided this long space of time, by the great conjunctions of the
Plannets, namely of the three superior Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars: which they
maintain to have more power over the principal alterations of this inferior
world, according to the qualities of the triplicities in the which they
happen, as fiery, ayrie, watery, or earthly. That there have already been
seven, in the space of five thousand, five hundred and thirty years, (for so
many the Hebrews reckon from the beginning of the world,) and that the eigth
shall be in the year of Christ 1604. The Chaldees, Persians, Egyptians, and
ancient Grecians judged of the notable events of the world by the Eclipses of
the Sun and Moon, and by those Stars, which have their aspectes, toward
the places of the Eclipse, or which arise together, or which are in the midst
of heaven. Belus the Babylonian, (as Seneca alleges) appointed the times both
of the deluge, and conflagration of the world, affirming that then all earthly
substaunces should be burnt, when all the stars having now diverse courses,
should meet together in the sign of Cancer, under the same place, in such a
position as a straight line might pass through all their circles: And then
should all be drowned, when the same stars in the like sort should meet in
Capricorn, both signs of great efficacy, and power, in cha^ging of the year.
The ancient Poets under the fables of Phaeton, and of Deucalion, and Pyrrha,
have represented these two ruins of the world, the one by fire, the other by
water. Also the Egiptia^ priest in Plato his Timaeus discoursing with Solon,
says that many ruins have come unto the world and shall come hereafter, the
greatest by fire and water: the lesser by earthquakes, wars, famine and
pestilence.

And that the tale of Phaeton the son of the Sun is not altogether
estraunged from truth, that is, that being mounted on his fathers chariot, and
not able to guide it aright, he burnt things on earth, and was slain himself
with lightning: for as much as in long space of time do happen many such
destructions by fire, by reason of the disorder happening about the earth, and
in the celestial motions. That then those which inhabit in the mountains,
and in dry places, are sooner destroyed then such as dwell by the seaside or
near the rivers. But contrariwise when it pleases God to cleanse the earth by
inundations, then the dwellers on plains, and valleys, to be forceably carried
into the sea by the impetuositie of rivers, while the inhabitauntes of the hills
remain in safety. That those which remain after such tempests are ignorant of
that which is past, and unfurnished of learning, which by little and little
they recover afterward.

Others say, that in long space of time there are certain periods appointed
for the world, which while they endure, all things do come to their vigor;
and which being ended, they do al perish: but that al of them end their course
within the revolution of the great year. And that when the one comes to end,
and the other is ready to begin, there are many strange signs seen both in
earth and in heaven. Wherefore many are of opinion that some great alteration
does approach, considering the signs which within these few years have
appeared in heaven, in the stars, in the elements, and in all nature. Never
were the Sun and Moon eclipsed more apparently; never were seen so many
Comets, and other impressions in the air; never did the Sea and the rivers so
violently ouerflowe their banks; never have bin heard such earthquakes; never
were borne so many and so hydeous monsters: Neither has there ever bin seen
since the memory of man, so many and so often changes to come to pass in
Countries, Nations, Manners, Laws, Estates, and Religions. The course of the
sun is no more such as it was wont to be in old time, neither are there the
same points of the Solstices and Equinoxes: but within this fourteen hundred
years since Ptolomey lived, who was a most diligent obseruer of the course of
the world, it is come nearer unto the earth then at that time it was, about
twelve degrees. Moreover they say, that all the parts of the Zodiac and the
whole signs have changed their places; and that the earth is removed from his
first situation, being not entierly and absolutely (as before it was) the
center of the world. Some also (as Hipparchus a famous Astrologer amongst the
Grecians) have given out, that the celestial motions in time to come, shall go
a contrary course, and that the course of the stars shall be changed, the East
becoming West, and the South, North. In the mean time, the continuation of
the successiue alteration which we see here below, consists in the moving
cause, and in the first matter. The cause that moves is of two sorts, the one
being the first and chief mouer immovable, the other the first mouer moveable,
by whose virtue and influence (governed by the divine providence) the
corruptible things in this sensible world, are incessantly restored and
renewed, through the means of generation: while the first matter subiecteth it
self continually to al mouings and changings in the same perpetuity, that the
first mouer, moves and forms, and never fails to produce these transitory
things.

OF THE VICISSITVDE WHICH THE four Elements have amongst them selves, and
every one by it self.
THat successiue alteration which is in the inferior part of the world,
consists principally in the four Elements, of which it is compounded, which
do receive continual change both amongst themselves together, and each of them
severally. First when the water is thickened, it seems to become a stone, or a
piece of earth; when it vapors away, to be breath or air. Also the air
enlightened is converted into fire: the fire extinguished and thickened is
turned into air: again, the air thickened, into mists and clouds, whence
proceeds water. Also we see of water, earth and stones to be engendered, in
such sort that they give one to another, by turn and course a continual
generation. Seeing then they never remain in the same estate, it is hard to
discern the one from the other: But that which we see to be now of one form,
then of another, and like unto fire, we must not call it fire, but like unto
fire; neither water, but such a thing as water; and so likewise in the rest, as
things which have not any stability. We ought not to signifye them by names,
such as we use to demonstrate any thing, as when we say this or that, for
they fly, and will never abide this demonstration, being only applyable to
things which are stable: but each of them ought to be called such and such,
according to his similitude, as the fire, and whatsoever else has generation.
But that wherein they seem to be formed and fashioned again, ought only to
be designed by this, or that; remaining alwaie the same without diminishing
either power or faculty, and continually receiving all, without retayning ever
any semblable form. It is the first matter exposed to all nature, to receive
any form, and being stirred and formed by those things which happen on it,
sometimes it seems to be of one sort, and sometimes of another. But the
matter that is subject to such a formation, should not be well prepared or
ordered, if it were not of it self without form, and naturally despoyled of
all the forms which it is to receive: for if it were like to any of these
things, when his contrary or any other nature should come, it could not well
represent it having the other already: wherefore it behooves it to be exempted
of all shapes figures and forms, which must receive into it self all kinds.
We will not say than that the mother and receptacle of this inferior world,
is the earth, the air, the fire, the water, or anything which is made of them,
or whereof they are made: but that it is an invisible nature without form, yet
capable of any; to be comprehended only by the understanding with reason, and
not to be perceived by the senses: that the fire seems to be somewhat that is
heated, and the water somewhat that is moistened, likewise the air, and the
earth according as it receives their forms, suffering the other passions
which depend of them, by means whereof it seems to be of all forms. But
because it has not forces or faculties, neither of the like quality, nor of
the same weight, it keeps not any equality, but is unequally moved, or
stirred of these kinds which again are moved of it: by which motion they are
carried hither, and thither, and discerned the one from the other by kinds and
qualities, observing the order which is given them, to the end, that by the
coherence of different bodies, there should not remain that confusion, which
was before the constitution of the world.

These four Elements so different in natures and qualities, and contrary one
to another, are assembled by such a proportion, that those which are light are
held down by weight least they should mount higher, and contrariwise the
heavy, least they should fall, are hanged on the light ones which tend always
upward, remaining all by a like force constrained, and kept in their places, by
the perpetual circuit of the world, which turning always in it self, holds
the earth balanced in the midst, as the lowest of al, which again in
counterchange does ballaunce the other Elements themselves, which hold it as
it were ballaunced and hanged in the midst of them. The water is diffused
round about it. And the air is carried over them both making but one globe.
The fire is seated highest, which being placed between the heaven and the
air, is pure on that part which touches the celestial body, and impure in
that which is next to the air, receiving many chaunges in diverse forms. And
although in that part next unto heaven, it have no contrary to corrupt it,
remaining in his natural place apt for the conservation thereof;
nevertheless, the parts of it do not always persevere in their purity, by
reason of the difformitie or diversity of the motion which turns it, and
shakes them, and forces them downwards toward the air even to the earth,
where they perish and are consumed. Likewise, the air is diversely altered by
the others which are next unto it, for being divided into three parts, the
highest, the middle, and the lowest, the highest part next unto the fire, to
the celestial mouings, and the stars, is thinnest, and purest; the lowest
next unto the earth, is thickest, and grossest; the mean or middlemost is
temperate betwixt both; yet colder notwithstanding then either of them both:
for the highest does participate with the heat of the stars, the inferior is
warmed by the vapors proceeding from the earth, and then again by the
repercussion of the Sun beams, and also by the artificial fires used amongst
men, and the natural which are hid in the earth. But the mean being secluded
from both extremities does continue in his coldness. The air then being thus
divided, is for the most part variable, inconstant, and changeable, especially
near unto the earth, where it does and suffers much according to the diverse
situation of the places, and according to the aspects, and different course of
the stars, which by their contrary rising, and falling, do raise exhalations
and vapors, from whence proceed the winds, clouds, showers, tempests
lightninges, thunders, hail, frost, snow, and other calamities of the earth,
with great strife of natural things amongst themselves: some striving upwards,
which are forceably kept down by resistance of the stars: others being
violently carried away: the rain descends, the clouds ascend, the waters are
dried, the hail and snow do fall, the Sun beams reflexed do heat, the
winds whirling about blow unequally the one against the other, being sometimes
calm, and sometimes stormy. And the Northren winds are raised by Jupiter,
the Eastern winds by the sun, the Southren by Mars, the Western by the
Moon: Or else by the four triplicities of the twelve signs of the Zodiac,
those three which are of quality hot and dry, moving wind from the oriental
part under the equinoctial line called East: the three other cold and dry,
raising the Southern wind coming from under the Pole antarticke; the other
three hot and moist, the West wind being also under the equinoctial line: the
other which are cold and moist, the North wind coming from under the pole
articke: which winds have their different properties according to the places
from whence they proceed, and where they blow, moving about the water and the
earth, even as the stars by which they are raised. The four principal
winds have four other collateral: all which eight together are called entier
or whole winds: betwixt whom are placed eight half winds, and sixteen other
quarters of winds, and by these is all navigations ordered.

But the water, on which they sail, being contiguous or joining to the air,
receives no less variety than it, and makes but one globe with the earth:
For as the earth being dry of his own nature cannot endure without moisture,
neither should the water have any where to abide without resting it self on
the earth; they have therefore bin thus by nature joined together: the one
opening the veins and conduites of the earth, the other passing through it
both within and without, to serve instead of a band unto it. All water of his
proper motion descends down from on high, but in the Ocean sea which
enuironeth the earth, are found three motions: the one from East to West, another
from the North toward the South, the third of the daily ebbing and flowing:
for from six hours to six, it aduaunceth, and enlarges it self; then it
abateth and retyreth. The which motions are seen also in the Mediterranean sea
toward the banks.

The cause of the first motion from East to West, is, the daily moving of the
firm ament, by whose impetuositie all the Spheres are moved, with a good part
of the fire and the air. The other from the North toward the South; is,
because that the Sea is higher in the North parts, then in the South; in
respect that the Northren cold ingendreth more water, then the Sea can contain
within the space, distance, and height of his banks; and the water which is in
the South part is consumed and diminished, by the heat of the same: So one part
of the water in the North, forces down an other on that side which is lowest,
and moves accidentally from the place of his generation.

The third follows the revolution of the Moon, which always increasing, and
decreasing, appears sometimes horned, sometmes half round, some times almost
round, and sometimes spotted: then by and by clear and great, when she is at
full, and anon she is not seen at all: Sometimes she shines all night,
sometimes arises late, sometimes she shines all day, supplying the brightness
of the sun; and coming to Eclipsie, yet appears notwithstanding: and at
the months end hides her self; when she is said to travail. Sometimes also
she is low, and sometimes high, which never happens after one sort: for
sometimes one would say that she were fixed to the firmament, other whiles that
she touched the top of the mountains, so low she is abased; she is sometimes
found in the South side of the heavens, and sometimes we must seek her in the
North.

Since then that she is so variable, it is no marvel if the ebbings and
flowings of the Tides in the sea, which are caused chiefly by her, are also
variable: First in the daily motion which the Moon makes with the heaven in
twenty four hours, there are two tides ebbing, and two flowing, the sea
increasing by the space of six hours, and diminishing six others, which are
twelve: And it does as much in other twelve hours, which are twenty four.
Their augmentations are not always alike in all times and places, for by the
space of seven days, the waters do increase, when they call them live waters;
and seven other days they decrease, when they are called dead waters. In such
sort, that from the first day of the change of the Moon, until the eight,
which is the first quarter, the waters are diminished; and from the said
quarter until the fifteenth, which is full Moon, they are still augmented:
and from thence till the third quarter, they go still decreasing; and from
that to the conjunction, they are increased again. So the first day of the
Moon is chief of the waters, and the second day the waters are yet very
great, and the third in like sort; but the fourth day they begin to wax less,
and so go diminishing from day to day, until they come to the eight: for then
are the low waters: and on the ninth likewise: and the tenth almost the same:
then on the eleventh is the rising of the waters, when they begin a little to
augment. And from that time forward they increase every day until the
fifteenth when it is full moon, and then it begins again to be head water,
and on the sixteenth it increases likewise, and almost unto the end of the
seventeenth. But on the eighteenth it decreaseth, and goes so diminishing
every day until the thirtieth, when as she is in conjunction: And so on the
first day it begins again to behead water, and proceeds thus increasing
and decreasing as has bin said.

Yet in these increasings the waters are not so high at one time as at another;
but greater at one time and less at another. Also the ebbing and flowing of
tides are not equal in all places. Nevertheless when the moon is at Northeast,
it is full sea; and when she is at Southeast, it is low water. Also there is
nothing perpetual in the earth; sometime the sea or some other water enclosed
within it, breaking out forceably, does cover a part thereof; sometimes again
it retireth. The Rivers and fountains are dried up, and there arise new in
other places. Some Countries are turned into standing pooles and marshes,
others into sandy deserts, others into woods: then being husbanded and
labored, they become fertile of barrain: and again on the contrary, barrain
of fruitful. The Mountains are made plain, and the plains are lifted up: some
places are swallowed by Earthquakes, or scorched by exceeding heats. When it
has long bin manured, it waxes weary; then by rest and cherishing it
recouereth vigor. In tract of time it waxes old, if not wholly, yet at the
least in his parts; then is renewed and becomes young again. We see every
year at the spring time, and beginning of Summer, how being watered with small
rain, caused by soft winds, and moderately heated, it opens the seeds of
all things which before were shut up, and puts some of them into herbs,
stalks, and ears, others into stems and husks, others into budds, others into
tender tops* the garden trees yield buds, flowers, leaves, and fruit: the
forestes and woods are clothed with green, bearing on their branches and
boug^es, the birds pricked with a desire of engendring, which record by
themselves their melodious songs: The Fishes leap; and the beasts amidst the
green pastures skip up and down, being inflamed with love. In brief every
thing springs, grows, embelisheth, florisheth, and fructifieth: all things
are renewed. On the contrary, when Autumn and Winter do return, all is full
of horror, and of sadness, cold, rain, dirt, sleete, hayle, snow, frost, ice,
foggy mists, long nights, and almost continual darkness. We travail the earth
day and night, more to satisfy our pleasures, then for our necessary
norishment. And notwithstanding that which it endures superficially might
seem tolerable, if we did not pierce it so far, as to seek gold and
silver, brass, copper, lead, tin, iron, stones to build, and others
accounted precious in the entrails thereof. Neither is it only thus vexed by
men: but it seems that the three other Elements have conspired the ruin of
this one alone; without speaking of the heaven it self, which by his
intemperate disposition, has cut off a great part thereof. Might it not have
sufficed the Sea to have compassed it, and to have cut off a great part thereof,
without stretching it self into it, in so many gulfes, little distant the one
from the other, breaking through mountains, and making violent ruptures, as
though it would spread it self over all. Then so many rivers, lakes, marshes,
so many standing pooles, as are throughout, so many springs, and little brooks,
so many swift and raging streams. The air shakes it, causing it to lose that
natural property of being immovable, ouerwhelming not only fields,
houses, towns, cities, but whole nations, and countries, oftentimes not
leaving any appearance, whereby one may see, that there have bin such. Then the
fire being so fertile, that it ingendreth of it self, and grows of little
sparks becoming in an instant, great and impetous, burns it in many places,
both without and within, being dispersed about the chimnies, arysing out of
billets and sticks-ends beaten together, appearing thorough the clouds, or
coming of lightning, kindled by burning glasses opposed to the sun, which
also with the other stars does dry and scorch it excessiuely in some seasons
and countries.

It is a marvel, that being so vexed on all parts, it is not already
consumed, but so far are these great and violent calamities from distroying
it, that they rather help to the conservation thereof. For the Earthquakes by
the openings which they make, draw out the corrupted winds which were kept in
the entrails of it, and caused within such disordered noise: the inundations
do cleanse the filth; the heats digest those humors which they find too gross;
as the colds and frosts do moderate that which is inflamed.

HOW ALL THINGS IN THE WORLD are tempered and conserved by unlike, and
contrary things.
IN like manner is the Earth, and every other thing in the world tempered and
conserved by things of dislike and contrary quality. It is not then without
cause, that nature is so desirous of contraries, making of them, all decency,
and beauty; not of things which are of like nature. This kind of tempering is
the cause, that such things as before were diverse and different, do accord and
agree together, to establish, intertain, and embellish one an other, the
contrariety, becoming unity; and the discord concord; the enmity amity;
and contention covenant. Wherefore Heraclitus said, that discord, and concord,
were the father and mother of all things. And Homer, that whosoever spoke evil
of contention, did blame nature. Empedocles maintained, not of discord by it
self, but that with concord, it was the beginning of all things: meaning by
discord, the variety of things that are assembled, and by concord, the union
of them: But the union in this assembly ought to exceed the contrariety:
Otherwise the thing should be dissolved, the principles dividing themselves: So
we see in the Heaven contrary mouings to preserve the world: Venus placed in
the midst near unto Mars, to assuage his fircenes, which of his own nature is
corruptiue: And Jupiter next unto Saturn, to mitigate his malice. The
inferior world composed of contrary elements to maintain it self by the
proportion which they have together; and the natures made of them to preserve
themselves, by the temperature of different qualities, which being simple in
their nature without any manner of mixtion or composition; and contrary one to
the other when they are compared in their qualities in the highest degree, yet
of them are all things compounded, and by their commixtion, is the beginning
of all generation. There are found in the body of the world, Earth, Water,
Air, Fire; Sun, Moon, and other stars: There is matter, form, privation,
simplicity, mixtion, substance, quantity, quality, action, and passion. In
man's body, blood, phlegm, choler, melancholy; flesh, bones, sinews, veins,
arteries, head, eyes, nose, ears, hands, feet, brain, heart, liver, and
spleen. In the oeconomical body, husband, wife, children, Lord, slave, master,
and servant. In the politic body, Justice, Fortitude, Prudence, Temperance,
Religion, warfare, judgment, counsel, magistrates, and private men, noble,
and base, rich and poor, young and old, weak and strong, good and evil,
laborers, artificers, merchants, retaylers, and cariers: which are all dislike
parts, and the most of them contrary, conjoined together by due conueniency.
Art imitating nature in the painting of black, white, green, blew, yellow,
red, and other mingled colors, represents the portraitures convenient to
those things for the which they are made. And in Music, of high and low, long
and short, is made an accord. Grammar consists of letters, vowels and mutes:
The Sciences can not well be taught without comparing of contraries, the one
being considered principally, and in regard of that one, the other accidentally,
that it may be avoided. As Physic does accidentally treat of sickness, to the
end to be the better able to preserve health, and to avoid the other. The
Ethicke, and Politic science do not only show what is honest, just, and
profitable; but also that which is dishonest, unjust, and domageable. Insomuch
that we may say in all cases, that contraries when they are put near, one to
the other, they appear the more clearly: Even as want makes riches to be the
more esteemed; and the obscurity of darkness commends the cleerenesse of
light: The sweetness of the Springtime is more esteemed by the sharpness of
Winter: the happiness of peace, by the calamities of war; and fair weather
after long rain: So it seems, that the good can not be known without the
evil: and although they be contrary, yet have they such a conjunction, that
in taking of one, both are taken away. For the good can not be understood, nor
esteemed, but by conferring of it with evil to avoid it, neither the evil
shunned and eschewed, except that which is good be thoroughly known. Plato
says the like of pleasure, and sorrow, that although they be two things
contrary and repugnant between them selves, and can not be together in one
person, yet nevertheless, if any one follow and receive the one, he is for the
most part ever constrained to take the other: as if they were both in one point
and extremity conjoined and knit together. Moreover it is certain, that
Nature has not created any thing, unto which she has not given a contrary to
withhold it and keep it back, where hence proceed the Antipathies, or
contrary affections in all things, as well animate as inanimate, living as
without life: In beasts, as between the Cock and the Fox: in fishes,
between the Mullet and the fish called Lupus, which some take it to be the
Pike: in birds, betwixt the Crow and the Kite: Amongst trees, the Chestnut and
Olive: amongst stones, the Adamant and the Diamant. What then shall we say of
men, which are so passionate and inconstant? Truly, that al in all ages, and
all kinds of life, public, private, solitary, contemplative, active, are
inclined to contentions and partialities, even so far, as every one to be at
variance in him self, having in his body and soul a perpetual combat
between reason and concupiscence: And in this manner is the strife amongst
children, which yet have no knowledge, and amongst the Savages, which have
nothing proper or peculier. There are Sects in the schools of Law, Physic,
Divinity, Philosophy, and in the conuents and monasteries amongst the Reclus
and Recluses. No marvel is it therefore if there be seditions in Cities and
Countries, which make people of diverse estates even to run hedlong, as was
sometimes in Rome, that of the common people and the Nobility: If there be
wars between Lordship and Lordship, kingdom and kingdom, which respectively
keeps them both in fear: So were aunciently in Greece the Lacedaemonians to the
Athenians; so to the Romans, the Carthaginians; and afterward the Parthians.

So are at this day opposed the Scots to the English; the English to the
French; the French to the Italians; The Almaines to the Suitzers; the Africans
to the Spaniards; the Turks to the Christians; the Persians to the Turks; the
Zagathaines to the Persians; being divided amongst themselves by colors redd
and green, and of that are called Caselbas, and Cuselbas: the Moscouites to
the Polonians; the Tartarians to them both. In the Indies Cochim to Calecut: in
high Africa the Moors to the Abissins; thorough out the country of the
Arabians, the inhabitants of the Mountains to those that dwell in the Plains:
The Blackmoores amongst themselves: And in Brasil the Sauluages even to the
eating of one another when they are taken in war. And it might seem that
these divisions were in some sort necessary thoroughout the world, and such
contrarieties as God has given to every estate, and almost to every person
profitable to keep them in fear and humility: for men will soon wax proud,
and are easily puffed up with prosperity and riches: and especially when they
misconceaue from whence such grace proceeds, God is wont to send them
adversities for their chastisment. Wheresore it is ordinarily seen, that every
mighty estate, having no foreign enemy finds some within it self: and when
it is come to such greatness, that it cannot be brought under, or kept down
by any strange or foraine force, then is it afflicted with partialities, and
oftentimes distroied or translated into some other nation, with alteration both
of Justice and politic government. Moreover, when the Countries are to full of
inhabitants, and that the malice and subtilty of man is come to the highest;
then are they purged and empted by famines and pestilence: to the end that the
people which are in it, being reduced to a less number, and chastised, may
live better. But if herewith they amend not, but wax worse and worse: then
either are they exterminated by fire and water, or by Earthquakes overwhelmed.
God using always such rigours against those which persevere in their wickedness,
as he is always ready to receive to mercy such as are truly penitent, which
turn to him, and pray to him with their hearts.

OF THE VARIETY AND INTER course of Shadows, Days, and seasons of the year,
and diversity of habitations on the Earth.
HItherto has bin declared how the world is not only conserned by the
intercourse of the Heavens, and Elements; but also tempered by contraries. Now
to the end we may the better consider the difference which is found in respect
of the diversity of places, and aspectes of heaven, as well in plants, trees,
fruits, metals, savors, colors, and tastes: as in beasts, fishes, birds, and
even in men themselves, and all their affairs: we will briefly touch as far
forth as shall belong to our present purpose, the five Zones of the habitable
earth; the seven Climats; four limits, East, West, North, and South; the two
sides or hemisphers, longitude, and latitude; the three parts thereof, Europe,
Asia, and Afric, unto which is also added America: the variety of shadows,
days, and seasons, with the diverse manners of inhabiting: because that all
these considerations serve to the knowledge of the world, and the chaunges
which in times past have happened therein, and do every day come to pass. The
Ancients divided the Heaven, and consequently the earth, into five Zones,
thinking that those two that are uttermost about the two Poles, North and
South, did make those two parts of the earth which are subject to them
uninhabitable by their extreme and continual cold. Also that that part of the
heaven which beholds the middle of the earth under the Equinoctial, made it
likewise uninhabitable, by reason that the Sun having there his continual
course, burns with his beams, beating on it so near, and perpendicularly,
all the country lying under that Zone; That the two others which are between
the burning Zone and the Poles, were temperate, as also those parts of the
earth which are answerable unto them: But that one could not pass very well
from the one to the other, because of the burning Zone being in the midst.

But by the latter voyages and nauigations, the whole earth is found to be
inhabited, yea, even under the Poles themselves, being both in the midst and
in the utmost parts frequented with men, and with singular commodities, the
heat of the middle-most accounted burning hot, being less under the
Equinoctial, then the Tropicke, not a whit hindering the passage from one of
the temperate unto the other. For although that under the Equinoctial, the
sunne-beames are perpendicular twice in a year, yet do they but little harm,
by reason that they stay not long there: the Zodiake being straight, and not
oblique or crooked in that place: Then the nights being there continually
equal in length unto the days, do mitigate with their cold the heat of the
days. But under and near unto the Tropickes, the Zodiac being crooked, the
Sun stays longer there, and discendeth not so swiftlle under the Horizon,
making the days longer, and the sun hotter; yet sufferable notwithstanding,
as we see by innumerable people dwelling under the Equinoctial, and between
the Tropickes.

In the uttermost part of the North dwell the Liuonians, Noruegians,
Lithuanians, Swedens, Moscouites, Lapians, and Brarmians last of all, having in
their depth of winter the air full of foggs, and great clouds, with much snow,
and frost: In such sort, that both by water and by land, they make their
traficke and wars on ice. But when summer returns, the country is
uncovered, and made more temperate, by the light which the Sun gives there
longer in one place, then in another; according as it is nearer or farther
removed from the Pole: Even as in the hot quarter, some places by the presence
of the Sun are disinhabited, or at least incommodiously inhabited, which by
his departure do recover an habitable temperature.

The superficies or upper face of the Earth has bin also otherwise
distinguished: for by how much any country declineth on one side or other from
the Equinoctial, so much is their day the longer in Summer, and their night in
Winter. In such sort, that according to the diverse increase of the days, the
spaces of the earth have bin distinguished, attributing to every Climate half
an hours increase. And the places subject unto these Climates have bin noted
out, either by famous Cities, or rivers, or mountains: as by Meroe, Sienna,
Alexandria, Rhodes, Rome, Borysthenes, and the mountain Ripheus, fabulously
invented: where the longest day is of 16. hours, and a quarter; and the Pole
is elevated 50. degrees. The Ancients stayed at this seventh; not knowing the
Regions, Countries, Seas, and Isles that are beyond it. At this day by the same
reason there may others be added.

The four limitts or bounds of the world are, the East, West, South, and
North; differing in this, that the South and the North are stable and
immovable; But the East and West do never remain in one estate, by reason of
the ascent and descent which the Sun makes in the signs of the Zodiac.
Wherefore Eratosthenes following nature, divides the world chiefly into two
parts, the South and North, imagining that from them proceeded the diversity
of all inferior things, according to their neerenesse or distance from the
sun. True it is, that thereby arises some difference; but all consists not
therein, as hereafter shall be declared. Moreover, nature has indewed every
one of these extremities, or utmost parts with some singular excellency: For
toward, the East, there India brings forth Rubies, Emeraulds, Pearls, and many
other precious stones, both out of the earth and the sea; the great and mighty
Elephants, the high palme-trees full of wine, and laden with nuts: And Serica
in that quarter has first given us the Silk, which is had of worms bred in
Mulberie-trees: Arabia in the South yields incense, ebony and cotton: Iewrie
next unto it the balsme, and the cedar: Ethiopia, Cassia and Ciuet: The
Moluccaes in the farthest parts of the West, Pepper, spice cloves, cinnamon,
ginger, nutmeggs, and other druggs. The North, the Alces, Bears, Ounces, and
other beasts which are not seen elsewhere: honey and wax, without the industry
of man, throughout the large forestes; exquisite skins of Martins, Sables,
and others of great account in the other parts of the world, to make furs for
great Lords. Cornelius Tacitus says, that Amber grows only in Borussia,
and is fished there: as in the South comes incense, and balsme. Also the earth
being spherical or round, is parted into two equal sides, called Hemispheres;
and by the roundnesse of it from East to West, it comes to pass, that there
it is sooner day and night; and by the roundnesse of it from South to North,
that there are always seen some stars about the Pole Articke; not about the
Antarticke, which remains hidden from us which are one this side the earth,
as ours is also unseen of those on the other side. The longitude or length of
the earth, is taken from the West to East: the latitude or breadth from the
South to the North. The ancients, as Isocrates divided the earth only into
two parts, Europe and Asia, afterward they added Afric for the third, this
division taking his beginning at the straight of Gibraltar, where the
Atlanticke sea engulfeth it self within the land, making the Mediterranean or
midland sea, by which these three are divided, Afric remaining on the right
hand, Europe on the left, and Asia in the midst. On the other side the rivers
Nilus, and Tanais, made these divisions long agone. But as for Tanais, it
cannot now stand for a bound, so many innumerable people and countries being
known now on this side, which heretofore were unknown to the Ancients. To
these three also it is necessary to add a fowerth taken of America, and other
lands newly discovered toward the West and the South, of which it is not yet
known, whether they be joined or no to Asia: that is to say, whether they
ought to be reputed maine land, or Isles.

These things premised as necessary to the understanding of this discourse
that follows; we will entreat henceforward of the variety of shadows,
inequality of days and nights, intercourse of the seasons of the year,
according to the diverse habitations; and will propose the diversity of
things, according to the difference of places. Then coming to the shadows,
we find that they change with the Sun, and from Country to Country: for
by how much the Sun is higher, the shadow is the less; and by how much he is
the lower, the shadow is greater; in such sort, that always it is greater in
the morning and evening then at noonetyde. Under the two Tropickes there is no
shadow at noone on the days of the Solstices, nor under the Equinoctial, in
the days of the Equinoxes. The inhabitants on the one side and the other have
their shadows opposite, the one on the right hand, the other on the left. To
those that dwell under the Poles, they are round about them in manner of
roundels, or milstones. The Sun then going always either toward the North,
or on the Equinoctial, or toward the South, makes five sorts of shadows
through out the world: that is, to the East, to the West, to the North, to the
South, and one straight shadow. Toward the East it makes shadow when it
sets; to the West, when it rises; toward the North, when it comes from
the South; and when he whose shadow is made, is nearer to the North, then is
the Sun; and toward the South when he that makes the shadow, is nearer
then the sun is to the South. Also, the straight shadow is when the Sun is
on our Zenith. All these five sorts of shadows happen only to those which
dwell between the Tropickes, and they which inhabit under the Equinoctial
have but four, toward East, and West, They that are under the Tropicke of
Cancer, have their shadow toward the North, and those that are under the
Tropicke of Capricorn, toward the South; And once in the year direct when
the Sun enters into that Tropicke. Those which dwell without the Tropickes
have but three shadows, toward East, and West; and those which dwell in the
North have their shadow toward the North, and such as inhabit the South
part, have their shadow toward the South; and never have it direct, or
straight. Concerning the days and nights, they are always alike under the
Equinoctial, but thence they go continually increasing and diminishing,
either by the opposition of the earth which makes the night, or by the
roundnesse thereof which brings the day. They then which inhabit Northward
from the Equinoctial, have their days increasing when the Sun returns from
the Tropicke of Capricorn, to that of Cancer; and those which inhabit the
South, have the contrary: namely their nights increasing in length, and their
days decreasing by reason that the sun goes every day farther and farther
from them toward the North. Also when he comes into Aries on the eleventh of
March, he treads the Equinoctial line, and makes the days equal with the
nights on every side; but when he has passed the first point of Aries, the
days become longer then the nights, to those on the North; and shorter to
those on the South. And the eleventh of June when the Sun enters into Cancer,
is the longest day, and the shortest night; and on the other side the
contrary: for the Sun is then nearest to the one, and farthest from the
other. Also from thence forward he begins to descend; and returning by
little and little, makes the days shorter, and the nights longer to them
which inhabit Northward; and contrariwise to the inhabitants of the South.
Moreover, when he is in Libra, the thirteenth of September, he traceth again
the Equinoctial line, and then are the nights, and the days equal. But from
thence he discendeth toward the sign of Capricorn; and the nights become
longer then the days, to them that dwell in the North; and the days longer,
and shorter nights to those of the South. Finally, being come to the Tropic of
Capricorn, he makes to us here the shortest day, and the longest night; and
in the South the longest day, and shortest night. For this is also a place where
the sun is nearest to the one, and farthest from the other. And by how much
the Pole is elevated above the Horizon of every habitation, the days and
nights are so much the longer: In so much that they which have their Zenith
under the Circle articke, and to whom the Pole is raised above their Horizon
66. degrees and a half; when the sun comes into the first point of Cancer
on the eleventh of June, they have a day of 24. hours; and their night is
almost as an instant: because the sun touches their Horizon but a moment for
that day. And on the thirteenth of December when the Sun is in the first
degree of Capricorn, they have then a night of 24. hours, and in a manner but
a moment of day, by reason that the sun touches their Horizon in an instant,
and by and by sets, and they account this small touch for a day. They which
are under the Antarticke circle have the clean contrary. And those which have
their Zenith between the Circle and the Pole of the world, while the Sun is
going toward the North, that which their Horizon discovers of the
Equinoctial shall be unto them for one day. And if it be the quantity of one
sign, their day shall endure one Month, and if of two signs, it shall be of
two Months, and so for the rest. And he which shall be under one of the Poles,
shall have all the year long but one day, and one night. In such sort, that if
he were under the Pole Artick, those six Months in which the sun is going
toward the North, shall be a day unto him without night, and the other six
Months while the Sun is going toward the South, should be a night unto him
without any day. And on the contrary, to those which are under the Pole
Antartick: In so much that half the year shall be unto them a day, and the
other half a night; by reason of the roundnes of the world, which waxes less
and less toward the Poles. So their Horizon which are nearest to the Poles,
discovers the greatest part of the day which the sun makes when he goes
on their side; the earth and water not hindering them of the sight of the
sun, all the time that he ascends and discendeth, until he comes to that
place where their Horizon does not discover any thing of the Circle or course
which he makes about the world; and also by how much that part is greater, so
much shall the day be longer.

Many do err, thinking the increasing and decreasing of days to proceed
equally throughout the year; because that in deed they increase as much in
the one only month of March; as they did in the months of January and
February together. And on the other side, they are shortened as much in the one
only month of September, as they were before in July and August. The cause is,
for that the Sun on the twelfth of March parting from out the Equinoctial,
and returning toward the North until the twelfth of April, makes twelve
degrees: and from the twelfth of April until the twelfth of May, eight: and
from the twelfth of May to the eleventh of June that he comes into the
Tropicke, three and a half: which are together 23. degrees and a half, which
is the greatest declyning of the sun. In such sort that he separateth
himself the first month by the one half of his declining, and the second
month a third part, and the third a sixth part. And so the length of the day
is equal with the night, on the eleventh of March; and from thence unto the
eleventh of April, the day increases the one half of his whole increase; and
from the twelfth of April until the twelfth of May, it increases a third
part; and from the twelfth of May to the eleventh of June, it increases a
sixth part. In the uttermost North of Moscouia, the day and the night, are each
of them three months in the time of the Solstices. During the Summer time, in
May, June, and July; there is day continually; In the Winter time, in November,
December, and January, continual night; In February, March, and April,
first the day is short, the night long: and on the contrary, in August, the
night short; in October, long.

Of the diversity of Shadows; there fall out three sorts of habitations,
which we are constrained to express in Greek words, because we have no other:
They are, the Amphiscians, Eteroscians, and Periscians. Amphiscians are they
which have their shadows on both sides of them, Northward and Southward; such
as are the inhabitants between the two Tropickes, and under the Equinoctial;
as the Ethiopians, Arabians, and Indians: Eteroscians which have their shadows
turned on the one side, inhabiting the temperate zones, between the Polarie, and
Tropic circles; such are toward the North, the Spaniards, Frenchmen,
Englishmen, Italians, and Greeks: Periscians are they which have their
shadows round about them in form of milstones; such are they which dwell
under the Poles, having but one day and one night in the whole year, and always
the same six signs above the earth, and the six other underneath.

Again, the inhabitants of the earth compared one to the other, are called
Periecians, Antecians, and Antipodes. Periecians may be called collateral, and
are they which dwell under the self same climate, paralelle and Meridian
drawn through the Poles. They have this common with us: First, that they
inhabit the same temperate Zone; secondly, that at the same time they have
winter, and summer, and the other seasons, and the increasing of days and
nights; but differ in this, that they have not the same East, and West, and
that when it is high noone with us, it is midnight with them: Such are the
inhabitants of the Canaries, with the people of China. Antecians are they which
inhabit the other temperate zone toward the South, turning their backs toward
us, distant equally from the Equinoctial on their side, as we are on ours;
Having then a contrary latitude, they have also the seasons of the year
contrary; The Autumn in Aries, when the Spring is with us: The winter in
Cancer when we have summer; the spring in Libra, when harvest is here; the
summer in capricorn, which to us is winter; But because they are in the same
longitude they have at the same instant with us midday and midnight: Such are
the Egiptians with the farthest Africans. The Antipodes so called, because they
go with their feet opposite to ours, having the Horizon and Hemisphers opposed:
unto whom al things are contrary, winter, summer, day and night; East and west.

OF THE VARIETY OF THINGS AC cording to the difference of places.
HEnceforward, following our purposed order, we will speak of the diversity
of things according to the difference of places: Where then the heat is
neither to extreme and fervent, nor the cold to excessive and sharp; where
there are neither unmeasurable raines, nor too violent winds; but the seasons
of the year continue in moderate disposition there is found a convenient
temperature of the air, holsomnes of waters, and fertility of grounds: by
means whereof the Country is made pleasant, healthsome, apt to bring forth
corn and pulse, to norishe all kind of plants, as well others as wild,
bearing fruit abundantly in their seasons; The beasts, birds and fishes are
better formed, more fruitful, and of better taste, then elsewhere: But where as
hot or cold, dry or moist do exceed, they hurt every thing and make it
worse. The Ethiopians being near unto the Sun, which burns them with his
beams, are black, having their hear and beard frisled, or curled. On the
contrary they which inhabit the cold and ycie countries, have their skin
white and soft, their hear yellow and united: both the one and the other being
naturally cruel by reason of their excessive cold and heat. They are in both
countries of high stature, which proceeds of the abundance of heat in respect
of the Ethiopians; and of the abundant moisture in regard of those which
inhabit the cold countries. But the regions of the mean temperature are very
good and fertile; the people which inhabit there, of mean stature, quick
witted, and well tempered of color. They are delicate in their manner of
living, and have a good sharp and quick wit, ready to comprehend any thing.
And commonly the great Empires and famous monarchies, are in their hands; which
are not found amongst people removed from this temperature, by reason of their
beastly sauagenes, and brutish immanity. Likewise the beasts which are bred in
the cold countries, are lumpish and heavy. And on the contrary, they are light,
that are in the hoate regions: the one sort very much differing from the other,
both in form, shape, colors, and properties. The fishes from sea to sea, and
the birds from country to country, do differ much one from the other as may be
known by the sight of the^, and understood by the books, which are written of
the^. There is no less difference amongst herbs and trees, according to the
place where they are brought forth. For they which grow in the ha^gings of
hills, cold, dry, and exposed to the wind, are of greater virtue, the^ the
others: on the contrary such as grow on plains and shadowed places, and
waterie, being hid from the wind are not of such efficacy. Also the soil, and
season makes them often times to shoot forward, or to be backward. We see better
trees, fuller of leaves, and better stored with fruit in one territory then in
another: because they like the place better. Those trees which love the hills
are very great and fair: as Cedars, Fur trees, pynetrees, boxetrees, and
plaintrees: In the Forests, the oaks, beeches, corketrees, lotetrees, elmes,
ashes, and haseltrees do grow; The alders, poplars, willowes, and reeds on the
rivers sides, and in watrie places. Some come not any where but in the South
Countries; as the orange tree, the citron or lemmon tree, palm or date tree,
and the sicamore: Others in the cold Countries as appletrees, and pearetrees.
The same difference is found both in herbs, and lesser plants the one not
growing but in hot countries, the other in cold, others in those that are
meanly temperate. Some grow in marshes, others in standing waters; There are
some which are found ordinarily in moist places, and some in dry; others love
the fields, others the vines, and others the meadows. Some do better in the
valleys, then on the sides of hills; others love the high places exposed to the
wind. There are that find norishment along the walls of Towns and Castles,
and betwixt the closures and ruins of houses. Corn coms better in one place;
the vine in another, and cattle in an other. The air is so temperate in
Calecut, that there is never any plague, but continual greenenes in the herbs
and trees, and there are every month new fruits differing altogether from
ours, yet good nevertheless, and marvelous pleasant. The country of Syria
chiefly about Damasco, abounds with all sort of corn, flesh, and fruit,
especially with new grapes all the year long; Also pomgranats, quinces,
almonds, olives, and roses of diverse colors, very fair and odoriferous; But
their apples, pears, and peaches are of an evil taste. In the west Indies as
well throughout the Islands, as in the Maine there are wild vines that bear
good grapes without industry or care of man: But the kernels of the peaches,
plums, and cherries, sown in diverse places there do take no root. Olive trees
being planted there bring nothing but leaves without fruit. The country of
Babylon is most fertile in corn; but the vine and figgtree will not grow there.
In Moscouia, there is great abundance of honey and wax, rich skins, and
exquisite furs: but not any fruit worth the reckoning. The Tartarians, and
Arabians have nothing but cattle. The Moluccaes yield the aromaticall druggs
of spicery, and in all things else are barren: In one place are the Emerauds,
Rubies, Turkoises and Pearls: In another is Corrall, Ambor, and Crystal; in
one place there is gold found; in another lead, tin, and silver. Pliny
esteeming the wheat of Italy above al others, both for whiteness and weight,
says that nature has showed her self so friendly toward the Italians, that
she has not only made them excellent, in laws, government of states, and
manners of life, customs and fashions; but also has given them corn, and many
other things more excelent then they are in other countries. In such manner
has every country his particular gifts, and singularities so distributed by
the divine providence, which is careful of the universal good of the world,
that it cannot persevere in his perfection without such variety; to the end that
the one having need of the other they might communicate together, and succor
each other.

OF THE VARIETY, AND AL teration in Man.
But the Variety, and alteration is greater in man, then in any other thing;
as soon as he is borne he begins to dye, and his end depends of his
beginning. During the time while he lives from his infancy, even til his old
age, he has never the same things in him, neither is the same: but is still
renewed, subject to change as well in his body, his hear, flesh, blood, and
bones; as in his mind: changing his manners, customs, opinions, appetites,
pleasures, sorrows, fears, and hopes. We learn, forget, and remember the
sciences. We receive food into our bodies, and cast out the excrement by the
ways and conueiances prepared for that purpose: always repairing the
incommodities of such egestion, by new norishment, and by respiration or
breathing of the air. The little children are foolish, and old men are
dotards; others are either always foolish, or now and then at the least.
Others become madd, either in continual fevers, or by some other accident:
others with too much drinking lose the use of their reason. Some are naturally
more heavy and dull; others more quick and ingenious; others wiser and better
conditioned: But seeing that they do al participate of one reasonable soul,
and have their bodies made of the self same matter; it is a marvel from whence
should come such variety, as we see particulerly in every one from his birth
and generally thoroughout the nations. Wherein it seems that nature takes
pleasure, to supply the indigence of man, not only producing every one more apt
for one thing then another; as learning, arms, and the other liberal and
mechanical Arts: but also making the people borne in diverse parts of the
habitable earth, to differ in inclinations, and complexions.

MANY learned men have assaied to render a reason of this so admirable a
diversity. First the natural Philosophers, are of opinion that it proceeds
of the mingling of the four humors of which men's bodies are compounded, the
which according as they agree, or disagree one with another, do change the
co^plexions, in disposing the natures diversely according to their predominant
qualities: But principally according to the proportion of the heart, being the
fountain of the vital spirits, and of the blood, and governor of the
affections as it is diversely affected or altered: also by the disposition of
the melancholic humor; which is mother of the arts, and of al good
inventions; unto whom they attribute all the dexterity, perseverance, and
perfection in them. From thence comes it (according to this opinion) that men
are merry, sad, dilligent, slouthful, tractable, opiniatiue, gracious, merciful,
envious, fearful, audatious, foolish, light, wise, true, false, liars,
quarelours, deceauers, with the other like, and ordinary affections of men;
more or less, according as one humor exceeds another. To this healpeth much
the corrupted estate of commonweals, and the talk which is held both openly
and secretly, and that from their youth few do think on remedying of it by good
noriture, discipline, and studies. Whereunto the Physicians do add eating, and
drinking, with exercise, showing that they are sufficiently serviceable to the
disposition of manners. Besides the waters, winds, and air enuironing; and
that there is great difference in the places which are inhabited: So that
commonly the Spaniards are proud and haughty; Egiptians light; Africans
disloyal; Englishmen and Scots courageous; Greeks crafty and subtle; Italians
wise and wary; Frenchmen bold and hardy: And thence is it, that amongst the
Scithians there was never but one Philosopher; and in Athens have been many.

THE ASTROLOGERS affirm all these inferior natures to be governed, and
disposed by the superiors, And that by the moving of heaven all things here
below, are engendered, and distroyed; or enter changed one into another:
Moreover that by the reuolutions, and influences of the Plannets assisted with
the other stars, there comes such a diversity of bodies and minds unto
men: some being stirred up to one action, others moved to another, even as
ships in the sea by the winds: so that they cannot of them selves either
move or stir any ways: Likewise the humors of the bodies to be moved by the
irradiations of the stars, of whom they receive diverse dispositions, which
the soul represents afterward in her actions: Insomuch, that in their
opinion, none can learn any art, or disiplin whatsoever, nor become excellent
therein, if he have not the original, and cause of his excellency, from the
heaven, and constellations. They say moreover, that howsoever the poverty,
situation, nature, and customs of countries, laws, and statutes of
government, religions, and manners of people do often contrary their fatal
destiny; nevertheless, that the destiny be it to good, or evil, does
ordinarilye return to his course, and accommodate it self as near as is
possible, to his first order, not denying notwithstanding, but that by good
education and laudable exercises it may greatly be helped: even as it comes
to pass in grounds, which by care and diligence are made more fertile: but
being left wast, do soon return to their first nature.

SOME ancient Philosophers considering, that in the minds of men do appear
the seeds of al disciplines, with some knowledge of God, of virtue, and of
vice, without any former teaching, or institution; have thought, that the
reasonable souls were taken and extracted from the Godhead: And that before
they came down from heaven to the earth (which place is contrary to their
divine, and immortal nature) they were full of universal intelligences, and
of sciences, which they forgot by the contagion of the body, as soon as they
came to dwell therein: But that afterward by care, study, and exercise they
recovered the remembrance of them: Thinking these first sparks and faculties
of the mind, to be quickened and revived again by learning and use; which for
that respect they called remembrance. That discoursing, teaching, learning,
providing, numbering, inuenting, judging, and other actions of the understanding
soul, did not proceed of any elementarie matter in any sort disposed,
affected, or ordered by the heavenly bodies; but of a more noble and
sempiternall coming from without, and being separable from the body; as the
eternal from the corruptible.

THE CHRISTIANS, being better instructed in the truth, have not sought the
cause of this variety, either in complexions or constellations; nor yet posted
it over to the inconstancy of fortune: but rejecting all such dedestiny, fatal
necessity, and hazardous chance, acknowledging truly the world to be governed,
by the divine providence; and reducing al thereunto do firmly believe, that God
according to his good pleasure, and one only Spirit which does all things in
all men, distributeth to diverse persons, distinct and different graces,
respecting still, the common good, and preservation of humane society: which
cannot endure without many and diverse estates, charges, administrations,
offices, callings, and works: in such sort preserving it self by mutual
succor, and reciprocal aid. But that the true virtue, ought chiefly to be
required and hoped for of him, without rejecting either natural inclination or
good education. And that therefore it behooves that this natural instinct, of
which we have spoken, should be provoked and stirred up by virtuous
institution, which corrects the ill if there be any, and augmenteth the good
in such as are of a good natural disposition, guiding by wise precepts and
counsels, this natural aptnes and inclination unto true perfection. Since that
nothing in the beginning is perfect: but that there goes always before some
toward disposition, and after follows the accomplishment; As at the point of
day break there is first a certain glimmering before the light appears: In
trees the bud, and the flower come before the fruit: In corn that is sown,
the blade, and the ear come before the grain. The goodness of nature alone
without discipline is not well assured, and discipline without nature altogether
unprofitable. Even as in tilling of the land to have good profit thereof, it is
not enough to have good ground, but it behooves also that the husbandman be
skilful in his trade and have good seed. After to confirm the^ both, and to
take a good custom which may always remain, perseverance, and continual
exercise are requisite, in such works and actions as concern that vocation
whereunto one is called. As the dyer being desirous to give some fine dye unto
a cloth which shall long time keep his color, does first wash it and prepare
it carefully, and after dies it again and again: So to the obtaining of
perdurable praise in any calling we must use necessary preparatiues, and even
from our youth imprint virtue in our hearts, and our manners by diligent
instruction; that it may long remain with us. These means are seldom found
altogether: but where they meet fitly and agreably they make men accomplished,
and admirable, such as those have been in times past, which at this day we so
highly commend and esteem. Such are the opinions concerning the variety which
is amongst men; having all of them a great appearance of truth: But here we
will follow the celestial and natural as the most common, and that which
Ptolomey writes thereof in these words. The properties of people (says he)
have usually been distinguished either by all Parallels and all Angles, or by
their situation toward the Ecliptique and the sun. For the inhabitants of
our land situated in an aquilonarie quadrant, which are subject to Souther
parellels; that is to say, which are described by the equinoctial unto the
tropique of Summer; as the sun goes over them, their bodies are black and
in a manner burnt therewith, their heir thick and curled, their faces
scorched: they are slender of stature, hot of nature, and cruel of disposition
by reason of the great heat which reigns in their country. We call the^
Ethiopians being so disposed as we have said, and having such constitution of
air, wherein do agree with them all the living creatures, and things growing
of that Country. But those which are under Aquilonarie Parallels, that is to
say, which inhabit such places as are under the North, because their vertical
point is far removed from the Zodiac, and from the heat of the sun, they
abound in cold and moisture: in which there is much nourishment which is not
drawn up by the said heat. By means whereof the men there are white of
color, with long hair; great of stature, and well made: but of cold nature,
and cruel manners through the vehement cold of those places. The sharpnes of
winter is agreeable hereunto and the greatness of all things which grow out of
the earth, and the wildnes of their beasts, we call them generally Scythians.
Touching them which inhabit between the Tropique of Summer and the North,
because the sun goes not on their Zenith, nor yet to far toward the South,
they live in a very temperate air, joining their houses together, and being of
gentle, and sweet manners. And such of them as are nearest the South are most
ingenious, and wise, and have accustomed to be best skilled in heavenly
matters, for as much as their vertical point is nearer the Zodiac, and the
wandering stars which are under it: by the familiarity of which, they have
their minds prompt, and ready for the comprehending and understanding of
affairs, and of arts; especially of the Mathematickes. Also such of them as
are toward the East, are more vigorous and firm of understanding, concealing
nothing. For by right we say that the East is of the nature of the sun: and
therefore that part of the day ought to be esteemed as the right side, the
better, and more manlike; as we see in living creatures, the right side to be
stronger and harder then the left. On the contrary they which are toward the
west are more effeminate, soft and secret; for that part belongs unto the
Moon, which is seen always toward the west between the interlunary spaces:
And therefore as the nocturnal, worst and left side is reputed opposite unto the
East. Aristotle affirms that those nations are barbarous which dwell under
excessive cold or heat, for as much as the good temperature of the air does
better both the manners and understandings. For the extreme Northern or
Southern people are not civil by nature, nor governed by discipline, nor
conjoined in habitations, neither do they sow nor plant; help themselves
little or nothing with manuary trades; exchange in their bargaining one thing
for another; not knowing the use of money: but living without houses, towns,
and cities; wandering continually by great troops representing great walking
Cities, guyded by diverse heads and Lords, and trailing or drawing after them
their little lodges, or houels, covered with leather, mattes, canes, or course
wool, to defend them selves against heat, cold, and rain. And without long
abode in any place, they follow the commodities of the herbage, and water for
their beasts and cattle, which they bring with them innumerable of diverse
sorts; as Horses, Camels, Sheep, and Kine; wherewith they sustain them
selves, and with venyson: being destitute of Corn, herbs, and fruits. Such
were, of ancient time in the Northern Countries the Scythians, and Sarmatians,
or Sauromatians dwelling in fields or Champaignes infinitely large, and
spacious, open, without wood, trees, or bushes, without ways or bounds, on
Chariots whereon they placed their wives, and children, which were therhence
called Nomades, and Hamaxobites. Being ignorant of till age they nourished them
selves with flesh and with milk, their land, which was plain and united being
fit for such manner of living, and being helped by sundry great rivers which
running overthwart and watering the ground, made it fat and fertile. Unto which
Scythians, the Tartarians, have succeeded living at this day (as is said) in
the same manner. Out of this quarter and this kind of people never came but two
Philosophers, Anacharsis, and Zamolsis, both of them brought up elsewhere: how
be it that in Greece there have bin innumerable.

ON THE other part, toward the south were the Numidians, living in the open
air without houses, always in labor and travail, not drinking any wine, and
faring simply and poorly, seeking only to satisfy nature, and not to serve
pleasure. Who by reason here of were very strong, whole, lusty, and able men,
and long lived. The Arabians or Alarbians live now in such manner sithence the
coming of Mahomet, leading with them their houses, villages, and towns which
they carry on Chariots; or on the back of Camels, following the commodity of
pasturage from Arabie, and the river Euphrates, even to the Atlanticke sea,
being very hurtful to the bordering plains of Suria, Egypt, and all the
nearer Afric: especially about the time of gathering corn, and fruits, for
they go down then by troops close, and thick: Then having taken what they
can, they retire with such swiftness that they seem rather to fly, then to
run: and it is not possible to overtake them, or to follow them thorough places
destitute of waters. It is a vagabond people and innumerable, yet diurded by
Nations, and Lords, called Schez evil agreeing together, and having no firm
habitation: They dwell commonly under tents and pauilions made of course and bad
wool; They live with flesh and milk especially of Camels, putting thereunto a
little rice, honey, dates, raisins, dry figgs, olives, and Venison when they
can catch it, going often with dogs and hawks, to hunt red dear, fallow
dear, Ostriches, and all other sort of wild game. They are commonly misshapen,
maigre, and lean, of small stature, of tawny, and duskish color, black eyed,
with a weak and feminine voice; wearing no other garments but shirts, saving
some chief of the^. They ride the most part, without sadles, spurs, or shoes on
their horses. Their arms are great India canes of x. or xij. cubits long, with
a little iron at the end, and a little taffeta in manner of a banderoll.
Notwithstanding living in this poverty and misery, they glory that they are
first nations and chief of the world, in that they were never mingled with
others, and have still preserved and kept entier the nobility of their blood.
Ioannes Leo an Affrican historiographer writes that they have many goodly
observations of Astrology, which by tradition they deliver from hand to hand to
their successors, and increase them daily.

BUT those nations which are in the mean habitatio of the world, are well
disposed, and instructed both in arms and learning: having by nature both
courage and understanding together. They live in good policy, inhabiting
houses, hamlets, parishes, villages, towns, cities, commonweals, kingdoms
and Empires: they have universities, and public schools, in which all
sciences are taught; they have variety of trads and occupations, serving not
only for necessity, but also for pleasure, ornament, and magnificence of
buildings, victuals, habits, and arms; they have judgment, reuenew, warfare,
and religion well appointed, and maintained.

AMONGST these of the mean, they which dwell nearest the South being naturally
melancolick do give themselves willingly to solytarines, and contemplation,
being sharp witted and ingenious: as the Egiptians, Lybians, Hebrews,
Arabians, Phaenicians, Assyrians, Persians, and Indians. Wherefore they have
invented many goodly sciences, unfolded the secrets of nature, found out the
Mathematickes, observed the celestial motions, and first known religion.
Amongst them have bin found learned Philosophers, divine Prophets and famous
Lawmakers.

THEY which draw toward the North, as the Almains, thorough the abundance of
humor and blood (which does hinder speculation) do apply themselves more to
sensible things and to Mechanical arts, that is to say, to the finding of
metals, and conduct of mines, to melt and forge works in iron, steel,
copper, and brass, in which they are admirable; having invented the use of
Ordinance, Artillery and Printing.

THOSE which dwell in the very midst, are not so naturally fit for the
speculatiue sciences, as the Southern nations, nor so apt for the mechanical
works as the Northern people are; but are best seen in handling public
affairs; and from them are come many good institutions, Laws, manners, the art
of government or Imperial, military discipline, and politic ordering of a
common wealth, the regiment of a Shipp or Pilots art, Logike, and Rhetoric.
And as the Meridional nations have not bin much exercised in arms, nor the
Septentrional in learning, the one excelling in understanding, the other in force;
they of the mean being both ingenious, and courageous, embracing both letters,
and arms together, and joining force with wisdom, have established
flourishing, and durable Empires, which the other could not do; for although
the Goths, Hunnes, and Vandales, more hardy then wise, have by arms invaded
Europe, Asia, and Afric, nevertheless for want of Counsel they established
not any power of continuance. Contrariwise the Romans being both valiant and
prudent, have surmounted all nations by the glory of their decdes, establishing
the greatest Empire and of longest continuance that ever was. And yet have not
been deprived of the excellency of disciplines, or of mechanical works.
Amongst whom have flourished famous Captains, good Lawmakers, learned Lawiers,
just Judges, severe Censors, grave Senators, ingenious and pleasant Poets,
eloquent Orators, true and elegant Historiographers, wary Merchants, and
exquisite Artificers.

CONCERNING the East and West, all do agree, that the Oriental or Easterly
situation, in the same aspect of heaven, and seated in the like place, is
better then the Westerly or Occidentall and that all things grow fairer, and
greater in the one then the other. Notwithstanding we see the Western people to
excel in force of body: and the others in vigor and sharpnes of
understanding. In so much that the West seems to have some affinity with the
North, and the East with the South. The Gauls or Frenchmen have often sent
great armies into Italy, Greece, and Asia: The Italians never overcame France
till they brought their Empire to his full height and force, and that under
Julius Caesar who found them divided into factions. The Italians overcame the
Grecians without great difficulty. The Grecians who by their arms had
penetrated into the farther Asia, came not far into Italy, but under King
Pyrrhus who was shamfully beaten back. Xerxes came down into Greece with an
innumerable army, yet nevertheless was overcome by a few Grecians, and
driven back again with a reprochful, and ignominious loss.

INREGARD of the parts of the habitable earth, many excellent men of war have been renowned in Europe, few in Africa, fewer in Asia: which is come to pass,
by reason that these two last parts of the world have had one or two
soueraignties, but few commonweals. But Europe has only had certain
kingdoms, but infinite common weals. Men become excellent, and make show of
their virtue, according as they are employed and advanced by their Prince, or
common wealth. It is the^ likly that where are many potentats, there will also
be found many valiant men: and few, where there are but few potentats. In Asia
are found Ninus, Cyrus, Darius, Artaxerxes, Mithridates, and a few others to
bear them company. In Afric are named (leaving out the antiquity of Egypt)
Masinissa, Iugurtha, and the Captains bred by the common wealth of Carthage:
the which yet in respect of Europe are but few; For as much as there are
excellent ones in Europe without number, and more would be, if those other were
named which by the malignity of the time are forgotten. For the world has been
there most virtuous, where there have been most great estates favorers of
virtue; either for necessity; or some other humane passion. There have been
therefore few excellent men in Asia, because that province was wholly under one
kingdom, which by the greatness thereof remaining for the most part idle, they
could not there become excellent men for managing of affairs. The same is also
in Africa where likewise there have bin few, save only in the common wealth of
Carthage. This being also observed, that there are more excellent personages
found in commonweals, then in kingdoms; in the which virtue is honored, and
in kingdoms suppressed: whence comes to pass that in a common wealth the
virtuous are cherished, and in a kingdom not regarded.

Wherefore he that shall consider Europe shall find it to have bin full of
commonweals, and principalities, which for the fear they had one of the
other, were constrained to keep in vigor the military orders; and to honor,
and esteem of such as were best skilled therein. For in Greece besides the
kingdom of Macedony there were many commonweals, and in every of the^ were
bred most excellent men; In Italy were the Romans, Samnites, Toscans, and
Gauls Cisalpins; France, and Germany were full of commonweals and princes:
likewise Spain. And although in comparison of the Romans there are few others
named; that coms to pas by the malignity of writers, which follow fortune, and
honor none but the vanquishers: But it seems not likely that amongst the
Samnites, and Toscans which maintained wars 150. years against the people of
Rome, before they were overcome, there were not many excellent men; and
likewise in France and Spain. But that virtue which the writers do not
celebrate in particular men, they extol generally in the whole nations;
exalting even unto heaven their obstinate defending of their liberty. It being
true then, that where are most estates, there arise most valiant men, It
follows necessarily that where there are fewest, there virtue from hand to
hand diminishes: because there remains lest occasion to make me^ virtuous.

Wherefore the Empire being since increased, and having extinguished all the
commonweals and Seigniories of Europe, and Afric, and the greatest part of
those of Asia; it left no way nor means unto virtue any where but at Rome; so
that there began to be few excellent men in Europe, as in Asia; which virtue
came since even to his last overthrow; forasmuch as all virtue being reduced
unto Rome; when it was once corrupted, even almost all the world came to
corruption therewith. And the Northren nations were of power to come, and
spoil this Empire, which had extinguished the light of others virtue, and
could not maintain his own. Although then that by the inundation of these
barbarous nations, it was divided into many parts; yet the former virtue could
not yet spring up again, by reason of the difficulty which there is for a time
to resume the former orders being overthrown; and also because the manner of
living at this day (considering the christian religion) does not imposethe same
necessity of defending our selves, which was in ancient time. For then, those
me^ that were over come in war were either slain, or else remained in perpetual
bondage, leading a miserable life: The conquered lands were left desolate, or
else they drove the inahbitants, being spoiled of their goods, like fugitives
throughout the world. Insomuch that those which in wars were overcome endured
al extremity of misery. Being moved with this fear, me^ always held military
exercise in vigor, and honored such as excelled therein. But at this day this
fear for the most part is taken away: for there are few of the vanquished
slain, and they remain not long prisoners, the way being easy to deliver
them. And although Cities should a thousand times reuolte, yet are they not
destroyed, but the men enjoy their goods; and the greatest evil they fear is
an impost or tax: wherefore they will not submit themselves to the military
orders, and entirely bear the charges of the war, to prevent these dangers,
which they do not much fear; since the provinces of Europe are reduced to so
few heads in respect of the time past: All France being subject to one king,
Spain to another, and Italy divided into parts. In such sort, that the weak
Cities are saved by associating them selves with the vanquishers; and the other
estates by the foresaid reasons do not fear their utter overthrow. Touching
the Almaines and Switzers, because there were amongst them many common wealths,
and Seigniories, being jealous of their estates, and constrained to maintain
them by exercise of arms, they have brought forth whatsoever is good at this
day in Military discipline, in these parts. Moreover men in their food and
norishment, are no less different, according to the diversity of countries
then in other things; each country having his peculiar meats, and a several
kind of dressing, preparing, sauouring, saulcing, rosting, and boiling them:
And in each season of the year nature yeldeth new meats both by sea and land.
As then there are found diverse sorts of food; so are there also diverse manners
of living, both of beasts, and of men. For being not possible for them to live
without nourishment, the difference thereof makes their manner of living to be
diverse, and different. So that of beasts, some live in herds and flocks;
other separated here and there, as is most expedient for purchase of their
living: And some of the^ feed on living creatures, others on fruits, others on
every thing; so that nature has severed their lives according to the commodity
and choice of these things. But for as much as naturally every creature has
not pleasure in the self same, but some delight in one thing and some in
another: for this cause do the lives of them differ which eat living
creatures, and which feed on fruits. Likewise there is a great difference
between the lives of men; The Idler sort give them selves to pasturage,
feeding on tame beasts, without pains; or travail: but because it is needful
for them to remove their cattaile from place to place for pasture, they are
constrained to follow, exercising as it were a lively kind of husbandry. Some
live on hunting in diverse sorts: as some on their pray; others on fishing, as
they which live near unto lakes, pondes, and rivers; and such as border on the
sea; others on birds, and wild beasts, which inhabit near unto the woods;
The poor thoroughout the wide forests, and high mountains, live on roots,
akornes, and wildfruits: notwithstanding the greatest part of men live of the
earth, and of such fruits as they find at home. So that the manners of living
used amongst them, are pasturage, tillage, hunting, hauking, fishing, and
fouling. Others by mingling of these do live better at ease, helping their life
(which has need of many things) with that which it wants, to thend to have
sufficient: As some use pasturage and hauking, others join tillage with
hunting; and so the other kinds of living according as necessity constrains
them, or delight and pleasure provoke them.

The Canibals even at this day do eat man's flesh roasted; likewise the other
Savages eat their enemies which they have taken in wars: The Arabians feed on
Camels, and Ostriches, bread of Millet and rapeseed pilled. The Tartarians on
raw flesh indifferently, of dogs, horses, cats, snakes, and such other beasts:
which they do only press between two stones to draw out the blood thereof, or
else do mortify it on the back of a horse when a man is on him. They drink
mares milk, preparing it in such sort that it resembles whitewine, and it is
not much unsavory, nor of ill taste: The Cathayans also eat raw flesh, cutting
it first in small pieces, then they conserve it in odoriferous oils, with good
spices, and then do eat if so prepared. Their drink is made of rice, with
diverse spices; which has a taste more delicious and pleasant then wine, and
they which drink more then enough thereof, are sooner drunk then with wine. The
Medites having neither corn nor wine, use great hunting in the summer time,
and taking both of wild beasts, and birds: whereof they make their provision to
live in winter. And in some places they make biscuit of fishes, dried and cut in
small pieces, which they beat, and bray into powder or flower, then they temper
it with water, make past thereof, mould it, and make it into loaves of bread,
which they dry in the sun; and live thereof all the year. The people of
Calecut live on rice, fishes, spices, and fruits altogether different from
ours. They drink wine of palms, and of dates mingled with rice, and sugar.
Throughout all the western Islands they make bread of a kind of wheat called
Mahiz, and of a root named Iuca: which are ordinary feeding as well in the
Islands, as in the maine land. They make drink of certain Pine apples which
the call Ya yama, which is wholesome; but because it is to sweet, it is not so
pleasant to drink as the drink of our countries. It would be too long, and
tedious, to recite here and set down severally all the kinds of living,
received of men either for necessity, or for superfluity, and delights.

Therefore these already rehearsed as the most strange, and most different from
ours shall suffice at this time. But besides the commodities and discommodities
of living, which men have in their several Countries; some abstain from
certain meats, either by opinion, as the Pythagoreans did, from a cow, and
from a bean: or else by religion; and that either for a time; as from flesh in
Lent, and on fasting days amongst the Christians; or always, as the
Charterhouse Monks, and Carthusian Friars. On the contrary the ancient
priests of Egypt, thought it a great sin to eat fish, as Herodotus has
wrtiten. The Egiptians abstained also from swines-flesh, as the Jews do at this
day, and the Mahometans, who moreover will drink no wine: The Malharbians, and
Guzeras do eat nothing that has blood, neither kill they any thing that has
life: Therefore they neither eat green herbs nor new fruit, thinking that
there is life in them, and that it is a great offense to make them die: They
worship Oxen, and abstain from eating them as the Jews do from swine: The
others being not so scrupulous do use indifferently all kind of meats which
they can comeby.

OF THE VARIETY of People.
IT seems that there is in men some natural desire to change their
habitations, and dwellings; having a mutable mind, impacient of rest, and
desirous of novelties: By reason whereof, they cease not from going one to an
other, changing of manners, tongues, letters, lordships, and religions: Few
countries are inhabited by the true originaries: almost all Nations are
mingled. In ancient time the Egyptians dwelt in Babylon, Cholchis, Syria, and
Greece; The Grecians in that part of Italy, which is next the lower sea; the
Tyrians in Afrike; the Africans in Spain; the Phocians in Gaul; the Gauls in
Greece, and Asia; the Macedonians in Syria, and Egypt: So have the Arabians
past into Persia, Syria, Afrike, Italy, and Spain: So the Tartarians into
Scythia: So the Spaniards into America, to Peru, and into the East, and West
India: The excessive heates, and coldes, the deep seas, and large rivers, the
high mountains, the great woods, and deserts, can not let them from changing
their dwellinges: Notwithstanding, they remove commonly out of cold Regions
into temperate; as the Parthians and Turks have done on the side of Asia; and
in Europe the Cymbrians, Sicambrians, Saxons, Goths, Lombards, Burgundians,
Frenchmen, Vandales, Normans, Alanes, Hunnes, Hungarians, and Slauonians: which
at diverse times going out of the North, have possessed the principal regions
of Europe. Others having long straied and wandered, do not make choice of their
habitation, but stay at the first place where they find themselves wearle;
being not able to go any farther: Others get it by force of arms: Some
straiers perish bythe way; others dwell where their poverty leaves them; and
they have not all the same necessity to abandon their Country, and to seek a
new. Some by strange armies being beaten out of their own, invade some other:
others being oppressed with civil sedition; others being increased to an
ouergreat multitude; others by pestilence; or by barrennes of their land; and
others hoping to recover a better. Howsoever; all usurpers have accustomed, to
abolysh as much as lay in them, the dignity, and memory of their
predecessors, as well for envy, hatred, and contempt, as for ambition, to thend
to make their name only from that time forward to flourish: as the Medians
did, usurping the Lordship over the Assyrians; the Persians over the Medes, and
Egiptians; the Romans over the Gauls, Spaniards, and Africans; the Goths and
Vandales over the Romans; the Arabians over the Persians, Egiptians, and
Africans: which at this day also the Spaniards do in the new found Lands; and
the Turks in those places which they get on the Christians; destroying their
buildings, titles, letters, books, histories, and sciences.

THE VICISSITVDE of Towns
SOme Towns and Cities begin, others end, others increase, and others diminish:
coming of little to be great; and of great little: some are overthrown by
wars, others by sedition, others by long peace turned into loosenes; or by
pomp and prodigality, pernicious to great riches; or by casual chances of
fire, inundation of waters, or Earthquakes; or else by old age, which consumes
all things. Niniue so great, so fair, and sumptuous, was distroyed by Arbaces,
and the Medians; Carthage by Scipio, and the Romans* By tract of time the
greatest part of Babylon has bin turned unto tillage, and at this day is
nothing; or else has changed his name: Athens is reduced into a little
village; Troy into Champaigne: Jerusalem so famous throughout the scripture,
has bin often distroied, and reedified: Thebes was sometime the fairest City,
not only of Egypt, but of the whole world; the magnificence of which was
diminished by the increase of Memphis: And that of Memphis, by the edification
and augmentation of Alexandria, holden for the chief or second City in the
world. Rome began when Babylon ended: and Constantinople is grown up by the
spoil of Rome; the Empire being transported thither with his chief forces,
and riches. Lions first situated on a hill, was burned, then reedified below:
Elice and Buria drowned. In ancient time there were in Candie 100. Towns,
which are now reduced unto three. On the contrary, in Germany there were no
Towns: there are at this day the fairest, the strongest, and best governed
that are any where. The Arabians and Tartarians march by great troops,
representing great walking cities. In other places are seen veriefaire Cities,
which were not in former time: As Cair, Alep, Tauris, Mosko, Prague, Cracouia,
Nugradia, Antwerp, London, Lishbon, Paris, Roan, Mexico in Temistiten, Venice,
Cambalu, Quinzay, Meace in Gyapan, Malach, and Ormus.

THE VICISSITVDE OF COMMONWEALS, Kingdoms, and Empires.
THe first and chiefest form of Civil government is a Monarchy erected
naturally, which by good establishment begets a Kingdom, or Roialtie; but
when a Roialtie falls into those vices which are nearest i^; as into
Tyranny: of their abolition arises Aristocratie, which is commonly changed
into Oligarchie. And when the Communaltie reuengeth the injustice of the
Governors, there follows a Democratie; by the outrages, and iniquities
whereof, is again erected the Ochlocratie. Such is the natural revolution of
governments, according unto which the estate of the common wealth is changed
and translated; and again returns to the same. If the virtue of commanders
were always alike, the affairs of men would go better, and more certainly
without being transported to and fro, and incessantly altered; for authority
is easily maintained by the same means, by which it is gotten: but where for
diligence idleness; for continency and equity, covetousness and pride do take
place: there the fortune changes with the manner of their living. Wherefore
the Kingdoms and Empires are translated continually from the less apt and
able, to those that more; changing from family to family, and from nation to
nation; As by the variable course of the Moon is governed the great Sea,
moving or appeasing his waves; aduauncing or withdrawing the flowing, and the
ebbing of the tides: so are by the vnstabilitie of fortune, and men's want of
wisdom, public states increased, diminished, exalted, abased, changed,
destroyed, converted, and put over, from some unto others: those that are best
governed, having their power more assured, and durable then the rest: and yet
none being perpetual; for as much as they are corrupted in length of years,
whatsoever good orders there are at the beginning: if heed be not carefully
taken in reforming them often, and reducing them as much as is possible to
their first integrity. We see that a Lordship well founded does prosper a
time, by the goodness of the government, and goes from good to better, drawing
in a right line toward the midst, or the highest of his true politic course:
afterward declineth from high to low, or from the midst to the extremity.
True it is, that where the one ends, the other begins; and is advanced by the
ruin of the former: or many small are reduced into one great; and that great
one divided into lesser.

THE VICISSITVDE AND variety of Tongues.
LIkewise the Tongues, words, writings, and Characters, are continually
changed, having no better hap, then other human things, which do change
ordinarily, with their words: namely, manners of living, both public, and
private; customs, meats, laws, habits, and garments, edifices, buildings,
arms, engines, and instruments. They have a beginning, continuance,
perfection, corruption, and alteration. Some are altogether lost; others do
spring out of the former, being corrupted, and mingled: others after they have
bin long time disanulled, are restored. They are maintained with their
propriety, sweetness, and elegancie: with the sciences which are written in
them, thorough the power and greatness of Empire; and by religions: with which
means they are largely spread abroad in diverse Countries, and endure long: as
also they are lost by the contrary.

THE VICISSITVDE of Arts.
BY the same order and interchangeable course, the Arts and Sciences being
small at beginning, do augment by little and little, and come up to their
perfection: whether after they are once come, they fall eftsoons, and finally
perish thorough the sloth of men, or by the calamity of wars long
continued, or by the tyranny of barbarous people: Then when they have bin a
while let down, they arise again, and successively recover their former
strength. Which has given occasion to some excellent Philosophers, and
Astrologers to think, that the same Sciences have sundry times bin invented
before, time out of mind, and lost again; as they may be again also in time
to come: seeing that power and wisdom leave not long each other; but
ordinarily keep good company together. As I have observed within these three
thousand years to have fallen out five or six times at certain seasons,
finding the excellency of arms, and learning, to have bin first in Egypt,
Assyria, Persia, and Asia the lesser: consequently in Greece, Italy, and
Sarasmenia: and finally in this age, in which we see almost all ancient,
liberal, and Mechanical arts to be restored with the tongues: after that they
had bin lost almost twelve hundred years, and other new, invented in their
places. Wherein shall be employed all the discourse ensuing, depending on the
former: which we will begin with the Tongues, with which are preserved and
lost, all human arts and affairs.

The end of the first Book.
OF THE VICISSITVDE AND variety of Tongues. The second Book.
GOD creating Man, gave him for a great and excellent gift, the use of Reason,
and Speech; and by these two prerogatives has separated him from other
Creatures: But reason would little help him, and would less appear in him,
if he could not by speech express that which before he had conceived in his
mind; for the beasts seem to yield unto him rather in speech then
understanding; doing finely and curiously many works which he can not imitate:
which because they can not speak, are called mute or dumb, and unreasonable
creatures. And although men are more sociable, yet little would the similitude
of nature which is amongst them, avail them unto this society, if they did
not understand one an other; and would rather choose to converse with the dumb
creatures, of diverse kinds* then with other strange men which they understand
not. Speech then being so necessary to a civil man; who by reason alone can
not have the company of an other, and being naturally given him to declare the
conceits and affections of his mind; notwithstanding it comes to pass, that
the words are not always, and every where the same, as the things are unto
which they are imposed: but do change from country to country, and from time
to time; according to the use and custom of those that speak; being
received, and understood amongst them by their own agreement, and consent:
From whence proceeds this variety of Languages amongst men dispersed over
the whole habitable earth, being so spacious in length, and breadth, the one not
understanding the other but by signs, or interpreters. But if, as there is in
all men one first principle of reason, and one common interior intelligence,
it were possible that there were also but one common tongue to serve in arts,
and contracts; they would love one another better, by the ceasing of that
discord, which comes by the diversity, and ignorance of tongues; and employ
that time in knowledge of things, which they are now constrained to bestow in
learning of words. Diodorus the Sicilian following the ancient Philosophers
has written, that men at the beginning had the sound of their voice confused,
and not to be understood; but that by little and little, making distinction,
they named every thing by his name: And for as much as they were then dwelling
in diverse parts of the world, they did not use all one speech and language;
whence it came to pass, that they had also different Characters, and letters.
Moses declares in Genesis, how the language of all the earth was confounded in
the building of the tower of Babel; wherehence has proceeded the division of
Nations, and the beginning of the diversity of Tongues, by the pride and
presumption of men. As in truth it is a punishment for sin that we have so
many, which are changed incessantly at the pleasure of the common people,
forging daily new words; by the birth of which the former must needs decay:
Even as the seasons of the year do spoil the earth of her flowers and
fruits; and do after cloth it a new with others. Likewise time makes words
to fall; and use makes new to spring in their places, and graceth them, making
them to be in request; until that, being by age consumed by little and little,
they come also to die: because that in the end, both we, and all things that
are ours are mortal. But such change and variety comes ordinarily of the
mingling of diverse Nations, and of great faires, and armies; where are people
of diverse languages, who assembling, and communing together, do continually
forge new words; which do either endure, or perish, according as of custom
they are accepted, or rejected.

And howbeit that speech is natural unto men, yet do they not speak but
artificially; nor do they learn it, but in hearing others speak: first their
mothers, and their nurses; and afterward the common people. Wherefore it
behooves, that the first which imposed names on things, having no other of whom
they might learn them, did miraculously learn them in that tongue, wherein
the nature, and truth of things agreed with their originals, and Etimologies:
which men even to this present have endeavored to seek in all tongues, in the
significations of words. The Hebrews attribute this honor to their tongue,
which they account the first and most ancient of the world. Herodotus writes,
that Psamneticus King of Egypt, being desirous to know which was the first
language, gave two young children of poor parentage to a Shepherd to be kept,
forbidding any word to be spoken in their hearing: but commanded they should
be kept a sunder; and that at certain hours there should goats be brought to
give them suck: which he did for a desire he had to hear what word these
children would speak first: And it happened after two years, when the Shepherd
opened the door to come in to the children, they fell down both at his feet,
and holding up their hands pronounced this word, Bec, which is as much to say
as Bread, in the Phrygian tongues. And so it was found, that the Phrygians were
more ancient then the Egyptians, and their language the first. Vitruuius the
Architect, speaking somewhat grossly of this matter, says, that while men
dwelt yet in the forrestes, in some of the thickest places, the trees shaken by
the force of the winds, and beating violently one against an other, stroke
fire, whereat those that were near being astonished, fled; and afterward
coming near again, when the noise was stilled, they found that great
commodity came to the body by the heat of the fire; and putting wood into it,
so maintayning it, they called the rest, and showed unto them by signs, the
good that came of it: In this first assembly, their voices issuing diversely
out of their breasts, the words were made as they offered themselves, by the
which signifying often the same things, they began to speak at adventure; and so
formed the languages amongst them. Pythagoras did attribute sovereign wisdom to
him which first found out names for every thing. And Plato affirms in his
Cratilus, that it was done by a power, more then human: for in truth man
could not of him self, without the help of God discern innumerable things
contained in the world by their proper names, which otherways had remained
unknown: I say, the Heaven, his parts, and mouings; the fixed, and wandering
Stars; the Elements with their qualities; wyndes, raines, hail, snowes,
thunders, and other meteors; birds, beasts, fishes, herbs, plants, trees,
grains, minerals, stones, pearls, their natures and properties; seas, gulfes,
climates, havens, ports, isles, rivers, lakes, pooles, lands, countries,
people, nations, villages, hamlets, towns, and cities: The inward and outward
parts of the body; senses, and their objects; odours, savors, smells, and
tastes; maladies, and their remedies; infinite human actions; victuals,
garments, laws, magistrates, judgments, governments, ceremonies, warfare,
revenues, moneies: so many arts and occupations with their instruments: so
many persons with names, and surnames, the affinities and alliances betwixt
them. The controversy also in times past has bin great amongst the learned,
whether words were imposed at the will and pleasure of them that speak, or else
by art, and natural reason. The variety and continual mutation which is seen
in tongues, made some think that this imposition was casual, and arbitrarie,
founded on the consent and custom of men: Others said, that sithence the names
are as instruments ordained to present things unto us, which do not change
thorough our opinions; but according to their nature remain always in the
same order; also that the true names did not change after our pleasure: but
were agreeable to the things signified, whose essence, and similitude they did
imitate; being first conceived in mind, afterward expressed in sound, and
voice, and then written by letters and sillables. Which opinion some have so
far believed, that they have gone about to enquire, and search out the
propriety of things, by the propriety of words; and to insinuate so far, by
the secret virtue which they deemed in them, as to do miracles in pronouncing
them; and to heal the diseases both of body and mind therewith: And that which
is more, they have affirmed, that there are some invented by divine
inspiration, meaning amongst others the name of GOD, which is pronounced by
four letters only in most languages: In which they say so many Nations could
not agree, without some maruailous mystery of the divinity.

If the imposition, property, and virtue of names be admirable, the invention
and use of Letters is no less; and to have found a mean to comprehend in a few
notes, such a multitude, and variety of sounds, and voices of men. By them are
written the things of greatest profit unto the world; as the laws, sentences
of Judges, testaments, contracts, and other such things necessary for the
understanding of the life of man: Those which have bin long time dead, are
revived in the memory of the living; and they which are many miles distant a
sunder, commune with their absent friends, as if they were present: The sacred
Books of the holy Scripture, and word of God, are preserved by them; the
sentences of wise men, philosophy, and generally all sciences are delivered
over from hand to hand to the suruiuors. Some have cauiled at this invention,
as Thames king of Egypt (in Platoes Phaedrus) who made answer to Theut
(boasting himself thereof) that he had not found, a remedy or help for memory,
but for remembrance. Therefore, the Pythagoreans, and the French Druydes did
write nothing; but delivered one to another their mysteries without writing; to
thend that they should not exercise their memory the less, thorough the
confidence of letters: Notwithstanding, experience (which is Mistres of things)
has manifestly opened their error; for as much as by writing nothing, the
memory of their doctrine in process of years thorough man's imbecillitie is
utterly lost, no appearance, or ancient mark thereof remaining at this day.

In like manner the Hebrews say of their Cabal, that it was first given by God
to the Patriarchs, and to Moises, afterward to the Prophets: not written, but
revealed successively, and given from hand to hand, by the one to the other.
But after they were delivered from the Captivity of Babylon by Cyrus, and that
under Zorobabel they had reedified the Temple: then Esdras who already had
restored the books of Moises, foreseeing, that his nation amongst so many
calamities, flights, banishments, and mortalities, unto which it was exposed;
could not at length preserve and keep the secreats of that celestial doctrine
revealed to them from above, and preferred before the written Law; except they
did write them: he gathered what he could of the wise men then suruiuing, and
reduced it into seventy Volumes.

Letters then being most necessary; after they were invented, they which
considered them nearest, divided them into Vowels, and Consonants; then into
half vowels, mutes, and liquids: calling that art Grammar, which served to
know, to discern, and to assemble them; to make sillables, nounes, verbs, and
speech. And although Pliny, building on the authority of Epigenes, thinks
the use of letters to have bin eternal (that is to say, without beginning)
nevertheless, he is gainsaid in that, by other Authors. Philo the Jew imputes
the invention of the Hebrew letters to Abraham; Eusebius to Moises; and others
unto Esdras. Josephus says, that the children of Seth, the son of Adam,
erected two Pillars, the one of stone, the other of earth, in the which they
wrote the arts invented by them: and that the one of stone was yet in his time
remaining in Syria. Cicero attributes the Egiptian letters to Mercury, and the
Phrygian to Hercules. Liuie ascribes the Latin to Euander the Arcadian, whom
he calls venerable by the miracle of letters. Cor. Tacitus the Hetrurian
letters to Demaratus the Corinthian: The Slauonians attribute theirs to S.
Iherome, who they say translated into their tongue, the old and new Testament.
The Bishop Gordian gave letters to the Goths. The ancient Frenchmen which
first possessed both the Gauls, had three sorts of letters, differing the one
from the other: The first inverted by Wastald; the other by Dorac; the third by
Hiche. The Normans had theirs also described by Bid. In like manner many
Nations have invented new Characters, have changed, and corrupted the old; as
the Slauons those of the Greeks; the Armenia^s of the Chaldees; the Chaldees of
the Hebrews; the Goths, Lombards, Spaniards, Germains, and Frenchmen those of
the Romans. The other Hetrurian letters which are seen yet at this day in the
ancient sepulchers, are altogether unknown: Others searching the same yet more
deeply, and fetching it farther off, affime that they were first invented by
the Ethiopians, who delivered them to the Egiptians; the Egiptians to the
Assyrians; the Assyrians to the Phenicians; the Phenicians to the Pelagians;
the Pelagians to the Latins; the Latins to the Italians, Frenchmen, Spaniards,
Almains, Englishmen, Scots, Noruegians, Suecians, Polacques, and Hungarians.

The Characters of the letters are no less different then the tongues; and can
not serve any tongue but that whereunto they were ordained; nor represent the
entier, and natural pronunciation, no, not of their own; which changes not
only from town to town, but almost from village to village; for Greek could
not be written in Latin letters, nor the Latin in Greek letters: and the Greeks
and Latins do not always pronounce as they write; but to make the sound of
their words softer, do change the pronounciation of some letters, taking the one
for the other: whereof there is a complaint made in Lucian to the judgment of the
vowels. Suetonius writes of Augustus, that he observed not the Ortographie set
down by the Gramarians, but seem rather to lean to the opinion of those, which
think that we ought to writ as we speak: In the which howbeit he were followed,
yet could he not with his imperial authority, and inestimable power prevail
against custom: And therefore I wonder at some Frenchmen, who not considering
that in Grammar, there is more observation the^ reason; and that it behooves in
such things as are speking, writing, and pronou^cing, with nature to mingle
custom (which as Quint. says, is the most certain Mistress thereof) have of
late intruded themselves, assaying to reduce the writing of that language
(which they have clean turned vp-side down) wholly to the pronunciation;
without thinking that the French do use strange letters; which if they could
never thoroughly satisfy their own tongue, but because of their defect have
bin often changed, and augmented; how should they then satisfy another? In
so much that it seems to some to be a thing impossible, that a people having
a peculier tongue of their own should use strange letters, but with great
difficulty; as we see in the Dutch and English, using Latin letters; and in
the Turk, and Persian, which use the Arabian. As also they are of opinion,
that the history of one Nation, can not conveniently be written in another
language, then that of the same country; induced to think so by the Romain
history, which being written in Greek, seems no more to be Romain:
especially where there is question of customs, laws, magistrates, moneys,
revenues, and ceremonies: wherein the Greek tongue being otherwise rich and
plentiful, seems rude, and barbarous; where the latin is fine and eloquent.
The same is befalne to the Greek History, written in the Latin tongue: and
likewise to the French made by Gaguinus, Paulus Emilius, and others,
representing little, and ill to the purpose, the affairs of France in a
strange language, used only now a days in schools: whereas Froissard,
Monstrellet, Phillip de Commines, Guill. and Martin du Bellay, are found large
and convenient. But to thend not to digress from our commenced purpose, I will
return to speak of Letters. The Hebrews and Latins have twenty and two;
The Slauons, and Iacobites two and thirty; The Armenians 38; The Abissins or
Ethiopians 47; The Arabians 31; The Chaldeans 28: The Latins, Greeks, and other
inhabitants of Europe, and the Indians of Malabar, having peculiar letters of
their own, do write from the left side toward the right; The Hebrews,
Chaldees, Arabians, and generally all the Asiatickes, and Africans, from the
right to the left, imitating the moving of the Heaven, which is from the right
hand to the left, and is most perfect according to Aristotle, approaching
nearest to the unity, which of Plato is called the motion of similitude, or of
uniformity; The Cathayans, or people of China, and Iapania, from above
downe-wards, saying that therein they follow the order of nature, which has
given to men their heads placed above, and their feet below. Diodorus the
Sicilian writes, that in a certain Island found toward the South by
Iambolus, thinhabitants did not write from one side to the other as we do, but
drew their line straight from above downwards, having 28* letters in number,
according to the signification which they give them. Other manners of writing
there can not be; except one would write a cross, or overthwart. The Eastern,
and Southern nations do use points; the Greeks their abbreuiations; the
Latins their titles; the Egiptians in holy things did use the figures of
beasts for letters, which they called Hierogliphicks. The most Ancients did
write, in the rynde or bark of trees, and in tables, and leaves of wood:
others in Palm-leaues, according to the commodity of their country; others in
lead. Their missiue letters, or Epistles were written in tables or wax; the
Laws, and other durable things were engraven in brass, or copper: They did
write also in fine linen cloth. Themperor Commodus used the fine bark of the
Linden tree, called of the Latins Tylia, or Philyra: Others the rynds of a
little tree called Papyrus, (growing in the marshes of Egypt) which were
thicker: from whence came the name of Paper used at this present: which is made
of old rags of cloth, steeped along time in water, and braied in the mill;
after brought into a kind of past, which being stretched out on a gredyron of
brass, to thend to dry it, and being put between locks of woll, and pressed;
after it is a little dried, becomes fine, smooth, thin, and white paper: we
use Parchmin also more strong, and durable then paper, which is made of
sheepskins, goatskins, and calueskins, coried and dressed by the
Leatherdressers, and parchminmakers. Herodotus in his Terpsichore witnesses,
that they used these skins to write on in his time. And Josephus says, that
the holy Scriptures were first written in them. M. Varro thinks they were first
found out at Pergamus a City of Asia, (from whence they yet take their name)
at such time as the two kings, Ptolomeus, and Eumenes erected their Libraries;
envying one the other. Diodorus the Sicilian writes, that the letters of the
Ethiopians were made after the likeness of sundry beasts; and the extremities
of diverse members of man; and of diverse instruments and tools of artificers,
and their intentions, and words were not expressed by composition of sillables
or letters; but by forms, and figures of Images; whose signification remained
unto them by use in the memory of men: for they would set down a Kyte, a
Crocodile, a man's eye, a hand, a face, and other such like things: The Kyte
signified a thing soon done, because he is one of the swiftest birds; and this
character is properly applied to home affairs which are speedily dispatched;
the Crocodile did note some evil thing; the eye, an obseruer of Justice, and a
guard or watchman of the body; the right hand with the fingers stretched out,
betokened liberty, or liberality; and the left hand closed, was hardness and
greedines. After this manner the figures of other parts of the body, and forms
of certain instruments, did notify some other thing amongst those Ethiopians,
who retayning it thorough long practice in their memory, did readily
understand what the said figures meant, and signified.

Those of Malabar, and other Indians dwelling between the river of Inde, and
Ganges, do yet at this day write in palm-leaues, either greater or lesser,
according to the matter which they intend to write: In whole ones they write
such things as they would have to endure long; as the affairs of their
Religion, and their Histories; the other things of less consequence, in a
quarter, or half quarter, as well on the one side, as the other. And when they have
written a great number, meaning to ioin them in books, they fasten them between
two bordes, in steed of those forels or couers which we use; after, as we sow
our leaves, so do they tie theirs with strings to the said couers. For their
missiue letters, it suffiseth that the leaf be written, and rolled up in it
self, and in steed of sealing of it, they bind it with a thread of the palm it
self: They use to writ with an instrument of iron or wood sharpened, passing
lightly over the leaf not percing it, and imprinting the characters of their
letters in such sort, that they may write on both sides: The Other writings more
permanent, as foundations of Churches, are ^^t in Copper, or graven in stone.

Peter Marty^a Milanois historian, writing of the difcouerie of the new found
lands* made by the Castilians; says that the inhabitants of Collacuan, brought
into Spain amongst other gifts, certain books written in the fine inner
ryndes of trees, which are found between the wood, and the thick uttermost
bark: And that they are taken sometimes of willowes, or of Alders, which they
covered with course cloth, and fastened together with cyment, and rubbed over
with fine plaster; which when it is dry, they write what they will on them.
There books are not made by leaves, but they stretch them forth many cubits in
length, and bring them into square pieces, joined in such sort with cyment, or
soder, that they are easy to turn, and seem to be made of bordes, or tables
of wood: and wheresoever they are opened, there appear twosides written, in
manner of two pages: as much there is underneath, if they be not stretched out
in length, because that under one leaf are many leaves written. The letters
and characters are like unto hooks, ginnes, files, stars, and other such
forms; where with they write in lines after our fashion, representing in some
sort the ancient manner of the Egiptians, and Ethiopians; and they paint
between the lines figures of living creatures: namely of men as is aforesaid,
as of Kings and princes, reciting their acts. They write also their Laws,
sacrifices, ceremonies, observations of the stars, and of husbandry: Both
the upper, and under side is of fine workmanship, and such as when they are
foulded up, they seem nothing different from ours. They make little
table-bookes also of bordes of figtree, to write common things on; which they
can easily deface again. The said Martyr says also, that there have bin
found in Darienna, books made of the leaves of trees sowed together; and that
at Mesira they use figures, by which they signify their affairs, as well as by
writing. Moreover, that in Hispaniola, there is found a tree called Coppeia,
whose leaf is as fit to write on as paper, with a needle, or pin, or a pointed
stick: and that it is to be thought, that this is the tree, in the leaves of
which the Chaldees, the first inuentors of Letters, did write their conceits,
before the use of letters was invented. The leaf will abide writing on both
sides, as well as our paper; it is about twelve fingers broad; and almost round;
thicker then double parchmine; and very tough: When it is wet, the letters
appear white in the green leaf; but when it is dried, it becoms white, and
hard as a wooden board; but then the letters are yellow: it is never marred,
nor defaced for wetting; if it be not burnt. Paulus Venetus writes, that in
the province of Arcadan (which is subject to the great Cham) there are neither
letters, nor characters: but that men there make their contracts, and
obligations, by little bordes or tablets; which they divide in the midst; and
compare afterward together, and confer their marks and signs one with the
other, and so do acknowledge the cause of such contracts. The simple people of
the new found land, not knowing the use of Letters, did marvel much to see
that Christians by means of them, understood one an other; and thought that
the written leaves did speak by their commandment, and reported their
secrets: in such sort, that they touched, and carried them with fear; as if
there had bin some spirit in them; and that they had spoken by some divinity,
and not by industry of man.

THE most common kind of writing, which we use at this day in these parts, is
with black Ink: which heretofore was made of the sweat of bathes, and
furnaces; but now of gauls, gum Arabic, and ryndes of pomgranats; being all
steeped in water of victriol or copperis beaten into powder. There is used also
red ynke, made either of Vermilion, or of the shauings or fylings of Brasell
steeped in strong Lie, being yet warm, and putting a little Alum to it: and
Azure made of some blew stone or earth; yelow, of goldsand or powder. Also one
may write with the juice of Mulberies, Cheries, and other such fruicts: And
that with pens made of reeds or canes, such as Erasmus used; or of brass,
gold, or silver: or of goose-feathers, swans, peacockes, or ostriches: Without
speaking of the subtilities of writing with Ciphers which Princes use; and
notes which Cicero invented; or with Alum where the letters do not appear; nor
can not be read, except they be dipped in water; or with salt Armoniack, juice of
an orange, limon, citron, or onyon; to be discovered only when they are held
near the fire; or with grease, cinders, and coals. But the manner to write by
imprinting has excelled all the rest in readynes, and diligence, dispatching
more work in a day, then many speedy or swift writers are able to do in a
year. And since it comes in so fitly to our purpose, we will intermeddle
here a little; and say briefly, as much as we shall think fit for this present
discourse, of that which we have heard, and learned of the most expert,
touching this so rare, so profitable, and admirable Art: to the end, that if by
wars, or other human mischiefs, and casualties, the use thereof should at
any time be left off, yet it should not be altogether lost, but be faithfully
kept and preserved by books, as it has saved and preserved many books.

TO MAKE Characters for imprinting, it is requisite first to have ponchions of
steel, softened by the fire, on the which they grave with cou^ter-ponchions
hardened, or grauing yrons steeled, the white which is within the letters:
perfecting and smoothing the bodies of them with fyles, where they are eminent,
or uneven; not at the right ends, but at the contrary: after they wet these
ponchions in water to harden them, and then polish them, and do strike them
into little pieces of fine copper, that have bin in the fire: which being so
engraven, do naturally represent the form of the letters: which the artisans
do call, striking of the matrices: Then do they justify their matrices on
moulds of iron, and in the white thereof make their castings, with lead,
tinglasse, antimony, and other mixed matters; to the end to harden them: and
that they may endure the longer. The Letters being thus cast and made, are put
in a great case or box of wood, full of little boxes, in to which they are
distributed, according to their several sorts. From whence the Compositors
(having laid before them the writing which they are to imprint) do take the^
one by one, and dispose them by pages and forms, which they put again into
other chasies or frames of iron, with one or two crosses, locked or shut fast
with furnitures of wood. Then the governor of the Press takes these last
chasies or fourmes, and lays them on the marble of his Press, then beats
them with balls of wood filled with woll, covered with white leather, and
soaked or rubbed with ynke well mixed and distributed, placing the leaf that
is to be printed, on a double tympan or parchmin (having a woollen cloth betwixt
them) and a moist linen cloth to keep the leaf from mackling, and putting
down the frisquet of parchmin, which covers the white or margent of the
leaf, he makes the train of the press to roll* (which rests on the
carriage) till it come under the vice or spindle, unto which the plattin is
fastened; and taking the bar in his hand, he pulls as hard as he can until
the leaf be imprinted on one side, on which they bestow half the day; and the
other half, on the other side; yelding in a day twelve hundred and fifty
sheets, or thirteen hundred imprinted. But before they do this, they make two
or three proofs, which are reulewed: and on this correction continue the rest.
Two men are requisite about the press, one to take, to gather, and order the
sheets, o^ leaves; the other to beat on the form which is on the press, and
to distribute or bray the ynke on the stone or block: which could not serve
the turn by reason of the great travail required therein, if they did not
draw the press one after the other, and by turns. Two presses also are
needful; the one for the ordinary work; and the other to make the proofs, and
reiterations: More or less Compositours (that is to say Collectors of letters
together) according as they are great, or small, or in a mean between both;
and sometimes a Founder or melter is requisite to renew the letters. The ynke
is made of the smoke or sweat of oil, and dissolved in oil which must be
beaten, and distributed, because of the thicknes; and it would not stick on
the paper if it were not wett. Others have thought it better to make letters of
copper, saying that they are of less cost, and yet will endure longer. But
experience has found that they are not so commodious, and that they pierce
the paper. This is that which we have understood of this Art unknown
heretofore amongst the ancient Greeks and Romans; whereof the Almains
attribute the invention to themselves. Notwithstanding the Portugals traficking
on the farthest parts of the East, and the North, into China, and Cathay, have
brought therehence books printed in the languag, and writing of that Country,
saying that they have used it there a long time: which has moved some to
think, that the invention has bin brought out of that country through
Tartaria and Moscouia, into Germany, and so after communicated to the rest of
Christiandome: and yet not received of the Mahometistes; who superstitiously
account it a great sin to write their Alcoran by any other mean but by the
hand of man.

Almost all nations have remained a long time without letters, which has bin a
cause of making the antiquities and originals uncertain. Touching those books
which we have, there are none of them written above 3000. years agone, except
the Hebrew, neither is there found amongst the Gentiles any author more
ancient then Homer. Therefore the Egiptian Priest in Platoes Timeus,
reprocheth unto Solon, that the Greeks were all young of understanding, having
no old opinion derived from antiquity, nor any aged science. And Herodotus in
his Terpsichore writes, that the Phenicians arriving with Cadmus at Berce,
brought in the letters with them, which the Greeks had not before: and as Liuy
writes, they came but lately into Italy: The German tongue was not written in
ancient time; and the Hongarian began not long since to be written. The
Nomedes of the great Tartaria, and some Savages of the newfound Lands do use
no letters at all: But they have amongst them, some matters touching their
antiquities not written nor represented by notes which they give by word of
mouth successively the one to the other. As the Jews kept a long time the memory
of the antiquities, which Moises afterward set down in writing, continued by
the successors of Adam, and of Noe, even to his time. And the verses of Homer,
before they were gathered in the form which we see by Aristarchus, were
learned and song only by heart. And so used at the first the Egiptians,
Chaldees, Babylonians, Greeks, Latins, and other nations.

WE have said enough of the imposition of names, the invention, diversity, and
antiquity of Letters; the manners of writing, and matters which are written on,
and with what instruments, and of the Art of Imprinting: now coming again to
our speech of tongues: I say that they get reputation by their property,
elegancy, and sweetenes: by the sciences which are written in them; by power
and greatness of Empire; and by the religions, by which means they are enlarged
in many Countries, and endure long; as also they are soon lost and decayed by
their contraries.

THE GREEK tongue came in estimation by the elegancie, sweetenes, and richnes
thereof, by Philosophy which has bin handled therein; and al Arts and
Sciences. It has bin propagated by the nauigations, and Colonies of the
Athenians, and by the arms of the Macedonians, which ruling far in Asia, and
namely in Syria, and Egypt, made their language to be understood in many
Countries: In so much as by the saying of Cicero, it was in his time red almost
in all nations. Also the new Testament first written in Greek has made it
known in many places.

THE ROMANS no less ambitious in amplifying their tongue then their Empire,
constrained the people which they had overcome to speak Latin; and did not
negociate with strangers in any tongue but their own; to thend to spread it
over all, with more veneration: as Valerius says in his second book of
ancient Institutions. They made their Prouincials to change not only their
language, but also their manners, and customs; to make them more tractable.
Afterward the Christian religion passing into the West, and using Latin in the
Churches, and Schools; and consequently in public instruments, and sentences
of sovereign Judges; has preserved it thoroughout Italy, France, Spain,
England, Scotland, Germany, Poland, Prussia, Sweden, Hungary, Bohemia, and
part of Slauonia. The Christians in the East, and South Countries, as the
Nestorians, Iacobites and Maronites use the Syrian tongue, as we do the Latin:
The Abyssins or Ethiopians use the Chaldaick, in the which they have all the
holy Scripture; not giving credit to any other language whatsoever. The Jews,
wheresoever they are thoroughout the world, would never consent, that the old
Testament which they use should be translated, but do read, and singe it in
Hebrew; practizing in their contracts the tongues of those Countries where they
dwell. Likewise the Mahometists have not suffered their Alcoran, to be red, or
understood in any tongue but the Arabian; in which it was written: which
resembling the Hebrew, Chaldaicke, and Syriack is at this day largely spread
abroad. For although the Tartarians, Corasmians, Persians, and Turks, have a
diverse language from the Arabian; the Syrians, modern Arabians, and Mores, a
tongue somewhat like it; yet so is it that the Arabian-grammer tongue in
religion, and sciences, amongst the learned, the Judges, and Priests is common
to all the inhabitants almost of Asia, Afric, and the third part of Europe.
Amongst all the languages of Europe there is not any more ample, and large then
the Slauonian; understood, and spoken by the Seruians, Mysians, Bosnians,
Dalmatians, Croatians, Slauons, Carnians, Bohemians, Morauians, Slesites,
Polaques, Mazouites, Pomerans, Cassubites, Sarbians, Ruthenians, and
Moscouites. Moreover the Lythuanians, Nugardians, Plescouians, Smolnians, and
Ohalicians begin to speak Slauonian. It was also familiar amongst the
Mammelucs, as it is at this present in the Turkishe Court. In Asia, the
Tartarian is understood thoroughout the North, and a part of the East: The
Moorish thoroughout Afric; and the Brasilian in the new found Lands.

YET have not tongues any better estate then other humane things; but even as
buildinges, habites, manners, customs, laws, Magistrates, manners of living
both public and private, arms, engines, and instruments are changed: so are
words and languages; which perish at length not leaving by succession of time
any appearance of their manner of writing. We have now no knowledge at all of
the Oscian, and Hetrurian tongue. The Prouencal in times past so much
celebrated amongst famous writers, is not understood of the Prouencals at this
day. The ancient Gaulish, Spanish, Persian, and Punick languages are lost.

THE HEBREW has lost much of his integrity by the calamitous exiles, and
often mutations happened to the Jews under diverse Lords: For the Assyrians,
Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans reigning over the Jews, assaied for the hatred
they bare to their religion, to distroy the Hebrew tongue, and the books of the
Law; which they caused all to be burned, as many as they could get into their
hands; and namely the Assyrians. But they were miraculously restored again by
Esdras, or Jesus his son the high priest, which knew then by heart; and
changed the Hebrew letters to hinder the Jews from being mingled with the
Samaritans; which came of the Gentiles in Jury as Eusebius reports. These
letters which the Jews have sithence used, differ only by figures, and points
from those of the Samaritans; which are those that were given asore time by
Moses.

But being so many times dispersed hither and thither, into diverse Countries,
and mingled with strangers, whose Captives, and tributaries they were: (as they
are yet at this present in what part soever they dwell) they have kept few
words pure; amongst which are found some ambiguous, signifying contrary things,
not to be understood but by continuance of the speech; or by the addition,
detraction, or inuersion of the points, holding the place of vowels. Their
phrases are obscure, and full of metaphors, parables, and riddles to be
construed diversely: Nevertheless it is profitable for Christians, and especially
for Divines to know this tongue, as well for the better understanding of the
scriptures; as to refute more certainly the Jews, if they happen to dispute
against them: As also the Arabian is necessary for the conversion of
Mahometistes; by reason whereof it was ordained at the Counsel of Vienna, that
these two tongues should be publicly taught in the chiese Universities of
Christendom.

THE SARAZENS spreading abroad by arms with their religion, and lordship the
Arabian tongue, first they destroyed the Persian, with the letters, and
learning thereof; and by the commandment of their Caliphes, they caused the
books written therein to be burnt; imagining that while the Persians
contending before with the Greeks in arms, and learning, should have these
books containing natural sciences, laws of the Country, and ancient
ceremonies, they could not be good Mahometists: as before the Christians had
endeavored, to abolish the books of the Gentiles, and utterly to deface the
memory of their divinity. After these Sarazens going into Egypt, they
banished out of Alexandria the Greek with the disciplines written therein, and
out of Africa the Latin; as the Romans before had banished the African
tongue, with the learning and letters thereof. So that nations passing out of
one Country into another, do change the manners, tongues, religions, and
dominions, the victors spoiling whatsoever they think good in the land of the
vanquished, defacing their titles, and destroying for envy that which they
cannot carry away: to thend to abolish the honor and virtue of others; and that
none but their own may be celebrated and spoken off. So do the Turks at this
day to the Christians they rule over: and so did in ancient time, the Goths,
Alans, Hunnes, Vandales, Seruiens, Turules, and Lombards; who diverse times
conquering Countries whose languages they disdained, neither understanding
them, nor knowing how to read them, corrupted them, in making new by mixtion of
their own with those which they found: insomuch as the poor people remaining
after such transmigrations, did learn the languages of the cruel, and inhumane
usurpers, to use in speech unto them, that they might be thought the fitter
subjects. Moreover these barbarous people referring all unto war, and
contemning all other disciplines; burnt the libraries and all the books in
them, unto which the learned had recommended all their memorials: in so much
that with the loss of the tongues, there ensued also the loss of the sciences
which were written in them; from whence there arose great ignorance in the
world which lasted a long time. In this manner of the Grammatical Greek,
proceeded the vulgar; Of the Latin, the Italian, French and Spanish; in which
are found many Arabian words, by reason that the Sarazens held Spain a long
time: Of the grammatical Arabian, the Vulgar, and Moorish, used from Syria,
unto the straights of Marocco; and coming as near unto it, as the Italian
does to the Latin: Of the Almaygne, and French, the English: The Moore which
comes of the Arabian, and the Turk of the Tartarian, understanding on an
other as the Italian, and Spanyarde. And so of those which are now in use are
others made, and of them others will be made in time to come.

But howbeit they change incessantly, and that in the same Country and
language, there appears in short time a difference both in speaking, and
pronouncing: yet every where there are somethat speak finer, and purer then
the rest: such as were the Athenians in Greece, the Romans in Italy, and the
Tuscans there at this day; The Castilians in Spain; the Saxons in Germany; The
Persians in Asia; The Nobles, and Courtiers in France; whereby the question is
decided which has bin debated between some learned men: namely whether the
ancient Greeks, and Romans had two languages, and whether Plato, Aristotle,
and Demosthenes in Greek; and Cicero, Salust, and Caesar in Latin, did write in
their mother-tongues. It is certain, that in Athens there was but one
language, and in Rome one other, yet the speech of the common people was not so
pure, as that of men of calling, and the ciuiler sort; as one may see by the
Latin of Vitruuius, who was a chief Mason, and Cicero who was Consul: Which
elegancie, and purity of speech is preserved longer amongst women, which
converse not so much with strangers as the men; and commonly are more curious
to speak well* Tully in the third book of his Orator, writes that in his
time, the learning of the Athenians was lost in Athens; only remaining in that
town the school or house of studies; which was not cared for of the Citizens;
and the strangers enjoyed it, which were drawn thither in some sort by the
name and authority of the city: notwithstanding that an unlearned Athenian
excelled the most learned of Asia, not in words but in sound of the voice; and
not so much in speaking well, as in pronou^cing sweetly. Likewise says he there
is a certain voice or accent peculiar, and proper to the Romain kind, and to
the City, in the which there is nothing offending, or displeasing the ear, or
sauouring in any sort of peregrinity, and strangnes; in so much that the
Romans with less study then the Latins, did excel the most learned amongst
the^ by sweetness of voice.

THE GREEKS dwelling in true Greece, in Italy, Asia, in Sicile, and other
Islandes, had four tongues or speeches; The Atticke, Dorike, Eolike, and
Ionian: and in choosing out of every of them throughout the Poets words, and
figures, as came fittest to their purpose, they made another tongue which they
called the Common: and after under one name only, called them all five the
Greeketongue. And although the Athenian, were finer and more fruitful then the
rest; yet the learned which were not Athenians by nation, did write only after
their natural manner, fearing peradventure that they should not attain to the
Attike purity, unto which but seldom and by leisure attained those which were
borne elsewhere. For Theophrastus who had long abode in Athens, being reputed
most eloquent, was known by an old woman of Athens to be a stranger by his
speech; Pollio objected Paduanisme unto Liuie; and unto Virgill who was a
Mantuan, it was reproached that he spoke not Romain: so every tongue by how
much the farther it is from his natural spring, is the less pure. As in old
time the Syrians and Egyptians, speaking Greek did not speak it so purely as
the Athenians; nor the Gauls, Spaniards, or Africans, Latin as the Romans:
for although their words were Greek or Latin, yet they retained the phrase of
their own Country. Insomuch that speaking Greek or Latin they were always
known for strangers: as it happens to the English and Scots, Flemings,
Almains, Italians, and Spaniards, when they speak French, if they have not
learned it very young.

But the tongues as all other human things, have their beginning, progress,
perfection, corruption, and end: and being rude at first, do afterward polish
themselves, with civility of manners and knowledge; And when they have endured
a time in purity, and elegancy, they are corrupted, and do finally perish: and
by process of time no appearance of their writing remains. The Greeks at the
first were but rude, and gross, as Thucydides, Plato, and* Aristotle affirm:
and the first which became civil amongst them were the Athenians, who polished
their language, which they also brought unto perfection; where it remained not
long: but was corrupted, and lost, together with the liberty of the Country,
being supplanted by the Macedonians, Romans, and other strangers which have
ruled there. In such sort that never sithence could be restored, the true
propriety, and natural elegancy of the Greek which was spoken by Plato,
Aristotle, Isocrates, Demosthenes, and Eschines: but in steed of that tongue
(which may be said to have bin the best in the world) there is at length come
an other used at this present in Greece, and in the Isles adjoining, mingled of
many other languages: which is every day falling to decay under the Turkish
Empire, wherewith the Country has bin already more then a hundred years most
miserably oppressed.

If the first Romain writings had endured till this present, we should see that
Euander, and Turnus, and the other Latins of that time, spoke otherwise then
did afterward the last Roman Kings, and the first Consuls. The verses which
were song by the Salian priests were scarcely understood; but because they were
so ordained by the first founders, they were not changed for reverence of the
religion. Polybius writes that the language was so much changed from the first
Punick war to the second, that with great difficulty were understood the
treaties made before between the Romans and Carthaginians: And it remained
rude about five hundred years, having no writer in it worthy of memory. From
that time forward the people gave themselves to learning, and some became
learned: yet hard in their speech; commended only, for having bin the
inuentours; and first teachers of the Latin tongue: which was after made most
pure, and perfect, by Cicero, Caesar, and other eloquent men, which flourished
then in great number: in whom indeed the purity there of is to be acknowledged.
For afterward the common wealth being changed into a monarchy, and the manners
corrupted; the speech was also changed and corrupted, losing his natural grace,
and goodness under the Emperors. Then the Empire being translated from Rome to
Constantinople, many strange nations coming into Italy, altered the tongue, so
that men left speaking it, and it remained in books only: which were not red,
nor understood by the space of eight hundred years; some of them lost, others
eaten by worms, and devoured by age: til such time as some Greeks and
Italians, did by study make these two ancient tongues to revive when they were
almost dead: by copying out, publishing, and correcting the books that
remained in some libraries, such as had bin preserved from the rage of those
barbarous nations; which has so happily succeeded, that the said tongues have
recovered great light, with the arts written in them; which we see restored
with them; and many inventions added to antiquity as shall be declared hereafter.

Then the Romain Empire declining to the West, as the Ostrogoths, and Lombards,
had possessed Italy; the Visigoths, and Sarazens the Country of Prouence,
Languedoc, Aquitayne, and Spain. The Burguignons, and Frenchmen, the Gauls,
Belgic, and Celtick: the Vandals, Bethick, and Africa; by their conversation
the Latin was corrupted: Of which corruption, came the Italian, French, and
Spanish. The Italian remained long time unpolished, because there was none that
took care thereof; or endeavored to give it any polishment, until Dante,
Petrarch, and Boccace; who have much embelished it by their conceits
ingeniously expressed, and elegantly couched in prose, and verse: Where in they
have bin seconded by others no less learned, and eloquent; who have likewise
enriched this language with many fair works, and translations. As much is
there happened to the Spanish, and French, which have bin made within these
fifty years more elegant then they were before, by the diligence of some
excellent men which have translated a great number of books not only Greek,
and Latin, but Italian also into them; showing that all sciences may
conveniently be handled in them.

CERTAINLY it is a great Comfort, and ease found out in this variety of
languages, which cannot be understood, nor learned of all, to translate out of
one into another. By this means the old Testament has bin translated out of
Hebrew into Greek, and into Latin; the new Testament out of Greek into Latin;
and consequently both Testaments into Syriack, Chaldaick, Egyptian, Persian,
Indian, Armenian, Scythian, Sclauonian, German, English, French, Italian, and
into all languages used by men: without which benefit the greater part of them
had remained in perpetual ignorance of God. And that there is in the same some
divine working, it appeared then, when Ptolomeus Philadelphus desiring to put
into his excellent library the holy books of the Pentateuch, and of the
Prophets translated into Greek, and having procured out of Jury 72.
Interpreters skilful in both languages: to make proof of their fidelity, he
caused them all to work apart severally; and yet nevertheless found in them
such consent and agreement, that there was not one differing from the other in
the sense of the Scripture: having received this so marvelous a gift of God,
to thend the scripture might be acknowledged to be divine as it is; and that
the translation might be of more authority, as being don, not by the diligence
of men, serving but for the words; but by the spirit of God, guyding and
governing the understanding of the Translators. Moreover by such means
Philosophy, Physics and the Mathematick, were translated out of the Greek
into Arabian, and out of Greek, and Arabian into Latin: many arts, infinite
histories communicated by one nation to another. Varro, and Columella, say that
the Romans understanding the profit which was contained in the books of
husbandry made by Mago the Carthaginian in the Punicke tongue, ordained by
decree of the Senate that they should be translated into Latin: whence may
manifestly be known the profit of translation, favored by God in the
exposition of his word, and holy scripture; confirmed by the consent of all
nations, in the communicating of arts: and approved by the authority of the
sage Senate of the triumphant Seigniory of Rome. Yet can I not deny but that it
is more painful then praiseworthy; where diligence assisted with Judgment is
more requisite, then any excellent knowledge; which appears more in inuenting
of it self, then in translating; that is to say, writing out of one book into
another; observing the propriety of both tongues without adding any thing of
his own, or taking ought from the author: whom it is not possible to
translate so faithfully, and elegantly, but there will be always more grace in
the original then the translation; where the words are always tied to the
phrase, sauouring more or less of the tongue out of which one translateth, in
diverse strange words belonging unto the religion, state of government, laws,
magistrates, or sciences, which it is not lawful to change; and hard or
uncouth to make new in their places: and again in the metaphors, allegories,
comparisons, similitudes, and other figures, and ornaments of speech: each
several tongue having I know not what proper, and peculiar, unto it self, not
to be expressed in an other. In such sort that there is no means to bring a
tongue to perfection by translation; and there was never translator how
sufficient soever, that deserved the like praise as his author; whatsoever
Theodorus Gaza list to say, the most excellent that is known in this quality.
Cicero, Father of the Romain eloquence, translated into Latin Xenophon his
Oeconomick; the contrary orations of Eschines and Demosthenes, the Timaeus of
Plato, and the Astronomical poem of Aratus. But S. Hierome found great
difference between his writings, and translations; in which he found wanting
his wonted elegancie and facility. Wherefore it were better to put forth his
own inventions for him that has means to do it. Notwithstanding if one do
it to help the ignorant of the tongues; or for his own particular study, to
thend to fashion his style, and to settle his judgment on the best authors,
as Cicero himself did, and I have assaied to do after his example and
exhortation in accommodating the virtues of the most esteemed ancient writers
to the manners, and affairs of this time; I reckon translation very
comendable. And he that with a mediocritie of understanding, and knowledge
should be the first that had proposed to his nation, the lights or lamps of
learning, namely Isocrates, Xenophon, Demosthenes, Aristotle, Plato, and the
Schoolemasters of mankind, as they are termed by Seneca, which have long time
lain hidden in Schools, or buried in libraries, without being put in ure, were
not altogether to be rejected; especially travailing in a tongue not yet
polished, nor accustomed unto arts: which will be much amended by travailing
therein, even as the Greek and Latin came by little and little to their
perfection, by handling of good matters in them, as Philosophy, matter of state,
or public government, deeds of arms, and other honest and profitable
sciences; not by writing of fabulous Romances, or amorous Sonets, or such kind
of stuff wherewith the vulgar tongues are all pestered. But there is need of
learned and eloquent men, such as hardly and rarely are found in many hundreds
and thousands of years worthy of admiration: of whom we have always had no
less want then other Countries: or if some such have at any time bin found
here, they have for the most part bin delighted instrangetongues more then in
their own. But it is great reason that the learned should exactly know their
own tongue, and that they should write in it sometimes to make it better; and
do good to their own Countrymen rather then to strangers: so that the
Greek, Latin, Hebrewe, Chaldaick, and Arabian which are common to many nations
be not thereby forgotten or laid aside: wherehence would arise great obscurity
to those disciplines, which are written in them, confusion to the world, and
ignorance unto men deprived of the communication which they have by means of
them, not understanding one another afterward, nor conferring together.
Notwithstanding I would never counsel to employ so many years on these learned
tongues as men have accustomed to do, and to consume the time inlerning of
words, which ought rather to be bestowed in knowledge of such things, as they
have not afterward the means nor leisure to intend: which error brings great
backwardnes and damage to the sciences.

But let it suffice hitherto to have spoken of languages, and let us come now
following the order set down by us, to the invention and vicissitude of Arts.

The end of the second Book.
OF THE VICISSITVDE, AND INVENTION OF ARTS, AND HOW men from their first
simplicity and Rudenes, have come to the present Commodity, Magnificence, and
Excellency. The third Book.
PLato a most renowned Philosopher amongst all that ever were celebrated for
the knowledge of learning, representing under a fable the first estate of
mankind, sayneth, that at the beginning the Gods were alone before there were
any mortal Creatures: but that the fatal destiny of generation being come;
they framed them in the bowels of the earth, and made them of fire, and of
earth, with other things mingled with them; And that being willing to bring
them into light, they gave the charge to Prometheus, and Epimetheus to
distribute to every one his forces, and proprieties: Then Epimetheus prayed
Prometheus to let him make the distribution in his presence; And so goes about
it alone, giving to some, force without lightness, to others lightness
without force: he armed some, and for those which were without arms he
invented other succor: Those which he had enclosed in a little body, he lifted
them up into the air with feathers; or commanded them to craule on the earth:
He fortifyed such as were grown into a great Mass with their Mass it self:
And likewise he proceeded with the rest giving to every one his virtues. After
he had so furnished them, to thend they should not distroy one another, he gave
them means to defend them the one from the other; and to remain abroad without
covert. Clothing some of them with thick hear, little houses, or shells and
skales of diverse sorts, with feathers, or hard skins, against the
vntemperatenes of Winter, and Summer: and of the same things made them beds,
and natural couches: ioining to their feet, claws, nails, and callosites: to
their heads, horns, teeth, and tronks: then distributed to them food, making
some to eat grass on the earth; others to feed on fruits, and roots of trees;
and others more greedy to devour one another. Provided that they which lived
on pray should be in some sort barren, and the others that were subject to be
devoured, more fruitful: to thend that the kind should continue. For the divine
providence has bin wise therein, making al fearful beasts, and such as are good
to ^eed on, very fruitful, lest by being often eaten there should fail of the
kind: even as hurtful, and harmeful beasts are of small increase. Therefore
the hare is very fruitful, and alone of al kind of venison, surchargeth the
burden in his belly, because that men, beasts, and birds, do prosecute him to
death. Likewise the Cony is sound so full of rabets that some of them are yet
without hear, others somewhat riper, and others going out of the belly. But
the Lioness which is the strongest, and hardiest of all beasts, never
brings but one; and but once in her life. But Epimetheus being not very wise,
he gave all to the brute beasts, reserving nothing for man, whom he left alone
without force, without power, without property, stark naked, without armor,
without clothing, vnhosed, and vnshood, without convenient food, and wanting
all things: In such sort that he could not resist other creatures being then
more excellent then himself. For the staggs ran swifter; the bears, and Lions
were stronger; the Peacock was fairer; the fox was craftier; the Emmet more
diligent; and the snayle better lodged then he: Every beast found a medicine
fit for his malady and hurt; whereof man was ignorant. Of this came such a
confusion that men perished by little and little thorough diverse sorts of
cruelt^e: In such sort that their kind had soon bin consumed, without the advice of prudent Prometheus; who seeing so great a fault, to redress it,
stole from Vulcan, and Minerua the artificial wisdom, together with the fire:
being not possible to obtain it, or to use it without fire; and so did
distribute it to mankind: by means whereof men began for their common
commodity to assemble together for fear of the be astes, and to thend to
resist them, helping one another, and seeking here and there after safe places
for their habitation, they learned to make houses, and garments to avoid the
sharpnes of cold, and the force of heat; to reserve fruits for their
necessity; to prepare arms for their defense; and to find out other
commodities for their life. Which finally necessity it self being inuentour of
all things makes known particularly to the understanding of men; unto whom
were given for helps, their hands, speech and reason; Reason to invent, speech
to communicate* the hands to accomplish that which they should either invent
themselves by reason, or learn of others by speech: for no other creature does
speak in deed, for as much as speech proceeds of reason; nor has hands;
though peradventure somewhat like unto hands. Wherefore man has first found
out by reason the most necessary things; as food, clothing; and arms: and
afterward such as serve for pleasure, ornament and magnificence: he has
imposed names on every thing, invented letters of diverse sorts, and sundry
kinds of writing; made all arts both mechanical and liberal: proceeding so
far as to measure the earth, and the sea; to reduce by instruments the mighty
mass of heaven, scarce to be comprehended by understanding, and to propose it
before our eyes. Moreover the same Plato affirms that before men lived in
company, and spoke together, or that they had begun to invent; and exercise
arts; for as much as they alone of al other creatures did participate of the
divine nature, being indewed with an immortal soul; that they by reason of
this divine affinity, did think first that there were Gods, and so honored
them; and prayed to them: from thence, had religion her beginning, public
government, judgment, negotiation and traficke by Sea, and by land, laws were
established, magistrates created, innumerable trades invented, houses,
villages, and towns builded, consequently cities, castles, and fortresses; and
then kingdoms, and Empires erected: Wherehence has succeeded, the greatness,
and excellency of mankind such as we see it at this day. From thence I say
began religion which is more natural to men then all their other arts, and
inventions: no nation in the world having bin found so rude, so cruel, and
barbarous; but that it had some appearance of religion. For howbeit that the
greater part is ignorant, what God, and how they ought to worship him; yet al
notwithstanding do agree that we ought to honor, pray, and fear one God the
author of all things: which is confirmed not only in the first, and most
ancient nations, as the Ethiopians, Indians, Armenians, Chaldees, Hebrews,
Assyrians, Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, and Gauls: but also in the Goths,
Vandales, Sarazens, Tartarians, Turks, Persians, Cathayans or Chinoys: And not
only in our hemisphere; but also amongst the Antipodes; and Savages of the new
found lands: of whom heretofore we never had any knowledge. They which have
nauigated thither, have found many people living yet as the first men, without
letters, without Laws, without Kings, without common wealths, without arts;
but yet not without religion: who believe, that the souls of the dead go into
other places according to such works as they have done in this life. To
intertaine it, have bin appointed ceremonies, prayers ordained, temples
edifyed, oratories, chapels, hospitals, almeshouses, cloisters, and couents:
Sacrificers or priests have bin instituted, and much respected in all
Countries. And if it pleased God that he would be worshipped thoroughout all
the world in one self same manner, men should be delivered of great hatred,
and cruel discord, happening amongst them thorough the diversity of Religions.

AT THE beginning men were very simple and rude in all things, little
differing from beasts. They did eat in the fields and mountains, the raw
flesh of beasts, or herbs, with their roots, stalks, and leaves, which the
earth brought forth of his own accord; and in the woods the fruictes of
wild trees; or venison: on the banks of the Sea, Rivers, Lakes, Pooles, and
Marshes, they fedd on fishes and birds: They clad them selves with skins,
in steed of garments; to be defended from heat and cold, from wind, rain,
and snow, they withdrewe themselves into great holow trees; or under their
thick leaued branches; or into low dyches, hideous caves, holow vautes, cabins,
and lodges made of great logges of wood, and lightly covered with boughs,
stalks, canes, and reeds. Then having strong bodies, they nourished themselves
with strong meats, and also lived longer. They abode ever almost in the open
air, in continual travail, and lying on the hard ground, wheresoever sleep
ouertooke them. When they waxed weaker; and could not digest such meats, nor
dwell in the open air naked, and uncovered, they were constrained to seek by
little and little, to soften this wild and savage manner of living, which they
could no longer endure: learning to sow Corn, which before grew up unknown
amongst herbs and weeds; and to dress the vines, which likewise the earth
brought forth amongst other plants; to transplant, and to graffe fruict-trees,
to thend to make the fruicts better; and to dress and season both flesh and
fish: and then to build, and to assemble themselves in companies, that they
might live the more safely, and commodiously. In such manner were they reduced,
from that brutish life which they led, to this sweetness, and civility;
beginning from that time forward, to feed, cloth, and lodge themselves in
better sort, and more commodiously.

Now whereas men have taken nourishment, first of tame beasts, before either
of grain, or of fruits: there is no doubt but that pasturage, grasing, and
shepheardrie, were before husbandry and tillage; as it appears by the most
ancient nations, who having so lived from the beginning, have taken their
names there hence, as the Hebrews, and the Italians, which is to say
shepherds, and that many Nations use it even at this day, exercising (as may
be said) a kind of lively tillage. The tilling and planting of the earth have
bin both invented after pasturage, and unto both have bin added hunting,
fouling, and fishing. On the one side they have found out the use of Wheat,
which in these parts is found the best and most commodious nourishment: as
also Barley, Millet, Rye, and all other known kind of grain. On the other
side, they have found Ryce, Mahiz, and Iuca: the manner to sow, and gather them,
to thresh, fan, and winnow, to boult and sift flower, to knead it, and to make
dowe, to mould it, and raise past, to make loaves, and to bake them in the
oven: whereunto are appointed and do serve, the Millers and Bakers. Then have
they added pease and beans, and other sorts of pulse, both new and old:
Herbs of diverse sorts, and roots; as persley, lettice, spinach, time,
pepperwort, marioram, buglosse, maloes, beetes, endive, succorie, purslain,
sage, colworts, melons, cucombers, gourds, artichocks, sperage, mugwort,
onyons, garlic, leekes, chibols, carrets, parsnebbs, nauets, radishes, and
turnepps, mingling with them salt, oiles, butter, and suet, to give them a
better taste, and make them the more sauorie. Moreover the fruits of trees,
cheries, plums, pears, apples, peaches, apricocks, mulberies, medlers,
quinces, raisins, figgs, olives, citrons, orenges, dates, chestnuts, and
marrons. And not content with grain, fruits, herbs, and roots, they have bin
given to eat the flesh, first of themselves, which they have left for the most
part with horror; the^ of other creatures both tame and wild; of the land, of
the water, and flying in the air; neither leaving inward nor outward part of
them, which they have not found mean to season, boil, and sees, roast and
fry, or put in past and bake with saulces, and spices, brought from the
fardest parts of the earth, making puddings, saulciges, haggasses, tripes, and
chitterlings, which they serve at the beginning of meals with potages,
broathes, and sallets; and at the end thereof cheeses, tarts, and creames;
wafers, iunkets, and march-panes, prepared and dressed by Cooks and pybakers:
Neither has their pomp and riot bin any less with fishes, both of the sea,
and of freshwater. In so much, that Plutarch in his Symposiacke proposing this
question, whether that the Sea or the Earth brought forth most delicate and
delicious meats, finds business, and difficulty enough in the decision
thereof. Moreover being not pleased with milk, nor fair water to drink; they
found out a way to brew Beer, and Ale; to draw and press out Syder of apples
and pears; wine out of grapes, and palms; and to make sweet drinks,
compounded with honey, as bragget, mead, and metheglem, which they call Medons
in Moscouia, and Polonia; and infinite other artificial drinks, which they have
dronk in cups of gold, silver, cristall, and glass, spicing them in diverse
manners. Besides, to make their drink fresher, they have found means in some
places to keep snow, and y^e, all the year. At the first sitting on the
ground they took their repast on the grass, and under the shadow of leaves:
after they made stools, forms, benches, tables, and tressels: Table clothes,
table napkins, trenchers; saltsellers, cupbords, vessel, and vtensiles of
diverse sorts, and fashions; appointing officers fit for these charges: as
Stewards of the house, pantlers; cellerers, caruers, cupbearers, cooks,
boylers, and rosters. Salust blames the Romans, which sought in his time by
sea and by land, after all sorts of delicacies, not expecting hunger, nor
thirst, nor cold, nor weariness; but preventing all these things by
disordinate appetite. Liuie tells how after the Conquest of Asia, all sorts
of superfluities and delicacies came unto Rome, and that then the Romans began
to make banquets with more curiosity, and cost: And a Cook, which before was
held amongst them for a servile drudge, began to come in reputation. Seneca
complains, that the kitchins were more celebrated, then the Schools of
Philosophers, and Rhetoricians. Who would not wonder to hear tell of the
excessive feasts of Anthonius and Cleopatra? or of the Emperor Caligula, who
consumed on one supper the revenues of three provinces? of Heliogabalus; of
Lucullus; or of the prodigality of Esope, and Apicius, who shortened his life,
fearing least goods would fail him to the maintayning of his sumptuousnes? In
one feast made to Vitellius by his brother, were served two thousand dainty
fishes, and seven thousand birds. Good God, how much pain has bin procured
unto men by their insatiable gluttony and gurmandise! how many sorts of
workmen, and their servants has it set on work! But their curiosity in
apparel has not bin less; to the furnishing whereof many occupations have
bin applied: as the spinner, carder, tucker, weauer, clothworker, fuller,
sherman, dyer, tailor, cutter, hosier, doubletmaker, linen draper, semster,
capper, and feltmaker, feathermaker, lacemaker, embroderer, felmonger, skinner,
furrier, leatherdresser, tanner, currier, cordwayner, and shoemaker. They have
spon and wouen flax, hemp, woll, cotton, silk, made of worms, and of it
have made Velvet, Satin, Damask, Taffeta; and of goats hair, and camels
hair, Grogram, and Chamlet: whereunto have bin added fustians, bombasies,
sarges, cloth of Gold, and Silver, purple, and skarlet, with other infinite
colors: making of these stuffes* shirts, rochets, wimples, doublets, caps,
hats, hoods, gowns, coats, cloaks, cassocks, ierkins, and iackets, enriched
with ornaments, trimmings, embroderies, and laces, after diverse fashions, whith
change from Country to Country, and from day to day, thorough the lightness of
persons. Of tanned and coried leather they have made Ierkins, buskins, boots,
shoes, and pantofles, and lyned and faced them with velvet. They have applied
Carcanets and Chains to their necks, brasselets to their hands, rings to their
fingers, spectacles to their eyes, paynting to their cheeks, jewels to their
ears, tyres and borders of gold to their heads, and garters to their legs:
distinguishing by the habits, the Princes from the subjects; the Magistrates
from private men; the noble from the base; the learned from the ignorant; and
the holy from the profane. What shall I say of the skinns of Wolves, Sables,
Martins, and other precious furs, fet from the farthest parts of the North,
which they buy for excessive prices. Plinietelleth it for a wonderful strange
thing, and full of great superfluity, that he had seen Lollia Paulina a Romain
Lady, widow of the Emperor Caligula, at a wedding banquet, having her head,
neck, and bosom covered, and her hands likewise, with pearls, and
Emeraudes, joined together, and enterlaced: which jewels were esteemed to be
worth a Million of crowns.

The Queen Cleopatra coming to meet Antonius in Cilicia, put her self on
the river Cydnus, into a boat, whose stern was all of gold, the sails of
Purple, the oars of Silver, which kept stroke in rowing with the sound of
Music: Touching her person, she was laid under a pauilion of gold tyssued,
decked like the Goddess Venus, and round about her were maruailous odoriferous
and sweet smells, and perfumes. Heliogabalus slept on a tyke full of hares
hears, and partridge-feathers. The bed of Darius the last King of the
Persians, was sumptuously garnished, and covered with a vine of gold, in
manner of a grate or lettice, enriched with raisins and grapes hanging in it,
all of precious stones: And at his bedds head, there was in Treasure five
thousand Talents of gold; at his bedds foot, three thousand Talents of
Silver: So much and so dearly he esteemed and valued his nights pleasure, that
he would have his head rest on so great cheuisance.

But yet, the excess in buylding has bin more outrageous, for coming out of
hollow trees, houells, bowers, cabins, and lodges, covered with straw, and
reeds, and going into houses builded with brickes, stones, and marble, cut,
squared, and fastened with mortar, plaster, lyme, and varnish, hanged with
Tapistrie and painted, covered with slattes and tyles, the roof hollow with
arches and vaults, and the flower curiously paued and wrought, divided by
halles, upper and lower chambers, utter chambers, inner chambers,
with-drawing-chambers, bedchambers, wardrobes, cabinets, closets, stairs,
entries, galleries, and terrasses: They have accomodated arts and artificers
for the buylding and furnishing of them: as Architects, masons, plaisterers,
tylers, carpenters, smithes, glasiers, tapisters, painters, grauers, cutters,
caruers, melters, casters of Images, goldsmithes, gilders, locksmithes, and
others: buylding pallaices, castles, towns, cities, bridges, conduicts,
pyramides, sepulchers, theaters, amphitheaters, bathes, and porches; turning
the course of streams, and raising of mounts, and throwing down mountains,
with prodigality exceeding all bounds of reason; hoping thereby to make their
names immortal. And whereas it was necessary for them, intertayning that
variety and magnificence, to trafique by sea and by land, and to have Cariers
on them both; to thend to receive from other places, such commodities as they
wanted, or to send abroad such things as abounded with them; to nauigate, they
hollowed first the bodies of trees after the manner of the Indian Canoes, and
afterward made boats, schiffes, pinacies, and galleys, with three, four,
five, six, seven, eight, and ten Oars on a side, yea; to thirty on a side:
foistes, brigantines, barks, caruels, ships, hulks, gallions, galliasses,
armadoes, and argosies, with their tackling, and furniture, of anchors, cabels,
mastes, sails, artillery, ordinance, victuals, and compass, or box: To
receive, keep, and repair them, arsenals, ports, and havens; To guide, and
to man them were appointed Pilots, mariners, sailers, rowers, and gallyslaues:
even as carters, wagoners, coachmen, and horse-keepers were ordained for
trafick, and travail by land. And for both cariages, cursitours, regraters,
porters, balencers; Masters of ports, customers, controllers, reuisitors, and
serchers. To serve which turn with more ease, it was needful to coin money
of gold, silver, brass, and copper, defined in value by the quantity and
weight; marked with diverse figures, according to the diversity of the
Country where it is made: being not possible to use permutation in every
thing: and therefore were brought in money-tellers, and changers. Moreover it
was necessary to have Notaries or Scriueners, to pass the contracts of
Markets, sergeants, huissiers, solicitors, proctors, informers, auditors,
judges, counsailors, presidents, registers, criers, and executours of
sentences. For the expedition of royal letters, Secretaries, Masters of
requests, Chauncelors, or Keepers of seals. The Physicians, Chirurgians, and
Apothecaries do serve for health, using druggs, coming for the most part out
of strange Countries: as Rheubarbe, Cassia, Aloe, Agarike, and such others.
Gymnasts, pedotribes, athletes, fencers, wrastlers, runners, swimmers, leapers,
and tumblers, for the exercise of the body. For pleasure, and recreation,
singers, minstrells, musicians, plaiers on instruments, organists, dauncers,
and ballad-makers, rymers, iesters, iuglers, barbers, perfumers, drawers of
flowers, and curious works. Also not contented with sticks, and stones, which
the simplicity of nature furnished unto their Choler, they have invented
infinite sorts of arms, and weapons, both offenssiue and defensive;
long-bowes, and crosse-bowes; with arrows and quiuers, slings, darts,
iauelins, lances, pikes, partysans, halbards, swords, bucklers, rapiers, and
daggers, shieldes, targets, cuyras^es, brigandines, headpeeces, helmets,
caskes, morions, and salads: gorgets, pauldrons, vantbrasses, tasses,
gauntlets, cuisses, and greues: engines to shoot in the field, or to batter
walls, catapults, and ramms in old time; and of late canons, double-canons,
demy-canons, basilisks, coluerins, sakers, faulcons, minions, and chambers: and
for smaller shot, and maniable, muskets, caliuers, harquebuzes, daggs; and
pistols: Serving for the wars, armorers, furbishers, spurriers, sadlers,
ryders, horsebreeders, horsekeepers, smithes, and farriers, founders, and
mounters of great ordinance, saltpeter-men, powder-makers, canoniers: Colonels,
Captains, soldiers, with their Ensigns, trumpets, drums, and other
Officers. Going farther yet, they have found out other estates, offices, and
exercises, employing some about conducting and managing the public revenues:
as Receiuours, Treasorers, Masters of accounts, Auditors, Controllers: Others
about the counsel of Princes, and of States: Others to the establishing and
preserving of the Laws, seeing to the public government, to discipline, and
correction of manners.

Then amongst so many commodities, idleness increasing with ease, and wealth,
they applied themselves to the study of learning; by reason that all naturally
desire to know new things, strange, admirable, fair, and variable, and to
understand the causes thereof; cherishing principally amongst all their senses,
their sight and hearing, which do help them to have knowledge, but the sight
most of all, where hence has begun this knowledge by admiration; for seeing
the Heaven, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars; and having known by their eyes
the difference of days, and nights, the reuolutions of the months, and the
years; they applied themselves to contemplate the disposition of the world,
and to seek out the secrets of nature: First, necessity (as has bin said)
taught them the arts necessary unto life; after followed those which serve for
pleasure, ornament, and magnificence: And after they had gotten opportunity
and leisure, they began to consider all things contained in the world, being
innumerable in multitude, and admirable in beauty; inquiring after their
properties, agreements, and differences, whereof they were made, what they
became, when, and how they perished, what in them was mortal, and corruptible,
and what divine, and perpetual. They were so desirous to learn, that dwelling
and living here on earth so little while, they durst undertake to know, not
only what is above, under, and in the earth; as the nature of all sorts of
living creatures, and qualities of metals: but also the nature of the Ocean,
and of all waters, and fishes that live therein: Then mounting into the air,
they inquired of the winds, of the raines, hail, snow, thunder, lightning, and
other accidents appearing in the middle Region thereof: they ascended by
understanding and by art even into Heaven, which they have endeavored to
compass round, imagining two Poles, and one Axeltree to sustain it,
distinguishing the planets from the fixed stars, inuenting the Zodiac,
observing the Solstices, and Equinoxes; the causes of the equality, shortness,
and length of days, and nights; the reasons of shadows; the manner of
discribing, and measuring the world; of sailing out of one Country into an
other, guiding the way by the winds, and stars: whose mouings, conjunctions,
and oppositions they have diligently observed; their greatness, quicknes, or
slownes, colors, shinings, serenities, heats, colds; and the power which they
have on these inferior things, and the good or ill which they signify: And
wholly and altogether the agreement, and sympathy of heaven, and earth; from
whence as from a perpetual spring flows this universal abundance, by which
this world is incessantly restored, and renewed. Their industry has pierced
thorough all; neither the thickness of the earth, nor the depth of the Sea,
nor the variety of the aier, neither the heat and brightness of the fire, nor
the spacious largeness of Heaven, could amaze their understanding. Moreover,
they which were most speculatiue, considering the feeblenes of the senses, the
multitude of sensible things, so small that they can not be perceived; or so
moveable, that they are without certainty; that our life is short; all full of
opinions, and customs; and all environed with darkness, and hidden; have
thought that by humane discourse, nothing could be certainly known, nothing
understood, and comprehended: but that, separating our selves from sight, and
hearing, and from the whole body, we ought to take the thought of the mind,
and by the understanding (which is in the Soul, as the sight is in the body)
to endeavor to know the reason of every thing, and that which is in it pure and
clean, always simple, and uniform, without ever being changed by generation,
and corruption. These have passed the vault of heaven, so far distant from the
earth, and came to the place above; withdrawing themselves by contemplation
from the world toward God, from darkness to light, from corruption to
eternity, from ignorance to wisdom, satisfied (as they say) of all their
desire; and inioying the knowledge of the truth: which is of things that are
always alike, not receiving any mutation; wherefore they have called this
inferior part of the world, (where there is almost nothing certain, and few
things certainly known) the region of falshod, and opinion: and the other
superior known by reason, and intelligence (where are the forms, and
exemplaries of things) the seat of truth. In this progress of knowledge, they
have known some things by natural instinct, without learning; others by
observation, use, and experience: others by reasonable discourse, and
demonstrations; and others by divine inspiration. But there is such pleasure in
this contemplation, that they which with a good will give themselves to it, do
easily forgo all other delights, and are so constant, and perseuerant, that
they admit them not at any time; neither fearing damage, nor loss of goods,
nor the blame of the people, and ignominy but are ready to endure all kind of
crosses, and calamities, even to the suffering of voluntary poverty: which
gave occasion to people in times past to say, that Atlas sustained heaven on
his shoulders; and that Endymion had long time slept with the Moon; and that
Prometheus was tied to the high mountain Caucasus, with a Vulture feeding on
his liver: Meaning by such tales to signify unto us, the great and maruailous
study, which these excellent persons bestowed, in contemplation of celestial
and natural things. Democritus having begun to withdraw his mind from his
senses, put out his own eyes. Anaxagoras forsook his patrimony. What
exceeding pleasure had Aristotle, teaching not only Athens, and all Greece,
but also the universal world, discovering the secrets of nature, before
unknown, and hidden in profound obscurity, magnifying and boasting himself
with good reason, that he had attained thither, whereno other Greek nor
Egiptian had ever come? What contentment received Plato, who did write at 90.
years of age, and even the very day that he deceased; who was for his
excellent knowledge honored in Greece, Sicile, and Italy, above the common
estimation of men, esteemed by Kings, admired of people: and has always bin
reverenced by all such as desired to have knowledge of divine and human
things. So men moved by nature with a desire of knowledge, and of the pleasure
which is found therein, have invented Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic; for
speech, Oration and disputation: Poesy for composition of verses, and rimes:
Arithmeticke to number; Geometry for measure and weight: And passing farther
have come to Music, consisting in concord of voices and sounds; and in
observation of due proportions; Astrology which serves for consideration of
celestial things; Physic of natural things; and Metaphysicke of
supernatural: Theology of divine things; Ethicke for institution of private
manners; Economicke for household; Politic for governments, and states; and
Nomotechnicke for knowledge, exposition or interpretation of Laws. Such has
bin their dexterity in the inuenting of liberal, and mechanical sciences.

But although there are every where found people, capable of knowledge, so that
they be duly instructed; yet notwithstanding, there are some more ingenious,
and inuentiue then the rest, and more apt to certain sciences, either by
natural inclination, and influence of the heavens, or by the situation of the
Country wherein they are borne, or by exercise which they use while they are
young, or by honor which is nurse of all arts whatsoever, and the rewards
which are proposed for the learned and expert therein.

THE Babylonians dwelling in spacious plains, and having nothing to hinder
them the whole sight of the heavens, they placed all their study in observing
of the Stars: The like has bin done by the Egiptians, who have always their
air clear without clouds: And by reason of the yearly ouerflowing of the
river Nilus, which covers and waters their Country, they were constrained
to bestow some time on Geometry. The Phenicians being given to merchandise,
invented Arithmeticke; and dwelling near the Sea, began first navigations;
which the Castilians, Portugals, and Englishmen, bordering likewise on the sea,
have brought to perfection. It was unseemly amongst the Arcadians not to be
skillful in Music; which they learned not for pleasure and delight, but for
necessity, to thend to make sweet and gentle by custom, that which was rude
in them by nature, by reason of the coldness of the air, whereof we participate
in our birth, and by their continuance of travail, in tillage, pasturage, and
brutishnes of life. Eloquence flourished at Athens, and at Rome, because that
by means thereof they were advanced to honors and wealth. In Augustus time, who
took pleasure in Poetry, every one made Verses: and all were Musicians, under
Nero. The nations which desired to be great, and grow up by arms, have
directed their Laws and exercises to dominion, honoring and recompensing
valiant men, and dishonouring and punishing the cowardes: Such were the
Scythians, Egiptians, Persians, Thracians, Lacedaemonians, Candians, Gauls,
Iberians, Macedonians, and Indians, accounting all noble and gentle that made
profession of arms; and the artisans base, and servile. At this day in Turkey,
where all is reduced unto force, every one applies arms, being assured, that
in well doing they shall be advanced in pay, reuenew, and public charge: as
also the punishment is certain there for cowardice. The greatest part of good
wits in France apply themselves to the Civil Law, and to the practice of it,
for the profit which they find therein; and for the honor of innumerable
offices of judgment ordained both in the sovereign, mean, and inferior
jurisdiction; being both profitable and honorable. The Hetrurians, which had
their air gross and thick, subject to thunders, invented the divination by
lightning. The Arabians, Cilicians, and Phrygians, being great shepherds,
invented that divination which is made by entrails of beasts, or by the voice
of birds. Philosophy has bin professed in Greece, full of subtle and sharp
wi^ts. Architecture began in Asia, by the abundance of wealth, and leisure of
the great Kings there, having need of large and ample houses for
intertainment, and magnificence of their Courts: Afterward it flourished in
Greece, whence it was banished; and from thence passed into Italy, recovering
his ripeness there: namely, under the Emperors; who as they had subdued the
rest of the world by arms, would also surmount them in wonderful buildings
with incredible expenses. The Ethiopians, by the abundance of all good herbs,
and vigorous simples, which grow in their Country, invented the natural
Magic, observing by it, the wonders hidden in the secret proprieties of
things; their agreements, and contrarieties. Plato in his Charmides, and his
first Alcibiades maintayneth, that Zoroaster the Bactrian, and Zamolsis the
Scithian, made profession thereof: Then it was transported into Persia, where it
remained long; as we will declare hereafter when we speak of the Persians, and
of their Mages.

BUT as following the general disposition to virtue, there have always bin
here and there some making profession of wisdom, as the Druides in Gaul,
and in great Britayne; the Chaldees in Assyria; the Brachmanes, and
Gymnosophistes in the Indies; the Mages in Persia; the Priests in Egypt; the
Philosophers in Greece; the Pharisees in Jury; the Theologians or Divines in
Christendom: yet antiquity has given the first praise of Letters to the
Ethiopians, attributing the invention to them, which they communicated with the
Egiptians their neighbors; where they have bin augmented: from thence they
came to the Libians, Babylonians, and Chaldeans; consequently to the Greeks;
then to the Romans; the Arabians, Italians, Frenchmen, Almains, Englishmen,
Spaniards, and Polonians. ON which course of letters, if we think attentively
as far forth as is possible to consider all the time past, and to call to mind
again the memory of so many years ouerslipped, repeating from thence where in
histories, begins the age of people, and of Cities; that is to say, about
three or four thousand years since men began to write books; we shall find
that there has not bin any Author amongst the Gentiles, more ancient then
Homer: And that letters have not bin sithence with like earnestnes followed;
nor in all times and countries equally esteemed: but only in certain famous
ages, which we may term Heroical. In the which (human power and wisdom,
keeping company one with the other) men have commonly seen, the art Military,
Eloquence, Philosophy, the Mathematics, Physic, Music, Poetry,
architecture, painting, caruing, and grauing, to flourish together, and to fall
together: as it has especially hap^ed in the kingdoms of Sesostris, Ninus,
Cyrus, Alexander; of Augustus and Traian; of the Arabians and Sarazens; and in
this age, in the which after they had bin long time a sleep, they have bin
wakened again, and have recovered their former strength: which is not to say,
that there have not happened many other admirable events in other seasons; but
these are most notable: in the which many extraordinary maruailes have met
together in matter of arms, and of letters; and which have most similitude
between them; as it will appear in reciting of them.

WHEREFORE is it so come to pass, rather at these times then at others? and
what reason can we give thereof? to thend the better to understand the present
consideration, being of so great weight, and long deduction: It seems to some,
that we ought not to marvel, that in an infinite space of time, as fortune
turns, and varieth diversely, there happens by casual chance, some accidents
like unto others. For be it that there is no certain number set down of
accidents that may fall out; fortune has fruitful matter enough to produce
effects resembling one an other: or else be it that human chances are
comprehended in a determinate number, there must needs sometimes happen like
cases, considering that they are brought to pass by the same causes, and by
the same means: Others say, that in length of years are certain periods of
the whole world; and in the one, that all arts do grow in reputation, and in the
other do fall, and come to be neglected. Others attribute it to honor, and to
rewards, which are more proposed at one time then at an other: for (...)uch as
by good intertainment all men are induced to virtue. And assayi(...)nder a
reason wherefore many notable personages meet in the same (...), or little
distant the one from the other, and trauayling in diverse exercises do obtain alike
excellency, and reputation; they think that men's wits are nourished by
emulation, and that sometimes envy, sometimes admiration, does stir them up,
and makes them mount by little and little to the highest; where it is hard to
remain, since every thing that can not go forward, or upward, does naturally
descend, and retire, yea commonly much faster then it ascended. And as they are
provoked to follow or imitate the first, so after they despair of going beyond
them, or attayning to them, they lose their courage of trauayling, and
laboring with their hope; leaving the matter as already possessed: which
falls after by negligence, and comes to contempt. Aristotle, who affirms
the world to be eternal, and Plato, who said that it had a beginning, but that
it should have no end, do both affirm, that infinite things have bin in one,
and the same kind, and should be infinitely; that there is nothing whose like
has not bin; that there should be nothing which had not bin; and that nothing
has bin, but should be again: That in this manner the Arts and sciences, and
other human inventions cannot be perpetual (those Nations being distroied
where they flourished) by reason of extreme heats and inundations, which must
needs happen at certain times by the moving, and progress of the stars:
either by the fire and water, discending from above in exceeding quantity; or
fire breaking out of the earth; or the sea forcibly ouerflowing his banks, or
by the increase and swelling of rivers, which can not run into the sea; or
that the earth trembling and quaking open it self, and violently cast forth
the water before enclosed in his entrails.

But howbeit the Stars have some power toward the disposing of inferior
things; the situation of places; and temperature of the seasons of the year do
help, concerning understandings and manners; the reward and honor proposed
unto man's industry; the learned ages, and liberal Princes, give great
advancement unto Arts; and emulation serves for a spur thereunto:
Notwithstanding for my part, I think that God being careful of all the parts
of the world, does grant the excellency of Arms and of Learning, sometimes
unto Asia, sometimes unto Africa, sometimes unto Europe; establishing the
soueraign Empire of the world, once in the East, another time in the West,
another time in the South, another in the North: and suffering virtue and vice,
valiancie and cowardice, sobriety and delicacie, knowledge and ignorance, to
go from country to country, honoring and diffaming the Nations at diverse
times: to thend that every one in his turn might have part of good hap and
ill; and that none should wax proud by ouerlong prosperity: as it will
appear to have fallen out unto this present, by particular recital of the
Nations accounted the first or chiefest of the world.

The end of the third Book.
OF THE VICISSITVDE, OF ARMS, AND OF LETTERS concurring in the Conjunction of
Power and wisdom, through the most renowned Nations of the world: and who have
bin the first and most ancient of all that have excelled in them both. The
fourth Book.
INtending to begin our discourse by the most ancient Nations of the world, I
find my self hindered by the different, which has bin between some of them,
touching the honor of antiquity, and of precedence.

THE INDIANS inhabiting Countries of maruailous largeness, did boast, that
they were the true Originaries; having never received any strangers among them;
neither sent any of theirs to dwell elsewhere: But that the first amongst them
used such victuals, as the earth brought forth of it self, and skinns of
beasts for their garments: and then found out by little and little, the Arts,
sciences, and other things necessary to live well: That their land is so
fertile, that they never found want of victuals. For whereas it brings forth
twice in a year all manner of Corn, they gather one Harvest in winter, at such
time as they plant roots; and the other in summer, when they sow Rice, sesame,
and millet; whereof there comes great abundance from thence, for as much as
the grains and fruits grow there, without any help of man; and that the roots
growing in the marshes of singular sweetness, serve men in steed of other
victuals very sufficiently: and that the customs do help that fertility
much, which they observe in time of wars, not to hurt the husbandmen, nor
endamage the laborers in any thing; but to leave them in peace, as ministers of
the common profit; and not to burn the farms, and villages of their
adversaries themselves; nor to cut their trees, or corn which they had sown.

THE strength of the Indians appeared then, when they were assailed by
Semiramis Queen of Assyria: for being a woman exceeding covetous of honor,
and of glory; after she had conquered Egypt, and Ethiopia, she thought yet to
make one war more, the memory whereof should last forever. Understanding
then that the people of the Indies, was the greatest of the world, and their
Country above all others, excellent in beauty, and fertility: where the
earth (as is said) carried twice in a year fruits and seeds; and where there
was great quantity of gold, silver, brass, precious stones, and all other
things, both for profit and pleasure: she employed all her forces against the
Indians, over whom reigned Staurobates, and assembled her Army, in the which
there were three Millions of foot, five hundred thousand horsemen, a hundred
thousand chariots, and as many fighters on camels-backs, with swords of six
foot in length; two thousand barks or ships, and made or fained Elephants in
great number, whose counterfaits were carried on Camels. Which military
preparation being understood by the King of the Indians, he assayed to exceed
her forces; and having ordained all things in a readiness for the resisting of
her, he sent his Ambassadors before, reprehending her of great ambition, that
without being provoked by any wrong, or injury of them, she made war against
them: blaming her besides in many and diverse respects, and calling the Gods to
witness, he threatened her, that if she were over come in battle, he would
cause her to be hanged and crucified. Whereunto Semiramis answered smyling,
that they must fight with prowess, and not with words. The battles then
approaching one against the other; Semiramis had the better in the first
encounter: and in the second was overthrown, with her counterfeit Elephants;
in such sort, that almost all the Assyrians being put to flight, Staurobates by
chance meeting with Semiramis, hurt her first with an arrow i^ the arm, and
then with a dart in the shoulder, and as she was getting to horse, she was
almost taken; the Kings Elephant pursuing her. The Assyrians in this manner
overcome, took the way to their ships, and the Indians pursuing their
victory, slew many of them at the straights, and narrow ways, in the which
the footmen and horsemen being intermingled, hindered one an other: in so much
that there was no means to fly, nor to save themselves; but they killed one
an other with their press and disorder. And when the greatest part of such as
had escaped this overthrow were passed over the bridge, which was made with
boats on the river Indus, Semiramis caused it to be broken; and the king being
warned by prodigious apparitions not to go beyond the bridge, ceased the
pursuit: Such was the proof of the Indian power.

Touching their wisdom, the Brachmans made profession thereof amongst them
naked, and austere; being holiemen, living according to their Laws: intending
altogether the contemplation of God, without making any provision of vittailes:
for the earth furnished them always with new and fresh; the rivers gave them
drink, and the leaves ^^lling of the trees, and the grass yielded them
lodging. And there was not on^ amongst them reputed a holy or happy man, if
while he was yet living of perfect memory and understanding, he did not
separate his soul from his body with fire, and did not go pure and clean out
of the flesh, having consumed whatsoever was mortal in him. And whereas the
people were divided into seven sorts and degrees, they were the first in
dignity, being exempted from all charges, not subject unto any man, nor ruling
over any; but as men acceptable unto the Gods, and reputed to know all that is
done in Hell; they received of every one his oblation made for sacrifices, and
took the care and charge of the dead, receiving great guists by occasion
thereof. Assembling and gathering themselves together at beginning of the year;
they fortold, of drouths, raines, winds, diseases, and other things: the
knowledge whereof brought great profit to the people. Their Artisans were very
good as being brought up in a pure, and clean air, and drinking nothing but
good and wholsomewaters. The gouerme^ts of the Indians, being divided into many
parts, it was not permitted unto any to change his manner of living, not seeming
reasonable unto them, that a man of war should till the earth, nor that a
Philopher should become an Artisan.

On the other part, the ETHIOPIANS vaunted them selves to be the first created
of all the men in the world, and that they were brought sorth by the earth: for
considering that the heat of the sun in drying the earth when it was moist,
had given life to all things, it was also co^sequent that in places nearest
unto the su^ne, there were procreated from the beginning al kind of living
creatures. They said that religion and adoration of the gods was first sound
out amongst them; and the sacrifices, processions, pompes, solemnities, and al
such things, by the which honor was given them of men: of the which they had
such reco^pense, that they were never vanquished nor ouercom by any strange
king; and that always they had remained in liberty. And howbeit diverse princes
had assaied with great armies to bring them in subjection, yet none of the^ had
enjoyed their Empire. Moreover that they were the first that had invented the
forms and use of letters, and given themselves to the study of Astrology, as
well by reason of their quick wits, and sharpnes of understanding, whereby they
exceed all other nations; as by the opportunity of the Country which they
inhabit: and that therefore they have continual serenity, and tranquillity of
the air, and have not the seasons of the year, disordered, and variable; but
live always in one temperature. Moreover that the Egyptians were descended of
them; the Priests of both nations observing the same order and manner of doing
their sacrifices, and using the like vestures, and ornaments.

For the prerogative of antiquity there was in times past great contention
between the Egyptians, and the Scythians. For the EGYPTIANS said; that from
the beginning when the world was created, where other lands burned on the one
side by ouergreat heat of the sun, and others on the other side were frozen
thorough the extremity of the cold, in such sort that they could neither bring
forth new men nor receive strangers, if any had come thither: and especially
before garments were invented to keep men from cold, and heat; and the
artificial remedies to correct the ill disposition of places: Egypt has
always bin so temperate, that the inhabitants thereof are not molested with
the great cold of winter; nor with the heat of Summer. Also the land is so
fruitful there of all thing necessary for the life of man, that not any where
else is found a land so plentiful. Wherefore reason would have it, that men
should be first borne in that Country where they might best, and with most
ease be nourished.

On the contrary, the SCYTHIANS said that the temperatnes served to no purpose
to prove the antiquity; for when nature parted, and divided extreme heat, and
extreme cold into diverse regions; it is to be thought that the land which first
remained uncovered and unclothed of these two extreme qualities, did
incontinently bring forth men, and beasts, which might there be nourished. And
concerning trees, and other fruits they were varied according to the estate of
the Countries. And for as much as the Scythians have a sharper air then the
Egyptians, so are there bodies and their understandings harder also then
theirs. Nevertheless, if the frame of the world which is now divided into two
parts has bin sometime all one, whether the whole earth were enclosed and
environed with water, or that the fire (which has engendered all things) held
and possessed the whole world, in both cases the Scythians were the first: For
if the fire possessed al, it must needs be that by little and little it was
quenched to make place for the habitable earth; In which case it is to be
thought, that it was first quenched on the north side, because it is the
coldest region, and the Scythians are seated there: whence it comes to pass,
that even at this present it is the coldest country that is known. And in
regard of Egypt, and all the East, we must think that the heat was there but
lately remitted; For yet at this day they have marvelous heat there when the
sun is at highest. Also if the whole earth were at the first environed with
water, it is to be thought that the places that are highest were first
discovered; and that where the earth is lowest, there the water remained
longest; and by consequent, that there where the earth was first discovered,
and dried, there began first all living things to be engendered: But the
country of the Scythians is higher then all other lands, as appears by this,
that all the rivers which do arise there descend to the poole Meotis, and from
thence do take their course into the Ponticke Sea, and into Egypt: which
Country of Egypt is so low, and so subject to waters, that although so many
Kings thoroughout so many ages, have with great diligence, and expense, made so
many rampyers, so many banks, and dyches to keep the land from being
overflowed by the impetuosity of rivers: because that when they held them in on
oneside, they ran out on the other, they have so little prevailed that yet at
this present, they are not able there to till the land; except the river Nilus
be held in by Causwais, and banks. And it is not possible that this country
did first of all bring forth men, which notwithstanding the banks and
causies, yet by means of the mudde and dreggs which the river Nilus brings
in and leaves there, appears yet all waterie. By these reasons both the one,
and the other nation maintained their antiquity.

But as concerning Egypt it is certain that a part thereof was sometimes
covered with water. All that which is above Memphis, toward the mountains of
Ethiopia, has bin Sea by the opinion of Herodotus. And Strabo thinks all the
land which is from Siena unto the Sea watered with the river Nilus, to have bin
at the beginning called Egypt, which was much increased, as one may see by the
verse of Homer, saving that the Isle of Pharos was a days journey distant from
firm land: which is now even almost joining to Alexandria. If these things be
true, they show sufficiently that this land is not ancient. Neither can the
Scythians prove their antiquity: If it be true that Herodotus says, that they
began but a thousand years before the reign of king Darius over the Persians.
But as both regions by the reasons debated, have not bin very apt for
habitation of men: so is it better to believe that land to have bin first
inhabited, which has the air most temperate: by which means the Egyptians
said that they were most ancient. But as they by reason of the waters cannot
allege any ancient habitation, so neither can the Scythians because they
dwell in a quarter which is afflicted with continual cold. Wherefore it is
more conformable unto truth to say that the middle region between them both,
where the territory of Damasco is situated, has borne the first men: (as the
holy Scripture witnesses) which is exempted from the discommodities of Egypt,
and of Scythia, and by reason of the situation is naturally more temperate then
either of them both. Otherwise it is hard by human knowledge, to know in what
place, what people, or what nation has bin the first; by how much space, or
how many years it was before the rest. Yet the opinion in times past touching
the beginning of people was such; that at the beginning of all things the
heaven, and earth had one only essence, and form; but that afterward the
Elements being separated one from the other, the world took that order in
which we see it now. Amongst which elements there befell into the air that
continual motion which it has; and to the fire for his lightness that place
which it has above the air; and for the same reason to the Sun, and stars,
the course which they naturally keep. That which was mixed with moisture by
reason of his heaviness remained in the same mass. Wherhence was created of the
moistest the sea, and of the hardest the earth being soft in it self, and
myrie. Which when it was first dried, and made thicker by the heat of the
sun, after by force of the heat lifted up, and made to swell upwards, there
grew together in many and diverse places thereof certain humors ingendring
rottenes, covered and hid with thin and tender skins. As generation then is
made in moist things by adding heat unto it; and the air blown abroad by
night feeds it with moisture, which is strengthened in the day time by the
power of the sun: finally these rotten things being come as it were to their
extremity, brought forth (as if the time of their childbirth had bin come) the
figures of all sorts of creatures and living things, after those little skins
were broken. Of which living creatures such as had received most heat were
made flying birds, and mounted into the higher regions; those which had most
earth remained as serpents, and such other beasts, below: they which retained
the nature of water, were put in the element of their complexion, and called
fishes: Then the earth being made dryer from thence forward, as well by the
heat of the sun, as by the winds, left bringing forth any more such
creatures. But those which were already made, begot others by continual
commixtion. Men being thus formed sought their living in the fields leading a
savage life without any order: unto who^ the herbs and trees brought forth of
themselves that which was necessary for their life. But the wild beasts
became against them, and their enemies: in such sort, that to resist them and
for their common profit, they began to assemble together, giving aid one to
the other, and seeking here and there safe places for their habitation. And
these first assemblies were the true beginning of every people and nation.

THE CHALDEES very skillful in Astrology, held opinion that the world had
always bin, that it had no beginning nor should have no end. Aristotle has
bin of the same opinion, and that all living creatures were sempiternall. Plato
in his third, and twelfth book of laws doubts of the world, and of mankind,
whether they were from the beginning or no; saying that the generation of men
either had no beginning, or that it began an inestimable length of time before
us. The same author in his Timaeus, Critias, Menexemus, and his Politic, is
of opinion, that by long tracte of time, the vigor of men's minds, and
fertility of their bodies diminishes by little and little, in such sort that
our understandings find themselves as it were deprived of their divinity and
the bodies void of their accustomed fertility: The^ God meaning to restore
mankind into his former dignity, drowneth or burns the earth, tempering in
such sort the celestial motions by himself which is their mouer, that the
heavenly destiny gives place and concurreth always with his divine
providence. And that the earth being abundantly watered with fresh humor, and
made fruitful by the heat ensuing does bring forth: or else that the rain
falling more plentifully after excessive heates and drouths, there are
engendered, or regenerated not only little creatures, but great ones also, being
borne of the earth as of their mother: Of which opinion also were many
Egyptians, Greeks, and Arabians, namely Algazel, and Auicen, with whom
Aristotle agrees in his Problemes, when he says, that in little mutations of
times little creatures are brought forth, and so in the great greater, and
very great in the greatest mutations.

THE JEWS, CHRISTIANS, AND SAR AZENS, following the divine prophet, and
Lawgiuer Moses, believe that God has made the world of nothing, and created
Adam the first man, after his own likeness, of the dust of the earth, and
breathed in his face that spirit of life, and that he was made with a living
soul; afterward meaning to give him help, and company, made a profound
sleep to fall on him, and being a sleep took one of his ribs, and made Eve
there of the first woman: That they were placed in an earthly paradise, where
was plenty of all good things without pain or travail, and were driven from
thence for their disobedience; and that of them two joined in marriage, have
proceeded all men dispersed over all the habitable earth. But Saint Augustine
considering, that of the five zones set down by the ancient Astrologers, and
Cosmographers, there were but two esteemed temperate, and inhabited, and that
from the one it was thought they could not pass to the other by reason of the
heat, which was in the midst called the burning zone, and that if it were so,
it must follow necessarily, that the Antipodes came not of Adam; he chose
rather to deny that there were any Antipodes, then to fall into any absurd
impiety; or to gainesay learned antiquity in this point. But it is certain
both by the ancient and modern nauigations, that there are Antipodes, as those
of Taprobana are to the Spaniards: which is known by the aspect of heaven,
appearance of the stars, hyding of our pole, and elevation of theirs, having
(as has bin said) every thing contrary unto us, Summer, and Winter, day and
night, East and West.

THE GREEKS in their fables said, that Vulcan being amorous of Minerua, shed
his seed on the land of Athens, from whence spong the Athenians: who therefore
vaunted themselves, that they were borne of their own land without taking any
original elsewhere: understanding by the earth al matter, and by Vulcan the
fire, which moves the earth, and quickens it: and that Ceres after the
rauishment of her daughter Proserpina, having wandered long throughout the
world, came into their Country, where she showed them the use of wheat,
wherehence afterward it was manifested to all men: that their City has not
only communicated such means of living to the indigent; but also was the
first that established laws; and set down government: and that in part it
invented the arts serving for necessity, and pleasure; and in part has
approved them, or made them better, and more exquisite: obtaining the honor of
Philosophy, by which all these things have bin either invented, or amended; and
of eloquence which first took beginning in Athens, and has there bin brought
to perfection: that City having gotten by wisdom and eloquence such
excellency, and reputation, that her Scholars were Masters of others; and that
the name of Greeks was no more a name of a people or nation, but of reason and
understanding: and that the partakers of their learning were more esteemed
Greeks, then those which participated of the same nature with them.

At this day the wandering ARABIANS boast themselves to be the first of the
world, having never bin mingled with other nations, and having kept entier (as
they say) the nobility of their blood.

BUT OMITTING all these disputings, and boastings of nations, all fantasies,
and human reasons of Philosophers; we will rest our selves on the certainty
of holy scripture, touching the creation of the world, and of mankind. And
concerning the discourse of arms, and of letters which are here in question,
we will begin it by the Egyptians: who being ingenious and valiant, seem to
have bin the first that have excelled, in wisdom, and power: from whom the
Greeks drew almost all their knowledge, which we use at this day: having not
only in estimation, but also in admiration both Egypt, and the Egyptians.

OF THE POWER, LEARNING, AND other excellency of the Egyptians.
AMongst others, Isocrates, that most excellent orator, praising Busiris, who
made choice of that Country to reign, in as the most commodious of all the
world, writes thus: for considering other places not to be conveniently
situated in respect of the nature of the whole world, but that some are too
much subject to rain, and others otherways molested; and that region to be in
the fairest seat of the earth, and most abounding in all sorts of good things,
and environed with the river Nilus, as with a natural wall, which not only
keeps, but fatneth it, being inexpugnable to strangers that assail it, and
much profitable to those which dwell near it, by the waterings and other
commodities which they receive of it, whose industry also he has made almost
divine in matter of tillage. For by his means they have both raines and
drouthes in their disposition: which are bestowed by Jupiter elsewhere. Their
felicity is so great, that if one consider the excellency, and goodness of the
Country and their spacious fields, he will think they inhabit the maine
land; if the commodities wherewith it abounds which are carried out, and those
which not growing there are brought in thither from other places, he will think
that they dwell in an Island. For the river running here, and there, and
watering it thoroughly, does furnish them with two marvelous commodities.
Busiris then began where wise men ought to begin, choosing a fair place which
supplied all things needful for the inhabitants abundantly. Then dividing
them by orders, and estates, he appointed some for sacrifices, others for handy
crafts, and others for warfare; thinking that ordinary necessities and
commodities ought to be furnished by tillage, and by trades, but that the
protection of them was most assured by the exercise of arms; and devotion
toward the Gods. Accomplishing then all the perfection required in a good law
maker, he ordained that every of them should always exercise one trade,
knowing that they which change often, cannot understand any thing well, nor do
any thing perfectly; but those which are always conversant about the same
things, do commonly excel. Whence it is come to pass, that the Egyptians in
every art do excel so much all other Artisans, as good workmen are wont to
excel the unskillful and ignorant. Moreover they observe so good order in
administration of their kingdom, and al other public government, that the
most famous philosophers disputing of such affairs, prefer the government of
Egypt above all theirs. Also to him we must refer as to the principal author,
the study and exercise of wisdom: for he so aduantaged the priests first that
they might maintain themselves in chief place with the holy revenues: that
afterward great holiness being by their laws required of them, they might live
temperatly, and being exempted from warfare, and other charges; they might rest
in quiet.

THEY enjoying then this commodity, have invented Physic to help the body;
not that which uses dangerous medicame^ts, but those which may as safely be
taken as the daily meats; and nevertheless are so profitable that they which
use them are seen to be lusty, and able of body, and to live long. And for
medicine of the mind, they have proposed the exercise of Philosophy, which can
make laws; and search out the nature of things. He committed to the
auncienter sort the best charges, and persuaded the younger, leaving pleasures
to, give themselves to Astrologye, Arithmetic; and Geometry: which faculties
are thought by some to be profitable in many things. The others endeavor to
show that they follow virtue earnestly. Their piety, and devotion toward the
Gods is worthy of great praise, and admiration. For they which disguise
themselves in such sort, that they may be the more esteemed thorough a show of
knowledge, they hurt those whom they deceive: But they which intermeddle in
divine matters, in such sort, that they make the rewards and punishments of the
other life to appear more certain then the present, they profit men much. For
they which at the beginning put such fear into us, have bin the cause of
ceasing amongst us all brutish wildness. Wherefore they rule these affairs so
holily and reverently, that oaths are more religiously observed amongst them,
the^ in other places; thinking the punishment to be incontinently proposed for
every offense, except it be hidden for the present, and the auengement reserved
for the children and posterity: wherein they do not err; for he has ordained
them many and different exercises of religion, setting down by Law certain
beasts to be honored and worshipped by them, which are despised amongst us:
not that he was ignorant of their small power; but because partly he thought
the common people was to be accustomed to do what soever the prince commanded
them; and partly, because he would make trial in manifest things what they
would do in those that were hidden: Judging that such as would contemn them,
would parauenture contemn greater also; and they which observed order
indifferently and equally in all things, did make proof of their constancy in
observing of religion.

Many other things remain to be said touching the holiness of the Egyptians,
which have not come to my knowledge alone, nor to me before the rest: but many
notable persons have understood them heretofore, and do understand them now,
of which number was Pythagoras the Samian, who went into Egypt, and was their
disciple, and first brought Philosophy into Greece: having more care then any
other of sacrifices, and consecration in the Temples, thinking that if by it he
obtained nothing the more of the Gods, at the least that he should be in a
greater reputation amongst men: as it happened unto him. For he has bin so
much esteemed, that all the young men desired to be his Scholars, and the
ancient choose rather to have their children in his schole, then at home to
look to their household; whereof we must not doubt. For even at this day, such
as say, they are his disciples are more esteemed holding their peace, then
others that speak eloquently.

PLATO in his Timaeus, telling of the voyage which Solon made into Egypt, and
how informing himself touching the ancient things of the priests of that
place, who understood them maruailously well; writes that he found by
experience that he, and the rest of the Greeks understood nothing in respect of
them: and that they were all young of understanding having no old opinion taken
from antiquity, nor any hoarheaded science. Then is summarily described the
Egyptian government: In the which first the priests were separated from the
common people; and then the Artificers kept their occupations severally by
themselves, and not indifferently mingled one amongst another. The like did the
shepherds, hunters, and laborers. Also the men at arms and Soldiers were
separated from the rest, having no other charge, nor commandment by the Law,
but to follow arms. And moreover what care the law had of prudence, and
temperance, of divination and of Physic to preserve the health of the
inhabitants; and of all other sciences agreeable.

ARISTOTLE in his politics co^firming this, says that it is not newly, or
lately come to the knowledge of Philosophers, touching matter of state that a
City ought to be divided by exercises; and that there should be a difference
between the Soldiers, and Laborers: For, this order, says he, is observed
yet in Egypt at this day, being so ordained by Sesostris.

PLVTARCH in his discourse of Isis and Osyris writes, that in Egypt the kings
were chosen either of the order of the priests, or of the men of war: because
the one order was reverenced and honored for valiancy; and the other for wisdom:
and he that was chosen from amongst the men at arms, presently after such
election was also received into the order of priesthood, and to him were
communicated and discovered the secrets of their Philosophy, which covered many
mysteries under the veil of fables, and under tales which obscurely showed the
truth; taking heed warily least they should profane their wisdom, in
publishing too much that which appertains to the knowledge of the Gods: which
is witnessed by the wisest and most learned men of Greece, Solon, Thales,
Plato, Eudoxus, Pythagoras, and as some say Lycurgus himself; which went of
purpose into Egypt to confer with the priests of that Country: That Pythagoras
was well beloved of them, and he also esteemed them very much; In so much as he
would ymitate their mystical fashion of speaking in hidden words, and hide his
doctrine and his sentences under figured, and enigmaticall words, those letters
which in Egypt are called Hieroglyphick being almost al like unto the precepts
of Pithagoras.

HERODOTVS the historian speaking in his Euterpe of the Egyptians affirms
those which inhabit the fruitfullest Country to be the most polished, and of
the best understanding of any that ever he was acquainted with. And that in
truth they were the most healthsom next to the Africans, because the seasons of
the year change but little; diseases being bred in men by sudden changes; and
especially by the changing of those seasons. That it was given him to
understand by the Priests, that in three hundred forty and one generations
they had so many Kings, and high Priests, and that in the space of one
thousand three hundred and forty years, the sun had four times changed
his accustomed course, arising twice in the west part, and setting also twice
in the East; and that yet notwithstanding Egypt had not changed any thing,
neither in the fruitfulness of the ground, nor in the nature of the river: nor
yet in diseases, nor term of life and death. In such reputation have the
Egyptians bin amongst the best learned of Greece.

TOUCHING themselves they boasted that they had invented Astrology,
Arithmeticke, Geometry, and many other sciences; and that the best Laws had
bin invented by them: especially the Thebanes, the situation of their Country
helping them greatly being plain and without clouds to know the mouings of
the stars which arise, and fall. And they have so diligently observed the
eclipses of the sun, and moon, that by them they have first prognosticated
many things to come, foretelling often (to thend men might the better prevent
it) the scarsitie or abundance of Corn, and fruits, the imminent maladies
both of men and beasts, the earthquakes, appearing of Comets, and other things
that were hard to be known: which were certain unto them, by long and
continual experience. This was the true and proper office of their priests,
who were in great authority as well because they had the charge of divine
things: as for that they were full of knowledge, and taught others. And
whereas the whole public reuenew was divided into three parts; they took
the first portion, to thend to employ it in administration of sacrifices, and
on their necessities: They were called near unto Kings to give counsel in
matters of consequence, both they and their children being exempted from
subsidies: and holding the second place to the king in honor and dignity.
The Other portion of the reuenew appertayned to the Kings, who employed it on the
wars, and on maintaining their estate, and train, and in recompensing such
as deserved: whence it came to pass, that the people was not any way oppressed
with tributes, and new subsidies. The third part was received by the nobles,
and other men of arms; wherein they were all exercised, to the end that by
such intertainement they should be the readier to undertake all military
hazards, and that living better thereby, and more at ease, they should be the
more inclined to beget offspring of their bodies: whence it came to pass that
the Country being peopled by these means had no need of foreign Soldiers.
They never learned any base or mechanical science, but gave themselves wholly to
arms: which exercise was taught from hand to hand, by the father to the son.
Concerning their arts and handycrafts; the Egyptians works were very well
wrought, and even come to their perfection; for the Artisans of Egypt employed
themselves only about works which were permitted by the Law, or which they
had learned of their fathers: And it behooved every one to show to the
governor from year to year whereof he lived: Otherwise for default of so
doing, or not showing his manner of living to be just, and reasonable; he was
led presently to death. And whereas that Country was more stored with people
then any other of the world, and furnished with such excellent Artisans; their
kings have built such great Cities as Thebes, and Memphis, and erected and made
marvelous pyramides, temples, labyrinths, ^epultures, colosses, obeliskes, and
other like works the greatest amongst men; which envious age thorough so long
tract of time amongst so many changes of Lordships could not yet consume.

Furthermore the country of Egypt has always seemed to be the most excellent
of all others; as well for that it is meruailously strong, and well bounded; as
for the pleasing beauty of the whole Country. For on the West side it has the
great deserts for defense, and a part of the wild Lybia; which is not only
difficult to pass over, but very dangerous also for want of waters, and
barennes of all other things: Toward the South it is environed with the
scluses of Nilus, and with the mountains adjoining. And to come down from the
higher Ethiopia, for the space of three hundred leagues, the river is not
easily nauigable, nor the way by land easy to be undertaken: if it be not by a
king; or with great provision of victuals. On the East side it is fortified
with the sameriuer, and with a deep and hollow marish ground, more then twelve
leagues in length being betwixt Syria, and Egypt. On the North it is enclosed
with a Sea which has no havens, and where it is very difficult to find
landing. Being by this means very safe and strong, it was first grouerned by
the native Kings of the Country: after by the Ethiopians, Persians,
Macedonians, Romans, Greeks, Caliphes, Soudans, and at this day by the Turks.

Amongst all the Kings borne in the country or aliens, which ever reigned
there SESOSTRIS was the most mighty and most magnificent; having excelled in
valiancy, and felicity, not only the Assyrians, and Persians, but also the
Macedonians, and Romans. His father being advertised by revelation of his
greatness to come, to the end to make him worthier to rule the Monarchy of the
whole world, he assembled together all the children that were borne on the
same day with his son, and caused them al to be instructed in the same
discipline with him: thinking that being so brought up together, they would
love one another the more; and be the better help to one another in the wars.
First of al then, going against the Arabians with an army of these, being
hardened with pain, and accustomed to sobriety, he brought under his obedience
all that nation which was free and at liberty before; then the greatest part of
Lybia, being yet very young: and lifted up in courage by the succes of this
expedition, he applied al his fantasy to make himself Lord of all the world,
gathering together an army of six hundred thousand foot, four and twenty
thousand horse, eighteen thousand chariots for war, and four hundred ships on
the red sea; finding out first the use of galleis: over all whom he appointed
Capitains the most part of those which had bin brought up with him (as is
fayde) accustomed unto war, and from their youth given to virtuous exercises.
With this great force he conquered on the one side Ethiopia, and all the Isles
of that Country, and all the Seacoast toward the Indies; on the other side
Asia the great: ouercomming not only those nations which were afterward
overcome by Alexander; but also many other whom Alexander never came unto. For
he passed the river Ganges, marching here and there thorough out all the
Country of the Indians, unto the great Ocean; and trauersed all the Scythians
country unto the river Tanais, which de^ideth Asia from Europe. Then going
therehence into Thrace, he was constrained by the difficulty of the places, and
thorough want of victuals to make an end of his enterprise, setting up diverse
pillars in the conquered Countries; some with the likeness of a man, others
with the secret parts of women; signifying thereby the valiancy, or cowardice
of the vanquished people. Returning into Egypt with all the prisoners whose
number was infinite, and the spoils of the conquered Countries, he decked the
Temples of Egypt with the most precious things which he had brought: and having
recompensed his soldiers which had well followed and served him, from that
time forward the whole Country was much enriched. Being at quiet he did also
many great and excellent things, serving for the ornament, and safety of Egypt:
as to raise mounts, on which the towns were placed, which before were low
seated; to thend that the men and beasts might remain in safety during the
increase of the river: make great diches and channels in the Country going from
Memphis to the Sea, to carry victuals more easily and readily: fortify those
places where the enemies might enter on the land of Egypt making their entrance
more difficulte by multitude of diches: build a great wall toward Syria, and
Arabia, from Peluse to the City of the Sun, fourscore and fourteen leagues
in length. But he exceeded all other magnificence in this, that when the
nations which he had overcome, and those to whom he had given kingdoms; as
also the Capitaines which he had ordained for the guard of his provinces, were
come into Egypt, at the time appointed to offer their gifts and tributes which
they ought him; if it happened that he went to the temple, or passed thorough the
town, he made four of them to be tied and fastened to his chariot in steed of
horses: declaring thereby that none of the other kings or famous Capitaines,
was to be compared to him in virtue, seeing he had overcome them all. His glory
and renown was so great, that long time after he was dead, when the Persians
held the kingdom of Egypt, and Darius the father of Xerxes would have placed
his own statue above that of Sesostris in the City of Memphis: the high Priest
of Vulcan gainsayd him publicly, saying that yet his acts were not like to
those of Sesostris, who had subdued as many nations as he; and amongst others
had overcome the Scythians, whom Darius could not any ways endamage; and
therefore it was not reason that his offering should go before that of a King
whom he had not gone beyond in great exploits. Which words Darius taking in
good part, and rejoicing at his so liberal speech, said that he would endeavor
not to be inferior to Sesostris in any thing, if he lived as long as he had
done; praying the priest to compare their years with their deeds, and that it
should be a testimony unto him of his virtue. After Sesostris, in my opinion
Ptolomeus Philadelphus deserves greatest praise, by the favor, and
advancement which he gave to all arts: founding that most famous school in
Alexandria the head City of his kingdom, to communicate to all students the
sciences, (which before were only managed by Priests, and handled in the
Egyptian tongue) which he caused to be translated into Greek; where he
assembled from all parts learned men to teach them, proposing them honorable
rewards: there built he that magnificent Museum, which he endewed with good
revenues, for the intertainment of Scholars; and erected in it that most famous
Library, furnished with seven hundred thousand volumes: which foundation was
after augmented by the Romain Emperor; and continued even till the Mahometans
usurped that kingdom; whence they banished both the Greek tongue, and the
ancient Egyptian with their sciences; though they had bin there continued
almost three thousand years, especially the knowledge of celestial motions,
and of natural things: amongst the variable accidents of so many monarchies
as of the Ethiopian, the Egyptian, Assyrian, Median, Persian, Macedonian,
Parthian, and Romain.

OF THE POWER OF THE Assyrians, and learning of the Chaldees.
IN ASSYRIA reigned in old time many Kings borne in the same Country, whose
names and deeds are both abolished by long course of years. But he amongst
them which first got learned men to writ his deeds, was NINVS, who being by his
nature inclined to war, and greedy of glory, subdued the first nations by
force, and invested himself with the monarchy, stretching out his dominions
far and wide thorough out Asia with an incredible army of seuenteen hundred
thousand foot, 2. hundred thousand horse, ten thousand six hundred chariots
armed with hooks: by means whereof he subdued in seventeen years all the
nations bordering on the banks of the East sea, and their neighbors; as the
Egyptians, Phenicians, those of the inner Syria, Cilicia, Pamphilia, Lycia,
Caria, Mysia, Lydia, Troada, Phrygia, which lies on the Sea Hellespont, the
Country of Propontida, and Bithinia, Capadocia, and the other nations which
border on the great Sea; not leaving any unconquered, from Nilus to Tanais. He
added besides to his estate the Cadusians, Tapyres, Hyrcanians, Dranges,
Deruices, Carmanians, Coronians, Rombians, Vocamians, Parthians, Persians,
Susians, Caspians, Bactrians, and many others, which, it were too long
particularly to recite. Then his army retorning into Syria, he chose a
commodio^s place to build a City, which (as he had surmounted all other
Kings in glory of his great deeds) he purposed to make so great, that there
was never before the like thereof in greatness; neither could there ever since
be found such another. And assembling from all parts great number of
workmen, with the provisions necessary for such a work, he built his City on
the river Euphrates, making it not altogether square, nor equally compassed on
all sides, of alike length; but longer on two sides, then on the other two; and
each side of the long wall was twenty miles in length, and a side of the lesser
wall not much less then twelve miles, so that it had in all three score and
two miles in circuit: And without doubt Ninus was no whit deceived of his
intent: for there has no City sithence bin found of so great compass;
neither of such sumptuousnes, beauty, and magnificence. Then to make it
populous, and well inhabited, he compelled the Assyrians, especially those of
the richer sort, to make their abode there: and of other neighbor nations
received such as would come thither: ordayning that the City in memory of him
should be called NINIVIE.

After whose death SEMIRAMIS his wife held the kingdom of Assyria, showing her
self as magnificent in riches, conquests, and triumphs, as ever any man had
bin: It is said, that being a little girl, she was cast into a desert full of
rocks, where there was a great number of birds, which by gods will nourished
and preserved her; bearing up the child with their wings, and feeding her with
milk, and after with cheese, which they stole from the shepcotes adjoining:
which being discovered by the shepheardes, who found their cheeses to be
gnawen, and perceiving the child to be of excellent beauty, they offered her
to their governor: who having no children, brought her up carefully, as if she
had bin his own; afterward being grown, by reason of her beauty, and good
behavior, she came to the knowledge of king Ninus, having helped him by her
dexterity to take the City of the Bactrians; so that he fell in love with
her, and married her: Yet was not her death less admirable then her strange
nourishment; for after she had made great Conquests, builded sumptuous
edifices, assailed the Indians with an army of three Millions of foot, five
hundred thousand horsemen, and a hundred thousand chariots, (as has bin said)
and at her return given order for government of her kingdom, she vanished
away, and was transported suddenly (as has bin believed) amongst the Gods.
Some feign, that she was turned into a Pigeon, and that she flew away with a
great number of birds, which came into her chamber. Desiring to match, or to
go beyond her husband in glory and magnificence, she undertook also to
buyld the City of BABYLON, assembling artisans from all parts: as Cutters,
Caruers, Masons, and workmaisters for this effect; and making provision of
stuffes necessary for so great a buylding; which to make up and finish, she
caused from all Nations to come to the number of three Millions of men; and
built her City on both sides of the river Euphrates, which passed thorough the
midst of it; over which she made a bridge half a mile in length, and of
thirty foot in breadth, and two palaces at the two ends thereof: The walls
were forty five miles round about, having many towers of equal distance one
from the other, which were threescore and one fadome in height; and a hundred
gates all of brass, with their hinges and pillars. The City was divided into
streets, the most part straight, full of houses of three and four stories
high, of palaces, castles, and temples, correspondent to such greatness and
magnificence, with altars, statues, tables, and other ornaments of incredible
riches: which the succeeding kings augmented, until the usurpation of the
Persians, which took away part, and overthrew the rest. Herodotus affirms,
that it was the greatest and strongest of all others next after Niniuie; and
that it was the fairest that ever he saw. By such works of Ninus and Semiramis
it appears, that Architecture, and all manual sciences were then in great
perfection, and estimation. BELVS the father of Ninus was the first obseruour
of the Stars in those parts, and ordained the Priests, Naturalists and
Astrologers. ZOROASTER king of the Bactrians, whom Ninus overcame in battle,
was the author of Magic. And according to the supputation of Eusebius,
ABRAHAM was the first founder of true Religion, the first that fulfilled the
Law of nature, and thought of the divine Law; the first that persuaded men to
worship one only God against the Pagans, and Idolaters; and the first that
drove away the darkness of error, and undertook wars against the wicked: for
this cause he received so much honor, that God spoke unto him, and promised to
multiply his posterity, above the stars of heaven, and sands of the sea,
and that in his seed all Nations should be blessed; coming thereof the
redeemer of the world, which before was utterly lost and overthrown: of which
promise, both the Mosaical and Christian Law took their beginning: And Mahomet
himself to cover his deceit, and win the more people, said; that he preached
no other thing, but the belief of Abraham, which he pretended to restore.

BUT young NINVS their son, taking the kingdom after them, and making peace
with all his neighbors, lived in pleasure, and idleness out of the sight of
men, shut up for the most part in his pallaice: But for the safety of his
kingdom, and that he might be feared of his subjects, he levied every year a
certain number of soldiers, and out of every province ordained them a
Captain. And when all his army was assembled without the City of Niniuie, he
appointed over every Nation an other Captain of the wisest and skilfullest of
those that were about him. The year being ended, he sent home his first
soldiers to their houses, and had others out of the provinces: whence it came
to pass, that his subjects were the readier to obey for fear, which they had
of the soldiers remaining always in the field: And if any had failed of their
duty, or rebelled against him, they were readier also to make satisfaction
for fear of punishment. Thinking also that such changing from year to year,
might serve to this end, that his soldiers and Captains might not so readily
knit themselves together to conspire against him: for to be continually in the
field exercised in the art military, makes the soldiers harder and stronger,
and the Capitains wiser, which has often bin an occasion to them of departing
from the obedience of their common wealth, or service of their Prince: which
point was ill considered of the Romans, when they lived in a common wealth;
and afterward by their Emperors. For the prolongation of general charges in
war, by succession of time distroied the common wealth by two inconveniences:
The one, that by this means less number of people was exercised in military
charges, and offices; and by consequence the reputation restrained to fewer
persons: The other, that one man always commanding over an Army, made it
partial and affectionate unto him, so that in time it forgot the Senate, and
acknowledged no head but him: So did Sylla, and Marius find soldiers to follow
them against the public weal: So Julius Caesar by the continuation which was
made him of his charge in Gaul, had means to seize on his own Country.
Likewise the ordinary armies which the Emperors intertayned, as well near
unto Rome, as on the frontiers of the Empire, overthrew many of them, and the
Empire also; setting up Caesar's, and pulling them down at their appetite,
having sometime chosen many of them in diverse places, at the self same time;
whereof great wars arose. This king then, to the end to provide for such
inconveniences, established (as has bin said) the Captains of his army, the
Governors of provinces, the Stewards of his household, and other officers of
his house; and also the Judges of every province, and other charges of his
estate: thinking as for the rest, that the Prince his unknown manner of living,
made his pleasures secret, and that none dared to blaspheme him; as if he were
God invisible.

Wherein he was followed by the other succeeding Kings, even till
SARDANAPALVS, in whose time this kingdom was translated to the Medians. He was
the most effeminate that ever was borne, so that he abode always amongst
women, handing the distaffe, and spinning in womanish apparel; more wanton in
looks, in apparel, and gesture, then the most wanton of them; to whom he
divided their works, clothing himself sometime with a crimson gown, and
sometimes with fine Tissue: He painted his face, and his whole body, and
counterfaited his speech after the imitation of women: He did not only desire
to have every day meats and drinks to provoke him to lust, but gave himself
wholly to pleasure, abusing sometimes the office of a man, and sometimes of a
woman; without all honesty, without regard of sex, or of shame; in such sort,
that being altogether drowned in delights, he scarce showed himself abroad at
any time. These fashions were the cause, that two of his Lieutenants, Beloch
the Babylonian, and Arbaces the Median, had him in disdain; and conspiring
against him through contempt, made war against him, after they had diffamed
him as loose, and effeminate: who at last presented himself against his will
in battle in the field, with his effeminate company, without order: but
having had the worst, he withdrew himself hastily into his royal palace, in
the which he caused to be raised in a back and secret room, a piece of timber
work; being of great pieces of wood, four hundred foot high, in manner of a
Pyramid, and within left a great space void: In such sort, that in the midst
there was an other place made of Carpenters work, furnished with great and
long tables, and was large a hundred foot square, which is four hundred foot
round: Therewithin he caused to be set four hundred couches of gold, which
served to make magnificent bankets, after the old sashion; and above over
against them as many tables of gold. But the ^ower was girt in such sort, and
compassed with great and heavy stuff, that there was no going out, nor
opening, but only to have light from the top: This being done, he made his
wife, and his Concubines, and the women of his Court which he loved best, to
enter into it; not knowing, nor doubting any thing what he meant to do; then
went he in himself, and there caused himself to be shut in, without hope of
ever going out: But before, he had caused to be brought thither a thousand
myriades of gold, and a myriade of myriades of silver, and a great number of
royal vestures, and precious stones. Then his Chamberlaines, and Eunuchs (in
whom he put all his trust, and of whom he had taken oaths to do it) put fire
in this pile, which endured fifteen days: So Sardanapalus burned himself
with all his riches, doing in that thing only the act of a man. Budeus valuing
it all after our manner, accounts that he spoiled the earth, or would have
spoiled it, of the value of fifty Milions of gold. These two Lieutenants
divided afterward the Monarchy betwixt them; Beloch was king of Babylon; and
Arbaces of the Medians. Aristotle in his politics, doubting of the end of
Sardanapalus, and of the Kingdom of Assyria, says, that if that had not happened
unto him, which is reported, yet that it might befall to any other king,
governing himself after that sort. Moreover, the Chaldees in Assyria were
appointed to have care of holy things; and did nothing but study all the time
of their life, being reputed very skillful in Astrology. Many among them did
prognosticate things to come, as if they were Prophets, and were wont to know
how to divert evil fortune coming toward men, and to bring them good by
sacrifices, and prayers. Besides they expounded dreams, soothsayings, and
prophecies: wherein they were very expert, as having bin brought up therein;
and taught by their fathers; still continuing and perseuering in the same: for
dwelling in plain countries, where the air is commonly without clouds, or
rain, and where there are no hills to hinder the sight of the heavens, they
had means to apply themselves wholieto contemplation of the Stars,
observing their mutual concursions; how they approach or recoile the one from
the other; what are their conjunctions and oppositions, and what becomes of
them, in what seasons, and how they are hid, and then appear again; the
signs of good or ill fortune to come, which they bring in particular to every
person, and in general to towns, and to peoples. In which observations they
affirmed that they had employed CCCC lxxiij. thousand years: from the time
when they began them, until Alexander the great went up into Asia: which space
is incredible. Nevertheless, all agree in this, that the Chaldees were most
skillful in the doctrine of the heavens, because they had continued the study
thereof longest. Plato in his Epinomides, acknowledges Astrology to have bin
begun in Syria, and Egypt, where by the serenitie of the summer season, almost
all the stars are clearly seen; and that time out of mind the observation of
stars had bin there continued, and there hence brought over to the Greeks.
Notwithstanding, Simplicius a Greek Co^mentator on Aristotle witnesses, that
Aristotle did write unto Calisthenes, being in the army of Alexander, that
while others were busied about the spoil, and pillage of Babylon, he should
diligently inquire of the antiquity of the Chaldees; and that Calisthenes
answered, that after having employed all diligence therein, he found their
history not to exccede the term of one thousand nine hundred and three
years. Others do not only attribute to the Chaldees the praise of Astrology,
but also of many other Arts; and that Prometheus of that nation, for having
showed the mouings of the Planets, and opened the mysteries of nature, was
accounted under the couerture of a fable, to have stolen out of heaven the
sacred fire of Pallas; and to have given a soul unto man, which he had
fashioned before of earth: After that in revenge hereof, and punishment of this
boldness, he was had by Mercury to the high mountain Caucasus, and fastened to a
great rock: signifying his great assiduitie in contemplation of Heaven, and of
nature. Now the Chaldees held opinion, that the world had always bin, that it
had no beginning, and should have no end; the order and form of all things
being made by the divine providence: and that the celestial affairs are not
casually or naturally guided; but by the firm and determinate will of the
Gods: saying, that the greatest force, and influence of heaven, does consist in
the planets; and that the knowledge of such events is known, as well by their
ascendents, as by their colors. Sometimes they showed visiblie, to peoples and
countries, to kings and private persons, such things as might help them, or
harm them; gathering the certainty thereof by the winds, or by the raines;
sometimes by the heats, and by the Comets, by the Eclipses of the Sun, and
Moon, and by many other signs serving greatly for the birth of men, to have
good fortune or bad; and that by their nature and propriety, especially by
their aspect, one might easily know things to come: having told unto Alexander,
that he should fight with Darius; and after to Antigonus, Nicanor, Seleucus,
and other Kings; and likewise to private persons so evidently, that which was
to happen unto them, that it seemed a miraculous thing, and above the
understanding of man. But when the reign of the Assyrians failed, the Medes on
the one side, and the Babylonians on the other, ruled in Asia: who followed the
manners and customs of those which were their Lords before; having no peculiar
singularity either in arms or letters: and therefore I will dwell thereon no
longer. Besides that, these affairs are so ancient, and so far from us, that
many esteem as fabulous whatsoever is written thereof: Wherefore I will come
to the Persians, who are better known; and to the reign of Cyrus being the
founder of their Monarchy: where begins the history of the Greeks; and in
whose time also philosophy was first manifested.

OF THE POWER OF THE Persians, the learning and Religion of their Mages.
THE PERSIANS were first shepherds, bornin a hard country, which made them
strong; inabling them to remain in the open field, to watch and travail in the
wars: They did eat nothing ordinarily but bread and herbs, with some
venison; having neither figgs, nor any other fruit, by reason of the rudenes,
and barrennes of their country: They drank no wine, but contented themselves
with water, every one carrying his dish to drink it in, when thirst came upon
him. They took no refection nor repast, without doing of some exercise before,
which was principally hunting: Their children went to school to learn
Justice; as they do in other Countries to learn Letters. All their habit or
raiment was of skinns; as well for their legs as for the rest of the body.

HERODOTVS brings in ARTEMBARES speaking thus to the Persians; Seeing that
Jupiter has given you the Monarchy, and to thee CYRUS, power to distroy
Astyages; go yet further: for the land which we hold is little, hard, and
barren; and we must go from it, to win a better elsewhere. There are many near
about us, and many farther removed from us* of the which, if we once possess
but one; we shall be admirable to many others. And surely men that rule, ought
to think on these things: for when shall we have better occasion, then when we
are Lords over many men, and over all Asia? CYRUS hearing these words,
commanded they should be put in execution: but in commanding, warned them
also to prepare themselves not to rule; but to be ouerruled: for it is so, that
soft Countries make soft people; because it is not proper to one land, to bear
both delectable fruits, and valiant warriors: Then the Persians repented them,
chosing rather to rule dwelling in an unfruitful land, then to serve others,
sowing and laboring of the fair fields. The same CYRUS in Xenophon, shows
his people, that watching, and trauayling, enduring of labor, and using of
diligence, had enriched them: Wherefore says he, it behooves also that
hereafter you be virtuous; holding for certain, that great goods, and great
contentments will come unto you, by obedience, constancy, virtue,
paines-taking, and hardines in virtuous, and perilous interprises. CYRUS then
is he, which first put the Persians in reputation, making them Lords over the
Medes; whose vassals and tributaries, they were before.

But as in all the great effects of nature, and notable mutations of mankind,
God raises up ordinarily great, and excellent Princes, adorned with rare
virtues, lifted up in great authority, to found Kingdoms, and Empiers; to
bring in good laws, and manners of living in Religion, and politic government;
and to further the arts and sciences: whose birth and death are foretold long
time before, by oracles, prophecies, and signs in Heaven and earth: and after
their death, reverenced with divine honors. So GOD meaning then to establish
in Asia a most mighty Monarchy, and to bring Philosophy into the world, at
the same time; he raised up CYRUS, as praise-worthie a Prince, as any other
has bin either before, or after him. It is he alone amongst all the great
Lords and Captains, of whom histories do make mention, that could observe
modesty in all his prosperities, and victories; and bridle his absolute power
and authority, with equity and clemency. But from whence may we have a
more certain testimony of his excellency, then from the Propher Esaias, where
he was named two hundred years before he was borne; and is called of GOD his
king, promising to hold his right hand, that he might take strong Towns, and
subdue mighty Nations, and humble the great Kings of the earth. And he chose
him amongst all the Princes of the Gentiles, to reedifie the Temple of
Jerusalem, and deliver the Jews from the Captivity of Babylon, in the which
they had long remained; restoring them to their full liberty, and use of the
true Religion.

The words of Esaias are these. The Lord says thus to CYRUS his anointed: I have
taken the right hand, that I may subdue the Nations before his face, and that I
may weaken the raines of Kings, that the doors may be opened before him, and
that the gates be not shut. I will go before him, and make the crooked ways
straight. I will break the gates of brass, and will bruise the bars of iron,
and will give the treasures laid up, and the things hid in secret places:
that thou may know that I am thy Lord the God of Israel, calling thee by thy
name, for my servant Jacobs sake, and for Israel my chosen. I have named thee
by thy name, though thou never know me. But though fortune were very
contrary to him at the beginning; yet did GOD never forsake him: but following
the prophecy, delivered him from many dangers, and inconveniences. ASTYAGES
king of the Medes had a daughter called Mandana, of whom he dreamt in his
sleep, and it seemed unto him that he saw her make water in such abundance,
that she filled all the City of Ecbatane, and from thence watered and
ouerflowed all Asia: He proposed this vision to some of his Mages, expounders
of dreams, and was afraied with that which he learned of them: Wherefore, when
Mandana was of years to be married, he would not give her to any Median Lord,
but gave her to a Persian, whom he found of a good house, and of sweet and
peaceable manners; though he esteemed him less then a Median of mean estate.
Mandana being married to this Persian, called Cambyses, the first year of
their marriage Astyages had an other vision, and dreamed that he saw a Vine
coming out of the womb of his daughter, and spreading over all Asia: which he
proposed to the deuiners, as before, and hearing them, sent into Persia for his
daughter, being already with child; who being come, he commanded she should
be carefully kept, purposing to put her child to death: because the Mages had
told him, that the son of his daughter should one day reign in his place.
Wherefore, as soon as she brought forth a child (who was called CYRUS) he
appointed Harpagus his greatest favorite, and trustiest servant, to put him to
death; who gave him to a Shepherd, to be exposed for a pray to wild beasts:
which the shepherd did, and left him in the midst of a forest, wrapped in a
blanket of cloth of gold, and a mantle of diverse colors: whither retourning
afterward, he found a bytch by the child, which gave him suck, and defended him
from the beasts. Wherefore, being moved with the same pity which moved the
bitch, he brought the cradle into his Cabin, and nourished the child as his
own, till he was ten years of age; when he was chosen king amongst the
children: In which charge, bearing himself more brauelier then the estate of a
shepherds son yielded, in appointing to every one their offices, and
estates; some to buyld him houses, and castles; others to be of his guard; one
to be as the eye of the king; another ordained to make report unto him of the
government of his affairs; and chastising roughly such as disobeyed him; he
became known, and was brought back again to Astyages: who brought him up,
thinking his dream to be accomplished in this childish royalty.

But being woxen greater, he became most warlike; and having at the beginning
of his conquests but thirty thousand fighting men; afterward as he increased
in Lordships, he augmented his forces, and gathered together six hundred
thousand footmen, six score thousand horsemen, and above two thousand
chariots, armed with hooks: His Empire being the greatest and the fairest that
ever king had in Asia: bounded toward the East with the red sea, toward the
North with the sea Euxinus; on the West with Cypres and Egypt; and on the south
with Ethiopia. He conquered first the Country of the Medes, and the
Hircanians, which yielded themselves unto him of their own free will; then
subdued by force the Assyrians, the Arabians, and Capadocians, the inhabitants
of the one, and the other Phrygia; the Lydians, Carians, Phenicians, and
Babylonians: He overcame the Bactrians, Indians, and Cilicians: Moreover also
the Saques, Paphlagonians, Magadides, and many other Nations. Likewise he made
himself Lord of the Greeks dwelling in Asia; and passing the sea, he
vanquished the Cyprians, and Egiptians. He besieged and took Babylon, which,
it was incredible that it might either be built by man's workmanship, or
distroyed by humane power: And nevertheless, he assailed it as an enemy,
spoiled it as vanquishour, and disposed of it as Lord. He brought under his
obedience so many Nations, which were not of his language, nor understood not
one an other: and stretched his dominion over so many Regions, by the fear of
his name: In such sort, that he astonished all the world, and none durst resist
him. This notwithstanding, he made himself so much beloved, that they desired
never to have any other Lord; and they reverenced him as a father, governing so
great an Empire, and of such largenes, by a marvelous order which he set down
when he was in peace: Providing for his residence, counsel, audiences, his
gards, the estate of his house, the service, exercise, and health of his
person; the train and followers of his Court; division of his provinces, and
governments of garrisons in fortresses, and frontiers; his reuenew, justice,
and soldiery: Showing himself religious, venerable, magnificent, liberal, and
worthy to be imitated in all actions, by the Princes that followed after him.
It is said that Alexander, having found the sepulcher of Cyrus uncovered and
defaced; caused him to be put to death which had done it: And having read the
inscription, which was in Persian letters, and words; he willed hit also to be
written in Greek underneath; and the substance of the inscription being this:
O Man whatsoever thou art, and whence soever thou come, (for I am assured
that thou will come,) I am Cyrus, he which conquered the Empire for the
Persians, and I pray thee, do not envy me this little earth, which covers my
poor body. These words moved greatly the heart of Alexander to compassion,
when he considered the vnstabilitie of things.

XENOPHON understanding Cyrus to have bin a Prince so admirable in his deeds,
and excellent in government of men, he chose him to express in his person the
image of a just and moderate reign, writing of his institution: which is one
of the best books that is to be read in Greek. Plato acknowledging him for a
worthy and valiant Prince, said that he failed greatly in bringing up of his
children: for beginning from his youth to make war, and being busied all his
life therein, he never thought on the government of his house; but left his two
sonns, CAMBISES and SMERDES to the Ladies of the Court, and to the Eunuchs to
bring up: who brought them up as children that were borne happy, not suffering
any to gainsay them in any sort; and constrayning all to praise whatsoever they
did or said. As Cyrus then was a Master of a great multitude of men and
beasts, and of many other things, he did not consider that they to whom he was
to leave so many good things, were not brought up in the ancient Persian
discipline, but in the corrupt discipline of the Medes: which was the cause of
making them such, as commonly they are, which are brought up with so much
liberty. Succeeding their father then after his decease, first the one slew the
other, not being able to endure an equal, and then like a mad man through
drunkenness and ignorance he lost his estate, by reason of the contempt which
men had of his folly.

Then DARIUS the first of that name, came to the Empire, who was no kings
son, nor brought up in Courtly delights: who governed himself by the Laws,
bringing in a common equality, and making friendship amongst them all, whom he
won with good deeds: So being beloved of his subjects, he conquered no fewer
Countries then Cyrus had left him; ordayning thorough out all the Countries,
lands, and Lordships, under his obedience, twenty governments, called in the
Persian language Satrapies; and taxing the annual tributes, which every of
them ought to pay in silver, after the weight of the Babylonian talent; or in
gold, according to the Euboick: for during the reign of Cyrus, and his son
Cambyses, there was no tribute imposed; but the Countries brought certain
presents, and gave certain gratuites and gifts to the king: by reason of
which imposition, the Persians said, that DARIUS was a Merchant, CAMBISES a
Lord, and CYRUS a father: because that Darius was too good a husband, and drew
profit out of every thing* Cambises proud and cruel; but Cyrus soft, kind,
gentle, and gracious: having procured all good things unto the Persians.

The first Satrapie comprehended the Iouians, the Magnetians which are in Asia,
the Eolians, Car^ans, Lycians, Melyans, and Pamphylians: all which made but a
tribute of forty talents of silver. The second was of the Mysians, Lydians,
Alysonians, Cabalians, and Higennians, which paid fifty talents of silver.
The third of the Hellespontins, Phrygians, Paphlagonians, Mariandines, and
Syrians, taxed at CCClx. talents. The fourth of the Cilicians, which were bound
to furnish every year CCClx. white horses: which was for every day in the
year a several horse: paying moreover five hundred talents, whereof a hundred
and forty were appointed for the finding of the said horses; and the other
three hundred and three score went into the kings cofers. The fifth began at
the City of Possidea, situated in the mountains of Cilicia, and Syria, and
stretched out unto Egypt, except Arabia which was exempted: This parcel of land
wherein were comprehended Phenicia, Palestina, and the Isle of Cypres, yielded
CCCL. talents. The sixth consisted in all Egypt, and the bordering Africans,
with Cyrene, and Barce, which contributed with them: so that the annual reuenew
was of seven hundred Talents; besides the fishing of the poole Meris; and
without reckoning of the Wheat which was provided for six score thousand
Persians, and their auxiliaries keeping garrison within the white walls of
Memphis. The seventh was of the Sattagidians, Gaudarians, Dadiques, and
Aparites, which was Clxx. tale^ts. The eight contained the town of Sourses;
and an other portion of the Cysses, yielding CCC. The ninth consisted in the
City of Babylon, and the rest of Assyria, finding a thousand talents of
silver, and five hundred gelded boys. Of the tenth ordained for Ecbatane, and
the rest of Media, with the xj. consisting of the Paricanians and
Orthocorimbantes, were received CCCCL. talents. The twelfth reached from the
Bactrians to the Egles, and was charged with CCClx. talents, The thirteenth
began at Pactica with the Armenians, and other bordering lands; and was bounded
with the greater sea, being taxed at CCCC. talents. The fourteenth consisted in
the Sagarties, Sarangres, Thamanees, Thiries, Meces, and in the people of the
Islands of the red sea: the tribute amounting unto six hundred talents. In the
fifteenth were the Saces and Caspians, which yielded CCL. In the sixteenth the
Parthians, Chorasmians, Sogdians, and Arians: taxed at CCC. In the seventeenth
the Paricanians, and the Ethiopians of Asia CCCC. In the eighteenth the
Manineans, Sarpites, and Atlarodians CC. In the xix. the Mosches, Tibarenes,
Macrosians, Mosinicians, and Mardians CCC. In the xx. were the Indians; which
because they were a very great multitude, paid more tribute then all the other
nations: namely, CCClx. talents of gold. Al these sums which were paid in the
Babilonian talent of silver, being referred to the Euboick talent, came to nine
thousand, five hundred, and forty talents: And the gold of the mine being
multiplied by thirteen; to four thousand, six hundred, and four score
Euboick talents: and was levied on Asia, and some part of Africa. Then he
raised an other tribute on the Isles, and Nations of Europe; having stretched
out his dominion as far as Thessalie. Persia was freed from all payments; and
the Ethiopians sent only certain presents: as from three years to three, a
bushel of gold from the mine, two hundred fagots of Ebony, five hundred black
boys, and xxij. Elephants, the greatest that could be found. The Cholchois and
Caucasians, from five years to five, one hundred young boys, and as many
girls. The Arabians, every year a present of incense, weighing a thousand
talents. The means which he used to keep his Treasures, was thus: He caused
the gold and silver to be melted, and cast into earthen barrels; then when the
vessel was full, he made it be removed up and down with his Court: and
whenever he wanted money, he broke, or cut out thereof as much as he would.
Touching his husbandry, and care for the intertayning of such power, and
riches: first this king was most careful of Arms, ordayning himself in each
government, both the victuals, and paies, which were to be distributed to his
soldiers, as well strangers, as his natural subjects, thoroughout his
garrisons: and seeing the musters in person. Where such as were found to have
fulfilled the appointed number of their men; and had best mounted, and
furnished them with arms, were advanced in honors, and enriched with great
gifts: On the contrary, he chastised such as failed, or were given to picory;
putting others in their charges: Moreover, he visited himself (as much as he
might) the Countries under his obedience, endeavoring to understand their
estate, and those which he could not see, he caused to be visited by some
trusty persons, sent for that purpose. Where he found the Countries well
peopled, and the lands diligently husbanded, full of corn, trees, and fruits;
he rewarded the Princes, or Governors, with great gifts, and augmented their
charges: But those whose countries were found desert, or evil inhabited, by
reason of their rudenes, insolency, or negligence; he punished or discharged
them: being no less careful to have his Countries, well ordered by the
inhabitants, then to have them kept in safety by the garrisons; and caring no
less for his revenues then his arms; and proposing as great a reward to the
diligent laborers, as to the valiant warriors.

We read, that then when the king of Persia was in his greatest glory, and
reputation, that his Majesty was highly exalted, and magnificently adorned
with august and venerable authority; that his royal seat being established
at SVSA or ECBATANA, he retired himself out of the sight of men into his
palace, being very fair and richly decked, with gold, silver, yuorie, and
other exquisite things: In the which were many galleries and halls, one within
an other, many doors compassed between them, and separated by spaces, and the
commings to them shut and closed with gates of brass: That there were many
Princes and Lords appointed in their several places, and some garding, and
serving his person, some looking to those that came in and out at the gates,
some receyuours, and treasourers; others Captains, and men of war: some
hunters and faulconers; and others ordained unto other offices, as ^se and
necessity required. Moreover the Satrapes or Princes went and came to and fro,
governing the whole Empier of Asia, beginning in the West at Hellespont, and
ending in India toward the East. Herodotus shows by iourneis and lodginges,
that from Sardes in Lydia, to Susa in Mennonia, which was the Kings seat, it
was three Months journey. It is written also in the book of Hester, that
ASSVERVS king of Persia reigned, even from the Indies unto Ethiopia, over an
hundred twenty and seven provinces, writing to every province according to
the Style thereof, and to every people in their own language. In the mean
time the king termed by them, their Lord and God, saw and understood all
things, by means of posts ordained in all the Countries under his obedience;
and spies dispersed here, and there, and secret Intellegencers: so that being
so many Officers, they did every one in his charge endeavor himself in such
sort, that their Lord knew incontinently whatsoever new thing happened, even from
the frontiers of his government to the place of his residence: which was in the
midst of his kingdom, dwelling the winter in Babylon, because the air there
is very mild and temperate; the three months of the Springtime, in the
Town of Susa; and the two months of great heat in the City of Ecbatana: In
such sort, that by this changing of Countries, what season of the year so ever
it were, he was always in a time like unto the spring. He was warned every
morning when he waked, to fear God, and to see to those affairs which God
has committed to his charge.

The intertainment of the Queen was correspondent to this greatness, and
magnificence: for many provinces were allotted her for the furnishing thereof,
which were called diversely, according to the use whereunto they were appointed:
As one was the Queens girdle; an other her veil: and so likewise the rest,
according to those ornaments which they furnished. As soon as his first son,
which was to succeed in the Crown was borne, all his subjects celebrated
this day; and afterward every year thorough out Asia, they solemnized the
feast of his nativity. Then the child was given to be nourished to the
Eunuchs, which held very honorable places in the Court; and their principal
charge amongst others was, to make him fair, and well proporcioned, by
composing and ordering his parts conveniently. Then when he was come to seven
years, he learned to ride, and began to go on hunting. At the fourteenth
year of his age, he was instructed by Masters called the royal Paedagogues
or Tutours, which were four chosen amongst all the Persians, the chiefest of
age and sufficiency, that is, the most wise, just, temperate, and valiant: The
first taught him the Magic of ZOROASTER, consisting in the service of the
Godds, and kingly manners. The second warned him to be all his life true, and
veritable. The third, that he should not be supplanted by any cupidity or
desire. The fourth, was to make him without fear, to the end he should not be
subject to cowardice and pusillanimitie.

But howbeit these things were well, and religiously instituted; yet were they
ill observed. For after Darius his son XERXES coming to rainge, which had
bin brought up in the same Kingly delicacies as Cambises, he likewise fell
into the like inconveniences. For possessing together whatsoever Cyrus and
Darius his father had gotten, and seeing himself exceeding rich and mighty,
he purposed to conquer Greece, and came thither with an inestimable army,
having by Sea five hundred and seuenteen thousand, six hundred men; by land a
milion and seven hundred thousand foot, and fourscore thousand horsemen, with
twenty thousand Arabians and Africans; unto whom there joined of Europe three
hundred thousand; the whole multitude coming to two milions, six hundred and
seuenteen thousand fighting me^: the greatest that ever was in field after
those of Ninus and Semiramis: at the least, of which we have knowledge by
histories. Insomuch that we need not to marvel, at that which is said, that
running ryuers were dried up by the infinite number which drank of them, and
that there were so many sails that one could not see the Sea, by reason of
them. But therein the riches of Xerxes was more to be admired, then his
conduct to be commended; because he was always seen to be the first in
flying, and the last in coming to fight: being fearful in dangers,
courageous and stout in security, and before he came to the hazard of the
wars. Trusting in his forces, as if he had bin Lord over nature, he leueled
mountains with the plains, filled and raised up valleys, passed over arms of
the Sea on bridges which he caused to be made, and turned the course of
others by new channels to sail at his pleasure. But by how much more his
coming into Greece was terrible; his departure thence, was so much the more
dishonorable: For being astonyed by the discomfitures of his people, both by
Sea and land, he went back into Asia, even almost alone, in a fisherboate.
Which retraite deserves well to be considered with admiration, for knowledge
of the truth of men's deeds: to see him hidden in a little Schiffe, whom, but a
little before the whole Sea could not suffice; and to see him destitute of
servants, whose army all Greece could scarce intertaine. In this manner
Xerxes who had bin the terror of the world began to be despised of his own
people: after he had bin so unhappy in the expedition of Greece. In so much
that Artabanus an Hircanian a man of great credit with him, and Captain of
his Guarde slew him, and Darius his eldest son after him; hoping to make
himself King: but setting upon Artaxerxes the second son, and having given
him a stroke with his sword, ARTAXERXES feeling himself wounded, but not to
death, est soones took his sword in hand for his defense, and stroke Artabanus
such a blow that he fell dead to the ground. So ARTAXERXES being almost
miraculously saved, and having also therewith avenged the death of his father
succeeded him in the kingdom, and Empire of Persia, where there has not bin
since any king that has bin great in deed as Plato says: nor of any reckoning
or renown. For taking away from the people to much of their liberty: and
introducing a more absolute authority of ruling over them, then was convenient,
they lost the amity and communion of the state. Which things being lost, the
Princes looked no longer to the profit of the subjects, or of the people: but
for the conservation of their authority, whatsoever little profit was offered
them, they razed the towns, and consumed with fire the nations that were their
friends: and hating spitefully, and without mercy; they were hated in like
manner. And when it was needful that their people should fight for them, they
found them not of accord, to hazard them selves willingly, and to fight: but
ruling over almost innumerable men, they made them unfit for war; and as having
need of men, they hired others; thinking to preserve themselves, and their
state by mercenary and strange Soldiers: who likewise forgot themselves,
showing by their deeds that they preferred riches before virtue. The tyrannies
which they used toward their subjects for their pretended conservation are
recited by Aristotle in his Politics, but not approved: as to abase and pull
down the highest, and to take away the most courageous, not to permit their
bankets, assemblies, disciplines, nor any such thing: but to take heed to
whatsoever is wont to engender these two; highness of mind, and confidence: to
forbid them Schools, and all other companies and meetinges; and to provide in
any case that they came not acquainted one with another: considering that
knowledge and acquaintance makes men to have more affyance one in another.
That all the archers of the Guard being strangers, should show themselves in
the streets, and walk before the doors of houses; whereby that which the
subjects imagined or practiced, should not be kept secret: and they would come
to have less courage by being continually kept under. Moreover to endeavor to
discover what they said and did, and to have spies, listeners, and
referendaries, dispersed thorough out the Countries, and whersoeuer there were
any assemblies: for they become less hardy by fearing such manner of people,
and if they should wax hardy, they be yet less secret. Also that they should
accuse and slander one an other, and friends fall to debate with friends, the
common people with the Nobles, and the rich amongst themselves. And to
impouerish the subjects, serves that they be not constrained to keep a guard;
and that being every day busied, they may have no leisure to conspire; and that
being urged with some war they may always have need of their king; as their
head and Chiefetaine. Not to suffer about him grave persons, and free of
speech; because that such diminish the excellency, and authority of the Lord:
which would only seem to be such a one himself. All which means, and such
other like, being drawn out of the government of the Persians; are
tyrannical, and most pernicious; gathered by Aristotle, not to the end to
teach them unto others; but rather to beware of them by knowing the misery of
tyrants which are constrained to fly to such evils, thereby to assure their
parsons, and estates: which when they think by these means to be surest and
safest, are then soonest overthrown at unawares thorough the hate which their
tyrannies have engendered.

By which rough and hard usage the Persians being degenerated, suffered them
selves to be overcome in many parts of Asia, bordering on the Sea; and having
passed into Europe, they were beaten back; some of them perishing miserably,
and others flying shamefully; as they were worthy, and had well deserved. For it
is impossible (says Isocrates in his Panegyric speaking of them) to find in
people so brought up, and governed, any virtue or prowes to triumph over their
enemies. How should there be amongst such manners, either valiant Captain, or
good Soldier; the greatest part of them being but a confused multitude, and
not accustomed to perils; being too soft for war, and fitter to make slaves
and drudges then our own servants? The most honorable amongst them never
lived equally, familiarly, or ciuilly, but continue all their life to do
outrage unto some and service unto others; as people of depraved natures. By
their abundance of riches, they deck their bodies magnificently, having their
minds base and vile, by their Monarchy: And being resident in Court, they
learn to humble them selves, and to have a cowardly heart, worshipping a
mortal man, and calling him God; and making less account of Gods then of men.
Those also which inhabit toward the Sea who are called Satrapes, do not
dishonor the Persian discipline, but persevere in the same manners, behauing
them selves disloyally toward their friends, and cowardly toward their
enemies; and humbling themselves on one side, and swelling on the other, they
despise their allies; and honor their adversaries.

XENOPHON comparing the reign of Cyrus, and of his successors, and rendering a
reason of the change of manners which happened in that nation; says that
before time; not only the king, but all private men also were wont to keep
faithfully, and constantly their promise, made either by oath, or by touching
of hands, yea even to those which had done some offense worthy of death: but
this faithfulness was afterward lost. For before, if any one had hazarded
himself in perils for the King, had subdued some nation, taken a Town, or
done any virtuous exployte, the King raised him unto honor: but sithence;
traitors, and such as to creep into favor kept neither promise nor faith;
were most reckoned of in Court. After whose example all the inhabitants of
Asia, have run into all injustice, and impiety. Also afterward they became more
licentious in ill doing, and more covetous, and so consequently more wicked.
For they raunsomed and constrained to pay money, not only such as were culpable
of crimes, and guilty of great misdeeds; but also those which had not done any
iniust or dishonest act: wherhence it came to pass that not only
malefactors, but al those of the richer sort were in continual fear, and
would not yield themselves to the most mighty; and durst not approach or trust
to the king; neither be of his bands of ordinance; neither go to war under
him. By means whereof it was more then lawful for those which made war on
them, to forage and spoil their Country without fight; and to the people to
revolt without fear of punishment: as well for their impiety toward the Gods;
as for their injustice toward men. Moreover they became more faint of
courage, and untoward of mind and disposition, not using any discipline either
of body or mind: having lost and left off that manner of exercising themselves
which was commanded them; and all rules of good life. For before there was a
law amongst them, that they should not spit nor blow their noses; which was
not ordained to make them retain the humors within their bodies; but to thend
that by exercise all those humors should be consumed, and they have their
bodies stronger, and liuelier: now the custom not to spit, nor blow their
noses, remained still; but to take pains at any labor or exercise, there was
no such matter. They had also an other Law to eat but once a day, to thend to
have the rest of the time free to bestow on their business; and it is true that
they did eat but once a day; but they began it early in the morning, and so
continued eating and drinking til night when they go to bed. Before, they
drank no wine, and abhorred all dronkennes; but sithence, they gave themselves
to wine; and thought it no shame to be drunk. They were wont to go so often on
hunting, that it suffised to keep them in breath, and their horses also: but
they left off that, as they did other good things. Moreover the order for their
children to frequent the Court remained; but the discipline of ryding horses,
and vaulting was altogether lost. And whereas in times past the children
learned justice, by seeing causes judged according to right and reason; that
was altogether abolished: because that none overcame in judgment, but those
which gave most money. They used before in their living, the discipline, and
continence of the the Persians; and did only wear the magnificent habit of
the Medes: but they afterward suffered the Persian constancy to be
extinguished; and observed curiously the delicacy of the Medes. It suffised
them not to have their beds made very soft; but their feet also trod upon
tapistry: lest their going on the pauement should make any noise: The service
of the Table, and things invented for magnificence, were augmented from day to
day with new licourousnes, and delicacies. In the winter it was not enough for
them to have their head, body, and feet covered; but they used to wear double
gloves: In Summer the shadows of the trees could not content them, but they
had men about them, which invented other kinds of shades to cool them, after
a strange fashion. Their ancient custom was to be always on horseback, and
never on foot; to thend to make them good men at arms: but now they had more
clothes and couerings on their horses, then on their beds; and cared not so
much for matter of arms and horsemanship, as to be sat at their ease. How
should they not then become more effeminate, and faint in matters of war, then
they were before? For then it was the custom of the Country, for those which
held lands to furnish men at arms, and to send them forth to service; likewise
to give good pay to garrisons, whenever there was occasion for defense of
their country: but since that time porters, cooks, bakers, cupbearers,
tasters, waiters on the bathes, servants of the table, ryders, horskeepers,
such as carry and recarry meat, grooms of the Chamber for their downlying and
their vprysing, barbers, and trimmers, persumers, and painters, and others of
such like occupations, were they which the rich men sent in steed of men of
arms to the war, to thend that they should bring them their pay. Even those
which seemed the best, showed themselves cowards, knowing the evil recompense
which they were to look for. And finding in themselves their own cowardice,
they went about no expedition without the Greeks, whether it were to make war
in their Country, or that the Greeks assailed them; thinking that they could
not overcome without their help: and that which is more, they help
themselves, with the Greeks themselves, to make war against the Greeks.

They were indeed a great multitude, but unprofitable in fight; as it was
clearly known by the valiancy and hardines of the Macedonian ALEXANDER, who
with xl. or l. thousand fighting men at the most, overcame three times DARIUS
the last King of the Persians, who led four or five hundred thousand, and
brought him into such extremity, that thinking to reunite himself in the third
overthrow, he was traitorously taken by BESSVS governor of Bactria, which had
the principal charge under him, who put him in a golden cage, and cast him on
a chariot, meaning to carry him to Bactria; then seeing that Alexander
approached, caused him to be killed with darts and Iauelins; and left him dead
in the midst of the way. Such was the end of a king so mighty in people, in
possessions and reuenews; who called him self Lord of all the world from the
East unto the West: having reigned only six years in all delicacies,
exceeding the common magnificence of Princes. Which luxurious manner of living
was cause of his utter overthrow: as humane things being variable have their
fatal inclination, so ordained by the divine providence to fall then, when
they are mounted highest; and that the Lords think themselves to be most
assured, sleeping therefore in carelesnes and ouerweening conceits. For he
suffered himself to slide so far into deliciousnes, and superfluous riches,
that he slept always in a chamber between two great chambers, most richly
furnished: in such sort that the Kings bed being sumptuously spread in his
chamber, and covered with a vine of gold, in manner of a grate or lettis,
enriched with precious stones gathered together in manner of hanging clusters
of grapes; the beds head was placed toward the wall of one of the great
chambers, in which there was five thousand talents of gold; and this great room
was called the kings beds head: whereunto right opposite was the wall of the
other great chamber, against his beds foot, in the which there was always
three thousand talents of silver; and was called the kings beds foot: which
sums are esteemed after our manner to be worth thirty millions of Crowns.
Going to war he carried with him in his host, for his pastime, and delight
cccxxxix. women, as Concubines, singers, dauncers, and such as were skillful in
all kind of Music* xlvj. workmen to set flowers in order, and to make
garlands, nosegaies, chapelets, and other sweet smelling things; cclxxvij.
cooks, xxix. potters, making every day vessels of earth to serve the kitchen;
xiij. bakers of tarts and such other licorous, and delicate bakemeates:
Cellerers, cupbearers, bruers, and minglers of wines, makers of spiced cupps,
and of all artificial lycours, and drinks; xvij. of the one sort, and lxx. of
the other. Perfumers and makers of sweet smelling savors, and odours, both
wet and dry; xl. If then the king of Persia used so much delicacy being in
war, and nourished himself with so many delights in the field; what did he
when he remained in peace at Persepoli, or in Babylon a city abounding in all
superfluities, and in all vices that proceed of great plenty? Yet
notwithstanding in the flower of his fortune, he being dronken with prosperity
and abundance of goods, was spoiled of his riches, which had bin heaped
together by many kings his predecessors; losing his life, and his kingdom;
which was clymed to the top of the worldy power and felicity: where arises the
spring of pride, arrogance, ouerweening, and extreme insolency. And there is
the slippery path whereon stands the envy of fortune, and where sovereign
felicity falls headlong into great calamity.

By this so magnificent victory over him, ALEXANDER brought under his obedience
almost all the countries of the East: and transported the Monarchy out of Asia
into Europe. So the Macedonians took away the Empire of the East from the
Persians; and the Parthians from the Macedonians by the conduct of Arsaces a
Captain of an uncertain birth, but of a most approved virtue; and no less
memorable amongst them, then Cyrus among the Persians: and Alexander among the
Macedonians: by whose name they called the succeeding Kings, because of the
reverence which they bare unto him. They became so mighty that for a time they
ruled over all Asia, possessing not only the unmeasurable plains, but also
the abrupt dounfals of the mountains; and placing the bounds of their Empire,
where either the heat or the cold stayed them with snowes, or immoderate, and
burning heates. They possessed eighteen kingdoms, dividing in this manner
their provinces, as having respect to the two Seas, that is the red Sea toward
the South, and the Caspian toward the North: where of eleven which were called
the superior or higher, began at the confines of Armenia, and at the banks of
the Caspian Sea, extending even to the Scythians: The Other seven were termed
the inferior or lower. They seemed to divide the world with the Romans,
the one ruling in the East; and the other the West. Their dominion from ARSACES to
ARTABANVS, endured cccc. years, which was brought back again into Persia by
ARTAXERXES, and after cccxviij. years, was taken again from the Persians by
the Arabians or Sarazens. Amongst whom the CALIPHES residing at Bagdet,
reigned in the East ccccxviij. years; after them the first TVRKS from the year
of Christ M.L.I. until M.cc.xj: when the Tartarians came out of their
country, who in a little time seized on the greatest part of the north; the
East, and the south: of who^ came the invincible TAMBERLAN, who made the whole
habitable earth afraid. And since (they being retired) the Persians, who are
reputed the ciu^lest people of the East; being ingenious, and valiant: and
there are amongst them excellent Philosophers, Physicians, Astrologers; and
very good Artisans in all mysteries and occupations. Their king is called
SOPHI, which is as much to say as wise, and the Interpreter of God: because
that ISMAEL, the first that was so named, under the color of expositions, and
new ceremonies brought in by him into the religion of Mahomet, got no long
time since, a great Empire in the East, having driven away the race of
Vsun-Cassanus king of Persia, to whom he was allied by his mothers side; and
made many Princes, and Lords of the East his vassals or tributaries. The chief
provinces under his obedience were Armenia the great, Persia, Media, and
Assyria: with iiij. capital or head Cities, Tauris* in Armenia, Samach in
Persia, Scyras in Media, and Bagdet which was sometimes Babylon in Assyria.
There are gentlemen amongst them after the manner of Italy, France, and Spain,
which use barded horses in the wars: unto which they go welarmed, bearing great
lances and good cymeters; being also very good archers. The Sophi is opposite
on the one side to the Ottoman, and to the Zagathain on the other. Thus have the
kingdoms of Asia and of the East varied.

But before we go out of this quarter, we must speak of the MAGES, which were
far different from other nations in their religion, and wisdom. They had no
temples, Images, nor altars; neither was it permitted by their law to make any;
esteeming them fools which had them; and accounting it impiety to enclose the
Gods within walls, which ought to have al open and free; and whose temple and
house was the whole world. For this cause they persuaded Xerxes warring in
Greece to burn all the Temples, which he should find there. And when they would
sacrifice, they went up into high mountains; where it was not lawful for him
that sacrificed to pray only for himself; but he must also pray for the
prosperity of the king, and generally of all the Persians: being himself by
this means comprised in the prayer. Every one of the^ when they would
sacrifice, brought his offering into a place that was not contaminated; then
having his attire on his head made for the most part of myrtle, he called on
that God to whom he sacrificed. They would neither, piss, spit, nor void their
noses into the rivers, but reverenced them above all things. They suffered
their dead bodies to be bitten, and prayed on by dogs, and birds, before they
would bury them; others anointed them over with wax, and then put them into
the earth. They and the Egyptians did not burn them, because the Persians said
it was not fit that a God should feed on a dead man; and the Egyptians thought
the fire to be a living creature, eating, and co^suming whatsoever he seized
on; and dying with his meat when he was full: and in their Law it was not
permitted to cast the dead bodies to birds and beasts to devour them, or to
any living Creatures: and therefore they embalmed them with salt, that they
should not be eaten of worms. The Egyptians would never kill any thing that
had life: The Mages killed with their hands every living creature, saving man:
whom also the DRVIDES of Gaul did not spare to kill, and sacrifice; divining
by southsayings as the MAGES, whom they resembled in many things: showing
themselves so cerimonious in observing of Magic, that they seemed to have
taught it to the Persians; and not to have learned it of them, as Pliny says.
These Mages gave out that the Gods appeared unto them, and foretold them of
things to come; affirming that the air was full of spirits, which did subtly
insinuate themselves into men's eyes: that there were two princes; namely one
good God which they called Herosmades: and the other evil whom they termed
Arinan. They clothed themselves with white garments, lived of herbs, cheese,
and course bread, slept on the ground, carried canes or reads, in steed of
staves: They assembled in a holy place to communicate, and talk together.
Their authority was so great that Cambises when he went out of Persia left the
government of his house to one of them, who in the absence of the king
conspired with a brother of his against him, and went about to make himself
king. Their Magic consisted wholly in the religion and service of the Gods; To
whom they offered prayers, vows and sacrifices, as if they only were exalted;
believing the resurrection of men, and that they should be immortal: Aristotle
witnesses that they were auncienter then the PROPHETS of Egypt; and Clearehus
affirms that the BRACHMANES, or GYMNOSOPHISTS of India came from the^.
ZOROASTER without doubt was the first inuentor, whom somethinke by the
etimologie of his name, to have bin an obseruer of the stars; and to have
understood natural things. Plato in his first Alcibiades, says that the Magic
of ZOROASTER is a knowledge of divine mysteries, which was wont to be taught
unto the children of the kings of Persia; to thend they might learn by example
of the whole worlds common wealth, to govern their own. And in his Charmides,
he says that the Magic of ZAMOLSIS was the physic of the mind causing it to
use temperance; as the other is cause of bodily health. Pithagoras, Empedocles,
Democritus, and the same Plato, sailed and went far to learn it; and having
learned it, did celebrate it at their return, and kept it secret: and many
other virtuous amongst the ancients have travailed carefully therein; getting
great authority, and reputation thereby. For observing by it, the meruailes
hidden in the secrets of the world, in the bosom of Nature, and mysteries of
God, they have discovered the concords of the world, and agreement of the
heaven with the earth; accommodating the superior things to the inferior,
after they had once known their virtues how they agree in doing and
suffering; which the Greeks call Sympathies, and Antipathies: which has moved
Plotinus to call such MAGES making profession of natural MAGIC, the
ministers of Nature. It is at this day much used in CHINA and CATHAY which are
Countries inhabited by most ingenious and industrious people; where they are
not permitted to come to Offices, and Honors in the Common wealth without
being learned, namely in this MAGIC: which signifies to speak simply
according to the ancient Persian language, perfect, and sovereign wisdom,
and MAGVS an expounder, and obseruer of the divinity. Sithence that, men have
abusiuely transferred this name to inchaunters, who do wickedly abuse the
simple; making them believe that they know the secret and future things, by
strange words, by signs, and characters, by devilish deceits and impostures,
and other superstitious observations of Necromantie, Geomantie, Hydromantie,
Aeromantie, Pyromantie, and such other of long time reproved both by divine,
and humane laws. Wherhence may be understood that there are two sorts of
MAGIC, the one natural, and the other superstitious. The natural in contemplating
the virtues of celestial, and terrestiall things, and considering the
conuenances and contrarieties, discovers the powers which are hidden in
nature; and mingling the one with the other in due proportion, and under certain
constellation, and applying the active to the passive, draws them one to
another by the similitude of nature. So the elements do draw the one the other;
so the loadstone draws the iron to it; amber the chafe; and brimstone fire;
the sun many flowers, and leaves; the Moon waters; and Mars the winds; many
herbs draw unto them many living creatures, and have marvelous secret
properties, by the which this Magic naturally works great miracles. The
other superstitious Magic is by invocation of evil spirits; which is a
manifest Idolatry; and has always bin forbidden by well ordered commonweals.
Such were the MAGICIANS of PHARAO which counterfeited diuelishly whatsoever
MOSES and ARON divinely had wrought, til such time as the rod of MOSES turned
into a serpent did eat up theirs which they had turned also into serpents.
Such was SIMON MAGVS, and such the Pythonisse was that called up the soul of
Samuel the prophet, such also was Circe, and such a one was Medea. Plutarch
writes that the spirit of Antony being bound by magical verses, and love
drenches; that his liberty being lost he was fixed in the face of Cleopatra.
The Euthydemus of Plato compares Oratorie, and Magic or Enchauntery
together, and says that as Oratory is a delighting and appeasing of the
Judges, and assemblies of men, so that Enchanting is an asswaging of vipers,
spiders, scorpions, and other venomous, and cruel beasts; as also of diseases.
The vanity of this superstitious Magic appeared especially in the Emperor
Nero, who gave him self to it as much as ever any man did, having neither want
of goods, of power, nor of understanding: and desiring nothing more then to
command the Gods, and the dead. Notwithstanding after he had called unto him,
Tyridates king of Armenia, who excelled in Magic, to learn it of him; and had
employed long time, great labor and infinite treasure thereon (not omitting
also to do such abominable superstition as was presciibed him) yet in the end
he found all false which had bin told him, and so gave it over. This
notwithstanding it has bin dispersed throughout the world which is so diverse
in other things; under the color of fair, but yet vain and frivolous
promises, associating it self with religion, Physic, and Mathematics; which
three have a marvelous power over the understandings of men: And thus being
fortified with a threefolde virtue, it could never yet be altogether
exterminated, and rooted out; but there remain here and there still some
relics, and remainders thereof: but in secret notwithstanding, for fear of
the punishment which is appointed for it; and the shame which comes unto
those that abuse themselves therein.

A COMPARISON OF THE INDIANS, Ethtopians, Egyptians, scythians, and Athenians,
in their Antiquities.
THE Indians, Ethiopians, Egyptians, Scythians, and Athenians, did all boast
that they were the first created, of all the men in the world: alleging diverse
and different reasons of their antiquities. As the INDIANS the fertility of
their country bearing twice a year both fruits and grain: where there was
never any want of victuals. The ETHIOPIANS allege their neerenesse of
situation to the south; thinking it must needs be that in places which are
nearest the sun and therefore hottest, that all living creatures were first
created which take their beginning of heat. The EGYPTIANS, the temperature of
their air, which is neither excessive hot, or cold; dry, or moist: and the
goodness of their territory; which brings forth abundantly whatsoever is
necessary for the life of man. The SCYTHIANS the height of their country,
which was the first freed from fire, or discovered from water: and therefore
soonest made apt before any other to produce both man and beast. The ATHENIANS
saying they are Aut^cthones (that is to say) issued out of the earth, without
having any other beginning. The Indians, Ethiopians, Egyptians, and Athenians,
that they have invented all arts, and means of living well, and easily. The
Scythians dwelling under a sharper climate, say that they have always
exercised arms: as having their bodies and minds more hardened: amongst whom
were never found but two persons renowned for learning Zamolsis and Anacharsis.

A COMPARISON OF THE GREAT monarchies, the Egyptian, Assyrian, Median, Persian,
and Parthian, in their situations, beginnings, largenes, reuenews, riches, and
power: and of those famous monarchs that founded them, and others under whom
they ended.
THE Monarchies of the Egyptians, Assyrians, Medians, Persians, and Parthians,
agree in this, that they have bin established chiefly in the fertile and
temperate countries of Asia; where the men are gentle and tractable, or
naturally servile; as Hyppocrates and Aristotle affirm. For the inhabitants,
which are removed from al temperature, will not easily be brought under
subjection, and cannot well be governed; not enduring any long or durable
government, except it be altogether tyrannical: as is that of the MOSCOVITE in
the north; and of the ABYSSINE in Ethiopia; where the great KNES commands
the one, and PRESBITER JOHN the other most rigoronsly; to thend to keep their
subjects in obedience: who are all generally of opinion, that whatsoever their
Princes do, they do it by the unchangeable will of God.

The circuit, and compass of their Monarchies were very great; SESOSTRIS the
Egyptian conquered all Arabia, and a great part of Lybia; Ethiopia, with all
the Isles of that country; all the sea coasts even to the Indies; passed the
river Ganges running hither and thither, even to the great Ocean, and over came
all the nations of the Scythians, even to the river Tanais: and coming into
Europe, went through the country of Thrace; where he made an end of his
enterprise, and returned into Egypt. NINVS brought under his obedience all the
nations, which inhabit on the seacoast toward the East, and their neighbors,
as the Egyptians, Phenicians, those of the inner Syria, Cilicia, Pamphilia,
Lycia, Caria, Phrygia, Mysia, Troada, and the other Phrygia which is on
Hellespont, the country of Propontida, Bythinia, Cappadocia, and other
barbarous nations which inhabit on the greater sea, even to the river Tanais:
He added more over to his estate the Cadusians, Tapyres, Hircanians, Dranges,
Deruices, Caramanians, Coronians, Rombes, Vuocarnians, the Parthians, Persians,
Susians, Caspians, and Bactrians. SEMIRAMIS his wife the greatest part of
Lybia, and Ethiopia. The limits of the Empire of CYRUS, were on the East Side
the red sea; on the North the sea Euxinus; toward the west Cyprus and Egypt;
on the south Ethiopia: CAMBYSES his son added Egypt, and Ethiopia. And DARIUS
the first of that name subdued no fewer countries then the two former had
conquered: and consequently the others which came after, augmented and enriched
it from hand to hand; making that kingdom one of the greatest, most mighty,
and most renowned that was ever in the world. The PARTHIANS possessed xviij.
kingdoms, whereof the xj. which were called the superior, began at the
Confines of Armenia, and banks of the Caspian sea, and reached unto the
Sythians: the other seven inferior kingdoms, stretched out even to the red
sea, dividing their Provinces, as respecting the two seas, the red sea toward
the south; and the Caspia^ on the north. As the spaciousnes of these
Monarchies, was very large, so the reuenew was also great; the riches infinite;
and power incredible. SESOSTRIS erected two square pillars of hard stone, each
of them thirty sadom high; in which he commanded to be pourtrayed the greatness
of his Empire* and the value of his demeine, and reuenew engraven: adding
thereto the number of the nations which he had over come. He gathered an army
of six hundred thousand foot, four and twenty thousand horsemen, eight and
twenty thousand chariots fit for war: and four hundred ships on the red sea.
The riches, and power of the Assyrian Monarchy, is known by the great and
magnificent towns that were built by NINVS, and SEMIRAMIS; and by the
wonderful armies which they had: namely NINVS going against the Bactrians,
with seuenteen hundred thousand foot, two hundred thousand horsemen; ten
thousand and six hundred armed chariots. SEMIRAMIS against the Indians with
three Millions of foot, five hundred thousand horsemen, one hundred thousand
chariots, and two thousand ships: unto which STAVROBATES then King of India,
opposed like forces or greater. Moreover the unreasonable riches of Assyria,
appeared in the end of Sardanapalus, who would have consumed with himself by
fire, a thousand Myriades of gold; that is to say, a thousand milions: and a
myriade of myriades of silver, which are a hundred milions: endeavoring to
spoil the earth of so great quantity of gold, and silver; coming to forty
Milions of Crowns in our money: besides the beds, and tables of gold,
precious stones, garments of purple, and other royal mouables, and stuff
that was there: and besides three thousand talents of Gold, which he had sent
before with his children to be safe kept, to the King of the City of Niniuy.

Concerning the PERSIAN Monarchy, CYRUS who founded it, had infinite wealth,
having spoiled all Asia; where he got five hundred thousand talents of silver;
which is the greatest sum or quantity of silver, that was ever found gathered
together at one time: rising to three hundred millions of crowns, and a sixth
part over, which are fifty milions. And it is not to be meruailed that he had
so much; for he got into his power, the treasure of CRESVS; of DAVID and
SOLOMON; the ancient riches of Assyria; which were translated into Media; and
of many other Countries. As DARIUS the first of that name ordained the
tributes, they might come to ten milions of gold every year; besides the gifts
of great value, which were given by the nations subject unto him: and without
speaking of such as were exempted. The Queen had certain towns and provinces
assigned her, for her intertainment: one furnished the attire of her head,
another this or that ornament: which wealth was always augmented by the Kings
that followed, even to Darius the last: in so much that in his reign it was
already become intolerable in destiny, and to luxurious; and was therefore the
ruin of him and of his estate. For in the conquest which Alexander made, he
found marvelous great Treasures in diverse Countries, of his kingdom; namely
at Susa, and Persepoli (as Quintus Curtius writes) one hundred and seventy
thousand talents of silver in mass; six thousand in Damasco; an other sum
in Babylon; and fifty thousand talents of purple. Strabo writes that the most
common opinion was, that there were found forty thousand talents in Persia,
besides that which was elsewhere; and that some esteemed the whole at nine-score
thousand talentes: which is an incredible sum: and as great as has ever bin
numbered or gathered after that foresaid treasure of CYRUS. For the hundred
thousand talents are esteemed at threescore milions of Crowns; and the
fourscore thousand remaining would come by this estimation to more then forty
millions, which would be in all about a hundred millions. This king used to make
bankets to such as were of best reckoning in his Court, to the number of
fifteen thousand; and for every supper, he appointed in expense of table, four
hundred talents, valued at twelve score thousand Crowns. The bed whereon he
slept was sumptuously set forth, and covered with a vine of gold, in manner of a
grate or lettice enriched with precious stones, hanging like clusters of
grapes: He had at his beds-head in treasure five thousand talents of gold; and
at his beds-foote always three thousand talents of silver. Such was the
dominion, and riches of the Persians; whereunto their power was correspondent:
for CYRUS assembled an army of six hundred thousand fighting men on foot; six
thousand on horseback, and about two thousand chariots of war. DARIUS the
first of that name, going to fight against the Scythians, led eight hundred
thousand men. XERXES came into Greece, having by sea five hundred and seuenteen
thousand, six hundred men; by land a Million, seven hundred thousand foot, and
four score thousand horsemen: with twenty thousand Africans and Arabians, to
whom there joined of Europe three hundred thousand; the whole multitude coming
to above two Millions six hundred seuenteen thousand fighting men. Since that
time the PARTHIANS obtaining the Empire of the East, and ruling over all Asia,
between the red sea, and the Caspian, came not to so great riches and power, as
the PERSIANS (for the greatest force which I find they ever had, was of Cxx.
thousand men on foot, and horseback) notwithstanding they found themselves so
strong, that being in three wars assailed by great Romain Captains, in the
vigor and flower of their Empire, amongst all the Nations of the world, they
not only remained equal; but also were sometimes superiors.

The length of all INDIA from the East unto the West, is of seuenteen hundred
Leagues; and from the North to South of two thousand Leagues. It excels
above all others in beauty and fertility; being divided into many parts, by
the rivers which do water it: Where is found great quantity of Gold, Silver,
Brass, precious stones; and all other things concerning riches and delicacies.
STAVROBATES reigning there in the time of SEMIRAMIS (who invaded it) endeavored
to exceed the forces of the ASSYRIANS, opposing as mighty an Army against
her, as she had brought with her; being three Millions of foot, and five
hundred thousand horsemen; and constrained her to retire, with great loss of
her people, and without doing any thing. The ETHIOPIANS believed, that by
reason of their devotion toward their Gods, they were never wholly overcome by
any stranger: and therefore remain always free. At this day PRESBITER JOHN
reigns there far and wide; having forty kings tributarie: and commanding
over infinite people of diverse colors; of whom shall be spoken hereafter in due
place. The SCYTHIANS feign, that in old time in their Country there was borne
of the earth a virgin, which was a woman from the nauel upward, and the rest a
snake; who begat a son called SCYTHA, which named the SCYTHIANS after his
own name, having made himself the most triumphant Prince of all that ever
were before him: And that amongst the successors of this king, there were two
brothers of great virtue, who did many things worthy of praise; whose line
being long time greatly increased, by virtuous acts, and military adventures,
subdued the Countries beyond the river Tanais, even unto Thrace. And turning
afterward their armies on the other side, came as far as the Nile of Egypt,
making themselves Lords of all the people between them: and stretching out
their dominion from the great Ocean, which is toward the sun rising; even to
the Caspian sea, and to the poole Meotis. Of these people thus fortified and
increased, many Nations have descended, and amongst the rest the Sares,
Massagetes, Assyrians, Medes, and Parthians: Then the Lordship of the
SCYTHIANS, failing through length of time, that the women called AMAZONS began
to reign there: whose power and virtue was so great, that they subdued not
only the Nations near unto them, but also a great part of Europe, and of Asia.

The greatest, fairest, and most magnificent Cities of the world, were NINIVIE,
and BABYLON in Assyria: THEBES, and MEMPHIS; and afterward ALEXANDRIA in
Egypt. But the Medians transferring to them selves the Empire of the Assyrians,
destroyed and razed the City of Niniuie; carrying to ECBATANA a city of Media,
all the gold and silver, and other ornaments which they found there. In like
sort the Persians, taking the Empire from the Medes, carried away all the riches
which they found in Babylon: and the castles, palaces, and other ornaments and
singularities were either distroied by them, or consumed by succession of time.
The same Persians in the time that Cambyses conquered Egypt, did not only
transport the ornaments of the singularities of Egypt into Asia, but also their
artisans, by whose industry they built their magnificent palaces, both in
PERSEPOLI, and in SVSA. And the Macedonians under Alexander, burned Persepoli
to the ground, and took away all the treasures, precious, moueables, and other
ornaments of Persia.

But as these great Lordships were begun, and maintained by virtuous Princes,
accompanied with men at arms on horseback, and on foot; hardened unto all
labors, accustomed to watch, to endure hunger and thirst patiently, to drink
water, being skillful and exercised in arms: so ended they under loose and
voluptuous Lords; having their subjects depraved and corrupted by deliciousnes,
proceeding of too much riches. NINVS interprising the Conquest of Asia,
exercised the strongest and lustiest young men of his kingdom, long before unto
arms, to the perils and dangers of war, and to endure patiently all pains
and travails. The father of SESOSTRIS, being advertised by revelation, that
the son which should be borne unto him, should be King of the whole world,
gathered together out of all Egypt, all the children that were borne the same
day that he was; and caused them all to be taught and brought up in the same
discipline, and exercises; accustoming them to pain, to make them endure it
continually; and to abstain from eating and drinking; and to make them by such
bringing up, both stronger of body, and hardier of courage then the rest: of
whom as being from their youth given to virtuous things, he was in all his
conquests served valiantly, with fidelity and affection. CYRUS being by nature
noble and valiant, was brought up after the ancient Persian manner, with the
young Persian gentlemen (called Omotimes, because they were all equal in
honors) in all sobriety, and laborous exercises: afterward when he went to
war, making choice of them to accompany him, they were a great help unto
his greatness. ARSACES being accustomed to live on pray in the mountains and
forests, with people of like bringing up; established the kingdom of the
Parthians.

Such were the Authors or promotours of these Monarchies, alike in virtue and
education: even as they also in whose reigns they ended, resembled one another
in pleasure and pusilanimitie, and died wretchedly. SARDANAPALVS burning
himself; with all his treasures. ASTYAGES vanquished and taken in war;
afterward bound with chains of gold. DARYVS the last, having lost three great
battles; and seen prisoners, his mother, his wife, and two daughters; as he
thought to gather together his forces, taken prisoner by the^ in whom he had
most confidence, being in prosperity; then miserably slain with iauelins, and
left dead in the way.

As then these later Princes ran by their vices into most piteous fortunes, and
little differing the one from the other: so the other by their virtues got great
praises. NINVS was the first that established the greatness of that domination,
which was gotten by continual possession; where the former sought not the
Empire for themselves, but for the glory of their people: and being content
with the victory, let alone the Lordship and Seignorie. CYRUS is thought alone
amongst all the Lords that have suddenly grown great, to have known how to
observe modesty in his prosperities; and to bridle his absolute power and
authority with equity, and clemency. SESOSTRIS was so brave and haughty,
that whenever he went to the Temple, or any whether in public, he caused his
chariot to be drawn by four tributarie kings, or other great Lords, in steed
of horses: showing thereby that none of the other Kings or Captains was to be
compared to him in virtue and prowess. Also the goings of CYRUS out of his
palace, which have since bin imitated by the kings his successors, were most
magnificent: and serving much to the honor of a Prince, and his government.
SEMIRAMIS as soon as she was borne, was cast out into a desert place, and full
of rocks, where there was great store of birds, by whom through the will of
God, she was nourished almost a year, then found by the Shepherds, and
brought up by them. In like manner CYRUS, even in his cradle was exposed to the
beasts, and left in the midst of a forest; where a bitch gave him suck, and
kept him, till such time as a shepherd finding him, brought him to his Cabin.
SEMIRAMIS purposing to conquer the Indies; and knowing how great an interprise
it was, and that to put it in execution it behooved her to leuy great forces;
she assembled an army of three Millions of foot, five hundred thousand
horsemen, and one hundred thousand chariots: with which going into India, she
was put to flight, and lost many of her people, returning without doing any
thing. XERXES also going out of Asia into Greece with two Millions three
hundred seeuenten thousand fighting men, (whereof there were four score
thousand on horseback, five hundred seventeen thousand on sea) was constrained
shamefully to retire himself, seeing his Army discomfited in many places.
Likewise DARIUS his father assailed the Scythians, accompanied with eight
hundred thousand men; without reaping any praise of that voyage. And CYRUS
warring against the Massagetes, was by THOMYRIS their Queen discomfited with
two hundred thousand Persians, and slain the thirtieth year of his reign.
SEMIRAMIS and THOMYRIS, amongst the women of this former age, deserve to be
accounted chief; the one having ruled the kingdom of Assyria, the other, that of
the Massagetes: and they having surmounted in glory and great deeds, all other
Queens that ever were.

SESOSTRIS divided Egypt into six and thirty Provinces; establishing in each
of them a Governor, as well to receive the revenues of the Crown and royal
tributes, as to take careful heed of the affairs concerning the good, and
conservation of them. DARIUS the first divided the kingdom of Persia into
twenty Satrapies; and in every of them established a Satrape or governor:
parting between them his yearly tributes, where, and how the contribution
should be made. This Darius going about to set up his statue above that of
Sesostris, in the City of Memphis, was put back by the high Priest, saying,
that his deeds were not yet equal unto those of Sesostris. The armies of Cyrus
and Sesostris were equal in number of footmen, each of them having six
hundred thousand: But Cyrus exceeded Sesostris in horsemen, assembling together
six score thousand, where Sesostris had but four and twenty thousand: but he
had xxviij. thousand armed Chariots; whereas Cyrus had but two thousand.

OF THE EGIPTIAN PRIESTS, or Prophets, and of the Chaldees, Mages, Brachmanes,
Druides, and other Religious and learned people among the Ancients.
IN ancient time Religion only was counted wisdom; and there were no other
esteemed wise, but such as delivered, and interpreted it unto men: for
ordinarily three things follow each other, RELIGION, WISDOM, and POWER: and
little would either Laws or Arms prevail, if they were not helped by
Religion; which is the foundation, establishment, and conservation of every
common wealth. RELIGION imprinteth, and retains in men's hearts, the reverence
of GOD, and love of their neighbor; ruling the exposition of the holy books,
and the charges of persons appointed for divine service. POLICY conducteth the
affairs of peace, and war; in the which would not be found any justice or
fidelity, without the fear of God, and love toward men; which are especially
commanded in all Religions. Wherefore in all Lordships, both ancient and
modern, the first care has always bin of Religion, and divine service; and
such as have had the chargethereof, have always bin reputed the chiefest in
authority, much honored and well entertained; being both they, and their
children exempted from subsidies, and military labors.

The PRIESTS or PROPHETS of Egypt inio^ed a third part of the reuenew of the
kingdom; and had great credit, both with the king, and with the common people:
as well for that they had the care of divine things, and were very learned, and
teachers of others; as because they were called by the king, to give counsel
in great affairs: foretelling of future things, which they knew by the
Sacrifices, and by the stars. The Roialtie was mingled with sacrificing, and
none could be king, but he were also a PRIEST, as Plato says in his Politiks.

The CHALDEES in Assyria and Media, had such authority, as the Egiptian
priests in Egypt, being reputed most skillful, and expert in Astrology; by
which they did prognosticate of things to come: and by sooth-sayings, and
sacrifices, turned away evil fortunes, and made good to come.

The BRACHMANES amongst the Indians held the chief place, to whom great honor
was borne; and great gifts were given: as to men that were acceptable to the
Gods; and thought to know whatsoever was done in Hell. They foretold at the
beginning of the year, droughts, raines, winds, and diseases: And they endure
still at this present in those parts, perseuering in the ceremonies of their
ancient Religion; and holding the chief places in honor: calling themselves
BRAMINS, which go before the NAIRES, that is to say, the Nobles. The King of
Calecut is their high Priest, and head of his Religion, going for this cause
before all the kings of India, and being called SAMORY, that is God in earth.

The MAGES governed the Religion and estate of the Persians with such
authority, that they interprised sometimes to usurp the kingdom, during
Cambyses his absence in his voyage of Egypt; and to make one of them king. It
was the custom also, that the king of Persia should learn their Magic,
without the which he might not reign.

The DRVIDES of Gaul being ministers of Religion, and of justice, discoursed
of the stars, and of their mouings; of the nature of things, and immortality
of souls; as also of the divine authority and providence: being greatly
respected of all the rest, and very well entertained.

At Rome the SACERDOTES, ARVSPICES, AVGVRES, FLAMINS, SODALES, and virgins
VESTALES, which kept the eternal fire, the high Priest, and inferior Priests
super-intende^ts of their ceremonies, sacrifices, and supersticions, had
knowledge of the Civil law; and managed the public affairs. The first kings of
Rome were sacrificers, and the Emperors to make their greatness and authority
more venerable; called themselves high Priests.

The PRIESTS both men and women ordained both in Greece and elsewhere, to see to
the observation of the pagan Religion, founded on Oracles, were in great
authority, and received mighty offerings. The Roialtie in Lacedemon was a
superintendence in war; and pre-eminence in sacrifices.

The LEVITES in Jury, separated from the other Jews, to exercise sacrificing;
and the office of Priesthood in the race of AARON; received duties of
inestimable value.

The THALISMANS, PARACADIS, CADIS, Priests, and Judges in the Law of Mahomet,
MENITSSMARLS, and IMANS were well privileged and freed from all subsidies. At
the beginning the CALIPHES in that religion were Kings and Priests, one in
Bagdet, another in Caire. Sithence the Sultans have taken the royal
authority, and have brought in the MVPHTIS, accounted as Patriarchs, in
steed of the CALIPHES super-intendents of the Religion, and judging soueraignly
in matters of the Law: by which are not only occained the prayers, and divine
ceremonies; but also the politic and military affairs. They have power to
retract the ordinances of the Sultans, and sentences of their Diuans or
Counsels, which are not conformable* or seem repugnant to the ALCORAN. Every
Mohammedan Prince keeps one always near about him, or in his principal
City, with great pension. The great CHAM of the Tartarians Zauologues keeps
his at ^^^^rcand; The SOPHI at T^^ris: There are also in Africa at Fez, Caroan,
^^^^^ssen* and elsewhere. The TVRK bears unto his, greater reverence, then to
any man of his Empire.

The ECCLESIASTICAL persons throughout Germany, France, Poland, England, and
Hungary, hold at this day the chief places in the counsel of Kings, and
administration of justice. Among the seven Electors of thempire* there are
three Ecclesiastical: Amongst the Peers of France, there are six. The
chiefest of the Counsel in Poland are the Archbishops and Bishops. The
Emperor is confirmed, and consecrated by the POPE. The French king consecrated
by the Archbishop of Rheimes. The king of England, by the Archbishop of
Canterbury: The king of Poland, by the Archbishop of G^es^e* For considering
that the Archbishops, and Bishops, are established amongst the people, as
messengers of God, and interpreters of the Law, and will of God: to their
authority being great in it self, have bin added great honors in the common
wealth; to the end that the public cou^sailes, and constitutions, should by
their presence be made more venerable. The POPE commands over the temporal
of the Church called S. Peter's patrimony, as king; and is reverenced by the
rest of the Latin Christendom, as head and chief of the Religion; in those
places where he is acknowledged for such.

But before we make an end of this matter, we will set down, the agreements
and differences, which were between the Egiptian Priests, and the Chaldees,
Mages, Brachmanes, and the Druides. The EGIPTIANS and BABYLONIANS, dwelling in
spacious plains, and having nothing to hinder them from the whole view of the
Heaueri, bestowed great study in observation of the stars; in the which both
the one and the other were most skilful, and expert. The Egiptians said that the
CHALDEES came out of Egypt, and had learned Astrology of them. The MAGES and
BRACHMANES agreed in sobriety and austeritie of life; and the Brachmanes were
thought to have descended of the Mages. There was also the like similitude
between the MAGES and DRVIDES, namely those of great Britain, that they
seemed to have delivered Magic to the Persians, and not to have learned it of
them. The bodies of the MAGES when they were dead, were left to the dogs and
birds to pray upon, before they were buried. The BRACHMANES voluntarily ended
their lives by fire. The CHALDEES and EGIPTIANS had fair, great, and
magnificent Temples: The MAGES had no temples, altars, nor images. The Mages
were common both to the Persians, and Parthians. The CHALDEES to the Assyrians
and Medes. The EGIPTIANS and the PERSIANS believed the Resurrection, and that
men being raised from the dead, should be immortal: even as the CHRISTIANS and
SARAZENS believe.

OF THE NOBILITY AMONGST the Egiptians, Persians, Assyrians, Indians,
Scythians, Thracians, and other ancient and modern Nations.
THey indeed were reputed noble, in Egypt, Persia, Scythia, Iberia, Assyria,
India, Thrace, and other ancient Nations, which made profession of Arms; and
meddled not with mechanical arts: to whom according to the quality of the
Country, were appointed lands, rents, and revenues, out of the public, for
their honest intertainment: and to the end they might not be constrained by
want, to exercise any other questuarie, gainful, and base manner of living. It
was not lawful in EGYPT for men of war called Culasyres and Hermotiuies, to
use any other art, but military: which they taught, and delivered from hand to
hand, and from the father to the son. LICVRGVS forbad the LACEDAEMONIANS, all
Mechanical arts and occupations; yea, even merchandise and traficks: accounting
such vocations to belong to bondmen, or strangers, or to men of base condition;
and putting Arms only in the hands of his Citizens, whom he would have
altogether free, and truly military. HER ODOTVS writes, that the PERSIANS
honored valiant men of war, more then all other Nations; and that they made
no account of merchandise. Moreover, that not only the Persians, but also the
Egiptians, Thracians, Scythians, Lydians, and almost all the barbarous Nations
esteemed artisans, the basest of all men; yea, even their children, and their
whole race: That the GREEKS also, and above all, the Lacedaemonians and
Corinthians made little reckoning of the artificers. And Plato in the second
and eight book of his Common wealth, and in the beginning of his Timaeus,
wills the Nobles and men of war, to abstain from tilling the ground, and
from Mechanical arts, and other questuarie occupations. At this day the
ARABIANS do utterly detest all Mechanical sciences: And the Nobility or
Gentlemen of FRANCE are forbidden by the ancient ordinances of the Country,
to exercise merchandise, or any other questuarie art, on pain of being
deprived of their nobility, and to pay tax, as those of the common sort.

The like do the NOBLES and Gentlemen of Spain, Lumbardie, Naples, England,
Germany, Hungary, and Poland: holding it a thing not only unworthy of
Nobility; but also to be an act derogating from the privilege thereof, to
exercise in steed of Arms, a mechanical art; or to use trade of merchandise,
if it be not of things of their own growing; of which the traficke is
permitted them. The Nobles of Persia use it in like manner, possessing fees, and
vnderfees, with vassals relieuing of them: also lands, castles, towns, and
Countries, which they hold either by succession of their parents; or by gifts
and benefits of the SOPHI their Prince: for the which they are bound to serve
him in his wars; furnishing a number of men, according to the value of their
revenues. And in INDIA, the Naires are held in such reputation, as the
Gentlemen in these parts; being constrained ordinarily to bear swords,
targets, bows, lances, and such other arms used amongst them: otherwise they
should lose the name, and privilege of nobility.

In TVRKIE there is no distinction of Nobility drawn from the ancestors;
but he only amongst the Turks is reputed noble, who in matter of war has
given many proofs of his valiancie. When the OTTOMAN conquereth any Country,
he extinguisheth the great ones, and the nobility, and sends thither his
Sangiacques, Subassis, and Spachis; giving them the fruits of the fees, and
appointing rents on the reuenew of his lands, which are called Timarly. Every
SPACHI is bound to have so many horses and men, as he has five or six Aspers a
day to spend, both of his pay, and of his Tymar, or yearly rent. They cannot
make over the fees which they hold to their children, without the express
permission of the great SIGNOR. And none enjoys the nobility of any father,
whose son he is, until by industry he represent the person of his father,
and not in word. None there possesses any villages, castles, or towns, after
the manner of the Persians, or of us: or inhabiteth strong houses, or dares to
build above one story, or higher then a douecote.

In ENGLAND at this day, the Nobility do not dwell in castles or houses of
strength, closed with motes and diches: neither have they any jurisdiction over
men: which is in the kings hand, be it high, base, or mean. The dignities
themselves, as Dukedomes, Marquisats, and Earledomes, are but titles which are
given at the kings pleasure: whereas they which have them, possess nothing
oftentimes in those places whereof they bear the name: but have their lands
lying elsewhere.

The Gentlemen in FRANCE possess, in high, base, and mean justice, villages,
boroughes, towns, castles, fortresses, Baronies, Earledoms, Marquisats,
Dukedoms, Principalities, and Peereships patrimoniall: with vassals holding,
and vnderholding of them, bound by faith, and homage: which jurisdiction
notwithstanding depends on that of the king; and answers at the last
appeal to his sovereign Courts, or Parliaments.

In the ROMAIN EMPIRE, the lands were first given in reward of service, to the
men of war, for term of their lives; as they are at this day in Turkey:
after they were made, and became patrimoniall and hereditarie to their
children. And because they were given them to live on in recompense of their
services, they were termed benefits; and they which were recompensed in such
sort, were said to be beneficed, or benefited. Then by this example, the Church
coming to be rich by the almesdeeds and foundations of Princes, and great
Lords, they called the Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Abbeies, Priories, and
Cures; by the name of benefices: because the Ecclesiastical persons possessed
them, after the same manner as the ancient men of war did their fees, and
benefices. The Emperor ALEXANDER SEVERUS, was the first that permitted the
heirs of those men of war to enjoy these fees: provided that they followed
Arms, and not otherwise; ordayning most expressly, that such heritages should
never fall, but into the hands of such as made profession of arms. And a while
after him CONSTANTINE the great, at the beginning of his Empire, gave to his
principal Captains, and to those by whose means he thought most to prevail
against his adversaries, a perpetuity in the lands which were assigned them:
Whereby one may know, that the estate of the Turk resembles in many things
the Romain Empire, and the ancient kingdom of Persia: in which the whole
government was in the disposition of one only Lord; serving himself with
mean fellows, which may without danger easily be advanced to great charges,
and honors; and without tumult or envy abased, withdrawn, or put to death.
But the FRENCH king is placed in the midst of an ancient Nobility, and
company of Princes, Earls, Barons, and other gentlemen; having subjects
peculier to themselves, and holding their pre-eminence in the kingdom, of which
they can hardly be deprived without sedition. The estates also of lands which
were but for life, were made perpetual under the last kings of the race of
Charlemaigne; and shortly upon the coming of Hugh Capet. Then such Lords as
held the great fees of the kings, they subdivided them to other persons, of
whom they expected service: and both the one and the other gave their lands to the
peasants, with duties of rents; and with condition to receive justice of them.
Wherehence are come the terms of fees and vnderfees, of vassals and
vndervassals, for a difference from them which relieve directly, and without
any mean of the king; Consequently of Ban and arriereban, and of liege or bond
men, who without exception do promise all duty of fidelity to their Lords;
and of those which are not bond or liege, which do only promise a duty, by
reason of superior estate or fee, of which theirs which is inferior
depends. And although at the beginning it was not lawful for any Roturier or
common person, to possess any fee simple, but to meddle only with his
traficke, tillage, or husbandry; and to pay his Lords duties: notwithstanding
by succession of time, the fees (contrary to their first and ancient
institution) fell without any difference or distinction into the hands of men
of arms, and such as were estranged from the exercise of arms: of noble, and
unnoble, of gentlemen, and ungentle; as merchants, practicioners, and other
rich commoners, that had means to buy them. Moreover, whereas many fees with
their duties were given by Kings, Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen, to
Bishoprics, Abbeies, monasteries, couents, priories, chanonries,
commaunderies, hospitals, spittels, and to other Ecclesiastical persons, which
are people of Mortmaine; and altogether estraunged from arms; the Ban and
arriereban, has bin much weakened thereby, and at length is so low brought, and
so despised; that even they which are bound thereunto think themselves
dishonored, if they appear there: and so send thither their servants, or
other mercenarie folks; the most part so evil appointed, and in such poor
equippage, that it is a mockery to see them: whereas in times past, the
chiefest of France accounted it a great honor to be there themselves in
person. So far have these sees and under fees straied, or so ill bin
employed; which were erected and ordained for the safety of the Country: to
the end that such as held them, should in all occurrents of business, be
readily furnished with arms, men, and horses, in such number and order as is
requisite; either to resist the approches of the enemy, or to set upon him if
need were. By reason whereof, the forces of the kingdom are lessned; and the
Laws military by little and little brought to naught: in such sort, that the
Kings have bin constrained to ordain those companies of waged men of arms,
called ordinances: and for their intertainment, to impose on the people tax
and tallage.

Moreover, it is seven or eight hundred years, since the Nobility has taken
up the use of Arms, and scutchions, with figures of beasts, and other things,
blazoned with diverse colors; with terms fitting thereunto: to thend to
discern and make difference between them of their Nobility, and the
antiquities thereof; their alliancies, and kinreds. Which manner was not in use
before CHARLEMAIGNE, and has not gone out of EVROPE, being yet unknown
throughout AFRIC and ASIA: where their Religion forbids them, to make the
pourtraitures of beasts. The Arms in the which there are Lions, Leopards,
Tigers, Eagles, Kytes, Faulcons, and other ravenous beasts, are accounted more
noble, then those which have but trees, flowers, stars, bars, files; or
which are only distinguished with color; or taken from the names of families:
because they seem not to have bin gotten by military prowess; or any other
virtue. To make them, correct, and expound them, are appointed the Herauldes,
and kings of Arms; curiously discoursing of the figures, and colors which are
in them: even to the mingling, and accomodating (according to the measure of
their understanding and knowledge) both Physic, Astrology, and Divinity.

THE ARTISANS, AND EXQVI site works of the Ancients.
IN EGYPT, INDIA, and elsewhere, the government being divided into many orders,
or estates, it was not lawful for any to take a wife of other estate but his
own; nor to change his vocation: because it seemed not reasonable unto them,
that a man of arms should labor the earth; or that a learned man should
become an Artisan. Then the Artisans there wrought their works severally every
one by himself; and not indifferently mingling one occupation amongst the
other. The like did the husbandmen, fishermen, and huntsmen: and it was not
lawful for one to exercise many trades. As then they applied not themselves,
but unto such works as were permitted by the law; and which they had learned
of their fathers: continuing the same all their life, they became excellent
therein. Especially the EGIPTIANS, whose works were meruailously well wrought;
and even come to their perfection. The great and magnificent buildings made at
that time, both in ASSIRIA, EGYPT, and elsewhere, do evidently show, the
ability of their architects, masons, statuaries, imagers, grauers, painters,
caruers, carpenters, and smithes. The same distinction of the multitude by
diverse orders, and kinds of exercise is used at this day at CAIR, FEZ,
MARROCCO, and in many other great Cities of Asia, and Africa. Others account
the manner of PARIS more commodious, where the Artificers dwell intermingled one
amongst the other. At this day the Artisans of CATHAY, and of CAIR, and of
PERSIA, are found very exquisite, making works so near approaching unto those
of nature, that they seem to be natural.

The end of the fowerth Book.
OF THE LEARNING, POESY, Eloquence, Power, and other excellency of the
Grecians. The fifth Book.
AT the same time that the Persians swaied by their arms in Asia, and that
Cyrus founded the Persian Monarchy; good letters and Learning were raised up
in Greece, and the Countries there about, as well in the Isles, as in the maine
land: and by the learned, and renowned Pythagoras began Philosophy. First of
all, men considering the admirable ornament of the whole world; the continual
and pe^durable motion of the Heaven; the variety and distinction of the
stars; the intercourse of days and nights, of months and years
continually succeeding; the vital power of fire diffused thorough out the whole
world; the variable air, sustayning with spiration and respiration all living
creatures; the sea beating the banks with his reciprocal waves, receiving and
casting out the other waters, without ouerflowing or diminishing the earth;
which is heaped together on each side thereof for a bound unto it: The
vicissitude and order of things, both simple and compounded; contained in the
circuit of the world, being innumerable in multitude, and marvelous in
beauty: They endeavored to search out their properties, conueniences, and
contrarieties; as to know whereof they were made and engendered; how long they
endured, what became of them, when, and how they perished; what in them was
mortal and corruptible; what divine and perpetual: They observed the course of
the stars, and the power which they have here below. The Egiptians,
Babylonians, Indians, Mages, and Druides, applied themselves to such
contemplation, as has bin showed heretofore; Then the GREEKS purposely
obscuring their writings with numbers and figures, to thend, that (by being too
much communicated) they should not be despised of the vulgar sort, or wrapping
them up in couers of fables, or using measured verses, to make them more
durable, by the delectation of fables, and sweetness of verses.

And when as they that were skillful in such things, and all such as were
ought seen in any thing, would arrogantly be called Sophoi, that is to say
wisemen: PITHAGORAS was the first, who by singular modesty took the name of a
Philosopher, signifying a lover of wisdom: For coming one day to Phliunta,
and having learnedly and gravely talked with Leon Prince of the Phliases about
certain affairs: This Lord admiring the understanding and eloquence of
PITHAGORAS; demanded of him, what Art he professed; by whom he was answered,
that he was not skillful in any Art, but that he was a Philosopher. Leon
wondering at the novelty of this name, asked him what Philosophers were; and
what difference there was between them and others. PITHAGORAS said, that the
life of man seemed unto him, to resemble one of those assemblies which were
made at the public plays of GREECE: where some by strength, agilitie, and
exercise of body; or by running of horses, sought the price of the victory,
and the glory proposed in races; others went thither to make their profit in
buying and selling: but that there were some of a more generous spirit, which
neither sought applause, nor gain; but came thither only to see: Even so men
in this life, as in some famous fair, coming thither, and being of different
nature and disposition, some sought after honor; others after profit; and
others (which are the fewer and rarer sort) omitting or lettle esteeming all
these things; considered diligently the nature of things: whom he termed
lovers of wisdom; that is to say Philosophers. And as in these assemblies it
was a goodly thing to see and behold without seeking after gain; so that in
this life contemplation, and knowledge is to be preferred, above all other
occupations. But PITHAGORAS was not only the inuentour of the name, but also
brought first (as has bin said) this learning into GREECE; which he augmented
and beautified much: instructing his followers, called after him PITHAGOREANS,
by whom he was singularly respected; and no less honored of others thorough
out the world: even the memory of him remaining at this present most
renowned, and reverenced thoroughout all nations; and will always so remain
as long as learning endures. Being borne at Samos, after he had much profited
in learning, he went first into Egypt; after into Babylon, to learn the course
of the stars, and the nature of the world: And returned afterward by
Crete, and Lacedemon, where he learned the Laws of Minos, and Lycurgus; which
were then in great veneration: and finally having known all the foresaid
things, he came to Crotona; where he withdrewe the people by his authority
from luxuriousnes, and idleness, whereunto they were given, to good manners and
honest life: having learning for the women separate from that which was for
men, and for children diverse from that which was for parents. For he taught
women how they ought to live chaste, to be obedient and serviceable to their
husbands, and to children how they ought to be modest, and to learn knowledge:
and to all people he gave counsel to live soberly, as a thing of which all
virtues had their beginning. After he had dwelled twenty years at Crotona,
he went to Metapont, where he dyed; and the inhabitants of Metapont, after his
decease had him in such reverence, that they consecrated his house as a temple:
and worshipped him as a God.

In this time also were those seven which were called, and reputed the wise men
of Greece, namely Solon, Thales, Pittacus, Bias, Cleobulus, Chilon, and
Periander; all which except Thales were either Lawmakers, or governors of
states: and got, that renown and reputation of wisdom for being only well
skilled in matter of government, and such things as are in the common use of
men. The other learned men of this age, and they also which succeeded them,
were Astrologers, natural Philosophers, and Physicians; as Democritus,
Heraclitus, Hippocrates, Empedocles, Parmenides, Melissus; and in the same age
are also reckoned, Stesichorus, Simonides, Alceus, Sapho, Theognis, Anacreon,
Archilochus, Alcmeon, and Epicharmus, who were Poets; Epimenides, a deuinor of
Candie, Anacharsis the Scythian, Charondas, and Zaleucus Lawmakers: Daniel,
Aggee, Zachary, Jeremy, and Sophonie, prophets of the Hebrews.

SOLON gave Laws to the Athenians, whereby he got great reputation, and
excelled in all knowledge, especially in Poetry; whereunto if he had wholly given
himself, he had bin no less reckoned of then Homer, and Hesiodus, or any
other of the most excellent ancient Poets; as Critias witnesses in Platoes
Timeus. He being desirous to travail, went into Egypt to the king Amasis, and
from thence came back unto Sardis, to CRESVS the rich and mighty king of
Lydia: who for this cause thought himself the most happy man of the world. But
having caused his treasures and worldly felicity to be showed to SOLON; he
asked him his opinion: who without flattery answered him, that none ought to
be judged happy before his end; Because that many in this present life after
great felicities, fall into extreme miseries and calamities: as eft soones it
befell unto Cresus, who being overcome in war, and made captive by CYRUS was
bound, and set on a pyle to be burnt. Then he remembering the speech of SOLON
named him thrice, with sighing: and CYRUS understanding the reason thereof had
remorse; thinking how he being a man made an other to be burned quick in the
fire, which not long sit hence was no less happy, then him self. So fearing
the divine punishment, and considering that there is nothing stable in humain
things* he commanded that the fire should be forthwith extinguished, and
Cresus be unbound. By this means came Solon to the knowledge of Cyrus, and by
his wife aduertisment saved the life of Cresus.

EPIMENIDES was a familiar friend of Solons, and help him to make his Laws;
he was excellent in inuenting of diverse new things; and excelling in
divination. He foretold the coming of the Persians into Greece, a long time
before they came: and that they should return without doing any thing.

THALES a famous natural Philosopher and Astrologer, was the first amongst the
Greeks that divided the year into ccclxv. days: and found out the points of
the Solstices, and Equinoxes; the little bear, and the stars about him. He
foretold the eclipse of the sun in the reign of Astyages the uncle of Cyrus,
by his mothers side: and kept back his citizens the Milesians from entering into
league with Cresus against Cyrus, which counsel was the cause of their safety
after the victory. Aristotle in his Politics writes of him, that he foresaw
by Astrology, the abundance of olives that was to come; wherein he might have
gained much: showing that it were easy for Philosophers to enriche themselves,
if they would; but it is not their study and profession. And Plato in his
Theaetetus tells that as he beheld the stars, and looked upwards, he fell
into a diche: whereof he was reprehended by his maid (who was pleasant, and
witty) that he would endeavor to know what was in heaven, being ignorant of
that which was in earth, and before his feet.

DEMOCRITVS is called by Seneca in the seventh of his natural questions, the
most subtle of the ancients; and in his book of the shortness of life, he
reckons him amongst the chief and most excellent masters of the sciences.
Cicero in his first Book of the ends of good and evil, calls him a man
learned and perfect in Geometry: and recommendeth his style or manner of
writing; unto Brutus in his Orator; saying that albeit it be estraunged from
verse; yet because it is elevated and enriched, with most clear lights of
words, that it seems rather to be a poem, then the verses of Comic Poets.
Pliny tells how that he and Pythagoras, travailed into Persia, Arabia,
Egypt, and Ethiopia, to the end to learn Magic; and that they two were the
first that did celebrate it in these parts. And in an other place, it is
manifest (says he) that DEMOCRITVS, a wise man otherwise, and profitable unto
life; has erred through too much desire which he had to be helpful unto me^.
And in his vij. Book; he promised says he to revive others which has not
raised up himself. He was so exceedingly given to co^templation, that his
citizens the Abderites counted him frantic, and sent for Hippocrates to heal
him: who, when he came to Abdera, found him only wise amongst them all. Seneca
writing of the divine providence, says that he abandoned riches, thinking them
to be burden some to a good wit. Some say that willingly with a burning glass,
he deprived himself of his sight, that he might see more clerly with his
understanding. Tully in his fifth Tusculane; DEMOCRITVS (says he) having lost
the sight of his eyes, could not discern white and black; but well could he the
good, and evil; just and unjust; honest and dishonest; profitable and
unprofitable: And could live well and happily without the sight of colors; but
not without the knowledge of things. This man thought the sight of the mind to
be hindered by the sight of the eyes. And as others did not see ofttimes that
which was before their feet; so he wandered throughout al infinity without
consisting in any extremity. Plutarch in his treatise of curiosity affirms it
to be false. Seneca in his second Book of Anger, says that HERACLITVS going
out of his house, and seeing about him so many living evil, or rather dying in
evil, he had pity of them all, and wept: on the contrary DEMOCRITVS was never
seen but laughing.

HIPPOCRATES had his honor, to have bin the first that did write perspicuously
of Physic, and of the rules thereof. Plutarch witnesses of him, that having
written touching the seames or ioinings of man's head in Anatomy, and afterward
finding that he had failed in somewhat, he did publicly declare his fault, for
fear lest others might fall into the like error. Saint Augustine after him
has bin the only man that has publicly corrected himself, by setting forth
his retractations. Others are commonly so ouergon with glory, and so opinatiue;
that they had rather dye, then yield in any thing.

EMPEDOCLES the Agrigentine, a famous natural Philosopher, wrote in verse vj*
books of the knowledge of nature: whereof Aristotle makes often mention,
especially in his Poetry; where he says that Homer and Empedocles had nothing
one like the other, but their verses: and that the one is a right Poet, and
the other ought rather to be called a natural Philosopher, then a Poet. And in
his Metaphysics speaking of him and of Anaxagoras, he witnesses that
Anaxagoras was superior in age to Empedocles, but inferior to him in works. And
he says in his problemes, that he was of melancholic complexion. Pliny says
that he travailed far to learn Magic; as did Pithagoras and Democritus. And
Horace in his art of Poetry, that being desirous to leave an opinion of
himself that he was a God, and was vanished secretly out of the sight of men;
he cast himself into the burning and smoking hole of the hill Etna: and that
this deed was afterward discovered by one of his slippers, which being made
of bras, was cast up by the vehemence of the fire and wind.

ANAXAGORAS a Clazomenian gentleman, became a very excellent Philosopher, and
was called by those of his time Nous (which signifies the mind or
understanding) were it for admiration which they had of his knowledge and
understanding which appeared to be great, especially in natural Philosophy; or
else because he was the first which added the intelligence unto the matter; and
appointed unto natural things, for their beginning, and first cause of their
distinction and ordinance, the intelligence. Pliny writes of him, that by
knowledge of the stars he foretold, that within certain days after, there
would fall a stone from heaven: which happened in the parts of Thrace, in the
day time. He was the first that published books written by him, and lived in
the time of Democritus.

In ancient time in Greece they which did write first of divine, celestial,
natural, moral, politic, and military matters were the Poets: and they were
commonly Priests, Theologians, Musicians, Astrologians, and Physicians; as
Linus, Musaeus, Orpheus, and Amphion. LINVS the son of Apollo, and of
Terpsichore being very skillful in Music, was the master of Hercules, of
Tamyras, and of Orpheus. They say that he brought the knowledge thereof out of
Phenicia into Greece; as did Atlas the Astrology out of Lybia. Museus was
reputed as a Prophet having delivered many Ceremonies to the Grecians: of whom
Virgill gives a very honorable testimony, in the sixth Book of his Aneids,
calling him an excellent Poet in great perfection: and making him to seem in
the Elysian fields the most eminent amongst all the men of honor, and learning
that were there; which have had a memorable name in all ages. ORPHEUS and
AMPHION were such excellent musicions, that they were said by their sweet
Songs to move trees, and stones; to stop the course of rivers, and to tame the
fiercenes of wild beasts. ORPHEUS first instituted in Greece the Initiatio^s of
the Gods, the purgation of sins, remedies of diseases by charms, and
Inchauntmentes; and means to appease the wrath of the Gods. They say that of
him and of Zoroaster as fathers and authors, came all the ancient wisdom.
Iamblicus affirms that Pythagoras followed Orpheus his divinity as a pattern;
on the which he framed, and formed his Philosophy; and which is more that the
words of Pythagoras, had not bin esteemed holy or sacred, but for being derived
from the precept of Orpheus. That from thence came the secret doctrine of
numbers, and whatsoever is admirable in the Philosophy of the Greeks, which
secrets he folded up in fables, and hid them under a poetical couerture.
Demosthenes in his oration against Aristogiton calls Orpheus the author of
the sacred ceremonies which the Grecians used. He was accounted holy after his
death, and every year there was a solemn feast dedicated unto him, as to the
most learned which was ever in Greece, as well in the religion and divinity of
those days as in Poetry.

Unto these succeeded HOMER, and HESIOD, who were of the same time, or near one
to another: and got by different virtues very great, and durable praises. Homer
wrote the Iliads, and Odyssees; Hesiodus left precepts of husbandry and
Astrology, entermingled with aduertisments of good life, and the fabulous
genealogy of the Gods. Homer without controversy has gotten the first and
chief place amongst all the Poets of al Nations; and ages which ever were. And
Pliny gives him the chief praise of human understanding, in so great
diversity of natures, multitude of disciplines, variety of actions, and of
exercises, and works; having deserved it as well by the excellency of his
poesy; as by the good happ of his argument so luckely handled. First that
which he writes, he seems not to say it; but to represent it before our
eyes. Such is the dexterity in him not only to express the bodies; but even
the hidden motions of the minds: in such sort that his poesy seems as an
Image of the life of man. He is so conformable to common sense, and has so
aptly accomodated his words to the things, that after so great mutation come
to pass, in the manners, and customs of men, from the time wherein he lived
until this present; ke keeps still from age to age, and from country to
country the same grace, as if he came from being newly made; retayning not
only the authority of antiquity but also the pleasure of nouelty: as if there
were in him some spirit continually renewing, and waxing young, and a soul
never waxing old which kept him always in this vigor. Such force have the
writings which come near unto nature, that they never decay: but so much
farther as they go, so much more grace they gain, and so much more authority
they obtain. Amongst his singular praises this of all other is most veritable,
that he is alone in the world who has never glutted or cloyed his readers;
showing himself always altogether of an other sort unto them, and still
flourishing in new delectation: for as much as he leads them from one tale to
another; and by his variety keeps them from being weary at any time to hear
his fine verses, flowing from him of their own accord without pain or
constraint; even almost with a divine felicity, and natural facility: which
notwithstandieg he has so conducted, that he observes gravity in great
affairs; and propriety in small matters; and a tempered decency in those of
the middle sort: with a delectable variety thoroughout in his narrations;
similitudes, orations, amplifications, arguments, examples, and digressions; in
words, sentences, figures, and in the continuation of his purpose, such
disposition; that one may well say there was never his like. Aristotle, and
Cicero think that he could not possibly come incontinently to such perfection*
and that therefore there were others before him: seeing that nothing is perfect
at his birth, and first beginning. The Greeks had him in such admiration that
they attributed to him the knowledge of all things; and thought that all Arts,
and all sects which were amongst them, were issued from his fountain. The
most renowned Captains red him, finding in him the best that belongs to art
military; The most eminent Philosophers alleged him, proving their reasons by
his verses: others founded in him the state politic, and oeconomicke, the art
of husbandry, the contempt of human vanities, and the devotion due unto
religion. For this cause (whereas he being far from ambition had concealed his
original) many nations claimed him to be their Citizen: as the Colophonians,
Rhodians, Chiotins, Salaminians; and Smirnians, who erected a temple unto him
in their City; and many others contended for him amongst themselves. But he
judged best, who considering so many virtues and graces in him, thought it not
possible that he could be engendered of man; but that the heaven was his father
and Calliope the chief of the Muses his mother.

Touching HESIODVS (which holds among the Greek Poets the second place, after
Homer) he gave men to understand, that he became such without study; and that
in his young years being sent by his father to keep the beasts, he fell a
sleep on the hill Parnassus: During which sleep, the Muses appeared unto him,
and inspired him divinely with Poesy. Afterward he was the Priest and Curate
of the Muses in Helicon; and wrote of Astrology, and Husbandry. Plutarch
tells how he being wrongfully slain and murdered, and then cast into the
sea; was taken up by a flote of Dolphins, which carried him to the head of Rhion
near the town of Molicria: where being known by reason that he was but newly
killed; the Molycrians because of his great renown, buried him honorably; and
nothing in more recommendation, then to send presently every where to enquire
of this murder: which they did with such diligence, that the murderers were
found out: whom they cast quick into the botome of the sea, and razed their
houses.

But the wise men, and religious of that time, did blame the impertinent fables
which Homer, and Hesiod and the other Poets had written of the Gods, proposing
their forms, ages, sexes, transformations, vestments, ornaments, banquets,
laughters, desires, complaints, lamentations, displeasures, angers, hatreds,
differents, discords, combats, wars, and battles; not only when diverse
Gods defended contrary armies of the one side, and the other; but also when they
warred themselves against the Titans, and Giants: their whoredoms, adulteries,
incests, bonds, companies with mankind, and mortal engendered of the immortal;
and many other such things transferd to the similitude of human fragility,
and contrary to good manners, and to piety. Pythagoras said that he had
descended into hell, and had seen there the soul of Hesiodus, hard bound to a
pillar of bras; and that of Homer hanged on a tree: both of them bearing the
punishment of that which they had foolishly feigned and invented of the Gods.
Isocrates affirmed, that although they had not yet bin sufficiently chastised
for these impieties; yet not withstanding that they remained not altogether
unpunished: some of them having bin vagabounds and beggars; others of them
blind; and others banished their country; and that Orpheus the chief author
of such fables was slain and rent in pieces; and his members dispersed here
and there thoroughout the fields. Plato allowed them no place in his common
wealth by reason of such absurd impieties; but would have those only received
there, which made divine hymns, or moral aduertisments. And therefore I
meruail at the Poets of these times, who that they may seem the more to
resemble the ancients by ymitation, endeavor to bring into use such pagan
fictions: not considering the Christian religion, in the which they are brought
up, free from all such superstition; and the manners of their time: whereunto al
writers both in prose, and verse ought especially to accommodate themselves.

After the said Poets, came the PHILOSOPHERS, which began in the reign of
Cyrus, as has bin touched heretofore: and they wrote at first almost al in
verse, as the former; and divided themselves into two sects, the one being called
Ionicques, the other Italiques. Thales being born at Miletum in Ionia, was the
author of the Ionian sect; Pythagoras the Samian dwelling at Crotona, in that
part of Italy which was called great Greece, instituted the Italia^, whose
sectaries, and folowers were called of him Pythagoreans: teaching their
doctrines by numbers, and figures. After Thales succeeded Anaximander, and
after Anaximander, Anaximenes; to him Anaxagoras, to Anaxagoras, Archelas; and
to Archelas, Socrates. On the other part to Pythagoras succeeded his son
Telanges, to him Xenophanes; after him Permenides, after him Zenon the
Eleatian, and Melissus; To Zenon, Leucippus, to Leucippus, Democritus, and to
Democritus many: amongst whom are celebrated Nauciphanes, and Naucides: and
other renowned in both sects even to PLATO, and ARISTOTLE; who abolished these
sects, bringing in others of the Academicks, and Peripateticks: and supplanting
the renown of those which had begone them: as the Macedonian Alexander
supplanted the glory of Cyrus, and of the kings his successors, by
overthrowing the Persian Monarchy.

But the greatest glory of the GREEKS began, at the expedition which XERXES
king of Persia had undertaken against Greece; who by his inestimable power
which he brought with him, amazed it much, and put the Grecians in the greatest
fear, that ever they were; knowing well that this war was undertaken against
them to bring them al in bondage: and seeing that already all the Grecian
cities seated in Asia were become subject, and servile; they expected that
those of Greece should not escape with any better condition. And on the
contrary the war having had a far other end then was looked for, they not only
found themselves out of danger of servitude; but got great glory thereby: and
there was neither town nor city but was become so rich, that all the world
wondered how things were so come to pass, contrary to that which every one
expected. For from that time fifty years forwards, Greece always increased
meruailously in felicity: and their prosperity and wealth made arts to flourish.
In such sort that we find, that the most excellent workmen that ever were in
the world, lived in that time there. Also the sciences, and namely Philosophy,
went then wonderfully forwards. Eloquence also was much advanced throughout all
Greece; but especially in Athens. For in that time were these excellent
Orators, Pericles, Gorgias, Thrasimachus, Hippias, Prodichus, Protagoras,
Isocrates, Lysias, Demosthenes, Eschines, Antipho, Andocidas, Hiperides,
Dinarchus, Iseas, Lycurgus, Demades, and Demetrius the Phalerian:
HISTORIOGRAPHERS, Herodotus, Thucydides, Xenophon, Philistius, Ephorus,
Theopompus, Timeus, and Calistenes: TRAGICAL POETS, Eschylus, Sophocles, and
Euripides; COMICAL, Cratinus, Aristophanes, Eupolis, Menander, Philemon, and
Diphilus: STATVARIES, Lysippus, Chares, Phydias, Polycletus, Praxiteles,
C^esias, Dinomenes, Cymon and Miron; IMAGERS Lysistratus, and Dibutades:
PAINTERS, Apelles, Protogenes, Polygnotus, Parrhasius, Aristides the Theba^,
Paralius, and Xeuxis. ARCHITECTS, Dinocrates, who built Alexandria in Egypt;
Ctesiphon of Crete, the temple of Ephesus: Philon, the Citadel of Athe^s.
GRAVERS, Alcamenes, Agoracritus, Scopas, Briax, Timotheus, Leochares and
Pythis. MVSICIANS Timotheus, Anaxarchus, Damon and Aristoxenus. ARITHMETICIANS
Nicomachus the son of Aristotle; Euclide, a GEOMETRICIAN; Eudoxus an
ASTROLOGER: for PHILOSOPHERS, the last of the Pythagorean sect, already named
even to Socrates, who was the first amongst all the Greek philosophers, which
withdrew philosophy from the heavenly and natural contemplation (wherein all the
former were busied) and applied it to government of houses, cities, and common
wealths: accounting the knowledge of heavenly and natural things to be
difficult; and also when it was obtained, to be little helpful unto good life:
wherefore he gave himself especially to treat of manners, of virtues, and of
vices; and entierly of good, and evil. After Socrates successively flourished,
Plato, Aristotle, Theophrastus, Xenocrates, Polemon, Crantor, and others both
Academicks, and Peripateticks: Zenon, the Stoic, whom succeeded Cleanthus the
Epicure: the spirits of the Greeks every day increasing until the reigns of
Philip, and Alexander, in which times al things came to their excellency, and
(as it were) full perfection: wherhence eftsoons they fell; and much sooner
then they were mounted up.

Concerning the Art Military, Philip, and Alexander of Macedonia, did not only
surpass all the great Captains of their time, in knowledge, and experience of
war, prowes, magnanimity, fortune, and succes of conquest: although there were
many famous me^ in their age; as Epanimondas, and Pelopidas, Thebans;
Timotheus, Conon, Chabrias, and Iphicrates, Athenia^s; and not long before,
Pausanias, Lysander, and Agesilaus, Lacedaemonians; and Timoleon of Corinth: but
also those of the times of the Persian and Median wars: as Themistocles,
Aristides, Cymon, and Miltiades; and before them Conon, Myronides, Pericles, and
some other Grecians: and in Sicilie Gelon, the son of Diomenes. For who so
will compare the virtues of al them, with the deeds and glory of Philip, and
Alexander; he shall find their virtue, and renown more excellent then of
thothers: and that they have left them a great space behind. PHILIP at his
beginning, having but small means; made in the end his kingdom more mighty and
more redoubted, then any other Lordship of his time in all Europe: and finding
at his coming to it, the kingdom of Macedon, handmaid, and tributary to the
Illyrians; he made it ere he dyed, Lady and mystresse of many Cities, diverse
Countries, and Nations, bordering about her. He made himself by his own
virtue to be chosen Chiefetaine general of all Greece; the Grecian Cities
voluntarily submitting themselves to his government. And after he had
overthrown by force of arms those which had sacked, and spoiled the temple of
Apollo at Delphos; and had made free, the access of the Oracle: he obtained a
place, and voice in the Counsel of the States of Greece called the
Amphictyones: which was given and granted him for reward of his virtue and
devotion showed toward the Gods. Then having subdued to his will the
Illirians, Pannonians, Thracians and Scythians; he undertook to overthrow
the Empire of Persia. Following which deliberation, he sent his army before
into Asia; where he set at liberty the Greek Cities that were seated there:
But being overtaken by death he could not make an end of his enterprise; but
left to his son, and successor Alexander such, and so great power, that de
had no need afterward else where to seek any aid or succor to ruinate the
Empire of Persia. All which great things he did not with the favor of fortune;
but by his own only virtue; being a very wise Prince, especially in matter of
war; valiant of his person, affable, and as liberal as any prince might be.

Touching his son ALEXANDER, he did in a little time many great things; and
by his good wit, and valor excelled all the kings that were ever renowned for
their great deeds, since the world was first a world. For in the space of
twelve years which he reigned and no more, he conquered a good part of Europe;
and even almost all Asia thoroughout: whereby he got of good right exceeding
great glory, and not inferior to the greatest Princes of ancient time: who
for the greatness and excellency of their deeds and virtues have bin reverenced
by their posterity as demi Gods. From his childhood he gave evident tokens of
his greatness, to ensue; He took no pleasure in women, nor in plays, nor any
other kind of pastime: but his whole and only delight was in arms. And the
more he saw his father Philip to prosper, the more sorry he was; saying that
he would leave nothing for him to do. When the other young Lords of his age
invited him to go to the Olympian games; he answered them that he would
willingly go, if he thought he should find any Kings there, with whom he
might combat and just. The Ambassadors of the king of Persia having talked
with him, said that they found in him more magnanimity then his age could
bear. King Philip being desirous to know who should be his successor, sent
to the Oracle of Apollo, at Delphos; where he had answer that he should
succeed him in his kingdom, and enjoy the empire of the whole world, whom the
horse Bucephalus would suffer to get up on him: The which fell out to be true
in Alexander. For this Bucephalus was a horse of singular beauty, but fierce,
and not to be ruled by others; which showed himself so tractable unto
Alexander, that he might do with him what he would: who kept him long,
reserving him for battails, or dangerous passages. But such was the hap of
Alexander, that he never sought battle but he wan; and never besieged
fortress, but he took it. While he was yet but young and euill-furnished with
money, and having but thirty five, or fortye thousand men of war; he was so
hardy and aduenturous as to pass the sea, and to go into Asia to assail the
king of Persia, the greatest, and most mighty king of the world, very far
into his own kingdom: whom he discomfited three times, putting to flight the
armies of his adversary; whereof the least was of four or five hundred
thousand fighting men. After which overthrows, the king of Persia offered him
two thousand talents, and a part of his kingdom, to ransom his mother, his
wife and his daughters: but he would not restore them; giving a magnanimous
answer, that as the world could not be guided by two suns; so that there
could not be two sovereign kingdoms; while the habitable earth remained.
Having conquered the whole estate of Persia, he marched with his army even to
the extremities of the East, thorough such rough and long ways for the most
part, and amongst so many different nations; that with great difficulty might
one go thithen being lightly furnished on horseback or on foot: besides the
danger of fighting. Then retourning out of India to Babylon, he was saluted
king of all the world, being about xxxiij. years of age; by Ambassadors, sent
from Carthage, and from the rest of Afric: from the Spaynes and Gauls, from
Sicilie, Sardigna, and Italy. Such was the terror of his name, and the
reputation of his greatness, and felicity. And having overcome the East, he
threatened Carthage; preparing great armies both by sea, and land to conquer
the West; having purposed to march thorough Afric even to the pillars of
Hercules; and to pass at the straights into Spain; then from thence to
return by Gaul, and Italy into Greece, when he dyed in the midst of his
enterprises and victories. He was so ambitious, that understanding how the
Philosopher Democritus affirmed that there were many worlds; he lamented that
he was so long in getting of this one: and was sorry that he could not sooner
invade the rest. He called himself the son of God, and would be worshipped
accordingly; And after he was dead, his body remained seven days without
stink or corruption: which confirmed the opinion that was held of his divinity.

Thus much touching the excellency of arms that was then: and it shall not be
besides our purpose to treat a little of that of learning; which will be found
to be no less in Plato, and Aristotle according to their quality.

These two then set Philophy as high as ever it was; and have surmounted not
only the other former Philosophers both Greeks and strangers; but also had
never since their equals. In so much that the world holds of them at this
present; the most part of that knowledge which it has: those books of theirs
which remain, being translated into all languages; and dispersed into all
nations: They have known whatsoever it was possible to know in their time, and
whereunto the understanding of man could then attain. There is no liberal
knowledge, nor art, nor science whatsoever; whereof they have not spoken
pertine^tly and properly. There is nothing in the heaven, in the earth, nor in
the sea, which they have omitted. Whereunto the better to attain they chose a
manner of living quiet, and peaceable, fit for learning, and contemplation:
which as nearest approaching to the heavenly life, they thought worthiest of a
wise man. They shunned public charges, full of envy, and of travails: seeking
rest that they might study, and write.

PLATO, after he had long time conuersed with Socrates, and having bin in
Italy, Sicile, and Egypt; although he loved well his Country, and understood
well matter of government; yet notwithstanding would not meddle with the
common wealth, because he saw the people of Athens even to dote with old age;
and to be near their end: but employed all the time of his life, in learning,
and seeking of truth; showing by words, by writing, and by deeds, the way of
virtue to those that would follow it. There is such majesty in his speech, that
it has bin thought, if God would have used the language of men, that he would
not have spoken otherwise, then as Plato did. And Cicero calls him the Father
not only of knowledge, but also of speaking well: having a style in a mean
betwixt prose, and verse; yet som-what nearer approaching to that of Homer. And
where the Greeks went before into strange countries to study; the strangers
began in his time to come to Athens to learn knowledge.

Likewise, ARISTOTLE was honorably sent for by King Philip, who esteemed it
much, that he had such a person borne in his own kingedome, and in his time;
And especially for the instruction of his son Alexander: where having
remained eight years, howbeit he had great credit in the Court of Macedon, and
might have come to great Offices, and riches: he retired himself
notwithstanding to Athens, to spend there the rest of his life in learning. And
whereas in any one particular science, one shall hardly attain to any
excellency, though he use no other exercise all his life; he excelled in
whatsoever he would apply himself unto: and never undertook to entreat of
anything, but he brought it almost to his sovereign perfection: wherein he was
much helped by the quicknes of his wit, and sharpenes of his understanding, his
inclination to learning, and perseverance: the excellent learning of his master
Plato, whose auditor he was by the space of xx. years; the happiness of that age
wherein he was borne, full of good books, and rich in all arts: and the
liberality of his scholar Alexander; who supplied him with goods, to come to
his intention.

Many debate, who was ever of greatest understanding amongst men; the which is
difficult to be decided. Notwithstanding if we consider it well, we shall not
find any more admirable, then ARISTOTLE: for the excellency of the works
which he has composed; and the worthynes of the matters of which he has
entreated. PLATO has not given himself so much to natural Philosophy, as
ARISTOTLE, but has bin very curious of Moral and Politic: and excellent in
Metaphysick: The One has entreated of the creation of the world, of the figures,
qualities, and motions of the four elements: of which the world is compounded.
He set down three principles, God, the Idea or for me, and the first matter;
being the nurse of all generation. The Other goes about to prove that the world
is eternal, setting down also three principles, yet different from the other:
namely, matter, form, and privation. He disputes of place, of void, of time,
of motion, of generation, and corruption; of the four elements; of mutations
happened in the air: he has declared the birth, lives, figures, parts,
inclinations, affections, and actions of all living creatures. His scholar
Theophrastus, has showed the natures, causes, and reasons of plants; and other
things growing on the earth. Both of them have written of the soul. But PLATO
speaks more certainly of the immortality thereof, then ARISTOTLE. PLATO has
discoursed of a perfect common wealth, of laws, and of virtues, largely.
ARISTOTLE also has composed many books in Moral philosophy, deducing all the
parts thereof even to the Economick. Moreover he has gathered the
institutions, and disciplines, of the Commonweals and kingdoms of his time,
and of such as flourished before him. The One and the other have showed the changes
which happened in them, and the means how to remedy them. As concerning
Logic; Aristotle attributes to himself the invention, and perfection
thereof. He has also spoken of Rhetoric, and of Poesy so exactly, that there
is none found better in these professions. Moreover PLATO has written in
dialogues: in the which commonly he brings in SOCRATES, assuring nothing; but
disputing much of things both affirmatively, and negatiuely: enquiring of all
things, and asking the opinion of the assistants or standers by; without saying
his own, or resolving of anything. Which manner of writing has great efficacy;
and makes things more intelligible: as if they were then doing, and were not
taken from elsewhere, observing the dignity of the persons introduced; and
accomodating of apt speech unto every one according to the variety: which
causes an exceeding pleasure. In doing whereof, he has followed an elegant
manner of writing, magnificent, full of majesty; and gravity both in words, and
sentences; enriched with translations, allegories, and other colors of
Rhetorik; without observing, any certain method of teaching. But ARISTOTLE
has endeavored to write methodically; he expresses himself according as the
matter requires properly, and without any exquisite ornament of words: That
which he undertakes to treat off, he pursues it from the beginning unto the
end, not digressing any ways; and leaves nothing vndecyded. Many have blamed
him for having made himself purposely obscure; and ambiguous, in many places:
and that he did it of craft; fearing least some should handle him in such sort;
as he had handled others. PLATO is more copious, ARISTOTLE more pithy; The One
has mingled many strange opinions in his books, as of the transmigration of
souls out of one body into another; of the communion of wives, of children,
and of goods: The Other has more conformed himself to common life; and to civil
actions. The One has chiefly stood on intelligible things; and the other on things
se^sible. The One has searched throughout for Ideas, and forms; the other made
but a jest thereof; as of the former opinions which he has sharply reprehe^ded:
notwithstanding many have bin of opinion, that there was no difference between
the^ in sentences* but in words only: and have assaied to reconcile them.
Finally, the Greeks reckoned the one divine; and his doctrine has bin much
honored, both whiles he lived, and after his decease. The Other has bin held
for a wonderful man, of great judgment, and incomparable knowledge; singularly
respected and reverenced of all that have sithence given themselves to
learning. In brief, ARISTOTLE learned all the good which he knew, of PLATO,
and it was a marvelous great happiness unto him, to have bin both a scholar of
the most excellent philosopher that has ever bin known; and Master of the
greatest King of the world.

It were not reasonable here to omit DEMOSTHENES, who was a diligent hearer of
Plato, and a friend unto Aristotle: being so accomplished in eloquence, that he
is accounted the law, and the rule of peroring, and speaking well. There is
such force in his words, and he has so well disposed them; that one cannot
well add any thing to them, or take ought from them. It is not possible in
those causes which he has handled, and in the Orations which he has written,
wisely to invent, or subtly to express any thing; but he has well
understood it: Neither on the contrary, to find any thing more stately, more
grave, or more beautified; then that which he has said, and written. For he
was so studious and laborious, that even till the fiftieth year of his age,
there was never found any Artisan in Athens more diligent to rise early then
he. And although he had many imperfections of nature; as being subject to
stammering in his speech, short breathed, and timorous: he overcame by
diligence and industry, all his hindrances. And used himself in such sort,
that there was no Orator in his time (albeit there were then many excellent)
that pronounced more cleanly and distinctly, or spoke longer, and bolder then
he. Moreover, he was no small personage: but had while he lived great authority
throughout Greece, being feared and redoubted by the king of Macedon, honored
by the great Signor of Persia, who managed long the affairs of Athens, where
he was borne. By reason whereof, he well understood matters of state, the
mutations which happen in Lordships, and the causes wherehence they proceed:
and there is not any thing necessary for public government; but some
appearance thereof is found in him; his counsels tending not only unto profit,
but to honor, and honesty. In so much, that Plato, and Aristotle, have not
better played the Philosophers in their schools; then he did in public
assemblies, and judgments.

But as this age was admirable in power and wisdom, and in all arts: so was it
also full of wickedness, and extraordinary changes: As if it had bin of
necessity, that the same age must bring forth horrible monsters, and notable
wonders: for it is commonly seen, that where men's wits are most excellent,
there are found together men notably vicious, and virtuous; the authors of
great good things and of evil: as if virtue and vice (which are things so
contrary and repugnant) had their extremities near one an other: In such sort,
that where the one is, the other estsoons accompanies it; and they leave not one
the other: for even as noble and generous natures being duly instructed become
perfectly good, and are causes of great good things; In like manner those that
are evil brought up, become exceeding evil, and do great mischiefs: by
reason that the exorbitant wickedness, and extreme vices proceed not of
weak, and simple natures; but of the noble and generous, being depraved by
institution. As appeared in this season, replenished with all good arts, and
excellent wits, by the extraordinary mutations which happened therein: Whereof
the Orator AESCHINES complaining, cried out, that they led not then the life of
men; but that they seemed to be born to that end that their posterity might tell
of the^ strange and unlooked for maruailes: And DEMOSTHENES answering him,
acknowledged the fortune of his time to be very adverse, and hard; and that
there was neither Greek nor Barbarian, but had suffered much: for not only
every one in particular; but publicly the kings, Cities, and Nations received
great calamities: First of all, what troubles raised king Philip thorough out
all Greece; corrupting by gifts the Magistrates and Governors of Towns; and
nourishing amongst the Greeks divisions and parcialities? In such sort, that
he himself confessed, that he had much more enlarged his kingdom by gold and
silver, then by arms. And albeit the Athenians having always in suspicion his
greatness, were exhorted continually by DEMOSTHENES, to take upon them the
protection of the common liberty; and to punish with death those Citizens whom
they should find to go about to betray the common wealth: Notwithstanding, this
great Orator could not with all his diligence refrain the evil inclination of
some particulars; which sought but how to sell their Country: Such abundance
of Traitors there were found in that season. Afterward as Philip being become
proud by many prosperities, for the greatness of his power, placed himself
amongst the twelve Gods, he was killed by Pausanias a Macedonian gentleman, to
whom he had denied justice; at the marriage of his daughter Cleopatra, which he
solemnized with great triumph, beholding the plays which were made: and even
in the midst of his guard, between the two Alexanders, the one being his
son, and the other his son in law, whom he had made king of Epirus. The fault
of which murder, was for the most part imputed to the Queen Olympias, who
being divorced from him, stirred up the youngman boiling before with anger to
do it. But there was also some suspicion which touched Alexander, doubting
least he would leave the kingdom to an other: Who likewise after he had turned
all topsie turuie in Europe, and in Asia; because of his insolency, was
poisoned by his most familiar friends. Olympias, wife of the one, and mother to
the other, was massacred by Cassandra for the great arrogancy which was in
her; and cruelties which she had committed. Seneca calls Alexander a furious
young man; having in steed of virtue, a fortunate temeritie; and that from his
youth he was a these, and a distroier of people: being the ruin both of his
enemies, and friends; who placed his soueraign felicity in astonishing, and
making himself feared of all men. Furour says he, stirred up the wicked man
to undo other men; and made him to march thorough unknown places: Account you
him wise that began with the ruins of Greece, in the which he had bin bred and
brought up; taking from every one that which was his good? He constrained
Lacedemon to serve, and Athens to be silent. Not content with the ruin of so
many Cities, which Philip either bought or overcame; he overthrew others also;
and bears arms thorough out the world, without satisfying his cruelty:
after the manner of savage beasts, which bite being not pressed with honger. He
has already gathered many Kingdoms into one; already the Greeks, and
Persians do fear one king; and notwithstanding, passing beyond the Ocean, he
is sorry and loath to bound his victories by the footsteps of Hercules, and of
Bacchus: but will force nature; and can not stay; as heavy things which do not
cease to roll, until they meet with some stop or hinderance. He says, that
Philip and Alexander, and other such like renowned, thorough the ruin of
people, have bin no less plagues unto men, then the deluge, by which the earth
was drowned: or then the burning which consumed by heat, and drougth, a great
part of living creatures. Lucan thinks, that he gave a pernicious example to
the world; showing the means how to reduce so many Countries under one Lord;
calling him the fat all evil of the world; and a lightning which struck all
Nations: whose insatiable ambition could not be stayed, but by death. Therefore
the Scythians spoke thus unto him; What need have thou of riches, which
constrain thee always to desire? Thou art the first, which of abundance have
made indigence: to the end that by possessing more, thou might more earnestly
desire that which thou have not. Who would ever have thought that the Greeks
should have ruled Asia? and that so mean a king, as that of Macedon, could
have overthrown the Monarchy of Persia, of inestimable largeness and power,
both by land and sea?

In like manner, the Lordship of DIONISE in Sicile, was overthrown by DION with
little means, against the opinion and expectation of all the world: which was
the greatest and mightiest that was then in Europe: for who could have
believed, that he which arrived in Sicile only with two ships of burden,
should have overcome a Lord, that had in his disposition four hundred vessels
with oars, a hundred thousand foot, and ten thousand horsemen; with provision
and munition, of arms, corn, and money, as much as was needful for
intertainment of so great power? and who above all the forenamed things, had
under his obedience one of the greatest, and most mighty Cities, which was
then in all Greece: which had-so many ports; so many arsenals, or storehouses
so many impregnable castles? and who besides all this, was allied with many
great and mighty confederates? But that which gave DION the victory in this
interprise, was principally his magnanimity, and greatness of courage: with
the love and good will which was borne him, of those whom he came to set free:
And that which help him yet more then all the rest was, the small valor; and
the cowardice of the Tyrant: with the hate and evil will which was borne him
of all those, whom he unjustly detained in bondage, and servitude. All which
causes at the same time concurring together; made these things come to effect,
which would be otherwise incredible.

Was it not a strange case to see the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, who had so
long time sought for the superiority; to come themselves into the subjection
of the Macedonians, who before was tributarie to the Illyrians? And the City
of Thebes, which had sometimes aspired to that principality, burned, rased,
and distroied in one day; and the Citizens thereof sold as slaves, and brought
into bondage? On the other side, there was not then any man excellent in
knowledge, but endured much. SOCRATES the father both of moral and politic
Philosophy, falsely accused of not believing in the Gods, and of corrupting
youth, was condemned and executed by poison: But his condemnation being found
unjust, the people repented it soon after; considering how great a personage
they had wrongfully put to death; and were so mutinous against them which were
the cause thereof: that finally they put them all to death also; without
hearing their defenses and allegations. PLATO was sold by pirates: and in danger
of his life in the Court of Syracusa. XENOPHON was banished Athens. ARISTOTLE
constrained to depart, fearing least they would deal with him, as they did
with Socrates. DEMOSTHENES poisoned himself with the poison which he carried in
his ring: because he would not yield himself to the mercy of his enemy
Antipater. DEMETRIUS the Phalerian, retired himself to the king of Alexandria,
where he died of the biting of an Aspe. EVRIPIDES into Macedonia, where he was
devoured by mastifes. So many strange accidents there were in that season.
PLVTARCH writes, that in his time GREECE was so brought to naught, that
scarcely altogether could it make three thousand men of war: which the only
City of Megara-sent in times past to the battle of Platea. In such sort
diminished it by succession of time, being di^sided into many commonweals,
ill agreeing amongst themselves; impouerished by sedicions, and wars;
infected with curious sects in philosophy, and the most of them pernicious: as
of the Epicures, Cynickes, Cyrenaickes, Eretrickes, Megarians, and Pyrrhonians;
sometimes subject to the Kings of Macedonia; sometimes to those of Syria, and
Asia; sometimes to Mithridates; sometimes to the Romans, which ruled it a long
time: after to the Emperors of Constantinople; and last of all to the Turks:
under whom it is brought into miserable bondage, being deprived of the arts, of
the ancient nobility, and of the fair Cities which it was wont to have.

A COMPARISON OF THE AVNCI ent Greeks, with the Egiptians, Assyrians,
Persians, and Indians.
PLATO in his Menexemus, and his Politics writes, that they called in Greece
all the other Nations barbarous: which had not any communion of living, or of
language with the Grecians: and that they accounted them all servile. Aristotle
in the first of his Politics, alleges the Poets which said, that the Greeks
should rule over the Barbarians: as if a Barbarian were the same by nature that
a servant is. And Demosthenes in his third Olynthiack; that it was fit, that
the Barbarians should be subject to the Grecians.

Plutarch says, that Alexander did not as Aristotle his Master counseled him;
which was, that he should show himself to the Greeks as a father; and behave
himself toward the Barbarians as a Lord: And that he should have care of the
one, as of his friends and kinsfolks; and serve himself of the others as of
plants, or of beasts: which if he had done, he had filled his Empire with
banishments; which are always secret seeds of wars, and factions: and very
dangerous partialities. But he accounting that he was sent from Heaven, as a
common reformer, governor, and reconciler of the world; those whom he could
not bring in by persuasions of reason, he constrained them by force of arms;
and assembled the whole world of many estates into one; and mingling together
the lives, manners, marriages, and kinds of living; he commanded all men living,
to account the habitable earth their Country; and his Camp to be the castle,
and dongeon: all the good folks to be of kin one to the other; and the evil,
and wicked only to be strangers: And moreover, that the Greek and the
Barbarian should no more be distinguished by their cloak, nor by the fashion
of their target, nor by the high hat; but should be marked and discerned; the
Greek by virtue, and the Barbarian by vice: reputing all the virtuous to be
Greeks, and all the vicious Barbarians: accounting moreover the garments
common; the tables common; as also the marriages, and manners of living; being
all united by the mixtion of blood; and communion of children. Strabo in the
first of his Colmographie is of the same opinion, that this difference ought
rather to be made by virtue and vice; because there were many Greeks wicked
and evil; and many Barbarians good and civil: as the Romans, and
Carthaginians, who governed very well their commonweals. Plato in his
Epinomides affirms, that the Greeks inhabited a Region most apt of all
others for virtue; and that the praise thereof consists chiefly in this,
that it is in a mean, between heat and cold. Whereunto Aristotle agrees,
saying in the seventh of his Politics, that the Greek nation is both
courageous, and ingenious; as inhabiting in a mean, between the North and the
South: which made it to persevere in liberty; and to be well governed: and that
it might command the whole world, if it had but one government. We will
compare it then unto the former: and first of all in power; then afterward in
learning: and other excellency, in many arts, and workmanships.

THE POWER, AND EMPIRE of Greece.
HE that will read what the Athenians, Lacedaemonians, and Thebans did, from the
time of the war which king Xerxes made against them (which was the beginning of
their great glory and prosperity) till the reign of king Philip the son of
Amyntas; shall find it a long time: during which, they fought more amongst
themselves for ambition of rule, one over the other, then they did against
strangers to augment their Empire, and to preserve their liberty. And some of
them for covetousness of getting a new Lordship in Sicile, overthrew themselves;
some others which went into Asia to conquer, got no great thing there; but
returned soon again. And in deed although the power of the Greeks has bin
travailed in many great wars, yet did it never firmly establish any Empire
out of Greece. The Grecians for a time were mighty enough, and made proof of
their forces for keeping of their liberty; and to show themselves invincible.
But in the time of the said Philip, and his son Alexander, their estate and
affairs began to decline. Before the deeds of the Macedonians were little
esteemed; and they were subject always for the most part to other nations. And
although Philip by his travails and labors magnified them greatly:
notwithstanding his authority never went out of the country of Greece.
Touching the Empire of Alexander it is most certain that it was glorious and
excellent, both for the greatness thereof, as also for the celeritie of his
conquests: But after it was once come to an infinite degree, and impossible to
imitate; it divided it self soon into many parts: Even as a flash of
lightning which gives suddenly a great light, and runs hither and thither,
and then is extinguished. But if the great God (says Plutarch) which sent the
soul of Alexander here below, had not suddenly called it unto him again;
peradventure there had bin but one only law, which had governed all men; and
all this world had bin ruled under one selfsame Justice: even as by one light.
But as soon as he was deceased; his Army and power wandering* and hurting it
self, was like unto a man, who having lost his sight* feels every where with
his hand, without knowing whether he goes: so the greatness of his power, he
being dead, went astray, and wandered hither and thither, reeling and stumbling
at every thing: because there was not any to whom it obeyed; Or rather as the
body, when the soul is once out of it, the parts do not sustain one another,
neither find themselves united one to the other; but they leave each other, and
disioine themselves one from the other, and withdraw themselves: So the Army
of Alexander, after it had lost him, did nothing but tremble and shake in a
continual fever, under Perdiccas, Meleager, Seleucus, Antigonus, Eumenes,
Lysimachus, Ptolemeus, Lacomedon, Antipater, Philotas, and Leonatus, his
successors: which were even as spirits, yet warm, and poulses beating,
sometimes here, sometimes there, by spaces and fits; until that finally
coming to waste, and perish in it self, it crauled all with worms: which
were the chief Captains, being become kings, by usurpation of his Lordships;
not like to him in valor, and generositie: Amongst whom, and their offspring
arose great civil wars, a long time continued; whereof followed the
desolation of their kingdoms: so that by little and little, they fell into the
hands of the Parthians; or of the Romans; or had particular Lords.

A COMPARISON OF ALEXANDER the great, unto Cyrus, Agesilaus, Themistocles,
Pericles, Agamemnon, Achilles, Ulysses, Diomedes, Bacchus, Hercules, and others.
IF we consider in Alexander, his devotion toward the Gods, affiance in his
friends, his suffisance with a little, his continency, beneficence, contempt
of death, magnanimity, humanity, gracious intertainment, easy access, frank
disposition of nature, not counterfaited, nor fained* his constancy in
counsels, readiness in executions, his will to be the chief of men in glory,
and resolution to do whatsoever his will commanded; we shall find that God who
composed him of many virtues, gave him the courage of Cyrus, the temperance of
Agesilaus, the sharp understanding of Themistocles, the experience of Philip,
the hardines of Brasidas, and the sufficiency of Pericles in matters of state
and government: And in respect of the more ancients, that he was more
continent then Agamemnon, who preferred a captive prisoner, before the love of
his lawful wife; and he would never once touch a captive, until he had first
married her: more magnanimious then Achilles, who for a little ransom sold the
body of Hector, being dead; whereas he bestowed a great sum of money in
burying that or Darius: and the other to appeal his choler, as being
mercenarie, took presents of his friends for his hire; and this man being
victorious, enriched his enemies. He was more religious then Diomedes, who was
ready to fight with the Gods them selves; and he accounted, that all his
victories and happy successes, came unto him by favor of the Gods. He was
more charitable to his parents then Ulysses, whose mother died for sorrow:
whereas the mother of his enemy for love and good will which she bore unto
him, died with him for grief of his death. Solon ordained at Athens an
abolishment of all debts; Alexander paid his soldiers debts to their
creditors. Pericles having taxed the Greeks, of the money which came of this
tax, beautified the City of Athens with fair Temples, especially the castle:
on the contrary, Alexander having taken the treasure of the Barbarians; sent
into Greece the sum of six Millions of gold, to build temples for the Gods,
in steed of those which they had overthrown. Brasidas got great reputation of
valiancie amongst the Grecians, because he trauersed, and passed thorough the
enemies host, from the one end to the other, being encamped before the Town of
Methona along the sea shore: whereas the marvelous leap which Alexander made
in the City of the Oxydraques, to those which hear it told, is incredible,
and to those which saw it, most terrible; when he threw himself from the
height of the walls into the midst of his enemies, who received him with
darts, and arrows, pikes, and swords: Whereunto might one compare this deed,
but unto the flash of lightning, which breaks forceably out of the cloud,
and being carried by the wind, strikes on the earth: even as an apparition
shining out of flaming armor. Insomuch, that those which saw him at the
instant, were so frighted therewith, that they retired back: but when they saw
that it was one man alone, assailing a great many; then they returned to make
head against him. That which led Alexander against all Nations, was nothing but
a desire of glory, and of rule, having proposed unto himself by jealousy and
emulation, to surpass the deeds of Bacchus, and of Hercules; by making his
arms to be seen yet farther then they had made theirs. Moreover, it was a
great happiness unto him, and such as never happened to any other Monarke; to have
in his time the most excellent men in all knowledge, and the best work men
that ever were; toward whom he was very liberal: as also to them it was a
great advantage to have such a beholder, who knew most ingeniously to judge of
that which they had done; and to recompense it most liberally. For even as the
humanity, the honor and liberality of the Prince, is that which provoke
and sets forward the advancement of arts* and of good inventions: so on the
contrary, all that languisheth, and is extinguished, by the envy, and
nigardnes of those that rule. Then as Alexander after his Conquests, had in
treasure a hundred thousand Talents, and thirty thousand of yearly reuenew;
which i^ eighteen Millions of Crowns by the year: he used these great
treasures magnificently, with marvelous and well ordered liberality; having
respect to the merits of men; and bestowing his benefits in those places, where
he thought the memory of them could not be lost. He gave charge unto
Aristotle, to reduce into writing, the natures of all living creatures; and for
this effect caused to be delivered to him eight hundred Talents; coming to
CCCClxxx. thousand Crowns of our money: commanding many thousands of men
thorough out Greece, and Asia, as hunters, fowlers, fauconers, fishers; and all
those which had charge of parkes, pooles, or birdhouses, to bring him beasts
and living creatures; or to make faithful report of their natures. He gave to
the Philosopher Anaxarchus to set up his School, a hundred talents; and to
Xenocrates, a man of great account, fifty. He did singularly admire the Poesy
of Homer, which he had always at night under his beds-head with his dagger;
and accounted much of philosophy, wherein he had bin instructed by the said
Aristotle: esteeming no less to surmount others in the knowledge of good, and
excellent arts, then in power and force of arms. Wherefore he desired above
all, that his deeds might be recommended to posterity, by worthy writers: as
in like manner he would not be pourtraied but by Apelles; neither have his
statue made but by Lysippus: which were two the most excellent workmen, that
Greece ever bare; the one of them a Painter; and the other a Statuarie. There is
yet to be seen at this day in the City of Alexandria in Egypt, a little house
in manner of a church, and therein a sepulture much honored, and visited by the
Mahometans; because they affirm that there do rest the bones of Alexander the
great prophet, and king, according as they are taught by their Alcoran;
insomuch, that many strangers go thither, out of Regions far distant, to visit
this sepulture, leaving in this place great offerings.

A COMPARISON OF THE LEAR ning of the Greeks, unto that of the Egiptians,
Chaldees, Persians, Indians, and others.
PLato in his Timaeus says, that the Country of Greece, by reason of the
temperature of all the seasons of the year did bring forth wisemen; and in the
fourth of his Common wealth; that the Grecians, by the situation of their
country, were naturally given to the study of wisdom: attributing in his
Menexemus this property principally to the territory of Athens, which he
vpholdeth to be most apt for the breeding of good arts; as in truth there have
bin more Grecians, and namely Athenians learned, and eloquent, then of all the
other Nations of Europe. Yet so is it, that the same author in his Epinomides
acknowledges, that the sciences came first from the Barbarians to the
Grecians, but that they amended and bettered whatsoever they received of
others. And Solon in the beginning of the said Timaeus confesses, that the
Grecians understood nothing of antiquity, in respect of the Egiptians. And
affirms, that by one of their Priests it was reproched unto him: that the
Grecians were always children: that there was none in Greece that was old: in
as much as they were all young of understanding; without having any opinion
taken from antiquity, nor any hoarie and aged science.

Josephus against Appion the Grammarian, meaning to show that we ought not
amongst the Greeks to seek for the knowledge of antiquity; but amongst the
Egiptians, and Chaldees, whose Priests were careful to write histories: says,
that he meruaileth at those which attributed all to the Greeks, therein; it
being most certain, that the Greecians came into the world, not only after it
was come to his full grows, but even when it was waxing old; and that all
their inventions, manners, laws, arts, towns, and cities are but new.
Herodotus affirms, that Divination and Geometry, were brought out of Egypt
into Greece: and that the Greeks learned of the Babylonians the elevation of
the Pole, the use of the quadrant, and the division of the day into hours.
Moreover, that the Egiptians found out the division of the year, and divided
it into twelve Months, by the knowledge which they had of the stars; where
in it seems to him, that they behaved themselves better then the Grecians:
for as much as the Greeks, to place the time that was super-abundant, were
constrained from three years to three, to put between them an odd month: And
on the contrary, the Egiptians allowed thirty days to every month,
adioining to each year five days, over and above; in such sort, that the
revolution of the time, came always to one point, and was found good.
Herodotus also writes in his fifth book, that the Phenicians which came with
Cadmus to inhabit Beotia, brought with them many arts and learnings, planting
there the knowledge of letters; which the Greeks had not before: And
confesses, that all the Phenicians used them before the Grecians; but that
sithence by succession of time, the sound of the said letters was changed
together with the words. The learned men which went out of Greece into Egypt,
to learn their Laws and sciences, were Orpheus, Musaeus, Melampus, Homer,
Lycurgus; and after them, Solon, Plato, Pythagoras, Eudoxus, Democritus, and
Inopis, which learned in Egypt, all that made them worthy of admiration. For
Orpheus brought therehence the hymns of the Gods; the festiuals; the
punishments, and rewards of the dead; and the use of statues. In like manner,
Licurgus, Plato, and Solon, brought to their commonweals, many laws and
constitutions; which they had taken from the Egiptians. Also Pythagoras learned
in the holy writings of Egypt; Geometry, and Arithmetick^ together with the
transmutation of souls from body to body. And Democritus in five years
which he spent there, understood many secrets of Astrology. Likewise Inopis
having long frequented with the Priests and Astrologers of Egypt, brought into
Greece the knowledge of whatsoever the sun does; and the course of the other
stars: of the Zodiac, and of many other such things.

A COMPARISON OF THE PHILO sophers of Greece, with the Chaldees of Babylon, and
the Priests of Egypt.
THe Priests of Egypt, and the Chaldees of Assyria, from their childhood were
brought up, and instructed by their parents in the sciences; the care of all
other things being laid apart: and they became by means hereof very learned;
as well for that they were so instructed and taught from their young years; as
also because they continued and perseuered long therein. But the Greeks did
otherwise: for commonly they gave not themselves to philophie, until they were
of good years; and did not study it long: but turned by and by to things of
profit. And there were few of them that would bestow their time in philosophy,
till they understood it well; but went to other exercises to get gain. And
they were not accustomed to follow that science whereunto their fathers were
given: but studied at their pleasure, and without constraint many several
sciences. But the strangers and Barbarians continued always their first
exercises: And the Greeks often changing their opinion for their profit, and
disputing one against an other of the greatest sciences, made their disciples
so uncertain, that they were forced to fail; and to remain all their life
time in doubt: without having certain knowledge of any thing, which was the
cause of so many sects, and opinions rising amongst them, the one contrary,
and repugnant to the other.

A COMPARISON OF THE GRECIANS with the Persians, Indians, and the Nomades of
Syria and Arabia.
THe Persians in old time contended with the Greeks in matter of arms, and of
learning: who surmounted the elegancie of the Greek tongue, by subtle brevity
of speech, being most ingenious to understand al subtilities and conueiances of
talk; and ready to answer to arguments proposed unto them: in discoursing
conveniently of great affairs; whereof they gave pertinent resolutions without
difficulty, or delaie. They used also wise proverbs, and profound riddels: not
that they understood the subtilities of Chrisippus, or of Aristotle; or that
they had learned this knowledge of Socrates, or Plato, or Demosthenes; for they
neither studied Philosophy, nor Rhetoric: but they did it by the natural
goodness of their mother wit, and sharp understanding: wherein the Indians were
taken to be better then the Persians. And the Nomades of Syria, and Arabia,
very apt and exquisite to find out the truth, and to refute falsehood: who
even at this time (without having given themselves to learning) do speak very
sufficiently of Astrology; alleging very apparent reasons of their sayings:
which they have understood by long observation, and deliver them from the
father to the son successively; and augment them continually.

THE ELOQVENCE Of the Greeks.
ELoquence was borne in Athens, where also it was fostered, and bred; and
brought up to his perfection: In so much, that in that City were seen at
onetime, ten excellent Orators; of whom Demosthenes appeared to be the best.
As touching strangers; they used not any Rhetoric to circumuent the Judges;
or to turn them from the truth: but decided the causes by the bills or
writings of the plaintiff, and defendant, who might make their replication, or
reioinder, without disguysing the deeds with fair words; or cloaking the
truth with affections. And when it was needful to deliberate in counsel of
state on public affairs, they speak their opinions in few: not holding or
troubling the assembly with affected and tedious words.

THE GREEK POESY.
THere is no Nation which has had more sorts of Poesy; nor more, or better
Poets then Greece. For besides the Heroicks which have written of diverse
matters; of wars; of natural philosophy, Astrology, Physic, Bucolicks,
and Georgicks: there has bin a great company of Tragicks, Gomicks, Elegiacks,
Lyricks, Iambicks, Dithyrambicks* and Epigrammatists: such as elsewhere have not
bin found the like* save amongst the Romans and Italians, who wrote after
imitation of them. Of whom shall be spoken hereafter, in comparing them
together.

THE GRECIAN HISTORY.
IT is natural to all Nations, to seek out their antiquities, and to preserve
the memory of public affairs: by reason whereof there are histories found
every where. But whereas others have contented themselves with bare Annals, or
Chronicles, discribing simply the times, persons, places, and affairs; the
Grecians have added thereunto the ornaments of eloquence. Especially Herodotus
and Thucydides, having surpassed all others that ever meddled with writing of
histories: except peradventure they oppose unto them Salust, and Liuie, of the
Latins; who after them have worthily acquitted themselves in this kind of
writing.

THE NOBILITY OF AVNCI ent Greece.
THe Greeks in old time, and namely the Lacedaemonians and Corinthians,
accounted the Artisans base; as we have said heretofore: and only those noble
which exercised arms. Herodotus doubts whether they took this custom of
the Egiptians; seeing the Thracians, Scythians, Persians, Lydians, and almost
all the Barbarians used the same. The Egiptians endeavored to prove, that the
Athenians were descended of a Colony of Scytes, a people of the country of
Egypt; as is told in the Timaeus of Plato; and rehearsed by Diodorus the
Sicilian: because that in the towns of Greece, the people was divided into
three parts, according to the custom of Egypt. For the first order of the
city was of the nobles, who being given above all others to the sciences, were
the more esteemed; being therein like to the Priests of Egypt. The second was
of those to whom lands had bin divided, and assigned, to thend they might the
better give themselves to arms, for defense of their Country; like unto those
of Egypt, who were invested with fees; and which did wage the soldiers for the
wars, at their charges. The third order was of the meaner sort of people, and
of Artisans, who being given altogether to Mechanical arts, furnished many
necessary works for the whole Communaltie.

THE ARTISANS, AND WORKS of the Grecians.
THe Artisans of Greece were no less excellent in their works, then the
learned in their professions; and many of them did write of their mysteries: of
whom the most famous in diverse arts have bin before recited. Nevertheless,
Herodotus in his second book, speaking of the Labyrinth of Egypt, and of the
Pyramides, says: that if any one would make comparison, of the buildings,
fortresses, and works, which were then in Greece, he should find that they were
all of less labor and expense, then this labyrinth. And albeit the Temple of
Ephesus; and that of Samos, deserved to be reckoned of: yet the Pyramides
exceeded tongue, and pen: considering that one of them was equal to all the
buildings of the Greeks; and yet notwithstanding, the Labyrinth surmounted the
Pyramides. But that the artificial poole of Meris, near unto which it was
seated, yielded yet greater meruails. Moreover Diodorus the Sicilian affirms,
that the best cutters, and caruers of Images that were in Greece, learned their
measures and dimensions of the Egyptians: who amongst al other nations did not
measure the composition of statues by the eye; but did them by compass: to thend
that the statue might be made of many and diverse stones gathered into one body;
observing the measures and proportions. A thing in deed worthy of admiration:
namely, that many Artisans in diverse places, should so well agree in one
measure; that one only Image entier, and perfect, should be made by them being
separated one from another; sometimes of twenty, sometimes of forty stones.

The end of the fifth Book.
OF THE POWER, WARFARE, LEAR ning, Eloquence, Poesy, and other excellence of
the Romans* The Sixth Book.
WE will now come to the ROMANS; who in their time obtained the excellence in
arms, in learning, and in all workmanships: But even as after the going of
Xerxes into Greece (which put the Grecians in the greatest fear that ever they
were) the war having had an other end then was expected, they not only found
themselves out of danger, but also got great glory thereby; growing
meruailously from that time forward in all felicity, riches, and excellency of
all arts: So the Romans after the second Punick war, and voyage of Hanibal
into Italy; which troubled them much, remaining there sixteen years with a
mighty army, in which time he wan many battails on them, and came even to the
gates of Rome, where he might also have entered, if he had known how to use
the victory: the Romans then being brought to the greatest extremity, that
ever they were (being vanquished by the Carthaginians, and seeming to have
given over the glory of arms unto them) yet this long, and cruel war having
taken an other end then was looked for; and the chance being turned to the
advantage, and honor of the Romans; by their constancy, and good counsel:
from that time forward for the space of three and fiftye years (as Polybius
says) they became exceeding strong both by land and by sea, commanding not
only over all Italy, but also over the better part of the world; stretching
their Empire to the rest of Europe, into Asia, and into Afric; which they
made greater then any other that had bin before, or has bin after them:
increasing in all felicity and abundance; which together with idleness, made
the Arts and sciences to come in reputation amongst them: as it had before in
Greece. For after they had vanquished, and overthrown the Carthaginians,
destroyed Numantia, and razed Corinth to the ground; reduced into provinces,
the kingdoms of Macedonia, Bythinia, Suria, Pontus, Capadocia, Numidia,
Mauritania, and Egypt: conquered the Spaynes, and the Gauls: subdued Germany,
and great Britain; obtained the Lordship of the sea, and Isles thereof: there
was not found any more sufficient power to resist them, then that of the
Parthians on the East; which seemed to have parted with them the Empire of the
world, possessing seventeen kingdoms. In so much that sithence that time,
both military, and politic discipline, was better in Italy then it had bin
before in any part of the world. Eloquence also flourished much at Rome; and
all arts both liberal and mechanical, came almost to their perfection. Then
lived those great CAPTAINS so much renowned; the two Scipioes, the one
surnamed of Afric, and the other called the Asiaticke; Quintus Fabius the
great; Marcus Marcellus, who was desirous to have saved that ingenious
Archimedes life, at the siege of Syracusa; Paulus Emilius, Marius, Sylla,
Pompeius, Julius Caesar: ORATOVRS Cethegus, M. Cato Censorius, Galba, Lelius,
the two Gracchi brethren; Carbo, Crassus, Antonius, Hortensius, Cicero, Caluus,
Pollio, Messala which lost his wit and memory; Cornelius Nepos, and Fenestella.
HISTORIANS, Pictor, Piso, Antipater, Sisenna, Salust, Titus Liuius, and Trogus
Pompeius: PHILOSOPHERS and wise men, Tubero, and Cato. STOICS, M. Varro, and
Nigidius. LAWIERS, Quintus Scaeuola, Seruius Sulpitius, Gallus Aquilius, Lucius
Balbus, C. Iuuencius, Sextus, Papyrius, Aulus Offilius, Alphenus, Varus, C.
Titius, Decius, the two Aufidij, Pacuuius, Flauius Priscus, Ginna, P. Celius,
C. Th^bacius, and Antistius Labeo. COMICAL POETS Liuius Andronicus the first
writer amongst the Romans, Cecilius, Plautus, Neuius, Licinius, Attila,
Terence, Turpilius, Trabea, Luscus, Afranius: TRAGICAL, Accius, Pacuuius,
Ennius: SATIRICAL, Lucilius, and Horace, who was also a LYRICK: ELEGIACAL,
^uid, Tibullus, Propertius, Catullus, Asconius Pedianus a GRAMARIAN; Cornelius
Gallus, Laberius Plotius, Valgius, Fuscus, the two Gisques, and Furnias:
HEROICAL, Lucretius, Macer, Virgil, Manilius, Julius Firmicus, ASTROLOGERS:
Antonius Musa a PHYSICION Vitruuius an ARCHITECT, Atela a PAINTER: The Italian
wits always fructifying and increasing til the time of Julius Caesar, and
Augustus: when as Italy rose to the greatest excelence, that it could attain,
both in arms, in learning, and in all workmanships: wherehence it fell
incontinently. Diodorus the Sicilian, Strabo of Crete, Dyonise the
Halicarnassean, and Cicero with them, do not only celebrate the perfection of
their age; but foresee also the fall thereof at hand: telling how eloquence
being brought from a little and low beginning, to her sovereign excellence,
waxed old; and seemed as if in short time it would decay and come to naught:
as by order of nature it falls out with all other things. Horace witnesses
that in his time the Romans were come to the height of fortune; and that they
did all works better then the Grecians. Seneca writes that all whatsoever
Italy may oppose or prefer unto Greece, flourished about the time of Cicero:
and that all good wits which have given light to Latin letters were borne then.
Solinus speaking of Augustus, says that his reign has bin almost the only
time wherein arms have ceased; and good wits, and sciences flourished.

To such authority, magnificence, and state came the Romain Empire; whose
beginning in deed was small and difficult, but yet miraculous: as promising
some greatness in time to come. And first the generation, birth, and education
of Romulus (who by beginning the buildings of the city of Rome laid the first
foundation of this estate) was marvelous. For it is said that his mother lay
with the God Mars; and it was then believed, that Hercules, was engendered in a
long night, the day having bin withheld, and the sun stayed contrary to the
course of nature; so was it also believed that in the conception of Romulus the
sun was eclipsed: and that there was a true conjunction of the Sun with the
moon; when Mars (who was a God according to the Pagan credulity) coupled with
Syluia being a mortal woman; and that the same happened again to Romulus the
same day that he departed this life, vanishing out of sight when the sun was
in eclypse. And then when he and his brother Remus were borne, Amulius (who had
constrained their mother to make her self a votarie or Nun, and to vow
perpetual chastity, shutting her up within the wood of Mars, where she became
with child) seeing that they were two, and meaning to make them die, commanded
they should be exposed, and cast forth; and their mother shut up close: whereof
she died. But fortune (which a far off beheld the birth of so great a city)
provided for the two children; by means of a kind and gentle servant, who
having charge to cast them out, would not put them to death: but laid them on
the bank of a river, joining to a fair green meadowe, and shadowed with little
trees near unto a wild figgtree: and then a shee-wolfe, which had lately
brought forth young ones and had lost them, having her teats so full of milk
that she was ready to burst, seeking to ease herself came to these children,
and gave them suck; as if she had brought forth a second time, in being
delivered of her milk. And then the bird which is consecrated to Mars called a
hickway or woodpecker coming thither, and approaching to them, amd with her
foot, opening gently the childrens mouths one after another; fed them with
little crommes of her own food: which being perceived by the shephearde
Faustulus, he carried them there hence, and brought them up poorly among his
beasts; no man knowing who they were; neither that they were the children of
Syluia, and nephews to Numitor, and to the king Amulius. And being after this
manner brought up amongst the shephards, they became strong and hardy: in such
sort that often times they defended their beasts from being taken of thee^es. It
fell out that after they had many times done so, Remus was taken, and accused
unto the king of theft, from which he had often kept others; and that it was he
which set upon the beasts of Numitor. And then was he delivered by the king
unto Numitor to take auengement of him; or to be recompensed by him for the
robberies which he had done: who seeing the young years of Remus; and
considering well the marks of his countenance; together with the time, when
his daughters children were cast out; began to suspect that he was one of them,
by his age so well agreeing thereto. And being in this doubt Romulus and
Faustulus came unto him; by whom he was advertised of the truth of all. Then
being avenged of Amulius (whom they slew) they placed Numitor in the kingdom;
and afterward founded the city of Rome. ROMULUS then the first Prince,
author, and founder thereof, having composed it of Country people, and
nea^heards, had many travails in doing thereof; and found himself entangled
with many wars, and many dangers: being constrained to fight with those that
opposed themselves to the rising and foundation of this City; and to the
increase of this people newly planted. Then afterward as his nativity,
preservation, and nourishment had bin maruailous; his end was no less. For as
he spoke unto the people, suddenly the weather was over cast, and the air was
horribly changed; The sun lost entierly his light, and there were terrible
thunders, impetuous winds, storms and tempests on every side, which made the
common people to hide themselves here and there in corners: But the Senators
kept themselves together. Then when the storm was past, the day cleared, and
the weather become fair, the people assembled again as before; and went to
seek their king, and to ask what was become of him. But the Lords would not
suffer them to enquire any farther; but admonished them to honor, and
reverence him, as one that had bin taken up into heaven; and who thence forward
instead of a good king, would be a propicious, and favorable God unto them.
Moreover Julius Proculus, one of the Patricians accounted a very honest man,
(who also had bin a great familiar friend of Romulus) affirmed that as he came
from Alba he met him on his way; greater and fairer then ever he had seen him;
armed all in white armor, bright, and shyning as fire: and that being
afrighted to see him in such sort, he asked him wherefore he had abandoned his
orphane city in such infinite sorrow: To who^ Romulus answered; It pleased the
Gods, from who^ I came, that I should remain among men, as long as I have
remained, and that after I had built a city (which in glory, and greatness of
Empire, shall one day be the chief in the world) I should return to dwell in
heaven, as before. Wherefore be of good cheer, and say unto the Romans, that
in exercising of prowes, and temperance, they shall attain to the height of
human power: and as for me I will be henceforth a God, Protector, and Patron
of them whom they shall call QVIRINVS.

The ancients recited many such meruailes, in the which there is no appearance
of truth, endeavoring to deifie the nature of man; and to associate him, with
the Gods. It is is very true says Plutarch, that it were evil, and wickedly
done to deny the divinity of virtue; but yet to mingle earth with heaven were
great foolishnes: being a thing most certain, that after death the soul
(which is the image of eternity) remains only alive, and retourneth to heaven
wherhence it came; not with the body; but rather when it is farthest removed,
and separated from the body; and when it is clean and holy, and holds
nothing any longer often he flesh. Therefore it is not necessary to go about to
send against nature, the bodies of virtuous men with their souls unto heaven:
but we ought to think, and firmly believe that their virtues and souls,
according to nature and divine Justice, become saints of men; and of saints
demy-Gods: and of demy-gods (after they are perfectly as in sacrifices of
purgation cleansed, and purified, being delivered of al passibility, and
mortality) they become (not by any civil ordinance, but in truth, reason and
liklyhood) entier and perfect Gods; receiving a most happy and glorious end.

But NVMA the second king, succeeding unto Romulus, had time and leisure to
establish Rome, and to ensure the increase thereof, by means of the long peace
which he had with all his enemies; which was to Rome as a storehouse of all
munition for the wars which followed after: and the people of Rome having
exercised themselves at leisure, and in quiet and rest, by the space of xliij.
years, after the wars which they had under Romulus; they made themselves strong
enough, and sufficient to make head against those which afterward opposed
themselves against them. Considering that in all that time, there was neither
plague, nor famine, nor barrennes of the earth, nor intemperatenes of winter or
summer that offended them: as if all these years had bin governed not by humane
wisdom, but by the divine providence. For he gave out that the goddess Egeria
was in love with him; and that lying with him, she taught him how to rule and
govern his common wealth. Numa then taking the city of Rome, as in a turbulent
tempest, and in a sea tormented, and troubled with the enmity, envy, and evil
will of all the neighbor nations, and bordering peoples; and moreover exercised
in it self with infinite troubles, and partialities; he extinquished and
assuaged all angers, and all the enuies, as evil, and contrary winds: giving
means to the people being but newly planted, and scarcely yet established, to
take root and to fasten their footing, by augmenting leasurely in all safety;
without wars, without sickness, without peril, without fear, or any other
hinderance whatsoever. For in all his reign there was neither war, nor civil
sedition, nor attempt of nouelty, in government of the common wealth; and yet
less enmity or envy perticularly against him; or conspiracy against his person
forgreedines of rule. And not only at Rome was the people softened, and reformed
after the example of the Justice, clemency and goodness of the king; but in all
the Citie^ also round about, began a marvelous change of manners no otherwise
then if it had bin a sweet breath of some wholesome and gracious wind, that
had breathed on them from the side of Rome, to refresh them and there stole
sweetly into the hearts of men, a desire to live in peace, to labor the earth
and to bring up their children, in rest and tranquillity, and to serve and
honor the Gods.

After these two reigned five kings at Rome: and in TARQVIN the last, for hate
of his pride, and not of the royal authority was the government changed:
Rome being from that time forth governed by two annual CONSVLS, and by the
SENATE under the authority of the people.

Then from the Consuls it came to the rule of TEN MEN, from whom it returned
back again to the CONSVLS. And whereas there were opposed unto them two
military TRIBVNES of equal power: they were within the year deposed, and gave
place to the CONSVLS. And albeit they used in the great affairs of the common
wealth to create a DICTATOVR with absolute authority for the time;
nevertheless the Consulary administration remained still; and under it Rome
prospered most; augmenting meruailously in power, till it came to the Empire of
the world. And it seems discoursing by reason on the augmentation thereof,
that it was guided, and governed by the divine Conduct: and that the true God
(though he were not known nor worshipped of them;) because of their justice,
prudence, valiance, and good discipline, exalted them: to the end to repress,
or to chastise the great, and exceeding vices reigning at that time, amongst
many nations? It was he that favored them continually, by land, by sea, in
war, and in peace; against the Italians, against the Greeks, against all
strangers and Barbarians; giving them means to join trophies to trophies;
tryumphes unto tryumphes; and conquest unto conquest; of kingdoms subdued,
nations overcome; Islandes and Continents brought under subjection: which came
all under the shadow of the greatness of this Empire. He permitted that by one
only battle Philip of Macedony should be chased away* That by one only blow
Antiochus should yield them Asia; That the Carthaginians by one only overthrow
should lose Lybia; That POMPEY at one adventure, and one only voyage should
conquer them Armenia, the kingdom of Pontus, Syria, Arabia, the Albanians, the
Iberians; and even to the hill Caucasus, and to the Hircanians; and to the
Ocean which enuironeth the world; which at three several times, and three
diverse places saw him victorious* that he should repress, and beat back the
Nomades in Africa, even to the banks of the meridional Ocean; that he should
subdue Spain, which was revolted with Sertorius, even to the Atlantic sea:
and should pursue the Kings of the Albanians, even to the Caspian sea. That
JULIUS CAESAR should overcome the Gauls, which had gone beyond the Romans in
military glory; taken, and burned Rome* possessed Italy* and who for a long
space of time constantly defended their liberty: in such fort that where the
Romans assailed others for glory, they made war against the Gauls for their
safety, and conservation. God I say caused Hannibal, to run and consume out of
Carthage into Italy, even as an impetuous raging stream; permitting that by
the envy, and malignity of his envious fellow citizens, no reenforcement nor
succor should be sent him from his country. He permitted that the armies of
the Cymbrians, and of the Teutons should be separated by great distance of
places, and times; to thend that MARIUS might be able to fight with them, and
to overthrow them both one after another: and to hinder that CCC. thousand
fighting men should not join together at the same time to ouerrun all Italy
with invincible men, and forces irresistable. He permitted that Antiochus
should hold him still, whiles they had wars with Phillip; and that Phillip
having bin already beaten, should dye when Antiochus was in danger of the loss
of his estate. He permitted that the Bastarnick, and Sarmatick wars should hold
the king Mithridates occupied, whiles the Marsick war burned, and foraged
Italy* That Tigranes, whiles Mithridates, was strong and mighty, should
distrust, and envy him; which kept him from joining with him: and afterward
when he was overthrown, should gather unto him, that he might also perish with
him. He permitted that the Romans after the great discomfiture which they had
received of the Gauls near to the river of Allia, should reunite themselves;
and that the said Gauls beseeging the Capitol, and having surprised it by
night should be discovered by geese: without which warning, both the place*
and the estate, had bin lost. He permitted that Alexander the great should die
before he came toward the west: who being elevated by many great victories and
glorious conquests, began already to darte the flaming beams of his arms even
into Italy. In such forte that all these hindrances being taken away by the
divine permission, the Romans had means to grow; and with time to establishe
an Empire of greater compass both by land and by sea, then any whereof there
is any memory; and at whose incomparable power Plutarch admiring in the reign
of Traian, thought, virtue and fortune (which ordinarily do never agree
together) had with one accord accomplished, the greatest and goodliest work,
that eu^^ was amongst men. For where as the greatest potentates, and Empires
that had bin amongst men, were changed according to the occurrences, and
stumbled one at the other; for as much as none of them was great enough to
command all the rest: and that nevertheless all of them desiring it, there
was a strange motion, and wandering agitation, and a universal mutation of
all in all thoroughout the world; until such time as Rome coming to take
force, and increase, and to tie and bind unto it on the one side other peoples,
and neighbor nations; and on the other side Lordships, Kingdoms, and
principalities of strange and far princes beyond the seas; the principal
things began to take firm foundation and assured establishment: because the
Empire was finallye reduced into peaceable order, and grown to such greatness
of estate, that nothing could fall; by reason that virtue reigned in them that
guyded this great work unto perfection; especially in JULIUS CAESAR, and
AUGUSTUS, who surpassed all the rest that were either before, or after them in
felicity, power' and glory.

For first of all who so will compare unto JULIUS CAESAR, all the Fabians,
Scipioes, Metelles; and those of his time, or somewhat before him, as Sylla,
Marius, the two Luculles; and Pompey himself, whom Pliny dares to compare,
not only with Alexander the great, but with Hercules, and Bacchus; recounting
the victories happily obtained by him in all parts of the world, with his
titles and tryumphes: He shall find that the deeds of Caesar, in all
military virtue, and precedence in matter of war, surmount them all entierly:
the one in the vneasinesse of the places where he made his Conquests; the other
in the largeness and circuit of those countries, which he added to the Romain
Empire; another in the multitude and strength of the enemies whom he defeated;
another in the roughness and sharpness of men with whom he had to deal;
whose manners he afterward polished, and softened; The other in clemency
toward those whom he had taken; another in liberality, and great benefice
toward those which fought under his charge in the wars: and all of them in
the number of battles which he wan; and multitude of enemies which he slew
in battle. For in less then in ten years (which the wars of the Gauls
endured) he took by assault or by force eight hundred Towns; subdued three
hundred nations; and having had many times in battle before him three
Millions of armed men; he slew one Million of them, and took as many
prisoners. Moreover he made himself so well beloved of his people, who were so
earnestly affectioned to do him service, that albeit they were but as other
men when they fought for any other; yet when the question was of the honor or
glory of Caesar, they were invincible, and ran headlong on all danger with
such furye, that none was able to abide them. And being borne to do all great
things, and his heart being by nature desirous of great honor, the prosperities
of his passed prowesses, and conquestes, did not inuit him to be desirous to
enjoy in peace the fruict of his labors: but rather kindeled him, and
encouraged him, to be willing to undertake others, engendring always more and
more, an ymagination in him of greater enterprises and a desire of new glory;
as if that which he had already had bin wasted and worn out. Which passion was
nothing else but a jealousy and emulation of himself, as if he had bin some
other man; and an obstinate desire always to overcome himself: the hope of
that which was to come fighting still with the glory of what was passed; and
the ambition of that which he desired to do, with that which he had all
ready done. For he had purposed, and already made preparation to go fight
against the Parthians, and after he had subdued them, to pass thorough
Hircania, and to enuiron the Caspian sea, and the mountain Caucasus; and
returning to win the kingdom of Pontus, that he might afterward go into
Scythia, and having ouerrun, all the Country and bordering provinces of great
Germany, and Germany it self, to return in the end thorough Gaul into
Italy, and so to spread the Roman Empire round about: in such fort that it
should on each side be bounded with the great Ocean. That great fortune, and
favor of heaven, that had accompanied him all his life long, continued in the
auengement of his death; pursuing by land, and by sea, all those which had
conspired against him: insomuch that there remained not one unpunished of all
those, which either in deed or in counsel, were partakers of the conspiracy
of his death. But of all things which have happened to men on earth, the most
wonderful, was that of Cassius; who after he had bin defeated, and lost the day
in the battle of Philippi, slew himself with that very sword, wherewith he
had stricken Caesar. And of those which happened in heaven the great comet
which appeared, was evident for seven nights continually after his death: and
shortly after also the darkening of the light of the Sun, the which in sight
of all that army arose always pale; and never with his sparkling and shyning
brightness; whereby his heat was also very feeble, annd weak; and the air
consequently all the year long very dark, and thick by reason of the
imbecillitie of the heat which could not resolve, and clarify it: which was
the cause that the fruictes on the earth remained unripe and imperfect,
perishing before they were rypened, by reason of the coldness of the air. But
above all, the vision which appeared to Brutus, showed evidently that the
slaughter was not acceptable to the Gods. Suetonius also witnesses that at
Capua was found in the sepulcher of Capys a Tablet of brass, signifying the
death of Julius; the manner how he should die, and be slain: which sepulcher,
and tablet had bin made a thousand years before. The people sorowed much for
him after his death; because he was most skillful and experienced how to rule:
and caused his body to be brought into the midst of the market place; building
a Temple for him near unto the place where he was buried, and worshipped him
as a God.

OCTAVIAN his nephew, and successor, had such hap, that of a simple Citizen,
or Knight of Rome, he obtained the Empire of the whole world; which he ruled
about fifty and six years; being whiles heeliued, and after his death
honored as a God: by consecrating of Temples unto him, erecting of statues,
and ordayning of Priests with great foundations to do service there. Before
he was borne, it was foretold by Julius Marathus unto the Senate and people of
Rome, that nature shortly would bring them forth a King. And P. Nigidius a very
learned Astrologer and Philosopher, having known his nativity, affirmed that
there was a Lord of the world borne. Which Cicero foresawe in a dream;
seeming unto him that the children of the Senators were called unto the
Capitol; because Jupiter had appointed to show which was he, that should one
day be head and Prince of Rome. And that all the Romans of a great desire
which they had to know who he should be, were all come round about the Temple;
and that all the children were likewise attending there in their purple
garments: until that suddenly the gates of the Temple were opened, and then
the children arose one after another, and passed along before the statue of
Jupiter; who looked upon them all saving the young Caesar, to whom when he
passed before him, he reached out his hand, and said, Ye Roman Lords, this
child here is he, that shall make an end of your civil wars when he comes
to be your head. It is said that Cicero had this vision while he slept; and
that he imprinted firmly in his memory the form of the child's countenance;
but that he knew him not: And that on the morrow he went of purpose into the
field of Mars, whither, the young folk were wont to go to play and sport
themselves; where he found that the childdren having ended their exercises,
were retourning home-ward: and that amongst them the first which he perceived,
was he whom he had seen in his dream, and he remembered his favor well.
Whereof being yet more astonished, he asked him whose child he was; who
answered that he was the son of one Octauian; a man not much renowned, and
of Actia, the sister of Julius Caesar: which Julius Caesar having no children
made him by testament his heir, leaving him his goods, and his house. It is
told of him that soon after he began to speak being not far from the city
in a house of his fathers, where the froggs did nothing but cry and trouble
men with their noise, he commanded them to cease, and be still; which they
did, and never afterward were heard in that place. He was a gentle, gracious,
and civil personage, proper, comely, and fair throughout all his body* But
especially his eyes; which shined as fair stars when he moved them. In such
sort that they which looked on him, winked as at the sunbeams: And when a
certain Soldier tourning away from his face, was asked why he did so; he
answered because he could not abide the shyning of his eyes: and we do yet
doubt that there be from above certain personages ordained to rule and
command over mankind, and to do great, and strange maruailes.

But JULIUS CAESAR having overcome his Citizens, made himself the first Monarck
of the Romain empire: to whom Augustus succeeded, who governed it most happily
after he was absolute Lord thereof. In such sort that there is not found any
time wherein it has bin so wealthy, and well ordered, and established in
peace, and obedience as it was in his time. And according to the form of
government, which he brought into the state of his house, the train of his
Court, into the Senate, or counsel, the course of Justice, managing of his
revenues, administration of provinces, entertainment of forces both by sea,
and by land, that Empire long maintained it self, and prospered meruailously
therewith. Being then in his greatest glory, and power, he held first of all
in the Britain Ocean many parts; and on the other side from the pillars of
Hercules, all the Islandes and Ports, peoples and Nations which are in this
Sea, as far as it is nauigable, on the one side, and the other. Of which
Nations the first on the right hand, are Mauritanians bordering on the Sea;
likewise the Country of Lybia, even as far as Carthage: After them higher,
and farther of the Numidians, and the Country of Numidia; and beyond them all
the rest of Lybia, which stretches out unto the Syrtes; together with the City
of Cyrene. Then are the Marmarides, the Ammonides, and those which hold the
marish of Marienna; and consequently the great city of Alexandria; together
with all the whole country of Egypt even to the easterly Ethiopia: and going
down along the river of Nile by Pelusium unto the sea. And after retourning
along the bank thereof, the country of Suria, Palestina; and yet higher, a
part of Arabia, and the Phenicians; and farther into the land the Cilisyrians
bordering on the river Euphrates. Farther on the sea, the Palmyrians amongst
sandy deserts which are on the said river of Euphrates; And yet farther the
Cilicians neighbors to the Surians* and the Cappadocians with a part of
Armenia, the lesser: Moreover all the nations dwelling near the sea Euxinus all
along the coast. In regard of mediterranean, or vpland countries toward
Armenia the great; the Romans ruled not over them, neither imposed any tribute
on them: but gave and confirmed their kings unto them. Therehence coming from
Cappadocia: and even to the Ionian sea is the great Chersonesus, in the which
are on the right hand the provinces, and nations of Pontus, and Propontida, of
Hellespont, and the Egean sea: On the left hand, the sea of Pamphylia, and of
Egypt. And beyond those the Pamphilians, Lycians, Phenicians, and Carians even
to Ionia; Moreover the Galathians, Bythinians, Phrygians, and Mysians being
above the Pontick sea; and farther into the maine land, the Pysidians and
Lydians: al which nations were subject to the Romans. And passing yet farther
by Hellespont, they ruled over the Mysians dwelling in Europe: and the
Thracians on the sea Euxinus. Near unto the country of Ionia, there is the
gulf of the Egean sea; and that of the Ionian; then the sea of Cilicia, and
the Tyrrhen sea, reaching even to the pillars of Hercules: within which reach,
which is from Ionia, unto the Ocean sea, there are many nations and provinces
which were subject to the Romans: that is to say, the whole country of
Greece, Thessaly, Macedony, and all the other quarters belonging to the
province of Thrace; the Illyrians, Peonians, and the territory of Italy; which
is for the most part environed with the Ionian, and Tyrrhene seas; and
stretches it self by land unto the country of the Gauls, having on the one
side the mediterranean or midland sea; on another the northern Ocean; and on
the other the river of Rhene: and yet farther is all the country of Spain, all
along the Atlantic sea, even to the pillars of Hercules. In regard of those
which are farther into land; they passed not into that part of Africa which
has on the one side the west Ethiopia; and on the other the desert country of
Lybia: which is not inhabited for the exceeding heat, and has nothing but
monsters, and wild beasts, unto the East Ethiopia. These were the limits of the
Romain Empire on the side of Ethiopia, and of Africa. On the side of Asia the
river Euphrates, the mountain Caucasus, the beginning of Armenia the great,
and the Cholches dwelling near the sea Euxinus, and the rest of the Euxine sea.
On the side of Europe the rivers of Rheine, and of Danubius: whereof the one
that is the Rhene enters into the Ocean; the other into the Euxin sea. And
notwithstanding the Romans also ruled over some nations dwelling above the
Rhene; and over the Gethes which dwelled beyond Danubius; and were called
Dacians. Touching the Isles: all those which are within the mediterranean sea,
which are called Cyclades, Sporades, Hyades, Echinades, Tyrthenides; or others
whatsoever they are, about Lybia, Ionia, Egypt, or elsewhere on the sea, which
the Greeks call the great Islands; as Cypres, Candie, Rhods, Lesbos, Euboe,
Sicilia, Sardignia, Corsica, Maiorca, Minorca; and all other great or little
were subject to the Empire of Rome: And on the coast of the northren sea, they
held under their obedience, the greatest, and the best part of the Isle of
Britayne.

So many nations, and provinces did they subdue unto their obedience, by order
of discipline, good counsel, strength, courage, virtue, patience, and
perseverance of the Italians; when they taught to fight with the best military
discipline in the world; which they used in rising, incamping, marching, and
fighting, well armed and ordered; resolute to overcome, or to die. Especially
the footmen; in which they had more confidence, then in their horsemen;
fou^ding their principal strength on then. Then for the maintenance of their
Empire, and safety; they had 200000. men ordinarily entertained; xl. thousand
horse, CCC. Elephants apt for war; two thousand Chariots furnished; and over
and besides iij. hundred thousand harness of provision: which is for their
force on land.

Touching that on the sea, they had about two thousand ships; a thousand and
five hundred galleis, of five, and six oars, with furniture accordingly;
eight hundred great Vessels for pomp, and to carry their Emperors gilded, and
richly wrought, both at the forecastle and stern: an inestimable quantity of
gold, and silver in treasure; having almost an infinite reuenew, consisting in
yearly rents, in customs, and subsidies; and in tributes which we call taxes,
and tallages: which they levied, on so many Countries, lands, and Seigniories.
Of which reuenew it is not possible to make any certain estimate, or account;
no more then of other Empires and kingdoms absolute: whereof the revenues
increase or diminish, according to the disposition of their affairs; and will
of the Sovereign Lords, imposing and taking away subsidy at their pleasures.

Such was the excellency of the Romans in arms. Touching that of Learning,
CICERO without controversy deserves to be the first named amongst them: who
giving himself to ymitation of the Grecians; has represented in his writings
the vehemence of Demosthenes, the abundance of Plato, and good grace of
Isocrates: he not only got by study that which was excellent in each of
them; but of him self also has produced many virtues, or rather all, by the
most happy felicitye of his immortal understanding; borne by some gift of the
divine providence, to the end that Eloquence in him might show all her forces.
For who could teach more dilygently, or move more earnestly; who was ever
more pleasant? in such sort that one would think that he obtained that which
he entreats by force. And albeit by his vehemency he transporteth the Judge;
yet seems he not to be drawn himself: but to follow of his own accord.
Moreover, there is such authority in whatsoever he says, that it seems a
shame to gainsay him; not bringing with him the diligence of an advocate, but
the testimony of a witness, or of a Judge: all these things notwithstanding
flowing from him without constraint or labor; amongst the which each of them
striving particularly, yet with great difficulty excels each other. And
there appears in his speech a happy facility, goodly to hear. Wherefore he
was not without cause accounted by those of his time to reign in judgments;
and has gotten amongst posterity the name, not of a man; but of eloquence.
Pliny gives such testimony of him. But what error were it for me (says he)
to omit thee M. Tullie, or what excellent praise shall I give thee? but even
that which has bin bestowed on thee, by the common voice, and universal
suffrage of all the people of this nation: in taking out of all thy life* the
works only of thy Consulship? when you spoke, the Tribunes refused the law
Agrarie: that is to say, their food and sustenance. When you persuaded; they
pardoned Roseius* the author of the law Theatral. When you perored and
pleaded; it was permitted unto the children of banished persons to seek for
honors, and magistracies. Catiline flies from thy wisdom; Thou have
proscribed and banished Mark Anthony: I salute thee the first that has bin
called the father of the Country; the first that has deserved in a gown, the
triumph of the Crown of laurel, by speaking well; parent of the Latin
language, and elegancie: and (as Caesar the Dictator was wont to say of thee)
having the prerogative of all triumphs: for as much as it is more to have
advanced the bounds of the Romain learning, then of the Empire.

The same Pliny writes thus of M. VARRO. The statue of him alone whiles he
lived, was placed by Asinius Pollio, in the library, which he first of all
others erected* of the spoils gotten of the enemies; which I esteem no less
glory, proceeding of a principal Orator and Citizen, in that multitude of
good wits that then was; and giving this crown to him alone: then when Pompey
the great, gave him the nauale Crown, for having well behaved himself in the
war against the pirates, where he was his Lieutenant. Cicero dedicating to
him his first Academick, says: Thou have declared the age of the Country, the
descriptions of time; the rights of holy things, and of Priests; the discipline
of peace, and of war; the situation of Countries, and places; the names,
kinds, offices, and causes of all, both divine and humane affairs; bringing
great light to our Poets, and generally to Latin words, and letters: and have
in many places begun Philosophy enough to awaken men, though little to teach
them. And in his second Philippick; M. Varro (says he) would that this place
should be the house of his studies: what matters were handeled therein, and
what written? The rights of the people of Rome, the monuments of the
ancestors, the reason and doctrine of all wisdom. And writing unto him in
his Epistles, he says: I have always esteemed you a great personage,
especially that in these troubles are almost alone in quiet; and receive the
fruits of learning, which are great; considering and treating of things, the
utility and delectation whereof ought to be preferred before all the actions,
and pleasures of these others: Surely I account this abode, which you make at
Tusculum to be the true life; and would willingly leave all riches to all men;
that it might be permitted me without any hinderance, to live after this manner.
Lactantius dares to affirm, that there was never any more learned amongst the
Greeks and Latins. S. Augustine calls him the sharpest of all men, and
without doubt the most learned: who has read so many things, that it is a
wonder he had any leisure to write of ought; and yet has written so much, that
it is scarce credible, that any one could read it all: for he wrote CCCCXC.
books. Also, who has more curiously searched out this then Marcus Varro; or
more learnedly found it; or more attentively considered it; or more subtly
distinguished it; or written more diligently and fully of it? who albeit he be
not so sweet in speech; abounds notwithstanding as well in knowledge, and
sentences; as in all doctrine, which we call secular; and they liberal: he can
as well teach the studious of things, as Cicero delight the curious of words.

Cicero, in his book of the world, gives such testimony of P. NIGIDIVS. This
personage was adorned with all liberal arts; and a diligent searcher of things
which were hidden, and folded up in nature. And I account thus of him, that
after the noble Pythagorians, whose discipline was in a manner extinct: having
flourished many years, in Italy and Sicilie, he has renewed it.

The same Cicero says of SERVIVS SVLPITIVS a Lawier: his admirable,
incredible, and almost divine knowledge in exposition of the laws, and
declaration of right and equity, shall not be forgotten. If all those which
ever in this City had understanding of the Laws, were assembled together in
one place; yet were they not comparable to Seruius Sulpitius: for he was not so
well seen in law, as in Justice; wherefore he referred always to facility and
equity, the deeds proceeding of the rule of right, and of the Civil Law: And
did not take so much pains to set down the actions and pleadings of causes;
as to take away the doubts of matters and difficulties of controversies.

The same Cicero of GALLVS AQVILIVS, an other Lawier; I say one could not to
much esteem the authority of such a man; whose wisdom the people of Rome
has known, in taking heed to himself; and not in deceauing of others. Who
did never sever the reason of Law from Equity; who so many years has readily
employed his wit, labor, and fidelity for the good of the people of Rome: who
is so just, and so good, that he seems to be a Lawier by nature, and not by
discipline; so learned and prudent, that he seems to be not only a natural
knowledge; but also a certain goodness of the civil Law: whose understanding
is so good, and such his fidelity; that whatsoever is drawn from thence, is
found to be pure and clear.

Before this time the Latin Poesy was rude, which was then polished, and
brought to perfection, especially by VERGIL; whom Quintilian witnesses, among
all the Heroicke poets, both Greeks and Latins, to have come nearest unto
Homer: in whom notwithstanding he acknowledges, that there was more of nature.
These are the most notable personages that flourished then both in arms, and
learning.

But JESUS CHRIST defaced all their excellency; who in the reign of Augustus,
discending out of Heaven here on earth, and clothing himself with the shape of
a man, was borne of the Virgin, and came forth of her womb, both visible Man,
and God invisible; promised by the Law, and the Prophets; the master of truth,
and cleanser of Idolatry; correctour of malice, and renewer of our depraved
nature: to thend, to restore such as believed in him to their ancient purity,
and innocence; corrupted by the forfaiture of the first man. He gave sight to
the blind; speech to the dumb; straight going to the lame; healed incurable
diseases; cast out evil spirits; fedd with five loaves, and two fishes, five
thousand persons; turned water into wine; went safely on the waters, as on the
land; commanded the sea, the winds, and the tempests; raised the dead to life;
and lived himself again, after he had bin wrongfully crucified, and killed by
the Jews. By which miracles he showed himself to be the son of God:
establishing his Church and christian Religion; in steed of the Mosaical, and
Pagan. Which has already endured more then fifteen hundred years, and shall
never have end; has passed already to the Antipodes; and has bin manifested
to the East and West Indians; yea, even amongst the savages lately discovered
toward the South, which before were unknown to all antiquity: and among the
farthest people of the North, by means of the Sueuians, and Moscouites. In
so much, that at this day we may affirm, that his word has bin heard in all
parts of the habitable earth; as he had ordained unto his Disciples, enduing
them with the grace of the holy Spirit, and power, to do miracles, as he had
done before, and with the gift of tongues; with perseverance, patience, and
constancy, against all torments and persecutions. A thing indeed admirable;
and the like whereof never happened to any King, Lawmakers, or Philosopher,
Grecian, or Barbarian: who contented themselves to set down, and cause to be
received in their country, and language, the institutions and Laws, which
they esteemed good and profitable. But Jesus Christ, not as a mortal man;
serving himself with poor fishermen for his Disciples: (whom he would have
from that time forward to be fishers of men) has manifested his Gospel by
them thorough out the whole world; and before all people: inioyning them to
show from him, the true way of salvation; and of believing in GOD the Creator
of all things. Such was the progress and advancement, which they made in
their ministry; that in a little time they induced the Nations by their
preaching, to leave their ancient idolatries, and to receive Christ as GOD:
they established schools, and auditories of the Christian doctrine: and then
were Temples buylt to the Apostles, and Martyrs, in the most famous Cities of
the world; at Rome, Alexandria, and Antioche; thorough out Egypt, and Lybia,
Europe, and Asia. Beginning then, when the Romain power was come to his
soueraign greatness, and glory, under Augustus the peaceable ruler of
innumerable Nations; when the kingdom of Egypt was extinguished, which had
endured almost time out of mind; and the nation of the Jews, brought under
bondage and subdued; and the Lordships of the Syrians, Cappadocians,
Macedonians, Bythinians, Grecians, Illyrians, Africans, Spaniards, and Gauls,
were under the Roman Seigniorie: which we must think did so fall out, by the
divine providence of God, to the end to make the same work the more easy;
which otherwise must needs have bin very difficult: if all these Nations had
remained in division and discord. But by means of the union of them under one
great Monarchy, they accomplished with less fear and danger their proposed
enterprise: God preparing them their way, and brideling the hearts of the
superstitious, by the terror of that most mighty Empire. Cornelius Tacitus
writes, that such had bin the persuasion of men, that it was contained in the
ancient learning of the Priests, that about this time the East should
prevail; and that such as came out of Iewrie should reign: which was verified
in the spiritual reign of Jesus Christ; whose Gospel, doctrine, and
religion, has bin preached thorough out the world.

God then seeing malice infinitely increased, and the worshipping of false Gods
dispersed thorough all the whole world: in such sort, that his name was
already almost out of the memory of men; and that the Jews themselves (to
whom only his divine mysteries had bin revealed, and promises made of his holy
alliance) given over to vain superstitions; having left the true Religion;
whereunto they refused to return, being reprehended, and admonished by the
Prophets: at this time ordained for the redemption, he sent his son, the
Prince of the Angels unto men, to thend to divert them from wicked and vain
worships; and to induce them to know, and to reverence the true God; bringing
back their souls from folly unto wisdom, from iniquity to justice, and from
impiety to a right belief. Such and so notable at this time was the mutation
both in government, and in Religion.

BUT as the Romans were climed to the top of humane power and wisdom, by
labor and industry: so were they straightwaies corrupted by riches, and
overmuch liberty; degenerating from the former integrity, prowess, learning,
and eloquence: Whereof I can not render any better reason then by their own
authors; men of good credit, and authority. To thend (says Seneca) that ye
may understand, how much the wits of men do every day decay; and by I know not
what iniquity of nature, and procliuitie unto vice, eloquence is gone back:
All whatsoever the Romain eloquence has to oppose unto proud Greece, it
flourished in the time of Cicero; All the good wits which brought any light unto
our studies, were borne then. Sithence that time it has always impaired:
either by the loosenes of the time, which is most pernicious unto good wits; or
that the reward which was proposed for so goodly a thing being lost, all the
travail and pains has bin bestowed on dishonest exercises; or else by some
destiny, whose envious law is perpetual over all things; so that being come
to the highest, they return to the lowest, faster then they went up. The good
wits of slothful youth do languish, and do not apply themselves to any
honest exercise. Sloth, and negligence, and dexterity in things that are
pernicious (which is worse then either sleep or negligence) have possessed
their minds. The delight of singing and dancing holds the effeminate, and
of dressing their hair, and fitting their speech unto womanish daliances; and
exceeding of women in corporal delicacies, and tricking themselves with
unclean cleanlynes: which is the bravery of our youth. Who is there among the
young folks ingenious, or studious enough, or rather man enough? Being softened
and effeminated; they remain of necessity as when they were first borne;
corrupting the chastity of others, and negligent of their own. The Gods will
not suffer so much evil, as that eloquence should come to such people: which I
would never so much admire; if she did not make choice of the minds on which
she bestowed her self. Cornelius Tacitus writing of famous Orators says:
Tell me the cause why we are so far from the former eloquence: since it is
but six score years from the death of Cicero to this present. And a little
after; who knows not that eloquence, and the other arts are fallen from their
ancient glory, not for want of men; but by the slouthfulnes of youth, and
negligence of parents, and ignorance of teachers, and forgetfulness of the
ancient customs, Which evils being first begun in the City; have bin eft
soones dispersed thorough Italy: and all the provinces. The eloquent men of
this time commit foul, and shameful faults in every word of their ordinary
speech shutting up eloquence into little sense, and small sentences, as if she
were banished from her kingdom: Whereas in times past, being richly decked with
all arts, she filled the breasts; now being clipped; and curtailed, she remains
without ornament, without honor; and as if she were without ingenuitie; and is
learned but as some base discipline. This we account to be the chief, and
principal cause, why we are so far gone back from eloquence. And the same
author again in the xvij. of his Annals says: Before, the affairs of the
people of Rome, were written with like eloquence, and liberty; but sithence
the battle of Actium that the benefit of peace required all things to be
reduced under the power of one; then ceased these great wits, and the truth
was utterly lost: first by ignorance of the state of the common wealth, which
was strange unto them; then by flattery, or hatred of those that ruled. Pliny
in his second book; I marvel (says he) that the world disagreeing, and
being divided into kingdoms, that is to say, into parts, so many persons have
employed themselves to search out things which are so difficult to find: In
such sort, that at this day every one in his country knows some things more
truly by the books of such as were never there, then by advertisement of the
originaries. And now that we enjoy so happy a peace, and have an Emperor that
takes so great pleasure in the sciences, and in new inventions; men are so far
off from inuenting any new thing, that they scarce learn the inventions of the
ancients. The rewards were not then bestowed in greater abundance by the
greatness of fortune; and yet more men employed themselves in searching out of
these things, not expecting any other reward then to help their posterie. But
men's manners are waxen old, and not the rewards. And the sea being open on all
sides, and safe landing in all coasts, many do nauigate; but it is to gain,
and not to learn: whiles the mind being blinded, and altogether given over to
avarice, does not consider that it may more surely and safely be done by
learning. The same Author says in his thirteenth book; As the world is
communicated by the majesty of the Roman Empire; who would not think the
life of man accomodated by the intercourse of things; and by the society of a
happy peace? And yet notwithstanding, there are found but few which know that
which the ancients have left: So much the greater was their study, and their
industry more fertile. About a thousand years past, shortly on the beginning
of Letters; Hesiodus gave precepts unto husbandmen; who has bin followed of
many, which has increased husbandry amongst us: for as much as it is good to
consider, not only that which has bin sithence invented; but also that which
the ancients invented before; the memory whereof is lost by our sluggishnes:
whereof we can allege no other causes, then those that are public of the
whole world. Surely, other customs are come in sithence; and men's wits are
busied about other exercises: They are only given to questuarie, and gainful
arts. Before, the Empires of nations were shut up in themselves, and therefore
were they constrained by the necessity of fortune, to exercise the gifts of
the mind. Innumerable Kings were honored by the Arts; and prevailed by them,
thinking by them to obtain, aid, and immortality: wherefore both the rewards
and works abounded. The inlargment of the world, and plenty of things, has
bin hurtful to posterity. Sithence the Senator began to be chosen by his
reuenew; the Judge to be made by the reuenew; and that nothing has so much
commended the Magistrate and Captain, as his reuenew: Since that corrupting
bribes were authorized, and the purchase of offices became very gainful; and
that the only pleasure was in possessing much: the prises of life are vanished;
and the arts called liberal, of the great benefit of liberty have fallen out
to the contrary: and men have begun to profit only by servitude, and
slavery; some worshipping of it in one sort, and some in an other: yet all
notwithstanding, aspiring to the same hope of profiting. The chiefest have
rather respected the vices of another, then their own virtues. Wherefore
pleasure has begun to live; and life is perished. And the same in his xxv.
book; I can not sufficiently admire the diligence of the ancients, who have
left nothing unsearched, and vnexperimented; not retayning to themselves, that
which they knew to be profitable to posterity: on the contrary, we endeavor
to hide, and to suppress their labors; and to deprive those good things of
life, which are gotten by others. So certainly do they hide it, which know any
thing; being envious of others: And ^eaching it unto none, do think thereby to
authorize their knowledge. So far are these manners from inuenting any new
thing, wherewith to be helpful to life: the chiefest and sovereign labor of
good wits being come unto this; to reserve to themselves the deeds of others,
and to let them perish.

Which is not to say, that there have not bin sithence any learned, and
eloquent men: but that they are much differing from the former in propriety,
purity, facility, and elegancie of speech; not comparable to them in
understanding, judgment, and knowledge. As in Italy, Seneca called by the
Emperor Claudius, sand without lyme, and a besome unbound: The two Plinies;
the Uncle accounted the most learned of his time; and the Nephew a famous
Orator; who were men of great credit, and authority. Tacitus and Suetonius
Historiographers. Lucan, Persius, Sylius Italicus (who was Consul the last
year of Nero) Statius, Iuuenal, and Martial, Poets. Cornelius Celsus,
exercised in all sciences. Quinctilian a Rhetorician. Aulus Gellius, Julius
Hyginus an Astrologer. Polemon, and Scaurus, Grammarians. Aburnius Valens,
Tuscianus, Vindius, Verus, Vlpius, Marcellus, Arrianus, Tertullianus, Saluius
Iulianus, L. Volusius, Mecianus, Papinianus, and his auditors, Vulpianus,
Tarnucius, Palernus, Macer, Terentius, Clementius, Menander, Arcadius, Rufinus,
Papyrius, Fronto, Anthius, Maximus, Hermogenianus, Africanus, Florentinus,
Triphonius, Iustus, Callistratus, Venuleius, Celsus, Alphenus, Sabinus, AElius
Gordianus, Triphonius, Proculus, Modestinus, Pomponius, and Africanus, all
excellent Lawiers.

In GREECE, ASIA, and ALEXANDRIA of EGYPT, Plutarch, and his nephew Sextus,
Musonius, Apollonius Tyanaeus; and of CHALCEDONIA, Lucian, Galen the Physician,
Epictetus the Stoic, Fauorinus, Arrianus, Herodianus, and Josephus,
Historiographers. Appian a Poet. Julius Pollux, and Harpocration, Grammarians.
Herodes Atticus; and Apolonius Rhetoricians. Alexander Aphrodiseus a
Peripatetick, which made the first Commentaries on Aristotle; who before was
more praised, then understood of the learned: Out of whose school came
Themistius, Ammonius, Simplicius, Philoponus, and Olympiodorus, all
Commentatours on Aristotle. About the same time the Mathematickes arose unto
their sovereign excellency; by the industry of Claudius Ptolomeus a
Mathematician of incomparable knowledge; and the best that ever was in this
profession, who has surpassed all the ancient Egiptians, Chaldeans, Persians,
and Grecians; and has not had his like sithence: having expounded more
diligently then any other, the whole description of heaven, of the earth, and
of the sea, correcting the errors of the former, and their instruments; and
declared the whole, with very likely arguments, and evident demonstrations.

The Romans for a time were very good, both in peace and in war, modest,
just, and valiant: especially after the wars which they had against the
Tarentines, and the king Pyrrhus, until the third Punick war. There was not
then amongst them any dissension of the Nobles, or commotion of the people. All
there care was to augment, and increase their Empire, without respect of their
particular profit. At what time there flourished in the common wealth, Curious,
Fabricius, Coruncanus, Metellus, Fabius, Scipio, Marcellus, Paulus, and
Lepidus: whose magnanimity, and prudence in war; and moderation in peace was
admirable. Then the common wealth was very good and holy; for as much as
poverty and sparing were then in estimation: and the three kinds of
government, were found there so equally ordained, and established so
conveniently; that one could not say whether the state were an Aristocratie, or
a Democratie, or a Monarchy. The power of the Consuls was manifestly
monarchical and royal; that of the Senators Aristocratical; and the popular
estate wholly Democratical: And there was such an agreement, and band between
them against all fortune, that one could not any where find a better estate of
a common wealth. For if any common fear came from abroad, and forced them to
succor one an other, then the power of this common wealth was so great, and
such, that they wanted nothing for their defense; and they applied themselves
all both in public and private, to execute in due season their deliberated
enterprises: In such sort, that they were sometimes reputed invincible. On the
contrary, if being delivered from the public fear of strangers, they became
insolent by domestical peace, and abundance of goods; and accustomed themselves
to idleness, and delights; and that by this means, the one part would be Masters
over the others, and rule beyond reason: They had so well provided a remedy
for it, by the mutual bridle and hinderance, which they were one to another,
that no one could break out of rank, or lift up himself above the rest: but
were every one constrained to remain in his charge. But after that by labor
and justice, they were increased; and had overcome the cruel. Nations, and
mighty kings: They were eft soones corrupted, perverting the order wherein they
lived before; and becoming proud, and auaricious; exceeding in gluttony, and
whordom; and dissolute in all superfluities and delicacies. And then they were
divided into parcialities, and factions; by occasion whereof they carried arms
and weapons into the temples, and publik assemblies: killing sometime the
Tribunes; sometime the Consuls; and other principal persons of the city.
Wherhence there arose dishonest quarrels and without order: and therhence
followed the contempt of laws and of judgments. And reenforcing the evil day
by day, they began to plot manifest enterprises against the common wealth: and
to bring the great armies forceably into the common wealth, which were gathered
of fugitive, and condemned persons. And although by their saying, they did it
but against their adversaries; nevertheless, in very truth it was against the
common wealth: because they invaded the city as enemies, and cruelly killed
such as they met; or persecuted the^ with banishme^ts, and abominable
proscriptio^s, not omitting any detestable deed

Which seditions began by the two Gracches, Saturnin, and Drusus, furious
Tribunes; then were diverse times renewed between Sylla and Marius; Pompey and
Caesar; and continued by Mark Antonie, Octauian, and Lepidus, against ^assius,
and Brutus: and finally being raised again between M. Antonie, and Octauian,
who were brothers in law, caused the change of the common wealth into a
Monarchy; the stoutest amongst the Romans being either slain in battles,
or by proscriptions: and the others, being wearied with the civil wars, and
grieved with the government of the Senate, and of the people; thorough the
dissension of the Lords, and avarice of the Magistrates. For as this age
nourished most excellent persons in all virtue, and knowledge: so did it also
bring forth more vicious then any time before; and authors of execrable
mischiefs.

The age of Cato (says Seneca) brought forth many worthy to be borne in Cato
his time: as there were then as wicked as ever were; and undertakers of the
greatest mischiefs. It was requisite that there should be of the one, and the
other: To thend that Cato might be known, it behooved there should be some good
men to approve and allow of him; and some evil, against whom he might prove
his force, and virtue. The same Seneca, says: No age has bin without blame;
and if one consider the liberty of every age, I am ashamed to tell it: but men
never sinned more openly, then before Cato. The same Author; M. Cicero (says
he) betwixt the Catilines and Clodians; between the Pompeyes, and the Crasses;
whiles he is tossed up and down with the common wealth; and the government
failing, he was carried away; and perished therewith. Cicero writing of Pompey,
and of Caesar; The One and the other (says he) has sought to make himself Lord,
and not to make the City happy, and honest; and Pompey never left the town
till he could no longer keep it; nor abandoned Italy till he was driven out
of it: but he thought at the beginning to move all lands and seas; to stir up
the Barbarian kings; to draw into Italy the cruel nations armed. Do you not
think there might be some agreement made between them? yes, now it might be
done; but neither the one, nor the other has this end, to make us happy: They
would both of them reign. And the same Author; Certainly both the one and
the other is miserable; who have always had less regard, to the safety and
dignity of their Country; then to their own domination and private
commodities: And in the same place; whose alliance, and fidelity in wicked
agreement, you see what mischief it has brought forth. The same Cicero says,
that Caesar was by nature and inclination cruel; but that he counterfaited
clemency, because that virtue seemed popular. And Seneca; Neither virtue nor
reason (says he) persuaded Pompey to undertake either foreine, or civil
wars: but being carried away with a foolish desire of his own greatness, he
carried arms now into Spain against Sertorius; now against the Pirates, under
color of pacifying the sea: He pretended these causes, to thend he might
continue his power. What led him into Africa, and into the North against
Mithridates; and into Armenia; and against all the kings of Asia; but only an
infinite desire of increasing in greatness, seeming only to himself, that he
was not great enough? What did put Julius so far forward into these public
evils? glory, and ambition, and a desire which he had without measure to
excel above others. He could not suffer one to be before him; where the common
wealth endured two. What? think you that Marius being once Consul indeed,
having taken away by force the six other Consulships, when he defeated the
Theutons, and the Cymbrians; and when he pursued Iugurtha, thorough the deserts
of Africa; did adventure these dangers by the instinct of virtue? These men
moving all things, were also moved themselves; after the manner of whirle-winds,
which carry away whatsoever they catch: and thereby become more impetuous, and
can not be still. Having then bin mischievous unto many, they finally feel in
themselves their pernicious mischief; whereby they have bin hurtful unto
many. The same Seneca; It is all one (says he) whether Cato overcome, or be
overcome in the battle of Pharsalia. The good being in him which could not be
vanquished when his party was overcome, was equal with the good which he
should have carried victorious into his Country; and have pacified the affairs.
Wherefore should it not be equal? seeing that by the same virtue evil fortune
is overcome, and good fortune well ordered. The virtue can not be greater nor
lesser; It is always after one sort. But Pompey shall lose his army; but the
honest pretense of the common wealth, and the Senate, with the chiefest Lords
of Rome, following the part of Pompey, being placed in the first rank of the
battle, shall be overthrown in one only battle; and the ruins of so
great an Empire shall be dispersed over all the world: one part shall fall into
Egypt, an other into Africa, an other into Spain. This miserable common wealth
can not all fall at one time; Let them do all they can. The knowledge of the
places does not help the king Iuba in his kingdom; nor the obstinate virtue of
his subjects: and the fidelity of the Vticians being broken with so many evils
fails. And should Scipio be abandoned in Africa, of the fortune of his name?
It was already provided that Cato should receive no harm: And yet he was
overcome. Certainly the calamities were very great in that conversion of the
world; and there were strange adversities mingled with the prosperities. There
was neither Country, City, Lordship, or personage any whit renowned; but
endured much. The ruin of Carthage first presents it self, which City
seven hundred years after it was founded, had bin so flourishing, and
excellent in all things; had borne rule over so many seas, and lands, and
Islands, and ships; and so much riches; and so many arms, as n^ne more: and
had courage more then any other. Fourteen years after, the Numantines being
besieged by Scipio AEmilian, seeing that for want of victuals they were not
able any longer to endure the siege, themselves burned their City of Numantia;
and killed themselves, part by the sword; part by fire; and part by poison.
Cicero names Carthage and Numantia, the two astonishments of the people of
Rome. Shall I tell how Syracusa was spoiled; Corinth rased; Antioch, and
Jerusalem taken; Athens besieged and sacked; Mars^illes borne in triumph? how
Rome saw her Senate flying; and her treasures taken away? Alexandria found
Caesar fighting in her; and her king the young Ptolomey dead? how Thebes in Egypt
was destroyed; Thirteen towns in Peloponesus swalowed up with an earthquak,
wherewith Caria and Rhodes also were shaken? How there came extraordinary
inundations of the sea; of rivers and of raines; of tempestuous winds? Monsters
hideous in all nature, signs in the air, comets, eclipses of the sun, and of
the moon; and other horrible things in the celestial motions: whereof ensued
famins, plagues, and other diseases, which were before unknown. Cicero
writes, that there appeared then, not only fiery impressions by night in the
heaven, flashes of of lightning, and tremblings of the earth: but moreover,
that the thunder fell on the high towers of the Temples; many Images of the
Gods were removed out of their places; many statues of famous men thrown
down; the tables of brass, wherein the Laws were engraven, were melted. The
Image also of Romulus the founder of Rome, (who was made as he were sucking,
and waiting at the tears of the wolf) stricken with thunder. Shall I tell of
fower-score thousand Romans, and their allies, defeated by the Cymbrians; and
a hundred forty thousand Cymbrians slain by the Romans? the armies of the
Heluetians, and Germains overthrown? the bondmen up in arms, and allies
mutining? And not only the good towns, and mighty armies did suffer, but
also the rich seignories, and noble kingdoms were distroied: the free nations
either travailed with wars, or were brought under subjection. As the Spanish,
French, British, Germain, Pannonian, Illyrian, Armenian, and Thracian. Italy
it self, after it had about some five hundred years valiantly defended it
self, was in the end subdued. Moreover, there were scarce any famous men,
either in arms or learning, but either received notable injuries; or suffered
violent death. Scipio Africanus being returned out of the Senate, was found the
next day stifled in his bed: which was thought to have bin done by his nearest
kindred. Hannibal being driven out of Italy, and banished Africa; poisoned
himself in the Court of king Prusias. The king Mithridates being besieged by
his son Pharnaces, slew himself; and Pharnaces was in a moment overcome by
Caesar. Antiochus the great was deprived of the greatest part of Asia; whereof
he thanked the Romans. And the king Prusias called himself their slave. Perseus
the last king of Macedonia was overcome, led in triumph, and died in
captivity; and one of his sons was the scribe of the magistrates. Tigranes
king of Armenia, prostrated himself before Pompey, and asking pardon, he
lifted him up; and put the Diadem on his head, which he had thrown down.
Ptolemey king of Cypres, threw himself headlong into the sea; knowing that by
the instance of Clodius the Tribune, Cato was sent thitherto carry away his
treasures. Syphax, Iugurtha, and Iuba, being great kings in Afric, ended
unhappily.

Sertorius was slain by treason; Marius flying from Rome in extreme danger of
his life, hid himself in the marish about Minturnes, and went to sea in a
squiffe without victuals, to the fortune of the winds, and the waves:
afterward being returned, he died, being three score and ten years old, and
almost mad. His son slew himself at Preneste. Sylla died eaten with worms,
and lyce. Crassus being overcome beyond Euphrates by the Parthians, was slain
as he parlied on safeguard. Pompey was beheaded in the shore of Alexandria.
Caesar murdered in the senate house. Cato, Brutus, Cassius, and Antonius, were
slain by their own hands. Cleopatra the last Queen of Alexandria, was strong
to death with an Aspe. Cicero twice banished, and his head, and hand cut off,
with which he had written his Philippicks. Mark Varro proscribed. Nigidius
exiled. So many horrible things came to pass at that time, that the very
remembrance of them strikes fear and horror into me.

THE FALL OF THE POWER, Learning, and Eloquence of the Romans.
THE Romans then (which for a time had meruailously profited) living in
liberty, after that by the factions, into which they were fallen, they were
brought into servitude under the rule of one Monarch; they waxed worse and
worse; by little and little decreasing the exercise of Arms, and studies of
learning. And howbeit by the virtue of some good Princes, the Empire seemed in
some sort to rise again; yet was it the more brought low, and afflicted
afterward by the loosnes of others: the honor and venerable excellency of
this sovereign dignity, being transferred from the ancient families of Rome,
to strangers of all nations: yea, even to certain base and vicious persons;
who came to it by force, and by corruption: of whom the most part were slain
by the greedy soldiers which had created them; and others were overthrown by
themselves. Which disorders continued till such time, as the Empire fatally
approaching to his end; was abandoned for a pray to the barbarous Nations. For,
these Emperors unadvisedly thinking to fortify themselves by the mercenarie
and auxiliarie arms of strangers, whom they sent for to their succor and
service; weakening the proper and natural forces of the Empire, which their
ancestors had used in the getting of it: they drew, ere they were ware of it,
many of the Northren nations into the countries, lands, and seigniories of
their obedience. Moreover, by transporting the principal forces, and riches,
from Rome to Bizantium, dividing of the Empire into the East and West; they
weakened much. In such sort, that the West was first distroied, and then at
length also the East; which remaining united, might have long, and almost
perpetually resisted all invasions. Then was lost the purity and elegancie of
the Latin tongue; the Italians leaving to speak Latin: and in like manner the
disciplines written therein came to contempt, and ignorance; and all liberal
and Mechanical arts were corrupted: as is easy to judge by the works of this
time, yet remaining of diverse sorts. And although in this mingling, there fell
out great things, and strange meruailes; yet met they not with men to gather
them diligently, and to write them worthily: but they whole remained either
buried in the darkness of ignorance, or wrapped up in confusion; or depraved
by barbarism, which endured in Europe about a thousand years.

But howbeit, that commonweals have their natural conuersions, fatal
periods, and prefixed times of continuance: It seems notwithstanding that the
chief cause of the ruin of the Romain Empire, ought to be attributed to
CONSTANTINE surnamed the great; who transported the seat thereof out of Italy,
where it was begone, and grown up; changed the form of government, in which
it had bin maintained sithence Augustus time; casserd the Pretorian soldiers;
made the fees hereditary, which the men of arms before possessed only for a
time, or during their life at most; created new Magistrates; and ordained new
Laws, altering in a little time all the ancient form of government. For,
Dioclesian being dead, Maximian, Maxencius, and Licinius slain (who had bin
all Emperors at the same time with Constantius associated by them) when this
CONSTANTINE (the son of this Constancius, and his successor in the Empire)
saw himself alone peaceable Monarch, he bethought him for the perpetuating of
his memory, and celebrating of it the more, to build upon the straight of the
sea, and the farthest part of Europe next unto Asia, in the place where
Byzantium stood before, a great city equal in all things unto Rome; which he
beautified with the same privileges, liberties, dignities and honors: To the
end that by the force thereof the Empire toward the East might be vpheld
against the Persians; whose power at that time was great, and terrrible; as in
the west it was maintained against the Germains by the means of ancient Rome.
He would that these two cities should be reputed as one; and that the citizens
of the one as of the other, should in like manner be chosen Consuls; of whom the one
should be resident here; and the other there. He ordained that there should be
four prefectures of the pretorie, or Courts of sovereign authority, next unto
the imperial; by which all the affairs of the Empire should be ordered: two
for the west, of Italy, and of France; two for the East, of Ilyrian, and of
the Orient. And in liew of the fifteen legions ordained by Augustus, and
entertained by his successors for defense of the Empire on the Rivers of the
Rhene, and of Danubius; he there built certain Castles, and Fortresses,
putting in them but weak garrisons: yet thinking nevertheless that they
would be strong enough to stop the courses of the Northren nations; which he
took to be altogether overcome by the great victories which he had obtained
over them. Wherein he was greatly deceived; for as much as these barbarous
people seeing the frontiers of the Empire weak, and evil guarded, stayed not
long from winning them; entering into the provinces of the Empire, which they
ouerran and invaded miserably: namely the Ostrogoths, and Lombardes of Italy;
the Visigoths, Aquitaine and Spain; the Frenchmen, and Burguignons, the
country of Gauls; the Vandales, Bethicke, and Afric: Finally Rome, which
was called before the head and light of the world, and subduer of countries,
was besieged, taken, spoiled, and destroyed many times. Which evils (according
to the saying of Ezechiel) came out of the North; which has always bin so
fertile of men, that not only it has filled with inhabitants the wast
wildernesses, and huge Forestes of that quarter; but also has accustomed to
cast out innumerable people; which have possessed Asia, and Europe,
overthrowing the ancient estates to establish new.

But I return to the Empire which THEODOSIUS the first of that name held last
entierly both in the East and West; and afterward divided it between his two
sons HONORIVS, and ARCADIVS: under whom began the foresaid afflictions, by
the disloyalty and blinded ambition of Ruffinus, and Stilicon their governors.
THEODOSIUS the second, son of Arcadius, was the last that may truly be called
Emperor of the west, until Charlemaigne. Whiles Martian, and Valentinian
reigned, GENSERICVS the Vandale who had intelligence with ATTILA king of the
Hunnes, made him come out of Pannonia into Gaulewith five hundred thousand men;
where he was fought with by the Romans, Goths, and Frenchmen. It is not red
that there were ever two greater armies any where opposed one against the
other, nor which fought more obstinately; in such sort that there were slain a
hundred and fourscore thousand; and amongst others Theodorick king of the
Goths. ATTILA being returned into Pannonia after this overthrow, levied a new
army; and came furiously into Italy, where he forced, sacked, and burned
Aquileia, and many other places. And as he purposed to go to Rome the Pope Leo
the first of that name came unto him, and did so much by his entreaty that he
not only changed his purpose of going to Rome; but also leaving Italy he
returned into his own country. He was a fatal Tyrant unto Europe, and
became in a little time very mighty; calling himself arrogantly the scourge of
God: but his power was estsoones lost by the discord of his children.

On the other side GENSERICVS, king of the Vandales went out of Spain into
Africa, where he made no less wast then Attila had done in Europe: he took
Carthage, and Hippona, of whence Saint Augustine was Bishop, who dyed there
during the siege, lamenting the ruin of the Empire; and destruction of the
Churches. Therhence he sailed into Italy with a mighty army, and went unto
Rome, which hetooke, and spoiled: And being won by the prayers of Pope Leo (who
before had appeased Attila) he did not put it to fire and sword. Whereby it
appears that the Empire toward the west was very weak: which many Emperors
of small renowmne held one after another; who dispatched one another by
treasons, and secret practices, without remaining long. Amongst whom there
was a certain AVGVSTVLVS, who voluntarily quitted the Empire; and led a
private life. His name seems to have bin fatal, because that the Empire
which began at AUGUSTUS ended in him at Rome.

At the same time ODOACER RVGIAN went with a great army of Herulois into Italy,
where he obtained the government. Against whom ZENON the Emperor sent
Theodorick king of the Ostrogoths, who overcame him in two battles; and in
the end slew him, remaining Master of Italy: which he and his successors
enjoyed about threescore years, wherehence the Emperor JUSTINIAN thrust them
out entierly by the Eunuch Narses, as he drove the Vandales out of Africa by
Bellisarius. From that time forth the Greek, and Lombard HEXARCHES tore, and
mangled Italy, till they were put down by the Frenchmen, and that by the
prowes, and felicity of CHARLEMAIGNE, the peace was there restored.

But by reason of these invasions made by so many diverse nations one upon an
other; there came wonderful mutations into the world; of tongues, buildings,
habits, customs, laws, Magistrates, offices, manners of living, public, and
private, of the military discipline, of arms, engines, and instruments: with
their words and names. This notwithstanding, and although learning and
eloquence diminished by little and little; there were many learned men both
Greeks and Latins; such as the estate of that wretched and troublesometime
could bring up. Namely those which are called the doctors of the Church, as
GRECIANS, Eusebius, Athanasius, Cyrillus, Gregory Nazianzen, and Basil the
great; being Bishops, both of them noble, and brought up together as fellow
Scholars at Athens: Theodoret, Gregory of Nicene, Epiphanius, Nectorius, and
John Chrysostom Patriarchs of Constantinople; Apollinarius of Antioch, and
Damascen all Thelogians or Divines. Before whom were Clement of Alexandria,
Justin Martyr, Aristides, and Athenagoras: there flourished moreover Appian and
Dydimus, Grammarians; Libanius a sophister. Plotinus Iamblichus, Maximus,
Porphyrius, and Proclus Philosophers. Oribasius, Paulus Egineta, and Etius
Physicians: Procopius, Agathias, Philostratus Histor^ans. The LATINS were
Cypria^, Tertullian, Arnobius, Lactantius, Hilarious, Ambrose, Hierome, Ruffin,
Augustine, and many other Theologians: Ausonius, Claudianus, Iuuencius, and
Prudencius Poets. Seruius Donatus, Priscianus, and Diomedes Grammarians.
Victorinus a Rhetorician: Sextus, Rusus, Aurelius, Victor, Trebellius Pollio,
Quintus Curtius, Vopiscus, Lampridius, Spartianus, Capitolinus, Idacius,
Eutropius, Ammianus Marcellinus, Paulus Orosius, Prosper Aquitanicus,
Cassiodorus, Sidonius Apollinarius, Iornandus, Paulus Diaconus, Methodius,
Gregory of Tours, Antony the Monk Historiographers; and Vegetius who has
written of the art Military. Tribonian a Lawier by the commandment of
Justinian, gathered the writings of the ancient Lawiers called the Pandects,
which only remain with us of antiquity. Afterward he did the like by the
edicts and ordinances of the Emperors, comprised before in iij. volumes, namly
the Gregorian, Hermogenian, and Theodosian, and gathered them into one volume,
called the Code or book of Justinian. Symmachus and Boecius were in the temple
of Theodorick a king of the Goths called Vero^ensis; who put them inhumanely to
death. Symmachus was an Orator, Boethius a Philosopher, who was exercised in all
parts of Philosophy, and in Mathematics, so happy both in verse and prose;
that it is hard to judge whether he were the last that spoke Latin, or the
first that did undertake to restore learning and eloquence decayed. Laurentius
Valla calls him the last of the learned men. For sithence we have not had any
but Saint Gregory, Beda, and Bernardus Clareuallensis. In so much that learning
remains as it were dead, the world going into a great silence, and ignorance.

The troubles also and varieties were no less in matter of religion then of
Empire. For whereas sithence the resurrection of JESUS CHRIST those which made
profession of his Gospel, had bin by the space of three hundred years, cruelly
persecuted with diverse sorts of horrible torments by the Emperors, Nero,
Domitian, Traian, Seuerus, Maximinus, Decius, Valerianus, Aurelian, Dioclesian,
and Maximinian: Finally CONSTANTINE embrasing our religion, undertook against
his brother in law, Licinius Caesar for the protection thereof a great war, and
more important then was that between Pompey and Caesar; or between Octauian,
and Antony. In which the question was not only of Empire, as in the other; but
also of religion: namely, whether the world from that time forward should be
subject and obedient to Christian Emperors, who would overthrow the religion
of the Gentiles; or else unto the Emperors of the Gentiles who would utterly
root out Christianity: whereof ensued one of the chiefest mutations that ever
was; CONSTANTINE thorough the grace of God remaining victorious: who caused the
worshipping of false Gods to cease, and shut up their temples, and set the
Christians in security; permitting them freely and publicly to pray unto the
true God, and to build Churches: unto which he assigned revenues for the
maintenance of Preachers and Ministers, and would have them received unto
honors, and magistracies notwithstanding their profession.

This quarrel being scarce appeased, the heresy of Arrius arose, the most
pernicious that ever was: for the rooting out of which, CONSTANTINE assembled
that famous counsel of Nicene. But yet two years before his death at the
persuasion of his sister Constance, hereuoked Arrius again out of banishment.
The which was cause of great scandal, especially between his sons the
Emperors CONSTANS, and CONSTANTIVS: of whom the one was an Arrian, and the
other an Orthodoxe or true Christian. Amongst whom thus disagreeing, there were
counsels held against counsels, and the one disanulled by the other:
confessions against confessions: creedes against creedes: two Bishops different
in every city; and double service in the churches, double mutining continually,
accusations, defenses, banishments, and martyrdomes. Which disorder endured a
long time, this discord being spread far and wide thoroughout the world, yea
even amongst the Goths, Vandales, and Lombards: who under this pretense
committed execrable cruelties, and innumerable spoils.

On this scandal happened an other yet worse then the former. For IVLIAN their
cousin, and successor, coming to the Empire, when Christiandome seemed clean
delivered of Paganism, he set it up again, denying the faith of JESUS CHRIST,
whereby he got the surname of an Apostata. He took away the reuenews granted
by Constantine, to the churches of the Christians; and forbad the schools unto
children: depriving both the teachers, and learners of their maintenance. He
killed many that made profession of christian Religion; deprived others of
their charges, as Iouinian; Valentinian, and Valens; took away their goods
from others, saying in mockery that by making of them poor, he made it easier
for them to go into paradise: because it was written in their books. Blessed
is the poor, for unto such belongs the kingdom of heaven. He exhorted the
Jews to restore their manner of government for hatred of the Christians; and
to reedifie the Temple. He wrote books against the Christian doctrine which
he said was repugnant to common sense; and did take away the bands of human
society: but his fury passed as a cloud; for he reigned only nineteen
months, dying of a hurt in the war, which he made against the Persians. In
whose place IOVINIAN was chosen Emperor by the army, who brought matters into
a better state. The destruction of the Iudaick, and Delphick Temples happened
at that time, which portending the ruin of both those religions, abated much
the insolence of the Jews, and of the Pagans; and assured, and comforted the
good Christians.

Afterward the Goths, Vandales, and Lombardes, Arrianizing (as we have said)
afflicted Europe and Africa, almost two hundred years, and ruinated the Empire
of the West. Which they that were reputed wise men amongst the Gentiles seeing,
said that this desolation proceeded of the changing of the ancient religion,
wherein the Empire had bin nourished, increased, and maintained long; and that
the Gods being angry sent such calamities, for revenge of their contempt.
Against whom S. Augustine opposed him self, writing his books of the city of
God to refute them. On the other side, the Nestorians, Eutichyans, and
Manichees, troubled all the East. The Persians destroyed Asia, and Africa:
their king Cosroe publishing an edict, that whosoever would save his life,
should renounce that God that was crucified. Then the Sarasens entierly
exterminated the Persians with their language, and religion. Moreover the
Emperors of Constantinople, beating down the Images, and statues of the
temples, were excommunicated by the Popes of Rome: Who forbad them thoroughout
Italy to pay them any tribute, or to put their pictures in their coin,
commanded that their names should be omitted in their masses, and public
prayers; and refused their edicts, commandments and letters; making them to
lose that which they had remaining in the west: and to assure themselves
against them and aganst the Lombards, who had seized on the Hexarchat of
Rauenna, they sent for Charles Martel, and Pepin, who were Frenchmen, and of
the house of Austrich to their succor: whose strength, authority, and renown
at that time was great. And consequently they created, consecrated, and crowned
CHARLEMAIGN Emperor of the west; calling him Augustus, and Caesar three hundred
and twenty years after the Emperors were ceased in Italy. He delivered Italy
from the Lombards, Germainy from the Hongarians, and Gaul of the Sarasens:
with the victories which the grandfather and his Father wan of them. He went
twice into Spain; and overcame the Saxons. And as he was learned in Greek and
Latin, being no less a favorer of learning then a lover of arms, he ordained
the University of Paris, which has bin sithence the most famous of the
world, and most flourishing in all Arts: having served for a refuge for the
studies of learning, which are waxen cold in Asia, utterly lost in Greece,
decayed in Italy, and driven out of Egypt, and Africa. So this magnanimous, and
victorious prince joining together the greatest provinces of Europe, was a
Monarch, protector of the peace, religion, laws, judgments and disciplines.

By such occasion was the Empire restored to the west; which had first his seat
in France; the^ in Germany, where from hereditary it is become elective; and in
process of years by evil ordering is so much diminished, and impouerished, that
there remains nothing but the shadow of a great name, and vain title: The
princes Electours holding the imperial lands with their rents, revenues,
customs and commodities horded up; and the principal countries being
franchised by the Emperors, who have given them privileges to govern freely
their commonweals. Concerning Italy which was the chief and ancient
patrimony of the empire; it is either possessed by the Popes which hold Rome
that was wont to be the proper seat of the Emperors, and many other places; or
by the kings of Naples, or by the Venitians, or by the dukes of Milayne,
Florence, Ferrara, Mantua, Vrbin, and other potentates sequestered from the
empire. The Isles of Sicilie, Sardigna, Corsica, Maiorca, Minorca, and Sauoye
also are cut off. Thus has the Empire by succession of time bin distracted,
and dissipated: Sithence the ruin whereof the world has not had his virtue so
united. But many kingdoms are lifted up each in his country: as toward the
west that of France, Spain, and Portingale. In the North England, Denmark,
Sueden, Moscouy, Polonia, Hungaria. In the East Persia, Narsingue, China or
Cathay. In the South that of the Soudan, of Presbiter-Iohn, Tuniz, and Fez; and
elsewhere many seigniories and communalties, which acknowledge none but
themselves.

The end of the sixth Book.
A COMPARISON OF THE ROMANS with the Egyptians, Assyrians, Persians, Greeks,
and Parthians; in power, warfare, learning, language, Eloquence, Poesy, and
works of other arts. The Seventh Book.
NAture having placed ITALY in a middle seat between the south and the North,
has as much or more favored the ITALIANS as any other people on the habitable
earth; making them not only strong, comely and courageous, but also ingenious,
and prudent: And consequently excellent in manners, laws, arts, and
workemanships. By means of which singularities, and prerogatives they got in
ancient time, the greatest Empire that ever was; and yet not of such
largeness that it comprehended the whole world: which never happened
hitherto; neither is ever possible to come to pass. For on the North side they
never ruled over all Germany and great Britain; neither over Norway,
Sweueland, Moscouia, Lituania, and Scythia; Neither toward the south over
Ethiopia, and the higher Africa, where the Blackmores inhabit; neither in the
East over India, China, Catay, Giapan, and Taprobana; which Easterly part has
the river Tygris for a fatal bound; without speaking of the lands lately
discovered in the West: in so much that looking considerately thereon, it will
be found by true reason of Cosmography, that they never possessed the twelfth
part of the earth. ZENON the first author of the sect of the Stoickes,
ymagined an universal form of government, tending to this, that all men
should not live by towns, peoples, and nations; being separated by particular
laws, rightes, and customs: but that they should account themselves fellow
citizens; and that there was but one sort of life, as there is but one world;
no otherwise then as if it were but one flock, feeding under one shepherd, in
common pastures. PLATO also wished that there were on earth but one king, as
there is in heaven but one God; to thend that the human government might
therein resemble the divine: which Lord of the world as a true shepherd of
mankind, should love al men indifferently as his natural subjects;
maintayning them with good manners, laws, judgments, and assured intercourse
both by sea, and land: so great a prince not bearing envy to any person; and
having no occasion to enlarge his frontiers by ambition: which would be the
cause of ceasing so many enmities, wars, slaughters, spoils, and robberies,
happening amongst men through the plurality, and dissentions of gouernements.
Which matters being by them gravely and magnificently propounded, are much more
easy to be wished then effected: considering the diversity of tongues,
dissimilitude of manners, and customs, variety of sects, and vanity of
opinions that reign amongst men; and make them to lose that love which is
wished amongst them: hindering the establishing of one universal common
wealth of all; and consequently a Monarchy, of people so much differing in
estimation of divine and human right, and the religion and service of God.
One man alone can not possess all the earth, the greatest part of it being
drowned by the sea; and in some places where it is uncovered of waters, being
uninhabitable thorough excessive heat or cold: And if he should possess it, he
would straight forget himself in so great authority and liberty; and become
proud beyond measure, waxing tyrannical and insupportable: as it happened to
Cambyses, to Nero, to Sesostris, to Attila, to Tamberlan, and to Alexander the
great; who thorough extreme ouerweening would be accounted and called the
son of God; and for his insolency was poisoned by his most familiar friends:
and as it happened to OCTAVIAN AUGUSTUS, who suffered Temples to be consecrated
to him, and divine honors to be given him in his life time: Considering also
that there is a certain measure, and proportion of greatness in Towns, Cities,
and States: even as in living creatures, plants, and instruments: which when
it exceeds; loses his nature and use. As it befell unto this ROMAN EMPIRE,
which being clymed up to an incomparable greatness, and inestimable wealth;
did fall est soones into great calamities; and was finally overthrown; as
others had bin before it: which we will compare together, setting down their
similitudes, and differences.

A COMPARISON OF THE ROMAIN Empire, with the Assyrian, Median, Persian,
Macedonian, and Parthian.
Amongst the great ancient kingdoms, the ASSYRIAN was excellent in nobility,
mighty in arms, large in compass of land, and in continuance admirable: which
being augmented by Belus, Ninus, and Semiramis; and enlarged by the spacious
countries of Asia; was the first that amongst all other Empires (which it
far exceeded) obtained the name of an established Monarchy: and for the
space of a thousand three hundred and threescore years, under thirty eight
kings flourished greatly. After followed that of the MEDES, which under nine
kings continued CClxj. years: well governed in peace, and war. Then reigned
the PERSIANS, who having added Egypt unto their dominion, and increased their
strength and riches, when they had prospered two hundred and thirty years;
they lost their state under Darius their fourteenth king. From that time
forward the MACEDONIANS by the success, and conduct of Alexander, obtained
the rule over Asia; which they lost one hundred and twenty years after, giving
occasion by their civil dissentions, to the Parthians in the East, and to the
Romans in the West to increase, and grow great. Then the Romans toward
the West seasing the Macedonian Seigniorie (which though it were great indeed,
yet was but weak by the division of the princes who had parted it between
them) established the greatest and fairest Empire that ever was. For if all the
famous Monarckes amongst the strangers be compared unto the Roman
Emperors, there will not be found any amongst them, that have done greater
things either in peace or war: or that have more enlarged their Empire; and
longer maintained it.

The Assyria^s went not out of Asia. The Medians endured only cclx. years: the
Persians having overcome the Medes obtained almost al Asia; but when they
assailed Europe, they little prevailed. And the Persians being overthrown; the
Macedonian Empire was greater then all the former: but it endured but a whiles.
For incontinently after the death of Alexander being divided into many
Lordships, it was easily supplanted by the Romans. And although it were very
^arge, yet it went not into spacious Africa, saving where it reaches unto
Egypt, neither possessed all Europe, being bounded on the north with the
country of Thrace, and toward the West with the Adriaticke sea. But the
ROMAIN EMPIRE extended into Europe, Asia, and Africa, from the Orcades, and
Thule on the one side, Spain, and Mauritania on the other; even to the hill
Caucasus, and the river Euphrates, and the higher Ethiopia* traversing the
country of Egypt, and of Arabia even to the East sea: being the first and
only, which to this present, has made the East, and West his limits; and has
endured longer then any other, excepting the Assyrian.

Touching the PARTHIAN which was at the same time when the Romain, and opposed
against it; being increased with the ruins of the Macedonian in the East, as
the Romain was also in the west; albeit it was very great and terrible unto all
the East, as comprehending eighteen kingdoms between the Caspian, and the
red sea; and being far stretched out toward the Indies; and famous by many
overthrows which it had given to the Romans, as namely by the death of
Crassus, and shameful retreat of Antonius, yet obtained it but one part of
Asia, and received some kings from Rome: which being begone by Arsaces, endured
only cccclxiij. years, under twenty and sean^n kings.

And the second PERSIAN also was of no greater circuit; which was set up by the
Persian Artaxerxes, having overcome in three battles, and in the end slain
Artabanus, the last king of the Parthians: and ended cccxiij. years after it
was restored: being overthrown under Hormisdas the xxviij. king by the
Arabians.

THE BIRTH OF ROME, AND CONTI nuance thereof, compared to the four Ages of
man's life.
AS the Astrologers say, that cities have their reuolutions, and prefixed times
of continuance, which is known by the situation of stars, at the day of
their natiuities: For this cause Tarucius a Roman in the time of Cicero, and
of Mark Varro (being a friend to them both, and a great Philosopher, and
Mathematician after the manner of the Chaldees) by the cunning of Astrologicall
calculation, cast the nativity of Rome, from the day wherein Romulus first
began it; which was the ninth of April, between two and three of the clock
in a pastoral feast, called Palilia: and rehearsing her passed adventures,
foretold those that were to come.

The same Varro (a very learned man, and one who read the Roman histories as
much as any Romain that ever was) writes that the continuance of Rome was
foreseen, and known by the twelve Vultures which at the foundation thereof
flew over Romulus, namely that it should be of twelve hundred years; every
vulture signifying an age, or a hundred years: and that in his time be had
heard of one Vectius Augur, that Rome should attain to twelve hundred years;
seeing it had escape^ one hundred and twenty: in which te(...) it was taken,
spoiled and destroyed many and sundry times.

The times of the continuance thereof were divided into ages after the
similitude of man's life: whereof the first which is called infancy or childhood,
we^ under Romulus, who founded it and brought it up. The puerilitie or boyt^ie
under the other Kings, who augmented and instructed it in good manners,
customs, laws, and disciplines* But being grown up under Tarquine it would
no longer endure the yo^^ of subjection, under proud domination; and from that
time forward chose rather to be obedient unto laws, then unto Kings. Then the
striplings age being ended in the end of the Punicke war; and the strength
more settled: it entered into the age of manhood; for having distroyed Carthage
(which of long time had bin her enemy) she stretched out her seigniory by
land, and by sea, into many countries, till such time as wanting matter of
foraine war, she abused her strength* employing it to her own destruction.
Then was her first old age, when being afflicted with civil wars, and
opp^^ssed with inward evils, she fell again into a Monarchy, and came to
another childhood or infancy: And remained in vigor till the time of Traian,
of the Antonines, and of Theodosius the first; and then became aged under
Honorius, and Arcadius, and the 471. years after that the Monarchy had
begun in Augustus, it finished in Augustulus, being utterly lost in respect
of Italy.

A COMPARISON OF ROME, with Babylon, and Constantinople.
TO this purpose it is obsermed that ROME and BABYLON had almost a like
beginning, increase, continuance, and ending: such affairs being disposed by
the ineffable mysteries, and profound judgments of God* and not happening
casually, or by human power. In such sort, that under a like disposition of
time BABYLON fell, and ROME arose: The One suffered the Lordship of strangers;
and the other despised that of her own citizens. The One (as it were) dying left
the heritage: and the other growing, acknowledged her self heir. And then
when the Empire of the East died, the Empire of the west was borne. And as
BABYLON eleven hundred threescore and four years after it was built, was by
Arbaces the Median dispoiled of her kingdom, and deprived of her king: In like
manner ROME after she had as many years endured; was assailed, and taken by
Alaricus king of the Goths. After this manner was the beginning of BABYLON, and
ROME alike, their power alike, their greatness alike, their time alike, their
good, and evil alike, their downefal alike; and alike their destruction. We may
say as much of CONSTANTINOPLE the heir of them both: which about xj. hundred
sixty and four years, after it was built by Constantine, who called it new
Rome* was taken* spoiled and deprived of the Greek Empire and of her Emperor
by Mahom^^ king of the Turks. wherein has bin observed a singular me(...),
that as it was built by Constantine the son of Helen, so it was also
conquered by the Turks, under another Constantine, the son of Helene.

A COMPARISON OF THE ROMAIN common wealth with the Lacedemonian, and
Carthaginian.
AS a Common wealth which is well ordained to endure a long time, ought not to
be single, or of one kind only, but must also have the virtues and properties
of others assembled in hit; to thend that nothing therein be unduly or
vnproportionably increased, which may make it to fall into the evil that is
next it, and consequently come to ruin, for this cause Lycurgus instituting
the LACEDEMONIAN common wealth mingled therein a Monarchy, Aristocratie, and
Democratie so conveniently, that it remained almost seven years in the same
manner, retayning still the integrity of his first institution. In the which
the king, the Ephori, and the Senate had their preheminences, and powers in
such sort intermingled, and balanced together; that one could not well
discern, under what kind of government it was established.

The CARTHAGINIAN common wealth was thus ordained from the beginning* It had
kings, and the Aristocratie ^e power of Senators; and the commons having also
their pre-eminence, in things appertaining to them. In such sort that as
touching the assembling of the three estates, it resembled the Lacedemoni^n.

Also the ROMAIN had these three estates so equally and conveniently tempered;
that one could not say, whether it were an entier Aristocratie, or a
Democratie, or a Monarchy* Considering the power of the Consuls, one would
have judged it Monarchical, and ^oial; regarding that of the Senators,
Aristocratical; and respecting that of the people, Democratical. But the
Seigniory being seized on by the Emperors, they first took from the people
the authority of meddling in public affairs, and transported it to the
Senate; then reduced that of the people and of the Senate, to their absolute
power.

The Lacedemonian was sufficient only to conserve their own, and to keep
their liberty; but insufficient to augment and to enlarge their Empire:
wherein the Romain was most excellent. For the Lacedaemonians assaying to
conquer the principality of Greece, they sodanly put their liberty in danger;
where the Romans after they had brought Italy under their obedience, subdued
in a little time a great part of the world; being abondantly furnished with all
preparations requisite for such an enterprise. Touching the Carthanginian, then
when it began to have wars with the Romain, it was in declining* and the Romain
in his vigor: seeing that all commonweals have a certain augmentation, and
vigor; and afterward a diminution* For Rome flourished then, especially in
order of government. The people in Carthage had usurped to much authority in
the Counsails. At Rome the Senate conducted the greatest part of the affairs;
which prospered the more for being governed by the wisest: and by such conduct
they finally overcame the Carthaginians. Besides, that the Italians are of a
more excellent nature, then the Lybians; both in shape of body, and in
hardiness of courage: and that the Romans were served by their own nation;
which were taught to war with the best discipline in the world: The
Carthaginians used none but strangers, and mercenaries; putting all their
confidence in them, which turned them unto evil.

A COMPARISON OF THE POWER of Alexander the great, with that which the Romans
had in his time: and if having conquered Asia he had turned his forces into
Europe; what might have happened* by the judgment of Liuie.
LIVIE in the ninth book of his first Decade speaking of PAPIRIVS CVRSOR,
says that in that time being as fertile of virtues as any other, there was no
man, on whom the state of Rome did more depend; then on him: and (which is
more) they accounted him matchable in courage with Alexander the great: if
having subdued Asia, he had turned his arms into Europe. Nothing less
(says he) may seem to have bin sought from the beginning of this work, then
that I should wander farther then appertains to the order of things, and
that beautifying the work with varieties, I should recreate the readers with
pleasant digressions; and give my mind some rest. Yet the mention of so great
a King and Captain, makes me set down here the secret thoughts, which
sometime have come into my head: as to know what had happened to the Romans,
if they had made war against Alexander the great*

Often times in war the multitude and valiancy of Soldiers may do much; as
also the wisdom of Captains; and fortune which is mighty in all human, and
especially in military affairs. Considering these things both severally and
together, I find that they made the Romain Empire invincible against this
King; as against all other Kings and Nations. First beginning by the comparison
of Capitaines; I deny not that Alexander was an excellent Captain: but he
is the more renowned, because he was alone, and dyed young, upon the
augmentation of his affairs, having not yet tasted of adverse fortune* not
speaking of other Kings and famous Capitaines* that have ^in notable examples
of human accidents. What made Cyrus so much celebrated by the Gre^ians, to
fall into the adversities of contrary fortune, but his long life; as not long
sithende it happened unto Pompey the great? I will not speak of the Romain
Captaine^ which were at other seasons* but of those with whom as being Consuls
or Dictatours, Alexander had fought: namely, M. Valerius Coruinus, ^. Marcus
Rutilius, C. Sulpitius, Titus Manlius Torquatus, Qu. Publius Philo, Lucius
Papirius Cursor, Quintus Fabius Maximus, and the two Decij, Lucius Voluminous,
Marcus Lucius, and other great personages following, if he had preferred the
Punick war before the Romain, and then being of more years, had passed into
Italy. In every of which there was the same vigor of spirit, and mind, that
was in Alexander; and military discipline from the beginning of the City,
successively delivered from hand to hand; and ordained in form of an art, by
the principal precepts thereof. Thus did the Kings fight; and thus they that
drove them away* namely, the Iunij* and Valerij: Thus consequently the Fabij,
Quintij, and Cornelij; Thus Furius Camillus, who being old, saw the two young
ones that should have fought with Alexander: To whom also Manlius Torquatus
would not have given place, if he had met him equally in battle; neither
Vaserius Coruinus, both of them notable soldiers before they were Captains.
Neither would the two Decij have yielded any whit unto him* who marching
against the enemy, disaduowed their bodies, and bequeathed them to death.
Papirius Cursor would not have yielded to him, with that strength of body and
courage that was in him. And that I may not stand to name every one, this
Senate (accounted to consist of Kings) would not have suffered it self to be
supplanted by the counsel of a young man: And he that so esteems it,
comprehends the true form of the Romain Senate* But peradventure it is to be
feared, that he would have pitched his camp better then any of those whom I
have named, conuoyed his vittailes, conducted his carriages, kept himself from
ambushes, chosen the time of fight, aranged the battle, and assured himself
of succors. But he should no more have said, that he had met with Darius,
accompanied with women, and Eunuchs; armed between purple and gold;
effeminated and weakened by the pomp of his fortune; rather a pray then an
enemy; whom he overcame without bloodshed: happy in this, that he dared to so
good purpose despise such vanities. He should have found Italy much different
from India, thorough which he went banqueting, with his dronken army: when he
should have here seen the forrestes of Apulia, and the Mountains of
Leucania, and the traces, or foote-stepps of the overthrow of his ancestors;
where his uncle Alexander, lately king of Epirus had bin overcome.

We speak of Alexander, not yet plonged in prosperity; wherein he showed
himself as insolent, as ever did any Prince: Who if he be considered by the
state of his new fortune, and by that new mind which he carried after his
victories, he had comen into Italy, more resembling Darius, then Alexander:
and had brought thither his host, not remembering Macedonia any longer; and
already degenerating into the manners of the Persians. It is grievous to me to
recite i^ ^o great a king, the proud changing of his garment; and the desired
flatteries of those which cast them selves prostrate on the ground before him;
being not only ^^k some to the vanquished, but also even to the victorious
Macedonians: and the shameful punishments, and murders of his friends amongst
his cups; and the vanity of his supposed, and fained race. And if from that
time forward he had become a greater drunkard, more ^^u^l and more sudden in
his anger* (which are undoubted things amongst those that have written of him)
would not these vi^^s have much endamaged and hindered the Imperial virtues? Is
that to be feared which some light persons amongst the Greeks, (namely
favoring the glory of the Parthians against the Romain name) have accustomed
to say, that the people of Rome could never have sustained the majesty of the
name of Alexander: who I think was never known to them, not so much as by
^ame? Against whom some in the City of Athens, whiles they yet beheld before
their eyes the smoking ruin of Thebes, supplanted by the arms of the
Macedonians; dared in full assemblies to speak freely, as appears by the
writings of their Orators: would none amongst so many Roman Lords have
spoken freely? Let his greatness be of so great reckoning: yet shall it be but
the greatness of a man; gotten by the felicity of little more then ten years.
And they which extol him, for as much as the people of Rome, having not bin
overcome in any war, yet has had the worst in sundry battles; and that
Alexander had the better in all: they do not consider that they compare the
acts of one man, being yet young; with those of a people which has already
warred for the space of eight hundred years? Do we then marvel, if on this
side be more ages, then years on the other; that fortune has bin more
variable in this long space, then in the time of thirteen years? Let us rather
compare the fortune with fortune, of one man with another; and of Captain with
Captain. How many Romain Captains can I name, that never had contrary
fortune in battle? One may see in the Annals of the Magistrates, and in the
Calenders, the battles of the Consuls, and of the Dictatours; whose virtue,
and fortune never brought any displeasure to the people of Rome: And they are
more admirable then Alexander, or any other king; having not bin Dictatours
some of them above ten or twenty days; and none above a year. The leuies of
men have bin hindered by the Tribunes; they went often to war after the
season, and have bin sent back again before it, by reason of the Comices or
Parliaments. The year has bin spent in preparations for enterprises; The
temeritie or malice of a Colleague has caused hinderance, or damage; and when
matters have bin evil managed, he has bin succeeded by another* They have
taken new or ill disciplined soldiers. But certainly kings are not only free
from all hindrances* but also Lords over time and business: and with their
counsels they draw all things after them, and do not follow them. Then
invincible Alexander, had waged war against invincible Captains; and had put
in hazard the like pledges of fortune: but there had bin more danger on the
Macedonians side which had but one Alexander, not only subject to many perils;
but also seeking of dangers. The Romans had many equal to Alexander inglorie
and greatness of exploits which might live or die according to their destiny,
without the public interest.

I^ remains to compare armies with armies, either in number; or kind of men;
of arms, or multitude of auxiliaries. Then at that time by the number taken of
the City, they were found two hundred and fifty thousand heads. Wherefore in
the revolt of the allies from the name of the Latins, there were levied well
near ten legions of Citizens. Often times there were four or five armies at a
time in Hetruria, and Vmbria; the Gauls being also their enemies: They made
war in Samnia, and against the Lucans. Then afterward he should have found
all Italy, with the Sabines, Volsces, Eques, and all Campania, and a part of
Vmbria, and Etruria; the Piscenians, Marsians, Pelignians, Vestines, Apulians,
and all the coast of the Grecians, inhabiting on the inferior sea, from the
Thracians unto Naples, and Cannes: and from thence to Antia, and Hostia; either
mighty with the Romans; or subdued by them. He should have passed the sea
with his old Macedonian soldiers, not exceeding the number of thirty thousand
on foot, and four thousand on horseback, almost all Thessalians: for this was
his strength. If he had joined with them the Indians, and other Nations; they
would rather have bin a hinderance, then any help unto him. Moreover, the
Roman army in their own country might easily have new supplies; and the
army of Alexander would have waxen old: as it happened afterward unto Hannibal.

The arms of the Macedonians were the buckler, and the iaueling, called
Sarissa: The Romans used a shield, which was greater to cover the body, and a
spear somewhat rougher, either to strike or throw then the pike. The footmen
both of the one, and the other keeping firmly their ranks: but the immovable
Macedonian phalange was of one sort; and the Romain squadron manyfold, and
compounded of many parts; easy to sunder or join, as need required. Touching
their work, there is none like to the Romain, nor better to endure travail.
Alexander if he had bin overcome in one battle, would have made an end of the
war; But what arms could have quailed the Romain, whom Candie and Cannes
could not quail? Surely, if he had prospered in the first encounter, he would
have bin gone to the Persians, and Indians, and to the cowardly nations of Asia:
as the brute is, that Alexander the king of Epirus, feeling himself wounded to
death, said; comparing the state of the wars made in Asia by this young
Prince, with his.

When I call to mind, how in the first Punick war they fought twenty and
four years against the Carthaginians, with mighty fleetes by sea; I then
think that the age of Alexander could not have suffised for one war: and
peradventure the Carthaginian state being allied with the Romain by ancient
line, and the fear being alike against a common enemy, might have joined two
such mighty Cities in arms, and men; and then he might have bin entangled
with the Punick and Romain war at one time. The Romans assaied the
Macedonian enemy* not under Alexander, neither when the forces of Macedon were
whole and entier; but against Antiochus, ^hilip, and Perses, not only without
any loss, but also without any danger. Let it not be evil taken that I say,
and let the civil warre^ cease; we have never failed, neither in places of
advantage* or disadvantage, when soever we had to deal with an enemy on
horseback, or on foot, and in open war. The soldier laden with arms, may
well fear the man at arms on horseback, the arrows, and thick forests, the
crooked and uneasy ways but he has beaten back, and shall beat a thousand
bands more heavily armed, then those of the Macedonians, and of Alexander:
provided that the love of peace wherein we live, remain still amongst us, and
the care of civil concord.

A COMPARISON OF POMPEY THE great, with Alexander, Hercules, and Bacchus,
according to Pliny.
BUT it pertains to the honor of the Romain Empire, and not to the victory
of one only man, to recite all the titles, and triumphs of POMPEY the great,
having attained to the glory of the deeds, not only of Alexander the great,
but of Hercules also, and the father Bacchus. Sicile then being recovered,
where he began to do service to the common wealth, following the party of
Sylla; and then all Africa being subdued, and brought under obedience, and his
surname of (great) being taken therhence; being a Romain knight (that which
never before happened unto any) he was carried in a triumphant chariot; and by and
by going toward the West, and having erected many trophies in the mountains
Pyrenees; he reduced under obedience, eight hundred three score and sixteen
Towns, between the Alps and the extremities of the farthest Spain: thorough
the magnanimity of his courage, making no mention of Sertorius. And the civil
war being extinguished, which moved all the strange wars, he again led the
triumphant chariots being a Roman knight, and so many times Emperor and
Captain before he was soldier. Then being sent to all the seas, and beyond
toward the East; he brought back his titles to his Country: after the manner of
such as overcome in Combats, and sacred games; who are not only crowned them
selves, but crown their Country also; attributing to the City these honors
at the Temple of Minerua, which he dedicated of his pray: after this manner. Cn.
Pompey the great, Emperor: having ended the war, which endured thirty
years, having defeated, put to flight, slain, and taken to mercy two Millions
of men, four score and three thousand, eight hundred, forty and six; and
having sonke and taken, eight hundred forty and six ships; won a thousand
five hundred thirty and eight Towns, and Castles: and conquered the lands
from the marish of Meotis, to the red Sea, has made this vow: to the merit of
Minerua. Such is the summarie of his deeds toward the East. Concerning the
triumph which he made at the end of September, in the year when Marc.
Messala, and Marc. Piso were Consuls, the preface was such. When we had
delivered all the seacoast of pirates, and had restored the Empire of the sea
to the people of Rome, he triumphed of Asia, Pontus, Armenia, Paphlagonia,
Cappadocia, Cilicia, Suria, the Scythians, Jews, Albanians, Iberians, the Isle
of Crete, and Basternes: Moreover, of the kings Mithridates, and Tygranes. The
top of his glory, as he said himself in a great assembly, was this; That
having found Asia, the last of the provinces, and farthest, he made it one of
the midlemost unto his Country. If some one on the contrary would in like
manner recite the deeds of Julius Caesar, which seemed greater then his, he
should reckon all the world, which would be an infinite thing.

A COMPARISON OF JULIUS Caesar, with Alexander the great, according to Appian.
ALEXANDER, and JULIUS CAESAR, were both of them very ambitious, and warlike
above all others; ready and diligent to execute all enterprises: and impetuous
in dangers, even to the contemning of their own lives. And their fortune and
audacitie was no less helpful to them both, then their military discipline:
Of whom the one, namely ALEXANDER, went in the summer season, and thorough
countries destitute of waters, to the god Hammon: and having passed the gulf
of the sea of Pamphylia, by great hap, and felicity, he got the country* For
in his passage over the sea, it seemed that fortune withheld, and appeased the
raging thereof. Afterward at the beginning of winter, being on his way, he went
thorough the rough seas: even to the Indies. Moreover, being at the siege of a
Town, he was the first that got upon the wall, and then leaped down all alone
amongst his enemies; and having received thirteen wounds; yet remained
notwithstanding invincible in all things. He subdued many Nations in Europe;
and conquered the Greeks by arms, which were a very warlike nation, and
desirous of liberty; and who were never accustomed to be subject unto any
other: till such time as under color of presidence, they were obedient to
Philip, the father of Alexander, as to their Protector. He vanquished almost
all Asia; and as one might say, overcame all that he saw. And finally, as he
purposed in his mind to conquer the rest of the world, he died in the flower of
his age.

Touching JULIUS CAESAR, in the sharpest of winter, the Ionian sea was calm,
and nauigable unto him. He sailed also in the Ocean sea over against the Isle
of great Britain: and albeit he had not any knowledge of the coast, yet he
commanded his Pilots, who kept a loose off, to put in with their ships. And
in an other place, having by night time alone in a little boat espied the
passage, he bid the Master of the shipp set sail to the wind; and to put
more confidence in the fortune of CAESAR, then in the sea. He entered oftentimes
all alone on his enemies, when all his people quaked and trembled for feate. He
fought in pitched field against the Gauls thirty times, and subdued all that
Nation: which was so terrible to the Romans; that whereas by the law of the
Priests, and of the Ancients, they gave immunities to the men of arms from
service, they always added, except it were against the Gauls; in which case
there was no excuse, neither for Priest, nor aged person. Moreover, CAESAR
fighting near unto Alexandria, and seeing himself on a bridge, abandoned of
all his people, and environed on all sides with his enemies; he cast his purple
garment on the ground, and then leaped into the sea. And because his enemies
pursued him in the water, he kept a long time at the botome, without showing
himself, saving now and then, to take breath; till he drew near to one of his
ships: and then stretching out his hand, he made himself known; and by that
means was saved. In the civil wars (for fear as he said, but in truth for
ambition) he had against him many great and valiant Captains, of many great
armies, not only of Barbarians, but of Romans also: and he over came all his
enemies (which had surmounted all others in virtue and felicity) in one only
battle, or two. But yet notwithstanding, his armies were not always
invincible, as those of Alexander: for his Pretors, Cotta' and Titurius,
fighting against the Gauls, were shamefully defeated; and in Spain, Petreius,
and Afranius, enclosed his army in such sort, that they were in a manner
besieged. Also at Dyrrhachium, and in Libia, they were about to run away: and
again in great fear of the young Pompey. But in as much as concerns the
person of Caesar, he was ever without fear; and in the end victorious. He
enlarged the Romain Empire both by sea, and by land; from the Ocean sea, even
to the river Euphrates; as well by force and virtue, as by his clemency, and
benignity. His Empire was more firm and better founded then that of Sylla;
for he showed himself in effect a king to those which would not have had it
so, although he abstained from the name: and having undertaken a new war, he
died; as did Alexander. Both of them had armies almost alike: for their men
were quick and hardy; loving their chiefes; sharp and fierce in fight; often
disobedient, and ready to mutine against their Emperors; because of their
continual labor: and notwithstanding, after they were dead, they lamented,
and bewailed them greatly; and judged them worthy to be honored as Gods. They
were both strong of body, and excellent in beamie; both descended of the line
of Jupiter; The One of AEacus, and of Hercules; and the other of Anchises, and
Venus. Both of them were contentious, and rough to such as provoked them; but
easy to be reconciled: pitiful and gracious to their prisoners, and to those
which they had overcome; and liberal toward all people; without covetousness of
any thing, but of the victory. By such virtues and conditions, they both
attained (howbeit by diverse means) to such great principality. For when
Alexander began to conquer, he had already a kingdom, which Philip had greatly
increased* But Caesar of a private Citizen (though of a noble race) without any
great patrimony, and without money, attained to this great glory. Both of
them contemned the great signs that appeared of their death; and
notwithstanding, toward those that foretold their mishap, they showed no
tokens of displeasure: and their end was almost after one sort; because that
both of them had twice together unfortunate prognostications; and were either
of them at both times in great danger. For ALEXANDER in the Country of the
Oxydraces, having gotten upon the wall of the enemies, before all the
Macedonians, seeing himself alone, and abandoned of all, (because the ladders
were broken) of a great audaciousnes leaped down into the Town amongst his
enemies: where being grievously hurt in the stomach, and the neck, even as he
began to fall, was succored by his people; who for fear of losing him had
broken the gates. CAESAR also being in Spain against the young Pompey; and seeing
his men afraied in such sort, that they durst not fight; ran alone into the
midst of his enemies: and having received in his shield above two hundred shot,
sustained the brunt, till such time, as his men for shame, and fear of him,
came to succor and reskue him. And after this manner, their first evil
prognostication put them in danger of death: But the second, made them both to
die outright. For Apollodorus fearing the force of Alexander, and of
Hephestion; Pythagoras, (who was a great diuiner) after Apollodorus had made
sacrifice, having beheld the entrails of the beast that was sacrificed, bad
him that he should not stand in fear of them, for both of them should die
within a little time. And after that Hephestion was dead, Apollodorus fearing
least some should practice the death of Alexander, revealed unto him the
prognostication; whereof he made but a sport, and demanded of Pythagoras, what
was signified by that which he had seen; who answered him, that it betokened
death: whereat laughing as before, he praised Apollodorus as his friend, for
that he gave him warning; and the diuinour for the confidence and assurance
which he had in his art. The like almost happened unto CAESAR as he went unto the
senate, where he was slain; for when it was told him, that his unfortunate
sacrifice signified death; he answered, that the like befell him, when he was
in Spain: the diuinour then replying, that he was then also in great danger;
and that now the signs were more mortal, then they were then; to show, that
he had some confidence in the diuinour, he set him to sacrifice again, till
such time as he saw, that he tarried ouerlong in doing thereof, and then all
angry he went into the Senate; where he was slain. The like happened also to
ALEXANDER, coming back with his army out of the Indies into Babylon; for as
he drew near the City, the Chaldees warned him, that he should forbear for
that time to enter into the City; to whom he answered, reciting a verse to
this effect; Who is the good deuinour, that thinks well? Afterward being
admonished by the Chaldees, that if (whatsoever be fell) he would needs go into
the City with his army, he should not turn his face toward the West; but
should go round about the Town, turning on the East side; he was content to
please them therein: But finding a marish in his way, that hindered his passage,
being angry, and mocking at them, he turned toward the West, and went into the
Town: out of which being afterward gone forth, and come in a boat on the river
Euphrates, and after on that of Pallacora, into which Euphrates falls, to
certain great lakes which are at the mouth of these two rivers; in such sort
that they make the land of Assyria almost all nauigable, purposing to enclose
the mouth of those said rivers with a wall; he iested (as is said) at the
prognostication of the Chaldees; because he was come out of the city, and had
nauigated safe, and sound: But nevertheless, being entered into it again, he
ended his days there shortly after. So happened it unto CAESAR, who meeting in
the morning the very same day that he was slain with the diuinour, which had
foretold him that he should not escape the day of the Ides of March; said to
him laughing, that the Ides were come and yet notwithstanding, he was slain
the same day. By this means both of them made no account of the
prognostications; and yet toward the prognosticatours they showed not any
anger: and died both according to their prognostications. Moreover, they were
both very studious of virtues, and of the sciences; both in the Greek,
Latin, and strange languages: ALEXANDER took pains to understand the learning
of the Brachmanes, who are reputed the most learned amongst the Indians; as the
Mages are among the Persians. CAESAR also going thorough the kingdom of Egypt
with Cleopatra, labored to understand, and to know the sciences of the
Egiptians: whereby he afterward ordered many things wisely at Rome. For the
course of the year which was il ordained (by reason of the odd months and
days called Intercalares) because they took it according to the course of the
Moon, he altered it by the course of the Sun, as did the Egiptians. It
happened also unto CAESAR, that none of those which conspired his death escaped,
but were slain all by his successors; as ALEXANDER had also done to them that
had slain his father.

A COMPARISON OF JULIUS CAESAR and Augustus; with Romulus, and Num^.
AS ROMULUS had many troubles in the founding of Rome, and was entangled with
many wars, being constrained to fight with those that opposed themselves to
the foundation of his Town; And then NVMA succeeding, had leisure to assure
the increase thereof: So JULIUS CAESAR, having obtained by many travails and
dangers the Monarchy that he so much desired, and so earnestly affected, he
left it to OCTAVIAN his nephew and heir troubled with partialities: who had
means to confirm it, in fifty and six years which he reigned; and to
establish the Country in great concord: causing the Temple of Ianus to be shut
after the battle at Actium, as it had ^in in the time of Numa, that all
occasions of war might be extinguished, and quenched.

A COMPARISON OF ROMULUS with Cyrus, Theseus, Arsaces, and Semiramis; who
founded Cities, and kingdoms, or Monarchies.
AS CYRUS presently after his birth was exposed unto beasts to be devoured, and
left in the midst of a forest, where a bitch gave him suck; and was after saved
by a shepherd: so was ROMULUS also cast forth; and sucked a sheewolfe; and was
fed by a woodpecker: till such time as the shepherd Faustulus had found him,
and carried him home in safety. And in like manner, SEMIRAMIS was left in a
desert place, full of rocks, where she was fed by the birds for a season:
and afterward found by the shepherds, which nourished and brought her up.
THESEUS and ROMULUS were begotten by stealth, and not in lawful marriage; and
it was bruted of them both, that they were borne of the seed of the Gods:
founding the two noblest Cities of the world, the one Rome, the other Athens.
SEMIRAMIS also, who founded Babylon, was begotten out of lawful marriage. And
as ROMULUS whiles he spoke unto the people, vanished away suddenly; and it was
given out, that he was taken up into heaven, and that from thenceforth in steed
of a good king, he would be a gracious god unto the Romans: So SEMIRAMIS,
having given commaundment to all the governors of the provinces of the kingdom
of Assyria, that they should be obedient to her son, as to their king, she
vanished suddenly: and it was believed, that she was translated among the Gods.
The people of Rome builded a Temple unto JULIUS CAESAR, near unto the place
where his body was burned, after his death: and worshipped him as a God:
thinking that the Comet which arose then, was his soul translated into heaven.
And if it were lawful to mingle truth with fables, and divinity with
humanity; MOSES (which received so much grace and favor of GOD, as to speak
unto him, and to be chosen to bring the children of Israel out of the miserable
bondage of Pharaoh, and to give them the Law, and form of living) he was soon
after his birth exposed in a basket of bulrushes, near to the river Nilus, and
after miraculously saved by the kings daughter; who brought him up, and adopted
him as her son: And when he died, and was buried, his sepulture was never
afterward known of any. God by the mouth of his Prophet Esaias, calls CYRUS,
who founded the kingdom of Persia, his king, two hundred years before he was
borne: promising to hold his right hand, and to help him to take the strong
Cities; to subdue mighty Nations; and to humble the kings of the earth: And
chose him amongst all the Princes of the Gentiles to reedifie the Temple of
Jerusalem: and to restore the people of Israel to their Country, wherhence
they had bin driven out a long time. ARSACES having conquered and established
the kingdom of the Parthians, was no less celebrated of them, then Ninus and
Semiramis of the Assyrians; Cyrus of the Persians; Alexander of the
Macedonians; Romulus, Julius Caesar, and Augustus of the Romans. In
remembrance and honor of whom, the succeeding kings which reigned in that
state were called of his name Arsacides, as the Romain Emperors are called
Cesars, and Augustes, in the honor and memory of Julius Caesar, and Augustus.

A COMPARISON OF THE ROMAIN warfare, with the Parthian, Carthaginian, and
Assyrian.
THE military exercise of the Carthaginians was principally in matter of the
sea; By reason whereof they made little reckoning of footmen; but gave some
order for horsemen: because they were served by strangers, and mercenaries. The
Parthians used not any footmen, neither fought in any order; but by skirmishes
confusedly, and uncertainly. On the contrary, the principal force of the
Romans consisted in their footmen, and they fought close in rank and order;
never forsaking that place wherein they were appointed: resolute to overcome,
or to die. The great champaignes and large countries, which the Parthians
inhabited far from the seas, and where there are but few rivers, being far
distant one from an other, were very fit for their horsemen to run swiftly,
from one side to the other: Where on the contrary, the Romans being laden with
arms, could not keeping their order, make have without damage, in such places
where they found neither vittailes nor waters. Who by military discipline and
exercise surmounted the multitude of the Gauls, the greatness of the Germains,
the strength of the Spaniards, the riches and cauteles of the Africans; the
wisdom and subtelties of the Grecians: albeit they were less in all things
then these Nations, saving in the art, and exercise of war. And having gotten
the seignorie of a great part of the world, when their Empire was mounted up to
the highest of the wheel, in the time of Augustus; it began then to turn, and
to go downwards: when the Citizens of Rome were left out of the hosts which
the Emperors gathered; and that they relied on the force of the mercenaries;
and of such as they had before overcome. And howbeit the great virtues which
were in Augustus, and his good wit, preserved and vpheld the Majesty of the
Empire, as long as he lived; yet his successors learned of him to intertaine
others in pay, besides the Romans; as Goths, Lombards, Germains, Frenchmen,
Spaniards, and others; whereof came the ruin of Rome: for as much as the
Emperors following kept an host of strangers, called the Pretorian, near the
walls of the City of Rome: which manner, albeit at the first it seemed for
their advantage; yet in the end it was their overthrow. For this number of
soldiers disposed of the Imperial dignity at their pleasure; being armed in
the place against naked, and unarmed people. Also the other armies which were
in Gaul, Germany, Pannonie, Suria, Afric, and elsewhere, would be of
authority; whiles the one of them named one to be Emperor, and an other named
another: in so much that there were sometimes two or three prete^ding at one
time: who thinking each to consume the other, consumed the Empire; which had
cost so much in the obtaining. But considering that almost all the Emperors
were of strange Nations; as also the soldiers which had created them: that
made them to care less for the conseruing of it, then if they had bin borne of
the City. Then as well those which were elected Emperors, as they which had
chosen them, marched against the City, with the same mind, as they would
against their enemies: doing in these changes many spoils and murders; as well
on the Emperors themselves; as on the Senators, and other great persons.
Whereas if the institution which the Romans had, in the time whiles their
virtue lived, had bin still maintained, (which was to make their wars with
their own people, and not to hire strangers; nor to admit their neighbors or
allies into their camp in greater number then they were themselves) their
Empire had not bin divided; neither transported out of their hands: neither
their City many times destroyed and abandoned, as it has bin. For by
maintaining their former manner of fighting, they should have avoided all these
inconveniences; and have comen always happily to a good end of all their
enterprises: as they did as long as they were served of their own Citizens.

Moreover, the Romans failed greatly in the intertaining of their ordinary
armies; and prolonging of general military charges: which fault was a great
furtherance to the overthrow of the common wealth, and destruction of the
Empire. But the kings of Assyria changed every year their armies; and their
Lieutenants general: providing wisely by such changing, that the soldiers and
Captains, could not so readily unite themselves one with the other, to
conspire against them. For the people that are continually exercised in arms,
and hardened unto labor, are more courageous; and the Captains which command
always over the same armies, make them partial to themselves; and draw them
oftentimes from the obedience of their common wealth, or the service of their
Prince: as it has bin discoursed more at large before, speaking of the
Assyrians.

Besides, they yet made an other fault, no less then the former: changing the
simplicity of the Romans, into the proud ceremony of the barbarous kings.
For whereas the first Emperors accomodated themselves to the Roman liberty,
not differing from other Lords, but by authority, and obedience which was
borne toward them: went unto the wars; conducted their armies; conquered
Countries; took fortresses; bearing all travails indifferently with their men
of arms; whom they called fellow soldiers: the later thinking, that to live
in delights and idleness, was the sovereign bliss and happiness, shut up
themselves in their palaces; and separated themselves as much as they could
from the sight of men; seeing and hearing little; making of themselves Gods
invisible, or seldom seen; and would be worshipped for such; to the end to be
more venerable, after the manner of the kings of Assyria, Persia, and Parthia:
and took a crown of laurel, a diadem of gold, a seat and scepter of Iuorie,
hose, girdles, and other apparel laden with precious stones; and going forth
in this pompous habit, environed with xxiiij. Lictours with fagots, and axes,
and with the train of their pretorian soldiers, they caused a torch or
firebrand to be carried before them* and gold land which was brought from far,
to be sowed in their way where they should pass, disdayning to touch the bare
ground, whereon other men did tread: In such sort, that desiring to seem more
then men, they became less then men; their arrogancy on the one side making
them odious* and their cowardice on the other side contemptible: and by the
evil opinion which was held of their life, and little power, they gave
occasion to men to conspire against them, to kill them, or drive them away.

A COMPARISON OF THE LEAR ning, and other knowledge of the Romans; with that
of the Greeks, Egiptians, and Chaldees.
Having compared the Romain power, and warfare, with the most famous of the
former Nations: we will after the same manner also compare the Learning of the
Romans, with that of the Greeks, Egiptians, and Chaldees. As learning then
came first from the Barbarians to the Grecians; and from the Grecians to the
Italians; by occasion hereof the Italians in the deep sciences, have always
used the inventions of strangers: or if of themselves they have written any
thing, there has bin but little soundnes therein. PLINY writing his natural
history, put his trust in those autors, of whom he received the matters:
without verifying of them. CORNELIUS CELSVS a man of reasonable understanding,
having written of al sciences, has only carried away this praise, to be
reputed to know al things: and in that which he has written of Physic, there
is nothing to be accounted of, but the Latin, such as was in his time. The most
that is praised in SENECA is, that he sharply reprehendeth the vices; showing
himself for the rest little Methodical; and somewhat negligent in those
matters which he handles: relying on such as gathered them; for the truth of
them. CICERO, who boasts that he has joined Philosophy, and eloquence of
pleading together (which no Grecian had done before him) he is reckoned a
better Orator, then a Philosopher: having handled certain places of
philosophy rather for ostentation, then for doctrine or institution. And MARC
VARRO (who is held the most learned of the Romans) began Philosophy, more to
stir up others, then to instruct them: as the same Cicero witnesses.

VIR GIL modestly aduowing the Greeks to be better Orators, Poets, Painters,
Statuaries, and wrestlers; and the Chaldees, and Egiptians better Astrologers,
Geometricians, and Arithmeticians; and that other strangers did excel in other
disciplines: he affirms, that the true art of the Roman is, to subdue the
proud* and to be pitiful to those that submit themselves. Cicero speaks more
bravely, not consenting to make the Latins equal with the Greeks and others:
but prefers them in many things, as in the preface of his Tusculans, where
he writes thus. My Judgment has always bin that our men either have of
themselves better invented then the Grecians; or have bettered whatsoever they
borrowed of them: for we have their manners, and fashions of life, their
domestical, and familiar affairs better, and seemlier ordered. And touching
the common wealth, our ancestors have framed and governed it with much better
Laws and institutions. What shall I say of warfare? in which virtue our men
have much excelled; and yet more in good discipline. In regard of other things
which they have gotten by nature, and not by learning; they ought not to be
compared neither with the Greeks; nor with any other nation. Where was ever
such gravity, such constancy, such courage, honesty, faith, and such excellent
virtue in all kinds, as may be compared to that of our ancestors? Greece
surmounted us before in learning, and all kind of knowledge: wherein it was
easy to overcome such as made no resistance. For the Poets being the most
ancient in learning amongst the Grecians (considering that Homer, and Hesiodus
were before the building of Rome; and Archilochus in the reign of Romulus) we
have Poetry more lately. For about four hundred and ten years after Rome was
built, Liuie published a comedy, when C. Claudius the son of him that was
blind, and Mark Tuditan were Consuls; a year before the birth of Ennius: who
was auncienter then Plautus and Neuius. The Poets then were but of late known,
and received of us: although it be written in the originaries, how people
being at the table, were wont to sing to the flute the virtues of renowned
parsons. Notwithstanding the oration of Cato shows that this thing was but of
small account; wherein he reproched unto Marcus Nobilis that he carried with him
Poets into his province: because this Consul had Ennius with him into Etolia,
as we know. Wherefore by how much the less honor they gave unto Poets; their
studies were so much the less. But this notwithstanding; if any endewed with
great wits have given themselves thereunto, they have no less answered the
glory of the Greeks. If Fabius a man of great nobility had bin praised for
painting well; it is to be thought there had bin amongst us many Polycletes, and
Parrhasies. Honor nourishes arts, and all are stirred up to study with glory;
and those things always remain untouched which of al men are reproved. The
Greeks esteemed much of the knowledge of singing, and playing on Instruments:
wherefore it is said that Epaminondas (in my opinion the first man of Greece)
could very well play on the Lute. And Themistocles some years before having
refused the harp, was accounted the more ignorant: Then the Musicians
flourished in Greece, and every one learned Music; and he which was ignorant
therein, was accounted the less learned. Geometry was in great honor amongst
them; and therefore there was no thing more respected, then the Mathematickes:
But we have moderated these arts by the vtility of numbering, and measuring. On
the contrary we have eftsoons received the Orator; howbeit not learned at
the first; yet apt to speak: and afterward learned. For it is written, that
Galba, African, and Lelius were learned; and Cato studious, who was before
them. Then Lepidus, Carbo, and the Gracches. And finally coming to our age; we
have had such stor^ of learned men, that we yield not much, or rather nothing
at all, to the Grecians. Philosophy has bin omitted until this time (having
not yet received any light from Latin letters) which we must beautify, and
bring to light: wherein we ought to take so much the more pains, because it is
said that there are many Latin books written inconsiderately, by good and
honest parsons; but yet not sufficiently learned.

The same Cicero in his fourth Tusculane; As in many places (says he) I have
accustomed to admire the good wits and virtues of our men; so I chieflly admire
them in these studies: which being very lately desired of them, have bin
transported out of Greece into this City. For the auspices, ceremonies,
comices, appellations, counsels of the fathers, the orders of footmen, and
of horsemen, and of the whole warsare being from the beginning of the city by
royal laws, and institutions divinely ordained: Surely then when the common
wealth was delivered from the domination of kings, it made an admirable
increase, and an incredible course in all excellence. Considering then the
studies of learning; many reasons make me think that they have also bin
brought from elsewhere: and not only bin desired; but also conserved, and
refined. How many and what excellent Poets have here bin in a little time? and
what Orators? In such sort as it appears that our men have easily attained
to all things when they have bin desirous of them. The study of wisdom has
bin of ancient time amongst them: Yet do I not find any that may be called
wisemen before the age of Lelius, and Scipio. While they were yet but young, I
see that Diogenes the Stoic, and Carneades the Academick, were sent
Ambassadors by the Athenians to our senate; and how that neither of them
before had handled any public affairs; and the one was a Cyrenian, and the other
a Babylonian: and that they never had bin taken out of the schools and chosen
unto this charge; if at that time there had bin any learning in those that were
chief of the city. Who writing in diverse professions, some of them handled
civil Law; others made Orations or Histories, representing the doctrine of
good life; the most venerable of all others: and more by example of life then
by writing. Then in this true, and elegant Philosophy (which began in Socrates,
and has remained amongst the Peripateticks and Stoics, which say the self
same thing, but after a diverse manner, and the Academickes endeavoring to decide
their differents) there are not any Latin writers; or if there be some, they
are but a small number: as well by reason of the greatness of the matters; as
of the hindrances of men; or because they thought them not to be approved of
the ignorant.

A COMPARISON OF THE LATIN authors, with the Greek: and namely of Cicero with
Demosthenes.
QVintilian who came after Cicero, comparing the Latin authors with the
Greek: First touching Heroical poesy, he gives the second praise unto
Virgil, singularly admiring the happy, and easy natural vain of Homer; and
in Virgil his diligence, and curious ymitation. In an Elegy he likes well of
Tibullus and Propertius, whom he compares with the Greek Elegiacks.
Concerning the Lyrickes, he accounts Horace the chief of all the Latins, and
almost alone deserving to be read. He confesses, Pindarus is not ymitable.
That the Latin Tragedy attaineth not to the gravity of Sophocles, and
Euripides. And the Comedy yet less to the Attick grace, and eloquence. No
Latin Poet has made any Iambicke or Dithyrambicke work. The Satyr is
altogether Latin.

The Latins were happier in History, then in Poesy: Salust being nothing
inferior to Thucydides, and Liuie to Herodotus.

But touching Eloquence Cicero makes this judgment of Demosthenes, and
himself. Demosthenes perfecteth many things; and I begin them. You may judge
that he is able, and that I am willing and that he declares him self
according as the matter requires. But he was excellent, and succeeded unto
excellent personages; and there were many great Orators in his time. We
should have done very much in coming in any sort to that which we pretended,
in the place where as Antony thought, never any eloquent man had bin heard.

It is certain that these two Orators, were very like in their Inventions,
and dispositions; keeping the same order, and the same manner of dividing,
preparing, and proving: But they were different in elocution, and in
affections. One is more strict, the other more abundant: The one concludes in
fewer words; The Other disputes more at large. The One is more sharp: and the
other for the most part grave. One can take nothing from the one; nor add any
thing to the other. In brief, there is more diligence in Demosthenes: and more
nature in Cicero. It was forbidden in Athens to use any proemes or epilogues;
and it was not lawful in peroring to move affections; By reason whereof
Demosthenes herein is inferior: But the Greek tongue which he used, is richer
and pleasanter then the Latin.

Moreover he that would enquire what personages they were, and how they lived;
he shall find their lives, and fortunes very like. First of al, both the one
and the other came from mean place, to great authority. They were both
banished their cities; and after called back with great honor. They
undertook quarrelles against mighty Lords; into whose hands they fell: and
died with the liberty of their Citizens. The excellent Poets living at rest
and solitary, being removed from public affairs, have ended more happily.
But besides their foresaid similitudes, and differences; I find that
Demosthenes employed wholly all the sense and science which he had either of
nature, or gotten by art of Rhetoric; and that he surpassed in force, and
virtue of eloquence all the Orators of his time; and in gravity, and
magnificence of style, all those which wrote only for show, and ostentation;
and in exquisite art, and diligence, all the Sophisters of Greece, and the
Masters of Rhetoric. And that Cicero was as well seen in many sciences, as a
statesman might be; being often employed in private, and public* civil, and
criminali affairs: as may be known by many Philosophical books which he
has written of his own invention; after the manner of the Academick
Philosophers: and seen by his Orations; in which he sought occasions, as he
went, to show that he was learned. Also in their styles may be found some
shadow of their natural disposition; for the style of Demosthenes has nothing
tending to sport or mirth; but is every where stricte; and there is nothing in
it but pricketh to the purpose, sauouring of great travail, with austerity and
sharpenes of nature: whereas Cicero used oftentimes to jest, even almost like a
Iester or pleasant companion; and tourning in his pleadings matters of
consequence into game, and laughter, because it came somewhat to his purpose; he
sometimes forgot the duty belonging to a personage of gravity, such as he
was. Moreover, one may see in their works and compositions, that the one
speaks soberly in his own praise, so that none could take offense thereat;
and never but on just occasion, in regard of some matter of consequence; and is
otherwise very modest and sparing to speak of him self: Contrariwise the
unmeasurable repetitions of the self same things which Cicero used commonly in
his orations, showed an excessive desire of glory. And moreover he praised not
only his own deeds; but also the orations, which he had written or
pronounced: as if he had bin to contest with some scholasticall Rhetorician;
and not to redress and reform the people of Rome. For to desire glory for his
fair speaking, or (which is worse) to beg it, is an act of a base mind. And
therefore in this part, we must confess that Demosthenes is more grave, and
more magnanimous: who himself said that al his eloquence was but a rote gotten
by long exercise; which had yet need of Auditors that would hear it
patiently: and that he esteemed them foolish and impertinent (as indeed they
are) which glorify themselves.

THE ROMAN KNOW ledge in Law.
COncerning the knowledge of the LAWS (which held the second place in Rome next
after eloquence) it has bin wholly Romain, and Italian. For in other well
ordered cou^treyes, and commonweals it is not found that there were any that
made, only profession of civil Law. The Athenians, and Lacedaemonians (from
whom the Laws were brought unto Rome) never used any such: neither the
Egyptians, Assyrians, Persians, Carthaginians, Macedonians, Parthians, and
others whose seigniories were mighty and well governed.

These men understanding the rights and customs, which particular men used in
the city, and the styles of pleading, they gave counsel touching mean
matters, and showed how causes were to be handled, and Process to besued out;
the manner of prosecuting actions, of proposing exceptions, demanding delays,
licenses, and defaults, framing of complaints, answers, replies, saluations,
aduertisments; of making inquestes, and informations; judging definitiuely; and
executing of judgments: whose authority came to be so great at Rome, and
thoroughout Italy that there was made no testament, obligation, bargain,
transaction* contract, rescission, or other deed of importance; without
communicating of it to them. And they came not only to them about cases
concerning the civil Law: but also for all affairs, and duties. They gave
counsel to the Emperors, to the senate, to the assemblies of people, and in
their friends causes: They were called on, and used both in peace, and war. By
reason where of they were called Prudentes wisemen; and there art
Iurisprudentia, the wisdom of the Law; for as much as their profession could
not be conducted without great wisdom: without having seen, heard, red, and
known much; without knowledge of antiquity; without understanding the common
disposition of mankind; the nature of right, and of equity; without observing
the manners of many nations, and especially of their own* They wrote infinitely
in their professions: their books being abolished by the Emperor Justinian;
after he had caused the Pandects to be gathered that are yet remaining. Which
has bin a great loss both to this art and to the Latin tongue; none of the
ancient writers being left but certain rags, and shreddes evil sowed
together, and disposed. Their true office was to expound the meaning of the
Pretorian edicts, constitutions of the Senate, decrees of the people,
ordinances of princes, and other laws; to show the reason of each of them; to
advertise which of them ought to be kept* or renewed, or abrogated; according
to the times, places, parsons, and other circumstances.

A COMPARISON OF THE LATIN tongue, with the Greek.
ALl the Latin authors have complained of the want of their tongue, confessing
it to be poor in respect of the Greek: in the which more persons had written
and of mo things. Cicero in his Tusculanes, says that the Greek tongue is
richer then the Latin; and in his first De finibus, that the Latin was so far
from being poor, that it is richer the^ the Greek: albeit that writing of
philosophy, he finds enough to do to make new words correspondent to the
Greek, peculiar to every art, or speculation; and affected by the philosophers:
being the first, or at lest he that has invented most; tourning some by
translations, and others in such terms as he could. Theodore Gaza (a Greek by
nation, but very well seen both in the Greek, and Latin tongues, as any that
has bin sithence the restitution of learning) affirms that the Latin tongue
is sufficient to represent every Greek word and sentence; and that they which
cannot turn the Greek into Latin, do endeavor to shadow their ignorance by
the poorenes of the tongue. Notwithstanding Quintilian does not dissemble that
scarsitie whereinto the ancients were fallen; by the scrupulous severity,
which they used in their speech: And without difficulty acknowledges Latin,
to be rougher in pronounciation; and harder to join or derive words: wherein
the Greek is happy and pleasant. The Greek, and the Latin, have their
sillables long and short; and versification alike: which other tongues have not
so well. The Greek has articles; and the Latin has not: but uses names
without any welt or guard (as one may say) or any kind of addition: and we must
not marvel thereat, considering that Homer (who in verse excels all
others) put articles unto few names: as if they were handles for vessels that
had need of them, or plumes upon morions. Cicero in his Oration for the Poet
Archias, says that the Greek writings were read amongst all nations; and the
Latin were shut up in very straight limits: On the contrary, Plutarch in his
Platonicall questions affirms that in his time, almost all the world used the
Romain language: The Cardinal Adrian, who has written of the Latin tongue,
gives it four times; the most ancient, the ancient, the perfect, and the
imperfect: fetching the most ancient from the beginning of Rome, to the time
of Liuius Andronicus; and the ancient from this Liuie, unto Cicero, in whose
time it was perfect; And the imperfect, after Cicero; for incontinently under
Augustus it began to lose his natural purity, and elegancy; and perished by
little and little with the majesty of the Empire: Till at last they left
speaking it, and in steed thereof succeeded the Italian, which is spoken at this
day. Likewise the Greek flourished, with the learning and power of Greece, till
the time of Philip, and Alexander: when it fell from his natural propriety, and
elegancie: diminishing from that time forward with the liberty of the country:
and engendring by process of years the vulgar Greek of this present, being
mingled with the Roman, Turkish, and Arabian: sithence that the country has
bin possessed by the Turks Mahometists: whereof we have largely spoken in the
discourse of Tongues.

The end of the seventh Book.
OF THE RELIGION, POWER, KNOW ledge, and other excellence of the Arabians, or
Sarasens; and other Mahometists. The Eigth Book.
AS the progress which arms, learning, and piety, have had hitherto, has
bin summarily declared in the two last books: hence forward shall be another
proposed, of the religion, power, knowledge, and other excellence of the
Arabians or Sarasens; which requires no less deduction then the former. In
the mean time whiles the Empire was afflicted by the barbarous nations, and
Christendom troubled with heretics; the Sarazens transported to themselves
the honor of arms, and of learning. For whereas the church divided by the
Arrians, Nestorians, Manichees, Donatists, and Pelagians; had lost much of her
integrity: Then the Empire in the East being vexed by the Persians; in the
West, and South, by the Goths, Vandales, Alanes, Hunnes, and Lumbards; and
consequently the light of learning extinguished: in such a confusion the people
grieved, and wearied with so many troubles; harkned the more easily unto
Mahomet, when he began to publish his law. Which was so plausible, in hatred of
the former contentions, that it was eftsoons received into many regions. In so
much that the followers thereof have by succession of time possessed both Asia,
and Afric, and a great part of Europe; making themselves Masters of the best
Countries of the world; out of which they banished the gospel, to give place
to their Alcoran: which the greatest part of mankind now follows; speaking
the Arabian tongue in the affairs of religion, and the disciplines, even as
Latin is used in these parts. So having ended so many conquestes, and subdued,
innumerable nations, they applied their selves to learning; becoming by the
quicknes and sharpnes of their wits: very learned in philosophy, Physic,
Astrology, Geometry, and other arts. By means whereof they got in their turn
great reputation, in the exercise of arms, and knowledge of learning. And as
that unmeasurable power of theirs extended into diverse countries; so have they
had many valiant Captains and famous princes for the conduct of their
affairs. But there is none more renowned then MAHOMET, the author of the
Alcoran, and founder of the Sarazen Empire; who being borne of an obscure, and
poor pare^tage, came to great riches, power, and authority, making himself
the lawgiver of mankind; and making the people believe, that he was the
prophet and messenger of God. His successors were Eubocara, Homar, Odmen, Hali,
Alharen, Moaui, Iesid, and the Caliphes, who prospered merueilously in a little
time with those beginnings which Mahomet had given them; spreading far and wide
together with their dominion, the Arabian language, and religion: abolishing in
those countries which they conquered, the Greek, Latin, Punick, and Persian:
which was a wonderful strange mutation. And as they have bin excellent
warriors; so have they bin no less studious; and learned. For they have had
Auicen, a man most learned in their Theology and in all sciences: Auerrois, an
expou^der of Aristotle; whom those of his time, and which have come after him,
have had in such admiration, that they have almost equalled him with Aristotle
himself; giving him by excellency the name of the Commentatour: Auempace,
Algazel, Benbitar, Abaren, and Siphac Philosophers: Mesue, Rasis whom they call
Almansor, Serapio^, and Zoar surnamed the wise, Physicians: Albumasar,
Auenzoar, Gebber, Alpharab; Alphragan, Hali, and Rodoan, Astrologers. All which
flourished almost at one time, and have bin followed by many others, as
Persians, Syrians, Egiptia^s, Africans, and Spaniards writing in the Arabian
tongue: which remain unknown to us by ignorance of the tongue, and diversity
of their religion. They say that Rhetoric is not needful, because that nature
plainly, and in few words declares her conceyts: and albeit they have (as
other nations) many Historiographers, yet they make but small account of
histories, especially the Turks; saying that men dare not write the truth of
princes while they are living, and that after their decease the memory of them
is lost. There are few Architects amongst the^, because they give not
themselves much to building, the most part of them dwelling under tents and
pauilions. The others build no houses above one story in height like to
doue-houses, as in Turkey, mocking at Christians that are so curious in their
houses, as if they were to dwell in them perpetually: or if they do build, they
are temples, bridges, stoues, baths, hospitals, and other such like public
edifices: caring little for the private, which they commonly make of wood, and of
earth, and seldom of squared stone: such vanity being reproved by their Law.
They have yet fewer painters, statuaries, cutters, grauers, and caruers of
images, for fear of Idolatry (which they abhor) detesting by reason thereof the
pictures and counterfeits of all living creatures. They have Poets enough,
which paint out their amarous passions, and such other fantasies. The Alcoran
it self is written in meeter, and is altogether poetical. On which is grounded
not only their religion, but their politic government, Justice, and warfare is
ruled thereby. Wherefore al Talismans, Basis, Subasis, Cadis, and Cadilesquets
are bound to understand it, and as near as they can to accomodate their
sentences thereunto. The princes themselves have Muphtis, and Patriarchs near
unto the^, to take heed to their decrees, and ordinances; and to repeal them
if they be found repugnant to their religion. For other things, they follow the
laws of the Sultans, and the customs of the country, by reason whereof they
have no other civil law, nor Lawiers. The christians which have written against
Mahomet, do call him a diabolical magician, a lier, a deceiuer; and say that he
was the son of a Pagan; and borne of a Jew; a thief, a whore-monger, and a
cunning contriuer: an idolater of religion; poor of fortune; presu^ptious of
understanding; ignorant of learning; and renowned for vilanies. That at his
beginning he was a Merchant, and a driuer of Camels; and afterward being
enriched by the marriage of a rich widow, became a Captain, and had charge of
the Arabians under the Emperor Heraclius. In which service he found means to
get him power and authority. For whereas the four thousand Arabians, which
served Heraclius had required to have the military garment given them, as well
as to the other men of war; an Eunuche who was Treasurer at this unhappy time
answered them, that the garment which was reserved for the Romain Souldior
ought not to be given to dogs. Which they taking in scorn, fell to mutiny,
and with the same disdain incensed the rest of that nation. To whom Mahomet
joining him self provoked them farther, and confirmed them in this rebellion.
Then was he chosen the chiefetaine by one part of them, as in sedicions they
are wont to be chosen, that support the multitude in their evil counsels, and
blame their superious. Many despised in him the baseness of his stock, and
poverty of his former life. But to warrant himself from this contempt (as it
is easy toward the simple, and ignorant multitude,) he used from that time
forward a pretext of divinity in his actions; calling himself no more a
Captain chosen by military favor, but the prophet and messenger of almighty
God: to thend that under color of this imposture, al men should obey him the
more willingly. And whereas he fell oftentimes of the falling evil, to excuse
himself of this disease, he affirmed that the Angel Gabriel spoke unto him,
and brought him the Law: which he published, as spoken by the mouth of God, and
revealed from above; albeit it be full of iniquity and of lies. He gave men to
understand that God first sent Moises unto mankind, then JESUS CHRIST with
miracles, and because they had not obeyed him, that he sent at that time
Mahomet with strong hand, to the end that such as were not moved by miracles
should be constrained by arms. And that the Mosaical, and Christian law being
to rigorous, he was sent to soften them, by the publication of more easy
precepts. That there should come no other messenger, and that he was the last,
that was foretold by Christ in the ghospel. And so has established a new sect
and most pernicious, mingled of the old, and new testament, whereof he has
perverted many places, endeavoring to subvert the holy Trinity, and to abolish
the divinity of Jesus Christ, and the mysteries of his death, passion, and
resurrection.

But those of his side, which will be called Musulmans do speak much otherwise,
and do exalt him infinitely: as the most excellent parsonage of the world,
having maliciously invented many lies of his pretended excellency, to make him
the more admirable, and to draw the more people to his belief. Amongst others
they have dreamed of a prophetical light, which appeared first in Adam, then
was continued from prophet to prophet, until Mahomet: shyning in their faces
even as the sun in fair weather, and the moon when it is full. That as soon
as a new prophet was conceived, it passed from the husband to the wife, and the
child borne of her; and remained with him, til being waxen great he had
engendered another. As soon then says he, as Adam was created, as he stood up
his brain shaked, and made a noise as the leaves do which are shaken with the
wind; and that Adam wondering thereat, God said unto him; The sound which thou
have heard, and whereat thou meruailest, is the sign of the prophets, and
messengers which shall preach my commandments: and therefore thou shall take
heed, that the same seed of light be not put, but into a clean womb. And when
he had engendered Seth (who is the father of the prophets, and the chief of the
messengers of God) at the instant that light passed from the face of Adam, into
the face of Eve; who while she was with child, shined in such sort* that the
birds of the air, and beasts of the earth, wondered at the beauty and
brightness of her face. Adam himself was astonished therewith. Every day the
Angels saluting her, brought her odours of Paradise, till such time as she
brought forth Seth alone; because that before she always had two at a burden,
male, and female; brother and sister. Seth being borne, carried in his face the
shyning of that light, which before his mother bare: which light remained
straight between heaven and earth, the Angels descending thereby upon Seth,
and crying always; Rejoice thou earth worthy of the light of Mahomet: on him
be the prayer of God, and the salvation. When his father Adam drew near to
his end, he declared unto him by his Testament the mystery of the light; and
the genealogy of the prophets. Then descended Gabriel accompained with lxx.
thousand Angels, bearing every one of them a white leaf, and a pen which
signed the writing, saying that, His voice was exalted, and that the will of
God was, that the order of the prophetical generation should be continued. So
Seth received the writing signed, and was clothed by the Lord, with a doublered
garment shyning as the sun, and soft as the violet flower. They affirmed that
this light passed after this manner from Adam to Seth, from Seth to Enoch; and
from Enoch by continual succession to Noe, and Sem; then to Abraham, at whose
birth two lights coming out of the East, and the west, met together in the
midst of the earth, enlightening the whole world in one: and the Angels were
heard singing, that it was the light of the Prophet Mahomet, who should be
borne of his seed; whose word should be in the virtue of God. This light
passed from Abraham to Ismael, and from Ismael to Amofre, to whom it seemed,
that their grew forth of his loins a tree, whose branches shyned, and reached
unto heaven: and that by the boughs thereof there went white men up and down.
He understood of the deuinours, that this high tree signified a great lignage,
which should lighten the earth, and clime up into heaven. From Amofre it came
to Abdamutalib the Graundfather of Mahomet, a personage replenished with all
virtue; and when there was any drought, as soon as this light shined on the
earth, it presently rained there. An elephant prostrated himself before him,
and speaking with the voice of a man said: (Salvation be on you, and on the
light that shines out of your reins. Dignity, fame, honor, and victory be on
you, and that there should proceed forth of him a king greater then all the
kings of the earth. An other time sleeping on the stone which was placed by
Abraham in his Oratorie at Mecha, he dreamed that there issued out of his
reins a chain parted in four, on one side stretched toward the East, on
the other side toward the west; upwards as high as heaven, and downwards to the
botome of the depth: and that suddenly it was all wound up together, and then
changed into a great herb, green and flourishing, such as was never seen
amongst men. That in the mean time there stood by him two old men; toward
whom tourning he asked them who they were; and they confessed that the one of
them was Noe, and the other Abraham, prophets of the most high God; and told him
that out of his reins should come a man, by whom the heaven and earth should
believe, and all nations should be converted unto Justice and truth. The
Magicians Sorcerers, and deuinours conspired against Abdalle the son of
Abdamutalib, and father of Mahomet, for to kill him: because that al their
practice was to be overthrown by his seed: and to him was given a Tutour, as a
defender; who seemed as a man, but was none: who perpetually watching over him,
turned away al their mischievous devises. Also the Jews conspired against
him, and he was preserved from them by lxx. Angels, which seemed men, and were
not. Leaving all other women he wedded Emina; and when the time was come which
God had foreseen, and prescribed, to put finally into the world the light of
the prophet Mahomet, the voice of the Lord was heard, saying: The gates of
Paradise should be opened, and the innermost of his secret manifested: for it
pleases me this night to transport the light of my prophet from the reins of
Abdalle into the womb of Emina, and that it come into the world. This being
done, as Abdalle the Judge and Lord of the Arabians, went unto the house of
prayer, he perceived a great light, to lighten from his house up toward
heaven: and by and by he dyed; leaving his wife with child. And within twelve
days after, Mahomet was borne; Then all Idols fell, and became black. All
kingdoms were destroyed from the East unto the West, and not one stood
upright. Lucifer was cast into the bottom of the sea where he remained forty
days; and with much a do came out therehence: then calling all his fellows
he showed them that Mahomet was borne; who would take away all their power: and
therefore they should determine to corrupt the world with hypocrisy,
riotousnes, and pleasure. At the same hour God made it to be understood
thoroughout heaven and earth that he had a faithful, and happy friend borne
unto him. His mother witnessed, that in bearing and bringing him forth in her
childbirth she felt not any pain at all; and that from above there were sent
to nourish him, flocks of birds, with beakes of Emerauldes, and wings of
hyacinth, who lifting up their eyes from the East toward the West, and looking
toward the child, perceived that he was almost fledged; and held out his
hands, as it were to pray unto God. There came also a man clothed in white
raiment, presenting him with three keys like unto pearls; which he took,
namely the key of victory, the key of the laws and the key of prophecy: And
afterward came three persons with their faces shyning; of whom the first
carried a cawderon of Emeraudes, with four handles of pearls well
appropriated; and offering it unto him said: This is the world and his four
corners; East, West, North, and South. Mahomet accepting it all it was
foretold him, that he should command over all the world: And when this man
had washed him thrice, he kissed his forehead, speaking thus; Be glad O
Mahomet; for that is reserved for thee, which has bin denied unto the
prophets; which surmountest all in wisdom, and magnanimity: And the key of
victory being especially given thee, thou shall be without fear; and there
shall be none remaining in the world but shall tell of thy name: And then
assembled all sorts of birds, the clouds, and the winds, and finally the
companies of Angels striving for the nourishment of the child. The birds said
that they were fittest: considering that they could gather fruits from diverse
places. The winds, that they could fill him with odours. The clouds that they
would nourish him most conveniently; having means to imparte unto him the
sweetness of waters. The Angels being angered said, that there remained
nothing for them: But a voice from above appeased the debate; declaring that he
should not be taken out of the hands of men; and that happy should be those
breasts which should give him suck; happy the hands which should handle
him; and happy should be his house and his bed. An ass being almost famished
with honger, kneeled down to worship him; and having him on her back, lift up
her head, and went beyond the others, which had gotten before her: And when as
every one meruailed thereat, the ass answered for her self speaking in the
voice of man; Thus has God restored me as I perished, and has raised me from
death to life: O if you knew what I bear: It is the seal of the prophets, the
Lord of the messengers, better then all the former friends of God. Three men
carried him up to a mountain, and ripped up his belly, without grief or harm.
The first opened him from the breast unto the navel, and washed his entrails
with snow; The second cleaued his heart in the midst, and took out thereof a
black grain, saying it was the portion of the devil; The third clensing the
place, made him whole again. He was then thus nourished according to their
fabulous saying; and grew in such sort, that he never gave any cause of
trouble or grief to those which nourished him. Seraphin kept him three years;
and Gabriel ninteene; who gave unto him the Law in the fortieth year of his
age; and carried him to heaven: Wherehence being descended, and associated with
Eubocara, Haly, and Zaid, he calls him self the prophet of God; preaching
publicly. And not only makes himself believed by his word; but also by
force, (considering that the sword prevails more with people, then reason)
fighting often against his adversaries: in so much that they reckon twenty and
two expeditions of his; having bin present in person at nine; and in his life
time given eighteen battles in which he obtained victory: conquered Mecha
with the places round about; and possessed the rest of Arabia. Then seeing
himself fortified, he wrote to the Princes of other languages, as to the King
of Persia, the Emperor of the Romans, the king of Ethiopia, and others; that
they would willingly receive his Law.

They have forged many other lies of him like unto these, which I will purposely
omit, fearing tedious prolixity: and least in reciting of scandalous
blasphemies* I should offend Christian ears. As touching his death, they say
he died of a Plurisie, or of the falling evil, the Lxiij. year of his age:
and that having foretold in his sickness, that the third day after his death
he should be carried into Heaven; the people expecting it, kept him so long,
that by the stinch of his carrion, they were constrained to bury him at Medina,
surnamed since of the Prophet.

Such then was the beginning of the Algier of MAHOMET* that is to say: of his
reign, which endured ten years; after the which his followers do reckon their
years, as we do ours after the Nativity of Christ. His parents, and
successors (continuing the enterprise) have persisted till this present, in
the publication of that Law, by preaching, and by force: making their power
very great; and spreading with their Empire, the Arabian religion, and
language, almost in all parts of the habitable earth. Then the Mahometists made
at the beginning great conquests, under the government of one only Lord called
the Caliphe, which was king and priest together, having the superintendence,
and conduct of all their affairs: concerning not only piety and justice; but
also arms and revenues; all possessions, sacred or profane; liberty, and
bondage; life and death. But as they increased in countries, so they entered
into partialities; and while this schism endured, they created in Egypt an
other Caliphe: leaving him of Bagdet, as too superstitious, and rigorous; who
excommunicated them, and declared them Heretics. The Caliphe of Bagdet
commanded in all the East. And the other of Egypt, who diminished his
authority, had but little lands at the first: But he conquered in process of
time all Barbary; and a great part of Spain. For the Saracens under his
obedience passed into Africa; where they took Carthage, Maiorca, Minorca; and
following their good fortune* marched as far as Mauritania: And still
endeavoring to increase, they passed into Europe, at the persuasion of an Earl
a western Gothe, called Julian* who (being much moved with the outrage done by
King Rodericke to his wife) caused them to pass over the straight of Sebi^a,
and to come into Spain: where at their first coming they gave many battles
to the Visigoths; and in the last slew all their Nobility: In such sort, that
Spain came into their possession, all except Esture, and Biscay.

The other Saracens sailed into Thrace, and held Constantinople three years
besieged; which they were constrained to abandon, being consumed by famine and
pestilence.

An other time they came into Italy, and having seized on Apulia, they ouerran
the country, as far as the port of Hostia; and entering into Rome, burned the
Churches of the Apostles, possessed the coast of Tuscane, of Province, and
Languedock; spoiled Genua, Auignon, and Narbona; went into the gulf of the
Adriatic sea; where they overcame the fleet of the Venetians. After so many
conquests they promised themselves the entier Monarchy of the whole world. For
having vanquished the East, subdued Africa, overcome Italy; and tamed Spain;
they did not think there were any Nations, or kings on the earth, which durst
undertake to resist them: making account to subdue all others in short space,
by the only fear of their name. Ten years after they had bin in Spain, they
determined to pass farther: and taking for a good presage, the request which
Eudon the Duke of Aquitaine made unto them, (thinking to find a better, and
fairer country) they went to the number of four hundred thousand into
Gascony; carrying with them their wives, and children, as if they had the
victory already assured. For seeing all things at the first to succeed unto
them prosperously, they became so proud, that they utterly disdained the
Christians. They had already ouerrun and spoiled all the country, as far as
Tours; whither being come with their great army, they were encountered by
CHARLES MARTEL, leading the forces of France and Germany; where he discomfited
CCCLxx. thousand; having lost but fifteen hundred of his. It is not remembered
that the Saracens were ever better chastized; or lost so many brave men, and
valiant Captains: All passed the edge of the sword, even women and little
children. Whiles the Saracens wasted and ouerran the Gauls, two Comets
appeared in heaven, for the space of fourteen days; whereof the one was seen
in the morning before the sunrising; and the other in the evening after the sun
was set: which flaming looked toward the North. There remained of these
Saracens even to our time, holding the kingdom of Granado: where hence they
were driven out about a hundred years sithence; and clean banished Europe by
king FERDINAND. Others remaining in Africa, and having lost their domination,
are divided into many Seignories; and into two sorts of people: whereof the one
inhabit the plains, and the Cities; the other wander continually on the
mountains: They are much fallen from their former power and military
reputation; and likewise from their excellency in learning.

A COMPARISON OF MAHOMET with Lycurgus, Minos, Numa, Zoroaster, Zamolsis,
Charondas, Zaleucus, Trismegistus, and other Pagan Lawmakers, or founders of
Cities, and Empires.
ALmost all the ancient Lawmakers, which gave Laws and manners of living unto
people in diverse Countries, and seasons, feigned that they were sent by the
commandment of GOD: thinking by this means to give their Laws the more
authority; and to make them be the easier received. And they attributed them
unto the divinity under different names, according to the opinions of the
Countries where they were; as Zoroaster the Lawgiuer of the Bactrians, and of
the Persians, to Horosmades; Trismegistus of the Egiptians, to Mercury;
Zamolsis of the Scythians, to Vesta, Charondas of the Calcides, to Saturn;
Minos of the Candians, to Jupiter; Numa of the Romans to Egeria; and such
other personages: who having to deal with rude and rough people, and intending
to bring in great novelties into the governments of their countries, fained
that they had communication with the Gods: as if that fiction had bin
profitable to those whom they made so to believe. So Mahomet, purposing to give
Laws to the rude and gross Arabians, living for the most part of robberies on
the mountains, made them believe, that he received them from God by the Angel
Gabriel; to make them obey them the more willingly.

And as Pythagoras had made an Eagle tame, which was used to come down to him
by a certain voice; as she flew in the air above his head: and as he passed
thorough the Olympian games, suffered his thigh to be seen, which seemed all of
gold; and many such other devises which are told of him, seeming to be
miracles: So Mahomet had tamed and taught a pigeon, which came to eat corn
out of his ear; which to deceive the people, he said was the holy Ghost, who
inspired him with these precepts. Almost all founders, or reformers of commonweals, and kingdoms, going about to bring in new laws, and manners, seized on
the sovereign force and authority; to the end to fear, and to refrain such
as would oppose themselves against it: knowing that such alteration could not
be made without violence, and force; and that otherwise, they should neither
have bin heard, nor followed: So Mahomet, calling himself the Prophet, and
messenger of God, sent to give the Law unto men, made himself believed, not
only by word, but also by force; and fought oftentimes against his
adversaries. Lycurgus referred all his Laws to the war, and to victory: And
Mahomet all his discipline to fighting, and commanding; placing the felicity
of man in great power, and largenes of Empire. Pythagoras was of opinion, that
the first cause was not sensible, nor passible; but invisible, and
incorruptible, and only intelligible. And Numa following him, forbad the
Romans, to make the form of God, like to any man, or beast: in such sort,
that at the beginning, there was not at Rome any Image of God, neither painted
nor molten. And a long time they had not in their Temples any statue or figure
of God; accounting it sacrilege to seek to represent heavenly things by the
earthly: (as Plutarch says) considering that it is not possible any way to
attain to the knowledge of the divinity, but by the understanding. For the
same reason, Mahomet says, he forbad all images, and figures of things that
have life; not suffering in his Mosgedes, or Temples, any corruptible thing
whatsoever: saving lamps burning on high all in a rank; and matts below to
kneel upon; that coming thither barefoote, they should not hurt themselves
with cold.

Solon did write in Greek verse, the Laws which he gave to the Athenians; and
Mahomet his Alcoran in Arabian meeter, which is altogether poetical. The
Assyrians invented many fictions of their Queen Semiramis, which had built
Babylon. The Persians of Cyrus, who founded their kingdom. The Romans of
Romulus, who began Rome, and the Romain Empire; to the end to make them more
admirable. But the Mahometists have exceeded the fables of all the rest in
their Mahomet; exalting him infinitely: as the most excellent personage of the
world: and have maliciously invented many lies of his pretended excellency,
heretofore rehearsed; to thend to make him more admirable, and to draw the more
people to his belief.

THE POWER OF THE ARABIANS or Saracens, compared to the Romain, Macedonian,
Persian Parthian, Assyrtan, and Egiptian.
Pliny speaking of the Arabians, says: that they were not inferior to any
people of the world. They receiving the law of Mahomet (who was of their
nation) were called Saracens, who in little time after they had received this
Religion, achieved great conquests, subdued many Regions, took, and ruinated
Towns, wasted countries, overthrew kingdoms, and namely the Romain Empire in
the East. But as they increased suddenly in dominions, so they entered into
partialities, and divided themselves under two Caliphes: whereof the one was
established at Bagdet in Assyria, commanding over all the East, the other in
Egypt, who conquered all the rest of Barbary with Spain. Being come to such
and so great power, albeit they were all of one religion, or little different
(because they called one another Schismatics) yet had they not one Empire
aunswering to one sovereign Monarch, and resident in the capital City of the
state; as had the Assyrians, Persians, Parthians, and Romans: but being
divided into many Lords, and evil agreeing; they fought the one against
the other; which was the cause that made them diminish as soon as they were
grown up. For the first Turks coming out of the North East parts of Asia, on
the differents of the two Caliphes; they took Persia from them, and possessed
the Caliphat of Bagdet, with the better part of the lesser Asia: becoming
Mahometists. But the Latin Christians under Godfrey of Bouillon, and the
Corasmians overcame these Turks; then the Latins and Corasmians being overcome,
the Tartarians issued from the same quarter, wherehence the Turks came before:
who in an instant ouerran a great part of the North, of the East, and of the
South: then drawing toward the West, they overcame the Ruthenians, Lithuanians,
Polaques; and pierced even into Hungary, Austrich, and Germany: which if they
had bin, or were united, would make an incomparable power. But they are divided
by hordes of the Procopians, Zauoglans, Nogacians, and Corasmians, the one
being governed by kings; and the other by commonweals.

A COMPARISON OF THE ARABIAN or Sarasen Learning, with the Greek, Egiptian,
Chaldaick, Persian, and Romain, or Latin.
AS the learning of the Greeks and Romans augmented with their power; so did
that of the Arabians, or Saracens. And when they were the most mighty of the
world, then they became most learned: especially in the demonstratiue sciences.
Amongst whom Auicenna, Albumasar, Gebber, and Auerrois, got the first praise.
Auicen has bin the most universal of them all; being eminent in philosophy,
in the Mathematics; in their Theology; and in the Arabian poesy: who writing
also in Physic, has very well handled (according to the judgment of the
most learned in this art) the signs and causes of diseases; accomodating unto
them many remedies not understood, nor practiced, by the Greeks and Italians.
Auerrois has learnedly expounded all Aristotle. Abumasar understood perfectly
all the celestial motions, and their effects: having invented the great
conjunctions, and many other goodly things which remained unknown until his
time. Gebber a very expert Mathematician, has found faults in the
demonstrations of Prolomey his Almagests. And others in diverse sciences have
invented many new things, or reformed those that were invented before: both
Persians, Syrians, Egiptians, Africans, and Spaniards, writing in Arabian;
which possessed the schools of the West, before the restitution of the Greek
and Latin. Which I thought good to speak of by the way; that it might be
known, that all learning is not comprised in these two languages, and that the
Arabian ought not to be despised; which comprehends a good part. They got
such reputation in the Mathematics, that Alphonsus king of Castile, going
about to make his Astronomical tables, had his principal recourse to them;
because that only they at that season could teach and restore such sciences: to
whom he made great presents, to the value of four hundred thousand Crowns:
Imitating therein the liberality of Alexander, who disbursed the like sum,
to have the natures of living creatures truly represented by Aristotle. But
the Caliphes seeing that the people too much given to Philosophy, and to the
Mathematics, cared but little for their Law; they founded Colleges for the
intertainment of teachers, and learners of their Alcoran; and in some
universities, they changed the Lectures of philosophy, into those of their
Law; ordaining that whosoever from thence forward, would study the Alcoran,
should in no sort give himself to Philosophy; which has made the exercises
of the sciences to wax cold in some places; but not thorough out: because that
at this day there are found in Persia, most learned Philosophers, and
Astrologers.

A COMPARISON OF THE ARABIAN tongue, with the Greek, Latin, and Hebrew.
WHen the Greeks and Romans were in their greatest prosperity, and rulers
over many Countries, they spread these two tongues with their dominions; and
much people learned to speak the^: either to please them therewith, or to
negociate with them: then the Christian religion serving it self with them,
has preserved and dispersed the^ into diverse countries: yet were they never
understood in so many places, as the Arabian is now: the which is common to
almost all the inhabitants of Asia, Africa, and a third part of Europe; the
affairs of the Alcoran being treated therein, which is followed by the one half of
the world or more; and all sciences. Even as we use Latin in these parts,
separated from the vulgar tongues, and not understood, but by such as have
learned it in schools. It resembles the Hebrew, Chaldaick, and Syriack, in
this, that it is written as they are from the right hand to the left; with
points in steed of vowels; and has many words common with them, and the phrase
somewhat near them: but peculiar letters to it self, wherein it is much
different from the Greek, and Latin, which are written from the left hand to
the right.

The end of the eigth Book.
THE SEQVELE OF THE RELIGION and power of the Mahometists; as of the first
Turks, Corasmians, Tartarians, of the Souldan, of the Ottoman, and of the
Sophy: Where there is mention made of the great Cham of Catay; of the King of
Narsingue, of the Moscouite, and of Presbiter John; as having all begun or
grown up about that time, albeit they have other Religions. The ninth Book.
ON the different which was between the Caliphes; The TVRKS coming out of the
Northeast of Scythia, went into Asia, about the hundredth year of the Algier of
Mahomet; and after they had a long time wandered, they stayed in Persia:
whither they came, being called by the Persians against the Arabians, and
others of the new Religion, which oppressed them. But finding at their coming
the kingdom of Persia vanquished, as well by arms, as by religion; and seeing
it was not possible for them to resist against the conquerers, they
confederated with the Arabians, receiving their Religion. And anon after on the
occasion which they took hold of, they rebelled and seized the Caliphat of
Bagdet, which they a long time held. Their power was grown and increased in
such sort, that at such time as the Frenchmen, under the conduct of Godfrey of
Bouillon went to recover the holy land, they ruled already over the better
part of Asia: Wherehence they were driven out after many victories gotten on
them by the Latin Christians, by the Georgians, and Armenians.

After the departure of the Turks, the CORASMIANS seeing the kingdom of Persia
disfurnished of defense, invaded it; and created their Seignior, Emperor of
Asia: Then undertaking to possess Turkey, they were beaten back; losing their
Emperor, who was slain there: and they could not rise again, but were by
little and little defeated.

And they being destroyed, the TARTARIANS began to be celebrated in Asia; who
came from the same quarter, wherehence the Turks before had come, as appears
by their language, and similitude of manners: whose beginning, progress,
victories, and conquests, are more admirable, then of all the Nations that ever
were before, or after; in greatness of armies, celeritie of expeditions,
success of battles, largenes of Seignories, foundations of Empires, and
manner of living, much different from others. First they inhabited that part of
Scythia, which is beyond the great mountain of Belgian, toward the Indies: to
which place came the arms of the Macedonians under the conduct of Alexander.
And being a beastly people without manners, without learning, without religion,
living on beasts which they kept, and nourished, wandering from place to place,
following the commodity of pasturage; unfit for arms, despised of all, and
tributaries to their neighbors: yet they increased so much, that they were
divided into seven principal peoples; and began to live under Captains, who
had the conduct of them, and of their affairs; remaining notwithstandtng under
the subjection of others: until such time as a poor old man, a Smith by his
occupation, (who as they believe was engendered of the sunbeams) was divinely
ordained their first CHAM, and Emperor. For he saw in his sleep a man of
war, clothed all in white, and mounted on a white horse, which called him by
his name, and said unto him, Changuis, The will of the immortal God is, that
thou be the governor of the Tartarians, and ruler over the seven Nations: to
the end, that by thee they may be delivered out of the bondage wherein they
have long remained, and receive the tributes which they have bin accustomed to
pay. CHANGVIS was very glad when he had heard the word of God; and told unto
every one this vision. But the Captains and chief men amongst them would not
harken to it; but made a jest thereof: Till themselves the night following saw
the white man of arms, and had such a vision, as he had declared unto them;
who were commanded from the immortal God, to be obedient to CHANGVIS, and to
accomplish his commaundments in all things. Then being assembled together, they
did their obedience and reverence unto him, as to their natural Lord: Then
they spread in the midst of them a black covering on the ground, and a seat on
it, whereon they placed CHANGVIS, calling him the first CHAM, and doing him
solemn reverence with kneeling. Which custom (though it be base) has bin
sithence observed by them in confirming of their Emperors: albeit they have
gotten many kingdoms, and infinite riches, having invested themselves of Asia,
and Europe; even to Hongary, and Austrich. CHANGVIS being thus established
Emperor, by the consent of all; would make trial whether they would obey him
faithfully; commanding them many things: And first that they should all
believe in the immortal God, by whose grace he was come to the Imperial
dignity. Secondly he ordained, that there should be made a general view of
all such as were able to bear arms; and that the muster being made, there
should be appointed a Captain over ten; over a thousand; and over ten
thousand: making the regiment of this assembly. Moreover he commanded the
foresaid seven Captains, to bereave themselves first of their charges, and
dignities: The Other commandment was yet more strange, by which he enjoined them
to bring every one his eldest son, and each to cut off his head, with his own
hand. And albeit that seemed cruel and unjust; yet was there not any that
refused it: forasmuch as they accounted him to have bin appointed their Lord by
the divine providence. When he had known and proved their good wills, and that
they were ready to obey him, even to death; he assigned them a certain day to
march forward. And from thence he went against many Nations; which he
incontinently subdued: and possessed all the lands on this side of the mountain
Belgian, and inioined them without any gainsaying, until such time as he had
an other vision: seeing the same white armed man again, which said unto him:
Changuis Cham; The will of God is, that thou pass over the mountain Belgian,
and go toward the West, where thou shall conquer kingdoms, seignories, and
lands, subduing many Nations unto thy Empire. And that thou may be assured
that it is true, and proceeds from God, which I tell thee; arise, and go with
thy people toward that mountain, to that part which joins on the sea: There
thou shall kneel down nine times, and worship God nine times; and he which is
almighty will show thee the way which thou may go conveniently. According to
this vision, Changuis reioicing arose, and without any doubt (because the first
vision being found true, assured him of the rest) he gathered together all his
people: commanding them to follow him with their wives and children, and all
that they had. Then they went so long, till they came where the great and deep
sea touches the mountains; and there appeared no way nor passage for them.
Changuis as was commanded him from the immortal God alighted off his horse
(as did also all the rest) and kneeling toward the East, worshipped God,
asking mercy, and grace of him, and that he would show them the way to go.
They remained that night in prayer; and arising in the morning, they saw the
sea retired nine foot, and that it had left a spacious way. Being all
astonished with this miracle, they thanked God devoutly: and going toward the
West, they went men and women, beasts, and chariots, a great and terrible
multitude.

The year before this their descent, which we reckon of Christ, M.CCxj. in the
month of May, appeared for the space of eighteen days a Comet, burning over
the Polaques, the river of Don or Tanais, and the Country of Russia, the tail
thereof directed toward the West: which signified the descent of the
Tartarians, which happened the next year following. If this be true, it
resembles much the going of the Hebrews out of the land of Egypt, under the
conduct of Moses; to whom the redd sea opening it self, gave passage; and
drowned the Egiptians pursuing after them. Josephus writes also, that the Sea
of Pamphylia opened unto Alexander the Macedonian, when he marched with his
Army against the Persians. But the Tartarians being passed over: their Cham
fell sick and died, having before commanded concord between his twelve
children, by the similitude of arrows which could not be broken altogether;
but being separate, they brake them easily, saying to them: that as long as
they agreed* their Empire should endure; and should be overthrown as soon as
they were divided. And before his death made his eldest son called HOCOTA,
the best and wisest of them to be received as their Lord, and his successor;
who purposing to march further, wan the Caspian gates being placed there, and
continually kept and shut up: to the end to stop the passage into Asia of
infinite people dwelling beyond it, as it were in an other world. Afterward he
dispatched three armies, and gave them to three of his sons: commanding
Iacchis being the eldest to go toward the West; Batho toward the North; and
Tagladais toward the South. He himself abounding in men, marched with a mighty
army into the East, conquering all the Country as far as Catay: where he
established that most mighty and rich Empire, which is there at this present,
and held by those which descended of him. He overcame also the kingdom of
Persia: in which voyage the Tartarians learned the knowledge of letters, the
use whereof was before unknown amongst them. He favoring the Latin Christians
which reigned at Jerusalem came to succor them: But being prevented thereof by
their overthrow, before he came; he drew toward Bagdet, where he took the
Caliphe being a Turk by nation, whom he made to die of famine and thirst;
having shut him up into the chamber of his treasures, as a man unworthy to
possess that riches, whereby he could not help himself. TAGLADAIS going into
the South, carried arms even into Ethiopia; where he had evil success: for
being overcome in battle by the Ethiopians, and driven into desert countries,
he lost there the greatest part of his people. Then he turned him toward the
West, and joined with his brother IACCHIS; who had much afflicted the estate of
the Turks in Persia, Assyria, and Mesopotamia. The voyage of BATHO was more
succesful, and renowned; who having in a great battle overcome Gonata king of
the Turks; he supplanted eft soones by arms the whole reign of that nation.
He vanquished the Rosullanois, Lapiges, Polaques, Lithuanians; and pierced even
into Hongary, Austrich, and Germany: putting all where he went to fire and
sword. Such were in a little time the terrible expeditions of the TARTARIANS in
the North, South, East, and West, thorough the great emotion and mutation of
human things. Wherefore the Christian Princes, and the Pope especially,
fearing their return, sent Ambassadors to their Emperor, to thend to pray
him that he would acknowledge and worship the GOD of all, and Jesus Christ whom
he had sent; and use no more such cruelty against the Christians, as he had
done in Polonia, Hongaria, and Morauia: He answered, that in five years he
would not molest them. After the departure of the Ambassadors of the
Christians, came those of the Saracens, to persuade the Tartarians to receive
the law of Mahomet: as easier, and more convenient for military people;
Saying, that the Law of Christians was of idle effeminate idolaters, and
worshippers of Images* that theirs was full of all commodities, and pleasures,
a conqueror of other religions by force, and arms* with beating down the proud
imposed tribute on such as were humbled. That pleased well the barbarous
people, being of nature courageous; and given to sensuality: And so they
received the Law of Mahomet, which they observe at this day. They hold much
land in Europe, joining to Russia, Lithuania, and Polonia: In Asia all that
lies from the river Tanais, and the bounds of Pontus and Bacchu, unto Cathay
and Chyna.

The ZAGATHAINS confining on the Persians, are more civil, sowing, planting,
buylding, traficking, being governed in a kingdom; and have for the seat of
their king called CVSILBAS, enemy to the Sophi, the City of Smarcand, being
marvelous great, fair, and rich: situated in the river Iaxartes, four days
journey from the Caspian sea, where the great Tamberlain was borne, of whom we
will speak hereafter.

The great CHAM of Catay is also a Tartarian, descended of the race of
Ghanguis, of whom seeing it comes to purpose, we will here entreat; albeit he
be no Mahometist: but has a religion separate, and different from the
Mosaical, Christian, and Saracen. It is not without cause that he is called
great; for he exceeds in politic government, power, wisdom, reuenew, and
magnificence, all the Princes of Europe, Asia, and Africa; yea, even the Turk
himself. And if all the Christian and Saracen Seignories were reduced under
one obedience; yet could they not be compared unto his. He commands over
more then seven hundred leagues of Country, well inhabited and peopled: full
of fair buyldings, after our manner; villages, boroughes, castles, rich and
strong towns, abundance of vittailes of all sorts, and exquisite Artisans.
The CATHAYANS or men of CHINA, have such an opinion of themselves, that they
account themselves to be the chief men of the world; thinking other men to be
but half sighted, as if they saw but with one eye: and that they only see
clearly with both eyes; by reason of their subtilitie and dexterity, making
such perfect, and lively works, that they seem not to be made by man's hand,
but by nature her self. They have learning and the sciences in singular
recommendation, honor, and estimation; receiving none to the sovereign
dignity, nor to public offices, but such as are learned: Considering that in
the distribution of their offices and Magistracies, they respect not nobility,
nor riches; but learning and virtue only.

OTTOMAN the first author of the family of the OTTOMANS, and founder of the
Turkish Empire, which is so mighty at this day, having again set up the name
of the TVRKS, which before was abolished, served in the wars at the first
under the great Cham: He came but of mean place, and was poor in possessions;
but strong of body, and of courage audacious. Thinking that he had some wrong
done him, he parted from the Tartarians, and accompanied only with forty
horses, he seized on some straight in the mountains of Cappadocia; Then being
helped by the commodity of place, and opportunity of time, he began to make
rodes in the plains adjoining, getting great spoils: To whom there joined
many thieves; multiplying from day to day. Then seeing himself reenforced with
men, he did manifestly and in open war, that which he did privily, and by
stelth before; conquering towns, people, and countries, without any great
resistance: In such sort, that in short space he got a great Seignorie in Asia:
which has bin valiantly and happily maintained by his successors discending
of him, and bearing his name; which have always augmented it, until the
thirteenth which reigns at this present; having one after an other from the
father to the son, gathered together two Empires, above twenty kingdoms, and
a great number of Cities in Asia, and Europe; gotten as well on the Mahometists,
as on the Christians; without ever losing any thing that they had taken. They
hold all that was in old time called Arabia, Egypt, Suria, Mesopotamia,
Chaldea, part of Persia, and of Media, Assyria, Adiabena, part of the greater
Armenia, and all the lesser, and a part of Cholches, which they call
Mengrelles; All Asia the lesser containing Cilicia, Cappadocia, Pamphylia,
Galatia, Caria, and Phrygia: And in Europe, a part of the Sarmatians, or Getes;
the Dacians, Mysians, Thracians, Macedonians, Greeks, Albaneses, Dalmatians,
Pannonians, Hongarians, Iaziges, and Metanastes: In Africa, Argier, Tripoli,
and Tunez. This unmeasurable power so renowned, and terrible at this day unto
all the world, is grown up from so small a beginning, as has bin said, to
such height, and reputation, in the space of two hundred and sixty years; by
their wise conduct in peace, and in war, by sobriety, patience, obedience,
concord, diligence, order, valiancie, abundance of men, horses, and arms; and
by means of the good, military, and politic discipline, which they carefully
observe: which has made them to prosper with the hinderance of their
neighbors, being loose, and corrupted, or infected with seditions.
Peradventure they are not entirely such as they have bin (as all impair with
time) and being enriched with their victories gotten on the Persians, are
become more pompous in their apparel, and harnes, then they were before: as
prosperity and riches depraueth people. But as they change their manner of
living, so their fortune also will change; and whereas they now beat others,
they will also be beaten: as they have begun to be, not many years sithence, at
the battle which they lost at Lepanto, against the Venetians; which is the
greatest adversity that ever they received, sithence they passed into Europe.

Likewise, VSVN-CASSANVS was a soldier under Tamberlain; who restored this new
kingdom of Persia. He being aduertized that there was in his country a Lord
called Harduel, of the race of the Prophet; and the bruit, that ran among the
Persians of his holiness, and learning, especially in the law whereof he was a
Doctor; and in Astrology, wherein he meruailously excelled; he gave him his
daughter to wife: of which marriage came the SOPHI ISMAEL. Harduel then being
more assured and hartned by this royal alliance, took upon him with the aid
of Techel Cusilbas, to bring in new expositions and ceremonies into the
Alcoran; following Haly, who was preferred by them before Mahomet. Whereat
JACOB the son and successor of Vsun-Cassanus being angry; banished him and
his son: because he feared, that by the favor of his adherents, under color
of reforming the Religion, he aspired to the estate. When the SOPHI (who at the
time of his banishment with his father, was but a child) was waxen great,
hereturned by force into Persia, setting up the Sect which was begun by his
father, and was afterward left off for fear. And under this pretense he drew
much people to his part, and conquered in few years the Seignorie, not only of
Persia; but also of Media, Armenia, and Assyria: finding at his return
Aleuant, and Morat-Champ, the sons of Jacob, and his cozins at war
together; whereof the one he slew in battle; and constrained the other to fly
into Arabia: wherefore he remained peaceable possessour of of the state. But
because his uncle Jacob was deceased before he might be revenged of him, he
burned his body: Of which inhumaine deed being reprehended by his Mother, he
put her to death; or killed her himself. And notwithstanding, was called
SOPHI, which is as much to say as holy, having gotten not by any merit of his
own, but by the goodness of his father this name, which has remained to his
heirs, being reputed heirs by the Turks. This SOPHI by the sudden success
of his conquests, put all the East in fear; spreding his renown over all the
habitable earth: To whom the Tartarian Zagathain opposed himself, warring
continually against him: and Selim Ottoman, who assailed him with a mighty
army, a good ways within his own kingdom, took and spoiled Tauris his
chief City; and wan the memorable battle of Chalderan: where* were slain
many, both of the one side and the other; and the two chiefes were hurt; the
Turks remaining victorious, only by reason of their artillery* which at that
time was unknown to the Persians. After Selim defeated in an other battle
the Souldan, who would have helped the Sophi; which were the two greatest
victories that happened within these five hundred years. Sultan Soliman
following the footsteps of his father, returned thither, and got on the Sophi
Damasco in Assyria, and the imperial City of Bagdet, being the ancient seat
of the Caliphat of Chaldea, overthrown by the Tartarians: as also that of
Caire has bin distroied by the Souldan. For they which bear the name now in
both Cities, have but the titles, putting the SVLTANS in possession, without
meddling at all with the state; who doing thus* receive because of their
pretended right three thousand Seraphes* to the end to retain after that manner
some form of the former religion; The soueraintie whereof is not governed any
more by them* but by Muphtis, as has bin said, who are as Patriarchs, and
Superintendents in divine matters; and Judges in cases of conscience: whom the
SVLTANS hold nere about their persons, or in the principal Towns of their
estates.

So by the ruin of the Latin kingdom in Jerusalem, and of the Egyptian
Caliphat, the estate of the SOVLDAN began in Egypt and Suria, instituted by
Syrracon and Saladine; which was hereditarie, until Menescala: who ordained the
MAMMELVCS, amongst whom it has long time bin elective. Never was there seen
nor heard a more strange or detestable kind of government then that of the
MAMMELVCS, being al Christians reheaged, and of servile condition, which
tyrannically commanded over the Egyptians and Surians being free; using
miserable indignities, and cruelties toward them. In so much that such power
deserved rather to be called servitude then Lordship. The MAMMELVCS then were
taken when they were little boys from the country of the Circasses, near to
the Temerinde or black sea: then brought and sold as slaves into Egypt. Where
some selected of them were nourished and hardened unto pain and travail, by
continual exercise of arms: And such as were found to be the best were
enrolled in the order of the Mammelucs, and to them succeeded from hand to
hand, not the sons of the Mammelucs deceased; but others nourished and chosen
after the same manner, to whom pertained the honors and profits of the state;
which they divided among them: not committing the governments of provinces, and
conductes of armies, but to those that were experienced, whose virtue was
known; and who had passed all the military degrees: and by them, and from
among them, was the SOVLDAN chosen. They held in most straight subjection all
the people of Egypt, and of Suria, forbidding them to have any weapons or to
ride on horseback. They were not above sixteen thousand; but they entertained
many servants under them: and being men of great force, and hardynesse, they
had not only tamed many bordering nations, and beaten the Arabians; but also
made many wars against the Turks; envying their prosperity; of whom they
remained often victorious, and were seldom or never vanquished by them. But
when as they were divided, and bandded in partalities, Selim the Turk defeated
them in two battles, killing in the first the SOVLDAN SAMPSON, who was gone
into Suria with an army to help the Sophi: then prosecuting his victory, he
went into Egypt against him that was chosen SOVLDAN, in steed of him that was
dead; whom he took, and made him ignominiously to be carried on a poor
Camel with his face backwardes all alonge the great street of Cair, and to
be hanged at the gate of that City: doubling his power by the Conquest of
such a state, much reverenced by those of the religion of Mahomet; and
redoubted because of the valyance of the MAMMELVCS, who were massacred in
such sort that there name is almost extinguished.

There remain yet other great kingdoms of this time as of NARSINGVE in the
Indies; and of PRESBITER JOHN in Afric, called Lac^gue, and Negus; of the
ABYSINS being baptized, and circumcised Christians; and of the MOSCOVITE in the
north a Christian also, but after the Greek manner.

The king of Narsingue, which is of the ancient religion of the Bramines,
yeldeth to no king of the world in riches, power, and magnificence:
intertaining forty thousand horsemen of ordinary; and four hundred elephants
fit for war, with infinite dromedaries.

Touching PRESBITER JOHN, he commands over innumerable nations different in
colors: and has under him forty kings tributary. His lands and seigniories
extend toward the West more then twenty days journey; and he has gold shut
up in a cave, enough to buy the moitie of the world: and the quantity is every
day increased, and multiplied without taking any thing from it. In the spacious
kingdom of Ethiopia being so large never did the kings sons or brothers move
any sedition for the state, nor defiled their hands in one another blood: but
the line of the blood royal is always conserved by rare hap; and never yet
communicated to any other kingdom whatsoever, Christian, Hebrew, Sarazen, or
Pagan. They say it was once revealed to one of their kings in a dream, that if
he desired to have his kingdom long maintained in peace, and unity, he must
lock up all his children (which were a great number) on a mountain; and that
he must keep only him that he would have to succeed in his kingdom: and this
custom remained eternally to his posterity, as a thing ordained of the
heavens. Otherwise, that one part of Ethiopia (which is so large) would come to
revolt against the heir; and put him in danger of his life, and of his state.
The king being awaked was meruailously astonished with this nouelty: not
knowing where he might find this mountain. Wherefore he had another vision,
revealing unto him that he should mark thorough out al his country, where he
should see goats, on the top of rocks so high that they seemed ready to
f^ll: and this should be the place where he should shut in his children. Which
the king having put in execution, the mountain was found to be of a marvelous
height and greatness, wherein the children of Presbiter John were locked up,
and carefully kept; for there is no less pain to them that come out
therehence, or which draw therehence any of those that are shut up, then
death; he only remaining free that ought to reign by his birthright; or
which seems the most capable to succeed in that dignity. Those which are shut
up do never come forth, except it so fall out that Presbiter John depart
without heirs of his body to inherit the crown. For then they take out him
that is next it, whom they know to be the worthiest.

Also the great KNES or king of Moscouie is a great landed man in the North;
whose dominion is about three months journey in compass of ground* and he
possesses innumerable people, nations, provinces, duchies, principalities and
seigniories; which the Emperors of Moscouia have gotten one after another by
arms, or by other means offered them from time to time; as Wolodimeria,
Nouingorod, Plescouia, Smolenk, Tuner, Iugaria, Permia, Viakia, Belgaria, the
lower Nouogorodia, Ceruigenia, Rozar, Volokde, Rezomia, Rostomi, Cazan,
Ostrakan, and others; which it would be tedious to recite because of the
rudenes of their names. They say that of all his Lordships there are seven
principal; wherehence he can bring forth for a need, seven hundred thousand
men of war, all on horseback: namely out of Plescouia a hundred thousand;
Nouingorode a hundred thousand; Tuner a hundred thousand; which are the
greatest seigniories, that he has: out of Smolenk (a duchy usurped on the
king of Poland) an other hundred thousand; and a hundred thousand out of the
Duchy of Mosco^ia; where is situated the great city of Mosko, the seat of the
prince. The bounds of his empire go a great way into Asia; as far as the
Caspian sea, near the lands of the Sophi: And having won a battle against the
King of Sueuia, he is entered into the country of Liuonia, where Germany
begins on this side; and has there conquered Riga, and Riuallia, two great
cities pertaining to the master Duke, and Knights of the Teutonian or Dutch
order. He exceeds in severity and rigor of commanding all the Monarchs of
the world; having gotten such authority over his subjects as well
ecclesiastical as secular, that he may dispose at his pleasure of their lives,
and goods: no man daring to gainsay him in any thing. They confess publicly,
that the will of their prince is the will of God; and that all whatsoever he
does, is done by the divine providence. Therefore they name him the Porter of
Paradise; the Chamberlain of God, and Executor of his will. By this means is
he become so mighty, within a little time, that all his neighbors which are
the Tartarians, Sueuians, Polonians, Liuonians, yea and the Turks themselves
do redoubt him. It would be an infinite labor to propose here all the
kingdoms and Empires that have bin, or are in reputation. But it shall suffice
to have touched such as are best known: namely, those that have joined
wisdom with power; whereunto this present discourse tends.

The end of the Ninth Book.
OF THE POWER, LEARNING, and other Excellence of this age, The Tenth Book.
AS the Tartarians, Turks, Mammelucs, and Sophians, have gotten into the East
by their valiancy the glory of Arms, So have we in these parts toward the
West recovered within these two hundred years, the excellency of Learning; and
set up the studies of the scienences, after they had long time remained in a
manner extinguished. Wherein by the industrious perseuera^ce, of diverse learned
men, the matter has had such good success, that at this day our age may
compare with the most learned that ever were. For now we see the tongues
restored; and not only the deeds, and writings of the ancient brought to
light; but also many other goodly things newly invented. Sithence this time
Grammar, Poesy, History, Rhetoric, and Logic have bin beautified with
innumerable expositions, adnotations, corrections, and translations. The
Mathematics were never better known; nor Astrology, Cosmography, and
Navigations better understood. Natural Philosophy and Physic, were not in
greater perfection among the ancient Greeks, and Arabians; then they are at
this present. The military arms, and instruments, were never so forceable, and
impetuous as they are now: nor the dexterity so great in the use of them. The
arts of painting, grauing, cutting, caruing, and building are almost brought to
their perfection. And men have so much labored in knowledge of Law, and
eloquence; that it is not possible, to do more. The art of Politic
government comprehending, and ruling them all (which seemed as it were laid
aside) has lately received great light. Moreuer Theology or Divinity the
worthiest of al, which was much obscured by the Sophisters, has bin very much
lightened by the knowledge of the Greek and Hebrew; and the ancient Doctors
of the church, which lay in obscurity in the libraries have likewise bin
brought to light: Unto which work the Art of Printing has bin a great help;
and made the increase thereof much easier. Seeing then that by course of
things, and succession of time we are come to this age, we will henceforth
consider it not by the particular excellencies of countries; but by the
memorable things done or happened, during this space of time, thoroughout
Europe, Asia, Afric, and the Newfound lands, in the East, West, North, and
South: and by such graces, as it has pleased God to imparte, to special
parsons, in this season, thoroughout the several countries of the habitable
earth.

And as we have marked the other ages by some famous warrior, and notable power
that has bin in every mutation; so it seems that the meruailes of this age
ought to begin at the great and invincible TAMBERLAN, who affrighted the world
with the terror of his name, about the year of Christ 1400. and by the
incredible army which he led of twelve hundred thousand fighting men, trained
unto warlike discipline, got the Empire of Asia: purposing (if the pestilence
had not come into his host) to have gone into Europe: and to have entierly
subdued it, as far as Spain; wherehence he would have crossed into Afric;
and thorough it have returned into Asia. Being then predestined unto great
things, because that in his former poverty there appeared in him some
generosity above the rest, he was in sport chosen king of his companions; But
he taking it in good earnest (as one that promised already great enterprises in
his mind) he took oaths of them, and having all sworn to do what he would
have them, and not to forsake him; he made himself their Captain, and
commanded them to leave their shepheardes life, as a base thing; and to small
purpose, for the getting of glory and riches; and that they should arm
themselves and follow him: That by this means they might from that poor and
base estate wherein they lived contemptible, come to great and unlooked for
felicity. With this company descending out of the mountains into the plain
country, and prospering from day to day; as he increased in Lordship, he
augmented in power. First he got the kingdom of his own country; then
obtained Parthia, and Persia: On the North side yielded to him the Hircanians,
Bactrians, Sogdians, Saces; and other innumerable people inhabiting on this
side the mountain Ismaus, which are called the Tartarians. He subdued the
Seres, Arians, Drangians, Aracosians, Gedrosians, and Paramisians which are
beyond the hill Ismaus. All the Massagets yielded themselves. Consequently
entering farther into Asia toward the East, he made him self Lord of
Bythinia, of Pontus, and of all the country called at this day Anatolia; with
the coast of the sea Euxinus, Propontis, Marais, Meotis, and the Cimmerian
Bosphorus: Moreover going on the right hand, he conquered infinite towns and
provinces; over coming the kings and tyrants which he met withal. And passing
his forces over the river Tygris both horse and man, he invaded the Vxians;
whom he subdued, with the Susians: and all the country even to the Persian
sea. From thence going over the mountain Tauris, he went into Mesopotamia,
then into Media, which he conquered: bringing under his obedience, the
Cadusians, Armades, Tapirdes, and Circitians. And tourning toward the south, he
passed over the mountain Amanus, and went down into Suria, and Comagena,
bordering on the river Euphrates: which he ouerran, as far as Arabia, and near
to Jerusalem. He subdued the Lydians, Phrygians, Capadocians, Paphlagonians,
Misians, Ionians, Dorians, and Eolians; not leaving finally any people or
nation between the hill Ismaus, and the Ocean, Caspian, and red sea, untamed or
unsubdued by arms. After he defeated Bajazet king of the Turks in battle;
who had opposed himself against him, with two hundred thousand men: and having
taken him, caused his hands to be bound behind his back; and showed him in that
piteous case to his people that were overcome; to thend that from that time
forth he might be accounted the absolute king over all Asia. He used his back
in steed of a stool to help him to horsback; and when he was set at meat made
him remain like a dog under the table; casting him crumbs and morsels in
mockery, and scorn: keeping him at other times in chains, and shut up in a
cage of iron; as wild beasts are wont to be kept. This great victory astonished
not only all the inhabitants of Asia, but also the other nations which
Tamberlain had never troubled, nor meant to trouble with war: In such sort that
the Moscouites being separated by the river of Rha, from the Tartarians, paid
him tribute, and sent him fresh men; The Mossinois, Cercetures, Leucosyrians,
and all the nations that are between the Caspian sea and the river Tanais,
yielded unto him of their own free will; and the Corasmians, Dacians, and
Sacians, dwelling beyond the river Tanai^* He received into his obedience the
Nogains, and Sciabenians; warlike nations, and neighbors to the Moscouites.
He took by force, Smirna, S^bastia, Tripoli, Antiochia; and Seleucia. Then
passing from Suria into the inner part, he assailed Galaria; and Rabatia;
where he slew all the inhabitants. Therehence he went into Egypt: constraining
the Souldan to save himself by flight. And he was l^tt^d from going any
farther by sandy deserts; and by want of waters. For he desired nothing more,
finding himself strong and fortunate in war* then to undertake great, and
difficult things; going over uneasy places, and hard passages; and assayling
of fortresses that were thought to be inexpugnable: to thend to be reputed a
valiant Prince and a hardy warrior. He commanded at the siege of places, to
spread the first day white pauilyons, the second day red, and the third black:
signifying by the white that he would take the besieged to mercy; by the
black that he would burn their City; and by the red, that he would put all
to the edge of the sword. And when a certain Italian (whom for the dexterity
which he found in him, he had made of a mean Merchant ouerseer of his
revenues) admonished him to join clemency with his unmeasurable power, and
felicity; he answered him with a frowning look, and sparkling eyes; that he
was the wrath of God, and the deadly destruction of the depraved age. To
another that entreated him to take pity on Bajazet, who was lately so great a
king; he sternely answered, that he did not chastise a King renowned for many
victories: but a cruel and vicious tyrant, who had put to death Solomon his*
eldest brother, and deprived him of his Kingdom. And to the Emperor of
Constantinople offering him his person, his city, and seigniory, as unto him,
to whom God had adjudged all the Empire of the East; and by whose benefit, al
men acknowledged Greece to be delivered from that cruel tyrant Bajazet; he
said, that he would not bring into bondage, the most fair, renowned and rich
city of all others, which had so lately bin saved out of the hands of the
Turks: Adding moreover that he was not entered into this war for execrable
ambition, or insatiable couetise of conquering countries, or enlarging his
dominions; but to the end to succor the Emperor and the Lords of Greece; and
to maintain it in liberty, as he understood it had remained: That the tyrant
being taken, and bound, endured the punishment of his wicked deeds, receiving
the same measure which he meaned to have given unto others. Moreover whereas he
overthrew, and burned all that was between the South and the East; he suffered
none to meddle with the temples which he left entier: and for reverence of
their prophet, he entered not into Arabia; moved with some fear of God, and
reverence of the religion. Yet fortune having allwaies favored him, without
ever having bin contrary unto him; seems among so many admirable events,
which exceed the ordinary course of Conquerours, to have denied him an
Historyographer of excellent learning, and eloquence; agreeable to his virtues:
to celebrate them worthily.

During the reign of TAMBERLAN, began the restitution of the tongues; and of
all sciences. The first that applied himself to this work was Franciscus
Petrarcha, opening the Libraries which til then were shut up; and beating away
the dust and filth, from the good books of ancient authors: for being a man
of great understanding; and excellent learning, he has not only beautified
the Italian tongue (for the which he is reverenced with his disciple Bocace, as
a principal Author and Illustratour thereof) but also has laudably awakened
both the Latin prose and poesy. After him John of Rauenna a Grammarian (who
when he was but young knew Petrarch an old man) has much advanced the Latin
tongue, instructing* and exhorting many to the love of learning; which became
very learned: Amongst whom was Leonard Aretin, Franciscus Philelphus,
Laurentius Valla, Guarin of Verona, Pogius, Omnibonus, Accursius, Nicolaus
Pe^otta, Victorinus Feltra, Franciscus Barbarus, Petrus Paulus Vergerius,
Maseus Vega, Leonardus Iustinianus; Gregorius and Lilius Triphernius; Antonius
Panormitanus, Ioannes Aurispius, Petrus Candidus, and Blondus Flauius. Then
Emanuel Chrysoloras a gentleman of Constantinople a renowned personage in
learning and all virtue, being sent by the Emperor Ioannes Paleologus unto the
kings of Europe, to obtain succors of them for Greece being greatly
endangered, after he was rid of that painful charge, he remained at Venice,
seeing his country delivered from the fear of Bajazet whom Tamberlan held
prisoner: where he taught first the Greek tongue, which was left off, and
unknown above seeuen years in Italy: And after at Florence, Rome and Paris,
instructing the most part of the Scholars of Ioannes Raue^nensis* which
prospered with him so well, that by his instruction continued a few years it
came to pass* that such as were ignorant of the Greek were from thence-forward
accounted the less learned among the Latins; But other Grecians coming after
into Italy, did meruailously advance this work, so happily by him begone:
namely the Cardinal Bessarion, a great Philosopher, and Divine, who left at
Venice that goodly Greek library; Georgius Gemistius, and Georgius
Trapezuntius a learned Peripatetick* who forgot the knowledge of letters in his
extreme old age. Theodore Gaza, an excellent translatour, Andronicus
Thessalicus, Ioannes Argyropilus, Constantinus and Johannes Lascares, Demetrius
Chalchondilas, Sophianus, Marullus a Poet, and Marcus Masurius; whom God has
raised up, to preserve in these parts the Greek language and learning;
oppressed by the Turkishe arms in Greece: having invited to the knowledge of
their learning, not only the Italians; but also the Frenchmen, Duchmen,
Flemings, Englishmen, Scots, Polonians, Hongarians, and Spaniards: which have
all given themselves unto it with great vehemence, and affection. The ITALIANS
most renowned therein have bin Pomponius Letus, Platina, Callimachus, Eneas
Syluius, who was afterward Pope Pius, Campanus, Andreas Alerius, Domitius
Calderinus, Angelus Politianus, Hermolaus Barbarus, and Ioannes Picus (called
the Phoenix of his time, as being singular in exquisite learning; and eminent in
the knowledge of many tongues; and of all sciences: who had done great good if
he had lived longer, and deserved to be compared with all antiquity.) Johannes
Franciscus being his nephew, Marsilius Ficinus a Platonist, Georgius Merula,
Georgius Valla, Baptista Pius, Christophorus Landinus* Philippus Beroaldus both
the Uncle, and Nephew, Antonius Codrus, Michael Palmerus, Petrus Crinita,
Sabellicus, Iouianus Pontanus apt and fit, for any kind of writing, as happy in
prose, as in verse of many sorts; a good Philosopher and Astrologer. Baptista
Mantuanus, the two St^ozzi the father and the son, Syncerus, Sannazarius,
Vida, Fracastorius, Palaiarus, Scipio Capicius, Octauius, Cleophilus, the two
Celij Rhodoginus and Calcagninus; Leonicenus, and Leonicus; Manardus, Iucundus
Veronensis* Paulus Emilius, Polydore Virgil, Egn^cius, Bembus, Sadoletus,
Contarenus, Nymphus, Eugubinus Romulus Amaseus, Marcus Antonius Flaminius,
Molsa, Andreas Naugerius, Hadrianus Cardinalis, Andreas Alciatus, Emilius
Ferrettus, Petrus Victorius, Mancinellus, Sulpicius, Carolus Sigonius,
Robertellus, Paulus Manucius, Nizolius, Lazarus Bonamicus, and Lampridius.
FRENCHMEN, Iacobus Faber a Philosopher and Divine, Guil. Budeus, the most
learned of his time both in Greek and in Latin, and a most diligent obseruer
of antiquity, Lazarus Baisius, Germanus Briensis, Nicolaus Beraltius, Michael
Hospitalis, Franciscus Connanus, the two Syluij Franciscus, and Iacobus;
Ioannes Fernelius a Physician, Orontius Fineus a Mathematician, Textor, Petrus
Dan^us, Iacobus Tusanus, Iacobus Amiottus, Stephanus Doleta, Adrianus Turnebus,
Ioachimus Perionius, Nicholaus Gruchius, Petrus Bun^llus, Marcus Antonius
Muretus, and Petrus Ramus: Antonius Fumeus, Duarinus, Baro, Balduinus,
Cuiacius, and Othomannus Ciuilians. Iacobus Ludouicus Strebeus, Macrinus,
Borbonius, and Beza Poets. FLEMINGS, Erasmus, Longolius, Gaguinus, and
Vesalius. GERMAINS The Cardinal of Cusa, Purbachius, Ioannes Regiomontanus, the
principal Mathematician of this age, Rodolphus Agricola, Reuchlinus Capnio,
Melancthon, Zasius, Beatus Rhenanus, Vadianus, Glareanus, Gulielmus Copus,
Leonardus Fuscius, Georgius Agricola, most expert in Mettalls, Saxo a
Grammarian, Oldendorpius, Brunus, Eobanus Hessus, Sleidan, Simon Grinaeus,
Huttenus, Bilibaldus, Pyrkmerus, Cornarius, Camerarius, Omphalius, Latomus,
Sturmius, Wolfgangus, Lazius, Cranzius, and Funccius. ENGLISHMEN, More,
Linacre, Tunstall, Pacey, and Fisher. SCOTS, Hector Boethius, and Buchanan.
POLONIANS, Osius, Frixius, Cromerus, and Johannes Zamoscius. SPANIARDES,
Nebrissensis, Viues, Poblacion, Amatus, Antonius Pinus, and Goueanus.

But it is better to distinguish these renowned parsons of this age by their
exercises, and professions: as we have done in other reuolutions.

The most renowned WARRIOVRS then have bin Tamberlan, called of his followers,
Temitcultu, or Demirben^, or Demirly; Amorath, and Mahomet his son; Selim,
and Soliman being Otthomans: Charles the eight king of France, king Ferdinand
of Spain the first called the Catholic King: Gonsaluus the great; the
Emperor Charles the fith; Charles of Bourbon; the Sophi Ismael; the Scirife of
Fez; and Francis Duke of Guize. BY SEA Andrew Dorie, Adrian Bassa, called
Barbarossa, Dragut, and Salec Rez, and S^rozza the Priour of Capua; PLATONICAL
PHILOSOPHERS, Bessarion, Gemistius, Ficinus; PERIPATETICKS, Trapezuntius,
Argiropolus, Fabius, Nymphus, Pomponacius, Contarenus, and Simon Grinaeus.
Johannes Picus purposed to hauereconciled Plato and Aristotle, and to have
accorded the two sects, as Boethius had undertaken before him: But both the one
and the other have laien down under the burden, without accomplishing of this
promise. ELOQVENT Imitatours of the ancients, and obseruers of Cicero:
Laurentius Valla is the first in this rank, who has reduced Latin speech to
the ancient manner of speaking; a great admirer of Quinctilian, as the Cardinal
Hadrian, was of Cicero; then Nizolius, and Doleta. Those which have most
expressed and ymitated Cicero in their writings are Bembus, Sadoletus,
Longolius, Perionius, and Elaminius: Latin, Italian, French, and English POETS,
are Petrarch, Antonius Panormitanus, Pontanus, Marullus, Syncerns, Vida,
Fracastorius, Molsa, Naugerius, Flaminius, Capicius; Palearius, Morus,
Borbonius, Macrinus, Eobanus Hessus, Sabinus, Bachananus, Ariosto, Rousard,
Ioachin du Bellay, Ponthus de Tyard, Marc Antony du Baif, Remy Belleau, Marot,
Mellin du Sangelais, Stephen Iodelle, and Philippede Ports. HISTORIOGRAPHERS,
Callimachus, Platina, Laurentius Valla, Ioannes Saxo, Pope Pius, Bloridus,
Sabellicus, Pontanus, Peter Martyr of Mil^in^, Michael Riccius, Paulus Emilius,
Polydore Virgil, Paulus Iouius, Sleidan, Staphilus, Pandulphus, Galeatius
Capella, Coccinus, Bembus, Tritemius, Gaguinus, Cuspinianus, Paradinus,
Bonfinis; Sorter, and Turoce Hongarians, Cromerus a Polonian, Crantzius a
Saxon, Olaus a Goth, Ioannes Leo an African, Franciscus Aluares, Damian, Goes,
Iuan de Baros, Portugales; Franciscus Taraphus, Antonius Nebrissensis, Petrus
Medimna, Rodericus Pallentinus, and Ferdina^do Gonzales Ouiedes, Spaniards;
Machiauel, and Guicchiardin, Italians; Iean Froissard, Enguerren de Monstrelet,
and Philippe Comines, Frenchmen; Stomphius a Swisser, and Mounster, a German.
CIVILIANS, Zasius, Alciatus Oldendorpius, Baro, Duarinus, Balduinus, Cuiacius,
Othomannus, and T^iraquellus. PHYSICIANS, Leonicenus, Manardus, Copus, Linacer,
Ioannes Ruellius, Cornarius, Guinterius, Fuscius, Fernelius, Rondeletius,
Iacobus Syluius, Amatus Lusitanus, Vesalius, Martinus Acakia, Tagaueltius, and
Iacobus Houlerius. MATHEMATICIANS, Bonatus, Johannes Regiomontanus, the
Cardinal of Cusa, Purbachius, Collimicius, Petrus Appianus, Gemma Frisius,
Vadianus, Copernicus, Leouicius, Orontius, Turrianus, Gauricius, and Hieronimus
Cardanus. PAINTERS, Zotta a Florentine, who has restored the art of painting
after it had bin long laid aside; and beautified it much. Belim (who for his
excellency was sent to Sultan Mahomet Emperor of Constantinople, from the
seigniory of Venice) Petrus Burgensis, Raphael of Vrbin, Albert Durer who has
written in the Dutch tongue of Painting: as Iean Cousin has also done in
French: and Leo Baptista Albertus in Latin. STATVARIES, and GRAVERS Donatel,
Michael Angelo, Andrea of Cremona, Christophero Mantoano and Lorenzo, who was
fifty years making the gates of a Chapel at Florence, in which with wonderful
workmanship are graven in brass the histories of the old, and new testament:
ARCHITECTS, Leo Baptista Albert* who has written a very learned work of
Architecture; Ioannes Iucundus of Verona, who built the great bridge at Paris,
and first published Vitruuius corrected, with figures, and Caesar his
Commentaries (...)* Philip that made the great Church of Florence, the vaute
whereofby singular art is not sustained by any pillars* Aristotlea Bolonian,
removed certain towers of stone from one place to another, whole without any
hurt, by putting wheels artifically under the foundations: Pierre L'Escot
called Claigny, ouerseer of the work and reparation of the Lou^re at Paris,
begone under king Frauncis the first; and Philbert de L'orme, chief Master of
the buildinges of the Tuilleries, of Annet, and of Saint Mor at Paris: he has
left books written of his art* and has invented a new kind of Carpentrie for
covering of houses. PHILOLOGVES or serchers of antiquity, and propriety of
tongues, Correctours of books, Translatours, and Commentatours, Laurentius
Valla, Perottus, Gaza, Trapezuncius, Pomponius Laetus, Domicius Calderinus,
Georgius Merula, Georgius Valla, Politian; Hermolaus Barbarus, Raphael
Volateranus, Galeotius, Na^nianus, Christopherus Landinus, Equacius,
Nebrissensis, Budeus, Erasmus, Sigonius, Gruchius, Mancinellus, Sulpicius,
Verulanus, Beroaldus, and Beraltius, Textor, Baptista Pius, Robertellus,
Victorius, Turn^bus, Gelius, Calcagninus, and Rhodoginus. And others
innumerable in many tongues and Nations. Famous trauailers, Pylots,
NAVIGATOVRS, discouerers, and conquerers of New lands, Christopherus Columbus
a Genouese, Americus Vespucius a Florentine, and Dom Henry the Infant of
Portugale, Magellan, Cortese, Pizairus, Alphonsus Alburquequen, and Chabot. The
Princes that have most helped the restitution of arts, are Alphonsus king of
Naples, having honorably received, and liberally rewarded such as presented
him with Greek books translated into Latin: Frauncis the King of France the
first of that name* who appointed salaries or stipendes for the public
professors at Paris, and erected a sumtuous Library at Fontainebleau full of
all good books. The Kings of Castile, And of Portugal have bestowed
liberally on the discovery of the Newfound lands and of the Indies: Cosmo, and
Lorenzo de Medicis Florentynes, have bin much helpefull unto learning;
receiving the learned men which came to them out of all parts, and
intertayning them honorably: and moreover sending at their charge thoroughout
all Greece, to seek out good and ancient books (which were neglected there)
they builded for the common vtility, magnificent libraries.

Besides the restitution of the ancient learning almost accomplished; The
Invention of many goodly new things, serving not only for necessity, but for
pleasure also, and ornament of this life, has bin reserved to this age.
Amongst which the Art of PRINTING deserves to be in the first place, for the
excellency, utility, and subtility of art whereby it is guided in the grauing
of the matrices; casting, distributing, and gathering of the letters; manner of
the ynke, and of the baules to put it on the form; placing of the presses,
and manner of using them; of wetting the paper, laying on, taking off, and
drying the leaves; then reducing them into volumes; reuiewing, and correcting
of the impression; whereof we have spoken before: and whereby there is more
dispatched in one day, then many diligent writers could do in one year. By
reason hereof, the books which before were rare and dear, are now become more
common, and easier to be had: For it seems to have bin miraculously invented
to make learning and good letters to live again; which were in a manner dead.
The invention thereof is attributed to the Germans, and began at Mentz,
therehence it was carried to Venice; and afterward spread over all
Christiandome; and so brought unto his perfection, by Nicholas Genson, Aldus,
the Iuntes, Frobenius, Badius, Robert Stephens and others. Notwithstanding the
Portugues traficking about the farthest of the East and of the North, into
China, and Catay, have brought therehence books written in the language, and
writing of that country: saying, that they have used it there a long time.
Which has made some to think that the invention thereof was brought therhence
thorough Tartaria, and Moscouia into Germany; and so communicated to the other
Christians: to whom by the divine providence has bin especially reserved the
consummation of divine, and human wisdom. The Mahometists deprived of this
grace do utterly reject printing, not using it amongst them, neither suffering
any to bring them books written of their affairs in Arabian, and printed
elsewhere.

The second praise ought to be given to the inue^tion of the Sea-mans compass,
consisting of a Rose, and a needle of steel, which being touched or rubbed
with an adamant or loadstone, shows always the point which is answerable to
the place where we ymagine the pole Artick. Aristotle understood not this
property, nor Galen, nor Alexander, Aphrodiseus, nor Auicen, the most curious
obseruers of natural things: For if they had known such a miracle of nature,
and so profitable a means of sailing, they would sure have made mention
thereof in their books; having stood so much upon others of much less
importance. It was also unknown to the Romans, who suffered so many
shipwrackes, fighting on sea against the Carthaginians: and under Octauian they
lost a great fleet of Vessels against Sextus Pompeius. By means hereof all the
Ocean has bin sailed over, innumerable Isles found out, and a great part of
the continent or maine land discovered toward the west, and the south;
unknown before of the Ancients; and has therefore bin called the new world;
and not only bin overcome, but also converted by the Christians. The
enterprise being begone, by Columbus a Genouese, and Vespucius a Florentine, men
of excellent understanding, and exquisite judgments, deserving no less praise
then Hercules of Greece that was so famous: and afterward continued by the
Castilians, being emulatours of the same honor, and desirous of gain. Whereof
some have bin swallowed up into the huge sea, not being yet thoroughly known;
and others eaten by the Cannibals; leaving a piteous remembrance of their
audacious enterprises. But there are three that having had more favorable
fortune, have made famous discoueries: namely Cortese of the kingdom of
Mexico, and of the great City Themistiten seated, builded, and peopled, like
unto Venice; Pizairus of Peru, and Cuscu rich in gold; and Magellan of the
Moluccaes where the spices grow. At the same time the Portugales parting the
world with the Castilians, by the same knowledge of Navigations passed the
Atlantic sea, and the Canaries; winning in the utter Barbary many Towns on
the Sarazens. Then crossing the line heretofore termed the burning Zone, and
^alsely esteemed to be desert, they have gone beyond the tropicke of
Capricorn; conquering Brasil, and other countries. Afterward drawing toward
the East, they went along all the coast of Africa, and the bank of Ethiopia;
surmounted the gulfes of the Arabian, and Persian seas; and being come to India
(having overcome by arms the kings of Cambaya, Canonot, and Calecut, building
in their countries fortresses, thereby to safeguard the traficke of the East;
whereof they made them selves masters; And farther passing over the rivers of
Ganges, and Indus) they travailed as far as Taprobana, and to the golden
Chersonesus: making the king of Malache their tributary. From whence setting
sail toward the North, they went to China and Catay; where they made an end
on this side of their Navigations, entering into amity and confederacy with the
great Cham, to thend to have liberty to traficke with safety in his country;
which before was not accessible, but with apparent danger of death unto
strangers: In such sort that by our industry all the world is at this day
known, whereof a great part that had so long remained unknown; and the
uttermost parts of the East, West, North, and South do communicate together:
the men that are separated with so many seas so distant and different, visiting
one another, by means of navigations, being made safer and easier by this
Invention.

I would willingly give the third place, to great ORDINANCE, and ARTILERY;
(which has made all other ancient military instruments, and engines of war to
cease, al which it exceeds in impetuosity, violence, and quicknes.) were it
not that it seems to have bin invented rather for the destruction, then the
profit of mankind: being an enemy to generous and courageous virtue, which it
spares no more then the rest; but breaks and bruseth whatsoever it
encountreth. First it was invented in Germany by a blower in Alchimie;
wherhence it has bin transported over all the world; and seems at this day to
be brought almost to his perfection; sithence the means is found to discharge
by volies many pieces together; which batter, and beat down al places, how
strong soever they are in situation, height, or thicknes of walls, and rampires.
The Canon at the first was called a Bombard, for the noise which it makes; and
Mortar which was of iron bound with many pieces heavy and unwieldy; shooting
huge bullets of stone, with a great quantity of powder made of saltpeter;
sulpher, and willow coals proportioned: the invention whereof has bin no
less admirable, then of the Canon it self. After in steed of iron succeeded
brass; whereof at first were made great pieces laid on wheels, yet more
maniable, then was the mortar; (giving them bullets of iron) unto which have
bin guien names of birds, and other living creatures, which have appearance of
terror: as Coleurines, Serpentines, Basilisks, Sacres, Faulcons, and other
appellations imposed according to the diversity of their measures, forms, and
cariages; at the pleasure of those that made them, or of the Princes which
commanded them. Sithence there have bin made some lesser, lighter, and
maniable, to shoot with bullets of lead: as muskets, caliuers, harquebuzes,
pistoles, and pistolets. But because the noise and violence of the Canon, has
bin fitly expressed by the Poet Fracastorius, I will here insert his Verses.
Continuo caua terrificis horrentia bombis
Era, and flammiferum tormenta imitantia fulmen,
Corripiunt, Vulcane tuum (dum Theutonas armas)
Inuentum: dum tela Jouis mortalibus affers.
Nec mora, signantes certam sibi quisque volucrem:
Inclusam, salicum cineris sulphurque nitrumque
Materiam accendunt, seruata in vest fauilla.
Fomite correpta, diffusa repent furit vis
Ignea circumsepta; simulque cita obice rupto
Intrusam impellit glandem: volat illa per auras
Stridula; and exanimes passim per prata iacebant
Deiectae volucres, magno micat ignibus aer,
Cum tonitru: quo sylua omnis ripaeque recuruae,
Et percussa imo sonuerunt aequora fundo.


This age has brough forth many great and notable inventions: on which
notwithstanding I will not stand, because they are rather accessarie to the
ancient things; then exceeding the understanding of our forfathers: all
antiquity having not any thing to compare unto these three. But amongst the
meruailes of our age, there have bin manifested new and strange maladies,
unknown of the Ancients, and not treated of by any Greek, Arabian, or Romain
Physician: as if there were not enough already dispersed over the world, to
the number of three hundred, and more; without speaking of the inconueniencies
happening every day, by the excesses which men do use.

Moreover, there are risen Sects in many Countries, which have much troubled
the public peace, and cooled the mutual charity of men: Whereof some more
curious will attribute the cause to the celestial motions. For as we have
observed in times past, in the notable mutations of mankind, where nature has
showed her greatest forces: that extreme evil, and wickedness* has met with
excellent virtue; and extraordinary calamities have accompanied great
felicity: so could not one imagine any kind of unhappiness or ^ice, which is
not found in this age, so happy in the restitution of good learning, and
restoring of sciences. Neither is there any amongst all men, either Christians
or barbarous Nations, but has suffered much, No part of the habitable earth,
no person is exempted from affections: which increase from day to day, and are
too much known to our damage and confusion.

Every where the public estates have ^in afflicted, changed, or destroyed; and
every where the Religion troubled with heresies. Not only all Europe* but also
the farthest regions of Asia, and Africa; the inhabitants of the new found
lands, and of the East and West Indies being innumerable in multitude, and
dispersed into infinite places, have bin troubled with foreine and civil
wars, long continued: wherehence has followed the excessive price of all
things, with often famines and pestilences. We must think that God being angry
with men, sends such calamities generally, and particularly, to correct our
vices; and to bring us to a greater knowledge, and reverence of him: For there
was never in the world more wickedness, more impiety, or more disloialtie;
Devotion is quenched; simplicity and innocence mocked at; and there remains
but a shadow of Justice. All is turned vpside down, nothing goes as it ought.
But the most notable adversities and prosperities of this age, are elegantly
represented by Fracastorius in these goodly Verses. Credo equidem and quaedam
nobis diuinitus esse
Inuenta, ignaros fatis ducentibus ipsis.
Nam quanquam fera tempestas, and iniqua fuerunt
Sydera: non tamen omnino praesentia diuum
Abfuit a nobis, placidi and clementia coeli.
Si morbum insolitum, si dura and tristia bella
Vidimus, and sparsos dominorum caede penates;
Oppidaque, incensasque vrbes, subuersaque regna,
Et templa, and captis temerata altaria sacris;
Elumina deiectas si perrumpentia ripas
Euertere sata, and medijs nemora eruta in vndis,
Et pecora, and domini correptaque rura natarunt;
Obseditque inimica ipsas penuria terras:
Haec eadem tamen haec aetas, quod fata negarunt
Antiquis, totum potuit sulcare carinis
Id pelagi immensum quod circuit Amphitrite.
Nec visum satis, extremo ex Atlante repostos
Hesperidum penetrare sinus, praxumque sub Arcto
Inspectare alia, praeruptaque littora rapti;
Atque Arabo aduehere, and Carmano ex aequore merces:
Aurorae sed itum in populos Titanidis vsque est,
Supta Indum Gangemque, supra qua terminus olim
Calygare noti orbis erat: superata Cyambe
Et dites Ebeno, and foelices macere syluae.
Denique and a nostro diuersum gentibus orbem,
Diuersum coelo, and clarum maioribus astris,
Remigio audaci a^^igimus, ducentibus and dijs.


The end of the tenth Book.
A COMPARISON OF THIS AGE, with the most famous former Ages; to know wherein it
is superior, inferior, or equal unto them* and first touching the warfare of
these days, with the ancient Greek, and Romain. The Eleventh Book.
THE excellency of this age being briefly declared; we will hence forward
compare it with the most famous of the former; in matter of Arms, Artillery,
Captains, Armies, Battles, Sieges, Empires, and other States; voiages by
sea, and by land, discoueries of Countries, riches, manners, and sciences: to
know wherein it is superior, or inferior, or equal unto them; beginning with
the comparison of the warfare of these days with the ancient Greek and
Roman. It is said, that CYAXARES king of the Medians was the first that
distributed the men of war of Asia into Bands, Squadrons, and Companies; and
ordained that the horsemen and footmen should have their quarters apart; and
should no more march confusedly as they were wont to do. The ROMANS accounting
more of their Infanterie, then of their Caualerie; and founding on it all the
desseignes of their power; divided their footmen into those that were heavily,
and such as were lightly armed, whom they called Velites: under which word were
understood, all such as used slings, darts, and bows; the greatest part of
whom (as Polybius says) were armed with a caske, and to cover themselves, had
a shield or target on their arm, and fought without keeping any rank or order,
a good way from the heaule, or maine army. The men that were heavily armed had
a salade, which covered their head, and came down as far as their shoulders.
There body was armed with cuirasses, which with the tases covered their
^highes, as far as their knees. They had moreover their legs, and their arms
covered with greues, and vantbrasses, and carried also a shield of four foot
long, and two and a half broad; which had a circle or plate of iron above, to
sustain the blows the better, and to keep it from cleaving; and an other
plate of iron underneath, which kept the shield from being wasted, and worn,
with leaning it on the ground: which might be compared to a pauois, provided
that the pauois had in the very midst thereof a bosse of iron, well set on,
and close joined, as their shieldes had; the better thereby to endure the
blows and strokes which should fall thereon. Besides they had a sword girt on
their left side, and on their right side a short dagger: They had a dart in
their hand, which they called Pilum, and threw it when they began their fight.
Some w^^te, that besides their pauois, they carried also a pike, namely the
Greek soldiers. But that seems impossible, because they must needs have
enough to do to help themselves with one of these weapons apart; and to use
them both together were an uneasy, and a very difficult thing: for the pike
alone requires both hands; and the pauois on the other side serves only for
defense to cover themselves, because it was not very maniable. And the target
also could not well be handled, but would be in a manner unprofitable: except at
the beginning of the battle they holp themselves with their pike, having
their target at their back; and that coming so near together, that the pike
served them to no farther use, then they abandoned it to take their Target;
wherewith, and with their sword, the soldiers holp themselves in the press.

The GREEKS did not lade themselves with such heavy armor as the Romans, but
they gave themselves therwithall much more to carry the pike; especially the
Macedonian Phalanges, which carried pikes called Sarisses, of ten cubits long;
wherewith they assaied to break the ranks of their enemies without going out of
their own. But seeing that the ROMANS conquered all the world, we may well
think that they were the best armed of all.

The fashion of this time is, to arm the footman with good Curets, and a cask
or headpeece: which seems to be sufficient for the defense of a man^ and is
better then the harneis of the ancients. Touching weapons to offend, we carry
a sword somewhat longer then theirs: Our other arms are the pike, the halbard,
partisan, harquebuze; and many others not so usual amongst soldiers; and the
target: although there is little reckoning made thereof, except it be for an
assault; and besides there are few that use it but the Captains. The
Harquebuze has bin found out but few years sithence; and is very good, so it
be handled by such as are skillful and ready: yet now adays, every one will
be a harquebuzier, whether it be to get the more pay; or to be the lesseloden;
or else to fight the farther off. The Halbards are a new kind of weapon lately
invented by the Switzers: which are very good if they be strong, and will cut
well; and not light ones such as the Italians use. And in like sort are their
Partisans; which being stronger and better steeled then they are, would serve
well against naked men: but against those that are armed can do no great
service. Amongst other arms which are less in use are the long bow, and the
crosbow: which may do very great harm to men that are not well armed: both by
reason of their readiness in shooting, which is very sudden; and also for the
surenes of their blows, which are seldom in vain. Concerning the Pike, if
the Switzers have not bin the inuentours thereof; yet at least wise they have
first brought it in use: because that they being poor at the first, and
desirous to live in liberty, were constrained to fight against the ambition of
the Princes of Germany; who by reason of their riches and power, entertained
many horsemen, which the Switzers could not do; and for this cause made their
wars on foot. Then were they constrained (to defend themselves against the
Cauallerie of their enemies) to hauerecourse to the ancient manner; and
therhence to chose some kind of arms for defense against horsemen: which
necessity, made them either to maintain, or bring in use again, the orders of
the time past; without which, footmen are altogether unprofitable: wherefore
they took pikes as very serviceable weapons, not only to sustain the assault
of men at arms; but also to overcome them. By means of which arms, and by
the affiance which they have in their good order; they have taken on them such
boldness, that fifteen or twenty thousand of them, durst undertake to stand
against a world of horsemen. The example of the force which these people have
showed to be in arms of footmen, are the cause that sithence the voyage of
king Charles the eight, other Nations have imitated them: namely the Spaniards,
and Almaines; then the Italians, and Frenchmen, following the order which the
said Switzers keep, and the manner of the arms which they bear; but for
order, there are few like unto them. We must labor then to get this order; or
if it be possible, to form or find out some more safe: by means whereof we
may defend us from every one, and be preferred before all others. To do this it
seems to such as are most expert in this matter, that we ought very well to
arm the bodies of our soldiers, to the end that the ranks may be so much
the harder to be broken: especially such as serve before in steed of a wall,
or vantmure; and all the rest (if it be possible) every one according to his
weapon. And it must not be thought strange, that we lode these men with so much
Armor; for it is to arm them surely in such sort as they ought to be armed,
that mean to stand to it: and not as they which arm them selves lightly; who
being evil covered and armed, think rather on flying, then of ouercomming:
taking example by the Romans, who armed their soldiers which were ordered in
batalions, as heavily as possibly they could, to make them the firmer against
their enemies; and that feeling their bodies so laden with harneis, they should
not look to save themselves by flight; but either to die in the place, or to
get the victory. Vegetius complayneth of the soldiers of his time, that they
went too lightly armed, and followed not the Ancients: which were always wont
to overcome their enemies, because they were evermore well armed; and that such
as were ill armed were ordinarily overcome in all their battles. The
soldiers also must harden their bodies unto pain, learn to help themselves
with those arms and weapons which they bear, to keep their order in marching
thorough the Country, and the manner of encamping, or lodging together in a
camp: which are the principal points that an Army ought to know.

The Nations which heretofore have had ordinances, or companies of footmen,
have always made one principal number of the men which they levied; which
although it has bin diversely named, yet has it bin ever almost equal in
number: because they have all ordained it of six or eight thousand men; which
number by the Romans was called a Legion, because they levied their men by
election; of the Greeks Phalanx; of the Gauls Caterue; of the Switzers and
Almaynes Hourt; that is to say, a Battalion: which the Italians and Spaniards
do also use; But they have of late began to call it a Regiment. The greatest
disorder that they can commit which ordain a battalion, is in this, that they
take no heed, but only to make the head strong; in which they place the
Captains, and all the valiantest, and best armed of all the bands; taking no
care of providing for the back, for the sides, and the innermost ranks: as if
the foremost ranks were the whole hope of the victory; and that the rest
served only to make up a number. For by this means they hazard the whole on
two or three ranks; as if they were immortal, or sufficient alone to make
resistance, without the help of the rest which are behind them: which is
directly contrary to that order which the Ancients observed; which was, to
receive one rank into another, and one battle into an other; and to fight
obstinately even to the last. For without this manner it is not possible to
succor or to defend the first: nor yet by withdrawing them within their
ranks, to come to fight in their place.

With which mean the ROMANS knew how to help themselves often, and to this
end they parted their Legions into three manners of men which were called
Hastarii, Principes, and Triarii. The Hastarii made the front, and had their
ranks furnished with good store of men. The Principes made the second
battle, and were aranged with thinner ranks then the first. The Triarii made
the third and last; with their ranks so thin, that when need was, they could
receive within them both the former battles. Moreover they had their Velites,
which were lightly armed; who did such services as the harquebuziers do with
us: and were placed in the wings between the batalion, and the horsemen. These
being lightly armed began the battle: And if it happened that they overcame
their enemies, they pursued the victory: but if they were beaten back, they
retired into the flanks of the Battalion. After whose retreat, the Hastaries
or pikemen came to fight with their enemies; and if they found themselves to
weak, to withstand them, and that the enemies overcame them, they retired then
by little and little into the thin ranks of the Princes, with whom they
renewed the battle. And if it so fell out, that again they were beaten; then
both the one, and the other withdrew themselves within the Triaries: with whom
they altogether began the fight a new* And if these three sorts of soldiers
were overthrown, they had then no farther remedy to relieve themselves. Which
manner of repairing themselves three times, seems to be invincible: because
that fortune must thrice abandon us; and there with also our enemy must fight
with us, and overcome us three times.

The GREEKS with all their Phalanges, had not this means of renewing
themselves* and although in them they had many chiefes, and many ranks; yet
notwithstanding of all together, there was made but one head, and one body.
And the manner which they had to succor one another, was not to retire the one
ranks into the other; as the Romans did: but for one soldier to step into
the place of another; and this they did in the manner as follows. The Phalange
was ordered by ranks, as is our Battalion; yet was it not confusedly: for every
band knew his own place; and the Decuries, that is to say, the chambers or
squadrons were aranged in such sort, that the soldiers followed one another;
and were in file, and not in front, as we place ours. Whereof the first was
called the Deane, or Decurion, whom we may call the Chief of the Chamber; and
the last was called the Guide of the back. The second was called Substes, and
the former Prestes: and consequently the rest called on the other Substes, and
Prestes, even to the said guide, which made up the end. Of these ranks there
were a good many and more; in so much that one Phalange had two hundred fifty
and six men in front: and Lxiiij. ranks in length. True it is that they were
divided under four Colonels: which marched all in front; with certain spaces
between them. But let us put the case, that in each rank there were CCLvj. men,
and that they came to encounter with their enemies; if it came to pass that in
going, or in fighting, any one of them were slain or overthrown, he that was
in the second rank, and right against the place of the man that was fallen,
namely his Substes est soones advanced himself, and stepped into the place of
the former. And by this means the men of that rank remained always complete,
and full. And to fill up the second rank, they of the third namely the Prestes,
stepped forward, and put them selves into the void places; and those of the
fourth furnished the third: and so successively, and almost at one instant, the
latter ranks supplied, and filled up the former: In such sort, that the first
ranks were always whole and entier; and there was no place that remained
void saving in the last rank, which consumed it self, having none behind to
fill it up; in such sort, that the damage which the first ranks received, was
the cause of consuming the last: So these Phalanges, by means of their order
might sooner be consumed; then broken: for to overthrow them was to difficult a
thing, by reason of their great number.

The Romans used Phalanges at the beginning, and had their legions also
ordered after the Greek manner; but that order afterward misliked them:
Wherefore they divided their men into many bodies; as namely into Cohortes, and
Manipulos, accounting that the body which had most souls, must have most
life; being also compounded of most members.

The Battalions of the Switzers, Almaines, Frenchmen, and others, do imitate at
this time in some part the manner of the Phalanges ^ as well in that they arange
a great number of men together; as also in that they place them in such sort,
that one may step into the place of another. But that this manner is not so
good, as that of the Romans; many examples of the Romain legions do tell us:
because that whenever the Romans fought against the Greeks, their Phalanges
were consumed, and overthrown by the Romain legions; for the difference of the
arms, which these Nations did use, and also the Romain manner of relieuing
themselves three times, was of more force, then the great number and the
soliditie of the Grecian Phalanges.

In ordering a BATALION then after all these examples, it were good to retain
in part the arms and fashions of the Greek Phalanges; and in part of the
Romain Legions, and of our modern men of war: Wherefore in one Legion now
adays, there should be three thousand, and five hundred ordinary pikemen, to
make the body of the Batalion; and four hundred and twenty for the flanks;
one hundred and seventy extraordinary, for the forlorn hope, which are the
arms of the Phalanges: Besides the pikemen were requisite five hundred
Halebardiers* which are weapons found out in our time* and moreover, CCCCxx.
Harquebuziers, for the flanks; DClxxx* for the forlorn hope. The body of the
Batalion is divided into ten bands; as the Romans parted their Legions, into
ten Cohortes* The Harquebuziers are ordained to begin the battle, and for
skirmishes; as the Romans had their Velites. And as the arms are taken of
diverse Nations; so must also these bands participate with the orders of many
sundry people. The men of all these bands are six thousand, and seventy:
besides which, there ought to be in every Legion a General* chief above the
Captains* whom they call a COLONEL having for his officers these which follow*
namely, a Marshall of the Camp, a Sergeant Mayor, a Provost, and under the
Provost, some men of knowledge, to assist him in his judgments; and to
counsel him concerning matter of Justice. He must also have a muster Master,
and some Sergeants, and Clerks of bands; and a master of high Justice, or
executioner. Moreover, it is necessary that the said Colonel, have one, or two
religious Parsons, to say the divine service, and to administer the
Sacraments, to those of his Legion, or Regiment. He must also have a
Physician, an Apothecarie, some Surgeons, some makers of fire-workes, and of
powder* and some Armorers. The overplus to the full number of thirty, ought to
be reserved for his guard.

The Ensigns at this time serve rather to make a great show of people, then
for any military use: but antiquity used them for guides, and to know the
better how to bring themselves in order. For every one as soon as the Ensign
made a stand, knew where his place was about it, and how to put himself in it
presently. They knew in like manner that if it moved or stayed, that they were
accordingly, either to move, or stand still. Therefore it is requisite, that in
one Camp there should be many bodies, that is to say, bands; and that every
body have his Ensign, to guide those that are of the same body: for in
having it, the camp has more arms, and by consequent more life. The
soldiers then ought to order themselves according to the Ensigns; and the
Ensigns according to the sound; which being ordained as it ought, commands
the whole Legion: which if it march in such sort, that their places be
correspondent to the beating of the Drumms, will easily keep this ordinance.
And to these ends the Ancients had flutes, and fifes, and sounds perfectly
agreeable. For as he which daunceth according to the falls of the Music does
not err; so also that Batalion which marches according to the sound of the
Drum, can not fall in disarray. And therefore when they were disposed to
change their place, or according as they listed to kindle, or appea^e, and
assure their soldiers, they likewise changed their sound; and as the sounds
were variable, so the names of them were diverse. We have in our time the
Drums for the footmen; and the Trompets for the horsemen* both which
instruments have their several bearings, and sounds* to encourage the
soldiers when it is needful: and to this end are they invented to command*
and to make themselves understood a far off. But I believe verily, that the
Drums were also invented to serve to keep measure for the soldiers in their
marching: for all the times and diversities of their beatings are true
cad^^^os, and measures for the hastening, or staying of the pace of the men of
war. It behooves them then to learn all the sounds, all the signs* and all
the c^ies; which are used to command in battle; and that every one
understand what they signify* Even as the Mariners know what they are to do by
the only whistle of the Master: wherein the soldier ought to be ready, and
instructed to obey presently, and to purpose* to the beating of the Drums,
whether it be to march forward; or to stand still; or to ^^^ire^* or else to
turn their faces, and arms to any part* And to these ends the Colonel is to
ordain that all his drums, have the self same kind of beating; and that they
all use one, and the same form of striking an Alarm* of shaking proclamation;
of imbatayling themselves; of going forward* or backward; of ^^^ing them on
the one side, or on the other; or for the retreit* And in brief to signify all the
other points, which the voice of one alone, can not make so well understood, as
does the sound of many drums* which cause themselves to be heard in the
greatest tumult, and the thickest thronges. The soldiers also ought to be so
attentive, to harken what is said unto them, or commanded; that they n^u^^
fail. The Drums also ought to be ready to beat, according to the sound of
the Colonel his Trompets; by which they are directed in all their beatings. The
Colonel his Trompet must be expert in all kind of soundings; and do them so
loud and shril, that he make not one thing understood for another: but know
how to express as appertains, the commaundment of the Colonel; about whom he
ought always to be, and never to forsake him. The cause why Trompets are
appointed for footmen, is because they be much better understood then the
Drums, if there be a great tumult, and that the sound must be varied: for it
is by the Trompets that they are governed, whose sound is higher then is the
beating of Drums: Which the Switzers, (who have bin the inuentours of
Drums) have known: And for these purposes have Trompets before their
batalions; by which the chiefes do signify what the Batalion is to do. And
it is no long time sithence they used great Cornetts.

And forasmuch as the ARTILLERY is conducted, and guarded by the footmen: we
will speak thereof, as far forth as concerns the comparison of ancient
things with modern; before we come to entreat of the horsemen, or men of
arms. The name of Artillery was before, that Canonrie was known,
comprehending all engines of battery, and defense; which by excellency,
remains only to the Canon; all other ancient military instruments failing:
as Balistes, Catapultes, Rams, and all others. Diodorus the Sicilian writes
of an engine of battery called Helipolis, which Demetrius surnamed Poliocritus
used against the Town of Salamis in Cyprus. This engine was Lx. cubits broad of
all sides, and Lxxx. in height: and therewith had nine stages, separated the one
from the other with plankes of wood; and yet notwithstanding was all sustained
with four great wheels of one Cubite in height. He had moreover many engines
called Rams to batter the walls: and to succor them two other mighty engines
or fences of bordes, covered with hairecloth, or with raw hides, which served
against fire or stones; under which they might safely assail the walls. He
placed below, and in the first story, many engines to shoot great and heavy
stones; in the middle story, there were other engines shooting long and sharp
shot; and in the highest stories, others shooting lighter shot, and smaller
stones: And every where was a sufficient number of men, to handle and use those
engines; about two hundred in all. Polybius shows the fashion of an other
engine of war called Sambucas, which the Romans used against the City of
Syracusa: and it was after this sort. They had ready in their ship a ladder of
four foot broad, that when they landed, they might set it against the wall; on
the sides whereof they fastened things to hold by, and armed it with a cover of
defense, setting it a cross those holds which held the ships together; in such
sort, that it stood agood way beyond the fordeck of the ship. To the top of the
masts were fastened polies with cords, and there when necessity required, they
drew those that were at the hind part of the ship by the polies with cords, to
the top of the ladder. The Other also which were at the forcastle, made fast the
engine with stages; and then they drew near unto the wall, coming on land by
the sailing of the ships, which was easily done by means of the two decks made
on the outside. At the top of the ladder there was a plank, of a good breadth,
and fenced with shieldes: on which four soldiers got up, and fought against
those which out of the fortresses did hinder the approach of the Sambuque: And
when as by the approach of the ladder they had gotten to the wall; disarming the
sides of their shieldes, they got up into the fortresses, or towers: and the
rest followed them by the Sambuque, by means of the transporting of the
ladder, out of one vessel into an other, by the cords and pullies. Which
engine was with good reason termed a Sambuque; for when it was so perfected and
erected, the figure of the ship, and the ladder together resembled a Sambuque;
being an instrument of Music, which we call a Shagboote. The Romans then
thought to come to the wall with this engine thus prepared: But Archimedes with
other engines, cast from the top of the wall a great stone of the weight of ten
kintalls, then a second, and afterward a third, one after an other; which
falling on this engine, with a wonderful thundering and tempest, broke down
all the foundation; dismembring, and disseuering those things which joined the
galleys together, and vpheld it. And going about to come nearer to the wall, to
avoid the blows of the stones, and the shot, which they thought would have
gone over their heads, and could not have hurt them, when they were near; they
were beaten back by other engines, whose carriage was proportioned for all
distances: and many holes and arches being near one an other on the wall,
where there were many crosbowes to shoot near at hand, being in such places,
that the enemies without could not see them; when they were about to come
nearer, thinking to be under covert, and to remain out of sight, they were all
astonished, finding themselves again received with an infinite number of shot,
and beaten down with stones, which fell directly on their heads: for there was
no place of the wall, but shot at them. By reason whereof they were constrained
to retire back again from the wall; but when they were then farther removed,
the shot, stones, and arrows, that flew on all sides, found them out, and hit
them where they were; in such sort, that there were many men spoiled, and many
of their vessels bruised, and battered: they not being able to take any revenge
on their enemies; because that Archimedes had prepared the most part of his
engines behind and under covert, and not upon the wall. All which inventions
are subtle, and ingenious: but yet not comparable to the Canon in these days;
which breaks and battereth whatsoever it encountreth.

I come now to the CAVALERIE, which is used diversely in diverse Regions. Some
use that called of the Ancients, Cataphracte of barded horses with lances, and
curtelasses; Others use light horses with swords and pistoles; And others ride
naked or unarmed, with short lances, as horsmanstaues, or bows and arrows, or
harquebuze. The Cataphracte Caualerie of France, has always bin much
regarded, carrying the name above all others, both for exploit, and equipage;
and especially sithence the time of king Charles the seventh: who reduced it to
a certain number of lances, and men of arms, of his ordinances, ordinarily
paid, and continually exercised in arms, being divided into garrisons in his
frontier places. He divided them into bands, and companies, furnished with
Captains, Lieutenants, Ensigns, Guidons, men of arms, Marshals of the
lodgings, quarter Masters, and harbingers; treasorers of the wars, and
paymasters of companies, commissaries, and controllours: committing the charge
of them to chosen Lords of wisdom, and magnanimity: as to the Constable, and
Marshals of France; and other men of quality.

The MAMMELVCS being taken the most of them out of the country of Circasse,
were instructed by Masters of fence, and continually exercised in arms;
hardening them to labor, to honger, and to thirst, and to lie on the ground; or
on some poor piece of tapistry. They which were found the most valiant, were
enrolled in this order; receiving from that time forward good intertainment,
and salarie. Wherefore having no other care, but of arms; and being strong of
disposition, and accustomed from their infancy unto pain; they gave
themselves the chief praise for war, above all other Nations: thinking that
there were not in the world any, whom they could not overcome by arms.

The PERSIANS are Cataphractes, having strong barded horses; and are very
valiant men of arms: in such sort, that five and twenty thousand of them, do
not fear a hundred thousand Turks; which fight unarmed upon light horses. The
Nobility of the country are bound to go to the war, by the fees, and
vnderfees which they possess; as in France, Spain, Lombardy, Naples, England,
Germany, and Poland: and to find a certain number of armed men, according to
the reuenew of their lands which they hold, either by succession from their
parents; or by benefit of the Prince. The richer sort are commonly very well
armed; the others content themselves with salets, and coats of mayle: and
being covered with shields, they fight sometimes with the lance, and sometimes
with the bow. Those of Scyras are accounted the best; then the Assyrians; with
whom are mingled, the Medians, and Parthians the best archers of Asia after the
Tartarians. The ARMENIANS like better to fight on foot, and are ordered in
batalions; fortifying themselves with great pauoises, pitched in the ground
against their enemies: using short pikes, and axes, and slings. Their allies
are the Georgians, and Mengrelles; which are Christians after the Greek manner;
and reputed most warlike.

There is great reckoning made of the ALBANESES of Greece, of the HOVSSERONS of
Hongarie, and of the REISTERS of Germany. But the Turks at this day seem to be
the chief warriors, having ouercom the Frenchmen in the battle of Nicopoli;
overthrown the Mammelucs; and vanquished the Persians in their own Country;
subdued the Albaneses, and the Hongarians; entered, and wasted Germany. Whereof
none ought to wonder, considering their discipline, in the which they have many
things most commendable, observed with Justice and severity; in such sort that
they excel therein the ancient Greeks, and Romans. The first is ^obr^ety,
for in scarsity of victuals they will sustain themselves in war with a little
bread half baked, and rice; with the powder of flesh that is dried in the
sun* ^^eir drink is fair water, being forbidden to drink wine in the Camp.
Such a law had in ancient time the Carthaginians in war, as Plato faith* But
the Turks besides this politic discipline have their religion also, which
makes them the more fearful to offend. There was never elsewhere the like
obedience, because there is not amongst them any company about x. men, but has
his head; and the inferiors are always obedient to their superiors. Their
s(...) in such a multitude is marvelous* so many soldiers being kept in order
by signs of the hand, and of the countenance, without speaking any word: In so
much that oftentimes in the night they let their prisoners escape for fear of
making noise. There is none so hardy as to bring any woman into the army; nor
to use the company of any. They play not at dic^, nor cards, nor any other
plays of hazard, for money: neither do they blaspheme God in any sort; but name
him at al times with great reverence. The two cases which they punish most
grievously are quarrels, and thefts. Marching thorough the country in the
summer season, they dare not for their lives to go amongst the come, and spoil
it. They despise death, thinking that it is predestinate unto every man* and
the day of his death written in his forehead; which it is not possible to
avoid: which makes them more bold and aduentorous; as also the punishment and
recompense which are present for them that do well or evil. For whereas
punishment, and reward, do uphold al common weals (as Solon said) and honor,
and reproach are the two wings of virtue* presently amongst them after the fight
is done, he that has acquitted himself well, is rewarded by increasing of his
pay; and he that has done evil has his head cut off; or else remains for
ever dishonored. They never lodge in the towns; neither when they come near
them* do they permit any to go lie there; for fear of injuries and seditions:
observing military discipline very strictly; to thend, that while they are in
ca^pe, they be not used unto delicacies, which in times past have destroyed
mighty kingdoms; and corrupted the most warlike Nations. Moreover to avoid
ydlenes, the Othoman Princes have accustomed, from two years to two years, to
make wars in some place; to the end to exercise their men of war: which
otherwise being dispersed here and there in the provinces would consume, and
come to be of little worth: There is no nation with whom the Turks have had
any different, but they always over came them; besides the Tartarians.
Notwithstanding although the great Seignior abounds in men, and in all things
requisite for wars, more then any other Monarch of our time; yet for all that
he aduentureth nothing rashly: and obtains more victories by dexterity, and
taking opportunities, then he does by force. He knows the manners of those
with who^ he has to deal; and procures the^ other enemies, to thend, to
distract, and to weake^ their forces: causing the situation of the countries to
be set down before him in a model: which way he is to march; whereto enca^pe
with his army; to fight or to retire; seldom going into any country, but when
it is divided; and that he has favor, and intelligence with the one party.
He accustometh when he goes about any long or difficult journey, and where the
country is uneasy to draw artillery* to carry it in pieces: and then toward
the bounds of the enemy, or when he has passed the evil way, to cast and melt
it. When he conquereth by arms any new (...)trey, he overthrows by and by
all the unnecessary fortresses; destroieth the cities, and iourneth them into
poor Hamlets; extinguisheth wholly the great ones, and the nobles: suffering
the common people to live in that religion which they had before. All his great
power consists in his (...) called commonly spachis; and in his footmen
which are called Ianisaries. The Spachis have as much pay in time of peace, as
in war, and are about the number of two hundred thousand; comprehending as
well the ordinary ones of the Court, and house of the Prince; as the subjects
or Beglerbeis. Moreover there are threescore thousand aduenturours, named
Achangis: to whom the Turks and Tartarians do join when they are called. But
there is no strength among the Turks more assured or more galant* then that of
the Ianisaries; which can after the manner of the Macedonian Argyr^spides in old
time being disposed into a phalange, sustain and break all the assaults of
the enemies: and never were overcome together. Amurath the second of that name
first ordained them, and by their help wan the great battle at Varne; where
Lancelot the king of Hongaria, and Polonia was slain His son Mahomet took
Constantinople by assault; and Bajazet, Methon: Selim vanquished the Sophi, and
the two Souldans; Soliman obtained many victories in Asia, Africa, and Europe.
Their weapons are either ^ows, or long harquebuses, which the most part handle
very well; shorter pikes then those with the Lansquenets and Switzers use; a
Cymeter, and a little battaile-axe. They fight stou^ely both by sea, and by
land. They take the sons of all the Christians that are subject to their
Seignior, which he commands to be taken from three years to three, or from
four to four; and makes them to be brought up very poorly, and to lie on
hard ground; to thend to harden them to travail, and accustom them to live in
the field. All the Turks go, with such courage, order, and alacrity to the
war, especially when it is for defense of their religion; that when they
assemble to go thither, one would think they were rather going to a marriage,
then to the camp. Scarsely, and with much a do will they stay for the
prefixed time of marching but do commonly prevent it. It dislyketh them much
to remain at rest without war; accounting themselves happy when they die not
in their houses, amidst the tears of their wives; but in fight amongst the
Lances, and arrows of their enemies: not lamenting for the loss of those
which die in that manner; but reputing them holy, and praying for them in all
their assemblies. To prevent manslaughters (which they have in great
detestation) they carieno weapons in the Court, nor in the Towns, or in camp,
save when they are to fight; but lay them on camels, or mules, or keep them
within their tents. They care not for the cold of Winter, nor the heat of
Summer, nor for any other incommodity of the air, or of the weather; They
fear not the roughness of places; or length of the ways; they content
themselves with a little; and do not lode themselves with unprofitable
baggage: making great iourneyes, without fainting thorough their trauail. They
show great staidness in their manners, avoiding lightness in their deeds,
gestures, apparel, and speeches. There is no curiosity, vanity o^
superfluity amongst them: but on the contrary great simplicity, and modesty.
When AMVRATH the second, (whom they account a Saint, and who was very valiant
and fortunate in arms) went to the Temple to prayer, he went out of his palace
without any pomp, accompanied only with two servants; and would not be
saluted nor flattered with acclamations: and being in the Temple had no heaven
spread over him, nor any other magnificence; and before he died gave over the
Empire to his son, and withdrew himself to a religious solitarines. He was
affable in speech, wise in judgment, and liberal in alms. His son MAHOMET
had very favorable fortune; resembling Alexander the great, in courage, in
wit, and desire of glory. He took Constantinople by assault at the age of
twenty and two years: And complained notwithstanding that Alexander at the
same age, with so little power, had conquered the Empire of the world: and he
which had no less heart, then he, and was so mighty in men, in horses, arms,
and revenues, could not have his will of one part thereof; although that by
his great deeds he got the title of great unto his fafamily. SELIM preferred
Alexander the great, and Julius Caesar before all the great Capitaines of the
ancients; reading incessantly their deeds translated into the Turkish tongue;
and conforming himself after their ymitation, has gotten the greatest
victories of our time. SOLIMAN after he had governed wisely and happily that
great Empire by the space of forty and seven years, being reverenced and
obeyed of his own; feared of his neighbors, and desired of all; dyed fighting
at the age of threescore and eighteen years: and when he was dead by the
terror of his name, and reputation of his magnanimity took Signet in
Hongarie, leaving peaceable so unmeasurable a power unto Selim his successor.

They were never to any purpose beaten, but by TAMBERLAN, who in knowledge, and
experience of arms, power, authority, felicity quickness of spirit,
diligence, hardiness, and perseverance* has excelled not only the Otthomans:
but also all the great Capitaines, Assyrians, Egyptians, Medes, Persians,
Parthyans, Greeks, Romans, Christians, and Sarasens.

A COMPARISON OF TAMBERLAN with Ninus, sesostris, Cyrus, Darius, Alexander,
Arsaces, Hannibal, Constantine, Attila, and Charlemaigne.
ALthough TAMBERLAN were no Kings son as was Ninus, yet notwithstanding by
especial favor of the heavens he attained to the whole Empire of Asia, as
the other had done; and led an army not much lesser then his. And as he
discomfited in battle Zoroaster King of the Bactrians; so this man overcame
Bajazet the king of the Turks. He vanquished all the Scythians and Tartarians,
on this side, and on the other of the hill Ismaus as far as the river Volga; who
before had killed Cyrus: and whom Darius with so many millions of men, could
not bring under his obedience: neither Alexander the terror of the East; and
which were never assailed of the Romans. As Sesostris made his triumphant
Chariot to be drawn by four Kings, coupled instead of horses, when he went to
the Temple, or walked thorough the City: So TAMBERLAN when he went to horse,
used the back of Bajazet, the captive king of the Turks for his footstool;
even as Sapores king of the Persians, had used Valerian, the Emperor of the
Romans. He has this common with Cyrus: that they were both brought up
amongst shepherds; and chosen kings by their companions; wherehence begone
their greatness. He was in fortune like to Alexander; who never fought
battle but he wan it; neither besieged fortress but he took it* having
both of them received continual favor of fortune, without any adversity. As
Alexander when he had* overcome the East, prepared great armies by sea, and by
land, to conquerial^^ the West; intending to have go^ into Africa, as far as
Mauritania, and to pass at the straight of Gibraltar into Spain, and then
there hence to re^ourne^y Gaul and Italy into Greece* and as Julius Caesar went
to fight against the Parthians, purposing after he had overcome them to go
into Hircania, and en^ir^^ing the Caspian sea* and the mountain Caucasus, to
conquer the kingdom of Pontus as he came back, that he might afterward enter
into Scythia; and having ouerrun all the countries, nations, and provinces of
great Germany, and Germany it self: to return in the end by Gaul into
Italy; and so to spread the Roman empire roundla(...), in such some that it
should be on all sides inuirone^ with the Ocean* So Sesostris aft^^ he had
conquered the better part of Africa* Ethiopia, and Arabia, aspiring to the
Empire of the world, prepared a great army on the Arabian sea, wherewith he
coasted, and subdued all the countries bordering on the sea, even as far as
India, which he wholly ouerran beyond the river of Ganges; and from thence
marched with his land army, thoroughout Asia, and Scythia, which he overcame
as far as Tanais: wherehence he went into Europe, with intention to subdue it
entierly. But that good fortune which had long accompanied these great
Capitaines, failing them; they could not accomplish such great enterprises. For
the first was poisoned, the second murdered, and the other two constrained to
return into their countries; the one by pestilence, and the other for want of
victuals, and the sharpnes and difficulty of the country of Thrace. Astyages
the king of the Medians being overcome by Cyrus was bound in chains of gold.
Darius king of Persia vanquished by Alexander, was shut up by Bessus in a
golden cage. Desiderius king of the Lombardes, being taken by Charles the great
at Pauie; was deprived of his kingdom; and kept prisoner the rest of his life:
So Bajazet being overcome by TAMBERLAN, remained prisoner until his death, and
was kept in chains. Attila was borne and died, the same day that Julius Caesar:
He called himself the scourge of God. TAMBERLAN said he was the wrath of God,
and the destruction of the depraved age. Nevertheless Attila moved with
reverence of Religion, at the request and instance of Pope Leo, did not only
change his determination of going to Rome; but also leaving Italy returned into
his own country. TAMBERLAN where he went permitted none to violate the
Temples, and meddled not of Arabia; because their Prophet was born there.
Sesostris being returned into Egypt, gave himself wholly to religion; and to
building of Temples. Charlemaigne founded Monasteries; and began the University
of Paris. Constantine made the Pagan worship to cease; and assured
Christendom; assigned revenues to the Christian Churches; and builded
Constantinople. TAMBERLAN restored Smarcand: both of them having beautified and
enriched their cities with the spoils of the whole world. Alexander, Hannibal,
Julius Caesar, Augustus, Constantine, Attila, Charlemaigne; and TAMBERLAN had no
issue, of their bodies: resembling one an other in this; that they all led
great armies, fought great battles, and got great seigniories; which eftsoon
were lost or alienated by the division or cowardice of their successors. Attila
was fatal to Europe, and the West; Alexander and TAMBERLAN to Asia, and the
East; Julius Caesar to the common wealth of Rome, Hannibal to Italy, and the
country of Lybia. TAMBERLAN brought the Turks to a piteous state; out of which
they soon arose, and became more mighty then before: as the Greeks and
Romans oppressed by Xerxses and Hannibal; when they thought themselves
utterly overthrown, came to greater glory.

A COMPARISON OF THE KING doms, Empires, or Monarchies, and commonweals of
these days; with those of ancient time.
IT is mentioned in the holy scripture how Nabuchodonosor saw an Image of an
exceeding greatness; the head whereof was of gold, the breast and arms of
silver, the belly and thighs of brass, the legs of iron, the feet part of
iron, and part of earth: And when he was awaked, because he could not remember
his dream, and yet found himself sore troubled and fryghted therewith, he
called together his deuinours before him; whom he commanded to expound unto him
what his dream was, and the meaning thereof: and if they failed herein, he
threatened to put them to death. Which being understood by Daniel a young man
that had bin brought thither as a Captive from Jerusalem, he made it known
that he could fulfill the kings desire; and being presented to the king, he
declared first what the king had dreamed; and then interpreted the meaning of
his dream: saying, that the Image signified the four sovereign Empires of
the world, which should succeed in order one after another; namely the
Babylonian, Persian, Greek, and Romain. Thereupon he spoke unto the king in
such terms; Thou art certainly the golden head of this Image; thou I say whom
God has decked with supreme power, and glory; to whom he has given dominion
over all men* over the beasts of the field and the birds of the air. And
after thee shall come another kingdom of silver, that is to say, worse then
thine which is present; The third shall be of brass which shall be stretched
out far and wide: the fourth of iron, for as iron bruseth and overcomes al
things, so likewise this fourth shall bruise all the rest, and subdue them to it
self. The power of Nabuchodonosor is compared to a high tree reaching unto
heaven, and covering the universal world with the shadow thereof; whose leaves
are singularly fair, and the fruit so plentiful, that all beasts are fed and
fatted therewith: In whose boughs and branches all sorts of birds do build
their nestes, and make their resort. Whereby the scripture signifies the
Assyrian Monarchy, which was augmented under this King, and exalted to the
highest. Daniel also saw in a dream four beasts coming out of the sea, a
Lion, a Bear, a Leopard, and the fourth being terrible and horrible to behold.
The Lion signifies the reign of the Assyrians; and the two wings which he
gives him are as the two members of this Empire, Babylon and Assyria. By the
Bear is meant the kingdom of Persia, by which that of Babylon was destroyed:
The three ribs which he says were between his teeth, are the principal
Kings of this Monarchy, Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes, excelling above the
rest; which have eaten much flesh; that is to say, have joined many nations to
their dominion. The Panther or Leopard is the Empire of Alexander the great, or
of the Grecians: The four wings and heads are the four kingdoms, issued out
of this Monarchy after the death of Alexander. The fourth and last beast is
the Romain Empire: the ten horns are the members or parts thereof, Syria,
Egypt, Asia the lesser, Greece, Afric, Spain, France, Italy, Germany, and
England: for the ROMANS ruled over all these Nations. Amongst these ten horns
arises and grows up another little horn, which takes away three of the
otherten; whereby is understood, the kingdom of MAHOMET or of the TVRKES:
which being risen from a small beginning in the Roman Monarchy, has seized
the three principal parts thereof; Egypt, Asia, and Greece. Moreover this
little horn has eyes, and is injurious against God; for Mahomet proposed new
Doctrine, having the appearance of wisdom; which is signified by the eyes:
and yet notwithstanding blasphemeth God, abolishing the Christian doctrine, and
outraging of his Saints; until such time as the Ancient which has neither
beginning nor end, comes unto Judgment. Whereby is evidently to be
understood, that the course of this world, shall end in this Empire; and that
there shall not follow any other. But that al principalities of the world being
abolished, that everlasting kingdom shall come, whereof CHRIST is the Author
and conductour. Thus have some Divines expounded Daniel.

Others accommodate it only unto Babylon; which fell under the dominion of the
Persians, Medes, Greeks, and Parthians; which has bin often desolate, and
finally overthrown; not thinking it good to reduce all Empires unto four;
considering there have bin others of great power, and largenes. As of the
Medes, who supplanted the Assyrians; of the Parthians which overcame the
Macedonians, and oftentimes vanquished the Romans; and as having parted the
world with the^, obtained the East, and ruled al Asia between the red sea, and
the Caspian; and a good way toward the Indies: Of the Egyptians, whose kings
excelled in praise of valiancy, and deeds of arms al other nations; which
would blot out and deface, the great and excellent victories of the Persians,
Macedonians, and Romans; if the long course of years would permit their renown
to endure till this time, the rest no way surpassing them, but in the happiness
of their Historiographers (who are more read) and by a fresher memory of their
antiquity; Of the Arabians or Sarasens, which possessed Persia, and Babylon,
destroying the Romain Empire in the East; and enjoyed a great part of Asia,
Afric, and Europe; planting there not only their armies and seigniories, but
their religion also, and their tongue: Of the Goths who invaded not only the
provinces of the Roman Empire in the West, but took, and sacked Rome the
seat of the Empire; reigning in Italy lxx. years: although Alexander who
ouerthrewe the kingdom of the Persians, reigned but twelve years; who like a
lightening thunder leaped into diverse parts, leaving his state to many
successors disagreeing amongst themselves who lost it incontinently: Finally
of the Tartarians who may be compared with all the former; who won Bactriana
and Sogdiana; the provinces of the Babylonian, Persian, and Parthian Empire;
and destroyed Babylon it self under the conduct of their Lord Halao.

At this day there are great estates, namely toward the East: Of Cathay or of
China, in the Northren India; and of Narsingue in the Southern, whereunto the
Persian is near: That of the Moscouite in the North, and the Abyssin or
Ethiopian in the south. In the West the Spanish, and French. The Turkish is as
it were in the midst of all very great and rich: which notwithstanding is
not to be compared to that of the Romans, who ruled from the Orcades and
Thule on the one side; Spain, and Mauritania on the other; as far as the hill
Caucasus, and to the river Euphrates, and the higher Ethiopia; traversing the
country of Egypt and of Arabia, even to the East sea: their Empire having bin
almost the only one that has until this present made the East, and West, the
North, and South, their limits; having endured xij. hundred years longer then
any other kingdom or common wealth, which has bin either before or sithence,
except the Assyrian. For the Turks hold little in Africa, and nothing in
Italy, Spain, France, Germany, and England; neither yet passing toward the
East and the south, the ancient bounds of the Romans.

The common wealth of VENICE being principally Aristocratical; by the senate,
and college of wisemen, has these parts so well tempered together and
proportioned, that it has bin a long time preserved from sedicions within it
self, and mutations, which at leastwise were of great importance; and
outwardly has maintained it self against the assault of many mighty princes:
having already continued above twelve hundred years, without any violence of
inward wars, and without falling under the yoke of any foraigne power, or
changing the first ordinance wherein it was founded. Many ancient commonweals have exceeded it in greatness of Empire, in military discipline, and
renown of great exploictes: But there is none to be compared to it in
government, and laws for good, and happy life; neither any to be found that
has reigned so long; no not among the ancients, the Roman, Carthaginian,
Rhodian, Athenian, Lacedemonian, and Marsilian; or amongst those of later age,
the Florentine, Senoise, Lucoise, and Genuoyse: the state being in deed
governed in the most accomplished communalty, that has bin seen or red of. The
Democratie of the SWITZERS likewise is well tempered by the counsels
established in every Canton; which preserve it from such vices and
inconveniences, unto which the common people are most ordinarily subject; and
have made it to prosper hitherto. And in as much as there are among them
thirteen cities confederate; they represent the ancient leagues of the
Toscans, Ionians, Eolians and Acheians: which exceeded not much the number of
twelve or thirteen towns. For being come to such a number that they have
means to defend them selves, they endeavor not to increase their state: as well
because that necessity constrains them not to seek to get greater power; as
also because that being common in their conquestes they make no less reckoning
of them; and that otherwise by augmenting in societies and confederacies, the
multitude would come to some confusion.

A COMPARISON OF WARLIKE NA tions, Armies, Battayles, Sieges, and Assaults of
Fortresses.
SOme nations are better by land; and others by sea. Polybius writes of the
CARTHAGINIANS, that they were best on the sea, and could there best furnish an
equippage, for as much as this exercise was hereditarie, and ancient unto them,
and that they traficqued on sea more then any others: but that the ROMANS
help themselves best with their footmen; and gave themselves wholly unto it.
The Phenicians, Cilicians, Egiptians, Rhodians, and Marsilians were in times
past much esteemed for marine matters. The situation of VENICE is more fit for
war by sea then by land: seeing that one could not there in any sort
accommodate any companies of horsemen; or bands and squadrons of footmen.
Moreover the most simple, and courageous nations seek not to fight but by
prowes, and virtue; blaming all subtelties, and surprises: such as the Gauls
and Heluetians were in old time. The others as the Greeks, Spaniards,
Persians, Egiptians, and Africans which are crafty, and cautelous of nature,
care not by what means they get the advantage on their adversaries: not
thinking any kind of deceight to be reprochful against the enemies; so that
they overcome them. And therefore they do ordinarily use ambushes to entrap
him; and do rob and spoil their towns at unawares: endeavoring to vanquish
them by skirmishes, and sudden surprises, when they find them unprovided;
rather then by battles determined, and prepared at a prefixed day. Polybius
says that the Cretenses or Candians are the nimblest people of the world,
both by sea, and by land, for ambushes, robberies and spoils; for surprises by
night, and all manner of deceipts: but that in a pitched field they are
fearful, and cowardly without service; unto whom the Acheians, and Macedonians
are quite contrary. Justin tells of the Parthians, that by flying or running
away they deceived their enemies; and that when one would think them to be
overcome, they were the^ most dangerous. The Turks (who are reckoned so
mighty) get more victories, by policy, and opportunity; then by force: never
aduenturing or hazarding battle, but to their advantage.

Concerning armies; Asia at all times by reason of the unmeasurable largenes
thereof has bin most populous; and therefore has set forth armies of
incredible greatness, and power: as we have said of Ninus, who led an army of
seventeen hundred thousand footmen, two hundred thousand horsemen, ten
thousand and six hundred chariots, armed with hooks: Of Semiramis his wife
who went into India with thirty hundred thousand foot, five hundred thousand
horsemen, a hundred thousand chariots; and made a bridge on the river of Inde
of two thousand boats: of Cyrus; who gathered together six hundred thousand
footmen, and sixescore thousand horsemen, with two thousand armed chariots: Of
Darius the first; who assailed the Scythians, with eight hundred thousand
fighting men: Of Xerxes going into Greece; who had by sea five hundred
seventeen thousand men, and by land a Million, seven hundred thousand
footmen, and fourscore thousand horsemen; with twenty thousand Arabians, and
Africans: unto whom there joined of Europe three hundred thousand: the whole
multitude coming to two millions, six hundred and seventeen thousand
fighting men. Attila in Europe assembled five hundred thousand men of war; on
horseback, and on foot. We will compare TAMBERLAN unto them, who had together
and entertained long twelve hundred thousand soldiers: and those which have
diminished this number, yet gave him no less then six hundred thousand
footmen, and four hundred thousand horse. The two greatest armies, which have
bin seen in the West by land; within these thousand years, were that of Sultan
Soliman when he came the second time to Vienna, and of the Emperor Charles the
fifth, going to defend it against him. Where if they had fought, the question
had not bin only of Vienno, but of the Empire almost of all the world: to bring
it into his ancient estate. But the winter coming on, they parted without
doing any thing worthy of remembrance, fearing one the other. In the Turks
army there were five hundred thousand fighting men; and of Artillery, three
hundred field pieces. In that of the Emperor xc. thousand foot, and thirty
thousand horsemen; Almaignes, Flemings, Bohemians, Polaques, Hongarians,
Spaniards, Italians, Bourguignons, Namurois, and Hannoniers; with incredible
preparation of al sorts of artillery: the whole number of all those that were
in the army when it was full, coming to cclxxx* thousand parsons. The other
military assemblies that have bin seen in the West of long time, do resemble
robberies, or playing at barriers, rather then true wars (if we believe
Blondus Flauius the Historiographer) military discipline being all observed in
these parts; and men effeminated by delights; and blinded by their mutual and
frivolous dissentions, diminishing from day to day their valiancy and
reputation.

As touching battles, Herodotus affirms that of all those which were ever
fought by the Barbarians, the sharpest and most furious, was between TOMYRIS
the Queen of the Massagetes, and CYRUS: where was overthrown a great part of
the Persian army, and Cyrus himself slain. Xenophon reckons for great
battles, those two which Cyrus obtained against the Assyrians and the
Lydians; in which the one King was slain, and the other taken. We may also put
amongst the principal battles, those three which ALEXANDER wan of DARIUS King
of Persia; Those which were between SCIPIO, and HANNIBAL; and between POMPEY
and CAESAR at Pharsalia: Between ATTILA king of the Hunnes on the one part, and
the Romans Frenchmen and Goths on the other in the plain of Chaalons, where
remained a hundred and fourscore thousand parsons in the place: That which
CHARLES MARTEL had at Tours against the Sarazens, where were slain three
hundred and threescore thousand. Unto which we may compare that which
TAMBERLAN gave to BAJAZET OTTOMAN, where were slain two hundred thousand
Turks: AMVRATH to LANCELOT King of Poland and Hongary, at Varne; where he was
slain: The two which SELIM got on the SOPHI at Calderan, and on the SOVLDAN in
Suria: the most renowned that were fought these thousand years.

The most memorable ancient sieges of places are, that of TROY by the Greeks,
where they continued ten years, and in the end took it in the night time by
device: of BABYLON by Cyrus, and by Darius: of MESSENE by the Lacedaemonians;
where they remained likewise ten years: having bound themselves by oath not to
depart, til they had taken it. Herodotus writes that Psamneticus king of
Egypt, held AZOTVS a city of Suria be sieged for the space of ninteene years;
and was so obstinate in his purpose that he would not depart til he had taken
it: The same Author saying, that of all the towns that he had ever known, it
had endured the longest siege. Moreover Alexander besieged Tire, Marcellus
Syracusa; Hannibal Sagunt; Scipio, Carthage, and Numantia; Numantius, Corinth;
Julius Caesar, Vxellodun, Alexia, Auaric, Gergobie, and Marseilles; Vespasian,
and his son Titus, Jerusalem; Alaricus, Attila, and Gensericus, Rome. We may
put amongst the new sieges, which we will compare with the ancients, that of
CONSTANTINOPLE by Mahomet, accompained with two hundred thousand Turks: who
took it by assault, when he was but two and twenty years old: of GRANADO by
king Ferdinand, and Queen Isabel, where they continued seven years before
they could take it on the Moors: of RHODES by Sultan Soliman, compassing it
with three hundred thousand men, who finally obtained it by composition: of
BELGRADO at the entrance of Hongary, a very strong city; and of MALTA also by
him, which he could not take, although his men did their uttermost: but
conquered Signet in Hongarie when he died. It is not long sithence Florence
sustained a siege a whole year together, before the common wealth was brought
into a Dukedom.

But the sieges of Rhodes and Malta were more by sea, then by land, and may be
compared to the sieges of Tire, Syracusa, Carthage, Numantia, and Marseilles:
which in like manner were rather on sea, then on land. The battle by sea which
the VENETIANS got not long sithence of the Turks does not yield any whit to the
most renowned of the ancients: as that of the ROMANS against the ARMORICANS
that of DEMETRIUS the son of Antiochus king of Suria, and PTOLOMEY king of
Egypt; Between PHILIP king of Macedonia, and ATTALVS king of Pergamus;
between OCTAVIUS CAESAR, and MARCUS ANTONIUS before Actium: It is true that the
ancients were more mighty by sea then we: but for want of understanding and
skill in navigations they made infinite shipwrackes, and received inestimable
losses. The only city of Athens kept sometimes three hundred galleys. And now
the Turk who is so rich, and so mighty cannot rig forth, set to sea, and
maintain so many. Xerxes when he went into Greece had three thousand vessels.
Alexander when he died caused a thousand to be prepared to go into Africa, and
to assail Carthage. The Romans, and Carthaginians in the wars which they
had long time together lost an infinite number of ships. Dionise the tyrant of
Syracuse had four hundred vessels with oars.

Moreover the ancients made galleys of v. vj. vij. viij. ix. and x. oars in a
seat, yea even to xxx. Those of this time are but of iij. and at Venice it
has bin a difficult thing to build one of five oars. These five hundred years
the Venetians, and Genuoises have bin Masters of the Mediterranean sea, and
have fought sharply thereon one against the other, for the chief
superintendance thereof: The Venetians at length have had the better, and are
mighty thereon at this day. In the Ocean the Portugales, Castilians, and
Englishmen by dexterity, knowledge, and skill of nauigating hold the chief
commendation in this exercise: having excelled the Tyrians, Egyptians,
Phenicians, Rhodians, Romans, Carthaginians, Marsilians, Armoricians, and all
others that ever meddled with long voiages, and discoueries of lands that were
before unknown; having gone round about the world by their nauigations: which
the ancients never did, nor could, or durst undertake to do.

A COMPARISON OF NAVIGATIONS, and discoueries of Countries, Peregrinations, and
voyages by land.
HOmer and Orpheus have song in their verses how all the habitable earth is
environed with the Ocean as an Isle. And the Cosmographers affirm that the
earth and water make but one globe; which has bin wholly compassed in our
time, in three years, by the navigations of MAGELLAN and his fellows. In
ancient time the North was sailed by the commandment of AUGUSTUS, as far as
the Baltic sea; and Borussia, where the Amber grows. Now the ENGLISHMEN, and
the NORMANS go easily into Moscouia, passing the sea of Y ce, at such time as
it is vnfrozen.

Touching the innermost, and farthest part of the North, the Ancients knew no
farther then the river of Tanais, dividing Asia from Europe: At this day all is
known even to the Pole; and the most part reduced to the Christian religion by
the SVEVIANS, and MOSCOVITES. Which on the other side was known by the
MACEDONIAN arms, during the reign of Seleucus and Antiochus from the Indian
sea unto the Caspian. And about the Caspian sea were discovered many banks, as
toward the East was visited a great part of the south sea by the victories of
ALEXANDER the great. HANNO also a rich Carthaginian Lord sailed from Gibraltar
into the Arabian sea, behind Afric: having set down his voyage in writing.
In our time the Castilians have sailed beyond the Canaries, and bearing
toward the West, passed unto our Perieces, which they have subdued to the
Crown of Spain, with many Cities and large countries full of gold, and other
good things by them discovered. And the Portugales going toward the south
beyond the Capricorn have come to our Anteces, proving all the middle Zone to
be inhabited; that is to say, all that space of ground which is under the
Zodiac between the two tropicks against the opinion of Aristotle, and the
ancient Poets. Afterward they trauersed toward the Indies, and went to our
Antipodes obtaining a dominion over them. Moreover Paulus Venetus, Ludouicus
Romanus, Franciscus, Aluarez, Ioannes Leo, and others travailing by land
thorough all the coasts thereof, have given us knowledge of infinite
Mediterranean or midland countries, which were not known before. In such sort
that we may truly affirm that the world is wholly manifested, at this day, and
all mankind entierly known: for now all men may communicate one to another
their commodities, and supply their mutual wants; as inhabiting all the self
same city, and common wealth of the world.

A COMPARISON OF THE RICHES of the time present, with that of the times past.
IT is certain, that this age has bin much enriched and accomodated with many
new things, serving not only for necessity, but also for pleasure, ornament,
and magnificence; by the foresaid nauigations, and discoueries: For besides the
sugers, pearls, spices, strange and medicinable herbs, trees, and fruits;
there have bin found many mines of fine Gold toward the South; especially in
the country of PERV, where all the vessel, and vtensiles of household, are of
gold: which has bin brought into Spain, and dispersed afterward over all
Europe. But there is no small difficulty in judging whether the riches of this
time, be comparable to that of the time passed. For it seems that the
Ancients were richer, when we call to memory the unmeasurable quantity of
gold, which SARDANAPALVS the last king of the Assyrians consumed* at his
departure out of the world; the riches of the kings, MIDAS, and CRESVS; of
PYTHIAS the Bythinian, who at his own charges feasted the Army of Xerxes, and
presented him with a great Vine of gold; the great treasures found by ALEXANDER
in the conquest of Persia. The abundance of gold that was in Iewry, in the time
of SOLOMON; the excessive expenses of ANTONIUS and CLEOPATRA; the wealth of
CRASSVS a Citizen of Rome, accounting no man rich, if he could not intertaine
an Army with his reuenew: the spoils which JULIUS CAESAR got in the Gauls;
and the gifts which he gave unto many, to draw them to his side: The
prodigality of the Emperors, Claudius, Caligula; and Nero: The possessions of
Pallas, Callistus, and Narcissus bondmen; And of SENECA the Philosopher: who
being but private men, exceeded the public reuenew of many kings, at this day
accounted to be very rich. Notwithstanding we understand, that the great CHAM
of Cathay, and PRESBITER JOHN, use a kind of husbandry never before practiced,
togather gold and silver unto them, and to keep that, which they have
gathered; and do continue togather, in so great quantity, that they have
enough to buy all the rest of the world: For the one, not using money made of any
Metal, but either pieces of paper, or the rinds of Mulberie trees, marked
with his Emperial mark; The other, grains of salt, or pepper corns, (which
they cause to be valued as money) they draw to themselves all the gold, and
silver of the Country; and cause it to be melted, and then lock it up in
strong places, without diminishing of it at any time: In such sort, that they
seem to exceed in wealth, all other Princes, both ancient and modern, that
were ever renowned for their riches. The kings of PERSIA were not so good
husbands, which gave money his course to and fro, both of gold, and silver in
their Country, and that which they drew unto themselves, they caused to be
melted and cast into earthen barrels; and when the vessels were full, they made
them to be carried up and down to follow their Court; and when they had any
need, they broke as much as they had use of. They say that the reuenew of the
great SIGNOR, amounts to twelve or fifteen Millions of gold; wherewith he
intertaineth so many men on horseback, and on foot, by land and by sea, in his
Court, and on his frontiers; which do never want their pay: and yet
notwithstanding, by good husbandry lays up every year great store of gold
and silver, in his treasure house, and in the seven towers of Constantinople.
Of long time there has not bin any Lord richer under the degree of a King, or
an Emperor, then COSMVS de MEDICIS, the first of that name being a Florentine.

A COMPARISON OF ARTISANS, and of works
THE excellent Artisans, and exquisite works, are commonly found amongst rich
folks; who are curious to have fair houses, moueables, garments, arms,
harneis, pleasures, and delights: But poor men are suffised with supplying of
their wants. Wherefore in those Countries where all riches do abound; and
namely in great Cities, do frequent all kind of workmen; which are very good
at this day: coming near to the Ancients in some works; and in others
excelling them. The GREEKS for a time excelled in all occupations; Then the
ITALIANS; who are ordinarily absolute in whatsoever they give themselves wholly
unto. The ALMAINS work wonderfully in all kind of Metalls. The FLEMINGS in
Paynting, and Tapistrie. The FRENCHMEN are most industrious to imitate that
which they see exactly done elsewhere: and to represent it afterward. The
EGIPTIANS of Cair, are very witty; honoring, and esteeming above all others,
the Inuentours of any brave novelty. But the CATHAYANS, or CHINOIS, have this
persuasion of themselves, that they surpass all men in dexterity: working so
lively, that their works do not seem to be made by man's hand; but by nature
her self.

A COMPARISON OF THE MANNERS of this present Age, with the former.
IT is an old complaint, that manners wax every day worse and worse. If it were
so, then men should ere this have come to the height of iniquity; and there
should now be no more integrity in them: which is not true. But we must think
that there is a vicissitude, and an interchangeable course between vice and
virtue; which arise and fall by turns, and are oftentimes opposed one against
an other, as contraries: that they may be the better known, and more easily
discerned. Inest enim rebus omnibus quidam velut crbis, vt quemadmodum temporum
vices, ita morum vertantur: nec omnia apud priores meliora (inquit Tacitus) sed
nostra quoque aetas multa laudis et artium, laudanda posteris tulit. It is
credible, that this complaint has first proceeded from old men: who having
passed the flower of their age (which was full of joy, and gladness) when they
come to their extreme old age (wherein is nothing but sorrow, and sadness,) they
wish again for the pleasures of youth; seeing their senses become feeble; and
all their members weakened. Sometimes also being despised or neglected of those
that erst had honored them; and deceived by a false opinion which they have of
things; they think there is no faith, nor friendship, nor honesty, remaining
among men: telling to the younger sort many wonders of their former age. To whom
it happens no otherwise then it does unto those, that embarke themselves on the
sea, and beginning to sail, according to the measure as they are distant from
land, it seems unto them, that the bank, or shore, the hills, trees, and
houses do leave them: thinking in like manner that in their old age, both
pleasure, humanity, and justice do forsake them, and vanish away. Moreover,
those which are extremely vicious, being not able to go any farther, nor yet to
stand at a stay wherethey be; are constrained to return by little, and little,
either for shame (which is naturally in men) or else for necessity; because
that in such manifest wickedness, they are eschewed of all men: or else by the
divine providence; which brings them back again. For in the ancient
histories are found such execrable vices, as there can not be more; which have
reigned for a time, and have afterward bin detested: in whose place have
suoceeded most commendable virtues. Whereon we will resolve with Seneca,
speaking thus to this purpose. Hoc maiores nostri questi sunt (ait) hoc nos
querimur, hoc posteri nostri queruntur; euersos esse mores, regnare nequitiam,
in deterius res humanas, et in omne nefas labi: At ista stant loco eodem,
stabunt que paululum duntaxat vltro citroque mota; vt fluctus quos aestus
accedens longius extulit, recedens maiore littorum vestigio tenuit. Nunc in
adulterio, magis quam in alio peccabitur, abrumpetque fraenos pudicitia; nunc
conuiuiorum vigebit furor, et foedissimum patrimoniorum exitium culina; nunc
cultus corporum nimius, and formae cura, praeseferens animi deformitatem: Nunc
in petulantiam and audaciam erumpet male dispensata libertas; nunc in
crudelitatem priuatam, ac publicam ibitur, bellorumque ciuilium insaniam, qua
omne sanctum, et sacrum profanetur. Habebitur aliquando ebrietati honor; et
plurimum meri cepisse virtus erit. Non expectant vno loco vitia; sed mobilia,
and inter se dissentientia tumultuantur: pellunt inuicem, fuganturque. Ceterum
idem semper de nobis pronunciare debemus; malos esse nos, malos fuisse (Inuitus
adiiciam) and futuros esse.

A COMPARISON OF THE LEARNING of these days, with the Ancient in Philosophy,
Eloquence, Law, Policy, Physic, Poetry, Astrology, Cosmographie, and the
other Mathematics.
Always the great understandings, and good wits fit for Learning, have bin
rare; yea even in the learned ages, and amongst the most ingenious Nations:
Consequently, the excellency of learning has bin also rare; and therefore the
more admirable. To the attayning whereof, there is requisite a happy nature, a
laborious diligence, and a constant perseverance; which must be advanced,
honored, and rewarded by the Princes: who notwithstanding commonly have small
care of learning, and favor it slenderly. The students, if they be poor, they
apply themselves to questuarie, or gainful arts; whereby to have means to
live, when they have reasonably profited in them. The rich give themselves to
pleasure, seeking the easy and superficial appearance; and not the painful
profoundnes, and depth of knowledge. The greatest part of Teachers use but
rehersings, and repetitions by rote, acquiting themselves lightly of their
charges. They which write for the most part, do nothing but tie together, and
all heap one on another Grammars, Rhetoricks, Logicks, Institutions,
Introductions, Abridgements, Annotations, Corrections, Translations, Epistles,
Orations, Eclogues, Dialogues, Common places, Elegyes, Odes, Vulgar rymes, and
such other versifications. Moreover, we must learn out of books in the
schools, the Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Chaldiack, and Arabian; which were mother
tongues amongst the Ancients, and they learned them from their cradle, when
they began to speak: In which we must now consume much time, and the best of
our age; which were better employed in the knowledge of things, and
understanding of the sciences. Besides there is one inconvenience in learning,
which is not small; that they are all their life time brought up in the shadow
of schools, without knowing of their behavior amongst men; and without having
experience of matters; although knowledge without practice be imperfect. Which
is the cause that we have not at this day such eminent persons in Philosophy,
as Pythagoras, Thales, Plato, Aristotle, and Theophrastus; In Eloquence, as
Demosthenes, and Cicero; In Physic, as Hippocrates, Galene, and Auicen; In
Law, as Seruius Sulpicius, Papinian, and Vlpian; In History, as Herodotus,
Thucydides, Polybius, Salust, Liuie, and Tacitus; In the Mathematics, as
Euclide, Eudoxus, Archimedes, and Ptolomeus: albeit there have bin in them
very excellent men of this age. For sithence they were extinguished in Egypt,
and left off by the Greeks, and Arabians; they were never more famous then they
are at this present: especially Astrology, and Cosmographie; for the Ancients
scarcely understood the one half of heaven, of the earth, and of the sea;
knowing nothing in the West beyond the Canaries; and in the East beyond
Catygare. At this day all lands and seas are known, and sailed.

Thales, Pythagoras, Aristotle, Hipparchus, Artemidorus, Eratosthenes, Strabo,
Pliny, Macrobius, Capella, Virgill, and generally all the ancient Authors;
save Ptolomey, Auicen, and Albertus magnus, thought that of the five Zones of
heaven, there were but two inhabited: and that the three others by excessive
heat, or extreme cold remained desert. At this day there is nothing more
certain, then that they all are inhabited. Pliny, Lactantius, and S. Augustine,
thought there were no Antipodes: But now we rule over them, and trafick with
them ordinarily. They which in times past beheld the heavens, found but few
mouings, and could scarce perceive ten; But now (as if the knowledge, both of
the one, and the other world, had bin by some destiny reserved for our age)
they have bin observed in greater number, and more admirable: and two other
principal ones added unto them, to serve for a certain demonstration of many
things appearing in the stars; and to discover the hidden mysteries of
nature. Cosmographie, and Astrology, are so beautified, that if Ptolomey the
father of them both were alive again, he would scarce know them, being
increased in such sort by the late observations, and nauigations. REGIOMONTANVS
is reputed the best Mathematician this age, and thought to be little inferior
to Anaximander the Milesian; or Archimedes the Syracusan. His Master
Purbachius, the Cardinal of CVSA, and COPER NICVS (being Germains al of them)
have excelled in these sciences. Also IOVIANVS PONTANVS has taken great pains
in Astrology, being no less happy in prose, then in verse; and apt for any
kind of writing. Volateran said, that he made verses with more art then nature:
But yet so labored after the imitation of the Ancients, that he has not had
his peer in this age. Crinitus speaking of him, and of MARVLLVS his disciple,
affirms, that both the one and the other is absolute in his kind; and that they
two may be compared with the Ancients: deserving very well to be taken for
good example, and admired as notable relics of antiquity. Fracastorius gives
such testimony of PONTANVS. Vidimus et Vatem egregium, cui pulchra canenti
Parthenope, Placidusque cauo Sebethas ab antro
Plauserunt, vmbraeque, sacri manesque Maronis:
Qui magnos stellarum ortus cantauit, and hortos
Hesperidum; caelique omnes variabilis oras.


SYNCERVS, VIDA, and FRACASTORIVS have likewise deserved much in the Latin
Poesy. PETRARCH, and ARIOSTO in the Italian. RONSARD, and BELLAY in the
French. GEORGIUS AGRICOLA a Germain, has so well acquitted himself in serching
the nature of Metals; as Aristotle, Theophrastus, Pliny, and other Ancients,
seem to have understood nothing in comparison of him. The Earl JOHN of
MIRANDVLA, was the honor of his age; and might well have bin compared to all
the Egiptian, Chaldean, Persian, Greek, Romain, and Arabian antiquity, if he
had lived.

But it is now time to make an end of this discourse; by which is evidently
showen the vicissitude in all humane affairs, arms, learning, languages,
arts, estates, laws, and manners: and how they cease not to arise and fall;
amending or empairing by turns. And if the memory and knowledge of that which
is past, be the instruction of the present, and advertisement for that which is
to come: it is to be feared, least the power, wisdom, sciences, books,
industry, workmanshipps, and knowledges of the world, being come to so great
excellency; do fall again, as they have done in times past, and come to
decay: by confusion succeeding after this order and perfection; rudeness after
ciuisitie; ignorance after knowledge; and barbarousnes after elegancie. I
foresee already in my mind, many strange Nations, differing in fashions,
colors, and habites; rushing into Europe as did in old time the Goths,
Hunnes, Lombardes, Vandales, and Saracens; which will distroy our Towns,
Cities, Castles, Palaces, and Temples: will change the manners, laws,
languages, and religion; burn the Libraries, spoiling whatsoever good things
they shall find in these Countries invaded by them: to the end to abolish the
honor and virtue thereof. I foresee wars arising in all Countries, both
civil and foreine; factions, and divisions springing, which will profane both
divine and humane whatsoever; famines, and pestilences threatening mortal men;
the order of nature, the rules of the celestial motions, and the agreement of
the elements breaking off; deluges, and inundations coming on the one side;
and excessive heates, and violent earthquakes on the other: and the world
drawing toward an end; bringing with it a confusion of all things, and
reducing them again to their ancient and former Chaos.

But howbeit, these things proceed (after the opinion of the Naturalists) from
the fatal law of the world; and have their natural causes: yet
notwithstanding, the events of them do principally depend on the pronidence of
God; who is above nature, and who alone does know the prefixed time, wherein
these things shall come to pass. Wherefore, men of good minds ought not to be
amazed or astonished therewith; but rather to take courage unto them,
travailing carefully, every one in that vocation whereunto he is called; to
thend to preserve to their power so many goodly things lately invented, or
restored; whose loss would be almost irrepairable; and to deliver them over to
such as come after us; as we have received them of our ancestors: and namely
GOOD LETTERS, as long as it shall please God that they endure. Whom we will
pray to preserve from indignity, such as make profession of them worthily;
that they may persevere in this honest study: amending the Arts, and clearing
of the truth, to his praise, honor, and glory. For this occasion, the better
to encourage them, shall be added an Inquisition on that common saying of men,
whereby they have always maintained, and do maintain; that nothing can be
said, which has not bin said heretofore: that thereby they may understand,
that the truth is not wholly discovered; nor all the learning taken up by our
forefathers.

The end of the eleventh Book.
WHETHER IT BE TRVE, OR NO, that there can be nothing said, which has not bin
said before; And that we must by our own Inventions, augment the Doctrine of
the Ancients: not contenting our selves only with Translations, Expositions,
Corrections, and Abridgements of their Writings. The Twelfth and Last Book.
THE beginnings of the Arts have bin small, and the greatest difficulty, was
in the first inuenting of them; then by the industry of the learned, they were
by little and little augmented; Correcting such things as were evil observed,
and supplying such as were omitted: but yet, without making any thing entierly
absolute; whereunto there might nothing be added. Nothing is begone and ended at
one time; but by succession of time, things are increased, amended, and become
better polished. Almost all the Arts have bin invented by Use and Experience;
and afterward gathered and made by observation and reason: and then
consequently reduced into better form, and more certain, by Divisions,
Definitions, Argumentations, and Demonstrations; by general precepts and rules
drawn from nature, not from opinion, and tending to the same end: not by
staying and resting on that which men had formerly done, said, or written; nor
by only imitating of them, after the manner of slothful, and cowardly persons:
but by the adding of somewhat of their own, by some that came after, according
as the matters from time to time discovered, and cleared themselves; the honor
commonly remaining to the last comers, as the most exquisite, and
accomplished. By whose example we ought to travail courageously, with hope to
make our selves better then them; aspiring continually to perfection, which as
yet is not seen any where: considering that there remain more things to be
sought out, then are already invented, and found. And let us not be so
simple, as to attribute so much unto the Ancients, that we believe that they
have known all, and said all; without leaving anything to be said, by those
that should come after them. They have not bin so arrogant, as to look that
none should meddle, or deal with those matters which they had handeled: But on
the contrary, considering the difficulty of knowledge, and the weakness of
man's understanding, they have exhorted others to travail therein; speaking
rather to stir them up, and provoke them thereunto, then to keep them back, or
stay them from writing. Let us not think that nature has given them all her
good gifts, that she might be barren in time to come: but that as she has in
times past brought forth certain notable personages, who have manifested many
of her secrets; so she can again bring forth, such as by the influence of
heaven, and a singular inclination, by liuelynes of understanding, and
perseverance of labor, shall attain thither; whither long experience,
diligent observation, and subtilitie of reason, have not pierced till this
present. She is the same that she was in the former famous ages: The world is
such as it was before: The heaven and the time keep the same order which they
did; The Sun, and the other Planets, have not changed their courses; and there
is no star removed out of his place: The Elements have the same power; men
are made of the same matter, and in the same sort disposed as they were in old
time. And were not the manner of living corrupted, which we use, preferring
idleness before diligence, pleasure before profit, and riches before virtue;
nothing would let, but this age might bring forth as eminent personages in
Philosophy as were Plato, and Aristotle; in Physic as Hippocrates, and Galen;
or in the Mathematics as Euclide, Archimedes, and Ptolomey. Considering the
help which we receive of their books, the examples wherewith antiquity has
instructed us, so many observations, and inventions sithence their time, and so
long experience of all things: In such sort, that (if we consider it well)
there was never age more happy for the advancement of learning, then this
present; if weying the shortness of man's life, we resolve to employ our whole
endeavor and industry, on the study of true knowledge. Wisdom has not
fulfilled her work; much remains, and will always remain: and there will
never be wanting occasion to add thereunto. Truth does offer her self to all
those that will seek her, and are of capacity to receive her* albeit Democritus
complayneth, that she is hid in a place as deep as a well, wherhence (in his
opinion) it is not possible to draw her forth. Whosoever gives himself to it
in good earnest, shall find always somewhat to do therein. All the mysteries of
God and secrets of nature, are not discovered at one time. The greatest things
are difficult, and long in coming. How many are there, not yet reduced into
art? How many have bin first known and found out in this age? I say, new
lands, new seas, new forms of men, manners, laws, and customs; new diseases,
and new remedies; new ways of the Heaven, and of the Ocean, never before found
out; and new stars seen? yea, and how many remain to be known by our
posterity? That which is now hidden, with time will come to light* and our
successors will wonder that we were ignorant of them. M. Varro witnesses,
that in the space of a thousand years, the Arts were invented, and augmented;
which yet until this time are not perfected, and accomplished: But if the
perfection of them has not hitherto bin found, it follows not thereof, that
it cannot be found. For those things which at this day are held to be the
greatest, and most admirable, had a time of beginning: and that which is now
very good, was not so at the first; but is increased by little and little,
amending from time to time. Certainly, the excellency in all things is slow,
difficult, and rare: seeing that there is scarcely found in many hundreds, and
thousands of years, amongst an infinite number of Students, one man worthy of
admiration; being learned and eloquent indeed; that with a good natural wit,
liuelynes and sharpnes of understanding, experience and use of things, has the
constancy and patience to persevere, which are requisite to such an
interprise. This notwithstanding, we ought not to faint, or to despair; for if
there be but small hope to excel and go beyond the best; yet is it an honor
to follow them: and if there be no means to reach them; yet is it commendable
to be second, or third unto them. It is therefore convenient to apply our
industry to the searching out of the truth, as they have done; and to
endeavor to augment the doctrine of the Ancients: without so much subiecting
our selves to antiquity, that we do nothing for our age; and have no care of
our posterity. Moreover, many things invented by the Ancients, are lost. The
wisdom of the Egiptians, Persians, Indians, and Bactrians, has not come unto
us; many good Greek and Latin Authors are not found; And amongst those that
remain, there are few agreeable to the present manners, and affairs. We do not
build now adays after the fashion of Vitruuius; neither till the ground, nor
plant, according to Varro, or Columella; nor take food or physic after the
ordinance of Hippocrates, and Galen: We judge not according to the Civil Law of
the Romans; neither plead we as did Demosthenes, and Cicero; or govern our
common wealths, by the Laws of Solon, and Lycurgus; or following the
politic precepts of Plato, and Aristotle. We sing not as did the Ancients;
neither war we according to Vegetius: the art military being changed; and
all kind of arms, both offensive, and defensive. Ptolomey in his Cosmographie,
does aduertize men to believe the latest trauaylers, touching the longitude,
and latitude of places. Aristotle says, that the Quadrature of the Circle may
be known; but that it is not yet found out. Plato affirms, that Geometry
was imperfect in his time, and that Stereometrie, and the Cubike wanted. The
Calculations of the Heavens are not all found true. Vesalius curiously
observing Anatomy, has found many points therein omitted by Aristotle, and
Galen. Pliny, boasts that he has added in the History of living Creatures,
that which Aristotle was ignorant of. Leonicenus reproves Pliny of lies, and
errors in many places. Auenreis has written against Galene; Galene against
Aristotle; and Aristotle against Plato. There is no Author so accomplished or
perfected, in whom one may not find somewhat wanting, or worthy of reproof.
And that which is worse; there are some men so given and so affectionate to
antiquity, that they are ignorant, or have very small knowledge, of the
Country, and time wherein they live. They know in every point how Athens,
Lacedemon, Carthage, Persia, and Egypt were governed, not knowing the affairs
of their own Country; wherein they are strangers: As there are found many
among us, discoursing of the assembly of the Ariopagites, and of the Comices of
the Romans; understanding nothing of the counsel of France, the handling of
the revenues, and the order of the Parliaments. Is it not then an abusing of
study, and of learning, to dwell continually among the Ancients,; and not to
endeavor to bring forth new inventions, agreeable to the manners, and affairs
of this time. When will we leave taking of grass for corn; the flower for the
fruit; and the rind for the wood; doing nothing but translate, correct,
expound, or abridge, the books of the Ancients? who if they had bin also of
this mind, not setting themselves to write; or to say any thing, but that which
had bin written, or said before; no Art should have bin invented: or at least,
they had all remained in their beginnings, without receiving any increase. The
perpetual Imitatours, or always Translatours; or Commentatours, hyding
themselves under the shadow of others, are very slaves; and have no generous
courage in them: if they dare not once to do, that which they have so long time
learned. They always distrust themselves; and follow the first in those
things, wherein the later have not agreed with the former; namely, in those
which are not yet sought out: and will never be found, if we content our selves
with that which is already invented; without adding any thing thereunto. By
occasion whereof, I will answer them henceforward which object, that there
are too many books.

Certainly, if all that has bin written by the ancient Philosophers,
Historiographers, Orators, Poets, Physicians, Divines, and Lawiers, had come
to our hands, all had bin full of books; and we should have had no other
moueables in our house but books: we should be constrained to go, sit, and lie
upon books. And yet there remain so many, and are made from day to day, that
the age of man could not suffice to read, not only the writings in many
disciplines; but in one particular: and seldom are the Inuentories found
perfect. The great number serves rather for charge, then for instruction; and
it is much better to read some few that be good; then to wander thorough many
which are evil. Lucian blames an ignorant person, which boasted that he had
many books; and Martial mocketh an other, who thought thereby to be accounted
learned. Seven hundred Volumes were found in the Library of Alexandria, which
were all burned together by a mischance of fire. The learned carried their books
thither from all parts, as to the Theater of learning; and they read them in
the Museum which was there, at the plays ordained for the honor of Apollo,
and of the Muses: the vanquishers receiving great gifts, in the sight and
knowledge of all the world; In so much that none were reckoned learned, which
had not won some prize there. Liuie calls that great Library, a worthy work
of kingly care, and magnificence: But Seneca says, that it was neither care,
nor magnifice^ce; but a studious pomp or superfluity: and yet not studious;
because the Ks. Ptolomeyes had not erected it to serve for study, but for a
show and spectacle. As we see many private men also which have gathered many
together, well printed, bound, and gilded: to serve only for ornaments, which
they never look in themselves, nor suffer others for fear of fouling them.
Also king ATTALVS assembled at Pergamus in emulation of the Ptolomeyes, two
hundred thousand volumes which were given by Antonius to Cleopatra, and so
vanished. There were in the Library of the GORDIANS xl. thousand: and a great
number of exquisite ones in that of LVCVLLVS, and AUGUSTUS. There are some at
this present very well furnished; both amongst the Christians, and the
Mahometists.

But going by the professions, I have read that DIDYMVS a Grammarian composed
four thousand books: APPIAN six thousand; who was so arrogant, as to say,
that he made them immortal, to whom he dedicated his works. CICERO said,
that if his age were doubled, yet would it not suffice to read all the Lyrick
Poets. Seneca thinks as much of those that have written of Logic. There is
no people, nation, city, commonwealth, seigniorie, country, kingdom, or
empire; but has his Cronicles and Histories. In Greece one only war of
Marathon, found three hundred Historiographers, and Plutarch in his lives
alleges more then two hundred of them. SALVST, and LIVIE are come to us
imperfect, and faulty: as are also many others of less reckoning both Greeks
and Romans. It is not possible to reckon the books that are made of Physic,
which has many times bin changed, and divided into diverse sects. ARISTOTLE the
Philosopher composed iiij. hundred volumes: and VARRO the most learned amongst
the Romans as many. The Emperor JUSTINIAN by the excessive multitude of books
which were of the civil Law, was constrained to cause the Pandects to be made:
on which contrary to his edict have bin heaped innumerable commentaries. S.
John the evangelist says, that the world is not able to receive all the books
which should be written of JESUS CHRIST: as appeared in the time following,
wherein were infinite written in many languages, concerning the Christian
religion; and the exposition of the old and new Testament. ORIGIN alone has
written six thousand books. The Goths, Vandales, Alanes, Hunnes, Lombards,
Sarazens, Turks, and Tartarians brought an inestimable loss to the libraries,
and corruption to the languages.

Books are different also according to the disposition of the times, and
inclination of the countries wherein they are made: even as wines are diverse
according to the territory, quality of the air, and disposition of the year;
the nature of the vine, and industry of the keeper. Every age has his peculiar
kind of speech; Every nation and age his phrase: the Greeks and Latins writing
after one sort; the Hebrews, Chaldees, and Arabians after an other. All are
not of continuance: and as many are lightly and easily made; so they are
estsoones and incontinently lost. Some are left off for the obscurity, and to
affected subtilty and barbarousnes which is in them: Others despised, or
neglected as unprofitable; or consumed by length of time; or destroyed by
wars, changes of tongues, and of religions; or by being evil written and
copied out; or corrupted, and depraved: In others there is nothing but tedious
repetitions; by changing the order, and the words. Pliny a man of great
reading, says that in conferring and comparing of authors, he has found the
old written out word for word by those that were next after them, concealing
their names; and choosing rather to be taken in their theft, then to
acknowledge the debt. Those which are respected here as holy; are burned
elsewhere, as abomination. The affected to some certain sect, religion, or
profession, are red only by people of the same sect, religion, and profession.
The poemes, orations, epistles, chronicles, histories, comedies, and tragedies,
are not looked on; but by such as understand the tongue wherein they are written:
and out of it they commonly lose their grace. There are not any which please
and satisfy al people; or which are received in all places; except they be
advisedly made, with great judgment, and profound learning, by a singular grace
of God, and a rare goodness of nature: resisting against envious old age, and
warranting themselves from the silence of oblivion. Such as seem to be those
of Plato, Aristotle, Hippocrates, and Ptolomey* who not content with the images
of things, and shadows of opinions, have sought the truth directly; and have
therefore escaped the injury of time, of fire, of water, and of wars; among so
many nations, and contrary sects, translated into diverse languages; yet keeping
still the same grace, as when they were newly made. For as time abolisheth the
opinions that are not well grounded; so it also confirms the infallible
judgments of a wise and understanding nature, augme^ting always the
reputation of those writers which have best observed, and understood it. The
judgment of time discovers in the end the secret faults of al things; who
being the father of truth, and a judge void of passion, has always accustomed
to give a just sentence, of the life or death of writings.

But seeing that the arts and sciences begin, and grow; are changed and
preserved by care, diligence, remembrance, and meditation, and are lost by
negligence, sloth, forgetfulness, and ignorance; it being a thing most
requisite that truth should remain amongst men: It behooves of necessity that
the first being abolished, others should come in their places; and that the old
books being lost, there should be made new. For as other things being subject
to mutatio^, have need of continual generation to renew themselves, and to
maintain each of them his kind: So must learning also be provided for, by
seeking of new inventions, in steed of those that are lost, by changing that
which is not well; and by supplying that which is wanting: to the end that it
be not decayed; but amended from day to day. For the world being made of two
things, whereof the one are perpetual, and others mutable and corruptible: It
is certain that those which are perpetual, as the heaven, the sun, the
moon, and the other stars, remain, constantly always in one self same
estate: But they that are moveable do begin, and end; are borne, and die; do
increase, and diminish incessantly; endeavoring notwithstanding (as much as
they may) to come near and participate of eternity: not by remaining always
one and the same (as doethe superior and divine things) but by continuing
their kinds by the means of generation; which is an immortal work in this
mortality. So the plants, and all living creatures which cannot endure long,
by the necessity of the matter whereof they are made, renew themselves
continually; procreating by budds, and seeds, their like. In such sort that by
the order of nature the young do always succeed unto the old, and the living to
those that are deceased; their kinds by this means remaining immortal. But
men being indewed with a divine and immortal soul, do aspire more to such
perpetuity and immortality; endeavoring to remedy that infirmity which they
know in themselves: Namely such as have their bodies most fruitful, by
begetting of children, by whom they hope to perpetuate their name, and lynage;
Others that have their mind better instructed, by bringing forth such fruits
as are proper thereunto; as virtues, sciences, learned and elegant writings,
and other such fruits more noble, more admirable, and more durable then those
of the body; which they prefer before children; and for which they voluntarily
expose themselves to all labors, and dangers; neither sparing their parsons
nor their goods. Therhence arises in good wits the insatiable desire of honor,
stirring them up day and night, not to content themselves with base, and casual
things: but to seek by virtuous deeds, to recompense the shortness of this
life, by the memory of all posterity. Therehence proceeds the wonderful
desire of making themselves known* of leaving a good opinion of them, and
getting an immortal renown. And by how much the better they are, the more they
strive to come to this point of immortality; which they do so long for. For
those most excellent personages, would not have travailed as they have done in
times passed; without the hope which they had to be praised, and renowned, as
now they are. Such were the ancient Poets, Orators, Historiographers,
Physicians, Philosophers, and Divines; who have brought forth so many books,
which bring them immortal glory; as they themselves being immortal, do teach
unto others piety, justice, and equity; declare the secrets of nature, both
in heaven, and in earth; teach the disciplines; contain Histories full of
examples; give remedies against maladies; and other innumerable helps, and
means: without which we should live worse then beasts; having neither
religion, learning, nor ciuility. Such were the LAWMAKERS, who begat LAWS, and
manners of government, giving to people, honest and durable manners of living.
Such were the LAWIERS who have ordered the business, contracts, and Cases of
particular parsons; expounded the Satutes, and ordinances; showing the reason
of them; aduertising how they ought to be kept, renewed, or abrogated. Such
were the valiant CAPTAINS who did heroycall deeds for the defense, and
liberty of their country; founded Empires, and monarchies; and builded
cities: forgetting all other pleasures, to the end to leave an immortal memory
for the time to come. Such were many notable parsonages; who for having showed
excellent inventions, and exercised al virtues, have bin greatly admired: even
to the deifying of some of them. And if we mislike barennes in the body, with
greater reason ought we to detest it in the mind; and aspire to the like
immortality, and renown: the desire whereof is naturally given to all parsons,
to serve for a spur to prick them forward unto honest actions. The husbandman
hates the fruitles ground; and the husband a wife that is barren: And all do
commend him more that by husbandry augmenteth his good, then him which
maintains it only in that estate which is fallen to him by succession. So in
like manner it suffiseth not to know by the book without bringing forth
something of our selves, whereby to help the truth. Plato says that the
Greeks have bettered that which they received from the Barbarians. Cicero is
of opinion, that the Italians have of themselves better invented then the
Grecians, or made that better which they borrowed of them. And why should not we
endeavor to do the like; amending that which the Barbarians, Greeks, and
Romans have left unto us? There is no want of good wits, so that they be
well instructed. Peradventure there are more in one place then in another; but
there are found some every where; as in this country of ours, where nature
has showed her self as favorable as any where else: creating us not inferior
to any others, in situation, fertility, and commodity of country, goodness of
wits, ciuility of manners, equity of Laws, government, and continuance of
Monarchy; dexterity both in liberal and mechanical sciences, variety of all
things either growing within the country, or brought from other places;
multitude of public schools well privileged, and richly founded for the
institution of youth, and intertainment of Professors, and Teachers.

Wherefore, if all men do think that the future belongs unto them; they that
are Learned must not be negligent in obtaining of that by the durable monuments
of Learning, which others do pretend and seek by works of small continuance.
But they ought to travail to their power, if not in respect of men (who show
themselves oftentimes ungrateful toward their benefactors, and envious of the
present virtue) yet at the least for the honor of God: Whose will is, that we
should carefully preserve the arts and sciences, as also all other things
necessary for life; and deliver them over from time to time to our posterity,
by learned, and elegant writings in good matters: giving light to the obscure,
credit to the doubtful, order to the confused, elegancy to the unpolished,
grace to such as are left of, novelty to the old, and authority to the new.

FINIS.

