A WARNING For Israel, IN A SERMON PREACHED AT CHRIST-CHVRCH, IN Dublin, the
30. of October, 1625.

By Henry Leslie, one of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

PROVERB. 22.3. A prudent man foreseeth the evil and hides himself, but the
foolish go on still and are punished.

LUKE. 19.42. O if thou had even known, at the least in this thy day,
those things which belong unto thy peace!

Imprinted at Dublin by the Society of STATIONERS, Anno 1625.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, HENRY, LORD VISCOUNT FALKLAND Lord Deputy general
of the Kingdom of IRELAND.
RIGHT HONORABLE;
INeyther as valewing your greatness or ability, present this before your
Honor; but your goodness and virtue: not that I think the subject unfit your
consideration, but because I am jealous of the compiler. Yet my presumption is
not great; for what I now do, is obedience, yea but seconding in action, what
your Honor thought worthy to be effected. Discourses of this nature have not
many Patrons: and to see great men busy both their senses with Divinity, is
mirum in terris. Yet the Church has had a Sergius Paulus, a prudent Deputy,
and a Publius also, from whom our Apostle might receive encouragement: and we
have not lost, but changed our late learned King, that mixed his meals with
divine thoughts, and taught his Nobles the like wisdom: and herein I know not
whether we can judge him more happy in his Princely power, or Priestly
prudence. That path that honored him a King, may crown you a subject. Neither
do I provoke you by the father, as if there were nothing imitable in the
son; for who does not see freshly budding in his sacred person, what his
Father presented to us in full ear? And your glory will be no less in
imitating his graces, then in presenting his person.

This (whatsoever it is) I place at your Lordships feet, if it please you, as
well published as presented, I have my desire: but if it fail herein, I shall
not want to rejoice that it once gave content. God add to your days, honors
and graces, and make you a true professor of his distressed Church in this
kingdom; as also that your Lordship may long remain with us a firm column
for the upholding the peace and tranquillity of this State. For which, (with
the rest of your true Honorers) I shall ever pray.

Your Honors in all duty and service HENRY LESLY.

A WARNING FOR JSRAEL.
HOSHA 14. VERSE. 2. O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God; for thou have
fallen by thine iniquity.


IT is the ordinary method of the Prophets, first to threaten, and then to
comfort; first to denounce Gods judgments, and after to promise mercy and
forgiveness: And accordingly the Prophet Hosea in this 14. Chapter (which is a
breviary, and compend of the whole prophecy) begins with a threatening in the
former verse, Samaria shall become desolate; for she has rebelled against her
God: they shall fall by the sword, their Infants shall be dashed into pieces,
and their women with child shall be ripped up. And after in the fifth verse,
there follows a promise: I will heal their rebellion, I will love them
freely, for mine anger is turned away from him. What can be the cause of such
a sudden change? Judgment is presently turned into mercy: and the reason
is, because the threatenings, and the promises of God in Scripture are
conditional. The threatening in the former verse is conditional; Samariashall
be desolate (namely) unless she repent. The promise likewise verse. 5. is
conditional; I will heal their rebellion (namely) if so be they do repent:
and therefore between the threatening and the promise, there is interlaced an
exhortation to repentance, O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God, for thou
have fallen by thine iniquity.

Where consider with me, first the exhortation it self, [ O Israel return
unto the Lord] and then the arguments to enforce this exhortation, which are
two; one taken from Gods mercy. [ He is thy God] another taken from their own
misery [ for thou have fallen by thine iniquity.] Again in the exhortation,
consider first, the people exhorted, [ O Israel] and then the duty required; [
Return unto the Lord.] O Israel return unto the Lord they God, for thou have
fallen by thine iniquity.

The people exhorted, is Israel, whereby we may understand, either the ten
Tribes who made defection from the house of David, following after Jeroboam,
against whom the judgment is denounced in the former verse: under the name of
Samaria, because Samaria was the Metropolitan City of that kingdom: or else
by Israel we may understand that Israel which was in the land of Judah* for
these two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin are often called Israel by a Synecdoche.
If by Israel we understand the ten Tribes, against whom the judgment was
threatened, then it ministers unto us these two instructions. First, that Gods
threatenings in Scripture are conditional, for in the former verse, desolation
is threatened against Israel, and yet here he exhorts Israel to repentance,
that so she might prevent that desolation. Now unless in the threatening
Samaria shall be desolate, there were understood this condition, except she
repent; the subsequent exhortation were in vain: and indeed it is a certain
rule set down by God himself, When I have spoken against a nation to destroy
them, and to reote them out: If they repent of their sins, I will repent of
the evil I thought to bring upon them: and again, If the wicked will return
from all his sins, he shall surely live and shall not die. Hence it is that God
many times seems to repeal his sentence, according to that of Gregory. Nevit
Deus aliqua^do mutare se^te^tia^, sed nu^qua^ nouit mutare co^siliu^, he
changes his sentence, not his purpose: It was Gods sentence against Nineveh,
Yet forty days, Jonah, 3 4.
and Nineveh shall be destroyed. It was Gods sentence to Hezekiah, Put thine
house in order, for thou shall die, and not live: Isai. 38 1.
and yet neither of these came to pass at that time. Does this argue any
inconstancy in God, or want of power that he could not perform what he had
spoken? No, Numb. 23 19.
God forbid; God is not as man that he should lie, neither as the son of man
that he should repent: Has he said, and shall he not do it? Has he spoken,
and shall he not accomplish it? I am the Lord and change not; Mal. 3.6. My
counsel shall stand, and my will shall be done, Isa. 46.10. But the reason is,
because all the threatenings of God are conditional, although the condition be
not expressed. God said to Abimelech, Thou shall die, because of the woman
which thou have taken, Genesis 20.3. This would seem an absolute sentence; yet
was it only conditional, for God says unto him again verse. 7. Deliver the
man his wife, if not, thou shall die. Thus the condition sometimes is
expressed, and always is to be understood, according to that general rule,
Ierem. 18.7.8. So forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed, the condition is
to be understood, except they repent. Hezekiah shall die: The condition is
understood, unless he sue unto God by prayer for a prorogation of his life.
Now the condition being performed, the sentence was void. So here, Samaria
shall be desolate, a condition must be understood, unless she repent;
otherwise, to what purpose were this exhortation, O Israel, return.

Secondly, hence we learn that God gives warning before he punish. Samaria
must become desolate, but first the Lord must send unto them, and forewarne
them by the mouth of a Prophet, of that desolation, exhorting them to prevent
it by repentance; that so they might be without all excuse. He gave warning to
the old world by his servant Noah, a preacher of righteousness; to Sodom by
Lot; to the Jews by the Prophets that lived before the captivity: Ierem 35.15.
He sent unto them all his servants the Prophets rising up early, and saying,
return now every man from his evil way, and amend your works. Finally, he
gave warning to Jerusalem before her destruction by his own Son, protesting
of his desire to reclayme them. Jerusalem, Jerusalem; How often would I have
gathered thy children, as the Hen gathers her chickins under her wings, and
ye would not? Behold your habitation shall be left desolate. So he gives us
watning at this time of an evil to come upon us. Isa 221 12.
Even, In this day dath the Lord God of heastes, call to weeping, and mourning,
to baldenesse, and girding with sackcloth. There is a threefold call to give us
warning; one occasional, our sins; another real, Gods judgments already
begun; a third vocal, the admonitions of Gods faithful servants. Gods wrath
in Scripture is compared to fire: and as a fire is known, either by the smoke
(as a sign always accompanying fire) or by the flames breaking forth, or by
the relation of others: So may Gods wrath now be known by such three things.
First, by the great sins of the land as a sign, or rather cause of Gods
wrath, and a most certain forerunner, and fore warner of a future
destruction. For it is a general rule sufficiently proved both by Scripture
and experience, that wheresoever sin does reign, there Gods wrath is imminent;
but sin reigns in this land (I dare say, in no place more) without
controlment. We have exceeded, not only Israel, but also Sodom and Gomorrah,
in all their abominations. Now, Ierem. 5 9.
Shall I not visit for these things says the Lord? Or shall not my soul be
avenged on such a nation as this? Yea sure, he must visit; If oppression and
sactiledge; If Idolatry and want of the knowledge of God; If incest and
innocent blood; If briberie and extortion; If neglect of the widow and
fatherless; If oaths and perjurie; If drunkenesse and gluttony; If pride,
avarice and ambition; If fraud and robbery; If profanation of the Sabbath, and
contempt of Gods word, worship and servants: Finally, If all these, committed
commonly in every place, openly in the sight of the Sun, and safely without
punishment, can draw down the judgments of God upon a nation, then how shall
it be possible for us to escape? Thus our sins give us warning of Gods
judgments. Secondly, the flames of this fire do already break out, and these
beginnings of Gods judgments give us warning of a greater destruction, for
when God takes a people in hand for to school them, he will either mend them,
or end them: and therefore he begins with mild chastisments (but if these do
not prevail) he proceeds to sharper corrections. In the 5. Chap. of Hosea
verse. 12. he threatens a gentle correction: I will be unto Ephraim as a Moath,
Hos. 5.12.
and unto the house of Judah as a rettennesse. But this did no good, they were
not affected with the slow gnawing of a small moath: therefore he threatens a
heavier judgment. verse. 14. Hos 5.14.
I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion to the house of Judah.
And Levit. 26. he threatens several plagues against the transgressors of his
law: first sickness, verse. 16. then famine: verse. 19.20. after that,
destruction of their Cattle, verse. 22. and after that, the sword verse. 25. and
lastly the pestilence ibid: And after each judgment he adds; And if ye will
not yet for all this obey me, but walk stubburnely against me, I will bring
seven times more plagues upon you. So now the Lord has begun these years past
to visit us with famine, with death and mortality; these are but the
beginnings of evil: and unless we repent, he has heavier judgments in store
for us, he will even take his three stringed whippe in his hand, which will
pierce our skin, were it never so thick. This is the second warning Thirdly,
there is yet a third, by the voice of the Prophets, calling unto you, that
unless ye repent, ye shall die in your sins. We have not now Prophets
immediately inspired by the holy Spirit to foretell things to come, these were
for the infancy of the Church, now the Church being built, God will have it
governed by ordinary Pastors: but we have Prophets for expounding of the Law,
that can foretell you of Gods judgments, by infallible consequence out of Gods
word, and by application of these threatenings which they find in the Law
against impenitent sinners after this manner: Who so persevere in sins, and
harden their hearts against all admonitions, shall be overtaken with Gods
judgments: but this people persevere in their sins, etc. Thus ought we to
bind your sins upon your consciences, and if we do not, your blood will be
required at our hands. Ye know what charge God gave unto Ezechiel, Son of
man I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel: Ezech. 3 17.
therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me: When I
shall say unto the wicked thou shall surely die, and thou give not him
warning, the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I
require at thine hand. But if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his
wickedness, he shall die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul.
The same charge lies upon these whom God now has made watchmen unto the house
of Israel: for Chap. 33.2. the same duty is required from ordinary Ministers
who receive their calling from men. Ezech. 33 23.
If the people of the land take a man from among them, and set him for their
watchman, if when he sees the sword come upon the land, he blow the Trumpet
and vvarne the people, then he that will not be warned his blood shall be upon
his own head, etc. But as in the days of Jeremy there were lying Prophets,
that prophesied peace, when destruction was at hand; saying, Jerem. 23.11.
that God would break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar, within the space of two
years, Ierem 8.11
and so heal the burt of the people with sweet words: So there are at this
time that love to preach Placentia, and make Sermons, as the Poet did his
fables, Populo ut placerent: Sowing pillowes under the elbowes of the wicked.
The occasion is, because they seek great things for themselves, therefore do
they study to please men: for they see that Zedekiah will be believed, when
Micajah will be sent to prison, 1. King. 22.
and fed with the bread of affliction: 1 rem. 20.1.2.
and Pashur will be a governor in the house of the Lord, when the Prophet
Jeremiah by his authority shall be put in the stocks. 2 Timothy 4 3.
For these are the times foretold by the Apostle, wherein the itching ears of
men cannot abide wholesome doctrine, but They hate him that rebukes in the
gate, Amos 5.10.
and they abhor him that speaks uprightly: as Achab hated Micajah, because
he prophesied evil, that is, he faithfully warned him of that judgment which
afterward came upon him. We are come to such an height of iniquity, as Israel
was when she could not endure the the rebukes of either Priest or Prophet.
Hoj. 4.4
Let none rebuke nor reprove another (says the Lord) for this people are as
they that rebuke the Priest. And by the Prophet Isaiah, They say unto the
Seers, see not; Isai. 39.10.
and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto us right things, but speak flattering
things unto us. And Micah. 2.11. If a man will say, I will prophecy unto thee
of Wine and of strong drink (that is, if he will tell them pleasant tales)
he shall even be the Prophet of this people. But it behooveth us whom the Lord
has made watchmen over his Jerusalem, if we will deliver our own souls, and
be free from the blood of all men, to blow the Trumpet, and give warning to the
wicked. Let us remember that caveat which the Lord gave unto Baruch. Ierem.
45.4.
Behold that which I have built, will I destroy, and that which I have planted,
will I pluck up, even this whole land, and seckest thou great things for
thyselfe? Seek them not. I^b 32 22.
And solet us say with Elihu, I know not to give flattering titles unto man;
for in so doing my maker should take me away suddenly. 1 King 22.14.
Let us resolve with Micajah, As the Lord lives, whatsoever the Lord says
unto me, that will I speak. Although Zedekiah doesmite me on the cheek and
Amaziah inform against me to Jeroboam, and others diswade me from
prophesying at Bethel, because it is the Kings Court: yet for Sions sake I will
not hold my peace, but I will lift up my voice like a Trumpet, and show the
people their sins, and forewarne them of Gods judgments, crying, Samaria
shall be desolate, and therefore O Israel return unto the Lord.

Again, if by Israel, we understand them of the land of Judah, then ye shall
observe from hence; That the corrections of other men, should be our
instructions; the judgments of God upon others, should waken us up, and make
us look about us, to see whether or not we be in the like danger. If our
neighbors house be on fire, it is time to look to our own: If Samaria become
desolate, then let that Israel which is in the land of Judah take heed, least,
as they have been partaker with her, in her sins, so they do also receive
of her plagues. Now I can tell you that Samaria is become desolate: The wrath
of God in a great measure has seized upon our neighbor Nations, that they may
take up the same lamentation that Jeremy did, The sword devoureth abroad,
Lament. 1.20.
and death is at home. Even that famous City of London is now become a
fearful spectacle of Gods judgments: God has met with her in the Month of
her affliction. Men women and Children, fall down in the streeres, smitten,
not with the sword of the Assirians, that were sent against Samaria, but by the
sword of the destroying Angel, that slew the Assirians: in a word, there is
nothing but desolation in her streets, Rachel mourning for her children, and
cannot be comforted. O Lord. What have they deserved which we have not? Were
they more vile and abominable then we? No, Luke. 13.4.
Think not that those eighteen upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell, and slew
them, were greater sinners then others: I tell you, nay; but except ye amend
your lives, ye shall all likewise perish. What (I pray you) are the sins for
which it has pleased God to enter into judgment with our neighbor Nation? Is
it the pride and prodigality of England? Is it their drunkenness, and
gluttony? Is it their luxury and uncleanness? Is it their oaths and
oppression? Or finally, Is it their contempt of Gods word and formal
hypocrisy? Look upon your selves with unpartiall eyes, and ye will find,
that we have justified our sister Samaria in all her abominations, that the
Lord may justly take up against us the same complaint he does against Judah,
Ierem. 3.8. Ierem. 3.8.
When backesliding Israel committed adultery, and I had put her away, and
given her a Bill of divorce, yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but
went and played the harlot also. What will follow hereupon, but as is Isai.
10.12. Shall I not, Isal. 10.1^.
as I have done unto Samaria and her Idols, so do to Jerusalem and her Idols?
But let the Kingdom of England rather be Judah, and this (where we live)
Samaria: and so the application will suite better. For ye know, Judah was the
first and the mother kingdom, so is England to us: Samaria was far more
corrupt in Religion then Judah, having only a show of truth, Joseph. antiq. l.
b. lib. 11. cap. 8.
in Circumcision, Temple, Priest, Books of Moses: so is this Kingdom where we
live. The Samaritanes were a mixed people of Jews and Gentiles; so are we
here. 2 King. 17.33.
The Samaritanes had a mixed worship; for in Samaria both the God of Israel, and
the Gods of the Nations were worshipped: Joseph. antiq. lib. 9. cap. ult.
and would to God it were not so here. Is there not in every Town, Village,
and Corner of the Kingdom, a mount Gerizim, whereupon they brag their
Fathers to have worshipped? John, 1, 20
Is there not a succession of Priests sacrificing upon every mountain, and
under every green Tree? and (least thus succession should fail for want of
issue, because they have no wives of their own.) Is there not a continual
supply every day from Rome? And finally, Are there not many Relickes of Saints,
and holy Wels, of more worth (if ye will believe them) then Jacobs Well in
Samaria? John 4, 12. Joseph, antiq, lib, 11, cap, ^,
Besides, Samaria was a receptacle for all fugitive persons who were not
suffered to live at Jerusalem, for strange wives, or for other crimes, for
which cause their Temple was called Templum transgressorum: And what better is
this of ours? Do not all sort of malectors fly hither as unto a City of
refuge, who dare not live at home, some for strange wives, some for blood, some
for thest, and the best for debt; Joseph, antiq. lib ^, cap, vii,
making this land a very den of thieves? Lastly, Josephus reports that the
Samaritanes, whenever the Jews were in prosperity, would be accounted
Jews; but when the Jews were oppressed by their enemies, then they did
disclaim all affinity with Jews, as having their progeny from Assiria, and
joined with their enemies: and, Is it not to be feared that we have such feigned
friends among us, that now profess themselves subjects to our Kings Majesty,
none better, nor more desirous of the peace of the Kingdom; who yet if the
Assirians should come against us, would prove our most dangerous enemies? If
the Pope have their hearts, the Spaniard will have their service. In all these
respects may this Kingdom be called Samaria. Well then, Has God begun to
visit Judah? What shall become of Samaria? 1, Pet, 4, ^^
and if judgment begin at Gods own house What shall the end be of them which
obey not the Gospel? If this be done to the green Tree, What shall become of
the dry wood? If God spare not the natural branches, How will he spare us who
are but wild Olives? Remember what God faith to the Jews who sojourned in the
land of Egypt, when Nebuchadnezzar had subdued Judah, because they were not
affected with the evil that was to come upon their mother nation, Ierem. Chap.
44. Verse, 3,
Ye have seen all the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon all
the Cities of Judah, how they are desolate because of their wickedness -- yet
they (namely that remain in the land of Egypt) are not humbled unto this day,
10
neither have they feared -- therefore thus says the Lord of heastes, 11
I will set my face against you -- and I will visit them that dvvell in the
land of Egypt, as I have visited Jerusalem, 13
by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence. Now our case is just as
theirs was. We sojourne here in a land of darkness, like Egypt, and we have
seen what evil the Lord has brought upon our mother nation, because of their
sins, yet are not we humbled unto this day, neither have we feared: What
remains then? But that God visit us, as he has done them? Therefore learn
from the correction of your neighbors to return unto the Lord in time, and
make your peace with God. The punishments of the Jews, are our ensamples
(says the Apostle) to the intent that We should not lust after evil things,
1, Cor, 10, 6
as they also lusted. The judgments of God upon our neighbors, should be unto
us as those arrows whereby Jonathan forewarned David of the Kings displeasure:
he shot not at him, but over and beyond him; yet David understood thereby that
the King was angry, and made have to be gone; so may we perceive by these
darts that come from heaven, and fall not upon us but near unto us, that Gods
wrath is kindled against us; and therefore we shall do well, to get up as
David did, and make have to fly from the face of an angry God, hiding our
selves in the holes of that rock CHRIST JESUS, who is a propitiation for our
sins, Proverb. 22,3
Solomon says, A prudent man sees the plague and hides himself. He sees it
in the Oracles of the Prophets, in the sins of the people, especially when it
is begun upon others, and he hides himself, that is, he prevents it by
repentance, he makes his peace with God, he hides himself under the mantle of
Christ's righteousness; he gets the dore-postes of his heart to be sprinkled
with the blood of that immaculate Lamb, that so he may be safe from the hand
of a destroying Angel in the day of the fierceness of Gods wrath. God grant
unto us all this wisdom to foresee the plague, and hide our selves; for
behold I give you warning, Samaria is become desolate, therefore let Israel
return.

From the people exhorted, I come to the duty required, which is, to return
unto the Lord. This phrase Return, is a Metaphor drawn from travelers, who
having lost their way, must come back again and return into the right way.
Beloved, we all are (or should be) travelers to heaven, where out home is;
but we have strayed out of the way, and gone a quite contrary course: we are
prodigal children that have departed from our fathers house, and gone into a
far country: we are lost sheep that have straied from the fold. Isal. 53.6.
All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his one
way. We have strayed out of Gods pastures, into Satan's enclosures; therefore
we must turn back again, and set our faces toward God, upon whom we have
turned out backs. The word is not simply to turn from one thing to another,
but to return, namely, to that which we was before: implying three things.
First, that once they were with the Lord. Secondly, that they had gone away
from him. Thirdly, that they must come home to him again. This is true of all
men. We were once with God, for being created after his image, we had
fellowship with God, and God with us. But we did fall away from God, and
became his enemies; for sin turns and averts a man's soul from God,
according to that of the Prophet, Your iniquities have separated between you,
and your God: Isai. 5^.2.
and your sins have hid his face from you: And now unless we would perish,
it behooveth us to return again to him. But in a special manner this agrees
to the people of Israel. They were Gods people, not only by creation, but by
particular adoption. The Lord did choose them above all the people of the earth,
to set his love upon them; they were a holy people, a royal Nation, a chosen
generation, to the Lord their God: he dealt not so with every Nation, as with
them; for he gave his Laws unto Jacob, and his testimonies to Israel. To them
were committed the Oracles of God; to them did appertain the adoption, and the
glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God,
and the promises, of them were the Fathers, and of them concerning the flesh,
CHRIST came. Yet such was their ungratitude, that they did kick up their
heels against the Lord their Master and Maker; they went away from him a
whoring after their own inventions: They committed Idolatry upon every
mountain, and under every green Tree. Ierem. 3.6. Ierem. 2.13.
In a word, they forsook the Lord the fountain of living waters, and dug
unto themselves Cisterns that could hold no water. And now here God by his
judgments does call them to return again unto him. O Israel, return.

Here (before I proceed any further) observe with me, That humiliation goes
always before grace, the sense and apprehension of our own wandering from God,
is the only way and means to bring us to God. Notitia peccati, initium
salutis. The right understanding and true acknowledgement of our own misery,
is the first step to salvation: for if Israel must return to the Lord, then
she must be possessed with an opinion of her own wandering from the Lord, she
must see that she has gone astray, and that there is no true comfort to be
found in those paths of sin, in which she walked. For, How can a man frame
himself to enter into a right course, till he be fully resolved and
persuaded within himself, that he has been mistaken in his former course of
life? So the prodigal son (a true pattern of a penitent sinner) never
seeks to his father, till that he came to himself, Luke. ^ ^.
then he saw his error, and resolved to return to his father. The Prophet
Chap. 5.15. brings in God, coupling these two together, Till they acknowledge
their offense; and seek my face: because we must first acknowledge our
offense, before we can seek Gods face, the full stomach of a Pharisee will
never thirst to drink of the cup of salvation: Luke 1.53.
only the hungry and the thirsty; therefore God fills the hungry with
good things, and sends away the full empty: You see who they are that CHRIST
calls to be eased of their sins; even the weary and laden, Math. 11 28.
Come unto me ye that are weary and laden: that is, ye, who find your
consciences to be laden with the burden of the Law, and the burden of sin and
are so weary of these burdens, that they are grievous to you to bear. Such
also be they whom he calls sinners, and sick. Matthew. 9.12.13. The whole
need not a Physician, but the sick, I am not come to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance. What? Is there any whole? Is there any righteous? No,
indeed, all are sinners, all are sick: but he calls only those sinners and
sick, who feel and acknowledge themselves to be such: as for the rest whose
eyes are not opened to see the miserable estate wherein they stand by nature,
he terms them righteous, and whole. Such are they whom he calls lost, Matthew.
15.24. Luke 19.10.
I am sent but unto the lost sheep, that is, unto such as are lost in their
own opinion: It is only those whom he seeks and saves, as is well set
forth in the Parables, of the lost Sheep, lost Groate, and lost Child, Luke,
15, Matthew. 5 3.
Such also are they who are called poor: Blessed are the poor in spirit,
namely these who find themselves to abound with many inward wants: finally
they are called fatherless. In the fourth verse of this Chap. With thee the
fatherless finds mercy, as if he should say, when as a man is brought to
the straights of a poor desolate shiftlesse Orphan, then is he a subject fit
for mercy. So, that if we would return unto the Lord, first we must see our
straying from the Lord: If we would seek Gods face, first we must
acknowledge knowledge our offense: If we would have God to fill us with good
things, first we must be hungry, even emptied of our evil liquor: If we
would have CHRIST to refresh us with rivers of water, and flagons of wine; then
we must be thirsty, that is, pained through the sense of our want of
spiritual drink: If we would have CHRIST to ease us of our burdens, first
we must be weary of them, that is, we must feel our burdens to lie heavy
upon us, and be grieved with the sense of them: If we would have the Savior
to save us, we must be sinners, that is, humbled with the sight and sense of
our sins. If we would have that great Physician to cure us, we must first
be sick, that is, sensible of our disease, for he will not cure any of us,
till first he have launced our wounds unto the very bottom: If we would have
the good Shepherd to find us, we must be lost in our selves, even out of
all hope of salvation in respect of any thing that is in us. Finally, If we
would have the God of mercy to show mercy unto us, then first we must be
fatherless, that is, hopeless and helpelesse in our selves. For he is the
God that resists the proud, Jam. s. 5.
but gives grace to the humble. Hereby then may a man judge of himself,
whether or no, he be in the way of salvation. Did thou never see thy woeful
misery, and the wretched estate wherein thou art by reason of sin, how thou
have turned thy back upon God, and art out of his favor? Then have thou just
cause to suspect thy self, that thou have not yet entered at the straight gate,
to walk toward the Lord; for as there can be no birth without the pains of
the travail going before: so neither any true co^version, without some
terrors of the Law, and straits of conscience. The Infant that has been laid
only nine Months, in the womb of the mother, is not delivered without pain,
suppose she conceived it with pleasure: and Think thou to part with sin,
which in thee was conceived with thee, and which since, so often thou have
nourished with pleasure, and not to prove the dolours of the second birth? No,
not assuredly; there is the humbled soul, the wounded conscience, the contrite
spirit, the broken heart, the mourning weed, the melting eye, the pale
countenance, the voice of lamentation; these are the dolours of the second
birth, which we meet with so soon as we begin to return to the Lord. On
the other part, Have thou found in thy self these inward wrestlings and
humiliations? Have thou groaned under the burden of thy sin, and under the
burden of Gods wrath? Have thou felt the terrors of God fighting against thee,
and the invenomed arrows of the Almighty sticking fast in thy ribs? Then
may thou conceive good hope that thou art in the way of salvation. If thou be
possessed with an opinion of thine own wandering from the Lord; If thou be
convicted that thou have strayed from him: Then it is like thou will seek to
return. Therefore does God oftentimes call upon men to consider their ways,
to call their lives to account, that so they may see how far their soul is
averted from God. Know thy sins, O Jerusalem, Iere. 3.13. The like speech is
used by the Prophet Zephanie, Fan your selves oh my people. Yea, Zeph 2^.
the Prophet Jeremy does oftentimes put us in mind of this duty, Oh let us
search and try our ways, Lam. 3 20.
and turn unto the Lord. First we must search our ways, to find out our
own wanderings, and then return unto the Lord.

And that ye may understand what is the duty here required (because this word
Return does express a change, not of place, but of qualities) I will show
unto you. First from whence, Secondly to whom, Thirdly how we must turn. As
for the first we must return from our sins: This is expressed Isai 55.7.
Let the wicked forsake his way in and the unrighteous his own imaginations,
and return unto the Lord. Let the wicked forsake his ways, there is Terminus
a quo. This turning from sin is called Mortification, and it contaynes five
things. First, a sense and sorrow for sin. Secondly, a hatred and detestation
of sin. Thirdly, a purpose in mind to leave sin. Fourthly, an inclination
in will to do the same. Fifthly, an endeavor in life and conversation to
forsake sin altogether. This must he do, that will return unto the Lord:
First he must be cast down with a deep sight and sense of his sin, Psalm.
38.18.
saying with David, I agnize my sin, Psalm. 119.128.
and am sorry for mine iniquite. He must hate and abhor sin, as the
greatest evil in the world, saying with the same Prophet, Do I not hate
every evil way. He must resolve with himself never to commit any sin.
This must be also the desire of his heart, and the endeavor of his whole
life. Otherwise, he cannot return unto the Lord, for God will not take a
wicked man by the hand, nor have fellowship with the throne of iniquity.

Again. To whom must we turn? To the Lord, according to that Ierem. 4.1. O
Israel, if thou return, return unto me, says the Lord; not to any other, not
to my Angels, not to my Saints, not to my Martyrs, not to my Mother; but to my
own self. In the 7. Chap verse. 16. this people is accused that They did
return, but not to the most high. They had some beginning of repentance, but
it failed by the way, and brought them not so far as home to the Lord. They
were like a deceitful bow, for, after all their aims and offers of turning to
the Lord; they started back, and returned not to the Lord, but to their Idols,
they returned to their sins as a Dog to his vomit. It is not enough then
to cease from sin, but withal we must turn unto the Lord; that is, we
must turn our hearts upward to heaven, setting our affections on things that
are above; we must fix our eye upon God, and make toward him with the foot,
walking in the way of his Commandments, that all men may see that we are not
of this world, but that our conversation is in heaven. This turning to the
Lord, is called a rising to newness of life, and it has three parts. First, a
resolution in the mind. Secondly, a lust in the will. Thirdly, an endeavor in
life and conversation to obey God. Josh 24.15. Psalm. 119.106.
Every man ought to resolve as Joshua; I and mine house will serve the Lord.
And as David, I have sworn, and I will perform it, Aeh, 13 1^. Act, 11.2^.
that I will keep thy righteous judgments. This must be his desire also, as
it was Paul's, he desired to live honestly. Hereunto Barnabas exhorted the
Antiochians that with their heart they would cleave unto the Lord. And finally
hereunto must we endeavor our selves throughout the whole course of our life.
So did the blessed Apostle Act. 24.16. Psalm. 119.6.
Herein I endeavor my self to have always a clear conscience toward God and
toward Men. And David, I have a respect to all thy commandments. Whosoever
has these, is turned from sin unto the Lord.

The manner how we must return, Joel 2.12.
is expressed by the Prophet Joel. Turn unto me with all your heart, and with
fasting, weeping, and mourning. Whence ye may observe four properties of our
conversion. First, we must turn with the heart, therefore our conversion must
be voluntary: there is a reformation which is not voluntary, but rather
against the will when a man turns not from sin, but sin turns from him:
because either he cannot practice it for want of strength, or dare not for
fear of punishment. Such a man may seem to turn from sin, but it is not
with his heart. We must turn with the heart, even so willingly, that it be
our chief delight to use all means for to set forward this work: for nothing
is done well, but that which is done with the will. Secondly, we must turn,
not only with our heart, but with all our heart, therefore our conversion must
be sincere: for as in Scripture the Phrases of a double heart, 1 Chronicles. 12.33.
a divided heart, Hos. 10.2. A heart and a heart, Psalm. 12. a are used to
signify hypocrisy: So this phrase, With all the heart, does signify
sincerity. Then we must turn unto the Lord with all our heart, that is to
say, sincerly, and not for show only: we must draw near unto God, not only
with the lips, Psalm. 51.6.
but with the heart also: for He loves truth in the inward affections. In
this sense it is said of David, that he followed God with all his heart, 1.
King. 14.8. And of Josiah, that He turned to the Lord with all his heart, and
with all his soul, and with all his might. 2. King. 23.25. And of the people
in the time of King Asa, that the oath which they made before the Lord, was
With all their heart, 2. Chron. 15.15. But Ierem. 3.10. The Lord accuses his
people for want of this sincerity, Her rebellious sister Judah, has not
returned unto me with her whole heart, but faynedly. Thirdly, we must turn
with all our heart, therefore our conversion must be a through change of the
whole man, of the whole life; though it be imperfect in degrees, yet it must be
perfect in regard of parts. We must not halt between God and Baal: We cannot
serve both God and Mammon: God will not be content with a part of the heart; he
will either have all, or none. It is said of Iehu, that he did not walk in the
Law of the Lord, with his whole heart, for why? Albeit he obeyed God in some
things, cutting off the house of Achab, Yet he departed not from the sin of
Jeroboam, 2. King. 10.31. And so there be many that give but the half turn,
like to Agrippa who was (not altogether, but) almost persuaded to become a
Christian. Some turning their words, not their deeds, as our verbal
professors. And others again turning from many sins, and yet (with Herod)
remain unturned from one special beloved sin. These be but false turnings:
our conversion must be a through change, we must turn with all our hearts.
Finally, we must turn not only with all our hearts, but also with fasting,
weeping, and mourning: therefore our conversion must not be inward only; but
it must be expressed outwardly in these things, wherein consists the practice
of humiliation, namely, fasting, etc. And that especially in the time of any
great affliction, such as this was when the Prophet Joel had foretold the
people of the coming of the Chaldeans. Esther when she heard of the intended
destruction of the Jews, appointed a fast. Esth. 4 10. Nehem. 1.4. 2. Chr^n.
20 3, 2. Sam. 1.12. Judge 20, 26. Ion. 3.
So did Nehemiah when he heard of the desolation of Jerusalem, and Iehosaphat
when the Moabites came up against him: and David when Saul and Jonathan were
slain: and the Israelites when they were overthrown by the Benjamites: and
the Ninivites when destruction was threatened against them. And have we not
just cause to do the like at this time? If we consider our grievous sins,
and the judgments of God which hang over our heads, together with the
troublesome estate of Gods Church in other places. Even this last may minister
unto us sufficient matter of grief, though our own private estate were never
so peaceable. Godly Nehemiah being placed in the honorable service of
Artashashte, was not so much comforted at his own good estate, as grieved at
the desolation of Jerusalem: Nekem 1.4. 1 King 19.4. 1. Sam. 4 19.
Decay of Religion and increase of Idolatry, made Elijah weary of his life:
The Ark of God captivated, and the glory departed from Israel, drove all
comfort out of the heart of Phineas wife. These (and many more examples) teach
us, That the affliction of Joseph should be the matter of our grief. Cast now
but an eye upon the ruefull face of Christendom; and ye will find that it is
time to Hang up our Harpes upon the Willowes, Psalm. 137 2. I^^^ 2 15.
and (as the Prophet calls us) to blow the Trumpet in Sion, and to sanctify a
fast: turning unto the Lord, with all our hearts, and with fasting, weeping,
and mourning.

But here ye may ask me the question, Whether or not it be in our power to
return unto the Lord, since we are exhorted thereunto? Answer, No, without a
special grace given us from above. The Scripture every where has disabled
us, pronouncing a man by nature to be the Child of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. A
transoressor from the womb, Isai. 48.8. Dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians.
2.1. Coloss. 2.13. We are not only sick with sin, or wounded by sin, or
half dead, but stark dead, bereft of all spiritual life, sense, and motion.
And therefore in our selves we are of no strength, Romans 5.6. For our mind is
dark, Ephesians. 5.8. Not perceiving the things of the spirit, 1. Cor. 2, 14. Our
will perverse, Genesis 6.5. Ierem. 17.9. The affections rebellious, Tit. 3.3. Romans
3.12. And we are so confirmed in this natural corruption, that we can no
more do good, then an Ethiopian can change his skin, or a Leopard his spots,
Ierem 13.23. or, Then an evil Tree can bring forth good fruit, Matthew. 7.18.
So that faith is Gods gift, Ephesians 2.8. Phil. 1.29. So is repentance, 2. Tim.
2.25. So is the knowledge of heavenly mysteries, Matthew. 13.11. In a word, every
thing that is good in us, is from Gods special grace, For we are not
sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves: but our
sufficiency is of God, 2. Corinthians 3.5. It is God that works in you both to
will and to do, Phil. 2.13. For who makes thee to differ from another? And
what have thou, that thou did not receive? 1. Cor. 4.7. As if he should say,
thou differs much from others, who are not as yet converted; but it is not thy
self that has made this separation, by the right use of thy own free will,
embracing that grace, which was equally offered unto them: but it is God that
wrought more powerfully in thee, then in them: For God does not only beseech
us, by the Ministry of reconciliation; but also He powers upon us the spirit
of grace, Zach. 12.10. He sheds on us abundantly the holy spirit, Tit. 3.6. He
works powerfully in us, Ephesians-3. verse. 20. So 2. These. 1.11. He is said to
work faith with power, and Ephesians. 1.19. It is called the exceeding greatness
of his power, and the working of his mighty power; and Colos. 2.12. This power
in the conversion of a sinner, is equalled to that whereby God raised up CHRIST
from the dead. Our Savior himself (to express this powerful working) calls
our conversion a drawing, No man can come to me, except the father draw him,
John 6.44. He does indeed draw us; for of our selves we are enemies to our
own salvation, and do nothing else, but resist the holy Ghost in the
Ministry of the Word: yet he who is able to do exceeding abundantly, above
all that we ask or think, overcommeth this resistance in the will of man,
and of unwilling, makes us willing: 1. Cor. 15.10.
This is his Grace which never is in vain; for all that the father gives me,
shall come to me, says CHRIST, John 6.37. It is also called a boring of the
care, Psalm. 40.6. An opening of the heart, Act. 16.14. The Circumcision of the
heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6. And further to signify not only Gods powerful working in
our conversion; but also our own inabilitie to bring any help to this work,
it is called a new creation, Psalm. 51.10. 2 Cor. 5.17. Ephesians3. 10. John 3.3
Iam. 1 18 Ephesians 2.1 John, ^.2^
a regeneration, a vivification and resurrection from the dead. A man cannot
create himself, nor beget himself, no6r quicken himself when be is dead,
Nay, he cannot so much as bring any help to these works, but is merely
patient: So is he in his conversion to God. Finally the work of our
conversion is called a renovation of the heart, Ezech. 36.26. I will give you a
new heart, and put a new spirit within you, I will take away the stony heart,
and give you a heart of flesh, and I will put my spirit within you, and cause
you to walk in my Statutes. This is a promulgation of the Covenant of Grace;
where ye may perceive the difference between this new Covenant, and the old.
In the covenant of works God required obedience to his law, and we were
unable to perform it. In the covenant of Grace, God requires faith and
repentance, and we are as unable to perform that Wherein then is the
difference? Even in this, that the first covenant had no such power annexed to
it, to work in us, that which it required from us; but in the new covenant,
that condition which God requires from us, he works in us. He calls us to
return, and he turns us. But then (will a Papist say) To what purpose are
these exhortations? Does God command us that which is impossible? And are his
admonitions in vain? I answer. First, God commands us many things which are
impossible, Romans 8.3.
not absolutely, but as the Apostle speaks, In as much as the Law is weak,
because of the flesh: For once God gave us a power to do whatsoever he
commanded, and we by our fall have lost this power; yet has not God lost his
right to demand that debt of obedience, which his creature owes unto him: So
that the Commandments of God in this state of corruption are the measure of
our debt, not of our strength; they show us what we should do, not what we
can do. Secondly, neither are these exhortations in vain; for God does not
regenerate us by sudden enthusiasmes; but by ordinary means: and these
exhortations are the means, without which ordinarily no man is, or can be
converted: We are begotten by the word of truth. Iam. 1.18. Through the
Gospel, 1. Cor. 4.15. Of the incorruptible seed of the word, 1. Pet. 1.23.
Now no man will say that it is in vain to use ordinary means, as to take
meat for to nourish our bodies, Physic to recover our health, to cast seed
in the ground, for to bring forth fruit, though the event be not in our
power, but in Gods hands: So neither can these exhortations to repentance be in
vain, though it be not in our power to return unto the Lord. Thirdly, these
exhortations serve to humble us with a sight of our own inabilitie, and also
to direct us what things we are to ask of God by prayer: according to that of
S. Augustine, Deus jubet aliqua, De gratia and (...) arbit. cap. 16.
quae non possumus; ut noverimus quid ab illo petere debeamus. God commands us
some things which are not in our power, that we might know what things we
have to ask of him by prayer. For when I hear that I am commanded to return
unto the Lord, and yet looking upon mine own strength, I find no such power
in my self; this must make me go out of my self, and fly unto the throne
of Grace, crying (with the Spouse of CHRIST) Draw me, and I will run after
thee, Cant. 1.3. and (with Ephraim) Convert me, and I shall be converted, Ierem.
2^,18 Psalm. 51, 13.
and with David) create in me a clean heart, and with the Disciples, Lord
increase our faith; S. August.
and with that holy Father, Domine, da, quod jubes, and jube quod vis, Give me
a power to do that which thou commands, and then command me to do what
thou will. Finally, this precept is given unto us, because there is something
in our power to do, we can use the means, as go to Church, and hear the
word: Besides after that God in the first moment of our uprising, has revived
the heart, and given life to the dead will; then, acti agimus, We are no
longer passive, but coworkers with God, Ierem. 31.19.
After I was converted, I repented (says Ephraim) Hence as our conversion is
ascribed to God, as the first and sole Author, so it is ascribed to our selves
as instruments of God apprehending his grace, and working forward with it. God
is said to give faith, and we are said to believe: God is said to give
repentance, and we are said to repent: God is said to turn us, and we are
said to turn unto the Lord.

From the exhortation, I come to the arguments: Indeed there is not a word in
all the exhortation but it contaynes in it an argument to invite them to
repentance. First, O Israel, Thou that art Gods own people, What shame is it
for thee to turn thy back upon God? Secondly, Return, thou have gone astray,
therefore come back again into the right way. Thirdly, unto the Lord, he is
JEHOVAH, the fountain of all goodness, that has right unto thee by creation,
by redemption, by covenant, by many other obligations: therefore return unto
him. Fourthly, he is thy God, and therefore if thou will return unto him, he
will receive thee. Fifthly, Thou have fallen by thine iniquity, therefore
continue no longer in that course which has procured thy fall, least thou
perish; but return unto the Lord, that he may raise thee up. But the two last
are the chief motives, one whereof is taken from Gods mercy, he is thy God:
another from their own miscrie; Thou have fallen by thine iniquity.

First, he is thy God, thine by creation, thine by redemption, thine by
adoption, thine by contract and covenant; for this is the covenant which he
made with Abraham thy father: I will be a God unto thee, Genes. 7.7.
and to thy seed after thee. Therefore thou may assure thy self, thy sin is
pardonable, if thou will return unto him, he will embrace thee in the arms
of his mercy. Hence observe that the exhortations to repentance in Scripture,
are founded commonly upon the mercy of God, as Isai. Chap. 55.7. Let the
wicked for sake his way, and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and return
unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will
abundantly pardon. In the Latin, it is, Multus ad ignoscendum: Whereupon (says
Bernard.) In hoc multo, nihil deest, ubi est omnipotens misericordia, and
misericors omnipotentia: He can pardon, for his mercy is omnipotent; and he
will pardon, for his omnipotency is merciful. Hos. 6.1. Come (say the
repenting Israelits) let us return unto the Lord; for he has torn, and he
will heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind us up. Joel 2.13. Turn unto
the Lord your God for he is gracious, and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness, and repents him of the evil. And Ierem. 3. There be many
the like exhortations, all upon this ground, verse. 12. Thou disobedient Israel
return, and I will not let my wrath fall upon you for I am merciful, and will
not always keep mine anger. Again, verse. 14. O ye disobedient Children, turn
again, for I am your Lord. And after verse. 22. O ye disobedient children
return, and I will heal your rebellions. This is the argument used by the
preacher of repentance, Mat^h. 35
Repent for the kingdom of heaven is at hand, in which CHRIST is ready to
dispense mercy, and forgiveness to the repenting sinner. So here, O Israel
return unto the Lord, for he is thy God, not, he is a great, or a just, or a
wise, or a powerful God; but he is thy God; grounding his exhortation upon
Gods mercy. The reason is, because a sinner apprehending nothing but rigor
and severitie in God, will never come in and submit himself. Psalm. 130.4
No, There is mercy with thee O Lord that thou may be feared. It is not the
consideration of Gods greatness, nor of his power, nor of his justice, nor of
his wisdom, that can make the heart of a sinner relent toward him; but it is
the consideration of his mercy: when looking upon the mercy of God, and merits
of CHRIST, I get some hope and inckling of pardon, then will I come in,
creeping and crouching before God; as the Syrians to Achab, with ropes about
their necks, because they had heard that the Kings of Israel were merciful.
The thundering out of the threatenings and judgments of the Law, will awake a
secure heart; but nothing will affect a man's mind, and even melt his soul to
make him return unto the Lord, but the due knowledge and consideration of the
unspeakeable riches of Gods mercy: The remembrance of his fathers house, made
the heart of the prodigal to relent; So will the consideration of Gods mercies
work upon our heart, if once our hearts be inflamed with the sense of Gods
love toward us, Oh then the working of our bowels! the stirring of our
affections! the melting and relenting of our repenting hearts! then will we
lament after the Lord, 1, Sam, 7, 2
and grieve that ever we have so grieved so good and gracious a God. Therefore
you see the wicked, that get a sight of their sins, because they have not a
sight of Gods mercy, they run away from God, as Adam, they are swallowed up
of despair as Cain, and never seek after that mercy which they know not: But
the Godly with the sight of their sins, having a sense of Gods mercy, and a
sight of Gods face reconciled to them in JESUS CHRIST, How do they seek after
that mercy with a longing desire? Out of the deepes with David, and out of the
belly of Hell with Jonas, they call upon God. Even when wounded by God, they
go to him to be healed, as the repenting Israelites, Hos, 6, ^,
Come let us return unto the Lord, for he has wounded, and he will heal
us: and these converts that sought for ease of him that pricked them, Men and
brethren what shall we do? Act, 2 37.
So that there is nothing in God so forceable to drive a man to repentace, as
the consideration of Gods mercy. As Tully said when he pleaded before Caesar
for the life and liberty of Ligarius: O Caesar, none of thy virtues is more
gracious, or more admirable, then thy mercy: Men come near to God in nothing
so much as in saving the afflicted: Thy fortune has nothing greater then that
thou have power, thy nature nothing better then that thou have will to show
mercy, and to save others. So may I say among all the properties of the divine
nature, there is none more admirable or more gracious then his mercy. It is
not his power, it is not his wisdom, it is not his justice wherein we
rejoice; but it is his mercy: If there were not mercy in God, I should
despair, there is so much misery in me, Rom, 12, 1*
therefore I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God: I will not adjure you
by the threatenings, but I beseech you by the mercies of God, Knowing that the
goodness of God leads you to repentance; Rom, 2, 4,
he is thy God, and therefore O Israel return unto him.

The other argument is taken from their sense of misery, Thou have fallen by
thine iniquity. Our falls in Scripture, Iam, 3, 2,
do sometimes signify our sins, In many things we fall all (says the
Apostle James) and sometimes our afflictions, as in that place of Solomon, The
just man falls seven times a day: Prunb, 24, 16,
so here it signifies affliction, Thou have fallen, namely into danger and
destruction; thou art afflicted, therefore return. Where we may observe, That
our falls are many times an occasion of our risings, and afflictions are of
excellent use to turn us to God: for this is the motive which the Prophet
uses. Thou art fallen, therefore return. And hardly could he use a better;
for affliction is a most effectual means to make our hearts relent and
resolve into the tears of unsayned repentance, Job, 33.16,
according to that of Elihu, God opens the ears of men by their corrections,
which he had sealed, that he might cause man to turn away from his purpose.
So the Lord taught Miriam by leprosy to forgo her murmuring. He awakened
Jonas out of his security, by casting him into the Sea. He cured Zachary of
infidelity, by striking him with dumbness. He diverted Saul from his evil
course by blindness. Thus Manasses (who forgot God in his prosperity) did
seek unto him in adversity; the Heathen Mariners did pray unto God in a
storm; and the Ninevits did humble themselves by fasting and prayer when
destruction was threatened against them; Gen, 42, 21,
when the brethren of Joseph were distressed in Egypt, they did remember the
injury they had done to their brother; when the prodigal son was pinched
with want, Luk 15, 18,
then did he resolve to return to his father: but especially this may be
seen in the Jewish Church. For, though in their prosperity (as the Lord
himself observes) They turned their back yet in their trouble; Ierem, 2, 27,
they said; Arise and help us. Isai, 26, 16,
This is observed also by the Prophet Isaiah, Psalm 78, 34.
Lord in trouble have they visited thee, they powered out a prayer when thy
chastisment was upon them. And David to the same purpose. When he slew them,
they sought him: Yea (speaking of the manifold kinds of misery wherewith the
faithful are exercised) he makes this the foot of his song, Then they cried
unto the Lord in their trouble, Psalm, 81, 7, Psalm, 107, 6,
and he delivered them. Apollonius writes of certain people that could see
nothing in the day, but all in the night: In like manner we are so blinded
with the bright sunshine of prosperity, that we cannot see those things
which concern our peace; but when the winter night of misery comes, then
schola Crucis, schola lucis. We are all branches of the Vine, and therefore
we must be pruned and cut with the knife of affliction that we may bring
forth fruit: and this is the last means which God ordinarily uses to convert
obstinate sinners: when nothing can prevail with us, then does he visit our
iniquities with the rod, and our sins with scourges; and he is so confident
that this will drive us to repentance, that in the fifth Chapter of this
prophecy, verse. 15. (having threatened to withdraw all the testimonies of his
love, and favor from his people, I will go, and return to my place, till
they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face) He adds, In their
affliction they will seek me carely: which was accordingly verified in the
event; for in the next words they call one another after this manner, Come let
us return unto the Lord, for he has vvounded us, etc. And surely this is a
strange thing, that affliction should make men turn to him that smites them;
it would seem that such dealing should rather terrific them, and make them
run away from God. Adam when he saw God to be angry, fled from his
presence, and this is natural to every creature to love it self, and to fly
from that which is hurtful unto it: strike a dog, and he will flic from
you. Judge, 14, 14,
Therefore that ye may conceive this riddle, how sweere comes out of sower:
ye shall understand, that afflictions being considered in their own nature,
are the fruits of sin, the evils of punishment, the testimonies of Gods
wrath, the curses of the Law, and the first flashes of hels fire: Therefore
when afflictions follow their kind, they bring forth nothing but evil fruit,
such as impatiencie, malice against the instruments, murmuring against God, the
use of unlawful means, 2 Chronicles 2^, 22,
and finally despair, as in Pharao, Saul, Ierobeam, Achaz, of whom it is said,
that in the time of his tribulation he did yet trespass more against the
Lord. But whenever afflictions do drive a man to repentance, it is not
properly of themselves that they produce so good an effect, but by accident, as
they are so disposed by the infinite wisdom, power, and goodness of God, to
whom only it is proper to work by contraries: he brings light out of
darkness, good out of evil; by sin he condemned sin; by death he
destroyed death; by the foolishness of preaching, he makes us wise: he casts
us down that he may raise us up; he works joy out of fear, heaven out of
hell: and by the Cross which naturally does banish a man from God, he makes
us return to him; he causes this birth and fruit of sin to kill the
mother that brought it forth, this temporary punishment to become a fatherly
chastisment, whereby we are preserved from the everlasting punishment of hels
fire; these testimonies of his wrath, to become signs of his love, and seals
of his adoption; and these curses of the Law, and flashes of hell, to become
Evangelicall blessings, and an ordinary way whereby we may travel toward his
heavenly kingdom. And therefore afflictions are fitly compared to the fire,
which purifieth the gold, and consumes the straw, and to the wind, which
purges the Wheat, and blows away the Chafe: and finally to the red Sea,
which was to the Israelites a way, to the Egiptians a grave. Now since
afflictions produce so diverse effects: we must labor to have our afflictions
so sanctified, as that we may be bettered by them. To this effect, First when
we are under any Cross, we must labor after tender hearts, that we may
be affected with grief and pain: for there is not a greater enemy to our
profitting by afflictions, then that senseless indolencie, Ierem. 5, ^.
whereby men are not affected with Gods judgments, like those Israelites, of
whom the Prophet says, Thou have stricken them, but they have not sorrowed:
For, when afflictions being added to our sins, as a double weight cannot
bruise our hearts, and press out of them sighs and groans; it is not likely
that sin alone will work in them sorrow and remorse, but on the other part,
if we be sensible of our afflictions, then this worldly sorrow will make way
for godly sorrow, as a Needle does for the threade. Secondly, let us remember
that all the afflictions which do befall us come from God: This is another
let that hinders many from profitting by afflictions, even their blindness,
whereby they ascribe all their calamities wholly to secondarie causes, and
inferior means, Amos, 3, 6,
and never look up to the hand of God striking them, which is the chief
cause; for there is no evil in the City which the Lord has not done.
Thirdly, let us look back into our former courses, and see what we have done
against God; for he would not strike us without a cause: by this examination
we will come to a sight and sense of our sins: we will find that we have
gone astray from God, and have fallen because of our iniquity. Finally, with
the sense of our sins, let us strive to get a sight of Gods mercy revealed
in the Gospel, remembering that he is our God: so will we desire to return to
him.

But the Prophet would not only make them sensible of their fall, but also of
their sin; therefore he illustrates this argument from the cause, Thou have
fallen by thine iniquity, or because of thine iniquity. Here observe, That
iniquity procures a fall, so that if we have fallen, then we have committed
iniquity; and if we commit iniquity, we shall assuredly fall. I say, If we
have fallen, we may accuse our iniquities which is the deserving cause of all
our afflictions The Apostle tells us, Rom, 5, 12,
that by sin death entered into the world, and if it had not been for sin,
death (whereby we are to understand every thing that is penal and huttfull to
the creature) could never have found an entry. Rom, 3, 39
So the Church in the Lamentations, Wherefore is the living man sorrowful?
Psalm, 107, 17,
Man suffers for his sin: And the Psalmist, Fools by reason of their
transgressions, and because of their iniquities are afflicted. Proverb, 13, 21,
Solomon makes affliction to be (as it were) the shadow of sin which does
always attend it, Affliction follows sinners, Proverb, 22, 8,
and as our falls convince us to have committed iniquity; so our iniquities
forewarne us of a fall: For he that sows iniquity shall reap affliction.
This doctrine is sufficiently proved by Scripture, reason and experience. God
threatened Adam, that at what time he did eat of the forbidden Tree, he
should die. Every sin unto man is the forbidden Tree, if we meddle with it,
we shall find no better fruit upon it then Adam found: the bitter fruit of
death, grows upon the pleasant Tree of sin: It is the sentence of the law,
Rom, 6, 23,
Cursed is every man that abides not in all things that are written in the
book of the Law. Iam, 1, 18.
This is confirmed by the Apostle Paul, saying, The reward of sin is death.
And James, Sin when it is finished, brings forth death. He says not, that
every sin brings forth death, but only sin when it is finished, or
perfected, that is come to an height: for God in his mercy forgiveth sins
not finished, or at least he tolerateth them, till they come to perfection,
that the sinner may be without all excuse: but in his justice, he judges and
condemns sins consummate by hardness of heart, and impenitencie, as he
shows himself, Amos 1.3. For three transgressions of Damascus, and for
four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, etc. As if he had said,
if Damascus had sinned only once in persecuting of my Church, I would turn
away my judgments: but they have sinned often, To three be sensible of our
afflictions, then this worldly sorrow will make way for godly sorrow, as a
Needle does for the threade. Secondly, let us remember that all the afflictions
which do befall us come from God. This is another let that hinders many
from profitting by afflictions, even their blindness, whereby they ascribe all
their calamities wholly to secondarie causes, and inferior means, Amos. 3, 6,
and never look up to the hand of God striking them, which is the chief
cause; for there is no evil in the City which the Lord has not done.
Thirdly, let us look back into our former courses, and see what we have done
against God; for he would not strike us without a cause: by this examination
we will come to a sight and sense of our sins: we will find that we have
gone astray from God, and have fallen because of our iniquity. Finally, with
the sense of our sins, let us strive to get a fight of Gods mercy revealed
in the Gospel, remembering that he is our God: so will we desire to return to
him.

But the Prophet would not only make them sensible of their fall, but also of
their sin; therefore he illustrates this argument from the cause, Thou have
fallen by thine iniquity, or because of thine iniquity. Here observe, That
iniquity procures a fall, so that if we have fallen, then we have committed
iniquity; and if we commit iniquity, we shall assuredly fall. I say, If we
have fallen, we may accuse our iniquities which is the deserving cause of all
our afflictionss* The Apostle tells us, Rom, 5, 12,
that by sin death entered into the world, and if it had not been for sin,
death (whereby we are to understand every thing that is penal and huttfull to
the creature) could never have found an entry. Lam, 1, 39
So the Church in the Lamentations, Wherefore is the living man sorrowful?
Psalm, 107, 17,
Man suffers for his sin: And the Psalmist, Fools by reason of their
transgressions, and because of their iniquities are afflicted. Proverb, 13, 21,
Solomon makes affliction to be (as it were) the shadow of sin which does
always attend it, Affliction follows sinners, Proverb, 22, 8,
and as our falls convince us to have committed iniquity; so our iniquities
forewarne us of a fall: For he that sows iniquity shall reap affliction.
This doctrine is sufficiently proved by Scripture, reason and experience. God
threatened Adam, that at what time he did eat of the forbidden Tree, he
should die. Every sin unto man is the forbidden Tree, if we meddle with it,
we shall find no better fruit upon it then Adam found: the bitter fruit of
death, grows upon the pleasant Tree of sin: It is the sentence of the law,
Rom, 6, 23.
Cursed is every man that abides not in all things that are written in the
book of the Law. Iam, 1, 1^.
This is confirmed by the Apostle Paul, saying, The reward of sin is death.
And James, Sin when it is finished, brings forth death. He says not, that
every sin brings forth death, but only sin when it is finished, or
perfected, that is come to an height: for God in his mercy forgiveth sins
not finished, or at least he tolerateth them, till they come to perfection,
that the sinner may be without all excuse: but in his justice, he judges and
condemns sins consummate by hardness of heart, and impenitencie, as he
shows himself, Amos 1.3. For three transgressions of Damascus, and for
four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, etc. As if he had said,
if Damascus had sinned only once in persecuting of my Church, I would turn
away my judgments: but they have sinned often, To three transgressions, they
have added four, they have threshed Gilead, with threshing instruments of
Iron, and for so many transgressions I will not turn away their punishment.
Again of sin finished it is not said, that it deserves death, which is
common to all sin; but that it brings forth death, where the word (...)
signifies to be delivered of that which has been conceived. So that sin
when once it comes to perfection, is with child of death, and must needs
be delivered. When Gods patience is abused, it will become futie, when the cup
of Gods wrath is full, it must of necessity run over; when the measure of
our iniquities is fulfilled, then must God power forth the vials of his wrath:
Psalm, 5, 5
And great reason there is why it must be so, if we consider the justice of
God, the nature of sin, and the truth of Gods threatening. The justice of God
is such, that he hates sin; 2, These, 2, 6
and therefore will he punish it. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight,
(says David) for thou hate all them that work iniquity, reasoning from the
nature of God; Rom, 2, 32
God hates iniquity, therefore he will punish it. And the Apostle, It is a
just thing with God, Genes, 18, 20
to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you. This is the justice of God
(which even the Gentiles knew) that they who commit such things are worthy of
death. Again the nature of sin is to cry, The cry of Sodom is great: It
cries, citing us before the Tribunal of God, as guilty of lease Majesty; it
cries unto the heavens for vengeance; provoking God to revenge, and not
suffering him to rest in heaven till he has inflicted punishment. Finally
Gods truth is such that none of his threatenings can fall to the ground; but
he has threatened a fall to iniquity, and according to his threatening, has
he executed his wrath upon impenitent sinners* When the earth was filled with
violence, Genes, 6, 13
then God sent the flood upon the old world. When the cry of Sodom waxed
great before God, then sent he Angels to destroy it. Genes 19 15. Genesis 15.16
1. King 21 20.
When the iniquity of the Amorites was full, then were they cast forth. When
Achab sold himself to work evil in the sight of the Lord, then did the Lord
bring evil upon him: When Jerusalem filled up the measure of their fathers,
Math, 23, 32,
then they could not escape the damnation of hell. When the sins of Babell
are come to that height, Revel. 18, 5.
that they reach unto the heaven, then will the Lord remember her iniquities.
Go and enquire, what is become of those famous Churches planted by the
Apostles, of Corinth, Ephesus, Galatia, etc. Are they not fallen by their
iniquity? What is become of Gods own people, the Jews? They are fallen, and
that by their iniquity (as the Lord himself declares) Isaiah, 50.1. Jerem.
49. 12.
Behold for your iniquities are ye sold, and because of your transgressions is
your Mother forsaken. Now if God spared not them: How will he spare us? I may
say unto you (as the Lord does to Idumea) Behold they whose judgment was not
to drink of the cup, (that is, they that were mine own people, and had not so
much deserved punishment as thou) have assuredly drunken, and art thou he that
shall go unpunished, thou shall not go unpunished, but thou shall surely
drink of it. If once our iniquities are come to the height, then we shall
fall as they have fallen. Now sins of a Nation are finished, and come to the
height, when they are general, when they are not punished, and when they are
persevered in, men continuing in their sins without repentance. First (I say)
when they are general; for so long as there be only some wicked men in a
kingdom, their sins are personal, and cannot bring the judgments of God
upon the whole land; for ten righteous men God would have spared Sodom:
Genes. 6.12.
but if sin become general, That all flesh has corrupted his way upon the
earth: Genes. 19.4,
then will the deluge be universal likewise. If all the men of Sodom, from
the young to the old, even all the people from all quarters, conspire to commit
filthiness: then shall the whole City be overthrown. Sin was come to this
height in Israel; Isaiah, 1, 5,
for (says Isaiah) The whole head is sick, and the whole heart heavy. From
the sole of the foot unto the head, there is nothing whole therein, but wounds
and swelling, and sores full of corruption. A conspiracy (says the Lord
himself) is found among the men of Judah, and among the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, Ierem. 11.9. For why? The children of Israel, and the children of
Judah did evil, even they, their Kings, their Princes, their Priests, and
their Prophets, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Ierem.
32.32. In so much that the Lord says to the Prophet: Run to and fro by the
streets of Jerusalem, and behold now, and know, and enquire in the open places
thereof, if ye can find a man, or if there be any that executes judgment,
and seeks the truth, and I will spare it, Ierem. 5.1. This general revolt
from God, is expressed by this Prophet in the fourth Chapter: The Lord has a
controversy with the land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor
knowledge of God in the land, etc. This was a general, and so a national
sin: therefore is the punishment general upon the Nation likewise. verse. 3.
The land shall mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall be cut off.
Secondly, The sins of a Nation are come to an height, when they are not
punished by the Magistrate, but all go on in their courses without
controlment. Numb. 25 ^
When Phinehas smote the adulterous persons, he turned Gods anger away from
the children of Israel, and caused the plague to cease: but where there is not
a Phinehas to draw the sword for the punishment of vice, there the guilt of
these sins lie upon the land, and draw down the judgments of God upon a
Nation. In this case was Israel before her captivity; for this is expressed as
a cause of their destruction: They execute no judgment, Ierem. 5.28. Isaiah,
1.23.
But (as Isaiah speaks) Their Princes were rebellious and companions of
thieves; every one loved gifts, Chapt. 3. v. 4.11, Chapt. 5. verse. 25.
and followed after rewards. Children were their Princes, and women had rule
over them; they did justify the wicked for reward. A third degree of
perfection in sin is perseverance. When men continue in sin without
repentance, hardening their hearts against all admonitions. Israel was come to
this height also: For the Lord sent unto them all his servants the Prophets,
rising up early, and saying, Ierem. 35.15.
return now every man from his evil way, and amend your works: -- but they
would not incline their ear, nor obey; and thereupon came their fall: for it
follows in the Text. verse. 17. Therefore thus says the Lord of hosts,
behold I will bring upon Judah, and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, all
the evil that I have pronounced against them, because I have spoken unto them,
but they would not hear. Now let us examine our selves, and see whether we
be come to such an height of iniquity, and I doubt we shall find, First that
sin reigns universally, like an Epidemicall disease that possesses the
whole body of the land. There is in great men, facriledge and oppression; in
officers, briberie, extortion, and wresting of justice: In the clergy,
ignorance, laziness, and covetousness: In tradesmen, fraud and deceit: In
every corner Idolatry, robbery, and shedding of blood: and What house is free
from adultery, drunkenness, and swearing? Next, do but consider whether
these (and many more sins) be committed safely, without punishment.
Oppression and sacrilege, have greatness for their patron: injustice,
briberie, and extortion, find Lawyers to plead their cause: Idolatry is but
a sin of tolleration: De gubern. Dei lib, 5.
incest and usurie are venial in poor men, and venall in the rich: pride,
swearing, drunkenness, and gluttony, are commendable because common, as
Salvianus complained in his time, In hoc scelus res devoluta, ut nisi quis
malus fuerit, salvus esse non possit. In plain English, except a man be thus
wicked, he cannot be reputed a good fellow. Finally robbery and parricide,
do sometimes find pardon And lastly, Do we not persevere in these sins,
and fall away more and more, hardening out hearts against all admonitions? How
then can we escape a fall? Yea, have we not fallen already? Consider but the
estate of the reformed Churches, how in their infancy, when they were
destitute of worldly power, and all Princes and Potentates enemies unto them;
yet then they did stand, maugre Antichrist and all his associats; Gods
protection was a wall of defense about them, that the fury of their enemies
could not come near them; and now when they were grown great in the eyes of
the world, and Kings were become their nursing fathers, and Queens their
nursing mothers, to protect Religion with the sword: yet How has the Lord
humbled them, and made them to fall before their enemies? 2. Chron. 1.5.2
The reason hereof we find in that speech of Azariah the Prophet, to King
Asa, The Lord is with you, while ye are with him: but if ye for sake him, he
will forsake you: At first we was with the Lord, and then he was with us: but
when we did forsake the Lord, and fall from our first love, and zeal of our
profession; then did he break down the hedges, Psalm. 80. 12
and let in the wild Bore out of the wood, and the wild beast out of the
forest to destroy this Vine which he had planted, Lament. 3.42,
that we may lament with Jeremy: We have sinned, and have rebelled,
therefore thou have not spared. Thus has God made us to fall: but unless we
return unto him, there is yet a greater fall to come. The same God that made
Nebuchadnezzar a scourge to his people; can send the Spaniards to scourge us.
Cedreu. hist. page, 512.
When Phocas had built a mighty wall about his Palace, for his security, in
the night he heard a voice: O King though thou build as high as the clouds,
yet the City will easily be taken, the sin within will mar all. So let us
never make so much preparation for our defense: Str^. 57.
yet unless we take a course with our sins, they will betray us into the
hands of our enemies: For, (says Ambrose,) Graviores sunt inimici, mores
pravi, quam hosts infesti. Our sins, are enemies more to be feared then
armed men. If God be with us, Who can be against us? If we stand against God,
Who can withstand him?

Now to shut up all in a word: It is plain that we have gone astray as far
as Israel did; for, what is the vanity after which we have not gone a
whoring? and now our iniquities are come to that height, Ion. 3 8. 9.
that they forewarne us of a fall: Therefore let every man turn from his evil
way, and from the wickedness in their hand. Who can tell if God will turn and
repent and turn away from his fierce wrath, that we perish not? Yea, I can
tell, that if we repent, he will turn away his wrath; Isaiah, 55, 6.
for he desires not the death of a sinner, and even now when the Axe is laid
to the root of the Tree, Hos. 2.7.
he calls us to repentance. Therefore seek the Lord while he may be found,
call upon him while he is near; take up the resolution of repenting Israel, I
will go and return to my first husband; for then it was better with me then
now: follow the counsel of the Prophet, in the words following my Text. Take
with you words, and turn to the Lord, say unto him, Take away all iniquity,
and receive us graciously, so will we render the calves of our lips. Ashur
shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any more
to the work of our hands, ye are our Gods; for in thee the fatherless
finds mercy. He is our God, and therefore if we seek him, he will be
found of us; and as he has wounded us, so he will heal us; he will even
give us beauty for ashes, and the oil of gladness for the spirit of
heaviness, and make the bones which he has broken to rejoice. To this God,
even our God, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA sic CORRIGE.
IN the Epistle Dedicatory, l. 8. for yea, read I, l. 13, for our read an, l.
30 for professor, read protector, p. 7. l. 12 for heal, read healed, p. 7.
l. 16 for occasion read reason, p. 10 l. 17. for thus, read this, p. 11. l 39
for was to come, read was come.


