(...) good lesson for young men.
Trinitarian depiction of Christ with orb and right hand extended in blessing

Mine own dear child, I read and counsel the
While thou have youth, Delicis iuue^tutis me et ignorantias meas: ne
memineris. Psalm. 24.
and strength at thy will
All sin and vice, that thou refuse and flee
Thy precious time, beware that thou do not spyll
It renneth away, it stands never still
Therefore beware, and fie from all outrage
There dies mo young, than lives to great age.
^ (...) Psalmus, 126
(...) ^y^e have spent
for every word and deed, that thou have done
Thou may not escape, from thy just Judgment
Therefore do so, that thou need not to repent
That thine enemies, say not to the chekmate
when thou shall pass, and mete them in the gate,
Let the dread of god, now be thy brydell
And puruey for the time, Initium sapientie timor domini. Psa. 110
that lasts aye
From virtuous occupacyon, be not ydell
But get the ghostly richesse, that thou may
The figure of this world, goes fast away
He is rich, that has heavenly richesse
All worldly mirth, shall end in heaviness.
while thou art young, be meke and seruyable
Unto thy souereygnes, Intertoga patrem tuu^ and annunciabit tibi maiores tuos
et dicent tibi. Deuter. 33.
use thou gentle speech
It is a thing in youth, right commendable
To be more glad to learn, than for to teache
Till thou may to more knowledge a reche
He that will teach, or he any good can
Ie will be long, or he prove a wise man.
Fle from pride, for that will have a fall
For god resysteth, Iniquitatem si aspexi in cord meo: non ex audiet dominus
Psalmus. 65.
proud men evermore
Beware of envy, it is better as gall
Fle from wrath, or it will grieve the sore
Keep no malice, within thine heart in store
These wicked rotes, be as a dethes darte
My child set wisely, keeping to thy heart.
^
Fle ryottous company, (...) chrietate^ secta^dam et potandu^ vsque ad
vesperam vt vino estuetis, Esa. 5
where so ever thou go
It is great shame, a man to take excess
For commonly a be will not do so
Fle from sloth, it is a pleasant foo
A dilygent man wynneth, for body and soul
Where as a slothful man, may chance lose all
Fle the fylthy sin of lecherye
For it is that, that god does greatly hate
Beware thou speak, no words of rybaudrye
For all that here, thereof some harm shall take
For auery word, Ex abunda^tis cordis os loqitur. Mathewe. 12.
acounte thou must need make
Thy tongue will show, plainly what thou art
A fylthy tongue, declares a fylthy heart
Labor truly, for to sustain thy need
To keep thy body, from all indygence
Covet the bliss of heuyn, Habebis Thesauros in celo. Mathewe. 19. Mark. 12.
for thy mete
Covet contrycyon, for all thine offense
Covet clean heart, and clean conscience
Covet heavenly richesse, that lasts aye
which no thief can stele, nor bear away.
The.x. commandments, In via testimonioru^ tuoru^ de lectatus sum sicut in
oi^bus diuitijs. Ps. 118
look ye thou keep and hold
with all thy power, unto thy lives end
Delight in them, more then in silver or gold
Love all creatures, be it foo or friend
None is so evil, Maledicti qui declinant a ma^dat^^ tuis. Ide^.
but that he may amend
And mekely look, upon thy self with all
None is so just, but that he may fall
^
It is a virtue, ^em pat^^^tur propter iustitiam. Mathewe. 5.
that is right excellent
Though thou sometime, for troth do suffer wrong
Thou shalt never be shamed, though thou be shent
To please god, Penitemini ergo et conuertemini, vt deleantur pcta vra. Acts.
3.
set all thy hole intent
Fle great oaths and lies, for they be evil
For all liars, be the children of the devil
Have steadfast faith, Quicu^que manducauerit panem, et biberit calicem dn^i
indigne / reus erit. corporis et san guinis dn^i. 1. Corynthi. 8
with parfyte reverence
Unto the holy sacraments all
The special remedy, for thine offense
To rise again by, when that thou do fall
Ordained of god, therefore most special
Very contrycyon, with confession true
To escape the pain, Confiteamur peccata nostra quonia^ fidelis est deus vt
remittat nobis. 1. Johan. 1.
that for the sin is dew.
But where the serpent, lurketh in their heart
They say that confession, is right naught
He is so loathe, from them to depart
They say it is yuough, Co^fitemini alter utrum p^^cata vestra. James. 5.
god knows our thought
we shall befafe, Christ has so dear us bought
But who so does, confession dispyse
The sacrament of the aultre, Quodcu^que solueritis super terram, erunt soluta
et in ceis. Mathewe. 16.
sets at little pryse.
Fasting and prayer, my child se that thou use
To exclude sin, with all thy hole intent
Holy bread, Hoc autem genus demonioru^ no^ eiicitur, nisi per orationem et
ieiunium. Mathewe. 17 Mathe. 9.
and holy water, do thou not refuse
In taking of them, be thou right reverent
Think they were ordained, for a good intent
A special virtue, shall thou find therein
Against wicked spyrytes, and venyall sin.
(...)
