THE TREASVRE OF VOWED CHASTITY in secular Persons.

Also the WIDOWS GLASS.

Written by the RR. Fathers Leonard Lessius, and Fuluius Androtius, both of
the Society of Jesus.

Translated into English by I. W. P.

Permissu Superiorum, 1621.

TO THE HONORABLE AND RIGHT virtuous Gentlewoma^, Mrs. Anne Vaux.
HONORABLE, AND RIGHT WORTHY, The constant report of your virtuous life, in
the State whereof this little Book entreats, has invited me to entitle the
same unto your Name in particular, which was written for the profit of all in
general, who have a true desire to embrace the State of vowed Chastity, and
yet remain in the world among secular persons.

If the subject seem new, or strange to any, I doubt not, but having
attentively read, and considered the several passages therein, they will
remain abundantly satisfied. For it was no part of the Authors intention (who
is known to be famous, both for learning and piety) thereby to derogate from
other Stats of life; but rather, by showing the good, and commodity, which may
proceed by embracing of this; those that be more perfect in themselves, might
heerby, be the more honored, and reverenced of all.

Neither, indeed, is there any thing at al proposed in this ensewing Discourse,
which has not been practiced in the Primitive Church, by persons of both
sexes; and for that cause so much admired, and extolled by the ancient Fathers
of those days: Howsoever the same may seem not to have been in some later
ages, so much in use, and therefore thought now behoofefull to be again renewed
to our memory, in these times of so great necessity, for the spiritual good of
souls, and increase of Charity, now half extinguished in the Christian world.

The profit that may, and does redound to such as desire to practice this state
of vowed Chastity, remaining in the world, will neither be small, or
uncertain, if the same be embraced with that sincerity of heart and virtuous
manner of life as it ought: wherein I know your self to have made good proof,
these many years, by reaping a plentiful harvest of the fruits, and heaping up
a mass of Treasure, against the coming of your heavenly Spouse, to present
him withal, to the unspeakable comfort and consolation of your souls
eternal Happynes.

To this little Treatise, I have adjoined the WIDDOVVES GLASS, the which I
humbly entreat you, to present, in my Name, to your two most worthy Sisters,
who for the long, constant, and most exemplar profession of that noble, and
worthy state of chaste Widdowhood, may seem to claim a just Title thereunto.
But I deemed not my labor in translating it, worthy to be presented to so
honorable Matrons, in a Dedicatory a part: not doubting but the same will be
more grateful, coming through your hands, who are so near a kin unto them,
both by Nature and Grace; seeing Virginity, and Widdowhood, have ever been
accounted Sisters, and betroathed to the same Eternal Spouse Christ Jesus.

Accept then (Right worthy Gentlewoman) these few sheets of paper, by me
translated out of Latin, as a future earnest of some better gift, wherewith I
intend to present you ere it be long. And in the mean time, among the many of
your pious and devout exercises, forget him not, who will ever remain

Your devoted servant, I. W.

THE GOOD AND COMMODITY Of the state of life, which some profess, living in
the world, and vowing Chastity.
THERE be not wanting in these our days, amongst secular persons very many, as
well Widows, as Virgins, who aspyring to perfection, have a desire (as far
as they may conveniently) to sequester themselves from the troubles and
incombra^ces of the world, thereby to employ their minds more freely and
securly in the service of God.

For whom notwithstanding, to live in Monasteryes, either it is not so
convenient, or else (grounded upon sufficient reasons) they may be otherwise
resolved. For the ways and manners of serving God are diverse, and those who
cannot aspire to the highest and most perfect, are not therefore constrained to
content themselves with the meanest and least noble.

Wherefore many there be who living in the world, rejecting the vanity of rich
and costly apparel, and taking a plain and simple habit, consecrate their
Virginity to Almighty God; and avoiding the conversation of secular persons (as
much as they may) do employ themselves wholly in the offices of Charity and
Devotion.

Yet nevertheless, because there be not wanting some, who (I know not out of
what zeal) carpe at the Institution of such manner of life, I am for this
respect won, at the entreaty of a special friend, to declare out of holy
Scripture, and ancient Fathers, in what degree such kind of life in the
Catholic Church is to be esteemed: for the satisfaction of whom in a matter of
such importance, and so much pertaining to the good of souls, I have purposed
to handle it in eight little Chapters following, where, in the first, it is
proved out of holy Scripture, that this kind of life is pious and laudable.

In the second, the same is proved by Examples out of holy Scripture, and
Ecclesiastical historyes.

In the third, the same is convinced by the Authorityes of holy Fathers.

In the fourth, the same is confirmed by Theological Arguments.

In the fifth, the same is also confirmed out of the good and commodity which
ensue of Chastity.

The sixth, contains a solution to certain objections made, concerning the
merits of Marriage and Chastity.

The seventh, sets down certain admonitions and aduices, to be exactly
followed in this estate.

The eight, shows that this manner of life, is truly and properly called an
Estate.

CHAP. I. VVherin it is proved out of Scripture, that, that kind of life,
wherein some, Men or VVome^, living in the world, leaving of costly apparel,
and using plain and modest attire, do vow Chastity, is laudable and
meritorious before God.
THERE be many in this age who using over much the liberty of their own
Judgments, disallow of this kind of life: yet by what reasons, or upon what
grounds they are moved so to do, besides those which Iouinian the ancient
heretic (and those also of his coat even in these times) has alleged, I
cannot imagine. Neither do I think they have any other, unless perhaps they
consider the difficulties which this manner of life is subject unto, and are
terrifyed with more dangers of living chaste in this, then in the state of
religion. For which cause they may think it more secure to vow Chastity in the
one, then in the other. But nevertheless it is to be held as a point of faith,
that this State is not only lawful, but also commendable, and of great merit
before Almighty God; and the same practiced not only of men, and women, but
also of youth it self.

This is evidently convinced out of holy Scriptur, where our Lord himself
(Matthew. 9.) does openly commend this Institution. For first when the Apostls
hearing the speeches of our Blessed Savior concerning Marriage, answered, Si
ita est etc. If such be the condition of man, linked unto a wife (to wit, that
it is lawful to have but one, neither to be so separated from that one, that
whiles she lives he may take another) it is better not to marry, and incur
such a servitude. To whom our Lord replied, approving that which they had said:
Non omnes capiunt etc. al apprehe^d not this speech but only such to whom it
is given: for there be those who have made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom
of heaven etc. He who can understand this, let him understand it.

Here our Lord spoke of single life in general, commending the same also in
those who live in the world; first, when approving the answer of his aforesaid
Apostles (who then thought not of living in Monasteryes, or being Religious) he
said: Non omnes capiunt etc. All apprehend not this word; as though he should
have said, you rightly infer, that it is not convenient to marry, but few there
be who understand a thing of so great, and high a Mystery.

Secondly, when distinguishing three sorts of Eunuchs, he shows, that those
do greatly please him, who have made themselves Eunuchs, that is to say, who
have exempted themselves from Marriage, for the Kingdom of heaven: To wit,
that being thereby made more free, from the burden of such a clogge, they may
run the faster unto it, and enjoy it more safely and abundantly.

Thirdly when he says, He that can understand this mystery, let him understand
it: as if he should have said, I co^straine no man, but exhort al, for it is a
great benefit to abstain from marriage for the kingdom of God. Therefore he
who has so great a courage, that he hops he shall be able to aprehend and
embrace so great a good, let him not neglect it.

Wherefore since our Lord did not only commend this state in general, but also
in particular according to which the apostles understood him, and which might
have been practiced at that time; it follows manifestly, that the same is
commendable, and most acceptable unto God, being practiced also by those that
live in the world.

Neither can it be said, that our Lord spoke not of the vow of Chastity, but
only of the simple purpose and use thereof: for to be made an Eunuch, is not
only to abstain from Marriage, but also to bereave ones self of al ability
thereof, and of all other carnal pleasure; which is done in effect also, by the
vow of Chastity. For even as the corporal making one an Eunuch, cuts off all
sufficiency of carnal act, or delight: So likewise the spiritual making one
an Eunuch, which is effected by the vow of chastity, disinables al moral
faculty so far, that we may not use any such delight lawfully, making it
morally impossible (as it is incompatible with Justice) to do it. For what we
cannot lawfully do, may be absolutely said, that we cannot do, and is said to
be (justly) impossible.

From whence it is, that holy Fathers usually out of this place of Scripture
prove the vow of Chastity, because a spiritual making one an Eunuch, cannot be
otherwise effected, then by vow. See S. Augustine in his book of holy
Virginity, cap. 30. S. Hierom in his book against Iouinian, and upon this place
of S. Matthew cap. 19. The same is clearly proved out of the Apostle 1. Corinthians. 7. where he greatly prayseth singlenes of life, professed in diverse
manners of estate, and observed also in the world, and in private howses, for as
then Monasteryes were not yet begun. Dico innuptis etc. I speak both to the
unmarried, and to Widows, that it is good for the^ to remain in that estate,
as I have also done. And again: I would have al be as I my self, that is, I
desire that all should be contine^t, as it will appear out of that which
follows. De Virginibus etc. As for those that are virgins, I have no express
commission to them from our Lord, but I give them Counsel (to wit, that they
remain in their Virginity) as having obtained mercy of Almighty God, to be
faithful, etc. And again, Si nupserit virgo etc: If a virgin marry, she
sins not, but such notwithstanding shall have the tribulation of the flesh,
that is to say, many troubls cares, and afflictions etc. Again: Igitur qui
etc. Therefore he which gives a virgin in marriage, does well, but he which does
it not, does better. Also, Beatior erit etc. she shall be more happy if she
remain so still (to wit unmarried) according unto my advice, for I think that
even I my self, have the spirit of God. In all these places the Apostle comends
the love of Chastity, and Virginity, eue^ in the world and in private howses,
as it was observed at that time.

For in Ancient times, when the faithful were most devout, many followed the
advice of our Savior, in such manner, as they had then opportunity to do it, as
is manifest out of the Acts of the Apostles; where many having sold their
goods and bestowed the money in common, embraced poverty. It is very probable
therefore, that there were a greater number of those who embraced Chastity, then
others, both because that virtue was more noble and profitable, and also
because there might be many poor folks which had not goods and possessions to
sell, or if they had, yet perhaps could not sell them; all which
notwithstanding might profess Chastity.

Neither is it to be doubted, but that many obliged themselves by vow
thereunto, since they embraced it out of a desire of perfection and zeal to
please Almighty God. And it is more perfect a great deal to keep it with an
entire resolution, then only with an uncertain and mutable purpose.

Finally also, because they embraced it out of the motive of our Saviors own
advise and commendation thereof; and that which our Savior commended was the
voluntary making of themselves Eunuchs, which is effected by vow, as has bin
said before. The same is collected also out of the Apostle 1. Tim. 5.
Adolescentiores viduas etc. Take none of the younger sort of widows, etc.
which is meant that they should not be admitted into the function or ministry
of diaconisses, or into the number of the Alumnae or Pupills of the Church. Cum
enim etc. for that, says S. Paul, after they have lived licentiously in
Christ, at last also they will not stick to marry, frustrating their former
Faith: that is, they will break the vow of Chastity which they had made
before; for the word Faith, is taken in this place for Promise, or obligation
dew by promise: as for example, to give ones Faith, is to give ones promise, to
keep faith, is to keep promise, to frustrate says given before, is to break
promise, and a promise made to God, is a vow.

From hence it is manifest, that it was a custom in the primitive Church, for
Widows also to vow Chastity, so that without a mortal sin, and being guilty
of damnation, they could not marry again: besides that, every act of
Concupiscence, yea and the very marriage it self was injury against Christ; for
so much is signified in these words, After they have lived licentiously in
Christ, that is to say, after they have lived lasciuiously and luxuriously,
wroning our Savior Christ, to whom they had bound themselves by vow, and were
become espowsed to him, at length also they will not stick to marry. After
this manner the Counsel of Carthage the 104. Canon, and S. Chrysostom upon
this place, and S. Hierome in his epistle to Herontia de Monogamia, and others,
do expound it.

This place is to be noted and pondered of all such as have made vow to
Almighty God of perpetual Chastity, for that without being guilty of eternal
damnation, they can neither marry (especially with an intention to consummate)
nor otherwise enjoy carnal delight, which also is the opinion of all the
Fathers, who interpret this place to be of promise made unto God by the vow of
Chastity.

Finally wheresoever holy Scripture commends Virginity, it speaks in
general; neither is it to be restrained unto those alone, who live in
Monasteryes, And all rewards and privileges of Virginity there rehearsed,
belong unto all holy Virgins, as in the 3. chap. of the Book of Wisdom:
Faelix est sterilis etc. happy is she that is barren and undefiled, which never
knew any impure bed, she shall have fruit in the behoulding of souls that are
blessed etc. Apoc. 14. It is granted only unto Virgins (sequi Agnum quocumq,
ierit) to follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, and to sing that new Hymn in
Isay 56. To Eunuchs which keep Gods divine Commandments, is promised an
everlasting name, and a high place, and a degree in the City of Almighty God.

Some will object that, that place of the Apostle 1. Tim. 5. saying: Volo
iuniores nubere etc. I would have the younger sort to marry, to bring forth
Children and keep house etc. makes clear against that which we have said. To
this I answer, that it is not to be understood of all Widows that are young,
but only of those which cannot live continent, and are not otherwise obliged by
any vow: for it is better that such should marry, then live incontinent, and
give scandal to the unfaithful, as the Apostle insinuates in the same place.

Also the holy Father S. Chrysostom in his 15. Homily upon the 1. to Timothy,
affirms, that the Apostle speaks there of such widows, who being freed from
the yoke and government of their husbands, live dissolutly, become idle,
pratlers, wanton, curious, running up and down to their neighbors houses, and
the like. And it is manifest out of the text it self that the Apostle speaks
of such, when he says: Volo etc. I would have the younger sort to marry. S.
Ambrose also in his book of Widows explicateth S. Paul. Pro remedio suasit
nuptias etc. he persuaded Marriage as a remedy, but not prescribed it as a
choice. S. Hierome in his 8. Epistle to Saluina, asking: Cur nuptias Paulus
indulserit etc. Why did S. Paul favor Marriage? Presently he adds: I am
quaedam etc. Some have already declined after Satan: whereby we may
understand, says S. Hierome, that these speeches rather signify a helping hand
to be lent to those that are fallen, then the reward of a crown to those which
stand firm: See then (says he) what these second Marriages be, which are yet
to be preferred before the condition of a Brothell-house: for some have
declined after Satan; therefore a young Widow which cannot, or will not
contain her self, let her rather take a husband then the devil. So S. Hierome
Out of which it appears that it is not convenient for all young Widows to
marry, but only such who are subject to the vices above named, to wit, in
whom there is manifest danger of Incontinency, or which cannot live chaste, or
will not use means to do it.

CHAP. II. The same is proved by examples out of holy Scripture, and the
custom of the Church, most frequently practiced from the first beginning of
Religion even unto these days.
FIRST of all, does here present her self our blessed Lady, as guide and
Author of this Iustitution, who living in the world at her own command, and
free from being subject to any other, reserving also her proper goods, vowed
unto God perpetual virginity, and this either before, or immediately after her
Marriage.

And truly, if before her marriage (as it is most likely she did, and S.
Augustine in his Book of holy virginity cap. 4. does think most probable) then
she contracted not marriage afterward of her own accord, but rather moved
thereunto by divine Revelation, by which also she was assured that there should
be no danger to loose her virginity, and that her husband also should bind
himself by the like vow of Chastity; wherefore she never consented neither
expressly, nor in effect to any matrimonial Act. For albeit that in the
contract of Marriage, there is power given to the husband over his wives body,
yet by this revelation she was assured that it should in her never actually
take effect. And as she for her part had chosen to prevent it, so likewise her
husband should presently do the like.

But if she made her vow after Marriage, it is to be said that she contracted
Marriage, not with an absolute consent to consumat the same, but in such manner
as she referred her self wholly to the providence of Almighty God, relying
altogether upon his divine will and pleasure. Moreover it is most manifesty
probable that our Blessed Lady had vowed Chastity, out of these words of S.
Luke: Q^omodo fied istu^ etc. How shall this com to pass, since I know not man?
that is to say, how shall I conceive a Son, that cannot know Man, because I
am bound by my vow of Virginity? for so the holy Fathers Athanasius, sermon. de
sanctissima Deipara, Gregory Nissen in his Oration on the birth of our Savior,
S. Augustine in his book of holy Virginity cap. 4. S. Bernard in his fourth
sermon super missus est etc. do teach; and reason it self does likewise
manifestly convince. For otherwise her objection to the Angel had been to no
purpose, since it might have been answered unto her, Now thou shall know man,
and conceive. Therefore her objection, I know not man, is the same, that I
cannot know man: even as he who has vowed to abstain from flesh or wine being
invited says: I eat not flesh, I drink not wine, I frequent not banquets etc.

An innumerable multitude of Virgins presently followed the example of our B.
Lady, in so much that one house, to wit of Philip the deaco^, had 4. daughters
remaining virgins, as it is manifest out of the Acts of the Apostles Chap. 21.
who also were endued with the spirit of Prophecy, as it is there said: which as
S. Hierome witnesses in his Epistle to Demetriades, was granted them as a
reward of their Virginity.

S. Philip the Apostle before his Apostleship, brought up three daughters also,
whereof two remained virgins till they were very old as Policrates in S. Hierome
reports De Scrip. Ecclesiast. in Polycrate.

S. Petronilla daughter S. Peter vowed virginity, and for fear of loosing it,
obtained soden death from Almighty God.

S. Tecla at the persuasion of S. Paul, embraced the same, as S. Ambrose
witnesses in his second book of Virgins.

S. Iphigenia daughter to the King of Ethiopia, by the counsel of S. Matthew,
as Abdias writes in her life.

Flauia Domitilla daughter to Clemens the Consul, and S. Peter's host at Rome,
at the persuasion of S. Clement, as S. Bid witnesses in his Martyrologe the
7. of May, or as it is set down in his life, at the persuasion of Nereus and
Achilleus.

S. Valeria at the persuasion of S. Martialis, as appears out of his Epistle
ad Tholosanos, Chap. 8.

S. Pudentiana and her sister Praxedes, by the Counsel of the Apostles, or
Apostolical men.

Finally S. Anatolia, Apollonia, Balbina, Barbara, Pelagia, Catherina,
Caecilia, Agatha, Agnes, Lucia, Basilla, Christina, Dorothea, Emerentiana,
Prisca, Euphemia, Saturnina, Susanna, Victoria, Theodora, and innumerable
others continued virgins, in the world, even to their death, and honored their
virginity with the crown of Martyrdom.

Moreover it is manifest out of S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose and S. Hierome with
other holy Fathers, that there were in those ages infinite who consecrated
their virginity to Almighty God, although they entered not into Monasteries, but
dwelt either in their Parents howses, or in their own, retayning the use of
their proper goods, or else lived many together in common.

The same appears also out of the testimony of Faustus Manichaeus in S.
Augustine, in his 30. book against Faustus the 4. Chap. where Faustus thus
obiecteth. Necvidetis hinc etc. Neither do you see here, both your virgins to
be noted of being deceived by the doctrine of the Devil, and your selves to
become his Prelates, who contentiously always incite them to this profession,
by your persuasions, that there is almost now in your Churches a greater number
of Virgins, then of married women.

By which speech two things are to be noted, that Bishops and Prelates, every
where through the whole world, did earnestly incite those that were under their
charge to the profession of Virginity, and that the number of those who did
publicly profess Virginity, was as great as those that were married. See S.
Ambrose in his 30. book of Virgins, where he shows the same most evidently.

Among these also many were very eminent and wealthy, as the daughters of
Senators, and Princes, and many of them had waiting women to follow them when
they went abroad, as it appears out of S. Hierome in his 8. Epistle to
Demetriades, where he also warns such Mistresses, that, as they themselves go
modestly in their apparel, so they should cause their women of attenda^ce also
to avoid vanity in their attyres, and see that their habits were modest and
grave.

Besides many Fathers have written of the attire, and discipline of Virgins, as
Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, in diverse places of their
works. All which they directed specially unto such, as living out of
Monasteryes at their own government, embraced virginity. And the said holy
Fathers do warn the^ that they should not be seen in public without veils,
and ciuilly accompanied; that they should not use secular ornaments; that they
should abstain from painting, and vanity in their clothes; that they should
avoid unprofitable meetings, marryages and banquets; that they should give
their alms with a pure intention to the relief of orphans, and such as were
in distress. All which things it is manifest do belong to such as are at their
own disposing, and retain their proper substance.

Neither have we only examples of Chastity in single or unmarried folks, but
also even in those themselves which are married, which to avoid tediousnes I
omit. See Marulus in his 4. book the 7. and 8. chap. Fulgosus in the 4. chap.
Ignat. in his 6. Book. Out of which it appears evidently, that this
institution of embracing and professing Chastity, in the world, has been most
frequent and usual, ever since the beginning of the Church, and therefore very
commendable and meritorious.

CHAP. III. The same is witnessed by the testimonies of holy Fathers.
MERVAILOVS are the commendations which holy Fathers give to this state of
life, which are no less referred to such as observe it in the world, then to
those which profess it in Monasteryes. S. Ignatius in his epistle ad
Tharsenses calls Virgins (so vowed unto God) the Priests of Christ, because
they offer their bodies to God as a sacrifice, Eas quae in virginitate degunt
etc. Account, says he, those who live in the state of Virginity, as Priests of
Christ.

S. Athanasius in his little work of virginity, about the end, says: Magna
virtus continentia etc. Continency is a great virtue, purity is a thing worthy
to be boasted of, great are the praises of Virgins. O Virginity, treasure
inconsumable, garland never to be withered, temple of Almighty God, house of
the holy Ghost, Margarite most precious, ouerco^mer of death and hell, life of
Angels, crown of Saints etc. S. Cyprian in his book of the habit and
discipline of Virgins: Nunc nobis ad Virgins sermo est etc. Now speak we of
Virgins, says he, of whom by how much their glory is the more eminent, by so
much their care is the greater. This is the flower of ecclesiastical bud, the
ornament and grace of spiritual grace it self, the hopeful towardnes of
praise and honor, a work entire and uncorrupted, the image of God
corresponde^t to the sanctimony of our Lord, the more beautiful part of Christ
his flock etc. And afterward: Si praemium pollicitationis etc. If thou expect
the reward of promise, thou will count thy labor little: Immortality shall be
given to him, that perseuereth; perpetual li^e is proposed a reward; our Lord
promises a kingdom: preserve ye Virgins, preserve that which you have begun
to be, preserve that which ye shall be, for great is the reward provided for
you etc.

That which we must be hereafter, you have begun to be already; ye possess
in present the glory of the Resurrection in the age to come; ye pass through
the times without taking infectio^ from them as long as ye persevere in
Chastity and Virginity; ye are equal even to the Angels of God, solid and
untouched; Virginity only endures, only lasts for ever.

The first Precept (S. Cypria^ goes still on) of Almighty God, commanded to
increase and generate; the second persuaded Contynency. Whilst the world was
rude and unpeopled, by our fertility, by generation we were multiplied, and
grew to the increase of mankind: but now when the world is peopled and filled,
those who are capable of Chastity are made Eunuchs spiritually, after the
manner of things that are made vselesse to the Sex, for the kingdom of God.
Hitherto S. Cyprian.

S. Basil in his book of true Virginity says: Virginity is certainly a great
and excellent thing, which makes a man incorruptible like unto God himself;
but it passes not from our bodies into our souls; yet being the propriety of
an incorporeall nature, keeps also our bodies incorrupt with a precious
integrity etc. Virgins have before hand indewed themselves with that which by
divine virtue, must be perfected in us at the Resurrection; for living here
like unto Angels, they neither marry, nor are married, but are both in virtue
of mind, and integrity of body, equal unto Angels. The same Father
explicating also the words of the Prophet Esaias 56. of Eunuchs, he writes in
this manner. Pro humano nomine etc. Instead of a humane name, says our Lord, I
will give them a name of Angels which are immortal, that they may have heaven
and the fairest part thereof to remain in, and that dwelling in the most
beautiful seat of heaven, that is to say, in my house, within the inclosurs
thereof, they may receive not only the nature of the Angels, and the honor of
perpetual succession, being sufficient of themselves to continue an eternal
succession of their kind, in themselves, for life everlasting; but also that
they may have a principal place amongst Angels, and a name indeleble, which
for the great splendor in their beauty shall never decay etc.

S. Gregory Nazianzen in his Verses in the praise of Virginity sings thus:
Salve Virginitas etc.

Hail Chastity the gift of only Heaven,

Parent of a purelise, by whom are given

Our greatest goods, part even of Christ, and one

That's to celestial spirits companion:

Nor ever knew of unchaste bed the touch,

For God himself and his fair Quire are such.

S. John Chrysostom in his book of Virginity the cap. 2. says: Virginity so
much excells marriage, by how much heaven does earth, and Angels mortal men.
And again in the 12. chap. Humanity since it is inferior to those happy
spirits the Angels, as far as it is able, strives to attain unto their
perfection. And how? Angels marry not, nor take to them wives, no more does a
Virgin. Angels waiting always about the throne of Almighty God, do serne him:
so does a Virgin. Wherefore S. Paul calls them away from all cares, that they
may continually employ themselves in the service of God, without having
wherewithal to be distracted. Again, chap. 37. Dare any one after all this
compare marriage with virginity, or but once bring the one in presence of the
other? S. Paul suffers not this, who interposeth a great distance between
these two, where he says: the one thinks on matters belonging unto God, the
other on matters belonging to the world.

S. Ambrose in his first book of virgins says, Nec immerito etc. deseruely
has virginity derived from heaven the manner of her life, since it is in
heaven that her Spouse has his dwelling place. This cloud passing thorough
the Air, Skies, and Quires of Angels themselves, has found out the word of
God, even in the bosom of God the Father, and has filled its bowels
therewith. For who is it, that having found so great a good, will leave it? For
thy Name is an ointment powered out, wherefore young virgins, and maids have
loved thee, and taken thee unto them. Finally, that is not my saying, Because
those which neither are nor will be married, shall be as the Angels of God in
heaven.

Let none therefore marvel (says S. Ambrose further) that they are compared
to the Angels of God who are lincked and united in the God of Angels etc. Let
us compare therefore the co^tents of married women, with the lowest and least
happiness of Virgins.

Admit (says he further) that some great woman should boast of her fertility
and the fruit which she has brought forth: by how many the more Children she
has been delivered of, by so much the greater have been the panges and
pains which she endured. Let her reckon the joy which she has of her
children, and withal she may count likewise the troubles which they have
caused her. She marryeth and weepeth: and what wise vows are these, which so
suddenly must be repented etc.

Again* You have heard all ye that are mothers, in what virtues, in what
order, and discipline, ye ought to bring up your children, that you may have
some of your own, by whose merits your own sins and offenses may be
forgiven. A Virgin is one to whom God has given her to be so, and therefore
she is his gift, she is the reward of her Parents etc. A virgin is the
oblation of her Mother, by whose daily sacrifice Gods divine power is appeased.

S. Hierome in his first book against Iouinian cap. 1. Ideoplus amat etc.
Therefore our Savior Christ loves Virgins the more, because of their own
accord they give him that, which was not exacted of them: and it is a token of
greater grace to offer that which is not due, then to give that which they are
compelled unto.

And afterward: Grandis fidei est etc. It is a work of great faith, and much
virtue, when the Temple of God is most pure to offer it entierly as a
burnt-sacrifice unto our Lord, and according to the Apostle to be holy, as well
in body as in spirit.

S. Augustine in his book of holy Virginity cap. 13. says: Virginal
integrity is an Angelical portion and a perpetual meditation of
incorruptibility in a corruptible body. Let all fertility of body give place
unto this, and all continency of married persons yield unto it; for the former
is not in our own power, the later lives not in eternity. The liberty of our
will extends not unto bodily fruitfullnesse, Matrimonial Chastity is not
found in Heaven. They certainly shall have some reward above all others in
that general immortality, who have already grown in their flesh somewhat that
is not fleshly. Wherefore they are much ouerseene, who think the good and
commodity of this co^ntinency not to be necessary, for the kingdom of heaven,
but only for the present world wherein we live.

In which last words he conuinceth Iouinia^ and the heretics of our times, who
with him teach, that Virginity is only convenient to avoid worldly troubles.

S. Fulgentius in his 2. Epistle to Proba cap. 9. Dicimus a sanctis nuptijs
etc. We affirm (whereas those marry who cannot live continent) that holy
Virginity as far excels holy Matrimony, as that which is better excels
that which is good, that with is high excels that which is low, that which
is heavenly excels earthly, that which is holy, more holy, mortal marriage,
marriage immortal, the flesh the spirit, weakness strength, the fruit of a
tra^sitory issue the fruit of a branch everlasting, tribulation security,
vnsetlednes of mind tranquillity, a good which is momentary and full of troubles
excels that which is better, and accompanied with joy everlasting.

These and many other things, holy Fathers have written in the co^mendatio^ of
virginity, by which the excellency and worth thereof may be beeter known and
esteemed, no one virtue or estate of life being commended with so great
affection, and consent of holy Fathers, as this.

Hereupon, especially in former ages, an infinite multitude have embraced it,
in so much that S. Ambrose in his 3. book of Virgins affirms, That in the
Eastern and Africa^ Churches, there were more virgins consecrated to Almighty
God, then we have men borne in our parts here. And yet notwithstanding
mankind is not thereby diminished, but increased. If any one (quoth he)
imagines, that the number of mankind is diminished by the multitude of
virgins, let him consider, that where there are few virgins there are also the
fewer persons, and where the number of them is more frequent who are lovers and
imbracers of Virginity, there also the number of men is more great. Consider
how many Alexandria, and all the Eastern parts, with the Churches also of
Africa, was wont every year to consecrate: fewer men are here begotten then
there virgins consecrated; the reason whereof is, that God will not be overcome
with liberality: but if the Parents offer him a Child or two, he renders them
eight or ten, granting fruitefullnes, and fortunate Childe-bearing to such as
are mothers, and filling their howses with his blessing. Therefore even as
faithful paying of Tithes, and liberality toward the poor, brings not
poverty, since God by his providence prospers and increases our substance,
and makes our fields the more fruitful, as S. Hierome teaches Sermon. 219. de
tempore; so the love and affection to virginity hinders not the world, nor
wastes the number of secular Persons, but obteyneth it a longer benediction.

CHAP. IIII. The same is proved also, by reason.
THE error of Iouinian was, that Virginity did not excel Marriage, which he
meant by virginity, taken absolutely and generally, whether it were professed
by persons living in the world or in Religion. He therefore who confesses that
virginity professed in the state of Religion, is to be preferred before
Marriage, but not that which is embraced in the world, is at least half a
Iouinianist, because he is half of his opinion; nay rather he seems to be
altogether of the same mind, and really a Iouinianist, because he denies,
that Virginity is of it own nature better the^ Marryage, wherein the whole
Error of Iouinian about this matter consisted. For if of it own proper nature
it were better, it would follow, that the same being also professed in the
world, would be better. See S. Augustine Cap. 28. ad Quod-vult-Deum, and S.
Jerome in his 10. book against the same Iouinian etc.

If it were not laudable and meritorious to vow Virginity, living in the world,
either it should be for the great difficulty and moral impossibility of
keeping their vow in that estate, or else because Chastity is not better then
marriag; for no other reason can be imagined. Not the former, for it is an
heresy of the heretics of these our days, who for the difficulty thereof,
affirm, that such a vow is not to be made, unless the person know that he is
peculiarly inspired with the gift of continency. Not the latter, for it is the
error of Iouinian aforesaid. Concerning the gift of Chastity, it is to be held
as a point of faith, that this gift will not be wanting to any who will resolve
to live chaste, if he do as much as lies in him to obtain the same of
Almighty God.

If there be so great difficulty to live chaste in the world, in so much that
it is not meritorious for a man to bind himself thereto by vow; then such a vow
is of it own nature vain, and of no effect to him that makes it, and so he
may freely break that which is of such difficulty, as seems morally
impossible. But this kind of reasoning may by no means be admitted; to wit,
that such a vow is of it own nature vain and of no effect, and that it may be
broken without a most grievous sin. See the above mentioned testimony of the
Apostle 1. Tim. 5.

It is very commendable and meritorious for young men also remaining in the
world to vow chastity, yea the Church binds al such as have taken holy Orders
thereunto. Therefore if men do it, and that it be commendable in them to do so;
why should it not be the like for women, such as are young, both Maids, and
Widows especially, since men live in far greater danger by means of their
greater freedom of conversation, and their less bashfullnes, together with
more frequent occasions of temptation. From whence we see, it proceeds, that
more men which vow Chastity in the world do offend against their vow then
women: yea there are very few of that sex who vowing Chastity in the world do
violat their vow: in so much that oftentimes in a great city, for the space of
many years, you shall not hear of any such: which is a sign, that it is a
matter more easy for women to do then for men; and yet we see that men do
laudably take upon them such vows: neither can they by any means be excused
from the^, being once undertaken.

If it be meritorious to keep Virginity in Religion, why is it not also in the
World? For the circumstance of the place alters not the merit of the work, but
the excellency it self thereof, and a devout will unto it: and this pious
inclination may be had as well out of the state of Religion, when a Virgin
purposes with her self to abstain from Marriage, and to consecrate her
virginity to Almighty God, that she may serve him the more perfectly, that she
may follow the counsel of our Savior Christ, that she may imitate our Lord,
and his most blessed Mother, that she may apply all her thoughts and affections
to heavenly things, and to the health of her soul; for the excellency of the
work is equal on both sides. Therefore there is no reason, why the profession
of Chastity in the World, should not be meritorious, as well as in Religion.

It is not only commendable in Monasteryes, but also in the world, to do other
good works, as to pray, to fast, to give corporal and spiritual alms, to
chastise our body, and to bind our selves by vow thereunto. Then if other good
works loose not their worth and esteem, nor their merit before God by being
done in the world; why should Virginity, and single life? Yea, as it is the
more prayse-worthyto be temperate, and to abstain sitting at a banquet, and to
be able to bridle our appetite, even in the very midst of prouocations; so
likewise may it be a deed of greater merit to live chastely in the world, where
occasions of falling are more frequent: As for example, when there are lawful
reasons why such occasions might not be conveniently shunned, which otherwise
they would have willingly avoided.

The state of being Religious, and to be shut up in Monasteryes, is not
agreeable with the complexion of every one: yea a great many, either are not
apt for this state, by reason of the weakness of their body, or for other
causes, or oftentimes their minds are not easily won to it, and that most
commonly for diverse sufficient reasons, which it is not necessary to reveal:
and who now should co^straine such to marry, or to enter into Monasteryes? Why
should it not be lawful for them to keep their virginity in the world, and to
vow themselves unto it? Is it either because they will not, nor cannot ascend to
the highest degree, that they must be therefore constrained to stay in the
lowest, and may not keep a mean betwixt both? No man will think so, except he
be endued with the spirit of Iouiuian. The counsels and aduices of our Savior
Christ are not so necessarely united one to the other, but that one may be
followed without another, and by themselves, in diverse degrees. Wherefore as
those who desire to observe the state of Poverty, are not bound unto Chastity;
so also those which embrace Chastity, must not therefore of necessity keep
Poverty, or Obedience, or shut themselves up in Monasteryes.

CHAP. V. The same is proved out of the commodities which this state of life,
being prosessed, both in the world and in Religion, does bring with it.
THe Cause why this state of life is so commended by holy Fathers, as well in
the one as the other, are the manifold commodities which it brings therewith.
For in both, it is an imitation of Angelical life; in both it is the making of
our body as it were a burnt-offering to Almighty God; in both it is a
spiritual Marriage, in which Christ is the spouse; in both it freeth from the
irksome slavery of Marriage, and from the troubles which belong unto it; in
both it delivers the mind from infinite cares and troubles; finally in both
it makes it free, and at liberty to apply it self unto God, and to dwell as it
were mentally and spiritually with the Blessed, in community of heavenly things.

First it is an imitation of Angelical life, as holy Fathers every where do
deliver, out of the opinion of our Lord Matt. 22. Because as Angels marry not,
nor are troubled with carnal concupiscence, but are ever attent to divine
matters, and entertain themselves always in them; so in like manner Virgins
are said to anticipate the glory of the Resurrection, because marriage after
the Resurrection shall cease.

Virginity is a burnt-offering: for as in a burnt offering the thing sacrificed
is killed, and afterward all of it consumed in the honor of God, that no part
thereof remains for human use: so likewise a Virgin must first kill all
carnal affections in her self, and afterward offer up her body, mortified
after this sort by the fire of Charity, to Almighty God, and reserve no part
thereof to any human or carnal use.

She is a spiritual marriage, because by vow she is bound unto God as to her
husband: for as the band of carnal marriage is not to be loosed; neither also
is that of spiritual: yea that of spiritual Marriage, is much more
indissoluble; for it cannot be loosed by death it self, but continues in all
eternity. Again, as carnal marriage is effected for the mutual enjoying and
comfort of both persons, and the bringing forth of children: so this Marriage
is made, that the soul may please God the better, and receive help and comfort
back again from him, and that it may converse more familiarly, and with the
greater delight with Almighty God, as with its Spouse.

And finally, to the end that having received seed of divine grace from him, an
immortal and glorious issue may be begotten to inherit in the world to come:
wherein spiritual Marriage is far more happy then carnal; for the later is
to the end, that of impure and corruptible seed, another man may be begotten,
and that but to enjoy a mortal life, and thereby subject to infinite miseryes:
but the other is to the end, that out of divine seed a mortal man should beget,
not another mortal man, but himself, to an immortal and happy life.
Therefore he persuades himself first unto this marriage, and afterward by
word and example profits others. To this may be likewise added, that as in
carnal marriage, titles, and dignityes, and all the goods of either is
communicated to both: so likewise in spiritual, the goods and dignityes of the
espoused, belongs also to the Spouse.

The desire of a wife is, that she may have a husband, who is fair, noble,
rich, powerful, and courteous, and if it happen that she get such a one, she
thinks her self happy. But how much more happy, is a Virgin whose husband is
the most fairest, most noble, most rich, most powerful, most gentle, and
immortal Lord of heaven and earth, of Angels also, and of men. See more of
this in S. Ambrose in his first book of Virgins.

For as much as belongs to the benefits and commodityes of holy Virginity, they
are generally three. The first is, that it freeth the mind from innumerable
troubles and afflictions unto which the state of matrimony either by means of
the wife or by means of the children is subject unto; which the Apostle
insinuates 1. Cor. 1. when he speaks in this manner of those which are
married: Tribulationem carnis habebunt huiusmodi; such shall have the
tribulation of the flesh. And first of all, is the servitude of the wife, by
reason that she has not power of her own body, and is made subject in all
things to her husband, must endure his frowardnes, his insolences, his
banqueting, dru^kenes, iealousy, suspicion, incontinency, adultery, taunts,
and blows. Also she must follow him, stick always to him, obey him and serve
him as his slave; so that many slaves in the world have a more tolerable
bondage, then some wives unhappily married; whilst he spends her wealth and
substance at dice, at play, in drinking, banqueting, prodigal giving,
improfitable bargains, improuident co^tentions, and diverse other ways, which
his wife is not able to remedy.

Moreover he leaves the charge of providing for the whole house-hould to her,
and yet allows not where withal sufficiently to do it; and brings her
oftentimes even into that extremity, that she grows half desperate. In the
mean time being oppressed and overcome with too much impatience, she often
curses her husband, and wishes al il hap to befall him, and desires nothing
more then his death. Neither are these things rare and seldom, but the whole
world is full of them.

Now if we should add unto all this, the troubles that come continually by
means of children, there would arise even a whole world of miseryes and
afflictions. And although in the carnal Act of marriage there seems to be
now and then a little pleasure: yet of it own nature, it is both unclean (as
a thing wherein we differ not from a beast) and also full of shame and
immodesty; and in a moment it is past, and afterward rewarded with innumerable
discommodityes. For presently after Conception, there follows a kind of
irkesomnes, idle dreams, giddines, vnsetlednes of the head, melancoly,
conuulsions of the hart-stringes, absurd longings after meats, and a general
perturbation of nature.

Then follow the pains of childbearing which are both violent to the sense,
and oftentimes endure long, and to many bring death also; and then the Child
being borne, with what great care and solicitude must it be brought up, until
it come to be of some strength and perfection of nature. How many times a day
must it be made clean, fed, made up, apparrelled, laid to sleep, rockt in the
cradell, taken out again to give it suck, and be held out. How many times must
it be flattered and entreated with fair speeches and with a thousand pretty
hypocrisies and flatterings, to make it leave crying, or to sleep?

These are the contynuall exercises of such as be Mothers, and in such they are
employed, not on ly all day long, but also most part of the night, so that they
can scarce take any rest but with often interruption.

I omit the sluttishnes, the ill savor, the weeping, crying, and brauling,
which they are constreyned daily to suffer. I omit also the cares and
troubles, which they have when their children begin to grow big, and to be
exposed to diverse cha^ces of the world. What great grief they have, if it
chance they should miscarry and dye; if by evil company they should be allured
to villainy and dishonesty; if they should prove stubborn and disobedient
against their Parents; if they should spend and wast their Parents goods at
play, drinking, or at any other unlawful game; if without their Parents consent
they should marry.

To these afflictions the whole life of all such as are mothers, is always
subject; for albeit the Parents be very devout and religious, yet it happens
oftentimes that the children be wicked and lewd, and with their misdemeanors,
and ill living, torment their Parents, as we have examples in Adam and Cain,
in Noe and Cham, in Abraham and Ismael, in Isaac and Esau, in Jacob and many of
his sons, in David, Amon, and Absalom, with infinite others: therefore since
sacred virginity delivers from all this, it is deservedly to be numbered amongst
the greatest benefitts that are.

Another commodity of virginity and single life is, that it freeth the mind
from all cares of governing a family, of increasing the stock and wealth of
their estate, of marrying their children, and of leaving them ample
Patrimonyes; for of these four things all Parents are for the most part most
careful and sollicitous; yea commonly their minds are so wholly addicted and
given to such businesses, as they can scarce ever think seriously on God, or
things belonging to the good of their soul.

These things they keep always in mind, in these things they spend all their
thoughts and affections, these things so waste and wear out all the ability
and powers of their minds, as they have no strength left to consider, or
think upon things that are eternal.

Greatly therefore is the misery of this estate to be pittyed; for the bondage
of the mind is more hurtful a great deal, then that of the body; and the
loss of good thoughts, is a greater damage, then the loss of money.

The third commodity of virginity and single life is, that it makes the mind,
being freed from the cares and troubles of Marriage, more fit and prepared to
serve Almighty God, and procure its own safety: and this is the greatest good
of this life. For which cause it is commended specially by the Apostle the 1.
Cor. 7. where he says, Mulier innupta etc. A woman unmarried, and a Virgin
thinks on what belongs unto God, that she may be holy, both in body and
mind.

There is nothing better nor more healthful unto our soul the^ to serve God,
and to endeavor the obteyning of our souls welfare. To this purpose were we
made, and adorned with these noble faculties of our soul, Understanding,
Memory, and Will. We have not received these to employ them about transitory
and servile matters, without any fruit at al, but to address them to eternal
and celestial things, for our great benifit and advantage. All earthly things
are to base and co^temptible for our minds (which is above all visible things)
to fix, and exercise it self there about. The shortness it self of our life,
together with the vncertinty and necessity of dying, might justly recall us
from the care of temporal matters, and address our thoghts to the solicitude
of things eternal. Whereupon the Apostle 1. Cor. 7. says: Te^pus breue est
etc. Time is short, it remains, that such as have wives, be as those who have
them not; and those who mourn, like those who mourn not; and those who
rejoice, like those who rejoice not; and those who buy, like those who possess
not; and those who use this world, like those who use it not; for the fashion
of this world passes away etc.

By which words he teaches us, that we should be no more affected and
addicted to transitory things, then as if they did not belong unto us. We ought
to have care of nothing so much, as to avoid eternal punishment, and attain
to everlasting joys: for in comparison of these, all the good or ill of this
world, ought to be of no ac^ount: So that if there were nothing but madness
practiced in the world, this would be the greatest, to neglect the highest and
everlasting things, and to follow that which is base and transitory, with so
great hazard of eternal damnation.

Therefore as that manner of life is miserable, and to be avoided by all wise
men, which intangleth the mind with care of base and earthly things, howsoever
glorious and honorable they seem: So on the contrary, is that state happy and
most desirously to be embraced, which freeth the mind from all these cares and
troubles, and affoardeth it commodity to meditate on heavenly things, and to
apply it self to the obtaining of its own welfare. And such is single life, as
it has been showed.

Neither in women only, but also in men single life has all these effects:
for most of those things which we have said before of women, have place also
in men: yet men in Marriage are most commonly exposed to more discommodityes
and inconveniences then women, because the whole care of maintayning the
household, and of the greatest business lies upon him; and infinite disdaines
of the wife, offenses, iealosies, suspicions, complaints, and frowardnes are to
be endured, as S. Hierome prosecuteth it, very elegantly out of Theophrastus
the Philosopher in his first book against Iouinianus, whose words it seems
here good to set down.

Fertur, inquit, Aureolus etc. Here is brought (quoth he) a little goulden
book of Theophrastus written concerning marriage, in which he asks this
question, Whether a wise man should marry a wife or no? And when he has
defined, that if she were fair, well brought up, of good Parents, and if she were
healthful and rich, with these conditions a wise man might sometimes marry; he
presently infers: But all these seldom match together in marriage,
therefore it is not behoofull for a wise man to marry etc. And then he sets down
diverse reasons which the same Philosopher alleges for his opinion.

First (quoth he) it hinders the study of Philosophy; for no man can serve his
books and his wife at once. There are also many things which are necessary
for the use of Wives, as gay apparel gold, Jewels expenses, waiting women,
variety of household stuff, gilded horse-litters, and coaches. Moreover you
shall have all the night long nothing but prattling, and complaints that this
Dame wears better clothes when she goes abroad then she: This Lady, or Gentle
woman is much honored and respected of all wheresoever she comes; whilst I,
poor soul, am despised and contemned of every body. Why did you look so
earnestly on my Neighbors wife? Why did you talk with her maid? Are you come
from the Market, what have ye bought? etc.

Her husband cannot have a friend or companion, but straight she thinks that
the love of another is her hatred. If there were a learned Master in every
town, men should neither forsake their wives, nor be able to walk with so
great a burden. If she be poor, it is cost to help her, if rich, a torment to
endure her.

Moreover there is no choice of a wife, but what a one soever you chance to
take, if she be colerique, if a fool, if deformed, if proud, if slutrish, what
fault soever she has, we learn that afterward. A Horse, an Ass, an Ox, a
Dog, the worst slave a man can entertain; his apparel also, his kettles, his
chayres, his cups, his earthen pots, all these a man may prove before he buy
them, only his wife must not be showed before she be had, for fear a man
should so dislike her, that he would never have her.

You must always be looking on her face, and commending her beauty, for fear
least if you look on another, she think that her beauty displeases you. She
must be called Mistress and her Birthday must be made a Holy day: you must
swear by her health, and you must pray that she may out live you: you must
reverence her that nursed her, and her also that bare her when she was a little
one, her servant, her brother-in-law, her little dandling, her pretty Page, her
hired Proour, and her Eunuch forsooth, for the longer continuance and more
security of lust (under all which names are prettily couched Adulterers.) And
whomesoeuer of all these she affectcteth, he must be beloved too, even by those
to whom they are ungrateful.

If you commit the government of the whole house to her charge, you must be
her servant. If you reserve any part of it to your self, she thinks you will
not trust her, and straight turns into hatred, and scoulding, and unless you
beware of her betymes, you are in danger to be poisoned.

Old women, Wisards, brokers of Jewels and silk apparel, if you admit any of
these into your house, you are in danger of cuckolding: and if you forbid them,
you do her wrong to suspect her.

But to what end is it to watch her narrowly, when a wife that is unchaste can
never be restrained: and if she be chaste, she ought not to be restayned; for
the constraint of chastity is but an unfaithful keeper. She only is truly to
be named chaste who can be otherwise if she will. A fair wife is a bayte, as well
in other men's eyes, as in his that has her. A slut will sooner desire others
then they her. It is a hard matter to enjoy that alone which many men seek
after; and it would be a trouble to have such a one, as no body would vouchsafe
to affect. Yet it is a less misery to have an ill favored wife, then to keep
a fair one true. There is nothing safely possessed by one, which of every body
is wished for.

One sollicits with his comlynes, another with his wit, another with his
pleasantnes, another with his money: by some means or other at last the Fort
will be taken, which is on every side so strongely beseiged.

But it may be objected, that it is necessary for a man to have a wife, to take
charge of the expe^ses of his house, or to be a comfort to him when he
languisheth, or to avoid solitarynes. To this I answer, that a faithful
servant obeying the authority of his Master, and doing his business according
to his will, disposes of matters a great deal better then a wife, who
thinks that her Mistresship consists in doing that which is against ^er
husbands will, that is to say, to do that which she has a will to, not that
which she is commanded to do.

And as for attending and comforting a man when he is sick, his friends and
servants, or such poor souls as he has made beholding unto him, may better
do it then she, who vpbraides him, as it were, with the tears which she
sheedes for him, yea sells the very filth and dross thereof, in hope to be his
executour. And by this boasting of her carefullnes, never leaves him, til with
her perpetual trouble, she drives him into utter desperation.

But if her finger chance to ache, he must be sick for it, and never budge from
her bed side. Or if she be a good wife, and of a sweet disposition (which
notwithstanding is a rare bird) he must groan with her, whilst she is in child
bed, and be payned with her danger.

As for the avoiding of solitarines, a wise man can never be alone; he has
present all those which are, or ever were good, in his thoughts, and freely
places his mind on what he will. That which he cannot do with his body, he
imbraceth with his thoughts, and if there be sarcity of men to converse withal,
he talks with God; he is neuerlesse alone then when he wants all company.

Besides it is a most idle thing to take a wife, in regard to have children by
her that his family may not be extinct, or that he have, help and aid to his
old age, and also to know who shall in herit that which he leaves behind. For
what is one the better when he is going out of the world, that another is
called by his name, when as a son cannot presently be like his Father; and
there are an infifinite number of other men also perhaps called by the same
name. Or what booteth it to nourish those at hom, who^ we hope may be helps to
us when we are old, when perhaps they either die before us, or become of such a
perverse disposition, as they will not succor us; or if they themselves come
to maturity of years, perhaps they think their parents live to long.

And as for heirs, our friends and our neighbors whom we love, are better and
more sure heirs unto us, being chosen thereunto by us freely, the^ those whom
we are constreyned to have whether we will or no: though indeed it be a for
more assured inheritance to make our selves our own heirs, (by doing good
works whilst we live, (for otherwise we do but abuse the same) then to leave
it, being gotten all by our own industry and pains, to the uncertain uses of
any others whatsoever.

These reasons and the like Theophrastus discussing, what good Christian might
he not make ashamed of such vanities and troubles, whose conversation ought to
be in heaven, and who daily says Cupio dissolui etc. I desire to be dissolved
and be with Christ: as though he who may be a coheyre with Christ himself,
should desire to have man to be his heir, and should wish for children, and be
delighted in the succession of his posterity whom perhaps Antichrist shall
pervert; when notwithstanding we read that Moses, and Samuel preferred others
before their own children. Neither yet did they account the^ children whom
they saw displease Almighty God.

Thus far are S. Hieromes words, who afterward confirms the same with
examples out of the old Testament. By which it is manifestly showed how far
single life in the world is to be preferred above Marriage, and out of how many
discommodityes and cares it does deliver a man; and what abundance of help it
affoardeth to a man, to pass over pleasantly, and quietly this temporal life,
and obtain a high degree in the everlasting. All which things if they should be
exactly weighed and considered of most men, I doubt not, but there would be
far fewer who would so much admire, love, and embrace the servitude, that
Marryage oftentimes brings with it.

CHAP. VI. Of the Merits of both States of life, to wit, of unmarried and
married.
SOME one will object, That if the pains and troubls of mothers be great in
bearing and breeding their children, and in supporting the conditions and
iniuryes of their husbands; great also are the merits of enduring them: which
merits such as are virgins cannot have. Whence the Apostle also 1. Tim 2.
says: Saluabitur etc. She shall be saved, by bringing forth children etc.

I answer, that Parents may be moved with a double affection, to beget and
bring up children: to wit, with a mere human and natural affection, and
with a spiritual or divine. A natural affection is, when any one desires
children for the conservation of his name and family that he may have heirs to
whom he may leave his goods; that he may out-liue his own death in his
posterity; that he may be honored in the^; that he may have comfort and help
by his children. All these are human respects and affections, and therefore of
no merit, or esteem before God; yet of their own nature they are not ill, but
indifferent. Wherefore those who out of such affection do contract Marriage, or
beget children, or bring them up begotten, merit nothing before Almighty God,
and loose all their labors and charges which they are at, as far forth as
this; to wit, that they shall not receive eternal reward for them, but only a
temporal comfort or comodity. For as an human affection is not meritorious
before Almighty God, no more also is the work which follows out of it,
although it be frequent and laborious.

In like manner to love and follow Honors, Riches, Magistracy, Dignityes and
Pleasures for the commodity, splendour and sweetness which we perceive in them,
although of it self it be no sin; neither likewise is it of any desert, but
rather apperteineth to the delight of such things as are the concupiscence of
the flesh, of the eyes, and pride of life, and which proceed out of a corrupt
nature, not out of the inspiratio^ of divine grace.

The same likewise is to be said of the affections of Parents, whereby they
wish and procure these co^tents and pleasures unto their children. For even as
when they desire and obtain these things for themselves, they deserve nothing
at the hands of Almighty God; no more likewise do they when they do the like
in their childrens behalf: yea this affection is not only not meritorious
before Almighty God, but also it is not so much as a work of any virtue.

For first of all, that it not a work proceeding out of any divine or infused
virtue, it is manifest, since it may be found also in Heathens themselves, and
the most wicked persons that live. Also that such affections proceed not out of
any moral or Philosophical virtue it is plain, for they respect not their
objects, as they are honest and reasonable, as the natures of such virtues
require, but as they are delightful and commodious, or honorable.

Whence it is, that no man by such an affection becomes praise worthy, which
is the propriety of virtue. As no man is worthy of praise, for that he loves
or gets riches, honors, plea, sures, or for loving his child because he is
fair, or because he is like him, for singing well, dancing well, speaking well,
or being indewed with such like civil ornaments or qualityes. Al such
affections are only natural and indifferent, and therefore of no desert or
merit in the sight of Almighty God before his Tribunal seat.

Therefore as he which gives alms to the poor prodigally, and vaynegloriously
to make himself honored and esteemed the more of men, according to the words
of our Savior, shall have no reward before Almighty God, but receaueth all his
reward in the praises which he gets of men in so doing: So those, which
marry for respect of pleasure or riches, those which desire to have children,
or to bring them up to have contentment, who day and night only take care, how
they may leave them a large and ample inheritance, that they may promote them
to honors, offices, dignityes, or wealthy marriages, deserve nothing before
God, but receive their reward in the temporal contentements, which by this
means they procure, either to themselves, or to their children.

Therefore to speak truly, their labors and cares are all lost; neither do
they reap any fruit at all to be accounted of from all this; for nothing is to
be esteemed of any great value, but that which is everlasting.

All temporal things are of small account, passing away as shaddows, and
therefore most unworthy to spend all the vigor and principal acts of our soul
about the^, which were ordained for things eternal. Heerupo^ holy Scripture
every where calls us from the love and desire of riches, honors, and
pleasures, and tells us that such as are poor, meek and oppressed, are only
happy.

Neither are all these labors and pains of Parents only unprofitable, but
they are also hurtful, and the original cause of infinite evils. From hence
it is, that there are such an infinite number of men in the world, who damn
there own souls (which otherwise might have been saved) for their childrens
sake, to make them rich, or to promote them to Honors. For those that will
become rich as the Apostle witnesses, fall into temptation, and the snare of
the devil, and into many unprofitable and hurtful desires, which send them
head long into damnation, and destruction; for covetous desire is the root of
all mischeife.

Marriage does commonly force men headlong unto this desire, for all me^ would
make their children rich, and leave them a large inheritance; so that
deservedly also for that cause, that state of life is not to be greatly
desired, which makes all our pains and cares, most commonly, not only
unprofitable for our welfare, but also dangerous and hurtful unto us, if it be
not avoided. Yet it follows not from hence, that wedlock is evil: for
neither Riches or Honnors be evil but good, which God also sometimes bestows
upon us, for the reward of some good deed or other; and in times past have
been promised also to those few who observed the law: but it is dangerous I
say, to love such pleasures and delights, to follow them, and to employ al our
endeavors only in attayning of them, since they are but base and mean, and do
hinder the love and desire of things eternal, and inta^gle the mind in many
snares.

In like manner, though Matrimony of it self be good, and ordained by God, yet
it draws with it many cares and troubles, which through humanie frailty hinder
the health of the soul, that it leads men secretly into many sins, and
oftentimes unto eternal damnation. Thus much of the human affection, out of
which many men inclyne unto Marryage.

The spiritual affection is, when Parents desire to have children, to the end
that they may instruct them in the fear of God, that they may teach them to
serve him, that they may increase the number of the faithful, that by them many
deeds of devotion may be done, that God may be honored by them and the like:
these affections rise not out of nature; but out of diu^ne inspiration, and are
worthy of a man, as he is a Christian.

Whence I confess that Parents who with this kind of affection desire to have
issue, and bring them up, as aforsaid, do merit greatly before Almighty God;
and the wife also who with such a spirit desires Marriage, shall be saved by the
bearing of children. And in this manner the words of the Apostle are to be
understood 1. Tim. 2. But yet it seems to be more probable, that the Apostle
in that place speaks not of the merit, but of the estate and office of
Marriage; and that to be also the meaning of this saying, Saluabitur etc. She
shall be saved, by doing the office of Marryage, and endeavoring to have
children: for so the Greek text does import, as the learned do teach.

So likewise to the Romans cap. 4. 5. and 11. Abraham is said to be the Father
of those that believe, by having the foreskin or Prepuce cut off, that is to
say, by those which are in that Estate. And in 2. Cor. cap. 6. Per gloriam and
ignobilitatem etc. By glory and ignobility, by infamy and good credit, that is
to say, in prosperity and adversity. The same is confirmed by the words which
the Apostle adds, Saluabitur etc. She shall be saved (says he) by the bearing
of children, if she persevere in faith, in love, and in holiness, with sobriety:
therefore he attributes the cause of saluatito faith, and to love etc. not to
the procreation of children: yet I confess also that this very deed is
meritorious likewise, if it be done, as we have said, out of spiritual
affection: but it is otherwise, if it be done out of human only.

Moreover if this estate and the offices thereof, be chosen and performed with
a spiritual affection: nevertheless single life is much better and more
meritorious; both because it remoues innumerable occasions of distractions,
imperfections, and sins, by which the estate of Matrimony is hindered in the
offices of devotion; and also because it affoardeth commodity of conuersing
daily with God and of being attent to divine matters. Wherefore a Virgin
oftentimes may merit more in one day, then a married woman in many months.

CHAP. VII. Of certain things to be observed in this Estate.
TO the end that Virgins may the better preserve this treasure, and obtain
their scope and purpose more at larg, by which they have so straightly bound
themselves unto God, and undertaken this estate; holy Fathers have prescribed
certain things to be observed. First in their apparel; secondly in their
exercises; thidly in the use of their riches and wealth; and lastly in their
conversation.

As for their apparel, it must not be costly, but dec^nt and grave, without
any kind of vanity or curiosity, without pride also, or any secular ornaments,
such as may represent the state wherein they live, and the forsaking of the
world: by which every man that sees them, may know that they are Virgins, and
have an intent never to marry. For by this means they shall avoid all
importunityes and troubles, which suitors are accustomed to use: and besides
this they shall prevent many other inticements to the breach of their intent.

S. Cyprian in his book de disciplina and habitu Virginum, handles this place
more at large, and with great elegancy: Continency (quoth he) and Chastity
consist not only in the integrity of the body, but also in the honor of the
Attire and apparel, being joined with modesty* She must not only be a Virgin
really, but also she must be known, and be believed to be such a one: so that
no man who sees her who is a Virgin, may have any doubt whether she be so or
no. For why should she go adorned, or attyred as though she had, or would have
a husband? let her rather fear to please any, if she be a Virgin; neither let
her seek her own danger, since she preserues her self for a better and more
devout purpose etc. Neither ought a Virgin to be delighted with the show of her
own beauty, or to take a glory in her own person or comlynes, since she has
no resistance or war against any thing, so much, as against the flesh, nor any
more obstinate enemy to ouercom the^ her own body.

Afterward he alleges some, who excuse themselves for their Riches and
Nobility, for which respects they think that it is convenient for them to go
more richly attyred; whose excuse he refuteth at large, showing in what things
they should employ their wealth.

To their habit also belongs a Veyle, with the which it is meet that a
Virgin should be covered when she goes abroad, least either she might see that
which were not befitting, or her countenance should be perceived of others. For
how many, I pray you, have there been in the world, who only by sight have
either perished themselves, or killed others? In so much that they must take
principal heed of their eyes. And Tertullian has written a particular Treatise
upon this subject of virgins veyling and covering their heads, which he judged
to be a thing so necessary, that he said: It was no less then a passion of
lust, to a virtuous Virgin, every time that she exposes her self to public
view; to wit, because that thereby she with her face open, casting her eyes
freely about to see, and to be seen, is easily corrupted in spirit; and that
the very gazing it self is a sign of an unchaste mind.

And again afterward: The desire not to be veyled or covered is not a chaste
desire, but admiteth somewhat that belongs not unto a Virgin; as also the
desire to delight others inbeholding her; for true, entyre, and pure Virginity
fears nothing so much, as it own self, yea it endures not the eyes of
other women that delight in gazing, since the eyes of it self are far
different from such; it flies to the veyle of her head, as to a helmet, and as
to a buckler which defends her; it is a protection against the blows of
temptation, against the darts of scandals, against suspicions, and whispering,
and emulation, yea and against Envy it self. After this put on the armor of
bashfullnes, entrench thy self within the bull warke of modesty, build up a
wall for thy sex, which keeps in thine own eyes, and lets not the eyes of
others to enter. Thou have married Christ and delivered thy body to him, thou
have espoused the maturity of thy years to him. Go according to his will and
pleasure; it is Christ that bids those who are married to others* to veil
themselves, much more those which are espoused unto him.

For this purpose the women's attyres of Brabant are very fit, which are called
by them Huekes, which the very noblest Matrons of that Country use, when they
would not be known in any public assembly.

Let us now come to the exercises which holy Fathers prescribe to be used by
virgins. These are fasting, prayer, reading of spiritual books, and
handyworke, in the daily use and variety whereof they may spend all their time
most profitably.

Fasting is as it were the foundation and ground of al other virtues; for by
this the root of many temptations, and by consequence of many vices, is cut
of; the mind is made more fit to converse daily with Almighty God, with great
comfort and fruit, from whom it conceiueth all its good, from whence al Saints
for the most part have derived the beginning of a spiritual life. By fasting, I
mean not such fasting, as should weaken or impair nature: but such whereby the
body becomes more healthful, the mind more quick, and the concupiscence more
subject.

S. Hierome commends greatly this exercise in his 8. Epistle to Demetriades,
de custodia virginit. After (says he) diligent taking heed of impure thoughts,
you must put on the ornament of fasting, and sing with David, I have humbled my
soul in fasting, etc. And then afterward. Fasting is not a perfect ve^tue of
it self, but the foundation of others, and is both sanctification and
chastity, without which no man shall ever see God. It affoardeth stairs to
such as will ascend to the top; and yet if it should be alone, it is not
sufficient to crown a virgins etc.

In which words it is to be noted, that fasting is termed by S. Hierome,
Sanctification, and Chastity of other virtues. It is called Sanctification,
because it makes others virtues flourish, and works their effects the better;
and by this means it sanctifies.

It is called Chastity, becanse it procures cleanesse of body and heart, wherein
consist all other virtues, without which no man shall see God.

And that this fasting must be moderate, and such as may not weaken the body,
but refresh and quicke^ the mind, S. Jerome warns us in these words, when he
says: Neither do I prescribe to you immoderate fasting, or such abstinences,
as should be altogether without meat, by which bodies that are tender and
delicate may be quickly brought out of health, and grow sick, before they have
laid the foundation of this holy conversation.

S. Ambrose in his first book of virgins says, that the sparing of meat, and
abstinence from drink, makes a man to be ignorant of vice; for it makes him
to be ignorant of the causes thereof. Therefore let this be rather a fast of
sobriety the^ affliction.

Prayer also, under which is contained the meditation of heavenly things, and
the mysteries of our faith, is principally necessary. First, because by this
we must obtain daily supply of Grace, whereby we may both resist temptations
and fulfill Gods divine Commandments, and persevere to the end: wherefore our
Lord warns us, that we always pray, to wit, as much as conveniently we may,
and as far forth as the fraylty, and necessary affairs of this world will
permit us: for our perseverance and eternal safety depends on Prayer.

Secondly by Prayer and Meditation we list up our mind to Almighty God, we
place our selves in his sight and presence; we consider his Majesty, his
Power, and his Wisdom, his Goodness and his providence, his Mercy and his
Justice; we adore him, and praise him, we give him thanks and bless him;
there we deal with him about the business of our Salvation, and call to mind
all things which he has both done and suffered for us.

For this cause especially, a Virgin must abandone Marriage and secularity, and
embrace the state of holy Virginity, according to the Apostole, to wit, that
she may think of these things which belong to our Lord, that she may be holy
in body and spirit, that she may behave her self worthily in the presence and
conversation of Almighty God, that she may stick so close unto him, that she
may never be drawn away: and as our Interpreter translateth it, that she may
have free leave to beseech any thing of our Lord, without hinderance.

Here are delights and spiritual comforts; in this consists as it were the
Paradise of our souls; by these things our conversation is in heaven, and we
are made to enjoy the society of Angels: without these whatsoever we do, is dry
and barren, for all comfort and spiritual joy proceeds from the attentive
consideration of divine matters.

From whence it comes, that those who apply not themselves with great love
and desire, to Prayer and Meditation, they must needs remain dry, or at
leastwise they shall never taste the most excellent delights of the spirit. By
Prayer and meditation the mind is exercysed, and grows zealous in the
function and habit of other virtues, because the gift of grace is more
abundantly obtained by it, whereby the labor of virtue is made more easy and
delightful.

Hence the Royal Prophet says, Viam ma^datoru^ etc. I have run the course
and way of thy commandments, whilst thou dilatedst my hartwith joy. And why?
because the vanity of the world, and the worth of virtue, and the Charity of
God, and the reward of life to come, are showed thereby unto us. The
consideration of all which, must needs greatly stir us up to all offices of
virtue, and to a diligent care of our own salvation.

Reading of Spiritual books also is commended by the holy Fathers, and
comes very near to the exercise of Prayer. For as by Prayer we obtain the
conversation even of God himself; so do we it also by reading of spiritual
books. Whereupon Isidorus in his 3. book of Sentences the 8. Chap. says: Who
always will converse with God, must pray often, and read much; for when we
pray, we speak familiarly unto God, but when we read, he speaks unto us.

And afterward be adds, that Spiritual profit also proceeds from praying
and reading.

Lastly handy-worke is greatly commended, for this is an especial and
beneficial Exercise for three things. The first is, thereby somewhat to release
and refresh our mind; for we cannot always attend to read or pray, but it is
needful to recreate our mind by intermixing of labors sometimes betwe^e,
least we should be ouerwearyed: and this is done most conveniently by outward
employments, in which the mind is little or nothing at all buysied.

Whence it follows, that this manner of variety becomes most grateful to
our weak and changeable Nature, and has been used in all ages by men and
women, such as were holy; and likewise it helps to avoid idleness, which is
especially to be taken heed of, by all such as endeavor to attain to the
perfection of a devout and holy life. For as S. Jerome in his Epistle to
Demetriades says, there is nothing more hurtful to any devout purpose then
Idleness, which does not only omit to get new perfection, but also wastes that
which was gotten before. And Blessed Ignatius says, Otium omnium malorum etc.
Idleness is said to be the beginning of all mischief; for a mind that is not
employed, is open to all suggestions and impressions of the devil.

Whereby sometimes it comes to pass, as Seneca witnesses, that although the
body be guiltless, yet the mind being idle, falls into a thousand sorts of
lewdness. Wherefore it is good to be always doing of somewhat, and to employ
our minds about one good action or other, that the devil may always find us
busy.

Lastly it is beneficial for the health of our body, and to give good example
also, and to relieve others. For no Alms is so pleasing to Almighty God, no
gift so acceptable, as that which is earned by our own labors. S. Hierome
discourses at large of this point in his epistle to Demetriades, which for
breuities sake I omit.

It rests now to speak of the third, to wit of the use of their Riches. Holy
Fathers set down the manner at large, how amongst Virgins, those who are
wealthy should employ their means; to wit, not in superfluous apparel, not in
banqueting and pleasures, not in adorning their bodies, not in Jewels,
pearls, rings, bracelets, not in rich and curious houshould-stuff, not in riot
and excess of bravery above their neighbors; but in the succor and releife
of the poor, and of such as are servants of God.

S. Cyprian in his book De disciplina and habitu Viginum, discourses at large
upon this thing: I will only allege one sentence for breuityes sake:
Locupletem te dicu etc. Thou boastest (quoth he) that thou art wealthy and
rich, and thou think that it behooves thee to use the riches which God has
permitted thee to possess. Do so, use them, but let it be in such things as
may concern the health of thy soul. Use them, but in that which God has
commanded. thee to use them, and in which he has showed thee and taught thee
how to do. Let the poor find thee to be rich, and those that are needy
perceive thee to be wealthy. Put out thy Patrimony to use, into the hands of
Almighty God. Give meat unto Christ, that it may be lawful for thee to
sustain the glory of thy Virginity. And to the end that it may be rewarded by
our Lord, beg it of him by the prayers of many. Lay up thy treasures there,
where no thief can dig them out, where no wait-layer, or night-robber can
break through. Purchase to thy self possessions, but let them be of heaven,
where neither rust shall eat, nor hayle fall upon, nor Sun burn, nor rain
corrupt thy fruits, they being continual and everlasting, free from the touch
of secular abuse etc.

And S. Hierome in his Epistle to Demetriades says: Consideremus etc. Let us
consider how wisely Wisdom it self has spoken: Sell what thou have. To whom
is this commanded? To wit, to him to whom it is said: If thou will be perfect,
sell not a part of thy goods, but all. And when thou have sold them, what
follows? Give them to the poor, not to the rich, not to thy Neighbors who are
wealthy, not to maintain excess, but to suffice necessity. Whether he be a
Priest, or thy cozen, or kinsman, thou shall consider in him no other respect
but his poverty. Let the bowels of those that are hungry, not the fat banquets
of those that surfeit receive thy alms etc.

Yet for all this it is not the meaning of S. Hierom, that if a Virgin enters
not in to Religion, she should deprive her self, of that which is needful for
her self to live on in good for; but that she bestow therest which she has
superfluous, for the use of the poor, and that after the manner which she
judges to be most to the honor of God.

S. Cyprian before mentioned goes yet for ward, speaking to those who having
vowed Virginity, and are very rich and wealthy, thus: But there be some rich
women and very wealthy, who will set out, and show their store, and say, that
they must use their own goods. Let these first understand, that she is rich,
who is rich in God; that she is wealthy who is wealthy in Christ; that those be
goods indeed, which be spiritual, divine, and heavenly, which lead us to God,
which with steadfast possession remain to us when we be with God. But
whatsoever things are earthly, gotten in this world, and here to remain
within the world, they must be contemned as well as the world it self, whose
pomps and pleasures we do then renounce, when with a better pace, we come
toward God. S. John does exhort and stir us up, contesting with his spiritual
and heavenly voice: Do not, says he, love the world nor those things which are
in the world. If any man love the world, the Charity of the Father is not in
him, because all that is in the world, is the concupiscence of the flesh, and
the concupiscence of the eyes, and the ambition of the world* which is not of
the Father, but of the concupiscence of the world. And the world shall pass
and the concupiscence thereof. But he that does the will of God abides for
ever, even as God abides for ever.

Wherefore eternal and divine things are to be sought after, and all things
are to be done according to Gods will* that so we may follow the footsteps of
our Lord, and his divine exexamples, who did warn us and say: I descended not
from heaven to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. Now if the
servant be not greater then his Master, and he that is made free owes duty
to his deliverer, we that desire to be Christians, must imitate that which
Christ did. It is written, it is read, it is heard, and for our example
celebrated by the Churches mouth. He that says, he abides in Christ, ought
even as he walked, himself also to walk. We must therefore walk with equal
steps, we must endeavor to follow his paces. Then does the following of the
Truth, answer to the Faith of the name, and reward is given to him that
belieueth, when that which is believed is also done.

Thou say, that thou art wealthy and rich: but S. Paul does object against
thy riches, and prescribe with his words, that thy trimming and decking is to
be moderated by an vprighteous end. Let women says he, with shamfastnes and
modesty adorn themselves, not in plaited hair, nor gold, nor precious stons
nor gorgeous apparel, but as it becomes women promising chastity by good
conversation. S. Peter likewise does consent with these precepts and say: Let
there be in a woman, not the outward decking of fairenes, or of gold, or of
goodly garments, but the trimming of the heart. Now if these men do admonish
us, that even those women, who are wont to excusethe adorning of themselves for
their husbands saks, are to be restrained, and moderated by religious
observation, according to Ecclesiastical discipline: how much more expedient is
it that a Virgin should observe the same? Who deserves no pardon of this her
trimming, neither can she cast her fault, upon another, but she her self must
bear all the blame.

Thou do say, that thou art wealthy and rich: but not all that may, ought
also to be done. Neither must inordinate desires, and such as spring up out of
the ambition of the world, be extended beyond the honesty and shamfastnes of a
Virgin, for so much as it is written: All things are lawful, but all things
are not expedidient. All things are lawful, but all things do not edify. But
if thou adorn thy self over sumptuously, and go abroad, so as al men may note
thee, and draw the eyes of young men to regard thee, and make them sigh after
thee, and nourish their unlawful appetite to desire thee, and kindle their
fire to long after thee, in such sort, that albeit thou perish not thy self,
yet thou art the ruin of others, and show thy self as a sword or poison to
those that look on thee; thou can not be excused, as if thou were chaste and
honest in mind. Thy wanton attire, and dishonest trimming does reprehend thee;
neither can thou be numbered amongst the Damsels and Virgins of Christ, who
do live so, as if thou would be loved.

Thou do say that thou art wealthy and rich; but it beseems not a virgin to
vaunt of her riches, because holy scripture says: what good has our pride
done unto us, or what profit has the vaunting of riches brought us? All those
things or past away like a shadow. And again the Apostle does admonish us and
say: And they that buy, let them be as though they possessed not; and they that
use this world, as though they used it not: for the figure of this world
passes a way. S Peter also unto whom our Lord c^mme^ded his sheep to feed,
and to defend them, and upon whom he set and founded his Church, did deny
that he had either gold or silver, saying that he was rich in the grace of
Christ, and wealthy in his faith and power; by which he could do strange and
miraculous things, and by which he abou^ded in spiritual goods to attain the
grace of glory. These goods and riches she can not possess, who desires to be
esteemed rich, rather to the world than to Christ. Thus far S. Cyprian.

The fourth is her conversation, wherein the holy Fathers prescribe to Virgins
that they must avoid frequentation of marriages public banquettings, and the
company and conversation of secular persons, especially of such are light in
their behavior, and are given unto the world; and that she should converse
with modest and devout women.

So says S. Cyprian in the place above cyted, Quosdam non pudet nube^tibus
interesse etc. Some (quoth he) are not ashamed to be present at Marriages, and
in that liberty of lascivious talk, to chatte with the rest, and mingle now
and then, impure and dishonest speeches; to hear that which is not fitting to
be heard, nor lawful to speak again; yea and to be even present at
lascivious conferences, and drunken banquets, by which the fuel of Lust is
kindled. The Bride now accustomed to the patience of hearing unchasteness, and
the Bridegroom to be the more audacious, what place is it then to be at
Marriages, for such a one whose mind is never to be married? And though she
remain both in body and mind a virgin, yet by her ears, and eyes, she has
lost part of that which she had before.

S. Hierome likewise in his epist. to Demetriades* Decline and avoid (says he)
the husbands of Matrons, such as serve the world, for fear least thy mind be
troubled, and thou hear either what the husband says to the wife, or the wife
to the husband, for such Conferences are poison unto others. Choose women that
are grave, and especially Widows and Virgins to be thy companions, whose
conversation is approved to be good, their speeches well governed; and their
outward modesty presages their sanctity within. Avoid the wantonness and
immodesty of young Maids, who attire their heads stangely, wear locks at
their ears, make their skin smooth by art, paint, wear strait bodies, and
sleeves, must not have a wrinkle in their clothes, wear creaking shoes, and
all this forsooth, that under the name of a Maid, they may seem the more
salable. For the comportment and inclination of the Mistress, is oftentimes
judged and proportioned, by that of the waiting woman, and such as they keep
company withal etc.

S. Hierome goes on thus: And this likewise a Virgin must take specially heed
of, that she never talk or co^uerse at any time alone, with any man, whether
he be secular or religious, no not so much as with her ghostly Father, withont
the company of others: but let all things be done openly, where they may be
beheld of others. Or if it be necessary at any time to talk with any man
within doors, let it not be done, unless some other be present who may see al.
For it is an unseemly thing for a man, though be her Confessarius, yea religious
(and though his habit should make him seem to be even of the sanctity of S.
John Baptist) to be alone with a woman in a chamber, the door being shut, and
without any other present; whether it be under pretense of Confession, or any
spiritual instruction whatsoever. Let her remember that Thamar in private, for
want of presence of others, was ravished by her own brother. Let her remember
that for the most part all that have fallen in this kind, have done it through
the neglect of this advice.

If there were no conference in private, there would hardly any dishonesty be
ever committed. Therefore this especially is to be observed of a virgin, as a
precept, That she keep herself undefiled, both before God and men

S. Ambrose also in his 2. bo. upon S. Lukes gospel says: Trepidare virginum
est etc. virgins ought to tremble and fear, as often as any man comes into
their presence, and be affrayde to speak unto any man etc. he speaks of such
a one when she is alone (for in private they are fire and tow to one another:)
and the devil never more imployeth all his strength and endeavor, then at
such a time, for fear least so fit an occasion should escape without benefit
unto him. See more concerning this matter in S. Hierome in his 8. 9. 10. 11.
and 22. Epistle.

Of any vow of Obedience to be made to ones ghostly Father, I find nothing
written in holy Fathers, neither do I judge it expedient (unless in some few
who are truly perfect, and are become even masters as it were, in the way of
Perfection) by reason of many discommodityes, that may follow thereof. Wherefore
it is deservedly forbidden in the Rules of the Society of Jesus, that any such
Vow should be admitted by any Father of that Order. To which also may be added
the solemn decre of the Provincial Council of Mechline which by chance I
happened upon lately, wherein the 5. title the 7. Chap. are these words. Nemo
aliquem ad perpetuo etc. No Ghostly father shall bind any one, never to
confess his sins to any other then to him etc. And this Synod declares all
such Obligation or promise, though confirmed by vow, to be unreasonable,
indiscreet, void, and of no effect; and therefore as far, as it shall be
needful, does by this present Decree ordeyne it to be so. I omit also many
other things which may be alleged for this purpose.

These prescriptions of holy Fathers, if a virgin keep, living in the world,
she shall be happy, and her Estate and condition shall come near to the
perfection of a Religious life.

CHAP. VIII. Whether single life, confirmed by Vow, may be properly called an
Estate.
SOME seem to make doubt, Whether single life confirmed by vow, ought properly
to be called an Estate, nor do* I know upon what grounds. Nevertheless it may be
easily gathered out of that which has been said before, that this manner of
living, may be properly called an Estate, and that such as profess the sam may
be rightly said to have chosen, and to be of an Estate.

For an Estate is nothing else, but a manner of life, in the which it is
purposed so to continue, that it may not be lawful to go out thereof into
another, as S. Thom. 2. 2. quaest. 183. and other Doctors, do every where
teach: but vowed Chastity or Virginity is a manner of life, wherein it is
firmly purposed to continue, so that it is not lawful to forsake the same and
marry; therefore it is properly an Estate.

Henriques teaches the same in his 12. Quodlibet, where he says, That the
estate of Virginity or widdowhood is no less to be accounted an Estate in the
Church of God, then the Estate of Marriage. And Caietan affirms, that this
doctrine of Henriques is true, according to the Law, if Virginity or Widdowhood
be kept, or professed by obligation of vow.

And surely if there be in the Church an Estate of Marriage, why should there
not be also an Estate of Virginity or widdowhood? If there be an Estate of
those which are wedded, why should there not be the like of those that live
continent, especially when S. Cyprian witnesses; That this is the more
beautyfull part or portion of Christ. If marriage with a mortal man or woman,
which can continue but a small time, setleth a man in an Estate, why should not
also an eternal marriage with Christ himself, which is never to have end,
effect the same? Those who at this prensent are in the state of wedlock,
continue not long therein, but after a little time by death of the one party,
must go out of it, into the estate of such as live single: but such as are now
in the Estate of thos^ that live continent, shall never go out of it, but
always remain therein. From whence it appears that this is rather, and more
perfectly to be termed an Estate, then that of Wedlock.

Neither does it avail, that this vow of perpetual Virginity may be dispensed
with all, and that therefore this Estate seems not to be firm and immovable.
First, because such a dispensation may be only granted by the Pope himself,
yea is very seldom granted, and that for matters of great importance:
otherwise such release is not of force before Almighty God; but that which is
only co^predended under the power of the Pope may be lawfully thought
impossible to us, and therefore it diminishes not the immobility or remouall
of this estate: for it is sufficient, that by us as much as is on our parts, it
is firm and immovable, in so much that it cannot be altered by us; otherwise
Religion it self should not be an Estate, since the Pope may upon just
occasions of great importance, release a Religious man from the obligation of
his Order, dispense with his vows, and permit him to marry.

Secondly also, because Marriage is an Estate, yet it may be many ways
dissolved, to wit before carnal knowledge of one another, by entering into
Religion; and also after the knowledge of one another by death of the wife, or
husband. Also by the Adultery of the husband, the wife has right of a divorce,
whereby the Marriage it self is dissolved even to every duty and conjugal
act, as though it had been no marriage at all, although the habitual
obligation remain.

Finally if it be contracted in the Estate of infidelity, it may be dissolved,
although it were consumated, by copulation, if so be the one be converted to
the Catholic faith, and the other persevere in Infidelity. Therefore Wedlock
is far more easily, and more ways dissolved, then the vow of Virginity: and
yet that hinders not, but that it is, and may be truly called an Estate; much
less therefore shall that power of releasing it, which consists only in the
authority of the Prince of spiritual matters, hinder the vow of Virginity of
being tearmedan Estate.

Thirdly a Clergy Estate is made a true Estate by means of the Vow of
Chastity, added to holy Orders, and has sufficient firmness; and yet the
Pope may easily take it away, especially in a Deacon, and give him leave to
marry. Therefore it follows etc.

Lastly, Servitude is a true Estate, according to al laws, and yet at the
Masters pleasure, the servant may be enfranchised, and made free: Therefore
that extrinsecal power of taking away any obligation, which consists not in
our own powers, does by no means impair the assuredness and certainty of an
Estate. For it is enough, that it is firm and immutable on our part. And the
reason is, because he is sufficiently said to be in an Estate, who makes
choice of a certain kind of life, and settleth himself firmly therein, so
that he cannot take any other upon him different unto this, but must continue
therein, even unto death. But he who imbraceth single life, and byndeth
himself by vow unto it, chooses to himself a certain kind of life, and so
establishes himself therein, as he cannot pass out of it, unto the contrary.
Therefore he is in an Estate.

You will ask perhaps, Whether this Estate may be called an Estate of
Perfection? I answer, that it is not a complete Estate of Perfection, but only
in part, because it is a notable part of the Estate of perfection for some
Estates include more, and others less. An Estate of Perfection which is entire
and complete, includes also the vow of Poverty and Obedience, both which a
Virgin vowing Chastity in the world, may also after her manner, imitate and
supply before God.

FINIS.
THE WIDOWS GLASS.

ABRIDGED Out of the Reverend Father Fuluius Androtius, of the Society of
Jesus, and others.

ANNO M.DC.XXI.

THE PREFACE TO ALL devout Widows.
BECAUSE thou have loved Chastity and remained a Widow after thy husband,
therefore the hand of our Lord has strengthened thee, and thou shall be blessed
for ever. These words were spoken to the holy, virtuous, and renowned Widow
Judith, who for her chaste Widdowhood, deserved to be so strengthened of our
Lord, that she overcame, and killed the great and cruel Holofernes, delivered
the people of Israel from tribulation and death, and reduced them to their
former peace and tranquillity.

And for this cause did she also deserve to be exalted to the Heavens, by
Ioachim the high Priest who withal the people, blessed her and said: Thou art
the glory of Jerusalem, thou the joy of Israel, thou the honor of our people,
because thou have done manfully, and thy heart was stre^gthned from above etc.
And besides all this, for her chaste Widdowhood did she merit an everlasting
blessing from our Lord, to wit, abundance of all graces in this world, and
perfect felicity in heaven.

In like manner all virtuous Widows following these her traces and footsteps
shall deserve to be comforted by our Lord with spiritual graces, virtues, and
gifts of the holy Ghost, in such sort, that they shall be ever blessed and happy,
if devoutly they persevere in their chaste Widowhood, and shall also deserve to
overcome and trample the devil under foot, signified by the aforesaid proud
and cruel Captain Holofernes. And to the end, that they may thus constantly
and devoutly persevere in the holy Estate of Contine^cy in their widdowhood, we
will, with the help of the holy Ghost, say something to this purpose, as as well
out the holy Scriptures, as ancient Fathers and Historyes.

THE WIDOWS GLASS.
CHAP. I. Who are to be accounted truly Widows.
THERE are said to be three kinds of Chastity, to wit, that of Marriage, that
of Widows, and that of Virgins; al three signified by the good ground
mentioned in the Holy Gospel, whereon the seed fell: The first whereof yielded
fruit thirthy fould, the second sixty fould, and the last an hundred. But they
who cannot yield the hundred-fould fruit, let them at least offer up sixty, to
show themseues more liberal toward our Savior.

And for as much as all perfection of man consists in abandoning and
forsaking carnal and worldly things, and drawing near and joining himself unto
God his Creator, loving him, fearing him, seeking him, thinking on him,
contemplating and honoring him in every thing and action; this can hardly be
affected in the state of Marriage, especially by women, who hunting after, and
daily following the delights and pleasures of the world, are hindered thereby,
for the most part, from treading the true path which leads directly
thereunto. But Widows who are free from such cares and troubles, and have a
true desire, may with great case and facility perform the same to their great
comfort.

Now, there be diverse sorts of Widows. Some, as soon as their husbands be
dead, purpose so marry again, for some temporal comfort and consolation, not
having any divine Inspiration to serve God Almighty in that Estate, and are in
danger to offend him. Of this sort of widows S. Paul speaks, when he says.
I will, that the young widows do marry again, and become mothers of families,
not to give occasion to the Devil to tempt them. And this is not ill but
approved of all. But when a widow will marry again for any disordinate
appetit, or because she is very rich, or fair, or soght after by some one that
is placed in a high degree of Honor or State, or for any other vicious
occasion, or ill end, without doubt this her desire is naught, nor is she to be
reckoned, or worthily called a widow, as long as she remaynes with this
desire, although she do not actually marry again.

There is another sort of widows, who though they do not purpose to marry
again at all, either for that they have no dowry, or for fear least they
happen upon an ill husband, or for some other secret or manifest respect, yet
is their manner of life and conversation, not like indeed unto widows: for
that they will always be gadding abroad, tatling, and gossipping, even with
those who be not reputed of the best edification. And these, forsooth, will be
finely apparelled: and though they have veyles, yet will they scarsely cover
their heads with them; their eyes must be rolling up and down, they must go
to banquets weddings and plays, they must tell tales, hear and tell news,
and carry themselves even as mere secular, ordinary, and the worst sort of
people. These are to be avoided and shunned by all true widows: and these be
those of whom S. Paul speaks in another place, saying: Take heed of such
young widows, for after that they have lived riotously, and licentiously in
Christ, they will marry, carrying with them their damnation, for that they have
broken and made void their first faith. etc. And for these it were better that
they did marry again, then live as they do.

Another sort there is, who never intend, nor do indeed marry again, but live
chastely and virtuously, both in act and desire. But yet they do it not for the
love of God, but rather for some human respect, as for the love of their
children, their goods, or the like. And although according to the esteem of
the world, they live honestly, and are reputed for Venerable Mothers and
Matrones; yet are they wholly dedicated to the service of the world, and have
little feeling or gust of spiritual things; and do but seldom frequent the
Sacraments or sermons, fast only but when the church commands them, or do
employ themselves in any other spiritual Exercises. These I do entreat, by the
bowels of Christ Jesus, that they will no longer employ the gifts and graces
which they have received from our Lord, to the honor and service of the world,
to the end they may have their reward in heaven, and not on earth.

There is another sort of widows also, who make a firm purpose and
deliberation, to conserve and keep their chastity and serve God with all their
heart: and of these there are two kinds. One who cannot separate themselves from
their children, or other parents, either for the charge they have of the^, or
because they cannot so well live alone, or for some necessity, or charity in
governing their family: and these although they be not wholly free from the
world, nor are dedicated to the service of God; notwithstanding all the pains
and labors they take, they do it principally for the love of God, of whom
they shall be rewarded with life everlasting. These Widows are not any to be
removed, or drawn away from this kind of life, but are, according to S. Paul,
greatly to be honored and esteemed.

The other kind, are those Widows, who desirous to serve God, and may
commodiously separat themselves from their parents, friends, or family, and be
more free to attend to prayer and other devout exercises; yet they will not,
thorough a kind of pufill animity, or little courage, or else for compassion to
their friends, or for some other reason. Neither are these to be condemned,
but esteemed in a second, or third degree from the former.

The last sort of widows, are the true, and worthily so called, Widows, who
dispatching themselves of al worldly impedime^ts, do attend only to the service
of God co^templating him, and meditating on him day and night. And these are
placed in a more quiet and peaceable Estate, then any of the others above
named, and are entered into the right, and direct way of perfection.

In this Estate lived that Holy Widdowe Anne the Prophetess, recorded by S.
Luke; who is said to have served God in fasting and prayer, remaining night and
day in the Temple. And if such Widows, who have a desire to live virtuously
cannot match or come near to S. Anne; yet let the^ come as near unto her as
they can.

So as I conclude, that the true Widow, is she, who not only conserues her
Chastity in the world, but also whatsoever she does, she does it purely for the
honor and service of Almighty God. And for that every widow does not know how
to exercise her self in the truly serving of God, unless she know the scope
and end thereof, I purpose here to set down briefly in what manner she is to
do the same.

CHAP. II. Of the Intention, and Exercise of a true Widow.
WHEN a Widow has well considered of her Estate and firm purpose to serve
God, it is necessary, that first she understand what is the end and scope of
this kind of life, that conformably thereto, she may address all her works and
actions.

The first and principal end then is, that not only Widows but every
Christian also ought to live well and in the fear of God, whom she must love
more then her own soul: and therefore she must labor, that by all her
endeauours and actions the name of God may be ever blessed and praised,
Christian faith and religion advanced, and honored. This belongs more to
Widows then to many others, who consequently must be mortifyed, and of a
chaste and pure life. For that they having lost their carnal Spouses, they
ought to seek for no other but their Spouse Christ Jesus. So as a truly
devout Widow ought so to inflame her heart with the zeal of Gods honor, that
she should choose rather to dye, then that by her means, her Spouse should be
any way dishonored.

Secondly she ought with as great zeal seek and procure her own salvation,
considering that she is not always to remain in this world, because it is
ordained for all men once to dye, and then of necessity, to go either to heave,
or to intolerable torments in Hell, or Purgatory. And therefore having as it
were, lost and forgone all the Consolations of this transitory world, she must
force her self, to get and conserve those that be celestial, and everlasting.

CHAP. III. Documents for Widows out of S. Paul.
SAINT Paul writing to Timothy says: Honor Widows. He means such
Widows who live virtuously according to the rule of Widdow-hood, that is to
say, to govern well their families, not only their children, or their
kinsfolks, but also their subjects, instructing them in good life, manners and
virtue, and when it is needful to reprehend and correct them. Secondly he
says, That Widows ought to hope in God, to trust in his mercy; in him alone
to seek for Comfort and consolation, having daily their mind elevated in God
in all humility, praying often, and imploring his divine aid to preserve them
from all evil, to forgive them, (and all sinners) their sins, to replenish
them with his gifts and graces, and lastly to guide them to eternal felicity.

Thirdly he says, That a Widow entertayning worldly and carnal
consolations, and passing her days in mirth, ioylity, and vanity is accounted
for dead. For although she live according to the body, yet is she dead
according to the spirit; nor can she once do any good or meritorious work,
worthy of heaven.

Fourthly, he commands widows, That they should be irreprehensible in all
their words and deeds; that is to say, that in all their actions they give good
example, and that they keep themselves, not only from committing of mortal
crims, but even from the least venial sins that may be. Whence it follows,
that if they live virtuously, humbly, in fear and vigilance, it may be said of
them, as it was said of Judith, that most noble and devout widow, That never
was there found any man who spoke evil of her.

Fifthly he says, That the Widow ought to think upon those things that belong
unto God, to the end she may be holy and sanctified in body and spirit etc.

CHAP. IIII. The praise of VViddowhood, out of S. Hierome.
SAINT Hierome, amongst the rest of Ancient Fathers, is not the last, nor least
that has praised widdowhood; nay I may say, he has exalted the same above
many, if not above all the rest. And to begin first with an Epistle of his to
Furia, a Noble young Lady and widow of Rome, thus he writes unto her in
commendation of the crown of Widdowhood.

You desire in your letter, and humbly entreat me, that I will answer you, or
rather write unto you in what manner you may live, and conserve the crown of
widdowhood, without any blemish of the honor of your good Name. My mind
reioiceth, my bowels do dance, my affection does leap, because you desire to
be such after your husbands death, as your mother Titiana of holy memory was a
long time her husband living. Her prayers and devotions are heard. She has
obtained in her only daughter, that which she possessed whilst she lived.

You have moreover a very great Privilege of your Ancestors, that even from
Camillus, either none at all, or very few women of your stock was married the
second time: so that you are not so much to be praised, if you remain a widow;
as to be detested, if being a Christian, you perform not that, which heathen
women for so many ages have observed. I say nothing of Paula and Eustochiu^,
flowers of your family, least I may seem to take occasion by the exhorting of
you, to praise them. I let pass Blesilla which following her husband your
brother, in a short space of life, fulfilled many years of virtue.

And I would to God that men would imitate the praises of women, and wrinckled
old age would perform that which voluntary youth does offer. Wittingly and
willingly I thrust my hand into the fire. Many countenances will frown, many
arms will be spread abroad, and angry Chremes will rage with his foaming
mouth. Many great personages will be incensed against my Epistles: the whole
company of Nobles will thunder out, and say I am a witch, that I am a seducer,
worthy to be banished from all civil common wealths. Let them add, if they
will, a Samaritane also, that I may acknowledge my Lords title.

Surely, I do not divide the daughter from her father Neither do I say that of
the gospel, Suffer the to bury the dead. For whosoever believes in Christ
lives, and whosoever believes in him, ought surely to walk, even as he
walked. Honor your father, but so, as he severe you not from your true father.
So long acknowledge the linck of your blood, how long he acknowledges his
Creator. For otherwise David will presently sing unto you: Hear O daughter,
and see, and incline thine ear, and forget thy people, and the house of thy
father: and the King will desire thy beauty, because he is thy Lord, thy God,
and thy King.

O great reward of forgetting ones Father! The King will desire thy beauty:
because thou have heard, because thou have seen, because thou have inclined
thy ear, and forgot thy people and the house of thy father; therefore will the
King desire thy beauty, and will say unto thee: Thou are al fair, O my Dear,
and there is no spotte in thee. What thing more fair then the soul, which is
called the daughter of God, and seeks no foreign ornaments? she believes in
Christ, and with this ambition she goes to her spouse, having the same to her
Lord, and to her spouse.

What miseries marriage have, you have learned in marriage it self: and you
have been filled with that which you longed for, even unto loathsomenes. Your
laws have tried most bitter choler, you have cast out those sower and
vnwholsom meats, you have eased your boiling stomach. Why will you yet throw
in again that which once was hurtful unto you? The dog returns to his
vomit, and the sow again to her wallowing in the mire. The very brute beasts,
and restles birds, do not fall the second time into the same snares and nets.

Do you fear least the family of the Furij be extinguished, and least your
father have not a babe by you, which may creep in his bosom, and beslauer his
neck? What, I pray you? have all which are married, children? And those
children which they have, do they always answer to their kindred? Yea surely
Ciceroes son did resemble his fathers eloquence: and Cornelia your
Auncestresse, an example of honesty and fecundity, had much joy of the Gracchi
her sons. It is ridiculous to hope of a certainty for that, which both many
have not had, and have lost when once they had it.

To whom will you leave so great riches? To Christ who cannot dye. Who shall be
your heir? he which is also my Lord. Your father will mourn, but Christ will
rejoice; your family will be sorrowful, but the Angels will be joyful. Let
your father do what he will with his substance: you are not his, by whom you
were borne, but his by whom you were borne again, and who redeemed you with an
exceeding great price, even with his blood.

So far, old good S. Hierom. Where you see what esteem he makes of
Widdowhood, yea in a young, noble, and beautiful Lady. And no less does he in
another Epistle of his to Marcella, commending the courage and resolution of
Blesilla a young and Noble widow also. Thus then he writes to Marcella of
Blesilla her sickness.

Abraham is tempted in his son, and is found more faithful. Joseph is sold
into Aegipt, that so he may feed his father and brethren. Ezechias is terrified
with his death at hand, and dissolved into tears, has his life prolonged for
fifteen years. Peter the Apostle is afflicted, with our Lords passion, and
weeping bitterly, he hears; Feed my sheep. Paul a ravening woolf, and
another young Benjamin is stricken blind in a trance, that he may receive his
sight: and being compassed with a sudden horror of darkness, calls him
Lord, whom before he persecuted as man.

Even so now, O Marcella, we have seen our loving Blesilla thirty days
continually to have been tormented with the burning of an ague, that she might
learn to reject the delights of that body which shortly after is to be
consumed with worms. To her also came our Lord Jesus, and touched her hand,
and behold she arising, now serves him. She sauoured somewhat of negligence:
and being tied with the bands of riches, she lay in the sepulcher of the
world. But Jesus groned, and being troubled in spirit, cried out: Blesilla,
come forth. Who arose when she was called, and being come forth, now sitteh at
the table with our Lord.

Let the Jews threaten and swell, let them seek to murder her who has been
raised up again; and let the only apostles rejoice. She knows, that she
owes her life unto him, who did restore it. She knows that she e^braceth his
feet, whose judgment lately she feared. Her body lay almost dead: and death
approaching did shake her gasping members. Where were then the helps of her
kindred? where were then the words full of vanity? She owes nothing unto thee
O ungrateful kindred, which dying to the world is revived unto Christ. Who is a
Christian, let him rejoice: he that is angry, shows that he is no Christian.

A widow loosed from the bond of marriage, needs nothing but perseverance:
But does the course garment offend any person? let John offend him, then whom,
amongst the sons of women there was none greater: who being called an Angel,
baptized our Lord himself, for he also was cladd with a Camells skin, and
girded with a girdle of hair. Do gross meats displease them? nothing is more
gross then locusts. Let those women rather offend Christian eyes who with
vernish and colors paint their eyes, and cheeks: whose plaistered countenance
deformed with overmuch shining, does resemble Idols. Who if they happen for
want of heed to let fall a tear, it trickleth down in a furrow: whom not so
much as the very number of their years can persuade that they are old: who
with other folks hair set forth their head: and paint out in aged wrinckles
their youth forespent: who finally in presence of many nephews are trimmed like
trembling girls.

Let the Christian woman blush, if she force the comeliness of nature, if she
make provision for the flesh unto concupiscence, in which according to the
Apostle, whosoever are delighted, cannot please God. Our widow before was very
carefully dressed: and all the day at the glass she studied what might be
amiss. Now she confidently says: but we beholding the glory of our lord with
face revealed, are transformed into the same image, from glory unto glory, as
of our Lords spirit. Then the maids did platte her hair, and the harmeles
head was wringed with frizeled tops: but now the untrimmed head knows this to
suffice, that it is covered.

Then did the very softnes of feathers seem hard, and she could scarce lay in
the raised bedds: now she rises betimes for to pray, and with her shrill voice
preventing the others, in singing Alleluia, she is the first which begins to
praise her Lord. She kneeleth upon the bare ground, and with often tears that
face is purged, which before was defiled with painting. After prayer, there are
sung psalms: and the feeble neck, and wearyed knees, and sleepy eyes, for the
earnest fervor of the mind, can scant obtain any rest. The mourning gown is
least fouled, when she lies on the ground. The course pantoffle affoardeth the
price of gilt shoes unto the poor: the girdle is not beset with gold and
precious stones, but of woollen, and most pure, because of the simplicity, and
such as may rather straiten the garments, then adorn them.

If the Scorpion enuyeth so good a purpose, and with flattering speech persuade
again to eat of the forbidden tree; instead of a shoe, let him be crushed
with a curse; and whilst he dies in his poison let him have this answer: Go
after me Satan: which is as much to say, as Adversary; for he is the Adversary
of Christ, and an Antichrist, whosoever is displeased with the precepts of
Christ.

I pray you, what have we done like unto the Apostles, that they are so
offended? They forsake their aged Father with their ship and nets: the Publican
rises from the custom-house and follows our Savior: The disciple which
desired to return home, and bidd friends farewell, is forbidden by our
Masters voice. The burial of a Father is not allowed, and it is a kind of
piety, for our Lord to be void of pity. We, because we go not in silks, are
esteemed Monks, because we are not drunk, neither open our mouths unto
dissolute laughter, we are calcalled grave and melancholy. If our coat be not
gorgeous, we straight hear that common Proverb: He is an hypocrite, and
deceauing Grecian.

Let them use even yet more rude scoffs; and carry about with them men stuffed
with fat paunches. Our Blesilla will laugh, and not disdain to hear the
reproaches of croking frogs, whereas her Lord and Master was called
Beelzebub.

Hitherto S. Hierome. And there might be here set down many of his Epistls of
the same subject in praise and commendation of the Crown and Merit of
Widdowhood, if this little treatise were capable thereof, or that it were our
intention to make hereof a great volume. And therefore we will content our
selves at this time with some brief Aduertisementes of his, concerning the
same subject.

CHAP. V. Aduertisementes to Widows, out of the same S. Hierome
MANY are the Instructions and documents, which the ancient Fathers, have set
down for virtuous and devout Widows. And first of all we will produce what we
find written by S. Hierome aforesaid in diverse places of his works, in the
briefest manner we can, not to ouerweary the Widdow-Reader.

As those Widows (says S. Hierome) who when they were married, did only
study to please their husbands: so let those, who are now freed from carnal
marriage, seek and study only to please God, whom they have chosen for their
spouse in place of their former husbands.

As Widows whilst they were joined to the world, did use the vanity of the
world: so let them now being joined to god, banish from their hearts all
vanities.

As Widows, whilst they were married in the world, studied how to nourish
and pamper their bodies, for the bearing of children, and supporting the burden
of Marriage: so now let them keep sobriety, and bring their body into
servitude, and subject the same to the spirit, thereby to be able to serve
their second spouse Christ Jesus, in their sacred and spiritual Marriage.

Let a Widow be so much the more a lover of Chastity; by how much all her
actions, words, and works, may savor of purity.

Let her never be alone, as near as possible, with any man, that she need not
be ashamed, whenever she is seen to converse with another.

Let her always avoid the company of vain, idle, and sensual persons;
especially of Widows that should be so given: nor so much as permit any such
to come near unto her.

Let her take great heed never to detract, or murmr, or speak evil of any
man. Let her also avoid those who use to murmr, and permit them not upon any
occasion to speak evil of any person in her presence, to the end that those
who visit her, may be edifyed by her virtuous comportment.

She must also have a great care of her honesty and reputation, of which she
ought to be always so jealous, and fearful, that her speech, her face, and
all the actions of her body, yea her very garments may demonstrate the same; to
the end that no occasion be given to others, not so much as to think the
contrary of her.

By how much more young she is; by so much the more ought she to be grave, and
venerable in all her actions.

Let her not take too much pleasure, or delight in singing, especially of
songs; but let her recreate her self honestly with those of her own house and
family.

Let her always have at hand, some book of devotion; and let her have often
recourse unto prayer, which is the readiest way to drive away all vain and
evil thoughts, which the Enemy may put into her mind.

And for that, the flesh has continually combat with the spirit, let her use
abstinence, and other mortifications, to subdue the same, according to the
counsel of her prudent Ghostly Father.

As Anger and Choler is natural oftentimes to a man: so never to be overcome
therewith is most proper to a Christian. Let the widow therefore take great heed
thereof.

Let her always have before her eyes the examples of Indith, and Anne the
Prophetess, widows, who continually night and day employed their time in
prayer, fasting, and virtuous exercises. For which God gave to one of them so
much grace and valor, as to overcome and cut off the Devils head, figured in
that of Holofernes; and to the other, to be the first widow who should
embrace, and receive the Savior of the world in her arms, and thereby made
partaker of diverse divine secrets.

Let her consider that her soul, is the daughter of God, and therefore she
ought not to use any strange or fantastical ornaments to adorn her body; but let
all her study and care be to adorn her soul, as it becomes the daughter of
God,

She must not content her self to have begone any thing well, but she must
study how to end it well: although S. Paul began to do evil, and ended with
good; and Judas contrariwise began to do well, but ended in evil.

To what purpose should there be colors and vernice used, to paint the face of
a Christian? Such an ornament of the body becomes not one, that serves
Christ, but rather one who serves Antichrist. And if any look toward heaven
with such a face, Christ will not know them, since they have changed that shape
which he gave them.

Why do we promise one thing, and do another? And why does the tongue praise
Chastity, and the body exercise Impurity?

It is a very great virtue, and worthy to be sought after with great diligence,
care, and watchfullnes, to wit, to be born in the flesh, and not to live
according to the flesh.

If S. Paul feared, saying: I do not the good that I would, and therefore I do
bring my body into ser^itude. Which of us is there, who can be assured in this
case?

If David and Solomon, the familiar friends of God, have been overcome, by
the temptations of their flesh: who is he, that will not fear to fall, walking
upon so slippery an ice?

Let a widow continually think of doing seriously the will of God, that she
may be worthy often to hear that saying of our Savior in the Gospel: Not
those who say lord, lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but those
who shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven. And that also which he
said in another place: Why do ye call me Lord and Master, and do not the
things I command you to do? And again: He that does the will of my Father, is
my brother, my sister, and my Mother.

Moreover God says by his Prophet: The Son honors the Father, and the
servant the Master: But I am your Father, and where is my honor? I am your
Master, and where is my service? Whereby it is manifest that whosoever does not
the will of God, nor loves him as a Father, nor serves and fears him as a Lord
and Master, is (as holy David says) for that he is a sinner, and has done
evil.

Labor, that thou may be rich: but so, as the poor may gain thereby. And
it will be most pleasing to God, if thou give what thou can possibly spare to
the poor.

Whensoever a widow takes her repast, let her think on the poor, if she be
of ability; at least let her give what she can, according to her riches, or
poverty. And let her also think at this time, that by and by after she must
fall to her prayers, or read some good spiritual lesson, or exercise her self
about some other devout and pious work.

VVhilest a Widow has means, let her make unto her self friends by Alms;
that when the same is wanting, and all spent, they may receive her into the
everlasting tabernacles.

Give unto all those that shall demand of you, if you be able, and specially to
those who be good. Cloth the naked, feed the hungry, and visit the sick.

Every time that you stretch forth your hand, to give to the poor, remember
that it is Jesus Christ to whom you give: and behold, how your sweet lord, and
Savior beggeth, to lay up riches for you, against you have need.

Think often that within a short time, you are to dye, and leave this world;
and so, you shall have little list to think of a second worldly marriage.

Carry your self so, in the government of your house and family, that all may
acknowledge you for their Mistress; and also reverence you for your holy and
virtuous life.

Fly all sorts of persons, that have any suspision of an evil name; it is not
enough to say, My Conscience is clear I care not what others say of me: but
take you away all occasion from others of thinking ill, whereby God may be in
any sort offended.

Seek first of all the kingdom of heaven purely, and all other things
necessary shall be given unto you abundantly.

A Widow ought to fly all inordinate delights of the sense of Tasting: and
for this cause, God would not have honey to be burnt in his honor in the church,
but oil, which comes from the bitter Oliue-tree, and is of an unpleasant taste.

S. Paul did chastise and afflict his body diversely, that he might not become
reprobate. And who will warrant a young widow for her Chastity, if she
continually fill her belly with variety of delicate viands?

It is not possible, that any one now adays should be exempted from the
obliquy of men's tongnes, since it is become, as it were, a kind of pastime
among the bad, to speak evil of the good: but a false brute is soon past;
and this present life of ours, does give us witness of our life past. If any
speak ill of thee, amend thy fault, and the rumor will quickly cease.

Nobility, Beauty, young Age and Riches, make widows amiable unto every one;
And how many more enemies they have to fight against, for the conservation of
their Chastity; so much more great shall be their reward and recompense, if
they ma^fully resist and overcome.

Fly the company of those widows, who are widows not in will, but of a kind
of necessity; as also those who live in such sort, that they may seem not to
have lost their husbands.

God did not send a widow riches to be idle, or to spend the same unthriftily,
but rather to the end she might labor the more, especially with her own
hands, and to have daily something to give thereof to the poor.

Have continually before your eyes, and in your memory, this sentence: That
which you would have to be done unto your selves, do you the same unto another.

Do not easily believe evil of another, for this is the property of a light
and giddy mind, which for this reason is seldom in quiet.

Do not regard that which another prayseth in thee; but weigh and ponder the
same well with thy self, and in thy own conscience.

Speak little, and not without necessity, and thou shall avoid a number of
sins and imperfections.

Esteem nothing more amiable, or precious, then Humility which is the keeper
and guardian of all other virtues. And know, that there is nothing which makes
thee more regarded of God and men, then Humility, our sweet Savior saying: In
whom shall I repose or rest, but in the humble?

This Humility must not be exteriourly faygned, nor in words only; but truly
perfect, and in the heart: for the Pride, which is turned into Humility, is
extreme deformed: and the vices with are covered over with the veyle of Virtue,
are insupportable, and odious in the sight of God.

Do not prefer thy self, before another, either for that thou art Noble,
Rich, or Fair, or for any other exterior ornament of thy body: but rather
esteem thy self the more base and abject, thereby to be truly greater in the
sight of God. For we are all borne of the same parents Adam and Even, and all
redeemed with the self same blood of Jesus Christ.

Do not regard the conditions of persons, but their affections: for their
ma^ners and carriage make them as well base, as noble. It is true liberty, and
noblenes indeed, according to God, not to be a slave to sin. Who has been
more famous or illustrious then S. Peter, who was eue^ but a poor Fisherman?
Who among women has been more noble then the B. Virgin, who was nevertheless
espoused but to a poor Carpenter? To this Fisherman, God notwithstanding gave
the keys of Heaven: and this humble Virgin was made worthy to be the Mother of
God himself, and her spouse S. Joseph his Foster-Father.

Have some convenient and retired place in thy house whither thou may repair
often to talk and trait with God alone, as well about that which belongs to
thy self, as to thy family.

Content thy self to have lost the first degree of Virginity; and that by the
third, thou art come to the second: to wit, that by the endeanour of marriage,
thou art come to the continency of Widdow-hood.

Many women whilst their husbands are alive, make vows of Chastity and are
continent. And shall not others who are freed from their husbands, and are
become widows, much sooner perform the same?

God gave thee a husband, and God has taken him from thee again, and thereby
made thee free from the servitude of men. Do thou therefore render him due
thanks by thy chaste and virtuous living in widdowhood

Let the young widow, who cannot (or rather will not) live chaste, rather take a
husband, then the devil.

You know by experience how many troubles cares and anguishes of mind marryage
draws with it: Now that you have vomited up all the bitterness thereof,
wherefore will you be again caught with the same? The byrd, that has once had
her foot in the limetwigs, will take heed for coming there again, I trow.

Make a Virtue of Necessity: and leave not a thing certain, for an uncertain
if you be wise.

Take heed of the cou^sells of your Nurse, and others of your house and family,
for that they do always set before your eyes something that may please you, and
that may turn to their own profit and commodity.

If in doing well your Father, or carnal friends be heavy and grieved, your
Spouse Christ Jesus will rejoice: And if your family weep, the Angels will
singe.

You do not so much belong to those of whom you were borne, as to him of whom
you were regenerat, and borne a new; redeemed by his precious blood and death.

Let the young Widow, if her stomach be weak, use a little wine; but let her
take heed of meats that be hot of nature.

A Heathen women once said, He that had my first love, was my husband: and he
that has taken it away, let him keep it with him still in his grave. If an
Infidel did so much dispraise and dislike a second marriage: what shall be
expected that a Christian widow should do?

All these sayings are of good old S. Hierome: in gathering whereof I have been
the longer, for that I hope they will be pleasing and comfortable to widows.
Now let us see a little what S. Augustine will say unto us, concerning the same
subject.

CHAP. VI. Documents for Widows, out of S. Augustine.
THE widow that has Children, ought to bring them up, and instruct them in
the fear of God. And this must be her principal care. Neither ought she so
much to glory that she has children, as that she has indeed good and virtuous
children.

If she resolve to keep her dowhood, let her give thanks to good, who has by
his holy inspiration, put this resolution into her heart, and let her in all
things praise his holy Name.

Let her not despise those who have not the intention to remain widows: but
let her know, that it is a special gift of God; and that he gives it to whom
he pleases, and in diverse manners.

Let her employ as much time to please and serve God, as she has done to
please and serve her husband: and by how much the more she shall please him, by
so much more shall she be happy.

Let her seek to please God with the beauty of her soul, as she has done
before to please the world with the beauty of her body: to wit, with her
humility, Chastity, wisdom, love etc.

In place of carnal and worldly pleasures, let there succeed spiritual, to
wit, prayer, reading, good thoughts, good works, freque^ting the Sacraments,
hope of eternal life, elevation of the mind to God, and continual giving of
thanks to his divine Majesty. These and the like are the true delights and
pleasures of a true and virtuous Widow.

Let her have a special care, that the love of riches, and Honors succeed not
in place of the love of her husband. For many have there been who have
vanquished and overcome the lascivious wantonness of the flesh, and yet have
been themselves overcome with covetousness: and have loved riches so much the
more disordinatly, by how much they have repressed the concupiscence, and
desires of the flesh.

Let her exercise her self in all true virtue, as well in her young age as in
her old; and as much as her health and ableness of body will permit.

When she loves God with her whole heart, all kind of labor and toil seems
sweet and light. And if it seem pleasant unto a hu^ter, to follow a wild and
savage beast, with so great labor, toil, yea and danger of his life, to take
him: what should it seem unto a soul inflamed with love, to take pains for
the getting of God himself?

Let not a Widow, though never so rich, noble, fair, yea and though she have
never so fair an issue of children, for this cause rejoice; but account her
self as one desolate in this world, not relying upon any other consolation,
but wholly upon God; esteeming her self but as a pilgrim upon earth, banished
into this world from her heavenly Country, and subject to many perils, and
miseryes, a great way distant from eternal happynes, and most uncertain ever
to attain thereunto: And therefore let her lament with King David, and S Paul,
who had the like thoughts and cogitations.

If she do abound in riches, yet let her not set her affection thereon. And
above all things, let her contemn covetousness and avarice, the holy Scripture
saying: There is nothing more pernicious then covetousness, nothing more wicked
then the love of money; since that for money the Covetous man will sell his own
soul. And the Apostle says: That covetousness is the root of all evil. Our
Savior also in the Gospel tells us. How hard a thing it is for those that
be rich to enter into the kingdom of heaven: And that a Camel, shall e^ter
more easily through a needle, then a richman into the Kingdom of heaven. By
riches are understood all earthly things, and goods, disordinatly affected, or
sought after.

When a widow has done her devotions, let her never be idle; let her take in
her hand either wool, or flax, let her card, let her spinne, let her wind the
yarn that others have spon, let her twist it, let her see there be no fault in
the work, and if there be any let her mend it, and do what is necessary. Being
thus continually occupied, the longest days will seem very short and pleasant:
For the soul that is idle is full of bad desires, as the holy Scripture
insinuates. And nothing can be so precious in the sight of God, as to give to
the poor the labor of her own hands.

Let a Widow take heed of adorning or attyring her head with pearls,
Jewels, or precious carcanets, nor use frizeled hair; for these be the true
signs of hellfire: but let her seek another sort of precious stones, and
wear them, to wit, Humility, Fear of God, and other virtues; to the end, she
may buy therewith that inestimable pearl and margarite, Christ Jesus the spouse
of the soul.

Finally let a Widow use discretion, maturity, and prudence in all her
actions: let her consider who she is, and who he is to whom she has
consecrated her Widdowhood; to the end she may obtain his earthly benediction
for her self, and her children in this world, and life eternal in the next.

CHAP. VII. Diverse memorable Examples of true VViddowhood.
WE have spoken already of the Famous and glorious Widows Judith, and Anne
the Prophetess, before the coming of Christ. Let us now set down some other
examples. And first of all occurs that most noble and illustrious Roman Widow
Paula, of whom S. Hierome writeh, That so soon as her husband was dead,
contemning the pompes and pleasurs of the world, even in the midst of so
great wealth and abundance of riches, chose the state of perpetual Continency
in widowhood.

Blesilla likewise renowned for her beauty, wealth, and honor, her husband
desceasing, and she being left a young and noble Lady, chose the holy State of
widowhood, by which she became renowned to al posterity.

Melania was no less prayse-worthy, who when her husband being dead, and not
as yet buried, she caused the bodies of two of her sons (of very great hope
and expectation, a little before also desceased) to be brought unto her
husbands body, where after extreme weeping, sighing, and drowninge of her self
almost in tears, and even loathing as it were marriage for the cares,
troubles, and torments that it bringes, without any longer deliberation,
consecrated her self unto God, by vowing perpetual Widdowhood.

Eufrasia likewise a Roman Lady is not inferior to the above named, whose
husband dying, she being in her young and flourishing age, fair, noble, rich,
contemned a second marriage, wheru^to she was as solicited by the Emperor
himself. And so dimissing her servants and retinew, retired her self into
Thebais, where she lived most Saintly in perpetual widdowhood.

The same did Elizabeth daughter to the King of Hungary, who being deprived of
her Lord and Husband, presently contemned the pleasures of the Court, and
vanities of the world, giving her self wholly to the service of poor, sick,
and needy people; not enduring that any man besides Jesus Christ, should be
called her Spouse, which she truly acknowledged in the poor.

The noble and most worthy example of Constantia daughter to Constantine the
Great, Emperor, is admirable: who whilst her husband was yet living, deserved
to receive the crown and merit of Continency. For that her Father the Emperor
marrying her to Halicarnus Captain of the Roman Army, she first persuaded him
to be a Christian, afterward to give over the wars, to lay aside his purple,
and finally for the love of Jesus Christ, to vow perpetual Chastity.

The same did Chunegundis wife to Henry the Emperor, who persuaded him also to
live in perpetual Chastity, as she had vowed to do; whereby they both became
Saints of Gods Church, renowned to all posterity.

Neither must we pass over in silence the most worthy and noble example of
Galla daughter to Simmachus a Consul of Rome, whose husband deceasing, and she
left a young and beautiful widow, was so assailed with infirmityes, that her
body became full of botches and soars. She consulted with her Doctors, who all
agreed, that if she would be cured, she must marry again. Whose counsel she
so much disliked, that she said, She would rather endure the same all the days
of her life, yea death it self, then marry again: which purpose she truly
observed most Saintly in holy Widdowhood to her dyingday.

Ania also another Roman Lady, and widow of great worth and nobility, young,
and fair, her husband being dead, which he had enjoyed but a small while, was
earnestly solicited by her friends to a second marriage, which she vterly
refused. Being by them demanded the cause why, she said. If (quoth she) I
should marry again, and find a good huba^d like to my former, I should live
continually in fear to loose him by death: and least I should chance to light
upon a bad husband, I will not adventure upon such a disgrace. An act and
purpose surely wise, and grave, worthy to be considered attentively by
widows, that desire to live out of danger.

As nobly and prudently did Olimpia of Constantinople, disciple of S. John
Chrysostom, and the widow of Nebridius Prefect of the Army, a man of most
noble Renown, who having been married but twenty months only, was exhorted by
Theodosius the Emperor to marry again, since she was both young, fair, noble,
rich, learned, and held of ever one for a virgin. She made this Answer. If my
Lord the Emperor (quoth she) would have me to marry again, why did he so
soon deprive me of my husband (for he was slain in the Emperors wars) who
was so agreeable to my nature, and mine to his? But because his Highness knows
me to be unfit for a married Estate, it seems he has quickly delivered me
from that servitude: and made me print in my heart the delight of Continency in
widdowhood.

And let no man marvel that the continency of widdowhood is so much
reco^mended to Christian women, seeing that among the Gentills, specially the
old Romans, the same was so greatly honored, that when a widow died, her head
was adorned with a Crown of Continency, and to carried in solemn triumph to
her grave.

The said Romans did also attribute another honor to the Continency of
Widdowhood, which was, That on the wedding day, there were no women suffered to
come near, much less to touch the Bride, but only such as had been the wives
of one husband, to wit, such as had been but once married; commanding all that
had been twice married (yea though they were Widows) to keep aloof of, as
profane, impure, and fortelling of an evil fortune to the happynes of
marriage.

They did moreover account it a sign of great intemperance in any woman, to
marry more then once. And for this cause one Portia a Noble Lady being in
company of other Matrons and Dames upon a time; and understanding that one of
the^ had been twice married, said unto her: Madame, The happy, and chaste woman
never marryes but once. A saying worthy of a most prudent and wise Lady. And
conform to this was that most laudable fact of Cornelia, daughter to Africanus
and wife to Tyberius Gracchus, who when her husband was desseased, refused a
second Marriage with King Ptolomey, accompting it an act of too great
Intemperance so to do.

And of no less praise and commendation was Continency in Widdow-hood, held
amongst the ancient Jews, in the old Testament whereof before we have set down
the Examples of Judith and Anne the Prophetess, and so needless to be here
again repeated.

The chaste Continency also of that holy and virtuous Widow of Sarepta, is not
unknown, to whom Meal and Oil never wanted during the time of that great
famine, till by gods commandment it rayned again upon the dry and withered
earth, whereby the same became so moist and fertile, as it filled the Countries
round about with all abundance.

CHAP. VIII. Of the works of Mercy, Devotion, Courage, and Constancy of
widows. And of the Mantle, and the Ring.
AMONGST many, this is not the least, nor last pious Consideration, that in all
Countries of Christendom, the noble works and momuments of widows are yet
exta^t. Nor shall we need at this time to travail out of our own Island of
England, to view the same.

For it is well known, that there is scarce any City, Town, yea or Borrough
thoughout all England, without some monument or other, of pious widows.

For how many goodly Hospitalls, Almes-houses Free-schooles, yea some famous
Churches also have you seen built, and endowed with sufficient rents, and
reuenews by widows? How many Highways, Bridges, Wels, Crosses, have been
made, and exected by pious Widows, for the increase of devotion in the
people, and for the good of their own souls?

What Prayers, I pray you, what Mortifications, Te^perance, Night-watchinges
giving of alms, have the devout Widows of our Country in former times (and
now a days very many also, but yet not comparable to the former) exercised,
for the love of God; taking a true delight therein in their most Chaste
Widdow-hood, to serve their spouse Christ Jesus, whom they had chosen instead
of their deceased husbands?

How many of prime Nobility have we had, in our Country, that have contemned
second marriages? And if we should recount all, we should perhaps surpass the
greatest part of Christendom basides, in that kind: some entering into Religion
and becoming Nuns, yea great Saints also; and others exercising works of
mercy at home among the poor, to the great comfort of the distressed.

And to begin with Queens, how many I pray you, have we had in our little
Island, that after the death of their Lords, have set aside all pomp and vanity
of the world, utterly refusing a second marriage, and have either voluntarily
shut themselves up in Cloisters, there to spend their days in prayer and
contemplation with God; or else have retired to some private place, continually
exercising themselves in devotion and meditation of heavenly things.

Before the Conquest our Island was more fertile in this kind, as being nearer
to their primitive fervor, and that in few ages, the^ it has been ever since.
For within the compass of 500. years, there have been above thirty Queens,
that our Histories do make mention of, to have made themselves either Nuns in
Monasteries as is above said, or else have lived privately at home, continuinge
in their Chaste widdowhood to their dying day.

Of the blood Royal, and other Noble familyes, the number is far greater;
neither will it be to our purpose in this place to recount them all. Only this
I note, that the greatest part of the forsaid Queens (besides others of noble
families) were many ages ago accounted Saints, and for such acknowledged
throughout Christendom; and many Churches, Altars, and Monuments of sanctity
erected in their honor, and their very Names famous to all Posterity. For to
omit S. Helen the Empress, a British Widow, and Mother to Constantine the
great the first Christian Emperor, we have S. Ermenild and S. Ermenburge
Queens of Mercia, or middle Englismen; S. Algiue mother, and S. Wilfrid
wife to king Edgar the first Monarch of England; S. Edilburge, and S. Ethelwide
Queens of the VVestsaxons; S. Eadgith, S. Ethelburge, S. Chineburge, S.
Ealflede, S. Audry Queens of Northumberland; S. Osith Queen of the
Eastsaxons; S. Sexburg Queen of Kent; S. Hereswide Q. of the Eastangles; S.
Agatha, widow of Prince Edward surnamed the Outlaw; S. Margaret Queen of
Scolland, Maude the Empress etc.

All these, and very many others, were most eniment in piety and devotion, both
in their widdowhood, and contine^cy: yea some of the^ vowed chastity their
Lords and Husbands yet living, as S. Edilburge Queen of the VVestsaxons, and S.
Audry Queen of Northunberland; at whose bodies and relics it has pleased God
to show wondrous signs, and work many Miracles to testify the same; whereby
they have been ever since, and still are honored for Saints thoroughout the
world.

It was an ancient custom in our Island (and the same continues in some parts
of Germany until this day) that in time of war, plagues, famyne, or of any
public necessity, there were in many Cities and Towns a certain number of
widows ordained to watch and pray continually, night and day, in the
Churches, by their turns or courses, one or more together: because it was
held, that their prayers were of more efficacy, and power with Almighty God, to
assuage his wrath, then the prayers of other common people, as persons
dedicated wholly to his service, by the observation of Continency, in their
Chaste, and Holy widdowhood.

Neither is the true Valor and Constancy of devout Widows, in our Country;
less to be praised and admired; since in that kind also we have gone beyond
many other Nations, especialy in these later days, when as their noble and
heriocall Examples heerof have made them famous to posterity; whether we
respect their courage and consta^cy in suffering both loss of goods and
imprisonment for their faith and religion, as glorious Confessors; or else the
sheeding of their blood in testimony of the same, as triu^phant Martyrs.

For upon some of these widows has God bestowed an invincible courage and
fortitude, joined with an admirable patience in suffering for the Catholic
Cause, not only imprisonment of their bodies, but loss also of goods and
fortunes, to their wholly undoing in their temporal estates in this world, that
they might receive a more plentiful reward and merit in the world to come. And
what Catholic in England is there, that cannot witness the same sufficiently?

Upon others, has sweet Jesus, of his infinite love, and superabundant Charity
bestowed a more high and supereminent gift, not only in suffering, as is
aforsaid, loss of goods and liberty in this life; but also to seal the same
with their dearest blood, for his Names sake, Honor, Faith, and Religion. And
this not upon the meanest sort, but even upon some of the Blood Royal of
England; as is well known in the Lady Margaret Pla^tagenet widow, countess
of Salisbury, and daughter to the Duke of Clare^ce, in time of K. Henry the 8.
and in the Soueraign Lady Q. Mary of Scotland, Widow, and mother to our
Sovereign that now reigns; upon the devout widows also Ms. Marg. Clitherow
at York, Ms. Anne Line at London, and others, in the late reign of Q.
Elizabeth: All giving their lives for the constant profession and defense of
the Catholic Faith, and thereby made worthy of a crown of a Martyrdom, in their
holy widdowhood.

Of the Mantle, and the Ring.
IT was also an ancient custom in England, (which I have not read to have been
practiced in other Cou^treyes) for widows to wear a proper, and peculiar
upper garment, called a Mantle, by which they were known, and distinguished
from other people.

This Mantle was a long, loose Garment, which covered them all over, and did
touch the ground, made of black cloth ordinarily, though others, who were
more noble, used them of stuff, yet always black; signifying thereby that they
were be accounted as dead to the world, and to spend the rest of their days in
mourning for their own sins, and the sins of others, for who^ of their
Charity they did pray.

It seems that this custom was in use in our Island long before the Conquest,
above 900. years ago. And the first that I read of, to have brought in the
same, was S. Theodore Archb. of Canterbury, sent into England by Pope Vitalian,
about the year 660. And a little after him again, by S. Adelmus Bishop of
Sherborne amongst the VVestsaxons, who lived in the year of Christ 709. of
who^ it is recorded, that he gave hallowed Mantles to diverse, both Virgins and
Widows who had vowed Virginity and Continency: after the taking whereof, it
was not lawful for them to marry, under pain of grievous sin.

Afterward, the same became more frequent, and was ordinarily used throughout
England, even until this last age of Schism and Heresy in the same. At the
receiving whereof, were used diverse pious and godly Cerimonyes: to wit, that
such widows, as had for a certain number of years, lived in Continency and
widdowhood (after the death of their first husbands only) and well proved
themselves therein, received from the Bishop, a hallowed Mantle, kneeling
before the high altar, in the Church, in time of solemn Mass; as also a Ring
of Gold, or Silver, made plain and round, like to a wedding-Ring, which was
also hallowed. And this Mantle was put about their necks, by the Bishop
himself, he pronouncing in the mean while, a short prayer; as also the ring
upon their fourth finger, with a prayer likewise pronounced by the Bishop. After
which, receiving the Bishops blessing, was song Te Deum laudamus, in
thanksgiving; and the widow thus adorned (with a veyle also over her head) was
led home to her house by two grave matro^s, and afterward held and reputed for
a sacred person, all the days of her life.

Nor after this, was it lawful for her ever to marry, or to fall from this her
pious purpose, without a most grievous syn, and other Eccleasisticall
punishments ordained for the same, having once received that hallowed Robe, and
Ring, as a pledge of her faith made to her Celestial spouse Christ Jesus, by
so public and solemn a Cerimony of his Church

And we read, that about the time of K. Henry the first, a widow was seuerly
punished by the Bishop, for marrying, after she had received the Ma^tle and the
Ring in the manner above said. Whereby it seems, that the custom was to make
some vow of perpetual Continency to the Bishop, at the receiving thereof; and
thereby became subject to Ecclesiastial power, and punishment also, if she
trangressed, or sacrilegiously violated the same.

FINIS.

