Great Britains Beauties, OR, The Female Glory; Epitomized, In Encomiastick
Anagramms, and Acrostiches, Upon the highly honored Names of the QUEENS most
gracious Majesty, and the Gallant Lady-Masquers in her Graces glorious
Grand-Masque. Presented at White Hall on Shrove-Tuesday at night, by the
Queens Majesty and her Ladies. With Disticks, and Illustrations, upon their
several Anagramms, being in number fifteen, whose Names ensue in order on the
next side.

Published by Authority.

Plectra gerens Erato, saltat pede, Carmine vultu. The pleasant Muse Erato,
she beguiles
The time, in Revels, Dancing, Songs and Smiles.
Framed, and formed, by the humble Pen of FRANCIS LENTON, the Queens Poet.

LONDON, Printed by Marmaduke Parsons, for James Becket, at the Inner Temple
Gate. 1638.

The Masquers.
1 The QUEENS Majesty. 2 Duchess Lenox. 3 Countess Oxford. 4 Countess
Southampt: 5 Countess Carnarvan. 6 Countess Newport. 7 Countess Portland. 8
La: Anne Rich. 9 La: Katherine Howard. 10 La: Elizabeth Cecill. 11 La: Dorothea
Sidney. 12 La: Elizab: Feilding. 13 La: Frances Howard. 14 Mris. Victoria
Carey. 15 Mris. Saphia Nevill.
The POETS Apology.
Where Coelique virtue shines, my Muses lays,
Freely, and fearlesse, may divulge their Praise,
But where foul vice does reign (in Honors hight)
My Pen shall scorn to be their Parasite:
In these rare Princely Dames (of precious lot)
No eye could ever spy, least taint, or spot.
TO THE MOST GRACIOUS, MOST BEAVTEOVS, and most Candide Queen of all
Christendom, our Magnificent Queen MARY.
Mirror of goodness, most Illustrious Dame,
My prostrate Muse, (adoring your great Name)
Presumes here to present unto your Grace,
Your Anagramme; with all the rest in Place,
Whom you were pleased to honor in this Task,
(The rarest Ladies of your Royal Masque.)
Together with a true Acrostique flame,
Aspiring from the Letters of your Name.
Pardon my humble Pen which (in your Fame)
Has blazed the brightness of your Anagramme;
From whose caelestiall light, and virtuous mind,
These Ladies (All) the milk-white Path do find,
(By your example) unto virtues height,
At which they aim, with labor, and delight,
And in their Race, that way, do strive which shall
Outstrip the other for the golden Ball;
Of these great Ladies, you the Leader are,
Who (like the Wisemen) follow you, their Star.
Your Graces most Humble Servant, FRA: LENTON.

TO THE HIGHLY DESCENDED And Heroicke Dutchesses Grace of LENOX, and all the
great and virtuous Countesses, and Virgin Ladies, Associats in this Royal
Assembly.
YOu rarer Beauties of great Britains Court,
(Employed in this most glorious Masquing sport)
At your high Altars I do humbly proffer
These Poems, which my modest Muse does offer
To each of your fair Hands, and gracious Eyes,
Craving you would receive this Sacrifice
Assigned to your Praise; whose real worth
My painful Pen here study'de to set forth:
Though in the best endeavors of my Spirits,
I fall far short of your transcending Merits;
Yet pardon, Ladies, and accept the Will,
Of your true Honourer, whose worthless Quill
Knows what he wants in Fancy, and in Flames,
Will be supplied by your Heroic Names:
Thus graced, when you have read, I do not fear,
A kind Acceptance from each Lady here.
Devoted to your Virtues, FRA: LENTON.

To the Critical Age.
TRranslators, and your Anagrammatists,
(All know) are both confined to narrow Lists;
Nor can a Rapture, or fantastic Flame,
Fly in it is full carreire upon a Name,
'Cause bounded with the Letters; where it is sin,
Not with the Names first Letters to begin
Each Verse composed by Acrostique Art,
Yet to run smooth (with Sense) in every part.
And for our Anagramms, some er'st did please,
To term them (right) Nugae Difficiles;
But if you will expect them without blame,
They must reflect o'th Nature, Beauty, Fame,
Birth, Honor, Breeding, Quality, or Wit.
Of them, whose Names your fancy happs to fit:
Which if you rightly construe, surely then,
You Will find no gross fault in my modest Pen.
But if rash Censure you will undertake,
I tell you it is more ease to mend then make:
Of which, I dare not say you can do neither,
Till you have tried, and faulty prove in either:
Then Bandy what you please, this Book has past,
Approved above, and slights each lower Blast.
An Anagramme upon the Name of our most gracious Queen, MARIA STVART.
Anagramme. I AM A TRV STAR.
Distichon.
A Royal, Sacred, bright, true fixed Star,
In whose compare, all other Comets are.
Illustration.
A Morning Star, whose Rose at blush and smile,
Shows the days solace, and the nights exile;
A radient Star, whose luster, more Divine,
By Charles (our Sun) does gloriously shine:
No wandering Planet, that moves circular,
But a true, constant, loyal, fixed Star:
A Star whose influence, and sacred light,
Does beautify the day, and bless the night;
Which shining brightly in the highest Sphaere,
Adornes those smaller Stars, which now appear
Before her presence; by whose gracious sight,
Their numerous feet now pace with rich delight:
O happy they approach unto that Throne,
Where virtues are the constellation.
And let it be proclaimed nigh, and far,
That our Illustrious Queen, Is a true Star.
Her Graces Acrostiche.
MINERVAS Darling, and the Muses Eye,
A ll Natures fair Perfections in her Feature,
R are President of virtuous Majesty,
I mparalell'd by any Mortal Creature,
A strea's Goddess, and Diana's Joy,
S urpassing both in Grace, and Excellence,
T hat Sacred Queen, which Haman sought to 'stroy,
V asti's Successor of such Eminence,
A Royal Dame of great Magnificence.
R aigne (rarest Queen) in Plenty, Pleasure, Peace,
T ill Sol's extinct, and crazie Time shall cease.
An Anagramme upon the Royal Name of Lenoxes gracious and loyal Duchess.
MARYE STVART. Anagr. A TRVSTY ARM.
Distichon.
Unto the world sound forth this rare Alarm,
This gracious Rib, is proved a Trusty Arm.
Illustration.
AN Arm implies strength, and courage too,
And women (though but weak) can mickle do*
But if you take it in another sense,
Arm signifies a safeguard, or defense,
And therefore when we shield our selves from harms,
Our Martialists do call our weapons, Arms:
Arm, Emblem is of Love, and Courtesy,
Which our embracing welcomes do descrie;
All these have essence in her virtuous Grace,
Giving unto her Lord a chaste embrace.
A Trusty Arm, there loyalty, and truth
Crown all the Actions of her beauteous youth;
O happy Prince, whose love is still kept warm
By such a loyal, loving, Trusty Arm.
Her Graces Acrostiche.
MARYES blessed Name you have, and Maryes Grace,
A nd Maryes Virtues deck both Soul, and Face,
R ight Royal Duchess, daigne to accept a Muse,
Y mploy'd, in duty, to your Graces use;
S acred Espousals now have crowned your Merit,
T hat by fair Hymen's Rites you do inherit
V nited Force; which Mighty Jove increase,
A nd long may you subsist in Love, and Peace:
R iches with Honor; Grace with Goodness twine,
T ogether in your Gordian Knot Divine.
An Anagramme upon the Name of the Noble minded, and heroic Assistant, of all
virtuous Actions, the Countess of Oxford. DIANA VERE. Anagr. AN AID EVER.
Distichon.
You are (fair Dame) that for the which you are made,
Your Lords Assistant, and perpetual Aid.
Illustration.
YOur real Anagramme (which here is named)
Is the chief end for which you first were framed,
To be a Coadjutor, helper, Aid,
Unto your Husband, for which you were made,
To be a Comfort, Solace, and Rejoice,
To him on whom you fixed have your choice:
This (Royal Lady) was your proper end,
Which moral, and diviner Schools commend
Unto your knowledge; next, in this Relation,
Is both for Love, Increase, and Propagation,
Nor is your chaste Assistance to persever,
For a short time, but to remain for ever
In Hymen's sacred Bond; a Loyal Wife,
And Twynn of Nuptial love your total life:
And so you are (renowned Oxfords Dame)
Who left behind him an eternal Fame.
By these, great Countess, 'twill be truly said,
Your Love, and Virtue ever is an Aid.
Her Acrostiche.
DIANA as our Poets do descry,
I s Virtues Queen, Goddess of Chastity,
A nd you retain her Nature, as her Name:
N or are your Virtues of a lesser Fame,
A nd you an aequall Deity may claim:
V ertue and Nobleness in you we find,
E nnately seated in your sacred Mind,
R aising a rare Applause of your Deserts,
E nriched with so many royal Parts:
That should I set them down in Verity,
The world would tax my Muse with Flattery.
An Anagramme upon the Name of the Sanctious and Chaste Countess of
Southampton. RACHEL WRIOTHESLEY. Anagr. HOLY LIVER, CHASTE EVER.
Distichon.
If chaste, and holy (Lady) you persever,
You Will be a Phoenix here, a Saint for ever.
Illustration.
LIke to an holy Angel, such is she,
( Chaste Ladies ever likest Angels be)
O happy Lady then, more happy wife,
Whose holy conversation, pious life,
Is pointed in thy Name, much more thy Mind,
Which unto every holy Act's inclined.
The Hebrew (which in Mystery is deep)
Says thy Name ( Rachel) signifies a Sheep;
And holy Text declares, that Sheep, and Goats,
The one righteous, the other wicked Flock denotes:
A holy Liver then (Religious Dame)
You are in deed, in Anagramme, and Name.
Being a holy Liver, none's so vast,
As to deny Holiness to be Chaste;
'Twould be absurd (each Scholar will confess)
To grant the greater, and deny the less:
Nor can they either; her chaste holy Flame,
In all her ways do justify the same:
By this mere Envy must confess (at last)
That she is a holy Liver, ever chaste.
Her Acrostiche.
R are, Holy, Chaste, see how each Epithete
A dornes her qualities, which are complete,
C hastitie is a Hand-mayd to her given,
H olynes once will lift her unto Heaven,
E ach Femals virtue on these two depend;
L ike* Babe on Nur^e, or Indigent on Friend;
L ove, Zeal, Hope, Charity, and all the Graces,
W hich Dignifie, and Deifie your Faces,
R ely on Purity, and Holiness,
I n both of which consists your happiness:
O prosper in those virtues, and persever,
T he which will crown you with Reward for ever:
H oly and Chaste your Honored Name implies,
E ven so your true Acrostiche verifies,
S ince you in Name and Graces simpathize:
L ive long (fair Dame) in Piety, and Peace,
E nriched with an Off spring, and increase,
Y mpes of this Tree grow up, and never cease.
An Anagramme upon the Name of the highly honored and adored, the Countess of
Carnarvan. ANNA SAPHIA DORMERE. Anagr. MANY A PAN ADORES HER.
Distichon.
For her rare Beauty, and her virtues more,
Many a Terrene God does Her adore.
Illustration.
THe Poets feign, the Shepherds God was Pan,
And yet that Shepherd God was but a Man,
A Man of eminence, King, Prince, or Peer,
Who over the rest ruled in a higher sphaere,
Alluding unto holy Scriptures Pen,
I called you Gods, but you shall die like Men:
Thus many men (who here are Gods on earth)
Adore her virtues, honor her high Birth:
For whosoever shall view the majesty
Of her rare presence, and commanding eye,
May quickly (for a Goddess) her implore,
And (secretly) her Princely form adore:
But to her Beauty, add her Virtues; than
She well may be adored by many a Pan.
Her Acrostiche.
A dmired Lady! Beauties Excellence,
N atures chief Workman-ship, and Masterpiece,
N or so alone, but Virtues Quintessence,
A nd far exceeding Hellena of Greece.
S weeter then Iunes new blossomed fragrant Rose,
A rabique Odours, or the Eastern Spice,
P erfumes of Aromatique; rare compose,
H ere vented at rich value, and high Price:
I n her all graces, and all virtues shine,
A s clear as mighty Phoebus does at noone,
D eclaring her to be a Dame divine,
O f rarest form, real Perfection:
R oyall in Mind, as noble in her Blood,
M aching each Muse her peereles praise to spread;
E ven from fair Thamesis sweet silver Flood,
R eaching unto blew Thetis deeper bed;
E njoy (fair Saint) All pleasures on the Earth,
And of your Offspring may there never be dearth.
An Anagramme upon the Name of the highly advanced, and virtuous, the Countess
of Newport. ANNA BLOVNTA. Anagr. ENN, VNA A^ ALTO. In English, Behold a high
one.
Distichon.
Behold a beauteous Lady, honored high,
Near to the brightest Star in Britains sky.
Illustration.
BEhold another shining from on high,
Of Princely grace, and honour'^ modesty,
A virtuous Lady of heroic Blood,
Chaste, wise, fair, witty, loyal, true, and good:
One of those blazing Stars which (on this night)
Accompanied the rest in their delight,
A high advanced one, to Mary near,
Placed with the greater Stars in Honors sphaere.
Behold Spectators (with a cheerful eye)
How passing comely, and how gracefully
These high ones do adorn our glorious Court,
In Masquing, Revels, and such Royal sport:
All eyes which on these gallant Ladies gaze,
Never weary, but with wonder and amaze.
Your Name no English Anagramme would take,
Therefore the Latin I was forced to make.
Her Acrostiche.
A s Heaven great Favors unto you assigned,
N atures fair Beauty, with a virtuous Mind,
N or are you barred of any terrene Pleasure,
E uen so may you enriched be, and move,
B oath in good Works, Zeal, Piety, and Love,
L aying up somewhat for your Coelique Treasure.
O n you (bright Star) all meaner Eyes do look,
V eiwing your Uertues in fair Actions Book;
N or shall they (in their searching) ever find,
T hat you eclipse the glory of your kind.
An Anagramme upon the Name of the Royal, and real lover of virtues, the
Countess of Portland. FRANCIS WESTONE. Anagr. ONE FANCY'S VERTV'S.
Distichon.
She to the best of Centers sure does move,
Whose Circle tends unto Virtues love.
Illustration.
ONe of a royal Stock, and Family,
One of rare Beauty, real Chastity,
A noble Lady (once of Stuarts Name)
Which fills Great Britain with eternal fame;
Has to her greatness, goodness of the mind,
And fancies Virtue, where she does it find,
Though wrapped in Beggars rags; she wisely sees,
(Though Justice be not current without Fees)
Yet Virtue one day, will have due reward,
When Vice (with it is Impostures) shall be barred
The place o'th Blessed; for which she does strive,
By pious Acts, whilst she is yet alive:
She Is one, a rare one too, who loves, and fancies
Virtue, before all pleasures, sports, and dances.
Her Acrostiche.
F air Virtues Cittadell, and Beauties Grace,
R ich both in real goodness, and high Place,
A Lady of inestimable Worth;
N ot by a meaner Muse to be set forth.
C ome all ye Sisters, join with one Consent,
I n her Applause, (who is so eminent.)
S ince what proceeds from my humble Bays,
W ill but diminish, not augment her Praise:
E ngaged thus, for your Assistance I
S hall study to be grateful till I Dye:
T hen gentle Lady cast a gracious Eye,
O n these Endeavors on your Honored Names.
N ow filling Britains Court with your great Fames.
An Anagramme upon the Name and Title of the beauteous, and virtuous, LADY ANNE
RICH. Anagr. RICH IN LAND.
Distichon.
She who has all Earths pleasures at command,
Is Rich in all, and therefore Rich in Land.
Illustration.
RIch in your honored Birth, and Rich in Name,
Rich in your Family, and Rich in Fame,
Rich in your Virtues, Rich in Chastity,
Rich in your noble Carriage, Courtesy,
Rich in your Consort, Rich in Progeny,
Rich in religious Zeal, and Piety,
Rich in your Person, Beauty, Modesty,
Seeming to us a Terrene Deity:
In all these Riches (which you do possess)
Heaven sure has lent you a great Happiness;
To which add this (which is at your command)
Rich in Estate, which we call, Rich in Land.
To all may length of days increase (with Honor)
And all Jove's blessings still be heaped upon her.
Her Acrostiche.
A ngelique Lady, Beauties Magazen,
N atures fair Glory, and Perfection,
N o Muse can blaze thy virtuous worth, nor Pen,
E xpresse to the life thy rare Proportion:
R ich every way, in Goodness, Grace, and Name,
I n Honor, Bounty, and Urbanity,
C hacing all Vice that may detect thy Fame,
H igh seated in the Sphaere of Majesty:
Where may it ever flourish, and grow green,
By the Reflection of our Sacred Queen.
An Anagramme upon the beauteous and virtuous Virgin, the Lady KATHERINE
HOWARD. Anagr. KIND HEART HEAR WOE.
Distichon.
If you expect kind usage from a Foe,
In your distress, then pity others woe.
Illustration.
Heroic Lady! Chaste, wise, fair, and witty,
Whose tender soul attentive is to pity,
Which does adorn your virgin noble Sex,
If a young Lord for you (by Loves perplex)
Be drowned in sorrow, drenched in amorous woe,
By the fierce dart of Cupid, from his bow,
And quite overthrown in that All-conquering Duel
Of love, whose fire burns out his vital Fuel;
Kind heart, kind heart! O be not too too cruel!
But e're he has his fatal overthrow,
Relent, kind heart, relent; and hear his woe:
And though your heart may think he does presume
Upon your kindness; do not quite consume
Him in his ardent Flame, which cannot dye,
Till he find mutual love to quench it by.
Thus from your tender soul, the world will know,
That your kind heart has ears to pity woe:
Yet not so pity, as to cross your mind,
In Loves most Sacred Band; though Love be blind.
O may you, when fair Hymen you invites,
Be blessed in all Loves mutual chaste delights:
Mean time, 'cause Cupids coals in you may glow,
If he deserve ( kind Lady) hear his woe:
Another. KATHERIN HOWARD. Anagr. AH, THOU RARE, KIND.
THou art the Kind, and Phoenix of thy kind,
Thou art the Rare, nay, rarest of the fair!
Whose Virtues show the beauties of thy mind,
And lovely hue, thy eye, cheek, lip, and hair:
Thus art Thou kind, and fair, in soul, and face,
Of noble carriage, and of comely grace.
Blame not your Anagramme, Thou Kind, and Rare,
In whose chaste soul each Virtue claims a share:
We may as soon the Northwest passage find,
As such another ( Thou) so Rare, so Kind.
Her Acrostiche.
K now Gallants all, (who love her Noble name,
A nd Virgin Virtues,) that this Beauteous Dame,
T ranscendeth far, the thrice three Sisters Praise,
H ere crowned with Pallas, and pure Vesta's Bays,
E nriching her with Wisdom from on high,
R eligious Zeal, Love, Truth, and Chastity,
I n whom all other Virtues we descry:
N or is this Fictive, for her glorious Fame
E xceedeth all Encomiastique Flame:
H ere Birth and high Descent (from ancient Kings)
O n her reflect; (as Heraldry now sings)
W hose Grace excels the greatness of her Arms,
A nd conquers Heroes with her virtuous Charms:
R are Vest all Lady, pardon, if my Truth,
D ue Honor and Applause, adds to your Youth.
An Anagramme upon the Name of the Pious, Zealous, and Beauteous Lady,
ELISABETH CECILL. Anagr. BY THY ZEAL ECCELL.
Distichon.
Certes, in Joys eternal thou shall dwell,
If on this Orb, in Zeal thou do eccell.
Illustration.
YOur Anagramme (imparative) does tell,
That you (fair Lady) others should excel;
And as there is a great Transcendencie,
In Birth, in Person, Place, and Quality,
From others, who in lower places dwell,
So you in grace, and goodness should excel:
That they (by your example) may delight
To imitate, though not attain that height
Of Virtue, which your honored Youth does hold,
Like Saphires rich enamelled in Gold:
But how should you excel? Heroic Dame,
And gain unto your self an endless Fame,
Not only by your Virtues morally,
As Justice, Prudence, Temperance, Chastity,
But by a pious and a zealous Flame,
Which shall in Sion ever fix your Name:
Do, noble Lady! By thy Zeal excel,
And Earth will scarce afford Thy Parallel.
Her Acrostiche.
E xcellent Lady, in your form I see,
L ively delineate the Graces three,
I nriching you with Virtues from above,
Z eale, Meekenes, Piety, Faith, Hope, and Love:
A dorning your fair Soul, and beauteous Mind,
B eyond all Trimmes which we on Earth do find:
E xcell you do indeed most of your Kind:
T hy Uertues and rare Parts do well descry,
H eaven of his gifts has not dealt nigardly.
C ome all ye Shepherds, all that are (with speed)
E xcellent, or with Pipe, or Oaten Reed;
C ome all ye Muses from Parnassus Hill,
I here invoke Apollo, with his Quill,
L et all these now assist me in her Praise,
L est in the same I linger out my Days.
An Anagramme upon the Name of the beauteous Virgin, the Lady DOROTHEA SYDNEY.
Anagr. THY EYES DO ADORN.
Distichon.
Thy chaste, and modest Eyes, so much adorn,
That Beauties Queen, to thee, is but a scorn.
Illustration.
THe Eyes, they are the beauties of the face,
And of the feature are the only grace,
The bodies light, most pleasant of the sense,
Feeding upon each objects excellence:
The prospect of the soul, which takes pleasure,
Through these Organs to behold the treasure
Of this large Cosmos; where (as well I ween)
We all delight to see, and to be seen:
So that to have a Body without Eyes,
Is like the world sans Phoebus in the skies:
But, not to lose my self, I will return
Unto your Eyes, your Eyes which do adorn.
The baits of Love, from whose enchanting parts,
You conquer, and inchaine the stoutest hearts:
There Love takes fire, and from that train, it steals
Down to the heart, which the Report reveals.
Besides these ornaments (chaste Lady, fair)
Your rose at Cheek, your coral Lip, and Hair,
Your Person, Presence, Virtues, all unite,
In which the greatest Prince may take delight:
In rings by all your Servants, this be worn,
Next to their vanquished hearts ( Thy Eyes adorn.
And let her be adored to the skies.
That is adorned with such All-conquering Eyes.
Her Acrostiche.
D ull world awake, and with thy Dim Eyes look,
O 're all the Beautyes of Dame Natures Book,
R ead till thy Eyes fall out, thou never wilt find,
O ne of so clear a Beauty, clear a Mind.
T ache heed (you flaming Hearts) how you come near,
H er fair, and princely Presence; for I fear
E ach of you will be taken by her Eye,
A nd led into Loves wished Captivity:
SIDNEY (of Endless Fame) whose rare Compile
I nrich'd is with sweet Eloquence, and Style,
D id not so much all other Pens control,
N or so delight the sense, as she the Soul:
E ach Part of her deserves the best of Men,
Y mployed in her Praise, beyond my Pen.
An Anagramme upon the Name of the flourishing Lilly of Virtues field, the
beauteous, ELISABETH FEILDING. Anagr. THY LIFE (AN EB) GLIDES.
Distichon.
Although thy Life (like to an Eb) does glide,
Thy Virtues do aspier like a Tide.
Illustration.
LAdy, the first day of our life, and Birth,
We do begin to dye, and go to Earth;
And here is a Paradox to you I show,
Our Life does Eb Maugre our time does flow:
Less years to less, the more in age we grow,
And yet our days, they cannot backward go;
If Life then be an Eb, and fades swift,
Long Life's a blessing, and a heavenly gift:
The which, for you, my Muse shall e're implore,
That from such noble Stems we may see more
Fair Branches of so high, a well-growne Tree,
To Increase your honored Name, and Pedigree.
Yet she who longest on this Globe abides,
Her Life like thine's ( an Eb) and quickly glides.
Her Acrostiche.
E ven as the Rose, or Lilly of the Field,
L ooks fair and fresh, and fragrant sweets does yield;
I n the full Time, and season of the Year;
S o this pure Lady to her Prime is grown,
A nd (like a Flower) blossomed is, and blown,
B eyond the Beauty which in them appear:
E ven as the Passengers more curious Eye,
T empted by Rose or Fruit as he goes by)
H ath a desire to taste, or pluck the same;
F ull so the noble Youths about the Court,
E nur'd to see such Beautyes here resort;
I f they desire to touch, it is their Flame:
L et then that Flame be quenched in nuptial Fires,
D ear Lady, so may both have their desires:
I n which you are knit, till one by Death expires:
N ow Vesta guard you, till fair Hymen shall
G reet you with Garlands, at Loves Festival.
An Anagramme upon the Name of the Virtuous, and Beauteous Lady, FRANCES
HOVVARDE. Anagr. HER FACE DRAVV'S ON.
Distichon.
Her Face (Loves Seat) is Beauties Paragon,
And (like a Load-star) draws Affection.
Illustration.
HEr lovely form (the beauty of her Face)
Unto the Graces is the only Grace,
The Poets feign, that wheresoever they spy
The Graces three, within one Phis'nomy,
There is perfection; But let them but view
Her sweet complexion, amorous eye, and hue,
Where the fresh, fragrant red Rose, and the white,
In her fair Cheek do mingle with delight,
Her snowy Brow, her Ivory neck, and hair,
Transcending Beauties Queen (who was so fair)
And they will all confess, that they descry
A thousand Graces in her Face, and Eye.
Her Eye, the neast of Cupid, where his Dart
Secretly wounds the Gazers to the heart:
Needs must her Face draw on then, and attract,
Which is so pure, so graceful, and exact,
That Loves beholders (in their ardencie)
Do all adore her for a Deity:
Thus truly we may say, Her Face draw's on,
When all are turned to love, she looks upon.
Her Acrostiche.
F ramed of Earthly Mould (Angelique Fair)
R eason and Sense, begin both to despair
A t thy Diviner Presence; and deny
N ature a share, or in thy Face, or Eye,
C ause they exceed this low Mortality:
E xpresse then that thou art of Humane shape,
S ince Gods in sundry Forms have made Escape.
H eavenly thou seem unto Mortal Sense,
O r if thou Earthly art, it is Exellence,
W here virtues do attend on such a Feature,
A Goddess we may well affirm that Creature.
R are Lady know! your Honor, and Esteem,
D eserves the same which you to us do seem.
An Anagramme upon the Name of the Virtuous, Witty, and Victorious Virgin Lady,
VICTORIA CAREY. Anagr. CARRY A VICTORY.
Distichon.
'Cause you to Virtue ever have an Eye,
Your Actions all are crowned with Victory.
Illustration.
IN your chaste Honor, and your virtuous Fame,
In your rare Wit, which does deserve A Name;
In your sweet Tongue, and language Elegant,
(Which in Discourse no Rhetoric does want)
In your rare Music, Mirth, sweet Voice, and Song,
(Which do A Captive Lovers life prolong)
In your so active Dance, and smoother measure,
(Which fills the Gazers with admiring Pleasure)
In your desires, and in your modest Love,
(To which all Youth do naturally move)
In any thing your honored Worth shall try,
The day be yours, Carry a Victory.
Her Acrostiche,
V ictorious Lady! your so many Parts,
( I n real Truth, repleate with high Deserts)
C onquer the knowing Souls of every one,
T hat see's you come so nigh Perfection:
O still be Victor in your Enterprise,
R aysing your Name, and Fame, unto the Skies,
I n your fair Carriage, Lovely Courtesy,
A n humble Soul in Honors height we spy,
C ausing a Reverence, and humble Knee,
A ttracted by your high Humility,
R are Mirror, in which you your self do see:
E njoy all good on Earth, and when you Dye,
Y mmortall live in endless Victory.
An Anagramme upon the Name of the truly Virtuous, and Happy, Mris. SAPHIA
NEVILL. Anagr. LIVE'S HAPI'N AL.
Distichon.
Where Piety true Virtue does install,
Her Life's a Happy Pilgrimage in all.
Illustration.
HAppy in Birth, and Education,
Happy in Nearness, and Relation
To Sacred Mary, our most gracious Queen,
(Whose Parallel on Earth's not to be seen)
Happy in Choice, Happy in Offspring too,
Happy in all you undertake to do;
Happy in Hopes, and Happy in Supplies,
Happy in Friends, and Happy in Allies:
Happy in Wisdom, Wit, and Government,
Happy in Virtue (Beauties ornament)
Happy in her sweet Carriage, Courtesy,
Esteem, Respect; Honor, and Chastity,
Happy in her Deportment, fair Desert,
(Which every where has gained each virtuous heart)
Here she both Happy lives, and draws sweet Breath,
And doubtless, will be Happy in her Death:
Then Certes we may her most Happy call,
Who (naught exempt) does Happy live in all.
Her Acrostiche.
S ummon the Muses all unto her Name,
A nd when they have (in a Nectarian Flame)
P aus'd on her Uertues, publish in her Glory,
H er real Worth, (which does deserve a Story:)
I n whom is Wisdom, Piety, and Grace,
A chaste white Soul, and a sweet Modest Face.
N o Pride can seize her, no, She Is still the same,
E rst knowing when Pride comes, then comes shame,
V ertue's her Object, Uice her Abject slave,
I n whose black Art, nor thought, nor Act, she will have:
L ooke on her Actions, with impartial Eye,
L oe then a Mortal Saint you will descry.
FINIS.

