RAVVLEIGH HIS GHOST. Or, A Feigned Apparition of Sir Walter Rawleigh, to a
friend of his, for the translating into English, the Book of Leonard Lessius
(that most learned man) entitled, De prouidentia Numinis, and Animi
immortalitate: written against Atheists, and Politicians of these days.

Translated by A. B.

Quae haec summa delicti, nolle illum agnoscere, quem ignorare non p^^^is?

Cyprian. l. de Idolorum vanitate. Permissu Superiorum. M. DC. XXXI.

THE APPARITION to his Friend.
DEAR Friend, whom I much prized, whiles my soul was invested with Flesh,
and my Body enjoyed the Air, which now thou breathest. My Spirit is, at this
time, permitted by the Almighty to appear to thee, to entreat a Boon, or
Favor. Thou well know, that the World (whose dialect is ever delivered in
the black notes of Obloquy and Reproach,) has at sundry times, cast a foul,
and most unjust aspersion upon Me, for my presumed denial of a Deity. From
which abominable and horrid crime, I was ever most free. And not any man now
living, better knows the same, the^ thy self, in whose presence (if thou
do remember) I was often accustomed highly to praise and esteem the Book
of Lessius, written in proof of the being of a Deity, and entitled, De
prouide^tia Numinis.

Since then, that Treatise even frustrateth with shame and consusion, all the
impugners of so illustrious and evident a Principle (Charactered in our Souls
by Gods own seal;) therefore my humble, and earnest request is, that thou
would take the pains to translate the said treatise into English; and let
the Title bear my Name, that so the Readers, may acknowledge it, as done by my
solicitation. In the performance of which labor (besides the accomplishme^t
of my desire herein) thou payest some small Tribute of that Homage to him who
gave thee and me our Being: In ipso enim viuimus, mou^mur, and sumus. So
wishing thee true felicity, and the world more charity in its Censures, I am in
have to leave thee, since my Spirit is not suffered to stay any longer upon
earth; but must return with speedy wing, to the place from whence it came.

The Ghost of W. Rawleigh.

THE TRANSLATOVR to the Reader.
COURTEOUS Reader, seeing the iniquities of these days are such, that diverse
men there are, of so flagitious lives, in their conversation and manners, that
they live as though there were neither God, Heanen, Hell, or any Immortality of
the soul; and it is to be feared, that diverse of the^, are in their secret
judgments so inwardly persuaded: Therefore for the awakening of all such, so
monstrously perverted and blinded, I have taken the pains to translate this
ensuing Treatise, written by the most learned Jesuit Leonard Lessius (a man in
these times of extraordinary talents in learning) wherein by many most
irrefragable argumets is convinced, and proved the Being of a Deity, and, the
Immortality of the Soul.

I have feigned the occasion hereof to be an Apparition of Sir Walter Rawleighs
Ghost, to a living friend, of his, entreating of him to translate the same. My
reason of vsinge this Fiction is, because it is well known, that Sir Walter,
was a man of great Natural Parts, and yet was suspected of the most foul and
execrable crime of Atheism. How truly, God and himself only know; though I
must think the best of him, and the rather in regard of that most excellent,
and learned Description of God, which himself sets down in the first lines
of his History or Cronicle.

Now, in regard of his eminency in the world when he was alive, I am the more
easily persuaded, that the very Name of him (by way of this feigned Apparition,
and the like answerable Title of the Translation) may beget in many an earnest
desire of perufing this Book; and so become the more profitable. I hope for
taking this method, I cannot be justly blamed; for if I have offended any, it
must be Sir Walter himself. But him I have not wronged, since I do vindicate,
and free him from the former blot, as presuming him to be innocent of the
suspected Crime. And thus (good Reader) thou have the reason of this my
proceeding. And so I remit thee to the Treatise it self.

A. B.

THE TABLE OF CHAPTERS.
The first Book, of the Being of a God.
WHO they were, that denied a Deity: and what were the Reasons persuading them
thereto Chap. 1. page 2. 2. That there is one supreme power, by whose
Providence all things are governed; is made evident by many reasons. page 11.
3. The first Reason is taken from the confession of all Countries, and of all
wise men. page 13. 4. The second Reason drawn from the motion of the heavenly
Orbs. page 19. 5. The 3 Reason taken from that, that corporeal substances, and
such as are subject to the eye and sight, cannot have their being by Chance, or
Fortune. page 27. 6. The 4. Reason, from the beauty of things, and the
structure, and composition of the parts, in respect of the whole. page 41. 7.
The 5. Reason drawn from the structure and disposition of the Parts of the
world, with reference to their ends. page 59. 8. The 6. Reason borrowed from
the structure of making of living Creatures, and Plants, with reference to an
end. page 86. 9. The 7. Reason, that all things do work most orderly to a
certain end. page 114. 10. The 8. Reason from the diversity of men's
Countenances and voices, and from the Poverty of Man. page 145. 11. The 9.
Reason, is from Miracles. page 153. 12. The 10. Reason taken from Prophefies.
p. 177. 13. The 11. Reason taken from Spirits. page 206. 14. The 12. Reason,
taken from the absurdities, rising from the contrary doctrine. page, 216. 15.
The 13. Reason drawn from the Immortality of the Soul. page 226. 16. The 14.
Reason taken from diverse examples of divine revenge, and benignity. page 229.
17. The 15. Reason taken from the secret punishing of Blasphemy, Perjury, and
Sacrilege. page 262. 18. The Arguments aswered which are brogh^ against the
being of a Providence, and a Deity. page 276. 19. The second Argument against
the Divine Providence, answered. page 282. 20. The third Argument. page 186.
21. The fourth Argument. page 288. 22. The fifth Argument. page 289.
The second Book.
WHEREIN is proved the Immortality of the Soul. Chap. 1. page 296. 2. The
first Reason, proving the souls Immortality. page 303. 3. The second Reason
proving the same. p. 303 4. The third Reason. page 305. 5. The fourth Reason.
page 307. 6. The fifth Reason. page 308. 7. The sixth Reason. page 309. 8. The
seventh Reason. page 313. 9. The eight Reason. page 316. 10. The ninth Reason.
page 317. 11. The tenth Reason. page 320. 12. The eleventh Reason. page 321.
13. The twelth Reason. page 325. 14. The 13. Reason. page 326. 15. The 14
Reason. page 328. 16. The 15. Reason. page 330. 17. The 16. Reason. page 339.
18. The 17. Reason. page 343. 19. The 18. Reason. page 362. 20. The 19. Reason.
page 368. 21. The 20. Reason. page 375. 22. The 21. Reason. page 377. 23. The
22. and last Reason. page 382. 24. The Arguments objected against the
Immortality of the soul, and their solutions or Answers. page 388. 25. Of the
Punishments of the life to come, out of holy Scripture. page 413. 26. The
Conclusion. page 441.
THE PREFACE of the Author.
IN this Treatise following we undertake to discuss two questions: The first
is touching a divine power; to wit, whether there be any divine power or God,
who with his providence sterneth, and governs man's affairs, and demands an
account of his actions after this life. The other, concerns the Soul of man,
that is, whether it be immortal, or perishes and is* utterly extinguished
with the body: Points worthy to be disputed of, most claborately and
succinctly; since of all things whatsoever, which become the object of our
understanding, these are most necessary to be known. And touching the first*
supposing that there were no God (of who^ this whole Universe and all
negotiations of man were to be governed) but that all things, either by a
certain force of nature, or casual concourse of causes had their events; then
should we be freed of great fear for the things to come, and might securely
and without all impunity do whatsoever were best pleasing to our own
dispositions. For then no man were obliged to yield an account (after the death
of the body) for things done in his life time; no man for his sins should
hereafter be punished; neither should any reward attend the faithful and
veriuous. Finally, neither of what comportment, carriage, and conversation a
man is, should it be (after the dissolution of the body from the soul) either
prejudicial, or beneficial unto him. Since sin then, should be nothing, but
a certain aerie, imaginary, and a false conceit, of a law violated, and a
divine power offended.

But now, once acknowledging that there is a God (through whose providence and
prescience all things are guided and measured) then it ineuitably follows,
that we ought greatly to fear and reverence him, and be most cautelous, and
wary, that we do not infringe his laws and sa^ctions; Since it is most
certain, that he will exact an account after this life, and will inflict due
punishments upon sinners. For it is a point principally iucumbent and belonging
to a governor, to give a just retaliation and retribution to men, recompensing
their enormities and vices with punishments, and their virtues with honors and
rewards. All kinds of Gouerments, as well of the worser sort, whether they be
Tyrannical, Oligarchicall, and Democratical, as of the better, as
Monarchical, Aristocratical, or Political, or any other kind of Regiment
compounded of these, do unanimously confirm and warrant this assertion. For it
is most evident, that all these have ever set down rewards and punishments,
grounding themselves upon these, as upon certain foundations, without the
which they cannot in any sort subsist or continue Therefore admitting that
there ought to be proposed both rewards and ch^^tis^en^s, thereby to debar men
from vice* and incyte them to virtue; It also follows, that this divine power
is mightily to be feared, of al me^, least they do ^^^urre his (...), and least
they purchas^ to themselves his just revenge. For no man is able to resist him;
no man of power to avoid his power; to be short, no man there is, which lives
not within the bou^d^ o^ his dominatio^.

Wherefore every one is chiefly to be most circumspect, that he does not deny
the existence and being of this power, and that he seek not to bepr^ue it of
providence in the disposal of the world, and of all things comprehended
therein; except it evidently aforehand can be euicted by conuincing and solid
reasons, that no such Divinity or Power there is; but that the being thereof is
suggested and supposed out of a humane conceit, only for Policy sake: for in
the intertaining a rash conceit hereof, a man exposes himself to the
perpetrating of the greatest offense that can be imagined, since gra^ting the
being of such a Deity, the denyers thereof stand culpable of a most heinous
blasphemy, and of spiritual treason against so great a Matesty: for as that
subject extremly wrongeth his King, who^ he denies to be King, or his kingdom
to be subject unto him; though this his denial be grounded upon some outward
shows of probability: Even so, who auerreth the not being of a supreme power
(by the which the world and the things therein are ruled) commits a most
heinous crime against God, and rests guilty of the highest disloyalty against
so powerful a Deity, though otherwise he may seem to shadow such his
blasphemy under the tecture of some weak and feeble reasons. Which point being
so, what then remains for such a man to expect, then a most heavy revenge to
be inflicted upon him, for his dentall of so sovereign, and so supreme a Power.

Now then, from this it appears, how absolutely necessary to man is the
indubious and certain confession and acknowledgment of the being of a God. And
indeed the knowledge of the condition and nature of man's soul is not much
less to be searched after: for if it could be proved that the Soul of man
were mortal (as the soul in beasts is) the^ should we not need to stand in
fear of what hereafter might fall upon us; but we might securely lead a
carcles and pleasurable life. best ^or^ing to our own desires and sensuality.

Now, if the contrary hereto shall be demonstrated to be most true (as infallibly
it will) the^ have we reason to be m^st anxious, fearful and sollicitous,
least by our wicked life, and Conversation our soul after death may i^curre
most dreadful and eternal torments. Of both these points I discourse in this
treatise; to wit, in the first book of the Being of a God and a supreme divine
power. In the second of, the Souls Immortality. The contemplation of both
which is most gratfull pleasing, and comfortable For the presence of a Deity
and his providence wonderfully sh^neth both in the whole fabric of the world,
and in the creatures contained therein; as also in the most wise disposal and
government of the same things. The Immortality of the soul is made
demonstrable by force of many irrefragable and conuincing arguments. Both these
shall be disputed off, with as much breui^y and perspicuity, as possible I can;
omitting diverse curious and subl^me points, which might otherwise serve to
en^a^gle the Reader, and to divert his judgment from the principal scope
intended by me; since my desire herein i^* that what is here undertaken, may
not be performed out of any idle ostentation, and vanity, but only for the
spiritual fruit and benefit of the studious Reader.

SIR WALTER RAVVLEIGH HIS GHOST.
Of the being of a Divine power, or God; and of his Providence. LIB. I.
IN the first place here, I will recall to light the names of such of the
ancient Authors who have denied a Deity, or a Divine power, by the which the
affairs of men are governed; and will produce the chiefest arguments used by
them herein. Secondly, I will set down the contrary sentence impugned by the
former Men; and will fortify it with many conuincing and unanswerable arguments
or demo^strations. Thirdly, I will answer, and satisfy the Reasons urged by
the adversaries party.

WHO THET WERE, THAT Denied a Deity: and what were the reasons persuading
them thereto. CHAP. I.
AMONG the Ancients, some are found, who denying all Divine Power (by the which
the world is governed) did take away al Divinity. Others though granting a
heavenly and supernatural power, did nevertheless deny the providence of the
said power in particular things (and especially in actions proceeding from man's
freewil) moved thereto through a show of some one or other weak reason, which
themselves were not able to answer. Those who absolutely denied a Deity were
but few, of whom the chief were Diagoras Milesius, and Protagoras Abderites
(both being scholars of Democritus, and Theodorus commonly called the Atheist
(being a most impure and impudent Sophister). To these may be adjoined Bion
Boristhenites (Scholar of Theodorus) of whom we may read in Suidas in his
Lexicon, and Laertius l. 2 and 9. de vitis Philosophorum. With these former may
be also marshalled Lucian the scorner of all divine powers, and the bitter
enemy of Christians, who for his impiety was torn asu^der with dogs, as Suidas
witnesses. Pliny also is to be ranged among the foresaid Atheists; who in his
second book c. 7. doubts, whether besides the Sun (which he calls the
chiefest governor, and Numen of Nature) there were any other power, or any
other God; for these are his words, Quisquis est Deus etc. Whosoever that God
is (if any such be) he is in every part, whole sense, whole sight, whole
hearing, whole soul, whole mind, and finally whole in himself: and after
refuting the Gods of the Gentiles, he further says: Deus est etc. He is said to
be a God, who helps others, and this is the way to purchase eternal glory.
This path the worthy and noble Romans did tread, and in this Vespasian^s
Augustus, the most eminent governor in all ages, walked with his children,
always supporting the decaying state of men. And that such men should be
ranged and marshalled in the number of Gods, was the most ancient manner of
showing thankefulnes and gratitude to men well deserving. And then after* the
said Author further writes: It is to be laughed at, to say, That that chief,
and supreme power (whatsoever it is) has any solicitude or care of humane
things; for may we not then well believe, that then it follows, that the said
Numen, or Divine power should be contaminated and defiled with so w^arisome,
and so multiplicious a charge and negotiation?

Now Democritus, Heraclitus, Epicurus, and Lucretius acknowledging a Numen or
divinity, denied only all providence of the said power; since they maintained,
that al things did happen either by force of Nature (as Lactantius shows l.
2. de ira Dei. c. 9. and 10.) or else by the casual concourse and meeting of
infinite Atomi, as is evidently gathered out of Lucretius: and according to the
judgment of some, Aristotle is auerred to be of the said opinion, who in the
12. book of his Metaphysics cap. 9. writes, that it is an absurd thing, that
prima Men's, the first mind (for so he calls God) should have a care of some
things; and more ^itting it were, that he should not see such things, as see
them. Yet the contrary hereto he intimates in the tenth book of his Ethics
cap. 8 in regard whereof I hold him rather to be freed from that imputation,
then otherwise. Cicero in his second book de diuinatione, takes away all
prescience and foreknowledg of things to come, especially of things depending
on the freedom of man's will; and his reason is, in that he thinks this
foreknowledge carries with it a necessity of the event of things: upon which
ground he also denies all divination and providence. Among men of later times
many may be found denying the Divinity it self, but few who deny only the
foreknowledge of the said divinity: for the reason of Providence or
foreknowledge is so inseparably joined with the divinity, as that they cannot
(in the eye of clear judgment) be divided asunder; for how impotent and weak
should that God be, who were ignorant of those things, which even to us are
become clear and evident? And how imperfect and narrow an understanding should
he have, that could not attend to all things, which do fall out in the world?
Therefore it is wisely pronounced by S. Austin Lib. 5. de ^^uit. cap.
in a certain place against Cicero: To confess that there is a God, and
withal to deny that he is prescious, or foreknowing of things to come, is
extreme madness. Therefore either preference and providence is to be admitted,
or else all divinity is to be rejected.

Although at this day there be many who deny in their secret judgments all
divine power and Deity, yet are they not much known to the world; since the
fear of the laws does impose silence to these kind of men, and only secretly
among their familiars they do vomit out their Atheism. The errors in Religion
(since all such wicked doctrines do finally propend and incline to Atheism)
have given great occasion hereof: for once departing from the true religion*
man's understanding finds nothing, wherein it may firmly and securely rest;
and then the understanding reflecting it self thereon, instantly falls to
doubt of the whole mystery of all religion; as if it were a thing forged only
out of policy* that so under the tecture and pretext of a Divine power, the
people may the more easily be contained within the limits and bounds of their
duties. And hence it proceeds that among Heretics, such as are of sharper
wits do inwardly doubt of all relig^on, and either deny, or at least rest
uncertain, whether there be any divine and supernatural power at al* being
thus prepared to entertain any religion, so far forth as it forteth to the
augmentation and increase of their temporal estates. These men be commonly
called Politicians, in that they subject all religion to policy, and
consequently by how much the more any religion is conducing to the bettering of
their political and temporal estate; by so much it is by the^ more esteemed
and practiced. Among these men Nicholas Machiauel has gained the chiefest
place, as appears out of his books written in the Italian tongue, and
particulerly of that entitled de Principe, which at this day is read by many.

The chief reasons, whereupon this opinion is grounded, are these following:
If there were any Divine power, by the which the world were governed, then
would it follow, that improbity, wickedness, and cruelty should not prevail so
much, as now it does: neither should it have so prosperous success and event,
nor should it oppress and betrample with wrong the virtuous and innocent, as
we find that in all ages it has done; seeing it belongs, and is peculiarly
incumbent to the office of a Governor, not to suffer the wicked to rule and
sway much, but to chastise them with diverse punishments; thereby not only to
cause them to cease from afflicting the virtuous; but also by amending their
manners, to affect and prosecute a virtuous life. And for example hereof, let
us suppose any one City, the which the worst and most wicked me^ do daily
govern, who without any fear of laws commit rapyne upon the goods of their
neighbors, do violate and desile the beds of others, and without restraint do
satisfy their lusts in all things; who would say that this City e^ioyed a
Governor that is wise and provident? Wherefore since in the whole world there
is such disturbance of order that we can hardly conceive a greater perturbation
then it i^, to wit, the religious worshippers of God to be oppressed, to endure
extreme want and other calamities, to live in a despicable and contemned state
of life, and finally most miserably to die; and on the contrary side, the wicked
to govern and sway all, to live affluently and abundantly in all riches, to
insult over the virtuous, to wallow in sensuality, and lastly to have a quiet
end and death. Now who would here think (says the Atheist) that Providence (by
the which all things are dispensed, and given in an even measure) should have
any presidency, or power in the unequal disposal of these worldly affairs?
For from this (...), and want of order, and from this confusion of things, the
former men did conjecture, that there was no supreme governor, which had any
care in the dispensatio^ of temporal business. This argument is the chiefest for
the strengthing of this most wicked assertion, which prevailed much, not only
with some of former ancient times, but also with diverse in our days.

Secondly, they object, that it is evident even by experience it self; that
men's negotiations and business receive their success (for the most part)
answerable to the industry and endeauours employed in them, and not according
to the right and equity of the matter; hence (say they) it proceeds, that many
waging most iniust wars have obtained the victory, either because they were
more numerous and powerful in souldiers^, or in that they were more industrious
and painful in their designments. In like sort such men, as maintain unlawful
suites, do oftentimes by periuryes and false witnesses purchase the sentence of
the Judge. Finally, we find, that men's own industry and laboriousnes does much
more predominate and rule over all their mutual commercements, then the
providence or influence of any higher cause. Al which observations may seem to
intimate, that there is no superior Divine Power, governing and moderating
men's actions; but that every one is lest to his own particular providence, and
watchfullnes.

Thirdly, we see that things consisting of nature, do ever proceed after one
and the same manner, keeping one immovable course and order. Thus the Sun
ever ryseth and sets and runs the same circles, occasioning with his
approach, the Spring and Su^mer; with his departure, the Autumn and Winter: in
like sort things natural do grow and after decay or dye, still one thing
begetting another without cessatio^ or end, to the perpetuating of the same
species or kind, which is a sign that all things are governed by the force of
Nature, and that there is no other higher power, then Nature her self, by the
which all these things are effected.

Fourthly, we observe that man is first begotten, formed in his mothers womb,
borne, increases, comes to his full groth or vigor, grows old and dies after
the same manner, as other more perfect living creatures do, and that he
consists of the said members and organs; therefore there is the like end of
ma^s life, as of other creatures; and as they do utterly perish away after
death, s also does man.

Lastly, if there be any supreme spirit, or divine nature, it is credible, that
it does not intermedle with man's affairs, nor busieth it self with things
done among us. First because, this seems unworthy the majesty of so great a
Deity; for as a mighty Monarch does not trouble himself with the particular
actions of his Citizens, workmen, or bond-slaues, little regarding what they
say, think, or do, as houlding the care of such small matters to be an
indignity to his regal state: In like sort, Men scorn the labor and business
of Ants or flees, as not regarding their policy or course they hold. But now
in reference and comparison to that supreme power, we men are far less
inferior then the Ants. Furthermore, seeing that Divinity is perfectly blessed,
containing all sufficiency within it self, and seeking nothing, that is
extrinsecall or external; why then should it be sollicitous and careful of
our Actions? Finally the former point seems true, in regard, that by the
means of humane things (howsoever they happen) there is neither any more near
approach or further distance from the said Deity. Other Arguments to prove the
same (then are here alleged) I find none; and these former arguments are
answered and solued in the five last Chapters of this first book.

THAT THERE IS ONE SVPREME Power, by whose Providence all things are governed;
is made evident by many reasons. CHAP. II.
BUT the contrary sentence of this point is to be acknowledged and set down,
as an inexpugnable verity; to wit, that there is a supreme Divine Power, by
whose providence and wisdom all things (both humane and others) are governed,
and this power we call God. Now this truth is not to be believed only by force
of divine revelation, but also is made most evident by many reasons and
demonstrations, which are most obuious and familiar unto us, and are to be
apprehended even by our senses. For although a divine nature or divinity, in
respect of it self is altogether invisible, notwithstanding there appear so
many perspicuous notes and prints thereof in sensible things so many footsteps
every where; finally so many sparcles of this light or splendor are shining in
every thing, as that who will diligently insist in the co^templation of them,
cannot possibly doubt either of the being of a God, or of his Providence.

Fourteen or fifteen reasons do occur to me, from which this truth
receaueth its proof, or rather demonstration, which I will briefly here
explicate, to wit: first, from the general confession of all Countries, and
wisemen. 2. From the motions of the heavens. 3. From that, that things
corporal and subject to sight, cannot receive their first being from
themselves. 4. From the pul^hr^^ude and beauty of things and from the structure
and position of parts in respect of the whole. 5. From the structure of the
parts of the world, in reference to their end. 6. From the structure and
position of parts in living Creatures, and plants, in reference also to their
ends. 7. From that, that the actions and operations of all things, most
directly and orderly tend to their end. 8. From the great diversity of faces
and countenances of men, and of their voices; as also from the poverty, and
penury, wherein the greatest part of the world are borne. 9. From Miracles. 10.
from the predictious and supernatural revelations of things most hidden and
secret. 11. From Spirits. 12. From the direction and government of Manners and
life. 13. From the immortality of the soul. 14. From diverse examples of
supernatural revenge, and benignity, or favor. 15. From the punishments
suddenly, and visibly inflected upon blasphemers, sacrilegious persons, and
periurers.

THE FIRST REASON IS TAKEN from the Confession of all Countries, and of al wise
men. CHAP. III.
AS much as we may be instructed by History, al Countries (whether barbarous or
professing learning) have in all ages maintained a divine and supernatural
power to be, which does know and govern al our actions, which undertakes the
charge of us, to whom in dangers, pressures, and afflictions we are to have
recourse, and from whose hand rewards for welld^ing, and chasticements or
punishments for wicked actions are to be expected. So did the Jews believe,
the Egiptians, Ethiopians, Assyrians, Chaldeans, Grecians, Romans, Germans,
French, Indians, the people of China, Iaponians, Tartarians, and all others,
not only after, but also before Christ's coming. Of the truth of which point
this is one manifest sign, to wit, in that all these had their religions,
their ceremonies, their temples, and their Priests instituted for the
worshipping of a divine Power. To this Power also they made their prayers and
vows, offered up their sacrifices and gifts, and diverse ways labored to
appease, and pacify the wrath of the said Deity. Therefore it follows, that
they all ascribed to this Power, Providence; assuring themselves, that it took
notice of their actions, that it was able to defend them, to free them from
dangers, to imparte to them things which they desired, and to take revenge for
injuries: since otherwise they should pray, and offer up sacrifices to it in
vain, if it knew not our estates nor intermingled it self with our estates,
nor took care for us. And hence it follows, that this opinion of a Deity is
not entertained only by force of Tradition, but is planted in the minds of al,
even by nature her self. For although all do not agree, whether the
supernatural power be one or many; corporal and bodily, or incorporall;
finite, or infinite and immense; yet all conspire in this point, that there was
a certain supreme intelligence, or Divinity, which is to be adored and
worshipped, as even Cicero ( Lib 1 de Leg.
) witnesses, saying: Among men there is no country so barbarous, or of so iron
and hard a disposition, which does not acknowledge, that there is a God, though
they be ignorant, what this God should be. Which Orator also in another (
Denatura Deo^^^^.
) place speaking of the said point says, hoc omnibus est innatum and
insculptum etc. This thing (to know that there is a God) is connaturall to all,
and even engraven in their souls. Now if the acknowledging of this point be
incident to all by nature, then it ineuitably follows, that it cannot be
false: for nature never planeth in the mind any assent of falsehood, but only of
truth (since otherwise she should be wicked, and should pervert the
understanding and reason) for Truth is the right state, and as it were the
health of the understanding; whereas falsehood is a deprauation, and a bad or
vicious distemperature of the same: but the Evil, and Vice of any thing
proceeds not from the inclination of nature (but ever against the natural
propension of it;) therefore an universal assent in the understanding of what
is false, never takes it origin, and first being from nature.

I further add, if it should not be true, that there is a God; the^ should it
be not only false, but also altogether (...), and impossible, as implying an
irreconciliable contradiction; for if at this present there be not a God, or
that he has no providence of our estates, then is it altogether impossible,
and inuolueth in it self a plain contradiction, to say, that ever at any time
he was, or that ever he had any Providence. For as Aristotle, and all
Philosophers teach: In diuinis idem est esse actu, and posse esse; non esie
actu, and esse impossible. In things that are divine, it is all one, the same
actually to be, and to have a power to be; as also actually not to be, or
exist, and to be impossible to be. But how is it credible, that, that which is
not only false, but also altogether impossible, should be so believed among all
nations, and should be so engrafted in the mynds of every man, as that all men
in all places should (without any external help of instruction therein)
entertain and believe the same with a unanimous and general consent and
approbation? And here is discovered the force of this verity, which is so
potent, and has such a secret agreement and sympathy with man's understanding,
as that it is able even to invade and possess (and this without any coaction
or constraint) the minds of all. And of this, here is an evident sign, in
that al countries in sudden and unexpected dangers (without any deliberation
at all) do recurre and fly to God, imploring his help and assistance, saying:
O God succor me, O God help me, O God have mercy on me etc. Again, in that
all nations believe, that God knows al things, and is able to do any thing,
they upon this acknowledged ground, do pray for favor for their friends, and
revenge against their enemies, as Tertullian elegantly shows in his book De
Animae testimonio.

And although the truth of this doctrine be not in it self so acknowledged and
evident to all, as none can contradict the verity, yet it is so agreeable to the
light of reason, and so probable, as that the mind of man is instantly ready to
give assent thereto, and the tongue prepared to confess the same; and all this
through a secret instinct without any precedent deliberation: from whence it
appears that hitherto never any man denied this verity, but only such, whose
natural judgment, through some false and weak reason, or through the
perverseness of his phantasy was mightily corrupted, and as it were darkened
with the mist of an erroneous imagination; no otherwise, then sometimes it
falls out, that some men have denied things, as were most evident to their
senses: so Zeno denied motion, and Democritus, rest; this later maintaining,
that nothnig was permane^t, but al things were in a continual flux and
mutability, and that the world did daily grow, and daily decay. Thus we find,
that nothing is so absurd, which may not to a depraved judgment seem consonant
to Reason; and so were the faculties of those few Philosophers mynds infected,
who denied a Divinity, or Providence, as above we said: Notwithstanding it is
not to be regarded, what some one or other do teach herein, but their reasons
whereupon they ground so an absurd assertion, are to be weighed, which indeed
are found to be most frivolous, weak, and inconsequent, as hereafter we will
show.

To the common judgment of al Contrie^s and nations herin, we may adioyne the
like sentence and judgment of all most learned Philosophers, who ever
flourished in any place or time: Since al these most co^fide^tly ever
maintained a Deity and Providence, as Augustinus Eugubinus in his work de
perenni Philosophia, largely shows. Thus did the Patriarchs teach, the
Prophets, and all the wise men among the Jews; thus the Priests among the
Egyptians, the Magi among the Chaldeans, the Gymnasophistae among the Indians
the Druides among the French, and the chief sects of Philosophers among the
Grecians; to wit, the Pithagoreans, the Platonickes, the Stoics, and (as
Eugubinus proves) the very Academians. I here omit the most excellent
se^tences of this point, which are frequetly found in Trismegistus, Orpheus,
Museus, Homer, Hesiod, Pindarus, Sophocles, Plato and the Platonicks, Seneca,
Plutarch, and who^ if any be desirous to see, let him peruse the foresaid
mentioned Author.

This opinion therefore of confessing a Deity, and Providence is fortified with
the authorities of al countries, al ages, all religions, all rites and
ceremonies of divine worship, al Priests al Prophets, al discipline of Magi and
Wise men, and all the more remarkable Philosophers of al nations; and finally it
is warra^ted by the force of nature which has imprinted this truth at his very
birth in ma^s soul.

Therefore what madness and blyndnes of mind it is (for some few weak and
sleighty reasons) to embrace the contrary opinion? Since this is nothing else,
but to prefer and advance a man's own private judgment above the judgment of
the whole world and of all times, and to venditate himself for more wise (as
enjoying a more searching and penetrating brain) then any other man living.
Therefore the Atheists do herin discover their wonderful folly, and
insupportable pride, which thus has enchanted them.

THE SECOND REASON DRAWN FROM the motion of the heavenly Orbs. CHAP. IIII.
IN this next place I will allege certain Philosophical reasons or arguments,
and such as are evident and clear to the understanding; pretermitting the more
obscure, which be taken out of the Metaphisicks. First then we see the heanenly
bodies to be carried about in their Orbs with a most rapid and swift motion.
Now this motion cannot have it beginning from any force of nature impressed in
the heavens, neither from any corporal cause; therefore it proceeds from some
intelligent and spiritual substance, and this substance is God. That it does
not rise from any natural inclination of the heavens, is manifest; since
things which are moved by a propension of nature, direct their motion unto some
one end, the which end once obtained, they cease from further motion, and then
do rest, and are co^serued. Thus al sublunary bodies enjoy a power and force to
move, that if chance they be taken from their natural place, they strive by
motion to return thereto; and being returned do there rest, and quietly enjoy
their own being. For all things, which stand obnoxious and subject to
corruption are preserved in their own natural place; but being out of it,
they perish, languishing (as it were) away and loosing their state of nature.
And there is no body, which has an inclination to motion, so, as it still
moves without end, and never attaynes to its period, and desired place of rest:
for as the Philosophers teach, Motus est quidda^ ^^perfectum, ^^pote via ad
terminum. Motion is a thing imperfect in it self, as being but only away or
passage to an end, or rest. But there is nothing, which covers to be ever in
its way or journey (as I may call it) but all things desire to hasten to their
terminus, or end, and there to repose and rest. Wherefore we may necessarily
conclude from the premises, that seeing the motion of the heavenly Orbs does not
tend, nor is directed to any terminus, or end, where it may find rest and
quiet, that therefore this motion flows not from any inclination of nature,
as the motion of all in animate things do, which we see in this world. This
point is further confirmed from that, that every natural inclination to motion
is directed to the good of the subject or body, which is moved: to wit, that
the body may obtain thereby its perfection and conservation, and is not
directed to the good or benefit of other bodies: for every particular thing
has therefore a force and propension to move, that by such a moving, it may
obtain that place, which is most agreeable to its nature, and so may firmly
place it self, and rest there, and not that by a motion it may benefit other
bodies. But now the motion of the heavenly Orbs brings no perfection at all
to the Orbs, or to those other heavenly bodies (for what does that continual
rolling about of the Orbs profit, or advantage the Sun, or the other stars?)
but is only beneficial to the inferior bodies, whiles by this motion it
carries their virtues and influences throughout the compass of the whole
Orbs; and so by distributing them, causes all things to receive vegetation,
life, increase, perfection, and conservation. Therefore it is most evident,
that this motion of the heavens proceeds not from any secret inclination of
nature in them: for those celestial Orbs cannot apprehend or conceive their
motion to be profitable to this inferior world; that out of such a charitable
cogitation and thought (forsooth) they should thus incessantly move and turn
about: for so to apprehend and reflect upon the profit of another, is peculiar
to a mind and intelligence endued with reason. From all which it is necessarily
euicted and inferred, that there is some most powerful spirit or intelligence,
which first conceived this profit in its mind, and by reason of the said profit
first ordained and tempered this motion, of which spirit it ever depends and
is governed. Furthermore the great variety of the heavenly motions does
sufficiently demonstrate, that they proceed not from nature, whose inclination
is ever simple and uniform. For besides their motion from the East to the west
upon the Poles of the world (which is common to all the Orbs) several Orbs
of every Planet enjoy a proper motion from the West to the East, upon a
different Axis, or Pole, a different way, and with different celerity. The Orb
of Saturn perfecteth its course almost in 30. years. The Orb of Jupiter in
12 years, of Mars about 2. years, of the Sunue in one year, of Venus in one
year, of Mercury almost in like space, of the Moon in 27. days, and 6.
hours. Behold here the great diversity. Neither is the point here lessened,
if in place of the motion of the Planets to the West, we suppose their motion
to the East (though somewhat slower) according to the judgment of some;
because even granting this supposal, yet the same variety is observed, the same
difference of motion, and the same sympathy, agreement, and proportion.

Again, the Planets sometimes are more near to the earth, other times more
remote and distant; now they are stationarij, then directi, and after
retrogradi: to the demonstration of which points are invented the Eccentrick
Circles, and the Epicycles.

Furthermore many other observations in the Heavens most wonderful and
unknown for somany ages to all antiquity* are lately discovered by the help
of a Perspectiue glass invented by a certain Batauia^. As for example, that
the body of the moon is spongious, consisting of some matter resembling little
locks of woll; that the star of Venus does increase and decrease in light like
the moon, crooking it self into horns, as the moon does; and when it Orb is
full of light, it is not opposed diametrically to the Sun, as the Moon is,
but is in small distance from the Sun: from which observation it may seem to
be necessarily inferred, that the star of Venus is carried in a huge Epicycle
about the Sun; so as it is sometimes far higher then the Sun, other times
much lower. In like sort by the former instrument there are observed, about the
star of Jupiter 4* small stars, sometimes going before, sometimes following
Jupiter: at one time they all appear, at another time but some of them, and at
a third time other some; from whence also we may gather that the said stars
do move in little Epicycles about the star of Jupiter. Again, in the body of
the Sun there appear certain spots, which notwithstanding do not ever
retain one and the same place in the Sun, but daily change their situation;
and at one time they appear more in number, at another fewer. From which it is
easily gathered, that these spots do not inhere in the body of the Sun, but
are little stars, which interpose themselves between the Sun and our
sight, and are moved in Epicycles about the body of the Sun. I my self have
often observed these varieties, with wonderful admiration of the wisdom and
power of God; who has disposed the course of the stars with that stupendous
art and skill, as that they are in no sort subject to the apprehension of man's
understanding. I here omit the infinite multitude of Stars, which (being
never discovered to the Astronomers until this time) are by the help of the
foresaid instrument most distinctly seen in the Heavens.

To conclude, in the eight Sphere (wherein the fixed Stars are) there is
observed a triple motion. The first from the Fast to the West, absoluing its
whole course in 24. hours. The second from the West to the East, which is
thought to go one degree in a hundred years. The third from the South to the
North, and contrariwise; by force of which motion the beginning of Aries and
Libra of the eight Sphere does descrybe certain small circles about the
beginning of Aries and Libra of the ninth Sphere; which course is perfected in
7000. years. Now, who will maintain, that so multiplicious, and so various a
local motion should proceed from nature, and not from some one most Wise and
Excellent an Understanding or Power, thus governing all the heavens for the
benefit of the sublunary or earthly bodies, and particulerly of man, to whom
the rest are subject and serviceable? Neither conduces it any thing against
our scope, whether it be replied, that these motions are performed by diverse
tra^sient pushes (even as the rolling about of a potters wheel is occasioned
by the Potter) or else by certain stable, firm and permament forces, impressed
in the celestial Orbs (as some do affirm) for by whether means soever it is
caused, it necessarily proceeds from some incorporeall cause endued with a
mind and understanding, and not from any peculiar propension and inclination of
nature. Now this Cause (which with so powerful a hand, and so many ways
turns about the heavenly Orbs) we call God, who either works this
immediately of himself (which is the more probable opinion) or else by the
ministry and help of inferior Spirits, and Intelligences, as many do hold.

THE THIRD REASON, TAKEN FROM that, that Corporal substances, and such as are
subject to the eye and sight, cannot have their being by Chance, or Fortune.
CHAP. V.
IN the whole course of the nature of things, there must needs be some one
cause, of which all therest, in respect of their substance, do depend: and that
we call God. That there is such a cause is proved, in that corporeal and
bodily things do proceed either from themselves, or casually from fortune, or
from some incorporeall cause endued with a mind, understanding and reason. For
never did any Philosopher set down any other efficient cause of the world,
then some of these three; neither can any other cause different from these be
suggested or imagined, except one will say, that this world is produced of
another world, and that other of another, and so still infinitely; which
assertion is in it self absurd, seeing it implies an infinity and interminable
progress and proceeding.

Now, it is manifest, that things have their beginning neither from themselves,
nor from Chance or fortune; therefore it follows necessarily, that they
receive their production and being from some Mind or Spirit endued with reason.

That they proceed not from Chance, to wit, from a casual concourse of
Atomies, or small bodies, as Democritus, Epicurus, Lucretius and some other did
teach, appears both from the structure and form of all things in the world;
as also from the great order and constancy* which is discovered in the motion
of the heavens, and in the function and office of other things: for what man,
that is endued with reason, will be persuaded, that those things, whose making
are accompanied with the fulness of all reason, and in that respect exceeds
the wit of all art and knowledge, should notwithstanding be produced of a mere
casual concourse of Atomies without reason, and without art? Since to say thus,
were as much as to defend, that some one most fair, sumptuous, and stately
palace were not made at all by any artificer with art, but only by a sudden
mingling and meeting together of certain pieces of stones into this curious
and artificial form, fallen from some huge rock of stone, shaken a sunder by
an Earthquake: or that the Annals of Ennius, or Commentaries of Liuy were not
composed by any writer, but by a strange and casual concourse of letters: for
if the parts of the world, and disposition of parts, and the bodies of living
Creatures, and plants (in the making whereof is found all reason, art and skill
in the highest degree) can be produced only by a mere co^course of Atomies
without art and without reason; then by the same reason, why cannot Palaces,
Temples, Cittyes, vestme^ts, books, epistles and the like (in all which is
discovered much less art, skill, and wit then in the former) take also their
making and being from Chance? Therefore, let that foolish absurd opinion of the
concourse of Atomyes be abolished, which seems to be invented to no other
end, then that the maintainers thereof, should not be forced to acknowledge the
world to be governed by divine Providence: against which Providence they had a
mighty auersion; it self of necessity being most formidable and dreadful
Luer. l 1* and 3. Plin. l. 1^^ 7. and l. 7. c. 55.
to a mind wallowing in all wickedness and voluptuousnes, as is evidently
gathered out of Lucretius and Pliny.

That the world and the parts thereof cannot receive their being from
themselves, is no less evident. First among subblunary bodies (as all those
be, which are under the Moon) those which are most perfect (as Man and other
living Creatures) cannot be of themselves; for how can those things receive
their being from themselves, Man and living Creatures.
which need a preparation and concourse of so many causes, that they may be
borne; and so many external helps and furtherrances, that they may live? Or
how can that be of it self, which is extinguished and perished with so great a
facility? Here perhaps it may be replied, that those bodies, which be
Indiuidua, as particular men* are not of themselves, but that the humane nature
in general (as being eternal, or for ever) is of it self: and that the like
may be said of other Species, or kinds of things. But this is spoken
ignorantly; seeing the Species of any creature, or body is not a thing
separated from the Indiuidua (as certain Platonickes dreamed) but does exist
in the Indiuidua; neither has it any esse, or being, in rerum natura, but only
by reason of the Indiuidua. Yea for example, species humana, or the whole kind
of men, is nothing else, but the whole multitude of particular men, which have
been, are, and may be, as they all bear a liknes of nature among themselves.
Now then if Individual and particular Men do depend of another cause, then
must also the whole Species or kind (which is not distinguished a part rei (as
the Philosophers speak) from the Indiuidua) depend also of another cause. This
point is further manifested, in that the whole Species, or kind may utterly be
extinguished or perishd. But what depends not of another, but has it being
only of it self, cannot be extinguished: for what is of it self, did never
begin, but had ever its existency; and therefore cannot cease or desist to be.
That it never begun, is proved, in that what once did begin, sometimes was not,
and therefore it is produced (as the phrase is) a non esle, ad esse, from the
not being of a thing, to the being of the thing it self. Now, a thing cannot
produce or cause it self; and the reason is, because that which does produce,
ought to precede or go before, that thereby it may draw that, which is to be
produced a non esle, ad esse. Therefore whatsoever begins once to be, is
produced of another, and consequently receaueth not it*s being of it self; for
to have its being of it self, is to have its essence without the influxe of
any other efficient cause. Therefore it is auident that what is of it self,
did never begin, and therefore shall never end; and on the contrary side, what
did begin has not its being from it self, but is necessarily produced of
another.

Furthermore, every thing compounded Co^pounded bodies.
of matter and form, cannot be of it self, but necessarily is produed of some
efficient cause, which must dispose the matter, and produce the form, and
join the form to the matter; for the matter neither receaueth those
dispositions, nor the form from its own essence (since they may be separated)
therefore this union of the matter and the form is occasioned by some
extrinsecal cause. The same may be said of every thing consisting of parts, for
seeing the parts are not through any necessity united among themselves, but may
be mutually separated one from another, it must needs follow, that this union
proceeds from some cause, which joined the parts together.

From these premises before, it appears, that also the Elements, (as the
earth, the water, the air, and the fire) are not of themselves, but have some
efficient beginning: for if those things, which are most perfect for their
nature (among these sublunary bodies) have not their being from themselves, but
from some other cause; then much more those bodies which are most imperfect (as
the Elements are) must for their being depend of another: for to be of it
self, and not to depend of another, is a sign of greatest perfection; seeing,
what is thus in nature, is to it self the origin and fountain of all good,
and stands not in need of any thing external. Furthermore the Elements are
not for themselves, but for others; I mean as they are parts of the world, and
as they afford matter to compounded bodies, therefore they have not their being
from themselves; for that Axiom in Philosophy is true, to wit: Quod habet
causam finalem, ad quam ordinetur, habet etiam efficientem, a qua ordinetur.
What has a final cause, to the which it is directed and ordained, the same
has also an efficient cause, by the which it is so ordained; for nothing is of
it self, to the end that it may serve another, but that it may enjoy it self.
Therefore even in this respect, that any thing is, non propter se, sed propter
aliud, not for it own self, but that it may conduce and be serviceable to some
other thing; it follows that the same thing is ordained by some one, which
has intended the good of another. Besides, in that the Elements do enjoy this
or that magnitude or greatness, this place or that place, in respect of the
whole space and place in the world, they receive not this from themselves
(seeing their essence necessarily exacteth none of these circumstances)
therefore they take them from some extrinsecall cause, which appoints to
every one of the Elements their measure or greatness, and their place or
situation. To conclude, the Elements are subject to so many mutations and
changes, and to so great a need of extrinsecall causes, as that in regard
hereof how can it be possibly conceived, that they should be of themselves, or
be at their own fredome and liberty, and in respect of their being not, to
depend of another? These former reasons do convince, that Materia prima Materia
Prima.
(whereof the Philosophers do teach, that all things were first made) has not
its being from it self, but from some other cause. For this Materia prima
either is not distinguished from the Elements (as many ancient Philosophers
did should, who taught that the Elements are mere simple bodies, without
composition of matter or form, and the last subject of all former) or else if
it be distinguished from the^ (as Aristotle with his followers maintained) then
is it far more imperfect then the Elements, as serving but for their matter,
whereof they are made. Therefore seeing this Materia prima is most imperfect and
next to Nothing, being subject to all mutations, and (as it were) a servant to
all natural causes, and being of it own nature deprived of all form, wherewith
to be invested, and borrowing all its perfection from other things, it
therefore cannot have its being of it self, and indepe^dent of all other
causes.

Now then from all this heretofore observed, it follows demonstratiuely, that
no Sublunary body has its being and essence from it self, but that all things
receive their being from some efficient cause.

Now, that this cause is incorporeall and intelligent, or enjoying Reason and
Understanding, appears several ways: first because Materia prima could not
be produced by any corporeal cause; seeing that every action of a corporeal
thing ever presupposes the subject, into the which it is received (as
Aristotle and all Philosophers do teach,) but before Materia Prima was, no
subject can be imagined, seeing it was the first, and (as I may term it) the
deepest, and most fundamental subject. Again, if this Cause were corporeal,
the^ doubtlesly the heavens should be this Cause, since there remains no
other corporeal Cause, to the which it may be ascribed: But the heavens could
not produce this Materia prima, both by reason that the Heavens work not, but
by the mediation of light and influence of the stars, both which qualities
require a subject into the which they may be received; as also because before
this production, the whole space, in which now the Elements are, was void, as
being destitute of any corporeal body; and then it follows, that the heavens
should produce this Materia prima in vacuo, not having any precedent subject
matter to work upon, and therefore should create it of nothing; but this does
transcend the power and force of any corporal nature: Therefore in regard of
this absurdity it follows, that the cause of this Materia prima must be
incorporall and most powerful, as being able to give it an essence and being,
even from nothing.

From which Collection it further follows, that this cause ought to be also
intelligent, as knowing what it does or works; both because every incorporall
substance is intelligent (as the Philosophers teach) as also in that it did not
produce this Materia prima, after a blind and ignorant manner, but with a
certain final intention and determination, to wit, that of it all other
things should be made, and that it should be the subject of all forms. This
point is made further evident, in that to a cause, which is so perfect, high
and potent, the most perfect manner of working is to be given; but the most
perfect manner is by the understanding and the will. Again the same is become
more clear, in that there ought to be contained in the cause all the
perfections of the effect, and this magis emi^^nter, more eminently then is in
the effect; I mean when the cause is of a different nature from the effect.
Wherefore seeing Man's nature (which is endued with reason) and the diverse kind
of living Creatures (which enjoy sense) are the effects of this incorporeall or
spiritual cause, it most consequently may be concluded, that all the
perfection of these (to wit reason and sense) are after an eminent manner
contained in the said cause.

That the heavenly bodies have not their The heavenly Orbs.
being from themselves, appears first from their motions; for if their
motions do depend of some other superior Cause (and that spiritual) as is
before proved, then can it be but acknowledged, that their substance and figure
are produced of the same cause; for who is so void of consideration, as to
think, that that Supreme cause should enter into the world (as into an ample
and maisterles house, whereunto it can pretend no right or title) and should
challenge to it self the government thereof? Can it be thought to be so
impotent, as not to be able to frame to it self (as it were) a proper house of
its own? If this house of the world belong not to this Cause, why then does it
assume the regiment thereof? Or why has it stored this our inferior world
with such opulency and abundance of riches of al kind* as of metals, precious
stones, herbs, trees, birds, fishes, earthly creatures, and all other variety
of things whatsoever?

To conclude, if thou considerest the stupendous power, which this cause
shows in the motions of these celestial Orbs, thou can not doubt, but that
the same Cause is the author of this whole work. For although the Sun be
incomparably greater then the vniuesal^ Globe of the earth and water (as is
euicted from the point of the shadow of the earth, which reaches not to the
Orb of Mars) yea according to the iudment of the Astronomers, the Sun is an
hundred sixty six times greater then the earth and water; notwithstanding the
Su^ne with its whole orb is carried about with such a velocity and swiftnes,
that in compass of one hour it goes in its motion above ten hundred thousand
miles; whereupon it is certain that in the same space of time it equalleth the
compass of the earth in its course above fifty times. Among the fixed stars
there are many which are 50. 70. 90. or 100. times greater then the whole
earth, and (as the Astronomers teach) there is none of them, which is not 18.
times greater then the earth: and yet they are carried about with their whole
Orb with such a swiftnes, as that such stars as are near to the
equinoctial line do move every hour more then 40. millions of miles (every
million being ten hundred thousand) and so in one hour moves more, then comes
to two thousand times the compass of the earth. Now who is he that will not
here fall into an astonishing admiration of his boundles power, who turns
about such vast and immense bodies, with so incomprehensible and impetuous a
celerity? Or what greater prints, or intimations of Omnipotency can be, then
these are? If any one of the stars should be carried about near unto the
earth with the like speed, presently all things would be dissipated and
shiuered asunder: the mountains would be shaken and pulled up, as it were by
the roots, and turned with the earth, and the sea into very dust. The swiftnes
of a bullet shot out of a great piece of ordinance seems great; and yet if one
consider attentively, supposing the bullet to be carried the space of a hundred
hours with one and the same swiftnes, yet would it not go so far as once the
compass of the earth. For experience shows us, that in one minute of an
hour it is carried scarce three miles, therefore in one hour 180. miles, in
an hundred hours 18. thousand miles* which wants of the compass of the
earth, its circu^ference (according to the more true judgment of Astronomers)
being 19. thousand miles, and 80. Wherefore from this we gather, that the Sun
performs a far greater course in one hour, the^ a bullet would do in five
thousand hours. Now the celerity and speed of the fixed stars about the
Equinoctial is forty times greater, then the celerity of the Sun. Therefore
that incorporeal power and virtue, which does so govern and stern the
celestial Orbs, as that it is able to drive them about with such a facility,
with such an incomprehensible velocity, and so long a time without any
slacknes, or wearines, does sufficiently discover it self to be the maker and
Lord of the said heavens, to whose good pleasure they are so serviceable and
obedient; and thus it appears that from whence they receive their most
wonderful motion, from the same cause also they take their nature and being.
Doubtlesly no man who enters into a serious consideration hereof, can be
otherwise persuaded; seeing there cannot be a greater argument and sign, that a
body is not of it self, but depends of another, then to show, that it
enjoys not it self, but is made serviceable and obedient to another.

The same point is also proved from the consideration of the diversity of the
parts, whereof these Orbs do consist. For seeing these are altogether distinct
in themselves, and have different qualities, they could never meet altogether
for the making up of one and the same Orb, except there were some higher
power, which did unity the said parts, distributing to every one of the^ their
place, their magnitude, their measure, proprieties, and influences. And this is
further confirmed, in that this different situation and disposition of parts,
whereby (for example) this Sarre is in this place of the Orb, that star in
another place etc. is not of the essence of them (nether does it necessarily
flow from their essence) therefore it proceeds from some extrinsecall cause
so disposing them.

THE FOVRTH REASON, FROM THE beauty of things, and the structure and
composition of the parts, in respect of the whole. CHAP. VI.
THE very beauty of things, which consists in a due proportion of parts, both
among themselves, and with refere^ce to the whole, manifestly shows that
there is one most wise mind or intelligence* which first conceived, weighed,
measured and conferred with himself all these proportions; and then after
externally produced them out. When we see any magnificent and sumptuous
palace, wherein a most precise proportion and symmetry of parts is observed,
so as nothing which belongs to the exact skill of architecture is there
wanting; no man doubts, but that the same was builded by some one or other
most artificial architect. How then ca^ any one call into question, but that
this world first had a most excellent and wise artificer and workman? seeing
the parts thereof are so perfect, and disposed, and conjoined together with
such an exact proportion and sympathy, and whose beauty is such, as that it is
therefore called (...), which signifies adorning, beauty, or comlines.

The heaven being extended above, like unto a vast and most large vault,
covers and imcompasseth all things, least they be severed and dispersed; It
is for greater admiration, beauty, and ornament, distinguished with an infinite
number of stars, as with so many Jewels: certainly a most fair and precious
vault or couerture of this worldly palace. Now what is more pleasing to the
eye of Man, then those bluish and purple colors of the Heavens? What more
pure, then those shining gems and precious stones? What more solid, then that
adamantine firmnes of the heavenly Orbs; which being never worn, nor growing
old, have continued so many ages inviolable? What is more admirable, then the
radiant body of the Sun, being the fountain of light and heat? What Nature
has imparted to all these their form, situation, splendor, and this
celestial and unchangeable beauty and fairnes? They do not receive them from
themselves (since they have not their being from themselves) but from another.
And if from some other thing they take their essence, then from the same they
also take their beauty. But this other thing cannot be corporeal; since no
corporeal thing can be more powerful and fair, then those heavenly bodies
are. Therefore that, which does impart to them all these qualities, must needs
be a certain incorporeall or spiritual substance; whose infinite puissance
and incomprehensible fayrnes we are partly able to glass and see (as it were
by reflection) in so great a work.

The Earth also, though it be seated in the lowest place, serving as the flore
or pauement of this princely and imperial palace, or rather as a channel,
wherinto the excreme^ts of the elements are disburdened, yet what pulchritude
and beauty has it? What delight is discovered in the mountains, and the
valleys thereof, in the springs, floods, gardens, woods, fields of pasture and
grain, orchards, and plains, covered with all kind of colors. exceeding al
tapistry, or other such artificial hangings whatsoever, through its various and
diverse vestment of herbs, flowers, and groves? Who can once dream, that all
things are thus disposed of a Nature void of reason and understanding; The
variety and beauty of things cannot be referred to the Sun.
seeing *that the soul or mind of man is not able to excogitate or imagine to
it self any thing more admirable, or beautiful? Neither avails it any thing
here to reply, that the Sun and the stars seem to be the cause of all
these things. For although without the heat and influence of the stars
(whereby the generatiue and seminall power or virtue is stirred, and the
vegetative humors are prepared) all these things cannot grow, increase, and
come to their perfection; notwithstanding these bodies take not from the Sun
and stars their original Cause, and reason of their particular structure,
forming, and making; but from some intelligent mind or spirit, which has
impressed in the seeds a certain power or virtue, being (as it were) the image
of its own conceit, by the which (as by its instrument) it disgesteth,
disposes, and frames the body, that it may be altogether answerable and
sorting to the intended form. For nether the Sun nor the stars can know,
of what kind every tree (for example) will be, or what temperature, color,
taste, smell, or medicinable virtue for diseases it will have, or with what
leaves it is to be covered, with what flowers to be adorned or beautifyed, and
with what fruits to be enriched; finally what measure it ought to have, what
figure, extensions, diffusions, connexions, and innumerable other such
observations; all which appear in every such particular body with admirable
artifice and wisdom: for there is in every work of nature (as their phrase
it) so great cunning, skill, and subtility, as that no art can attain to the
thousand part thereof; nor any wit can comprehend the same. Who then is so void
of reason, that can be persuaded, that such bodies, in whose making so eminent
reason and wisdom is discovered, could yet be made by any Cause that enjoys
not reason?

The Sun of its own nature imparteth its light and heat, and in these two
sorts, in one and the same uniform manner it cooperateth with all seeds, to
wit in heating the earth, nourishing the seeds, stirring up the seminall
spirit or virtue, and in preparing the humors: therefore this infinite
diversity of things, and this proportion and pulchritude, which is in them,
cannot proceed from this Sun, seeing his operation and working is uniform,
and a like upon al bodies; but it ought to be reduced to some principle or
beginning, which may contain distinctly al these things in it self, through
the force of a most working reason; which beginning can be no other, then some
one most excellent spirit, which is the Inuentour and workman of all these
things.

This point will be made more evident, Living Nature.
if we take into our consideration the body of living Creatures. Good God, how
much art is in their structure and making, and how much wit? Each particular
living Creature consists almost of innumerable parts, and yet these parts have
a most exact proportion both among themselves, as also in relation to the
whole, which consists of them: which proportion is precisely found in all
creatures of the same kind; except some deformity therein happen either out of
the abundance or defect of the matter, or by the interuention of some external
cause. As for example, in man's body there is that proportion, as that the
length of it with reference to the breadth is sixfold as much; to the thicknes
(which is taken from the superficies of the back in a right line to the
superficies of the breast) ten fould; to the Cubit four fould; to the
stretching out of both the arms, equal; to the foot six times; to Man's body.
the breadth of the hand, 24. times; to the breadth of the thumb, 72; to the
breadth of a finger, 96. times. The like proportion it bears to the eyes, the
nose, the forehead, the ears, to the several ribs, to the several internal
parts, to the bones, the bowels, the sinews, the arteryes, the veins and the
muscles. The like certain proportions do all these parts bear among
themselves; in so much that there are several thousands of proportions in this
kind, which are to be considered in the fabric of man's body. For not only in
longitude, but also in thicknes, in conformation, in distance and vicinity, in
strength, and in temperature there ought to be a due proportion in all parts;
in this symmetry and proportion of parts among themselves, and in respect of
the whole, consists all the comline^ and beauty of the body; in so much, that
^f but any one due proportion (among so ma^y) be here absent, then is there
something wanting to the concurrence and making up of that pulchritude and
fairenes, which is naturally incident to man's body.

We may also find the like proportion in all other creatures, which consists
in that structure and form, which is most agreing to their natures; in so
much, that the very flies, the gnats, and the little worms are not destitute
thereof. For the making of every one of these small creatures is according to
their own kind so perfect, so admirable, and so beautiful, as that if the
wisdom of all men living were contracted in one, and gathered together, it
could not find any one part, which might be corrected or amended; and which is
more, it were not able in its own retired thought and imagination to apprehend
the reason, wisdom, and providence, which appear in the structure in any of
al these or other creatures. Whereupon we may further infer, that supposing any
one man were so powerful and mighty, as that he were able instantly to make or
produce outwardly, what he did conceive inwardly in his mind; yet could he not
form any one fly (because he could not comprehend the reason of the outward
and inward structure and composition of the said fly) much less could he
animate it, or give the vigor of sense and motion, or plant in it phantasy,
and natural inclination; since what every one of these are, cannot possibly be
imagined or conceived.

But to descend to Plants; what exceeding beauty is in all kind of Plants? How
Plants.
pleasingly do they apparel and cloth the earth? How wonderfully does the
earth thurst them out of her bosom, and yet detaynes them by their roots,
least they be torn a sunder with the violence of the wynds? How great variety
is found among the^, of so many trees, so many young sprouts, so many kinds of
corn and grain, so many herbs growing in orchards, fields, and mountains,
and to conclude so many fragrant flowers in gardens and orchards? And touching
the use of these plants, the commodity is manifold; some of them serving for
building and making of diverse instruments, others for the nourishment of man
and beasts, others again, for the making of linen cloth; as also to burn,
and for other necessities of man's life.

Touching flowers, they do also delight us with their several forms, colors,
smells, Flowers.
as that they deservedly drive us into admiration of their maker. For there is
not greater profusion and wast (as I may say) of providence and divine art in
any body so base and instantly fading, then is in these. For what diversity of
forms are found in them? They are continued together, divided, deep, open or
displayed, hollow, rising in form of hair, formed like little flocks of
wool, winged, hooked, horned, eared like corn, spherically bearing their
leaves, environed thick with leaves like clustered grapes, and many other such
like different forms. In like sort they are of one leaf, three leaued, four
leaued, or of more leaves; which leaves bearing themselves in several manners,
do occasion infinite other forms of flowers.

Neither is their variety of colors less the^ the variety of forms, as
white, yellow, red, bloody, purple, ceruleous or bluish, and finally all
mingled colors whatsoever, which in regard of their several mixtures are many
in number, and therefore they al become grateful to the eye. To conclude, every
particular flower is wonderful fair, and the several parts of any one flower
is disposed in such variety, for the greater beauty of their form, according
to their nature and the different times of their growth, as they cannot by any
art possible be bettered or amended. Now who considering these things with a
serious meditation* will not acknowledge the infinite wisdom of the
artificer, and will not admire, praise, and reverence the some?

Touching the odor and smell of the flowers, there is also great variety, and
the smell in most of the^ is sweet; there is scarce any one flower which has
not a peculiar smell to it self, different more or less from all others* In
some, that are the fairest to the eye (a point which may serve as a docume^t to
us me^) the smell is less pleasing; and yet in some others there is an equal
strife and contention, between the excellency of their form or shape, and
their smell.

Now from all these observations we conclude, that it is a truth more radiant,
clear and perspicuous, then the Sun beams are; that all these things cannot
have their beginning from a nature, or cause void of reason; but from a most
wise and most puissant spirit, or Intelligence, which conceived all these
things before in its mind, and which also conferred and weighed together al
these particulers, to wit the quantity or greatness of every pla^te, their
figures or forms, their proportions, temperatures, virtues, colors, and smells.

Now then this Spirit impresseth all these in the seeds of things, (as the
image of his conceit) and then works and frames them according to the same.
For the virtue impressed in the seeds do not otherwise work, then if it
enjoyed reason; the cause hereof being, in that it is a footstep of a divine
conception, and as it were a sealed impression thereof. Therefore from this
supreme Intelligence, or Spirit (as being the first inuenting and informing
cause) the beauty, proportion, and perfection of all things does take its
emanation, flowing, and proceeding.

Neither only this visible fayrnes, and all variety (which is subject to the
eye) is to be ascribed to this cause, but also all invisible The beauty of ^^e
inward souls or forms of things.
beauty (which is inwardly hid in those visible things, and can be apprehended
only by reason) is to be referred thereto. For from this invisible pulchritude
the external and visible does rise: since what appears externally in these
corporal things, either in respect of form, proportion, color kind etc. it
comes altogether from the internal and invisible substance; which substance
is so much the more fair, and to be admired, by how much, it contains in it
self more highly and simply the reason and cause of those external
perfections. In the vegetative soul, by the virtue whereof trees, herbs,
flowers and the like (according to their several kynds) do live, the reason or
cause of their structure, and whole form or shape (which so much delights
the eye) is latent and unseen. In like sort in the sensitive soul (which
animateth all living Creatures) the whole reason of the fabric or form of
the body lies hidden and imperceptible by the eye; the same is also latent in
the genitall virtue or power, by the which all these things are formed.
Therefore how great and bewitching is the pulchritud^ and splendor of these
souls, in whom all these perfections are secretly and simply included? And how
stupendous and wonderful are these souls in their own nature, which after
one uniform manner contain in themselves so great multitude The sensitive
soul.
and variety of forms and figures.

Furthermore, in the sensitive soul is not only comprehended the entyre reason
of the structure of the body, but also of all the senses, the imagination, the
sensitive appetite, all natural instincts and operations, every one of which,
in respect of the wonders discovered therein, transcends ma^s apprehension. For
how great is the power of the senses? How far of does the eye penetrate in a
moment, viewing all things and apprehending the forms of them, and expressing
them in it self? How forcible is the power of smelling in dogs, Vultures, and
many other such like? And as touching the imaginatiue faculty, it is never
idle, still reuoluing with it self, and variously compounding the forms and
shapes of things, which it receaueth by the ministry of the external sense.
The appetite draws and inuiteth the soul to those things (which the
Imagination before conceived) if they be convenient; and auerteth it from them,
if they be dangerous and hurtful. To conclude the motive power obeys the
appetite with incredible celerity and speed, as appears even in the motion
and flying of flees.

It were over laboursome to prosecute al things in this kind. Every power or
faculty has its object, instrument, operation, its peculiar manner of working*
so occult, secret, and wonderful, as no man is able to apprehend it; and yet
the reason of all these is contained inwardly in the souls of the said living
creatures; so as whosoever could perfectly penetrate the nature and the
mysteries of the souls, should find the reasons of all the rest more clearly.
Wherefore I am fully persuaded, if one could attain the perfect knowledge of
one small fly, the pleasure of that knowledge would ouerballance and weigh
down all riches, honors and dignities of Kings. For if Pythagora^ (as is
written of him) at his finding out of a mathematicke demonstration did so
immoderatly rejoice, as for the time he perfectly enjoyed not himself; then
how much joy and exultation of mind will a clear knowledge of so many and so
great mysteries bring, which are in themselves discouerable in the making even
of the least fly; they being such as yet the most eminent Philosopher that
ever was, could not apprehend them, and such as may serve to entertain a most
sweet and serious speculation of the^, for the space of many years? Verily
touching my own private censu^e, I am of this former opinion (as I said) and I
doubt not but all such, as attentively consider the works of God, would
conspire and agree with me in judgment herein.

But now to speak something of the reasonable soul; it transce^deth in
beauty, work and dignity the former by infinite degrees, in the which not only
the reason of the structure or making of the body, and of all the senses, but
also the faculty of understanding, of recordation or remembering, and of
embracing or rejecting any thing freely (in the which is included true election
and freedom of will) is contained. By the understanding, the soul co^ceaueth
the whole world, and frames to it self certain invisible images or pictures
(as it were) of al things. By the memory, it retains al those images of
things wrought by the understanding, and when occasion is ministered, it makes
practice and use of them. Now, how vast and spacious are those entrances, which
are capable of so innumerable forms? By the will, the soul takes fruition of
all things, and disposes of them according to its best liking, yea (and which
is more) it makes to it self election, or choice of any course of life.
Neither is the difference here much to be regarded, whether the soul
performs al these things immediately by its simple substance, or by distinct
faculties and powers, seeing the reason of all these are contained in its simple
essence. Therefore it necessarily follows, that the reasonable Soul is of
wonderful pulchritude, splendor, and perfection; in so much, that if it were
to be known perfectly, as it is in it self, it would seem to be a kind of
divinity; in the contemplation whereof, the mind would be (as it were) absorpt
and swallowed up with an incredible pleasure and delight; seeing the essence of
it surpasses by many degrees all corporeal things; as also the vegetative and
sensitive souls of Plants and living creatures, in worth and dignity.

Therefore out of the premises we may gather, that there are four degrees of
beauty of things in this world; The first (which is lowest) is of bodies, which
are seen by the ye; the second of the vegetative soul; the third of the
sensitive soul; the fourth of the Rational, or reasonable soul. Therefore it
is evident, that not only the first, but also the rest are formed by some most
prudent and skilful intelligence or mind. For if the beauty, which is found in
bodies, be to be ascribed to some such spirit or divine power, for the
wonderful proportions appearing in them: then much more the glorious
fayrenesse, which is in the several kynds of souls, which comprehends in it
self the reason and cause of the bodies beauty, and which is much more
admirable then it, ought to be refered to the same celestial power.

Furthermore I would here dema^d, how it can possibly happen, that any cause
not capable of reason, wisdom, and understanding, could form and make in the
beginning, so many diversities of vegetative and sensitive souls; seeing every
one of the^ is so a^mirable, and is the Effect or work of so great a wisdom,
as that no humane wit is able to penetrate into the several mysteries of it,
or beget in his mind the true and proper conceit or image thereof. To conclude;
All the pulchritude and perfection of an Effect, ought to be contained in the
cause; (for the cause cannot give that to the Effect, which it self enjoys
not) whereupon it follows, that all the perfection of living creatures, and
all the vigor and natural working of the senses, ought to be comprehended
within that cause, by the which they were first framed: and this not after the
same manner, as they are in the creatures, but after a more excellent and
eminent sort, to wit, as the work is contained in the mind, or art of the
workman. This point is further confirmed, in that there is no cause (excepting
a mind or intelligence) in the which so great a diversity of things can rest;
but in a mind or intelligence it may well reside; even as the form of a house,
and all the measures and proportions of it are said to be in the phantasy or
understanding of the artificer.

Ad heereto for the greater access and increase of reason herein, that
himself who framed the soul of man, endewing it with reason, understanding,
and frewill, cannot possibly want reason, understanding and frewill; but must
have them in more perfect and excellent manner. For how can he want reason,
understanding, and will, who first made and gave reason, understanding and
will? The Prophet therefore truly said, Qui plantauit aurem etc. He which
planted the ear, shall he not hear? Or he that Psalm. 93.
formed the eye, shall he not see? especially seeing these are such perfections,
as the having of them is not any impediment to the fruition and enjoying of
greater perfections; since it is far better to be endued with understanding and
frewill, then to want the^, or to have any thing which may be repugnant to
them: from all these considerations then it is most evident, that there is a
certain supreme Intelligence, or Spirit, which is the inuentour, author, and
architect of all these visible, and invisible beautyes, in which spirit, as in
its cause al pulchritude and splendor does eminently exist, and this spirit we
call God, who be eternally blessed, praised and adored.

THE FIFTH REASON DRAWN FROM the structure and disposition of the parts of
the world, with reference to their ends. CHAP. VII.
EVEN as, not any of these things, which are subject to our sight, takes its
being from it self, but from some efficient cause; so nothing is made for it
self, but with respect to some extrinsecal end, to the which end the whole
structure of the thing, as also al its parts, and faculties of its parts, are
(after a wonderful manner) disposed and framed. Therefore of necessity there
must be some one most wise mind or spirit, which aforehand conceived in it
self all those ends, and ordained proportionable and fitting means to the
said ends. For Nature, which is not capable of reason, nor endued therewith, as
it cannot conceive or comprehend the ends of things; so neither ca^ it dispose
or set down suitable means to the said ends; since this is a chief work of
The Sun not created for it self.
art and wisdom; we will make this manifest first in heavenly bodies. The
Sun, excelling in fayrenesse all visible things, is not for it self (for it
can not apprehend, or reflect upon its own beauty) but for the good and
benefit of other things, to wit, that it may enlighten the world, and cherish
al things with its heat; not much unlike, as the heart is in man, and other
living creatures, which is not for it self, but for the good of the whole
body; for as the heart is in the body endued with life, so the Sun is in the
whole body of the world, which wants life. This then being thus, the Sun
ought to have a certain proportionable measure of light, and quantity, as also
a determinate place in the world, least that the light being over radiant,
shyning and great, or it self in place over near, it should burn the earth;
or on the contrary side the light being too remiss and small, or too far of
from the earth, should not sufficiently lighten it, or heat it. Now, this
disposition of a fitting quantity, light, and place, cannot be assigned by any,
but only by such a mind or spirit, as is able to consider the end and the
means, and of judgment to set down a sorting and convenient proportion
between them.

But if the Sun be made not for it self, but for some external end, then
much more the same may be verifyed of the rest of the The stares, the Orbs and
all other bodies created for the use of a reasonable soul.
stars, of the heavenly Orbs, and of all other corporeal natural bodies.
This point may be further fortifyed by this ensuing reason: That, which is for
its own self, ought to be of that excellency and perfection, as nothing can
be more excellent, for the good whereof this other may be ordained; This is
evident even in reason, since otherwise it should not be for it self, but for
that, for the benefit whereof it is disposed. Furthermore it ought to be of such
a nature, as that it may conceive and enjoy its own goodness; for if it has no
sense and feeling hereof, it is nothing aduantaged by such its excellency* For
what can the domination and government of the whole earth profit a man, if he
neither can take any pleasure thereby, nor knows that he has such a
principality, or rule belonging unto him? Therefore it is an evident sign,
that, what ca^ not perceive its own good, is not made for it self, but for
some other thing, to the which it becomes profitable. But to apply this now; no
corporeal nature is so excellent, but it may be ordained to some other thing
more excellent and more worthy; for the degree of a reasonable nature
transce^ds and exceeds much in worth the degree of a corporeal Nature, and
this to the former for many uses becomes serviceable. Again a corporeal nature
cannot have any feeling of its own good, but rests only in being profitable
and expedient for some other thing: Therefore it follows, that not corporeal
or bodily nature is made for it self, but even of its essence and being, is
ordained to some other thing, to wit, to a reasonable nature, for whose behoof
and good it existeth. From which it may be gathered, that if there were no
reasonable nature, then all the corporeal nature should exist, as in vain and
bootles* as not being able to bring any benefit to it self, or to any other
thing; even as the fruition of great riches should be altogether unprofitable,
if the man possessing them, should have neither knowledge, use, nor feeling of
them.

The same point is further made evident The motion of the Heavens ordained for
a reasonable soul.
from the motion of the celestial Orbs, which motion brings no benefit to
the heavens themselves, but is wholly applied to the good and vtility of man,
and of those things, which are commodious to the use of man. For first the
motion of them is so tempered, that all Countries of the earth (excepting some
few, which are beyond 66. degrees near to the Poles) enjoy within the space of
24. hours both day and night; this being so directed to the most grateful
alteration and change of day and night. Furthermore the Sun by his proper
motion under the Eclyptick eue^ly cutting the equinoctial line, and declining
sometimes to the south, or at other times to the north, The 4. seasons of the
year.
more then 23. degrees, causes the four several te^peratures of the years,
(I mean Winter, Spring-tyme, Summer, and Autumn) all these being most
accommodate and fitting for the good of such things, as the Earth brings
forth. For the winter so works by its cold, that the spirit and heat (which
is within the seeds and buds) being inwardly received, all things may be more
strengthened with in, that so they may better gather humor and nourishment;
that they may fasten their roots in the earth and finally that all such things
may inwardly swell, thereby to burst out in due time. The spring through its
pleasing and te^pered heat calls all things forth, drawing out buds, leaves,
grass, flowers, and the like. The Summer with its greater heat consumes the
super abunda^t humor, disgesteth crude and raw things, extenuateth and
refineth things gross, opens passages in the bodies, diffuseth or powers in
the spirit, and brings fruits to their maturity and rypenes.

To conclude the Autumn with its, humor and moderate heat, tempereth a new
all things, corrects the drynes and heat of things, which the summer
aforeha^d bestowed; it also disposes the earth to new seeds and new grothes;
lastly it repaireth the decayed states of living bodies, through want of
natural heat; Now out of all these observations, who sees not, that all this
motion of the Sun, and the heavenly bodies was first ordained and ever after
is perpetuated and continuated to the benefit of man, and to the grouth,
increase and fuller abundance of all living creatures, and other bodies, which
may in any sort be serviceable to the use of man? For no other benefit of it
can be assigned the^ this, nor any other cause can be alleged, why the motion
of the Sun, and the other celestial Orbs should be in any such, and such
sort. Wynds, showers, Clouds.


Now if any enter into consideration of Wynds, rain, snow, and frosts, he
shall easily discover, that these are ordained for the good, emolument, and
benefit of living creatures, but chiefly of Man,

And first of Wynds; the use of them is various and great, for they ventilate
and fan the air, and so m^ke it more wholesome to be breathed in; which if it
should continue The benefit of wynds.
unmoved and unshaken, would putryxy, and being by this means affected with
some pestilent quality would kill both men and beasts: For such close places (we
may observe) wherein the wynds blow not, are become most pestiferous and
noisome. Secondly, the wynds serve to carry the clouds about through the air,
and so to disperse and distribute them to several countries and regions: for
without the help of the wynds the mediterranean places, and such as are far
distant from the sea, would be ever destitute of clouds and showers; and so
would become over hoate, barren, and inhabitable. For seeing from coasts and
places far remote from the sea, there cannot be drawn up sufficient store of
vapors, which may serve for clouds and rain, except they being elevated from
other places, be thither carried by force of the wynds, the said mediterranean
countries would be continually scorched with the sun, and be deprived of all
rigation and watering. For it is the sea, which chiefly ministers matter for
clouds, out of whose vast bosom (being directly and continually opposed to the
Sun) great abundance of vapors are attracted upwards, by the heat of the
Sun; which being after by force of the cold gathered into Clouds, are lastly
resolved into showers of rain; wherefore, except the wynds did carry these
clouds unto another place, all rain would fall into the sea, from whence the
matter of it does rise; and the whole earth through want of watering would
remain barren and unprofitable.

Neither this above would happen, but also all fountains and rivers would in a
short time be drawn dry: for these take their The beginning of rivers and
welsprings.
beginning and continuance from the srow, and showers, which fall upon the
mediterranea^ and mountanous places. For the Snow, which during the winter
falls upon the hills, melting by little and little through the Suns heat, and
distilling into the hollowes and concauityes of the hills, does in the end cause
springs or fountains. In like sort the waters of showers, being received and
drink up into the higher places of the hills, and after many wyndings to and ^^o
under the earth meeting together, do in the end, fynding an issue or passage,
break out into fountains or springs. Now, of springs being mixed with other
waters (whether proceeding of snow or of showers) and running into one common
channel, are begotten Rivers. And hence it follows, that during the summer
(when it but seldom raineth) rivers are greatly decreased, and except they be
sed with snow water, they are sometimes dried up. So as if for the space of two
or three years it should neither rain nor snow, it would follow* that all
rivers and almost all fountains would cease their running through want of
matter. But these things are so disposed and governed, that for certain
seasons so great store of rain and snow may fall, as that thereby the springs
and rivers may be continually maintained and fed.

Furthermore the wynds are necessary to dry up the unprofitable humor of the
earth to recreate and refresh the bodies of living creatures, to rypen fruits,
to the turning of mils, and such machines or works and finally to the use of
Navigations; for ^ ^^^^^^ting there were no wynds, all Navigations would almost
cease. But what great pro^^ does rise by Navigations to Man? For by this, what
merchandise is in foreign countries, which conduces either to the commodities
of man's life, or to the use of physic, or to the delicacy of nature, the same
is most easily transported throughout the whole world; and what is peculiar to
few, is by this means communicated and imparted to all mankind.

Neither is the profit of the showers and rain inferior to that of the wynds:
for it cools the air, refreshes the bodies of living The profit of showers.
creatures, perpetuateth and continues springs and rivers, ministers drink to
beasts, waters the earth, and makes it fruitful; for without showers of
rain the earth would become dry, barren, deprived of all beauty and ornaments
of trees, grass, herbs and flowers, and finally not fit and commodious for
the habitatio^ of man and beasts. Showers receive their fecundity, and
fruitfulnes from a double cause: first by the mixture of a viscous and fat
matter, which is exhaled and drawn up with the vapors from the earth and the
sea; for the sea being fertile, has a certain fatnes, with the which fishes
are nourished. Therefore while the Sun eleuateth up the more thin parts of it
(which are vapors) it withal attracteth a certain oil and fat matter; which
being mingled with the vapors, and after through cold conden sd and thickened
into rain, does water the earth. The same thing also happens, when vapors and
exhalations are drawn up through the Suns heat from a fenny earth, from
garde^s, fields, and woods. Secondly, showers take their fruitfulnes from the
spirit and heat included and impressed in the cloud or shower by the beams of
the Sun: for this spirit or heat causes all things to grow and increase. And
to the end, that the fall of showers should not ouerwhelme with an over great
and impetuous force and weight, the tender buds and flowers, therefore the
divine providence has ordained, that they do not fall over abundantly and
precipitantly, but that from a great height they should distill by little and
little through a large tract of the air, whereby they being divided into
infinite most small drops, do be sprinkle the earth with a pleasing moisture
and humidity. And to the end, that what is thus falen upon the earth, should
not by the heat of the Sun be instantly dried up and consumed, before it
could penetrate and descend to the roots of plants; therefore for the most
part, certain dry remnants of clouds do intercept the beams of the Sun,
until the earth do drink and suck up the rain, and transmit it to the
roots, for the better nourishing of the fruit which it brings forth.

Also Snow (which is as it were the froth of clouds) is accompanied with no
small benefit; for besides, that it affords matter for the continuance of
springs and rivers, The profit of Snow
descending from the highest mountains, it does cover the earth (as it were)
with a fleece of wool, and by this means keeping the heat of the earth within,
it hinders, that frosts, penetrating over deeply the earth, do not extinguish
the seminall virtue resyding in roots; and thus, Snow is one cause of the
earths great fertility of plants. Snow also has in it self a fecundity and
fruitfulnes, in regard of the air included in it, which shining with infinite
bubles, gives that extraordinary whitenes to the Snow.

Frost in like manner is most profitable to all things, for by a repercussion
and beating back, it keeps within, the spirit and heat The profit of frost.
of the earth, and of living creatures, not suffering it to euaporate and
vanish away. And from this it comes, that in colder cou^tryes, and such as
are subject to frosts, men are of a more robustious and greater stature, and
longer lived, then in hoater regions.

Now these, to wit, Wynds, showers, snow, frosts, and the like come not
promis^^ously in any time of the year, but are so distributed by certain
seasons thereof, as they most aptly agree and sort to the begetting, growing,
increasing, and perfecting of plants and living creatures, and to the
perpetuating of their species and kynds, and further do serve most co^modiously
to Men's uses. From all which it is even demonstratiuely concluded, that all
these are ordained and instituted by a most wise, and most powerful mind or
spirit, for the good and s^ruice of living creatures, and chiefly of Man, to
whom all the rest are subject.

And that the Elements are for the same cause made, and do to that end enjoy
such The wonderful disposition of the Elements.
their peculiar situations, and their proper forms and figures, which now they
have, does abundan^ly appear from the consideration of the earth and water.
For if we consider precisely things, as they should be in their own nature,
the earth ought to be exactly round* and the water ought on every side to cover
and encompasse the earth; Seeing all things, that are ponderous and heavy, ought
to descend equally toward the Center of the earth; and by how much one body is
more heavy then another; by so much it ought to be more near to the center,
and lower in place then the other. Therefore the earth ought to be under the
waters, and the waters specially to be powered about it. But we see that these
two Elements are far otherwise situated: for a huge portion of the earth, to
wit, all that which is not covered with the sea, and all the immense weight and
heap of mountains, is far higher, and more remote from the Center, then the
water is. For there runs a mighty vast channel through the midst of the
earth of an infinite profundity, divided into several passages, which running
diverse ways and in some places of greater breadth, in others of lesser, do
make Islands. Into this channel all the Element of water is received (that only
excepted, which being extenuated and made thin, turns into vapors) that so
the earth as free from being covered with water, might be made serviceable for
the habitation of men and other creatures, and for the groth and increase of
things.

Furthermore, the Earth is so fashioned and brought into that form, that from
the sea toward the mediterranean places, it by The conformatio^ of the Earth.
insensible degrees lifts it self up, and rises higher, until it end into
mountains and rocks: in which point consists a most admirable art of the
divine Providence. For first by this structure of the Earth, it is made free
from all perilous inundations, which by little and little, and in long
process of time by tne influence of the stars, or force of the wynds might
endanger all the Earth. For we see by experience, that such bordering parts of
the earth, as are near to the sea, and do not much exceed the Sea in height,
are often utterly ouerflowed with the deaths of the Inhabitants, and loss of
all goods. Furthermore if this easy ascent and rising of the Earth were not,
there could not be any rivers: for if the superficies of the earth were equally
distant from the Center, (as in a globe perfectly round) then would there be no
fall of rivers; for the water cannot flow, except it find places more low and
near to the Center: And if the Earth should suddenly be lifted up into steep
heights, then would the fall of rivers be more impetuous and violent, then were
requisite; neither could rivers being so precipitious and downfall be
commodious to man's use; neither could they run continually through defect of
matter. I here omit the danger of inundations, which often do chance (to the
great loss and detriment of the inhabitants) when abundance of rain and
melted snow being gathered together, do suddenly and precipitantly fall from
some great height. Therefore the Earth ought to rise in height by little and
little, and by insensible increasings from the mouths of the rivers (where
they run and disgorge themselves into the sea) even to their springs and to
other mediterranean places. Now if we insist in the speculation Mountains.
of mountains, we shall find; that in nature there is no necessity of them,
but only for the behoof and benefit of man. For they first serve to break the
force of wynds, which might be very domageable to all creatures, if all coasts
were plain and even, and no hinderance were interposed to slacken their
strength. Hence it proceeds, that wynds are more impetuous and boisterous in
the open Sea, where all is plain and eauen without any obstacle, then in the
middle places of the Earth.

Secondly, Mountains and high hills serve for bounds of regions and kingdoms,
for they are (as it were) the limits or closures of great kingdoms, by the
which the ambition of men and desire of further enlarging their Regality is
bridled and restrained, least it should incessantly exercise it self in vexing
and subduing their bordering neighbors. Therefore the safety of kingdoms is
much preserved, and the infinite miseries and pressures still attending upon
wares by the difficult and inaccessible, passages of the mountains, are much
hindered. Great hills do furthermore suppeditate and mini^^er matter for
building, as stones, lyme, wood, tyle or slate, with many other things either
necessary, or at least very commodious to man's life. For almost all metals and
diverse kynds of precious stones are dug out of the bowels and veins of
mountains. There also do grow upon mountains diverse roots of great virtue,
and infinite kynds of herbs, as also most excellent wynes and olives. Lastly
they contain the origins, and beginnings of springs and rivers, and they
perpetuate and still continue them by feeding the^ with matter and store of
water.

Now let us next descend to the quality of The qualityes of the earth and the
sea.
the Earth and Sea; For this is not found to be such, as the nature of these
Elements (being considered in it self) does require, but such as may best sort
to the preservation of living Creatures and commodity of man. For if we
precisely consider the nature of these bodies, the Elements ought to be simple
or without mixture of other bodies, uniform and in every place of the same
virtue, operation and affection. For the earth in its own nature is vehemently
dry, and moderately cold; the water extremly cold and moist; the air moist and
moderately hot; and all these are naturally deprived and void of al sapour or
taste, color, and odor or smell. But this point is far otherwise; for there
are many diversities and differences of soyles of the earth; for they are hot,
cold, temperate, such as may be cru^led away or broken into small pieces,
light, ponderous, fatty, unctious, dry; In colors blackish, reddish, yellow,
white, as also of several tastes, and odours or smells, and fit and commodious
for the bringing forth of several things: according to those verses.

Hic segetes, illic veniunt faelicius vuae;
Arborei foetus alibi, atque iniussa virescunt
Gramina; Nonne vides croceos vt Tmolus odores,
India mittit ebur, molles sua thura Sabaei?
Therefore several soyles and earth have their peculiar fecundity and quality
impressed in them, by him who first created this Element. Neither can we
ascribe all this diversity to the Sun and the stars; seeing that under one
and the same Climate there are some places more desert and barren, other most
fertile; and such of these places as are fertile, do not bring forth the same
kynds of plants and other living Creatures, though they receive one and the
same aspect and influence from the Sun and the stars. In like sort, the
earth does not produce all kinds of metals and minerals in one and the same
place, but diverse in diverse places. For ^n one place it brings forth stones,
in another, chalk, red lead, in a third, brass, tyn and lead, in others gold,
silver, and precious stones. Therefore the earth in diverse places receaueth
diverse virtues, forces and operations, that thereby it may minister to Man all
kind of riches, which not only co^duce to an absolute necessity of man's life;
but also to a greater conueniency, delicacy and splendor thereof; which point
does turn to the greater honor, glory, and laud of so munificent a Creator.

In like sort, the Sea has its fruitfulnes altogether most admirable; and this
diverse, according to the difference of places. For not in each part of the Sea
all kynds of fishes are found; for some kynds do breed in the North, others in
the South seas; Some also only in the East, and others in the West seas.

Furthermore all the sea (mere contrary to the nature of that Element) is of a
strange The saltnes of the sea.
saltnes. Now from whence does this come? Or what power and virtue gave this
saltnes to it, and to what end? The reason is ridiculous and absurd, which some
Philosophers have invented hereof, to wit, that this saltnes comes by reason
of the Sun beams, by the which the bottom of the sea is scorched and
burned; and that adustion and burning causes saltnes (say they) is proved from
the experience in burnt ashes. That this reason is most insufficient, is
evident: for how ca^ the bottom or the ground under the sea (being covered
with such an infinite store of waters, that in some places it is 500. or a
thousand cubits deep) be so burnt by the Sun, as that from them all the
whole sea should contract such a bryny saltnes? For the Sun burns not but
only by reason of its light, which light does not penetrate in the water
further then 15. cubits (as diverse Swimmers under water affirm) and the light
is so faint, that the heat thereof can hardly be felt, but a little under the
water. Now, that saltnes should proceed of adustion, it is required, that the
adustion be so great, as that it dissolueth the matter, and reduces it to its
beginning, as experience shows. Neither does adustion and burning properly
cause salt in other things, but rather opens and discovers it; And
therefore we see, that of several bodies the salt is several, and takes its
several virtues and operations from the bodies so strayned and refyned, as the
Chymickes do experimentally prove. In like manner the spirit of every thing (or
the oil which is extracted out of it by fire) does aforehand lie hidden in the
thing it self. Furthermore if salsity or brynenes proceed from this adustion,
then ought the Sea to be dosy, more and more salt; whereupon it would ^ollow,
that the fishes as not e^during that temperature, would in the end dye, as it
happens in the Lake Asphaltites (which is called Mare mortuu^) since the nature
of fishes requires a certain temperature of the waters. To conclude the
increase of this saltnes in the Sea would be noted at least in several ages,
but no such augmentation has hitherto been observed. Of the like improbability
is that sentence, of the first origin of mountains, which teaches, that the
first proceeded of Earthquakes, by reason that the air, and other such
spiritual substance, which being included in the bowels of the earth, did
advance and lift up the higher part thereof. This opinion might with some
probability be maintained, if it were delivered only of some certain little
hills. But it cannot with any show or color of lykelyhood, be verifyed of that
great multitude of most huge mountains, possessing many mediterranean places,
and extending in length 800. or 1000. miles. But omitting many other strong
reasons, by the which this fiction is refuted, I conclude that the saltnes of
the Sea was first given to it by the author and maker of it, who as he
implanted (contrary to the course of nature) a fecundity in the earth for the
bringing out and nourishing of plants, and living Creatures, so the like the
bestowed upon the sea for the production, ingendring and feeding of fishes.

From all which speculatio^s it is most necessarily gathered and inferred, that
al these things (above mentioned) were so disposed and ordained for the use and
benefit of Man* by some most wise and most powerful Intelligence; since all
things (even besides their natural condition) do serve, and become obedient to
the use of man's life, and al do finally propend and are directed to this end;
Neither can there be rendered any other reason, why they should be ordered in
such sort, as they are, but only for the emolument, commodity, and service of
Man.

Neither it is in any sort prejudicial to the being of a divine Providence,
that by reason The Ca^^^ityes.
and means of impetuous wynds, hayle, thunder, earthquakes, infection of the
air, inundation of waters, drouthes, and the like, men do often suffer great
calamities and miseries; since these things do more evidently demonstrate the
being of the said providence. For as it is the property of a Provident and wise
Prince, so to dispose his laws, tribunals or Justice seats, towers, provision
of wars etc. that they may be directed to the good and security of his
subjects, as long as they live in due allegiance and duty toward him; and the
same things also to turn to their chastisings and punishments, if after they
should once endeavor to shake of the yoke of subjection: Even so although that
supreme Power or spirit has finally created the heavens and the Elements for
the service of man; yet has he so tempered these things, that withal they may
serve, as scourges for the castigation of sinners; which chasticement may
nevertheless be beneficial to such, who know to make true use thereof, as
hereafter we will show.

Some here may object (contrary to our former doctrine) that such things,
whereof we have entreated before; have not their eue^t from any particular end,
to the which they are by any intelligent cause directed, but only by reason (as
the Philosophers phrase and dialect here is) necessit^tis materiae, through the
nature of the matter forcing or causing such effects: as for example it is
natural, that through the heat of the Sun vapors and exhalations be
attracted from the Earth and the Sea; the which being elevated above, are
repelled back by the cold of the middle Region, and so do cause wynds, or else
being gathered into clouds, do minister matter for feign, snow and hail, from
which sp^ngs and floods do after take their sou^ce and beginning.

I answer hereto and confess, that some of those things may seem to take
such their events from their matter, whereof they are made: But this
discovers a greater and worth ver disposal of the divine Providence, by the
which the universal cause of things (to wit the motion of the Sun and
staris) is ^o ordained and governed, as that without ^^e c^course of any other
efficie^t cause, it can occasion the foresaid things, as wynds, ^^^^e and the
like, at such times and in such s^^so^s, as are most convenient for the
producing and nourishing of plants and living creatures, and for the benefit of
man. And therefore these effects do thu^ fall out, not only through the
^^^o^^eme^t of the matter, but withal through the various aspect and
application of the universal cause And herto for the greater fulness of our
answer herein that the disposition and placing of the Sea and the earth, the
first beginning and large extension of mountains, the channels of rivers etc
cannot be referred to any necessity of matter or force of nature, but are
necessarily produced by art and Providence as is above showed. And thus it
falls out that (for example ( Egypt) being destitute of rain) is in the
summer time so watered with the inundation of Nilus, and thereby so covered over
with a fat and unctious ^ly me, as it becomes most fertile. In like sort one
of the Isles of the Canaryes (called Ferr^) wanting altogether sweet water, is
supplied herein by divine Providence from a tree there growing; whose nature
is such, as that it daily distilleth (like unto a spring or fountain) a
certain sweet humor, which serves for drink both to man, and beasts.

Now besides the heavenly and Elementary bodies (of which we have spoken before)
there are found three perfect kynds of mixed bodies, to wit living Creatures,
Plants, and all such things as are to be dug out of the bowels of the earth;
al which no doubt were first created and made for the use of Man; considering,
that we see they are subject to Man; he ruling over the^, and applying them at
his pleasure to his own use and benefit.

From all which, this one true resulta^cy or conclusion may infallibly be
gathered; The world why created.
that all this aspectable world, with all the things, which it contains, was
first made for the cause of Man; and that it serves for the time, as a most
ample and fair house, furnished with all things serving either for necessity,
or pleasure and delicacy; in the which man is placed, to the end, that he
acknowledging a divine and supernatural power to be the author of this world,
may love, reverence, and adore the said power; and that he may use these things
according to the true use and prescript of Reason; whether they conduce to the
maintenance and sustentation of his body, or solace and comfort of his mind, or
to the health and increase of knowledge.

For seeing the rank of things intelligible and endu^d with Reason, is the
highest Man the end of all visible things and of the whole world.
and most worthy among al things created, it follows, that man (as being an
intelligent and reasonable creature) is of a more eminent nature, degree, and
order, then any other thing in the whole world. Therefore man ought to be the
end of all things in the world, and they to exist, and be for his use. For man
only considers al things in the world, apprehends all things, and uses and
enjoys all things. Man only also feels and discerns the sweetness and
beauty of al things, who being (as it were) a certain secondary Numen, or
divine power, does produce and create by the help of his understanding all this
corporal world in himself, after an incorporeall manner: for without man to
apprehend them, in vain were all this so great beauty and artifice of all
things, ^^ vain so wonderful a disposal of them; ^^ vain so stupendous a
structure and com^osition of all: finally in vain were such variety of forms
colors, smells, sapours, and temperame^ts. For if man were not, then there were
nothing left, which could discern or apprehend these things, admire them,
praise the^, use them, or take any pleasure of them. For all other living
creatures are se^uile and mancipated to the senses of taste and feeling, and do
not apprehe^d any thing under the show and form of good, but what is agreeable
and sorting to their belly, or venereous pleasure, and this also after a
brutish manner. Therefore as that house, wherein no man does inhabit, and of
which none is to make any use or benefit, (though it be otherwise stored with
all abundance of furniture and domestical necessaries) is not to be prized,
but to be reputed, as a needles Edifice or building; Even so this world (though
thus beautifyed (as it is) with such variety of celesticall and terrestrial
bodies, and al other things accompanyng the same) should but exist in vain and
fruitlesly, if there were no rational and intelligent nature, to reside and
dwell therein, who were able to apprehend, observe, and discern the admirable
works therein, and to take fruit and pleasure of it, both in regard of
temporal commodity, as also of speculation and knowledge.

Now then from al these Considerations it is most clear, that this world was
made for man; and consequently that there is a Providence, which did create the
world to this particular end. For it could not exist by it self to this end,
neither could it receive from it self all this disposition* by the which it is
so wonderfully accommodated to the use of Man (as is above showed:) Therefore
the world has its being, its form, its disposition, its motion, and its
forces and virtues from an intelligent nature, which we call God.

THE SIXTH REASON, BORROWED FROM the structure or making of living Creatures,
and Plants, with reference to an end. CHAP. VIII.
THAT the Providence of this divine and supreme Power, is not only in general
and confusedly; to wit, as it ordains the foresaid general causes to the
productio^ of sublunary things; but also, that it is in particular and most
perfectly, as distinctly belonging to the least things, is evidently conuin^ed
from the structure and making of living cr^atures and plants. For the seuer^ll
parts and members of them are framed with such exquisite artifice and skill,
and with such a proportion, and so apt and fit to perform their functions and
ends; as that no art or wisdom can add any thing thereto, or correct or better
the lest thing therein: which point is a most absolute demonstration, that al
these things were first excogitated, invented, and made by a most wise spirit,
or mind; and who first distinctly and ^epara^ly considered all particulers
aforehand and then after most curiously produced and b^ought them fo^th,
through his admirable and stupe^^dious art.

This we will make evident by some examples, and first we will a little insist
in the speculation of Man's body. Well then: Man The Consideration of (...) body.
could not consist of only one bone, because then he could not bend himself,
nor use his members to several motions and functions; Therefore he is framed
of many bones; some being greater, some less, and others most small, of all
which every one in particular has that mag^^^^de (...) and connection,(...)
Bones.
body, the facility (...) of the members requ^^^th The bones of the head are in
number eight, of the (...) twelve, of the lower, one. The teeth are thirty two,
the ridge of spine of the back consists of 32. Vertebres, or joints. The
bone of the breast is composed of three bones. The ribs are 24. of which
fourteen coming from the back bone, do arrive to, and touch the bone of the
breast, and are implanted in the same bone for the more firm keeping of the
Heart and the longs. The other ten do not proceed so far, to the end, that
laxity and loosenes may be left to the stomach and belly. Every several fingar
consists of 3 small bones, and the thumb of two. The hands with the small
bones of the wrest, by the which they are tied to the bones of the cubit or
arm, do consist of twenty small bones. In the feet there are no fewer bones,
and these are connected together after a wonderful manner. For some of them
are in fixed and driven in (like nails (as the teeth of the iaw bone are:)
Others are inserted, and as it were sowed in, as we see in the bones of the
scull. Some again are fastened in manner of a box, and are tied with strong
ligaments, as the bone of the thigh in the hollownes of the hip. Others do
mutually enter and penetrate one another in for me of the hinge of a door
(which connection is called in Greek (...):) to conclude others are knit
together after other sorts, as is best fitting to the firmnes and motion of
the member. Further more with what most strange skill are those little bones
(which are termed Sesamina) interposed in certain places for the more easy
moving of the joints? Briefly every bone is made fit and apt to its end and
function, that it cannot be conceived, how it could be made more commodious.
For there is nothing in vain, nothing redundant or superfluous, nothing
deficie^t or wanting; finally nothing which is not most necessary and expedient
to it^ end, whereunto it is made.

In like sort, these bones could not be covered with one continued and
undivided mass of flesh; for so they would be unfit to the use and moving of
the members; and therefore they are fitted with several parcels of flesh
(which we call Muscles) and with these parcels the bones are covered, and of
Muscles
them the body is framed after a wonderful manner. There an are in man's body
more then six hundred muscles, as long muscles, short, broad, narrow, thick,
thin, straight, crooked, sharp, obtuse, streit and round, plain or eauen
corned: they are also either of a simple figure and form, or else of a
multiplicious and diverse shape. Again they are placed either one upon
another, or near to another; As also either directly, obliquely, or
transuersly, and this most wonderfully; for by the means here of every member
exercises its moving. Galen writes, that in man's body there are more then two
hundred bones, and that every bone has more then forty scopi (as they are
called) which may well and deservedly be observed in the framing, disposing and
connecting or knitting together of the bones; therefore to the end, that the
only bones of Man's body may be aptly framed and formed, there are more then
eight thousand Scopi to be considered.

Further more there being more then six hundred nuscles, where of every one
has te^ scopi, and therefore only in the muscles there are six thousand, for
thus writes Galen; Eadem ars etc. The same art is to be seen about De
formatione ^^tus.
all the bowels, and indeed about every part, so as if one consider the scopi,
which the structure of man's body has, the multitude of them would rise unto
some myriades. And here upon Galene concludes, that man's body is framed by
some most wise and most puissant workman.

It was not sufficient, that man's body The spirits. (...)
should consist of bones and muscles; but withal it was needful that it
should have natural heat, by the which it might live; and blood by which it
might be nourished; and spirits, by the which it might move and excrcise its
senses; for without this spirit the soul could neither use any sense, nor the
body move it self; for seeing the spirit is of a most attenuated and thin
substance (as a thing between the most subtle soul and the gross body) it is
therefore the immediate and next instrument or Organum of the soul, by means
whereof the soul causes in the body motion and sense, and without the which
there can be no distribution of nourishment made through out the whole body.

Therefore the divine Providence has fabricated and made three principal
parts in The principal parts of the body
man's body, by the which these operations may be performed, to wit, the Heart,
the ^^uar and the brain. The Heart is ordained for the vital heat, and spirits
of the whole body; the Liver for the sanguineous, bloody and natural spirits;
and the brain for the animal spirits. To these three other external
instruments and parts of the body are serviceable. To the Liver belong the
teeth, the Esophagus, and the stomach to affoard the matter of blood, or a
certain concocted juice which is called Chylus. The Intestin^^ or entrals do
serve partly to tra^smit and send this Chylus through the Mesaraical veins to
the Liver, and partly to deonerate and disburden the body of the excrementall
part of meat and food. Furthermore to the Liver belongs that vessel, called
folliculus fellis, the receptacle of gall, that thereby, after the Chylus is
once turned into blood, it may draw to it self, and contain the more sharp
matter or substance of nourishment, which matter would be otherwise hurtful to
the body; The Liene, or Spleen conduces, that it may attract to it the more
gross and seculent parts of blood. The Reins, that they may suck up the raw,
and redundant wheish matter, being mixed with blood, and after they do send it
through the vessels of vryne to the bladder to be avoided in convenient time.
The Longs are serviceable to the Heart, whereby the Heart is refrigerated and
cooled, and the vital spirits recreated and refreshed through the often
attraction and expiration of new and fresh air.

Now, the spirits are engendered after this sort. The meat being once
concocted, the best juice of it is transferred to the Liver; The engendring of
the ^pirits.
This transmission or sending it thither is made partly by the vital
compression or closing of the stomach, and partly by the virtue of the veins
of the Intestine called Ieiunum, and other innumerable veins, which being
placed in the mesenterium, or in the middle of the bowels, have apower of
sucking to them. The Liver then receiving the Chylus through a fistula or
hollow pipe, turns it (through its own natural disposition) into blood; and
after that, the more thin parts thereof it cha^geth into a vapor, which
commonly is called spiritus naturalis: this vapor distendeth, enlarges, and
opens the veins and pores of the body. One part of this blood the liver by
means of vena caua (which proceeds or ryseth from it self) sends to the
heart; Then through the heat of the heart, this blood is wonderfully extenuated
and refyned; first in the right ventricle of the Heart, and after in the left
ventricle, and so a great part thereof is converted into a most subtle and thin
vapor; of which vapor one part is sent from the Heart to the brain by a great
Artery; and there being elaborated again, clarifyed and tempered in that
fould of small arteries (which is commonly called rete mirabile) it becomes
spiritus animalis: the Animal spirits do serve only to sense and motion, which
are peculiar functions of a living Creature. The rest of these spirits (being
mingled with most thin and pure blood) the Heart distributeth through out the
whole body through the Arteries, conseruing and maintaining herby the natural
heat of the body: and this spirit is usually termed spiritus vitalis. And here
now we are briefly to show, how both kynds of these spirits and blood is
dispersed throughout the whole body; that thereby we may the better apprehend by
how admirable, and wonderful a Wisdom all these things are thus disposed.

Our body consists of heat and moisture; The heat daily consumes and
spends How the spirits are distributed through out the body.
the moisture, vapouring it away into air; as the like appears by water
exposed to the Sun, or to fire, which by little and little vanishes away.
And thus all the members and entrals of man's body would soon decay and dry
away, if there were no instauration and repairing thereof made by nourishment.
The immediate and next nourishment of the body is blood; and therefore it is
requisite, that blood be distributed through the body, that all parts of it be
nourished therewith. The Liver is the shop (as it were) of blood. Therefore
from the Liver there are drawn two great veins, the one going upwards, the
other downwards The distributio^ of the blood.
the body; both which do after bra^ch and diuyde themselves into several
lesser veins; these again into lesser and lesser, till they end in most small
veins, and to the eye scarce visible. These veins go toward* the bowels and
to the muscles, and in them they are terminated and implanted. Seeing then that
there are above six hundred muscles, and that for the most part many small
veins do run into every muscle, it comes to pass, that besides those
inuisisible veins (which for their smalnes are called venae capillares, as
resembling in quantity the hairs of a man's head) there are some thousands of
veins, or rather branches of veins, which do rise and take their beginning
from the two former great veins.

Now by this means it is effected, that there is not the least part of the
body, but there is nourishment brought to it. The making and virtue of the
veins is wonderful: for they consist of fibrae, or small strings, and these
are direct, oblique, or transuerse* By the direct fibrae, they attract and suck
blood; by the oblique they retain and keep it; and by the transuerse they
transmit it further to the muscles and other extreme parts. The same art and
providence is observed in the concauityes and hollownes of the intestina, or
bowels: they have the power of keeping blood, which once bursting out of them,
does instantly putrifye, and ingendreth diseases as we may observe in
Plurisyes, Contusions, and infla^mations. The wheish humor is mingled with
blood, for the more easy distribution of it, which humor after is either
dissipated into air through heat, or else is purged away through sweat. The
blood is also mingled with a little gall for the more attenuating and making it
thin, lest otherwise it should coagulate and thicken. Finally the blood is in
like sort mingled with that spirit, which is called spiritus naturalis, that it
may open the pores, and let in the nourishment, for there is no part of the
body which is destitute of Pores.

In bones, muscles, bowels, sinews, veins, arteryes, membranes, and grisles,
there is vis assimulatrix, an assimulating power; by the which all these parts
do convert The distribution of the vital spirits
the nourishment sent to them into their own substance, nature, and kind.

As the Liver does suppeditate and minister blood to all parts of the body,
with the which it is nourished, as also natural spirits; so the heart does give
heat and vital spirits, by the which the native heat is cherished, ventilated,
and cooled: to which end there proceed from the heart two Arteries, the one
going upward, the other downward; both which deuyde themselves into many
branches, and these again into other lesser, until they end in most small
fibrae, just after the manner of the veins above specifyed. The smallest
branches of the Arteryes are implanted in all the Muscles, and all the bowels,
thereby to bring to them heat and spirit.

Furthermore, as in those bodies, which have hot blood, the heart does
continually Systole and diastole.
beat it self with those two motions, which are called systole and diastole:
By diastole or dilatation of it self, it draws in new air to temper the
heat, and refresh the spirits; by systole or compression of it self, it expels
all fulignious vapors; so are all the Arteryes throughout the whole body at
the same instant moved with an incessant and continual vicissitude, in
dilating and contracting themselves, even for the foresaid ends. And this
ventilation is of such moment, as if it be interrupted (as sometimes it is by
an afflux of humors) then presently is a fever inflamed, and set on fire.

The brain affords animal spirits which The distributio^ of the Animal
Spirits.
is diffused through all parts by means of the nerves or sinews; as blood and
natural spirits are by the veins, and heat, and vital spirits by the
Arteryes. But because such store of sinews, which were to be derived to the
bowels and all the Muscles, could not proceed from the brain, which is
contained in the head; therefore the divine Providence (being the maker of Man)
does extend and draw out the substance of the brain (enclosed in its own
membranes and The production of the brain and its skins.
skins) from the head by the vertebre or joint of the neck, throughout the
whole spine or ridgebone of the back, so as the medulla spinalis, or the
inward substance of the backbone is nothing else, then a certain continuation
and production of the brain. Now to the end, that these animal spirits should
not be dried up or vanish away, and so man should suddenly dye; therefore the
brain is inuolued and covered with a double skin; the one being more thin,
which is the more inward, and next to the brain; the other more hard, which is
the outward, and next to the bone of the Cranium or skull. In like sort and
with the same skins the Medulla spinalis is enclosed.

The sinews proceed from the brain and from the spinal is medulla, and from
the double Six pair of sinews from the brain.
membrane of them. From the brain there are six pair of nerves or sinews,
whereof five are directed to the organs or instruments of the five senses, the^
by to derive to them the animal spirit chiefly for sense, and secondarily for
the moving of the muscles of the head. The sixth pair o^ sinews is extended
out of the head, to certain Muscles of the neck, of the larinx of the breast,
and the orifice or mouth of the stomach, which bears a great sympathy with
the (...). From the spinalis Medulla and its memb^^nes, th^re ^o rise thirty
pair of syne^^^; whereof every pair being after de^^ded Thirty pair of
sinews from the spina dorsi.
into many b^anches, are in the end ^^^^^ted in the muscles, as the like before
we said of the veins and arteryes. When they come unto the muscles, they run
into a sin newy matter, which they call ^endo, and with makes the head of the
Muscle. Thus a^e the animal spirits transmitted and sent from the brain and
spinalis medulla, through the concauities of the sinews to the instruments of
sense, and to the Muscles: by the help of which spirits the soul moves the
muscles; and the muscles (being thus moved) do move every member, as also by
the means of the said spirits (as by its instrument) the Soul performs the
operations of both the external and internal senses.

The Composition of the sinews is most admirable; for as the brain consists
of The Composition of the Sinews.
three things; to wit the medulla or marrow therein and the two skins, within
the which it is inuolued; so in like sort does every sinew, proceeding from the
brain: for the inward medulla or marrow of the brain, is like to the
substance of the brain; and this medulla is covered over with two tunicles or
skins; so as the Sinews seem to be nothing else, then the production or
continuation of that medulla, and of these membranes or skins, where of the
brain consists. And by this means it is effected, that the brain is (after
a manner) throughout the whole body, and in every part thereof, which has sense
and motion. For first it is placed in the head, wherein are all the organs and
instruments of sense. From the head, it (being accompanied with the two
foresaid skins) is extended through the spine of the back; from the spina
dorsi, or ridgbone of the back, it goes into the sinews, which being
dispersed throughout the whole body, are implanted and inserted into all the
muscles.

In like manner, the Heart by means of the Arteries, which imitate the nature
of the heart; and the Liver, through the veins How the three principal members
are throughout the whole body.
which retain the virtue and power of the Liver, may be said to be diflused
through out the whole body, and to exist in the least part of it. Therefore with
what wonderful artifice and Providence are those three principal members, to
wit the brain, heart, and Liver, (by the which sense, motion, the dilatation
and compression of the heart of Arteryes, and Nutrition, are performed) extended
throughout the whole body, and do exist (after a certain manner) in all parts
thereof? I omit innumerable other points, which might be delivered and set
down touching the structure, and use of the parts of the body.

But I have somewhat largly insisted in discoursing of the use and end of these
three principal members, in that the serious consideration of them has
several times moved me to an admiration of the divine Power, who so strangly
has compacted and framed them. For let the wisdom of all men and al Angels
meet together, and they are not able to excogitate or invent any thing so well
disposed and directed to its end, and so sorting and agreeable to the nature of
the thing itself, as these things are. The three p^incip Memb^^ are (...) in
other living Creatures.


Neither only in Man, but in the Species or kynds of other living Creatures the
artifice and skill of these three members are found: for seeing all living
Creatures enjoy sense and motion; it is therefore needful, that they have
animal spirits, and consequently a brain sorting to its nature, which is the
shop of those spirits; as also that they have sinews deryued from the brain,
by the which the spirits are deferred and carried to the Muscles. In like sort
because al living Creatures are nourished, it is requisite, that they have a
Liver, which prepares and concocteth the nourishment, and veins, by the help
of which, the nourishment is transferred to each part, as also natural
spirits, seeing by the benefit of these the aliment penetrateth all parts of
the body.

Finally, because the foresaid Creatures are to be cherished with a certain
native heat of their own; whereby they may live, it is expedient, that they
have a heart, from the which the native heat and vital spirits are dispersed;
and arteryes, by the which they are so dispersed. Now these three principal
members are most appositly and aptly framed and disposed in living Creatures,
not after one and the same manner, but after different sorts according to the
different nature of the said Creatures, and therefore they are found in flies,
gnats, fleas, and the least worms. For these small creatures have their
brain, their Liver, their sinews, arteryes, and veins fabricated and made
with wonderful subtility: their inward parts are not confounded in themselves,
nor of one form, but they have several perfect organs and vnmixte; they being
of different temperature, different faculty, different use, different form,
different connection, and of different place or situation; yet made with such an
invisible tenuity and smalnes, as is incomprehensible to man's wit. And this
point is fully manifested by the sharpnes of their senses, their swiftnes of
motion, and their strange and great industry and sagacity.

Now, it we consider the external and outward parts of living Creatures; how
The external parts of living Creatures.
wonderfu^ly is every part appropriated to its peculiar v^e and end? How easy,
expedite, and quick functions and motions have they? And how great variety is
there of them according to the variety of their kinds? Birds are made with
small heads, and sharp becks the more easily thereby to cline and pie^ce the
air; with crooked pounces, wherewith to hold fast the boughs of the trees,
whereupon they sit; with The shape of Birds.
feathers growing backward, that their flying be not hindered; which feathers ly
close to the body, while they fly, that the air may the less enter among
them; their wings are most light, and so framed, as they may easily open and
close for flying; being fitted with a soft hollownes to receive air in while
they fly, and to cover their body straightly and comely. Such of them as feed
upon flesh, have most strong and hooked beckes to tear the flesh asunder, and
sharp and crooked tallants to apprehend and hold it. Such as feed upon the
water, have log necks, that they may dyue in to the water the deeper with their
head, To conclude, how many colors are there ^n several kynds of byrds? How
pleasant is the beauty of their wings? How great is the difference of their
sound and voices? How sweet is the singng of some of them? And even in some of
those, which have but a very small body, how shrill and piercing is the sound
they make?

The making of forefooted beasts, because they go upon the ground, is far
^^ffere^t The making of ^ourefooted Beasts.
from the former. Such as feed upon flesh and live upon preying, have the
members of their bodies fit and accommodated for prey: In their mouth they have
two teeth above, and two below, long and strong to hold, and tear a sunder;
their claws sharp and faulked, or hooked to hold fast; which claws, when
they go, they so bear, that they are not worn; and in catching their prey,
they stretch them out, like fingars.

Those other beasts, as feed upon herbs, leaves, or fruits, have their teeth
and hoofs otherwise formed. For the order of their teeth are eauen and equal,
one not being longer then an other* of which the furthermost are sharp to cut
the grass, or the new buds of trees and flowers; the inwardmost are broad and
blunt to grynd and make small the meat. Their hoofs are firm and plain, that
they may stand firmerly* and that their feet be not ouerpressed with the weight
of their body. Their neck of that length, as standing uprightly they may grase
upon the grass: and so accordingly Camels by reason of the hugenes of their
body, have a very long neck; But in an Elephant it is otherwise, to whom a
long neck would become deformed, and would have made that huge weight of his
body to be unapt to the defense of himself. Therefore an Elephant has a most
short neck, yet in liew thereof a long snout with the which (as with a hand) it
takes any thing, and reaches it to his mouth. Now, who sees not, that all
these things are thus purposely disposed and framed with wonderful wisdom
and consideration?

And to come to ^ihes: How fitly and proportionatly are then bodies framed to
live The making of fishes.
in the Element of water? The head of most of them is narrow, the better thereby
to cut the water; the tail broad and spread out, which serves (as (...)) to
guide the fishes motion with an extraordinary celerity and swiftnes. They have
also close to their belly certain fins (whereof some have two, others four or
more:) these stand instead of oars (as it were) by the help whereof they
either move in the water, or stay their moving: upon their back they have a
certain finne like unto a skin, which they stretch out, that they may swin
with their bodies downward, and that they may not easily be cast upon their
backs. Their gils, which they have upon the side of their chawes, deserve for
the casting out of water; both of that which they daily draw in, to the
refrigeration of their heart, as also of that, which enters into them, while
they are in taking of their food and nourishment. And therefore such fishes as
want these gils, have instead of them certain holes, by the which they
disburden themselves of this water. And without this help of auoydance, it is
certain, that they would be presently suffocated and choked, as wanting all
respiration. Their Scales grow backward, to the end they may be no hinderance
to their swiming* which, when the fishes are in motion, close near together.
Such fishes, as breath not much, want lungs or lights, and have their heart
thinly covered over, near unto their mouth, that it may be easily refrigerated
and cooled by the attraction of water. Those of a strong respiration have lungs
(with which the heart is covered) and other instruments fitting to the same end.
To conclude the kynds of fishes and variety of their forms is almost
innumerable; every one of them having their outward and inward parts and
members most aptly framed to their uses and ends; so nothing is there to be
found, which is not disposed with all reason, wisdom, and providence. Neither
is this variety of forms and elegancy of structure to be found only in the
bodies of fishes but also in shells, with the which the small fishes (though
imperfect in nature) are covered. Of these Shells, their beauty, and variety is
wonderful, although they serve to no other use, then to cover and arm the
small bodies of their fishes. For there is no where greater show of divine art
and skill, then in these, especially where there is produced such variety
without any seed, and only out of a formed Element, as appears from the
testimony of ( ^* 9. c. 33.
) Pliny himself. T^^ ibi colorum differentiae etc. So many differences of
colors in Shells, so many figures and forms* as plain, hollow, long, horned
as the moon, gathered together in a round form, smooth, rough, etc* with many
other forms by him recyted, and then after he further writes: Nitor and
puritas etc. The shining and purity is incredible in diverse of them, exceeding
^ll metals of gold and silver, and not to be corrupted, but in a most long
space and time.

This further is worthy of consideration in living Creatures. To wit, To man,
in The natural weapons and couerings of beasts.
that he is endued with reason, there is given at his birth, neither any thing
to cloth his body, nor any weapon for his own defense, but in place of these;
Hands are given him, with the which he may make to himself all kind of
vestme^ts or weapons, to wear or lay by at his pleasure. But to beasts,
because they cannot make and procure these things to themselves, they therefore
receive the^ even from a most benign and divine Providence, and they increase
with the increasing of the beasts, neither do they allat any time need any
repayring. For weapons, are given to some Horns; to others Teeth; to others
Claws; to others strength in their feet; to others a sharp dart in their
tails; to others a venomous poison in their teeth or their hoofes, and this
endangereth their Enemies either by touching or breathing. Of others; their
safety does lie in their speedines of flying away; or in their natural craft
and deceit, or in the hardness of their shells, wherewith they are covered, or in
the pricks of their skins, which some of them can cast from them against their
enemies. Instead of Cloth (wherewith they are covered) some have hair, others
wool, feathers, scales, a sharp and hard pil or rynd, shells, and a smooth skin,
yet of sufficient hardness. Furthermore their is in every living (...) a virtue
o^ power, by the which all these veapons and vestments (as it were) are framed
in convenient places, forms, and colors; and this out of the earthly and
gros^er part of the nourishment or meat, otherwise improfitable, and but to be
purged away. Therefore we may worthily admire Gods Providence herein, which
turns the matter (otherwise hurtful for the nourishing of the body) into
such necessary uses.

I here pretermit the most diverse forms and shapes of those living creatures,
which are commonly called Insecta; as flies, gnats, and the like; as also all
little worms, with the which the air, the earth, the fields, the rivers and
standing waters do abound in the Summer time. Al parts or members in them are
wonderfully fa^e, all most exactly framed, and all most perfectly agreing and
fitting to the functions, for which they were made. Among so many kinds of
which small living bodies, there is not one so base and vile, which is not able
to procure an astonishing admiration in whom behold them attentively. Yea by
how much the creature ie more base and abject, by so much the more the art of
divine Providence shines in the fabric and making of it.

The like Providence is showed in the making of Plants, which coming out of
the earth do remain fixed to the earth; whereof The fabric or making of
Pla^ts.
there are many kinds, and most diverse forms of the said kynds. Nothing is in
the^, which is without the height and fulness o^ reason: All their parts most
aptly sort to their ends* The roots (whether it be a tree, a young bud, or an
herb) do serve to ^asten the whole plant to the earth* and to suck from
thence humor for the nourishing of al its parts. The virtue of the roots, is
strange, seeing the greatest trees that are, though never so much diffused, and
spread out into branches, are by their roots ^o affixed to the earth, that no
force of wynds can level the^ with the earth. The Bark or outward ^ynd
(serving as a clothing to them) defenc^ them from cold and heat, and from the
encounter of any other domageable thing. The Bows and branches are directed
for the greater increase of fruits. The leaves serve partly for ornament, and
parley for the safty of the fruits, least they perish through heat and showers.
The fruit serves for the continuance of the seed, and in most of them for food
of men and other living creatures; and therefore they are more full of suck,
and there is greater store of them, then the continuance of the seed requires;
as appears in apples, pears, melions, and many other kynds of fruits. Plants
do want Muscles* because they want motion, and do cleave immoueably to the
earth. All parts even from the lowest piece of the root to the highest of the
leaves are full of pores: they have a power of sucking in, and what they suck
in, they do assimilate and make it the same with the substance of the tree. The
leaves and fruit do hang by a little stalk, which consists of many fibrae
or small strings, through the stalk all the juice passes, which after is
dispersed through the pores of the fibrae, into all parts of the leaves and
fruits in a most strange manner. The stalks do not adhere or cleave to the
boughs by any fibrae, which are continued to the boughs, but by such as are
inserted in them, and glewed or joined together through the force of a certain
humor; The which humor being once dried, the fruit and the leaves either
freely of themselves, or with very small pulling do fall down. In the Medulla
or marrow of the Plant there is a genitall power or virtue, and therefore it is
called (...) or in Latin Matrix; the which marrow being taken away, though the
tree do bear fruit, yet is this fruit destitute of seed. Even as the root,
the stock of the tree, and the boughs or branches do consist of the bark,
the wood, and the marrow; so the fruit consists of the bark of that part
which is commonly called Pulpa, and of the seed. The suck and humors of the
earth being attracted by the root, and dispersed by the fibrae into the body
and the boughs, and perfectly con^octed, the watery parts being improfitable
to the tree, or to that wooden substance (whatsoever the plant be) and going
to the furthest parts of the boughs, are turned into leaves; the very parts
into flowers: that which is more gross and better tempered is partly changed
into the substance of the plant, and partly into fruit; and thus no
superfluity remains which is to be purged away; though the contrary fall out
in living Creatures. Some of those plants (which ascending high are through
their height weak) do either fold themselves about some other thing (as hope,
Iuy, and many other such like plants) or else they have certain wynding twigs
or stringes, wherewith (as with hands) they take hold of staves or such things,
set purposely to support them, that they fall not; as Vynes, Pompions, and some
others. But to be short, it were a labor infinite and endless to repeat and set
down all the miracles (as I may truly term them) which appear in the
structure and making of Plants.

Now from all these foresaid speculations I conclude, that seeing the parts of
living creaures and of Plants have a double end; the one as they are parts, of
which the form and structure of the whole depends; the other as they are
organs and instruments ordained for certain functions necessary to the safety
of the whole; and to both these ends they are made so apt and proportionable,
as that it cannot be conceived, how more exactly and wonderfully they could be
framed; it is therefore evident, that all those parts were made by some one
supreme and most wise spirit or intelligence, who first conceived in himself
all these ends, and considered aforeha^d the means best sorting to the said
ends. For it is altogether impossible and with true reason incompatible, that
there should be so wonderful and admirable a proportion and conuenie^cy of so
many innumerable Media, or means, to so innumerable ends, except the means
and the ends had been aforeha^d most exactly weighed and compared together.

This reason most perspicuously conuinceth, that there is a most wise, and
divine Providence, and that this Providence has a care in the least things:
seeing that even in Gnats, Myse, little worms, and the least herbs it has
framed innumerable parts, and innumerable instruments to the complete and
perfect form of that little creature or small pla^t; as also it has disposed
all the functions and ends most agreing to its safety and health. For
Providence is discovered in nothing more, then in an apt disposition and
contriuing of means to their Ends; and this sorting of means cannot be
performed without an absolute and perfect working of Reason. Wherefore seeing
this disposal is most perfect and admirable in the least Creatures, it
follows, that it is more clear then the sun beams, that a most distinct
and remarkable Providence had it sole hand busyed in the making and creating
of the said small bodies.

THE SEVENTH REASON: THAT ALL things do work most orderly to a certain End.
CHAP. IX.
WE have proved in the precedent Chapters, that there is a divine Power, from
the nature and disposition of the parts of the world, and from the structure
and making of living Creatures and plants; Now, in this place we will
demonstrate the same from this consideration, that all things do work for some
one end or other. For there is nothing idle in the world, all things tend and
direct their operations and working to some end, and that to the benefit of the
worker, or of some other. And they incline and bend to their ends so ordinatly,
and with such convenient ways and passages, as that it cannot be bettered by
any art whatsoever. Wherefore seeing the things themselves can neither perceive
the ends, whereunto they are directed, neither the means, nor the proportion of
the means, by the which they are directed; it is therefore most certain, that
all things are directed by some superior Power, who sees and considers both
the means and the ends. For it is impossible, that a thing should particulerly
and ordinatly in its own operation aim at one certain end, except it either
knows the end, and the means conducing to the said end, that so by this
knowledge it may guide its operation, or at least be directed by some other,
which knows all these things. Thus (for example) a Clock, whose end is the
distinguishing the hours of the day, because it neither knows this end, nor
is of power to dispose it self to this end, is therefore necessarily to be
directed by some understanding mind, which knows these things, and can make
distinction of hours.

That all things tend to some one end or other, first it is evident in the
motion of the Heavens, and in the illumination and influx of the stars, and in
the fecundity and fruitfulnes of the sea and earth (as is showed before.)
Secondly in the parts and members of all living Creatures and Plants; each part
whereof we have already made evident, to have its peculiar use and function,
necessarily for the good of the whole. Thirdly, the same point is to be
manifested in all seeds. Fourthly in the industry, and labor of living
Creatures.

And first, this informing Virtue or Power, which is in seeds, does most
clearly work for some end, to wit to frame and The seminall virtue or power.
form the body of a living creature, or a Plant. Now, this it effects by so
multiplicious and strange an art, and by so long and well disposed a work, as
it is impossible it should be wrought by any more wise a manner. And certainly
if this seminall virtue were any Intelligence endued with reason and discourse,
it could not proceed with greater order, artifice, and wit. Upon which ground
Hypocrates in his book entitled (...), number 1. writeh, that this seminall
virtue or natural heat, by the which all things generable, are framed and
made, is eternal, and endued with an understanding, for thus he says: Videtur
sane etc. That which we call (calidum) seems to me to be immortal, and to
understand, see, hear, and know all things both present and to come. Of this
opinion he was, because he thought, that those things could not be made without
great art and understanding, which were wrought by the force and virtue of the
natural heat.

First then, the more gross part of the seed by force of this heat and spirit,
is extended The manner, how the seminall virtue works.
into fibrae, or little strings, into the which fibrae this spirit entering does
partly hollow them into fistules or pypes; and partly causes them to be
spongeous, in some places more thin, in others more solid and firm; and thus
does it form the extreme parts, making them fit, and bynding them, as the
necessity of the bones and members may seem to require. From the other portion
of seed and from blood, it frames the three principal members, to wit the
Brain, the Heart, and the Liver; drawing out of the fibrae matter for the
making of veins, arteries and sinews. The spirit entering into the^ does
hollow, dilate, extend, and deuyde them into several branches; then it
deduceth and draws them through the whole body, that they may carry
nourishment, as also vital and animal spirits to all parts. In the mean ty
me every small portion or part of the body does attract blood, and convert ^t
into its own substance; the spirit still forming every thing by little and
little, and giving each part its due figure, measure, proportion and connection
with other parts: so as from the seventh day after the conceptio^ the form of
the whole body and distinction of all parts even of the fingers, does appear.
Now how manifold and various is this labor in framing of so many bones,
veins, arteryes, sinews, and Muscles, in the apt distribution, deduction, or
drawing out, and termination or ending of every part, each of them keeping its
due form, temper, measure, place, joining together and incision? What mind or
understanding can be intent to so many things at once? What Art may in the
least part seem to equal this? Who therefore considering all these things, can
doubt, but that there is some one most wise and most potent Mind or Soul, by
whom all this operation and working is directed, and to who^ all this
admirable artifice is to be ascribed? If an indigested and informed heap of
stones, tyles, lyme and wood should begin to make to it self a house,
directing it self in the doing thereof, and framing all parts thereof, as the
Art of Architecture requires, who would not affirm that a certain
Understanding, skilful of building, were inuisibly and latently in the said
things, that they could so artificially dispose themselves? Or if a pensill
being imbued with diverse colors, should move it self, and first should but
rudely draw the lineaments of a man's face, and after should perfect every part
thereof by framing the eyes, drawing the cheeks, figuring the nose, mouth,
ears, and the other parts (serving in them all a due proportion, and fitting
colors, as the exact science of painting requires;) no man would doubt, but
that this pensill were directed herein by an intelligent spirit. But now, in
the framing of every living Creature far greater art and wit is desired, then
in any humane work whatsoever; since the skill whereof transcendeth by many
degrees all man's skill and artifice; for it arriueth to that height of
perfection, as that the work cannot in that kind be possibly bettered; neither
can the parts of it (whether internal or external) have a more pleasing
proportion and connection. Therefore who is so void of Reason, that can enter
into any dubious and uncertain consideration with himself, whether all this
molition and laboursome endeavor in framing a living Creature be directed by a
power endued with reason and wisdom, or no?

Furthermore, there are three things here to be considered, among which there
ought to be a great proportion; to wit the Soul of the living Creature, the
body, and the S^^inall The proportion between the internal form and the
body, and between the body and the seminall virtue.
virtue. And first, the Soul ought to be most proportionable to the body. For
such ought the small body of any little Creature to be, as the Anima or soul
of the same does require to perform its proper functions; wherefore how great
the difference is of Souls, so great also the discrepancy is of bodies, if we
insist in the figure, the temperature, and the conformation of the Organs;
therefore in the nature of every soul the whole formal reason is contained,
so as that if a man did perfectly know the nature of the soul, from it he
might easily collect, what the habit, figure, and temperature of the body ought
to be. But who is ignorant of the nature thereof, must consequently be
ignorant of the other; for in some one particular or other he shall ever be
wanting, and never attain to the due proportion in knowledge thereof. As for
example, if the question be touching the small body of a fly, how many feet it
ought to have, how many flexures or bendings in their legs, or thighs, what
difference between every flexure, what temperature, proportion and connection;
how many ^inews in every thigh, how many veins, what proportion to its little
nails; of which things many are for their smalnes not to be discerned by the
eye: for in the small body of the fly, there may be found several thousands
of proportions, as necessary, that its soul may rightly sort to the body; to
all which no man can attain, except the first does penetrate and consider in
his mind the nature of the soul, in the which the reason of all these (as in
the root) doth^y hidden and secret. Again the Seminal power ought to have most
perfect proportion with the body, that it may produce such a body in all
respects, as that soul does require. Therefore, who first caused and made this
seminall power, ought before* hand to have the whole structure of the body
exactly known unto him, that so he might suit and proportion this seminall
seed to the body. For as in the soul (as in the final cause) the whole reason
of the fabric of the body lies, and therefore the body ought in a perfect
proportion to be accommodated, and made fit to the soul; In like sort the
reason of the making of the same i^ latent and hidden in the seminall virtue,
o^ power, as in the efficient cause. Wherupon^ it follows, that there ought
to be as a^ exact proportion between the structure o^ the body and the seminall
virtue, as is between the efficient cause and the adequate effect of the said
Cause.

Now, from all these premises it is mos^* clearly demonstrated, that these
three, to wit the Soul of every living Creature, the structure of the body,
and the seminall virtue, have their source from one and the same beginning;
which beginning cannot be any nature deprived of reason and understanding:
seeing a beginning void of reason could not among different things set down*
congruous proportions; much less so exact and so infinite proportions, as are
between the body and the soul, and the seminall virtue and the making or
fabric of the body. For to perform this, requires a most perfect and
distinct knowledge. Therefore it is concluded, that there is an intelligence or
spirit both most wise and most powerful, which through its wisdom is able to
excogitate and invent, and through its power is of might to perform all these
things.

The reason, why this seminall virtue might seem to be endued with a mind or
The seminall virtue is the impression of a Di^yne Art.
understanding* is, because this virtue is a certain impression, and (as it
were) a foot step of the divine art and skill; and therefore it works, as if
it had a particular art and knowledge in working. Even as if a painter could
impresse in his pensill a permanent power and virtue of his art, and that
thereupon the pensill should move it self, and draw the images, as if there
were an art and understanding in the Pensill. Furthermore it may be here
presumed, that this diuyue spirit or Intelligence does conserve this impressio^
with his continual influxe, and does cooperate with it thus working with his
general concourse.

Even as in living creatures these three, to wit the Soul, the body, and the
seminall virtue do meet and conspire together in a wonderful proportion; so do
they a like in every kind of Plant: for in the Anima and soul of every plant
the whole reason of the structure of the body of the Plant, as also of the
leaves, flowers, and fruit is contained.

The like may be said of the seminall power. For the form or soul of the
Plant is a thing simple and uncompounded, and such also is the seminall virtue.
For the whole difference, and the whole multitude of figures, colors, smells,
lines and proportions, which is discerned, either externally in the body of the
Plant, or in the leaves, flowers, fruits, roots, bark, or juice and marrow,
proceeds from the seminall virtue and from the form or soul of the Plant: and
therefore all these things are internally after a simple and inuifible manner
most strangely contained in them both. If therefore flowers do appear
externally fair to the eye, and admirable for their great variety of figures
colors, and proportions; then how much more fair and pleasing is the
internal form (to wit the soul) and the seminall virtue, from which all that
visible beauty flows, and in the which after a wonderful particular and
ineffable sort it is wholly contained?

Neither do only the seeds of things (which works after a natural manner,
and The working of living Creatnres are directed to an end
without any reflexe, or knowledge of its own working) tend to a certain end
in their working; but also living Creatures do the like, when they work by
their imagination. For all living Creatures are moved and inclined to their
sense of gust and feeding, and to the act of generation; and these they
perform, not thinking at all or conceauing the end, whereunto those functions
do tend and are directed. For neither are they stirred up to the act of
generation through the desire of having young ones, neither do they eat with
intention of producing their lives and conseruing themselves; but they
apprehend the working of these two senses after a confused manner, under the
form of a dectable thing, and in this apprehension they are stirred thereto.
And yet doubtlesly these actions have a further intention and end. For neither
eating, nor the act of generation are ordained for pleasure; since this is to
perpetuate and continue the kynds of living creatures, and that to defend and
maintain the particular life of every one. Therefore it is needful, that
there be some one superior Mind or understanding, which knowing and intending
these ends, does direct bruit beasts to the said ends, and which gives to
every living creature (according to its nature) fitting organs and instruments,
by the which it may come to those ends.

To conclude, there appears in many irrationable creatures a certain
particular The Industry of irrationable Creatures.
industry, by the which they either take their meat, build their nests, bring
up and defend their offspring, and this in so industrious and witty a manner, as
that (if they were endued with reason) they could not perform the same actions
better, and the end (for which they thus do, and to which all this is finally
intended) they apprehend not, but rest absolutely ignorant of it.

The Spider (for example) weaueth her The spyder.
web with wonderful art, and (like a hu^ter) lays her nets for the catching
of flies; the threeds of her web are most fynely and curiously wrought, and the
further they are distant from the middle or center of the web, they always by
degrees do make greater Circles; and the connexions or insertions of one thread
with an other (still observing a precise distance) are most strange. She
conceaueth the aptnes of her web to hold fast with the fynenes of the thread?
And when her web is wrought, she prouydeth her self of a little hole to lie in
(like unto the custom of fowlers) lest she should be espied. When the fly
falls into the web, the spider instantly runs thereto, taking hold of her,
and hindering the motion of her wings, lest she should fly away, then presently
she kills the fly, takes it away and lays it up against time of hunger.
Now supposing the spider were endued with reason, could it do all these things
with better art and order, and more fitly tending to her designed end?

The Bees work their fine hony-Combs, distinguished on each side with little
cells The industry of Bees.
or rooms of six corners, which they frame with their six little feet. And
then they flying abroad, and lighting upon flowers and herbs, they gather from
thence the sweet dew of heaven, and lay it up in these small rooms, to serve
for their provision in the winter time. How they deuyde the labor herein among
themselves is most admirable* for some of them bring part of flowers with their
feet; others water with their mouths; others again serve to build, work,
and frame their cells within, and do disburden such bees, as come laden to the
Hyue. When their Cells are full of matter, then do they cover them with a small
membrane or skin, least otherwise the liquour therein should slow away, when any
part of their Combs is ready to fall, they support it with a partition wall (as
it were) made of earth in form of an Arch. All the Bees do rest together, they
labor together, and conspire together to perform one general work; helping
one another according to their facultyes and powers. I here omit what authors
have written of the strange policy and government of Bees* observed curiously by
diverse.

If we come next to Emmets or Ants, what s^dulity and industry is found in
them? And The industry of Emmets.
how much care is taken for the time to come, and yet they want all knowledge
of the time to come? They make their habitation and dwelling places in little
concauityes of the earth, themselves thus laboring the earth, which
habitations for greater security and quietness are full of many wyndings and
turnings. Here they bring forth their Eggs, and hither they bring in the summer
their winters provision; they indifferently communicate in their labors, as
bees do, and have a kind of political government and care: they do first know
and byte the corn, lest it should take root again (see herein the wonderful
providence of God in these so vile Creatures.) The corn being moystened with
rain, they lay out to the Su^ne, by which it is dried, and after they hord it
up again. They carry their burdens with the pinsers (as it were) of their
mouths; It is also strange to observe, how in so great a concu^se of them of
many hundreds or thousands, they meeting one another in a most strait way, are
no hindera^ce or let to their passages, and they only of all living Creature
(excepting man) do bury one another.

The Silkwormes do work out of their own bowels, their graves or sepulchers,
The Industry of the silkworme.
the wolly fertility of their bellies ministering them matter thereto; In this
grave they being shut up (as it were dead) at length appear and come forth in
another shape; imitating herein a second birth or generation through a
stupendous metamorphosis and change: their form is like to the garden worm
commonly called a Canker; they eat and feed almost continually, only they rest
from feeding, and attend the concoction of their meat two several times, till
they grow greater. Coming to a just quantity or bigness, and their body being
distented and stretched out with meat, they rest again for better concoction.
Then they begin to weaue with a continual pain and indefatigable labor,
until they have shut up themselves within their work. The fynenes and yet the
firmnes of the thread thereof is strange. They draw out the thread with the
small nails of their feet; they wynd it into a partly round clue, but of an
o^all figure, wherein they close themselves up. Now how great industry and
Providence is found in this work? And from this their working comes that so
great abundance of silk, wherein the world now offends so much in wast and
luxury.

The Hedgh^g goes under the Vine tree, and by shaking the vine casts down
such grapes, as are ripe; when great store of the^ are fallen down, he
contracteth his body into a round compass, and so tumbling him among the
grapes, and they sticking upon his pricks, he carries great store of them into
his den to feed himself and his whelps withal. The like he does for the
gathering of Apples. Neither is the industry small in Cats; for with what
silence of pace, do they rush upon birds, and with what obserua^t eye do they
light upon myce? And it is said, that their excrements they hyde and cover over
with earth, lest otherwise they be discouerd and betrayed by the smell thereof.

In fishes also there is a great show and outward The industry of fishes.
appearance of reason and providence, yea even in such as are thought to be
most dull of nature, as appears in the fish called Polypus (as having many
parts resembling feet, or arms) being accustomed to feed upon shel* fishes.
These fishes, after they perceive, that his feet are within their shells, do
presently shut and close them, and thus by this violent compression of the
shells they cut of the feet of the said fish. Now this danger to prevent, the
Polypus is used to cast within the shells a little stone; that so the shells not
closing together, he may without any danger feed of the fishes within them.

The Whale (as diverse ancient authors do write) being of an imperfect eye sight
has Oppianus l 5. de piscatura A^l^an^s l. 8. ^. 6. Plutarch de prudentia
animal.
a little fish, as his guide, which goes before him, least he should fall
upon any narrow rock. Many fishes, which are more slow of their own nature to
seek their prey and food, have diverse little things ha^ging about their
chawes, in shape like to small worms, that so the lesser fishes being allured
thither under the show of meat may be the more easily taken of other fishes.
The fish Sepia, when she perceives her self to be touched, does darken the
water with a kind of humor and moisture; as black as ^nke, that so hyding her
self in the darkness thereof she may better escape. The shelfish called Pinna
^s ever engendered in mudy waters, never goes without his companion, which they
call Pinnoter; This Pinnoter is a small shrimpe. The Pinna desirous of prey,
and being altogether blind, offers (as it were) his body to little fishes to
feed upon. The fishes assaulting him in that number as is sufficient for his
nourishment, and the Pinnoter, or his companion giving him notice thereof by a
little touch, the Pinna does kill all the fishes with a hard and violent
compression of them; so feeding himself after upon them, and giving part of
them to his fellow. The fish Torpedo being immersed in mud and dirt, hydeth
himself, that the fishes should not fly from him, the which then swimming
over him, and being benumd through an inward quality proceeding from him, he
after catches them* Other like relations of fishes are reported by Pliny,
Plutarch Oppianus, and others.

And next to come to Birds, in whom there appears no less providence, then
in the former creatures. And first, with how The Industry of Birds
much care, skill, and forcecast (as it were) do they build their nests, that
they may be sitting for their rest in the night time, and for the nourishing
and bringing up of their young ones? They work them for the most part in
trees, or thickets of brambles and qushes, thereby to be far from the danger of
men and beasts. The outward side of their nests are commonly but plain, as of
briars, twigs, or boughs. This matter they dispose ^n form of a hat turned up
side down, and ^asten one part thereof with an other, with clay, so as it can
hardly be dissolved; next they line the inward part thereof with some soft
matter, as moss, hay, or the like, straitning by degrees the hollownes of it
toward the entrance; Lastly for the more softning of it, and for the greater
heat, they strew it within with down of feathers, small hair and the like, so
as the birds may lie therein with ease and heat. And although all birds do
retain this form in general for the disposal of the matter of their nests,
yet every kind of them has his own peculiar frame, and different manner of
architecture (as I may call it;) as among us we find several kynds of
building, to wit the Corinthian, Dorick, Tuscane, Gothic, and several other
sorts thereof.

There is besides in birds and many other living creatures, an extraordinary
care of bringing up and feeding their young ones; I mean of such Creatures, as
being but newly borne, cannot provide for themselves: for they seek out of
every place food fitting for their brood, and bring it to their nests; yea
diverse of them not finding sufficient store of meat for themselves, and their
brood, are content to suffer hunger, thereby to give the greater quantity to the
other. Next observe with what earnestnes of mind they defend their offspring
from their enemies; for they presently raise themselves, interpose their body,
swell, rouse up their feathers in terror to their Enemy, and do oppose to him
all their weapons, as their beackes, teeth, nails, horns, claws, and what
other instrument they are able to fight withal. And some of them, where they
see their force cannot prevail, do use strange sleights for diuerting their
enemy from their nests, sometimes with show in suffering themselves to be taken,
that so with short flights they may the better draw their adversary from their
nests, and if their nests be found, how much then lamentation does appear in
many? With what do^efull cries do they fill the air? And what inco^solable
grief does afflict them for the time?

To conclude, there is in all living creatures a strange industry for their
own preservation. Many have their safety in their flight, others in their
weapons, and some in deceipts. The Hare being in danger, and willing to stay
securely in some one place, will make his last bounces and leapes wonderful
great, that thereby the dogs by such his iumping may lose their sent of him. And
for the same cause they so^times will swim over Rivers* because their smell
stays not in the water. The like and greater cunning does the Fox use for
saving his life.

In Aegipt there is great store of Serpents: for the better remedy of this
inconvenience, there is by Providence of the highest a little creature called
Ichneumon, like unto a dormouse; this (being the others natural enemy, and
ready to fight with it) does first roll and tumble himself in mire and dirt,
which after is dried and hardened with the suns heat. The Ichneumon thus armed
with the dried mire (as with a breast plate) comes to his denn, and provoke
him to fight. The same little beast also entering into the chawes of the
Crocodyle, (when he is a sleep) and penetrating his body does kill him by
gnawing and eating away his bowels.

In like sort irrationable creatures do know such kind of meats, as are
hurtful Beasts know what is hurtful to them, and what medicinable.
and dangerous to them, as also the remedy and cure of their diseases and
wounds. Dogs when they have surfetted with eating, do procure a vomit by eating
of grass, and so do purge their infectious humor.

The Ringdoue, the Chugh, the Vzell, and the Partridge do purge their yearly
corrupt humors by eating of the leaf of a bay tree; Swallows have taught us
that the herb Celandine is medicinable forth eye sight; for they do cure the
sore eyes of their young ones by causing them to eat thereof. The Heart being
wounded with an arrow yet sticking in him, does cast it out by seeding upon the
herb Dictamnum; and being stricken by a Serpent, cures himself by eating of
crabfishes. The Barbarians do hunt the Panther with a piece of flesh colored
with the juice of a venomous herb, but she perceauing her jaws to be shut
up with the force of the poison, seeks to feed upon the bowels of a dead man,
which is to her the only cure for this disease. I omit innumerable other
things touching the customs of living creatures, which are made known to us,
partly by the diligent inquisition and search of man, and partly by the often
experience had of them: all which is relaed unto us by good and approved
authors.

Now from all these observations it is evident that the operations and working
of living Creatures (yea when they perform the same by the interuention and
help of their imagination) do most ordinately and regularly tend to a certain
end. But if they aim to some such destinated end, then it necessarily
follows, that they are directed thither by some cause. But the beast it self
cannot be this cause; in that irrationable Creatures do not know the ends of
their own operations, neither can they apprehe^d or discourse with themselves;
that this thing is profitable and conducing to that end; or that this is to be
done for that respect, or the like. As for example, the Spyder knows not to
what end his web so wouen is profitable, or with what order he is to proceed in
making of it. Neither do the Bees know why their honycombs are made in such a
form, or what benefit and good they shall reap thereby. Neither does any other
such living creature know, why he eats or drinks, or begets little ones,
or feeds and nourishes them, or flies away from his enemy, or defends
himself from him: finally he knows not the end or reason of any thing he
does; and yet he performs his operations, in such an order, and with so great
an industry and reason, as if he were endued with the true use of Reason. In so
much that some of the ancient Authors maintained, that all living Creatures
had reason, though they were deprived of all speech or language, which might be
known to us. And of this very point and subject did Plutarch write a book.
But this opinion is most false, and ridiculous.

Therefore it is necessarily to be granted, that* there is a certain Spirit or
Intelligence presiding and ruling over brute beasts, and governing their
actions; which well knows what is convenient to the safety and defense of
their lives, and to the propagation of each one of their kynds, and by what
means they are to attain unto the same. By which Intelligence all the actions
of irrationable creatures are directed to their proper, several, and distinct
ends. For here is first needful an exact and distinct knowledge of all these
ends, which agree to every one of them according to their species and kynds, as
also of the means conducing to the same ends* Secondly it is requisite to know
what proportion ought to be of every mean to its end. Lastly what instinct is
necessary to several functions, and to the many series or degrees of their
functions. Now all this knowledge being presupposed and granted as necessary,
it was easy for that supreme Architect, and Maker of all things to imprint in
each living Creature peculiar and accommodated instincts, to all these means
and Ends.

Now, that beasts and al other irrationable Creatures by force of these
instincts do so proceed in their actions, as if they were endued with an
understanding; the reason is, because these instincts are certain impressions
of the wisdom and reason of the divine providence, and hereupon those
creatures do no otherwise direct their operations, then the divine Providence
it self, if it were planted in them, or would use them, as its instruments
would direct them. For two why natural instincts guide beasts like Reason.
ways may a thing be directed by reason and art in its working, and in tending
its working to some end. One way immediately, as the instrument is moved by the
artificer: thus is the pensill moved by the paynter. A second way, by the
mediation of some power or virtue impressed, which impression is a certain
printe or imitation of reason; And in this later manner are irrationable
creatures moved by the divine Providence. Therefore these Creatures are guyded
by reason in all their operations, yet not by reason inhering or really being
in them; but by reason inuisibly assisting and governing them; and not as bare
and naked instruments immediately moved by the workman, but by the means of a
certain impressed virtue, which virtue retains the form of art in working.
And in this sense the Philosophers were accustomed to say: Opus naturae est
opus intelligenti^, because an intelligent spirit directs nature in all
things through a (...) impressed virtue.

The like we find, that humane art (...) and causes in beasts; for we see that
Dogs and Apes are taught by man's labor to dance with distinct paces to the
pleasure of the beholders, and gain of their masters. This dancing is
governed by Art* not that this art is inherent in the Dog or Ape, but that in a
sort it does govern them, and has impressed in their pha^tasies a certain
print of it self through often practice; and many other things are dogs taught
especially touching hunting. In like sort Birds and diverse other Creatures
pleasingly perform many things, and yet they know not why they perform them,
or why they do thus, rather then otherwise, or to what end they so do, though
all these he who thus taught them, well knew. Now if man can transfer a
certain imitation and show of his art upon irrationable creatures to effect
certain functions, and for certain ends and proiects; the^ how much more
easily may that most wise and most powerful spirit and understanding (which we
call God) plant in all creatures a print of his Art and Providence, which
extends it self to al things necessary to the conservation of their lives,
and future propagation of their kynds?

Man, in that he enjoys reason and a certain general Providence (by the
which he governs himself, sets down his own end, and disposes of
fitting means for the same end) has no need of these natural instincts,
which other creatures have. And although diverse men in regard of their peculiar
temperature of body, have peculiar instincts both for the stirring up of
several motions and passions of the mind, as also for inclyning them to
certain arts; yet they are not to govern themselves by these instincts, but
by the guide and force of reason, which is granted unto them. But other
Creatures (because they are deprived of reason) cannot govern themselves, nor
direct their particular operations to suitable and convenient ends; therefore
they stand in need of a certain prudentiall instinct, by the which they are to
be directed both in the performance of their working, as also in the directing
and disposing of it to an end. Therefore Man has an universal prudence or
wisdom, by the which he leuelleth all his actions to his end; But other
Creatures have (as it were) a certain spark of prudence, or rather a peculiar
instinct like unto prudence, in certain peculiar works of their own. This
instinct, so far forth as it artificially performs its work, (as the web in
the Spider, and the honey comb in the Be) is a certain participation of
divine art, and this not universally but particularly; to wit as it is
considered in this or that work. In like sort as it fittingly directs its
working to an end, it bears the show of divine Providence.

Now this instinct in beasts consists chiefly in the disposition of the
phantasy, by the which it is brought to pass, that it apprehends after a
certain manner a thing, as convenient or hurtful, according to time and
place, and as occasion serves. Secondly it consists in the inclination of
the Appetite, and in a certain dexterity, or hability of working.

From all th^se considerations the^ I hold it sufficiently demonstrated, that
there is one Supreme Intelligence, Mind, or Spirit* whose wisdom is equally
paralelled with his power, by whom not only the principal parts of the world
were framed, and disposed to their particular ends; but also all the members,
and least parts of all living Creatures and plants, as also the seed of all
things, by whose sweet providence the operations of al living Creatures are
most co^gruently and orderly directed to their defigned ends. Out of which
point this resultacy or collection also rises, to wit, that his providence
extends it self to the least things; and that nothing is made without the
same, seeing nothing can have its being or essence without its virtue or
instinct communicated and imparted by the foresaid Intelligence, or Mind.

But here it may seem to be replied, that granting, that Gods providence has
collated virtue and power to all things to work, yet follows not, that his
providence therefore stretches it self forth to all the operations and
workings. Even as he, who teaches a Dog to dance, or a Parret to speak
Greek, does not (because he so taught the^) know all things, which after they
may do by reason of their teaching. To this I answer, and say that here is a
great disparity and difference; for Man may be far removed and distant from his
work, and then he knows not, what his work performs; But God cannot
depart from his work, but always remains within the same; both because God
is every where, filling all places whatsoever; as also in that he is to
preserve, support, and sustain his own work; since otherwise it would
instantly decay, vanishing away like a shadow. For though a Wright (for
example) building a house, and after departing from it, the house remains by
it self to be seen; yet neither the world nor any thing of the world can have
its subsiste^ce and being, after God has withdrawn himself from it. And the
reason of the difference here, is diverse; first because the Wright makes his
work in a matter or substance, which he neither made, nor ought to conserve,
but which God made and conserueth; the Wright doing nothing therein, but either
by way of adding to, or taking God is ever present to his works.
from, or placing all things in a certain order. But now God works in that
matter, which himself only made, and he only can destroy or preserve it.
Secondly, because God made all things of nothing, eleuating and advancing every
thing to its essence and being; and therefore all things may again reuert and
turn to nothing; even as a heavy body being by force lifted up from the earth
does of it own nature declyne toward the earth again. Wherefore as this body
is continually to be supported, that it does not precipitate and fall headlong
downwards; even so all things being first created by divine power, need to be
sustentated by the said power, that they be not reduced again to nothing. And
here I do not understand by the word Nothing, any positive inclination (such as
the heavens or the earth is) but a defect of power or hability to retain its
own being; because it has no power preserving it self but only from God.
Thirdly, because all things have their dependence of God after a perfect
manner, as the light of the air depends upon the Sun, and the intentionall
species or forms of Colors upon their object, or as the shadow upon the body
exposed to the Sun (as the ancient Philosophers do teach and especially the
Platonicks:) for we are not to think, that there is lesser (but rather far
greater) dependency of things created, upon God, being the most universal
cause, then is of these effects upon their particular causes. Therefore all
things do need a continual preservation and a continual influxe; in so much
that if God should but for a moment withdraw or divert this substance-making
beam (for so does Dionysi^s call it, terming it (...)) then would all things
instantly vanish away, and return to nothing. I omit diverse other reasons,
which here might be alleged; Only it suffices here to show, that God can in
no sort be absent from his work; from which point it necessarily may be
concluded, that nothing can be concealed and hid from his Providence, seeing
that himself is most intrinsecally and inwardly present to al things.

THE EIGHT REASON FROM THE diversity of Men's countenances and voices, and from
the poverty of Man. CHAP. X.
THESE two things (I mean the great diversity of faces and voices of Men, and
the penury that Man is ordinarily borne unto (may be no small inducements The
diversity of faces.
(if they be rightly considered) to prove the care of the divine Providence.
And touching the first; The diversity of faces is so multiplicious and almost
so infinite in Man, as it affords no final argument thereof; for without this
variety neither could justice be observed, neither could any form of a common
wealth consist. For suppose Men to be in countenance alyke, as sheep, crows,
sparrowes, and many other living Creatures of the same nature are, then most
inevitable perturbation and tumults among Men would ensue; for neither could
married Men discern their own wives from other women, neither the Parents
their children, neither the creditours their debtours, the friends their
enemies, nor the magistrate the delinquents, nor the subjects their Princes;
and therefore each Common wealth would be extremely in^ested with adulteries,
incests, frauds, proditions, murders, and all other wickedness whatsoever;
since such lewd miscariages might then be perpetrated with all impunity and
freedom from punishment; for every one might through a resemblance of face
give himself for whom he would, neither could the mistaking be easily
discovered. This point is most evident to any that seriously weighs the same,
and diverse examples of those men do witness no less, who cofyding and resting
upon likeness of face and favor, have attempted to invade other men's beds,
patrimonies, kingdoms; sometime with good event, at other times in vain, but
ever with great trouble and tumults. Therefore it is evident, that the
difference of faces is most necessary, that the laws of justice and of the
Commonwealth may not be transgressed, and peace and tranquillity observed.

If it be here replied that this difference of faces comes only by chance and
casually, and not from any Providence so disposing the same: I answer, that it
is absurd to affirm that to have its event by chance and fortune, which
preuayleth so much in preventing of iniures, and in co^seruing of justice among
Men; since, otherwise it would follow, that all justice and true policy which
is found among Men, should be grounded only upon chance; and that fortune
should be the foundation of all Commonwealthes. Furthermore what proceeds
from chance is not perpetual, but rarely happens; and is not found in all, but
in few only, (as Aristotle and other Philosophers do teach.) As for example,
that a man is borne with five fingers, cannot be said to come by chance, but it
may be so said of him, who is borne with six fingers. And answerably hereto, we
find, that difference of countenances and faces is not a thing strange and
rare, but very ordinary and common; which almost always, and in all places is
incident to Men. Therefore it is not a thing to be ascribed to chance, but to
Providence, which has ordained the same, the better to preserve justice and
civil life between Men, which without this variety of faces could most hardly
be observed. But on the other part, if the nature of Man and the propagation of
him were so disposed, that Men should be commonly borne like in faces, and
that no dissimilitude should be between them, the^ might this diversity of
faces well be attributed to chance, but the contrary we see, falls out; for
dissimilitude and vnliknes is ordinary, and likeness and resemblance of faces
but rare; Therefore, that Men are like, is to be imputed to chance; that they
are unlike, to Providence. And here I understand by the word, Chance, a rare
and extraordinary concourse of causes, which notwithstanding is governed by the
mighty hand of Gods providence: for in respect of his providence (which
incompasseth all things within the largenes of it own Orbs) nothing can be
said to be casual; but only in regard of secondary causes, whose knowledge and
power of working is limited.

In irrationable Creatures there is for the most part so great a parity and
likeness of the indiuidua and particulers of one kind, as that with difficulty
any difference can be observed: For seeing it imports not much, whether they
be like or unlike, nature follows that which is more easy; and therefore
makes them like, so as to the eye there appears no markable and notorious
difference or unlikeness: for it is more facile and better sorting to the course
of nature, that bodies which internally are of one and the same nature and
substance, should also be endued with the same external qualities, the^ with
diverse and different; And when occasion requires, that among these creatures,
one should be known from another (as in sheep, goats, horses etc. it is an
easy matter to set on them a mark for their better distinguishing.

Neither among Men is there only this variety of faces (for their better
discerning of one from another) but also of voices; so as there is no less
difference among them in sound of voice, then in Countenance. For seeing a
precise and distinct knowledge necessarily conduces to the preserving of
justice; therefore the divine Providence has so disposed, that there should be
a disparity and unlikeness not only in faces, but also in voices; that so by a
double sense (to wit by sight and hearing) as by a double witness, one man
should be made known from another. For if but one of these disparities were,
then perhaps some mistaking might be; but where both of them do jointly
concur and meet, it is almost impossible, that men herein should be in both
deceived. Only difference of Countenances were not sufficient, because matters
are often menaged in darkness; as also some men's eye sights are so weak and
imperfect, as that they cannot exactly discern the lineaments and portrature
of the face; besides among some men (though but seldom) there is a great
resemblance of visages; so as in distinguishing of them the eye may be
deceived. And therefore this want is here fully supplied with the like
disparity of men's voices; to the end that such me^, which could not be known
one from another by their faces, might nevertheless be easily distinguished by
the sound of their tongues.

But to proceed further in this general subject, it is evident, that the
consideration Of Poverty.
of Poverty (wherewith the world labors) affords a strong argument of a
divine Providence; Since Poverty is that, which preserves all intercourse
among Men, as furnishing man withal ornaments and delicacyes of this life; as
on the contrary side affluence and abundance of riches leads man to all
dissolution and tutpitude of life. For suppose, that all things, which are in
any sort necessary to man's life, were fully and promiscuously given to al men
without any labor and industry on their parts; then it is clear, that two
main inconveniences would instantly follow: to wit, an overthrow and decay of
all arts, and all other splendor now appearing in Man's life; and an utter
deprauation and corruption of manners and integrity of conversation. For
granting the former position, no man would learn any mechanical arts, or
learning would practice them.

No man would undertake any laborious and painful task, nor be serviceable to
any other; since no man would perform these things, were he not forced
thereunto through want and penury. And so we should want all rich attire all
fair and stately edifices, all costly furniture for houses, all magnificent
temples and Churches, all Cittyes, Towers, Castles, and other such
fortifications. In like sort, then would cease all agriculture and tilling, all
navigations, fishing, fowling, and all traffic for mercha^dize; again there
would be no nobie and potent men, as being destitute of all servants and
followers. Moreover, all differences of degrees and orders (which are necessary
in every common wealth) would be taken away, and consequently all reverence and
obedience^. Therefore whatsoever in the whole course of man's life is fair,
gorgeous, magnificent, and to be desired, all the same would be wanting, if men
were not poor: and nothing would remain but rudenes, barbarism, and
savageness.

To this former inconvenience may be adjoined another of greater importance, to
wit, an extreme corruption of manners and an opening the sluice to all disorder
and dissolution of life. For it is observed, that such lascivious courses do
commonly accompany idleness and abundance of wealth; an example of this we may
borrow from the men living. before the deluge, (whom lasinesse, opulency and
fulness of temporalities did overthrow) as also from the inhabitants of
Brasile, who (by reason that the country afforded them abundantly without
labor, through the natural temperature of the Climate, all things necessary)
are altogeter become mancipated and slaves to Epicurisme, lust, and all vicious
sensuality.

Two things then there are, which chiefly hurt, and deprave all conversation of
life; to wit idleness, and affluence of riches. This later ministers matter to
all vices; the first gives opportunity and time for the practizing of the^.
But both these are taken away by poverty, the one (to wit abundance)
immediately, seeing want is nothing else then the want and not having of riches;
the other (I mean idleness) in that whiles penury afflicts and presses men,
they are (for the further preventing thereof) willing to undergo any labor and
pains. Therefore penury serves to man, as a spur, whereby a flothfull nature is
pricked and stirred up to industry and toil; which while it is wholely
employed* bent, and intent upon its designed work and task, is freed from
dangerous and vicious cogitations, and consequently has not leisure* and time,
to spend the time in sensuality. From this then it is evident, how healthful
and medicinable Poverty is to mankind; since it extinguisheth and cutteth away
the nourisher of all vices, possesses and forestalleth the mind with hurtles
thoughts, and fills the world with all ornaments and commodityes. For what in
humane things is to be accounted as fair excellent, and to be admyred, is the
handy work of poverty, and is chiefly to be ascribed to it. Therefore it was
truly said of one author, (...) that is, Penury and want begets wisdom.
This argument is handled copiously by Aristopahnes in Pluto; and we do
evidently discover in it Gods providence, by the which he so sweetly and
moderatly governs mankind.

THE NYNTH REASON, IS FROM Miracles. CHAP. XI.
TO the former argument we may adioyne this next, which is drawn from
miracles, which do irrefragably demonstrate a divine power: for if events have,
and do happen, which cannot be ascribed to any corporal cause; then is it
evident, that there is some one invisible and greater virtue or power, from
whom all such stupendous actions do proceed; and this power we call God. Now,
that there are, and have been many such, which transcend the limits and bounds
of nature, is most clear from reason it self, from the frequent testimonies
of most approved histories, and from the joint confession^ and acknowledgment
of al countries. Among which great number I will here insist in the most
remarkable and notorious of those, which have been effected either before or
since our Saviors Incarnation. First then may be the creating of the world of
nothing; for seeing this cannot be made of it self (as is proved above in the
third and fourth reason) then must it necessarily be made by some other agent;
but it is an incomprehe^sible miracle, to wit, the producing of so huge a work
out of nothing, and such as could be accomplished only by that power and
wisdom, which is most infinite and illimitable.

The second may be the framing and making of so many living Creatures and
Plants, and the first institution of so many several seeds, by the which they
are propagated and increased; as also that great fecundity of the earth and the
sea, by the cooperation whereof, one Creature or seed is multiplied in a short
time into several thousands.

The third. The most swift motion of the heavens, and the government and
disposal of this inferious world by means of this rotation and speedy turning
about of the said celestial bodies. For by this is occasioned the most
pleasing and grateful alteration and change of day and night, with the secret
and stealing increase and decrease of them in length. By this also are effected
the several times of the year; so as all creatures and plants are by this
means brought forth and after become mature, ripe, and perfect in their due
times. In like manner by this motion of the heavenly Orbs, the fields are
beautifyed and enriched with flowers, the pastures with grass, the woods with
trees and leaves, and the trees with fruit: finally by the mediation of the
foresaid* motion is wrought the flux and reflux of the sea, the blowing of
wynds, the darcknesse of the clouds, the conueniency of showers, the benefit of
snow, the first rising of springs, the current of rivers, the wholsomnes and
serenity of the air, and the benefit proceeding from thunder, and diverse other
Meteors.

To these may be addressed the deluge and inundation of the whole world, the
safety of men and beasts by the Arc, the cloud or burning Sulphur with the
which the* City Pentapolis was consumed, the plagues of Aegipt, the division
of the sea, the submersion and drowning of the Egiptians, the pillar of the
cloud and fire, the heavenly meat or Manna given to the people of israel for
forty years space, the wels springing out of rocks through the striking of
the^ with a Rod; the infinite multitude of quails sent into the Camps; so many
apparitions of God evident to all men; so great castigations and punishment of
rebellious, incredulous, and misbeleeuing people, destroyed so^tymes through
the opening of the earth, other times through fire, or touch of serpents; so
many admirable and unexpected victories. To these in like sort, are to be
adjoined, the staying of the Sune in the middle of its course for the space of
ten hours; the retrograde or going back of it diverse degrees; the force and
burning of the fire suspended and restrained, and the preservation of the
servants of God put into a burning furnace; the fury of Lions suppressed that
they hurt not the true worshippers of God, the dead recald and raised to life,
and the wicked and impious by the peculiar hand of God, wonderfully chastised.

From all which it is a most clear and illustrious truth, that there is a
certain supernatural and divine power, which sees all things, governs all
things, and weighs all things in an even balance of justice and Reason; and
which seuerly punishes the perpetrators and workers of iniquity, and
undertakes a particular charge and defense of the virtuous, often effecting
for their good and safety many things, above the ordinary and settled course of
nature.

Neither in these miracles can there be conceived the least suspicion of any
imposture or deceit; first, because the author, which wrote all these (some few
excepted) was endued with extraordinary wisdom, and gravity, and was
accounted the greatest Prophet that ever lived in any age among those, who
either flourished for sanctity of life, or praise of wisdom. Secondly, because
there were many predictions set down by him in his works, as in Genesis 12.
and 49. the Numbers 24. Deutron. 32. and 33. all which seeing we find by the
event to be most true, we may rest assured, that he was most faithful in his
relation of other things Thirdly, in that every one of the things recyted
above, are so particularized with all their circumstances of times, places,
persons, names occasions, effects, with such an order and so sorting to the
nature of things, with such a consequence of matters, and so agreeably to piety
and probity of Manners, as that even an eye witness of the same passages and
occurrents could not deliver them with greater exactnes. Now who forgetn
things, auoydeth (for the most part) many circumstances; or if he adds them,
then is the fiction easily discovered by them: for what he writes, is either
not agreeable to the time, place, nature of things themselves, or other more
certain and approved historyes, or else some contradiction is found in the
matter it self, as falls out in the fabulous historyes of Homer, Nonnus,
Virgil, Ovid, Amadu, and many other such like. Fourthly in most of the things
above related, the author (to wit Moses) was not only present at the
performance of them; but was the chief man in the action, performing the same,
as the instrument of the holy Ghost, and therefore had best reason to know them
most precisely. Fifthly, if he had written differently from the truth
(especially touching the plagues of Aegipt, the deuyding of the Sea, and the
actions performed in the wilderness) he might easily have been convinced of
falsehood by many hundred thousands of witnesses, who were also then present
with him. For all these things were red openly before the whole multitude, and
were also to be read over again every seventh year in the presence of the
people, as appears out of the 31. chapter of Deuteronomy. Sixthly, all the
former things, as then being best known throughout all the East, were recorded
in Hebrew verse by David, who was a King and a Prophet, and who was later in
time then Moses, more then 450. years; which verses even from that time to
this very day, are continually sung in the public prayers, almost throughout
the whole world by the Jews, where they enjoy the use of their religion, and
by Christians for the space of 1600. years. Yea after the days of Moses
there did almost in every age rise up among the people of Israel certain
Prophets and venerable Men who being guyded by the assistance of the holy
Ghost, did govern, teach, and reduce the erring people to the law of Moses;
which men, did ever worship Moses, as a divine Prophet and worshipper of the
highest God.

All which, as being worthy and pious Men, and in what credit and estimation
they were had, may appear from the consideration both of their actions and
writings. For their actions were such, as exceeded al humane forces, and
necessarily required the aid of the Almighty: such were those acts performed
by Joshua, Debora, Gedeon, Sa^pson, Samuel, David, Nathan, Solomon, Ahias
Silonites, Elias, Elizaus, Esaias, Jeremy, Daniel, Jonas, Judith, Esther, the
Machabees, and by diverse others. And their writings were replenished with
diverse predictions and Prophesyes of things to come, which through long
succession of many ages, had their answerable accomplishments and fulfillings:
a point so worthy of observation, as that the like cannot be found in any
history or writings of other nations. Seauenthly even during the law of the
Jews from the times of Moses, there was every year an acknowledgment of the
effecting of these former wonders celebrated by diverse ceremonies, festival
days, sacrifices, and other rytes, least the memory of them should in tract of
time perish and be abolished: for the feast of the Passover, and the Sacrifice
or the Pascall Lamb was performed in thanksgiving for the peoples delivery
out of Aegipt, and for the preservation of those Jews who during their stay in
Aegipt, were saved from the slaughter, which was made upon the first borne of
the Jews. And for the same cause was offered unto God all the first borne of
things. The feast of Pentecost was in memory of the law given upon the fiftith
day after their delivery. The feast of the Tabernacles was celebrated, in
recordation that the people lived forty years in the desert in Tabernacles.
Furthermore the Arc of the Covenant was kept and preserved, the which Moses
by the commandment and direction of God made, and in the which the Rod of
Aaron which blossomed, and the vessel of the Manna, and the Law written in two
tables of stone by the hand of God, and delivered by Moses, were safely laid
up; all which benefits of God and his wonderful works were celebrated with
the singing of diverse Canticles and songs. To conclude the very books
themselves of the testament were with great diligence and public authority in
a holy, public, and most secure place (as divine Oracles) preserved, least
otherwise they might by any deceit be corrupted and depraved.

Eighthly, for the greater accession of Reasons to the former, it may be added,
that those wrytings of the old testament are full of wisdom, piety, and
gravity; in which are found no vanity or improfitable curiosity; For all things
there are set down most seriously and most aptly for the informing and
rectifying the mind with virtue and piety, for deterring it from all wickedness,
and for it voluntary embracing of godliness, justice, benignity, mansuetude,
patience and temperance; and all this with wonderful documents and examples of
most excellent men alleged to this end: a course far contrary to that, which
is taken in the wrytings of Philosophers, in the which many vain curious and
improfitable passages are found, as also sometimes many wicked, profane and
impure instructions are to be read. For they in their books, by reason of the
then common use, do permit the worship of Idols, though they were persuaded
that there was but one supreme divine Power. In like manner they permit
^ullination, repyning and secret hate against ones Enemy; as also fornications,
filthy lusts, a vain desire of glory, and other internal vicious affections
of the mind. And though sometimes in their wrytings they commend virtue and
reprehend vice, yet do they not bring any moving and forcing reason, thereby to
determen from vice, and persuade and move them to the practice of a virtuous
life. For the splendor and inward beauty of virtue, as also the turpitude and
vglines of vice (which two sole points are usually aledged by Philosophers) are
but weak incyteme^ts to the mind; therefore that Man may have an absolute
dominion over himself and his passions there is need of more vehement
persuasions. And hence it is observed, that very few men have bettered their
mynds (so far forth I mean as concerns piety) by reading of their labors,
though many by that means have arrived to a great pride and elation of spirit;
but it is certain, that from the wrytings and doctrine of Moses and from the
other sacred books of Scripture innumerable men have come to wonderful
holiness, and have enjoyed great familiarity with God himself; so as they were
most illustrious and celebrious for the admirable works performed by them.

To conclude this point, if any one will seriously contemplate and confer
together the mysteries of the Judicial and Christian religion, he shall
clearly see, that such things as were done by the Jews, did serve but to
adumbrate and shadow the mysteries of our Christian faith, according to the
words of the Apostle 1. Cor. 10 ^a^ omnia in figura etc. All these things
chanced to them in figure: but they are written to our correction, upon whom
the ends of the world are come. Wherefore we are able even from those points,
which Christians do daily profess and practice, to prove that the Jewish
discipline and doctrine was agreeable to the truth. From all which premises it
is most clear, that credit and fidelity is to be given to the books of Moses
(and not in that degree only, as is exhibited to the Commentaryes of Caesar, the
History of Liuy, or any other profane authors) but as to certain most
undoubted Oracles, written by the special concurrency and assistance of the
holy Ghost. The like may be auerred of other holy books of Scripture (whether
they be historical or prophetical) seeing the same reasons and arguments,
which are alleged for the writings of Moses, are also prevailing for them.

Now let us descend next to the miracle^ of the new testament: good God, how
many and notorious did our Lord here living in flesh, perform? He cleansed the
^^prous, he raised up the paralitick, he cast our devils in the possessed, he
cured all languors and diseases, he restored sight to the blind, hearing to the
deaf, speech to the dumb, going to the lame, and life to the dead. He also
commanded the wynds, restrained tempests, walked upon the waters, and finally
fed diverse thousands of men by a sudden multiplication of a small quantity of
bread. He wrought all these not in private, but openly in the sight of the
whole world; so as all Iud^a took notice thereof: neither could such as were
emulo^s and maligning of his glory contradict the same.

He also did them, not with much endeavor, or with any long preparation
aforehand; but only either by his word, or by the gentle touch of his hand. To
proceed further, we know, that in his death the Su^ne was obscured, the earth
trembled, rocks and stones broke asunder, the veyle of the temple did cleave in
two, and the dead did rise out of their graves; many thousands of me^ were
witnesses hereof, which might (and would no doubt) charge the Evangelists
writing these things in several times and places, with sacrilege, if they had
diuulged fictio^s and forgeries: since to lie in point of Religion is
s^c^^ledge in the highest degree.

But to omit all other things, how stupe^dious a miracle was it, that our
Savior converted the world by the means of twelve men, and these ignoble,
poor, despicable, and ignorant fishers, (notwithstanding the gainsaying of the
power, wisdom, and eloquence of the whole world, as also the great
reluctation to flesh and blood, man's corrupt nature, and an inuetera^e and
wicked custom?) For his doctrine was not to persuade men to an easy religion,
and such as was indulgent to sense, but to a profession most hard, severe and
repugnant both to man's understanding and his manners: for it taught, that he,
who was nailed upon the Cross was God; that riches, honors, pleasures, and
what else is to be prized in this world, ought to be contemned; that we ought to
^ame our flesh, bridle our desires, bear our Crosses, love our enemies, render
good for evil* spend our blood and life for Christ's sake, and finally pray for
all such, as do in any sort persecute or wrong us.

How difficult a labor was it, to persuade the world (blinded before with
Idolatry, and placing all its felicity in riches, honors, and pleasures) to
the embracing of these matters; and this against the custom and authority of
their forefathers, against the use of all Countries, against the common
judgment of all mankind, against the sentences of the Philosophers, against the
edicts, comminations, and threatenings of Princes, with a resolute neglect of
all commodities or discommodities of this life, of honor or contumely, of
wordly allurements or torments, how great soever? And yet Christ performed all
these great affairs by his Apostles, being but poor and ignoble men, reducing
by their means the whole power and wisdom of the world under his yoke and
government. Now the Apostles were before most rude, fearful, pusillanimous,
ignorant of heavenly misteryes, ignorant of the tongues, and indeed altogether
unapt, for so high an enterprise. But behold, after the Holy ghost once
descended down, they instantly became most wise, fearles, magnanimous,
skillful in all the tongues, having the courage to undertake so great an
exployt, and after performing the same most gloriously and happily. These
things are of such an infallible truth, as that no man had the forehead to deny
them, all ancient Historyes recording the^; for the whole world proclaims and
witnesses, that it was first converted to Christianity by certain fishers and
that no torments (how exquisite soever) of Tyrants (by the which themselves and
infinite other were consumed) could hinder the beginning, progress, and
increase of so worthy and heroical a business. Never did the like happen in
another country. Which miracle being deeply weighed, is not only of force to
the justifying of the being of Gods providence, but also of the divinity of
Christ, and of the truth of Christian religion. Furthermore the Apostles had
the guilt of working miracles, which in some sort was most necessary; since the
world could hardly have been induced to entertain so strange and displeasing a
doctrine, except in were waranted thereunto by some most wonderful signs and
prodigyes. Therefore they gave sight to the blind, strengthened the Paralytickes,
raised the lame, cured all kynds of diseases, restored the dead to life, and
effected many other such supernatural things, as appears from the acts of
the Apostles. From the Apostles times ever after, there passed not over any one
age, which was d^stitute of miracles, if we do believe Ecclesiastical historyes.

Now nothing can be answerable hereto to take away the authority of these
miracles, but that they were not true, but only forged; That the former
Miracles cannot be said to be forged.
or if true, performed by the help of the devil. But with what color or show
of truth, can it be said, that they were mere forgeryes, seeing this answer is
not wartanted with any reason? For from whence is it known, that they are
forged? belyke because they are miracles, and being miracles they seem
impossible to be wrought. But here the Atheist is to prove, that they are
impossible, (which he cannot) since the performance of them implies no true
and real contradiction. That they are not accomplished by the force and power
of nature, we all grant, and from thence do prove, that there is a divine and
invisible power, more potent then nature, by the h^nd whe^of all these are
wrought. Furthermore to say, that they are feigned, is implicitly to take away
all credit of histories, all memory of antiquity, and all knowledge of former
ages: since by this answer all ancyent historyes whatsoever shall be said to
be forged, and to be rejected as mere fables; seeing no historyes are written
more accurately, diligently, and with greater inuestigation and search of truth
then are the miracles above recyted, especially since the Church has been ever
most sollicitous and careful, that false miracles should not be ventilated,
and given out for true; for here we speak only of those miracles, which the
Church acknowledges for certain and evident. Thirdly who condemn all these
miracles for fictions, do charge all Christian Princes, magistrates, and all
the Christian world of madness, and extreme simplicity, in suffering innumerable
fictio^s and lies to be obtruded upon the^ for so many truths; they not having
so much perspicacity and clearnes of judgment, as to be able to discover the
deceit. They also no less do charge all Ecclesiastical Prelates, general
Councels, all Deuynes, and all wise men of sacrilegious imposture, in that they
do comme^d such commentitious and lying narrations for true miracles, they by
this means most egregiously deluding the whole world.

Fourthly, diverse of these miracles are recorded, by so grave authors endued
with learning and sanctity, and with so many particular circumstances, as that
all possibility of fraud is taken away. In things, that are forged, the forgers
are accustomed purposely to declyne and avoid the circumstances of names, and
especially of times and places, for the better concealing of their lying.
Fifthly, there was presented no just and urgent cause, why these should be
falsely invented. For why should the authors willingly stand obnoxious to so
great a sacrilege? Or with what hope or reward should they undergo the
aspersion of so foul a blemish? No man does any thing, but there is some
reason which induces him so to do. What then was the motive, that incyted so
many Authors, ( to wit, Eusebius, Socrates, S^zomene, Ruffi^^^, Gregory
Nissene, Basil, Jerome, Austin, Sulpitius, Gregorius Turonensis, Optatus,
Theodoret, Damasus, Gregory the great, and many others, who have written of
miracles) to perpetrate so heinous a wickedness? Certainly no true cause hereof
can be alligned: for what grave and religious man had not rather suffer death,
then deliberately to write one lie, especially in these things, which belong to
religion? since thus doing he does not only purchase an eternal infamy among
men, but also is most wicked, hateful and abominable in the sight of God.

Sixthly, if the foresaid miracles were but invented* then might the authors of
them be easily convinced of forgery by the men then living in that age, since
the lives and a^^io^s of Saints were for the most part diuulged throughout the
whole world, at that time, when they were wrought; for the radiant splendor
and light of such extraordinary virtues cannot be obscured, much less wholly
eclipsed; But there can be alleged not any one Man, who either in the days of
those Saints, or in the times immediately ensuing, durst charge the writers of
the said miracles with any fiction therein. Seauently, Man's nature is of it
self incredulous and full of suspicion, when it questioneth of any new
miracles; and hereupon it examineth all things concerning the same most
precisely and particularly, least there be some imposture latent and hidden
therein. Besides there are never wanting me^ which are emuious of the glory and
honor of others, who prying into each particular, do ever labor (as much as
in them lies) either wholly to call in question such miracles, or at least to
depresse and lessen the worth thereof.

Now to come to the second branch of the former answer. If it be said, that
they are performed by the work of the devils, then in thus answering, it
follows, that there are spirits, or incorporeall substances, which are more
excellent, then these visible things; and consequently it is to be granted,
that there is one suprem^ Spirit, excelling all the rest in power and wisdom,
and this we call God, as hereafter shall be proved. But to proceed further
against this second part of this Answer, I say; that these stupendous works
cannot with any show or protext of reason, be referred to the power of the
devils; for to restore sight to the blind, going to the lame, to cure the
paralitcks only with their word, and to raise the dead to life, do far
transcend and exceed the power of the As S. Augustine l. 3. de Trinit. c. 8.
teaches.
devils, who cure diseases only by the mediation of natural causes; to wit, by
applying the virtue of herbs and other medicinable things, as philosophers and
deuynes do teach. Furthermore those holy men, by the ministry of who^ these
miracles are performed, were ever in most deadly hatred with devils, and they
were so far from using them as a means, as that they proclaimed open war
against the Devils; for they ordinarily dispossessed men's bodies of them,
overthrew their worship, discovered their deceites, confuted their doctrines,
scorned and contemned all their prestigious arts, and finally destroyed their
kingdom and government. Such were in the beginning all the Apostles, and their
successors, and infinite others. For against these and such others no power of
Devils, no Arts magic, no machinations, and endeauours of wicked spirits, nor
any prestigyes, or sleights could prevail. Besides how can we with any
probability think, that so many learned Doctors, so many Prelates, so many
Princes, finally so many wise and prudent men were become so stupid and
blockish, as not to be able to discern true miracles from adulterate and
forged wonders, and the illusions of the devil from the hand and work of God?
Belyke only the Pharisyes, the heathen persecutours, and profane Atheists have
this gift of distinguishing miracles from the prestigyes and deceites of the
devil; and all other men are blind, foolish, and in this point depryued of all
sound and perfect judgment.

This indeed was long since the calumny of the Pharisees against our Lord, and
of the Heathens against Martyrs; who when they were clearly convinced with
supernatural signs and miracles (as plainly seeing them daily wrought) and
being then conscious of their own inward wickedness, did burst forth into
horrible blasphemies; attributing those things to the devil and art magic,
which were effected only by the mighty Luke 21.
hand of God. Now the Reason, why God vouchsafes to work miracles in diverse
places is manifold. First, he does this, that hereby he may manifest his
presence and providence to al men. For if during the space of many ages
whatsoever was wrought, was encompassed within the limits of Nature, then might
men (perhaps) be induced to think, that there were no divine Power, who had a
care of humane affairs, and upon whom the charge of them were property
incumbent; but that all things had their event by a secret impulse and force of
nature. For although this is evidently disproued by many reasons, as from the
motion of the stars, from the fabric and making of bodies, from the innate
direction of every particular thing to its certain end (as is showed above) yet
many do not sufficiently and seriously penetrate these matters, but are (as it
were) blinded here in through the daily and continual seeing of them; for how
admirable a thing is it, that from some few grains of corn so great an
increase should rise? From a formeles seed, so fair and so several kynds of
bodies both of living Creatures and of Plants should be framed? From a small
root so huge trees should grow? And yet few there are, who do admyre these
things; and few who do acknowledge Gods wonderful power and providence in
them. Therefore it was necessary, that some works might be effected, which
should transgress the bounds of nature, least otherwise men might think, that
there were no power above the nature and condition of corporal things: for by
reason of the exorbitancy and the vnaccustomednes of such stupendous events,
men are often stirred up to think of the Author of them, and to prosecute him
with true religion, reverence, and honor. Secondly, Miracles are effected to
the end, that men may be confirmed in other points of religion, giving a full
assent thereto without any hesitation or doubtfulnes, and making use of them
with all due reverence. Thirdly, that the doctrine and lives of those who work
miracles, may hereby be fully warranted, and so with greater certainty of truth
may be commended to us. For miracles are certain divine testimonies both of
the infallibility of doctrine, and of sanctity of life; especially where the
life is conformable to the doctrine. Fourthly, that by this means the servants
of God may be honored: for there is nothing, which makes holy men more
celebrious and famous throughout the whole world, and which more incyteth the
mynds of others to love, worship, and imitate the^ then the exhibiting of
miracles. For as God will have himself believed of Men above all things, and
our neighbors not above al things, but every one in his degree: so does he
expect himself to be worshipped above all things; to wit as the first
efficient, and last final cause of all things; and his servants not to be
honored after this supreme manner, but in their peculiar degree, and in that
respect, which they bear toward God; that is, as they are his adoptiue
sons, partakers of his kingdom, and his most dear friends. Thus from hence
it appears, that there is no fear of Idolatry in honoring here Gods Saints;
for where there is Idolatry committed, there is supreme honor given, by the
which a Creature is worshipped, as the Creator and first beginning, but no
worship is ascribed to the Saints in this sort.

Fifthly, Miracles are wrought, that men through occasion of corporal benefits
obtained thereby, may the sooner be stirred up to repentance and amendment of
life: for where miracles are wrought, there is to that place (for the most
part) a great confluence and concourse of many thousa^ds of grievous sinners,
who being before contaminated with alkynds of vices, and having conceived a
remorse of their former licentious lives, do undertake an amendment and change
of their former courses; and thus by this means it happens, that the souls of
many thousands are saved, which otherwise had perished everlastingly. To
conclude this point, by miracles all men are stirred up to reverence and praise
of God to the giving of thanks, and spiritual joy and exultation, and the
minds of all are raised up to a confident and erected hope, as conceauing the
expectation of the like help in their future calamityes and afflictions.

THE TENTH REASON TAKEN FROM Prophesyes. CHAP. XII.
I Here call prophesying, a prediction of things to come, which do depend of
the liberty of man's free will. This predictio^ is a manifest sign of a Deity
or Divinity; for that Mind, which through its own strength and power knows
things future, must also ( a ^ortio^^) know all things present and past; and
consequently must k^^w all things absolutely; I mean all those things, which
are intelligible and may be understood. Now that Mind, which knows omnia
intelligibilia, knows also omnia po^^^^^lia, all things which are poshb^e;
and thereupon must be omniscient (o^ know al things) and omnipotent* (...)
knowledge, Idea, or Notion of things is the cause of things, therefore what of
it ^e^^ has al knowledge, must ^e ^as be omnipotent. For who is prescient and
knows things to come, does herein far exceed the faculty of al mortal men
according to that saying of Pindarus: (...), that is, Humane minds are blind
in things to come. Therefore there is an invisible intelligence far more noble
and worthy, then man's mind, to which ever through its own proper force this
prenotion and fore knowledge agrees; and this is God. Which point is the more
true, seeing this prenotion is so sublime, high, and difficult, as that it
seems to exact an infinite power of understanding: for things future do
neither exist, or terminate in themselves, nor in their causes, neither is
there any reason, from whence it may be certainly gathered, that they rather
are to be, then that they are not to be. How then is that Intelligence of Mind
able determinatly and certainly to foresee what is to come, and what is not;
but that its ^^tuitiue power and ^ight is so perfect, and the efficacy of its
light so great, as that it is able to extend it self to all things future, as
they shall be in themselves in their due time; and this as certainly as if they
did now really exist, or had existed from all eternity?

Now it is r^o^isite, that this power be infinite, both because there cannot be
imagined a gre^^ and worthy^^ manner of seeing; as alsoin that it stretches
itself ^orth to all future things (seeing there is the same reason, manner, and
height of knowing all things. From which it follows, that even in this
respect, that if an Intelligence by its own peculiar force knows one thing
to come^^ kn^weth all things. Therefore this prenotion and fortelling of ^uture
things is an evident sign of a Divinity, and for that cause this kind of
prediction is called Divination; as if to tell what events are to happen, were
a proper sign of a Divinity or deity: and therefore upon this ground the Gods
of the Gentiles are refuted by Isay, in that they had not the ability to fore
tell future eue^ts; for thus he says. Annunciate quae ve^tura sunt etc. Show
the things, that are ^come hereafter, that we may know that you are Gods.

That there is a prenotion of future things is clearly proved from innumerable
predictions, which from their events are found to be most true, for prediction
or foretelling ever presupposes prenotion and foreknowledge. This prenotion
the Prophets had not from themselves, and from their own industry or
perspicacity and clearnes of judgment (since prenotion far transcendeth man's
capacity) but they received it from some superior power, which has it by its
own virtue, from it self, and not from another. Now many of these predictions
are (...) in the holy Scripture; out of the which I will allege some, which to
have been accomplished, is most evident.

First the^ Genesis 3. it is foretold, that the seed* mea^ing the of spring of
the woman, should c^ush the head of the Serpent that is shall overthrow the
power domination, and rule of the Devil; which (...) is accomplished partly
already by Christ, abolishing in most places the worship of Devils, wherein the
world before did lie plunged; and partly ^esteth to be further (...) by Christ
at the day of judgment; w^^^ the power and sway of the Devil and the (...)
utterly extinguished. In Genes (...). 18. and 22 it is prophesyed, that a ^hold
shall be borne to ^bra^^m by the benifit of whom all nations shall obtain
benedictio^ and solicity, which is evidently performed in Christ, throgn whom
the world is withdrawn from idolatry and pernicious errors, to the worship
and knowledge of the true God, and shall by him obtain the hope of eternal
salvation. Again in the 40 chapter of the said book, there is a wo^d(...)
prediction of Joseph, which was to be (...) within three days; as also in
interpretation of certain most obscure dreams touching three stocks of a
vine, and three baskets; and c. 41. an exposition of Pharoes dream, touching
the twyce seven beasts, and twice seven ears of corn. Where we are to
consider how expedite^y, and with what confidence are expounded all the
particulers of the according to their events. Now those d^^ame^ being pre^ages
and ^ignes of things to co^ne, cannot proceed, but only from a divine Power,
from whose providence all (...) matters (...) disposal* neither can the (...)
and construction of them (...), but only by reuela^ion of (...) divine Power
Again c. 49. Jacob the Patriarch (...) before his death, did prophesy to every
(...) of his sons, what should happen to them posterity; especially so far
forth, as con^erned their offspring, their riches, and the division of the land
of Promise; which all particulers were after a long deuolutio^ of Years
fulfilled as appears out of the sacred Scripture. But among other things,
that is very memorable and notorious which is there said. Non au^e^e^ur
sceptrum de ^uda etc. The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiuer
from between his seete, till he come who is to be sent, and he shall be the
expectation of the Gentiles. In which words three things are fore^ould. First
that regal principality shall be in the tribe of Judah; which was accomplished
when it was translated upon David, in whose family and race it continued 520.
years. Secondly that this Soueraingty should continue in the (...) till the
(...) of Christ, (...) was also accomplished, (...) that tribe (...) upon Herod
Ascalonites (who was ^o ^^w) in the time of whose Reign Christ was borne.
Thirdly, that Christ was to be rejected by the Jews, and received by the
Gentiles; who for that respect is there called Expectatio gentium, the
expectation of the Gentiles. In the 24. of the book of Numbers, Balaam being
possessed with a divine fury, foretells many things and among the rest, these
three. First, that the King at Israel was to be taken away by reason of agag
King of Amalec; where we s^e, that the name of that King is expressed, who was
to be borne some fo^re ages after, and for whose cause Saul was to be deprived
of his kingdom, which is fulfilled in the first book of the Kings c. 15.
Secondly that a King should rise out of Israel who (like a glorious star) was
to enlighten the (...) world, and to have dominion over all men, which was
performed in Christ. Thirdly, that the Romans were to come (...) their
galleys, and should overcome the Jews: ^^d t^is was effected under Titus and
Vespasian, more then a thousand, ears after the (...) prediction.

In the 18. of Deuteronomy, Moses prophesyeth, that ^^od would ^aise out of
the Jews, a Prophet l^^^ to himself; whom all ought to hear, and such ^s
would not, were to be severely punished by God, where in express words he
prophesyet^ of the coming of Christ, and does intimate his function, the
incredulity of the Jews, and their overthrow. Now Christ was like to Moses,
as the body is to the shadow, the (...) to the figure, and the Exemplar, of
Samp^e to the image, in that Morses was a typ^ and figure of Christ, ^^^ Moses
(...) people from the servitude of (...) Christ the world from the (...) Moses
brought (...), the Egiptians being the^e drowned; Christ saved his Belieuers
through (...) (which deriueth al its virtue from the (...) of Christ) with the
submersion and drowning of all their sins Moses gave to them the old law,
Christ gives to the world the new and Evangelical law. Moses ^ed the people
in the desert with Manna from heaven and gave them to drink of the rock.
Christ feeds his servants in the Church with his own celestial body and
blood; for he is the bread, that descended from heaven, and the hidden Manna;
he is the Rock of eternal salvation, which gives drink. The people by the
endeavor of Moses overcame their enemies, coming at the length to the (...)
of Promise* ^ee by the mediatio^ of Christ vanquish our souls adversaries, and
are brought to heaven. Thus by reason of these and other such comparisons,
Christ is called a Prophet like unto Moses.

In the 28. 29. 30. 31. and 32. of Deuteronomy the Idolatry of the Jews, their
sins and diverse calamityes, which were to fall upon them for the same cause,
are prophe^^^d: and in the 33. of Deuteronomy Moses ^^^^telleth the particular
lot to every try be, and diverse events, which Jacob had not expressed in his
benediction.

In like ^ort, that Prediction which is related in the th^^^ book of the Kings
^. ^^. is most wonderful, where when Jeroboam incensed frankincense to the
Idols, a certain Prophet thus exclaymed forth, Altar, Altar, etc. O Altar,
Altar, thus ^^^th the lord, behold a child shall be borne unto the house of
David* Josias by name, and upon thee shall ^e sacrifice the Priests of the high
places, that burnt ^^^^nse upon thee, and they shall burn bones upon thee. All
which things were accomplished ^^ter, as appears out of the fourth of the
Kings c. 23. (...) ^ome 3^^. years after; for as Josephus writes in the tenth
book of his Antiquities c. ^. so many years passed between that prediction,
and the accomplishment of ^.

In the 45. chapter of Isay, the kingdom of Cyrus (who was to be b^^ne some
two hundred years after) is prophesyed, his name being expressly set down, as
also his power, wars, victories, spoils, riches, and his beneficence toward
the Jews are in sinuated; which very place of Scripture, when the Jews had
showed to Cyrus, he wonderfully admyred the divination of the Prophet; and
being incensed with the desire of performing such things, as he had there read,
conferred great benefits upon the Jews, as Josephus records in his eleventh
book of Antiquities c. 1. I omit innumerable other prophesyes, which are to be
found of Isay.

In Daniel we find, many stupendous predictions, and interpretations of most
difficult things. In the second chapter, whereas a certain strange dream was
showed to the King of the Chaldeans; and the King forgetting the same, Daniel
distinctly opened the vision to him; to wit, that there appeared to the King in
his sleep a great and terrible statua or Image, whose head was made of gold,
his breast and arms of silver, his belly and thighs of brass, his legs of
Iron, ending in ^eet which were partly of clay, and partly of iron. Furthermore
he told the King, that he saw a stone cut out of a mountain without hands; and
that it did strike the statua upon the feet; which being broken and shiuered
asunder, the statua fell down, and was turned into dust: and that the sto^e
^^d increase into a great mountain, which filled the whole earth. This being
thus expressed, Daniel further gau^ ^he interpretation thereof; to wit, that by
the statua were figured four Monarchies, of the which the first was the^ in
being, the other three should succeed one after other in their due revolution
of times. For the head of gold did signify the Empire of the Chaldeans, which
the^ was most ample opulent, and rich. The breast of silver designed the
monarchy of the Persians and the Medes, which succeeded the former, consisting
of two kingdoms, as of two legs. The belly and thighs of brass did specify
the monarchy of the Grecians: the legs of Iron did prefigure the most powerful
monarcy of the Romans, divided into the Empire of the East and the west. The
feet being made partly of clay, and partly of Iron, did signify the monarchy
of the Romans to be partly strong, and partly weak. The stone cut out of the
mountain without the help of hands, did demonstrate Christ our Lord, who
without any endeavor of man was borne of the most holy, pure, and immaculate
Virgin, and proceeded from the prog^ny of Abraham; and who increased into a
great mountain; in that his kingdom was to replenish and possess the whole
earth and who in the end of the world was to destroy all other kingdoms,
himself only possessing an eternal kingdom. Now in showing and interpreting
of this dream, the power, wisdom and providence of God so clearly shyned,
that the proud King prostrated himself upon his face before Daniel his
servant, and worshipped him, and openly confessed the majesty and power of God.

The foresaid four Monarchies (which were to succeed in order) and the
conditions, states, and proprieties of every one of them were fore showed to
Daniel by another wonderful vision in the seventh Chapter, under the form and
show of four beasts; and then after was signified to him the kingdom of the
Saints, which (after all the kingdoms of the world were extinguished) should
continue and flourish eternally. For thus does the Angel interpret this vision
unto Daniel. He quatuor be^^iae etc. These four great beasts are four
Kingdoms, which shall arise ou of the earth, and they shall take the kingdom
of the Saints of the most highest, and they shall possess the kingdom for
ever, even for ever and ever, that is, for all eternity. And now seeing we have
observed by experience all those things to be accomplished concerning the four
Monarchies, which were showed to Daniel in the former vision; we therefore
ought to assure our selves, and not to fluctuate in any uncertainty of belief,
but such things, as there were prophesyed to him of the kingdom, of the
Saints, shall also be fulfilled in their due time.

Again in the eight Chapter, as yet the monarchy of the Chaldeans flourishing,
that other monarchies should succed to the former, was also foreshewed to the
said Daniel: to wit the monarchy of the Medes and Persia^s under the form of a
R^m with two horns; the monarchy of the Grecians also, of a g^a^ with one
horn; as also was foreshewed the manner, how the first Monarch was to be
destroyed by this other; and that this, after the first king thereof, should be
divided among four kings; out of the posterity of which kings one shall come
(to wit Antiochus Epiphanes) who (from a small state becoming great) shall
after persecute and afflict the Jews, shall profane the sanctuary, shall take
away the daily sacrifice, and shall force al unto Idolatry for the space of
23000. days, which is for six years, three months, and twenty days; and who
in the end (without any machination or endeavor of Man) shall, even by Gods
revenge only, be extinguished. All which particulers to be fulfilled in the
persecution of Antiochus is evident even out of the books of the Machabees, at
least 400 and eight years after this prediction of Daniel, as Josephus
Antiquit. c. 11. relates, who in his ^^. book c. 8. further shows, that
this prophecy of Daniel (touching the King of the Grecians, overthrowing the
Empire of the Persians) was related by the Prophets to Alexander then be^^g in
Jerusalem; and that Alexander rejoiced much thereat, as interpreting this was to
be performed by himself; to wit, that he was that Grecian King (as indeed he
was) who should arryue to the Empire of the Persians.

In the eleventh chapter of Daniel many things are in like sort prophesyed,
first the progress and good success of the Persian Empire. Secondly the
expedition of Xe^xe^ against the Grecians. Thirdly, that the empire of
Alexander the great should succed the Persian empire: fourthly the division of
the Grecian Empire into four kingdoms. Fifthly, that most bloudly wars
should fall out between two successors of Alexander; to wit between the kings
of Syria and Egypt, during which violent conflict, I^^^a (as being seated
between them both) should be most miserably afflicted. Moreover in the foresaid
chapter are foreshewed the amityes, marriages, deceites, proditions, and diverse
other events, which were to happen between the said kings; in so much that it
seems to the reader rather a history then a prop^^^y. Sixthly, the persecution
of Antiochus Epiphanes against the Jews. Seuently, through occasion of this
persecution, he passes over to the persecution of Antichrist prefigured by
that of Antiochus. Now that all these (the last only excepted, which is to
receive its performance in the end of the world) are already accomplished,
appears out of the wrytinges of the Heathens, out of Josephus, and out of the
Machabees. Doubtlesly so exact, particular, and various a prophe^y of things to
come was most admirable and stupendous. But it were an infinite labor to
prosecute all things of this nature; seeing all the books of the Prophets are
even fraughted and stored with such predictions* only now I will touch such, as
concern Christ our Lord and are rehearsed and acknowledged by the Eua^gelists,
which very particulerly many ages before, were foreseen and prophesyed.

And first, it is ^^^^nuated in diverse places of Scripture, but especially in
the 3. of Baruch that God was to converse with men in an humane shape; Hic est
Deus noster etc. This is our Lord, and there shall none other be compared unto
him* he has found out the way of knowledge, and has given it unto Jacob his
servant and to Israel his beloved, afterward he was seen upon the earth and
dwelt among men; as also in the thirty five of Isay, of which place see
hereafter.

2. That he was to be borne of a virgin, appears in Isay c. 7. Ecce virgo
concipiet etc. Behold* a Virgin shall bear a son, and she shall call his* name
Emanuel. By which name it is insinuated, that he shall be both God and man; for
the word Emanuel signifies as much, as nobiscum Deus, or, God with us.

3. That he was to be borne in Bethlee^, Micheas c. 7. says: Et tu Bethleem
etc. And thou Bethleem Ephrathah art little to be among the thousands of Judah;
yet out of thee shall come forth a Captain that shall be the ruler in Israel,
whose goings forth have been from the beginning and from everlasting. In which
words his divinity is also employed.

4 The time wherein he was to come* was foretold by Jacob in the 49. of Genesis:
Non auferetur sceptrum etc. The scepter shall not be taken from Judah etc til he
come who is to he sent, and he shall be the expectation of the Gentiles. And more
distinctly in Daniel c. 9. of which place we shall hereafter speak.

5. That he should have a precursour, who should prepare the mynds of the
people to receive him, was prophesyed in the third of Malachy: Ecce ego m^^to
Angelum etc. Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before
me, and the Lord whom you seek shall speedily come to his temple, the even
messe^ger of the Covenant, whom you desire: which very text our Lord him self
in Matthew. 11. and Luke 7 did teach to be understood of S. John Baptist the
precursour. Again his precursour is also foretold in the 40* of Isay; Vox
clamantis etc a voice cries in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of our Lord,
make straight in the desert a path for our Lord Of which place see the third of
Matthew, as also the 4. of Luke.

6. The preaching of our Lord in Isay 61. Spirit us Domini. etc The spirit of
the Lord is upon me, therefore the Lord has anointed me, he has sent me to
preach good tidings to the poor, to bynd up the broken hearted to preach
liberty to the captives, and to them that are bound the opening of the prison,
to preach the acceptable year of our Lord and the day of vengance of our God,
to comfort all that mourn. Which prophesy our Lord teaches to be accomplished
in himself, in Luke c. 4.

7. Of the miracles of Christ in Isay 35. Dicite pusillammes etc. Say unto them
that are fearful be you strong, fear not behold our God comes with
vengeance, even God will come and save you: then shall the eyes of the blind be
lightened, and the ^ares of the deaf be opened; then shall the lame man leap,
as a Heart, and the ^u^^^ man's tongue shall sing etc. Which words our Lord she
weth also to be understood of himself, in Matthew c. 11. Where he says: Ite and
renunciate etc. Go and show John what things ^^^ have heard and scene, the
blind receive sigh^ and he halt go: the leapers are cleansed, and the deaf
hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor receive the Gospel.

8. The entrance of Christ in Jerusalem in Zachary c. 9. Exulta satis fil^a
Sion etc Rejoice greatly O daughter Sion shout for ^oy, O daughter Jerusalem;
behold thy king comes unto thee he is just poor and ryding upon an Ass, and
upon a colt the fol^ of an ass* That this was fulfilled is evident ou^ of
Matthew c. 21.

9. The prodition and betraying by his own disciple, in Psalm. 41. Etenim homo
pacis etc. For the familiar friend who^ I trusted which did ear of my bread,
has lifted up the heel against me. Which very place Christ himself did
interprere in the 23. of John, of Judas who betrayed him.

10. That he was to be sold for thirty pieces of silver, is in Zachary. 11.
Appe^derunt mercedem etc. They weighed for my wages thirty pieces of silver,
and the Lord said unto me, cast it unto the potter; a goodly price, that I was
valued at of them And I took the thirty pence of silver, and cast them to the
potter in the house of the Lord. Here it is clearly prophesied, that Christ
should be valued at thirty pieces of silver; and that those thirty pieces were
to be cast into the Temple, and that a field of an imagemaker of earth, or
Potter was to be bought therewith. All which things we find to be fulfilled in
Matthew 27.

11. The flight of his Disciples, in Zachary, 13. Percutiam pastorem etc. I
will smite the she pheard, and the sheep shall be scattered. Which place our
Savior interpreted in the approach of his Passion. Matthew 26.

12. That he should suffer diverse kinds of pains and dolours by reason of his
stripes, his Coronation, and Cross, is in like manner foretold in Isay 53. Non
est species ei etc. He has neither form, nor beauty; and we saw him despised
and rejected of men* he is a man full of sorrows, and has experience of
infirmities etc.

13. That he was to suffer for our sakes al these pressures and afflictions
with wonderful modesty, gentleness and patience, in Isay 53. Vere la^guores
nostros etc. Surely he has borne our ^^^ies, and has carried our sorrows, yet
^^^ did iu^^ him as plagued and smitten of God and humbled ^^^ he was wounded
for our transgressions he was broken for our iniquities* the chastisement of
our peace was upon him and with his stripes we are healed. Al we like sheep
have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way and the Lord has
laid upon him the iniquity of us al. He was oppressed, he was afflicted yet*
did he not open his mouth ^^ is brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a
sheep before the shearer is dumb, so he opeeed not his mouth etc. Al which
particulers, that they were most evidently fulfilled in Christ, appears out
of the Evangelists.

14. His Crucifixio^ is recorded in Psalm 22. Foderun manus etc They pierced my
hands and my feet etc. The same was prefigured in the b^asen serpent being
hanged a height at the beholding whereof al such as were bitte^ by serpents were
cured. Numer. 21. as our Lord himself declares, John. 3.

15. That the was crucified between two thieves, and that he was to pray to
his Father for his persecutours, is foretold in Isay. 53. Ideo dispertiam etc.
Therefore I will give him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the
spoil with the strong, because he has powered out his soul unto death; and he
was counted with the transgressors, and he bare the sins of many, and prayed
for his trespassers.

16. The irisions and blasphemies of the Jews against Christ hanging upon the
Cross, in Psalm. 21. Ego sum vermis etc. I am a worm, and not a man, a shame
of men, and contempt of the people. All they that see me, have me in d^rision,
and make a mow, and nod the head saying he trusted in the Lord, let him
deliver him, let him save him, seeing he loved him. Where we find almost the
same words in part, in Matthew 27.

17. The division of his garments and casting lots for the same. in psalm. 21.
Diuiserunt etc. They parted my garments among them, and did cast lots upon my
vesture. For, one vestme^t they divided into four parts; and for the other
(because it was not to be divided) they did cast lots. John. 19.

18. That being upon the Cross, he dru^ke gall and vinegar, psalm. 68.
Dederu^t in escam etc. They gave me gall in my meat, and in my thirst they gave
me vinegar to drink.

19. That his bones were not to be broken. Exodus 12. and Number. 9. Os illius etc.
You shall not break a bone thereof. That his side was to be thrust through with
a spear appears in Zachary 12. Aspiciunt etc. They shall look upon me, whom
they have pierced, both which places are expounded of Christ by S. John the
Evangelist. c. 19.

20. His Resurrection is prophesyed in Psalm. 15. Non derelinques anima^ etc.
Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thine holy one to
see corruption. etc. which passage of Scripture S. Peter (instantly after he
had received the holy Ghost, and of a rude and ignorant fisher, became a most
wise Doctor of the whole world) interpreted of the Resurrection of our Lord.
Act. 2.

21. That he was to rise from death the third day, Osee. c. 6 Viuificabis nos
etc. After two days will be revive us, and the third day will be raise us up,
and we shall live in his sight. Of which verity Jonas, who was three days in
the whales belly, and the third day came out alive, Jonas c. 2. was (according
to our Saviors explication) a type and figure.

22. His Ascension into heaven in Psalm. 14. Aperite etc. Lift up your heads you
gates, and be you lifted up you everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall
come in. And Psalm. 67. Ascendisti etc. Thou art gone on high, thou have led
captivity captive, and received gifts for men. Which place in the fourth to
the Ephesians, the Apostle does thus interpret.

23. The sending of the holy Ghost in Joel. 2. Effundam Spirtum meum etc. I will
power out my spirit upon al flesh, and your sons, and your daughters shall
prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see
visions: Which prophesy was fulfilled in the second of the Acts, eve according
to the exposition of S. Peter.

24. The destruction of the Jews for the death of Christ, was prophesyed in
Psalm. 69. Fiat mensa etc. Let their table be a snare before the^ and their
prosperity their ruin, Let their eyes be blinded, that they see not. and make
their loins always to tremble. power out thine anger upon them, and let thy
wrathful displeasure take them ^et their inhabitans be void, and let no^e dwell
in their ^ents; for they persecuted him whom thou have smitten etc.

25. The time wherein al these things are to happen is exactly described by
Daniel being taught herein by an Eua^gelical revelation, for thus the Angel
speaks c. 9. Tu animaduer^e sermonem etc. Vnaerstand the matter, and consider
the vision: Seauenty weeks are determined upon the people and upon thine holy
City, to finish the wickedness, and to seal up the v^sion and prophesy, and to
annoint the most holy. The s^^^^e of which place is, that God appointed the
space of 490. years (for so many years do seauenty Hebdomadaes, or weeks of
years contain) within which compas^e of time (to wit toward the end thereof)
the Messiah was to come, who being the author of al holiness, shall blot away
the sin of mankind; shall reco^cile man to God; shall bring into the world
eternal justice; and at whose coming the visions and predictios of the
Prophets shall be fulfilled. And then he declares, where these Hebdomadaes are
to begin, and where to end. Scito ergo and animaduerte ab exitu sermonis etc.
Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the commandment,
and to build Jerusalem again, unto the Messiah the prince, shall be seven
weeks, and threescore, and two weeks, and that is 69. weeks, or 483. years.

Now this Exitus sermonis (that is the fulfilling of the kings commandment
touching the building of Jerusalem, to wit, when the City was finished and
dedicated, as the learned do interpret and prove) is made in the 23. year of
Artaxerxes, or as Josephus writes in his 11. Book of Antiquities c. 5. in the
28. year, reckoning from the beginning of the reign of Xerxes; that is, in
the third year of the 80. Olimpiade, which was the seventh year of
Artaxerxes then governing privately. Furthermore from the third year of the
80. Olimpiade to the baptism of Christ, when Christ was declared by his Father
to be Dux Populi, and that he begun so to show himself in doctrine and
miracles, are precisely 483. years. Daniel. ^. 9.
And where in the same chapter it is said; v. 25.
And the street shall be built again, and the wall in a troublesome time. This
was often attempted, but (...) (...), and at the last perfected; from the
twentieth year of Artaxerxes, til the 23. year* being in ^^e 80. Olimpiade:
And ( v. 26.
) after threscore and two weeks (which sh^^ ^odow after the seven first
weeks) the Mess^^s shall be slain; that is, after 483. years or ^^ ^^e 70.
week: And it shall not be his people which shall deny him etc. that is, the
people of the Jews shall not be accounted any longer as the people of God. ( v.
26.
) And the prince shall come, and shall destroy the ^i^y and the sanctuary etc.
that is, the Roman army with Titus and V^spasian. ( v. 26.
) And the end thereof shall be with a ^lo^d and unto the end of the battle it
shall be destrored by desolations etc. To wit, which God (...) and foretold. (
v. 27.
) And he shall confirm the couena^nt with many in one week; that is, Christ
being the captain shall confirm his Euangelical law by many miracles and many
ways in the last week (to wit the 70. Week) for Christ after his baptism
preched three years and some months. ( v. 27.
) And in the week, he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease etc.
For Christ suffering death in the m^^dest of the last week, the reason of all the old sacrifices shall cease, which were instituted to prefigure the sacrifice
of the Cro^^e. ( v. 27.
) And there shall be in the Temple the ab^ominatio^ of desolation etc. In which
words is m^nuated the detestable faction of the Zelotyts, which was the cause
of the whole desolation and overthrow, as ^os^phus shows, Lib. 6. de bello
^udaic* cap. 16. etc. 4. l 7. Or otherwise, it is signified hereby, that the
army of the Gentiles causing the desolation, and vastity, shall not only pos^es^e
and destroy the city, but also the T^ple. ( v* ibid.
) And the desotion shall continue until the consumation and end of the world
etc. Al which things (the last only excepted) we see fulfilled; and therefore we
are not to doubt, but this last also shall be performed* seeing that the
desolation and dispersion of the fewes have already continued almost 16. ages.

26. The conversion of the Gentiles to the faith of Christ is prophesyed in
Gen^^. 18. In semine tuo etc. In thy seed all nations shall be blessed* And in
Psalm. 22. Reminiscetur etc. All the ends of the world shall remember, and turn
to the Lord, and all the kinreds of the nations shall worship before thee, for
the kingdom is the Lords, and he rules over nations* etc. The same is
prophesyed also in Isay* 49. Parum est etc. It is a small thing* that thou
should be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the
desolatio^s of Israel, I will give thee for a light of the Gentiles, that thou
may be my health unto the end of the world. And in c. 66. I will send those,
that have escaped of them, unto the nations of Affricke, Lydia, Italy, and
Greece, and unto the Isles a far of, that have not heard my fame, nor have
seen my glory; and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles, and from all
nations they shall bring an offering unto God.

These and many other were foretold of our Lord by the Prophets many years
before his incarnation, which we find to be already accomplished. But our Lord
himself, as prescious, and foreknowing of all things, delivered also
wonderful predictions, in which he manifested his divinity, of which I will
relate some. For he foretold most particularly, and in order all the several
passages of his Passion; as in Matthew. 20. Ecce Ascendimus etc. Behold we go up
to Jerusalem, and the son of man shall be delivered unto the chief Priests,
and unto the Scribes; and they shall condemn him unto death, and shall deliver
him unto the Gentiles to be mocked, and to be scourged, and the third day he
shall rise again. Which is often else where insinuated in Math. c. 16. 17. and
26. Mark. 9. Luke. 10. John. 3.

2. The abnegation and denial of Peter, in Mark 14. For thus says our Lord
to him. Amen dico ti^i etc. Amen I say unto thee, this day, even in this night,
before the Cock crow twace, thou shall deny me thrice. Doubtlesly this so
particular and precise a prediction was most strange, especially seeing that at
the speaking of these words Peter seemed most constant and firm, and that the
time of this even was so short, and that his premonition might have been a
sufficient forewarning unto Peter. From which former words of Christ, we may
not only gather, that he knew this thing so to come to pass, but also knew,
that telling Peter before hand of it, should not in any sort hinder and prevent
the event.

3. His prodition or betraying of Judas, and the flight of his disciples in
Math. 26. Mark 14. Luke 22. John. 13.

4. The meeting of the man carrying a vessel of water was prophesied, in Mark
14. and Luke 22. Mittit duos etc. He sent two of his d^s^^ples and sa^d unto
them. Go into the (...), and ibere shall a man me ^e you bearing a pitcher of
water* Follow him, and whither soever he goeth^m say to the Master of the
house: Our master says: where is the resectory, where I shall eat the Pasche
with my disciples? And he shall show you a great chamber adorned, there prepare
for us. So his disciples went forth, and came to the city, and found as he had
said unto them.

5. The like prediction of the ^oale of the Ass is in Luke 19. and Math. 12.
touching the coin of silver in the mouth of the fish* which was first to be
taken, we have it foretold in Math. 17. Vt autem non scandalizemus eos etc. And
that we may not scandalize them, go to the sea, and cast in a hook, and take
the first fish that comes up; and when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall
find a piece of twenty pence; that take, and give it to them for me, and thee.
In which words he shows himself not only to foreknow things to come, but
also to be the Lord both of the sea and fishes, as having in his power all
things, though they be absent and far distant from him.

6. Lastly, touching the euersion and final destruction of the Jews, we read
it foreshewed in Math. c. 24. Videtis haec omnia? Do you see all these things?
Amen I say unto you; there shall not be ^eere left a stone upon a stone, which
shall not be destroyed. As also in Luke c. 19. Videns ciuit at^m fleuit etc. He
beheld the City, and wept upon it, saying: Because if thou had known, and
that in this thy day, the things which appertain to thy peace; but now are
they hid from thine eyes; for the days shall come upon thee, that thine
enemies shall compass thee with a tr^^^h, and enclose thee about, and straiten
thee on every side, and ^all beat thee flat to the ground, and thy children
which are in thee; and they shall not leave in thee a stone upon a stone,
because thou have not known the time of thy visitation. The same matter is
also related, as prophesied by Christ in 21. of Luke. Cum videritis circumdari
etc. When you shall see Jerusalem compassed about with an army, then know that
the desolation thereof is at hand. Then let them which are in Iudaea, fly to
the mountains; and let them which are in the midst thereof, depart out, and
let not them, which are in the Country enter into it* for these are the days
of vengeance, that all things may be fulfilled, that are written etc. they
shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led captive into all nations
etc. All which, that it is already accomplished, is evident out of the history
of Josephus the Jew. I omit many other predictious of our Lord, as of the
preaching and miracles of the Apostles, of their persecution, of the
crucifixion of Peter, of the stay of John, of the conuersions of the Gentiles,
of the preaching of the Gospel throughout the whole earth, of the continuance
of the Church till the end of the world, and the like. I omit in like sort the
innumerable predictio^s of all the holy men, which have lived in the ages since
Christ, and being assisted with the holy Ghost, have foretold future events,
and have revealed many matters kept before in great secret.

Now out of all these things, which are here said, we may gather three points,
as most true and infallible. First, that there is a divine Power, who is privy
to all future events, and to the secretest things that are, and by whom all
humane matters are governed; and that he reuealeth to diverse of such, which
truly serve and worship him, those future events, whereof there are no
determinate causes. Secondly, that Christ is the true and only Savior of the
world; since all his actions and doings were foretold by his Prophets so many
ages before, and since himself was so eminent and admirable for his birth,
works, predictions, doctrine, life, end, and resurrection Thirdly, that the
faith of Christ is necessary to salvation; for no man can with any show of
reason call these three points into question, who has with judgment and
maturity of discourse expended and waighed the forerehearsed predictions, and
Prophesyes.

THE ELEAVENTH REASON, TAKEN from the being of Spirits. CHAP. XIII.
IT is evident even by infinite example and long experience, that there are
Spirits* that is, certain invisible substances endued with an understanding,
and penetrating all things through their subtility of nature, and which do far
transcend, and exceed all humane power, wisdom, and industry.

This is manifest, first from Oracles and answers, which were accustomed to be
given by Idols in all countries, to such as came to take counsel from them.
For those statuaes or images (wanting altogether life and sense) could not
return any answer, but it was spirits or devils entering into the said
statuaes, which so answered. In some places these answers were given by
Idolatrous Pri^st^; who with certain Ceremonies ^^alling upon the Devil, were
so possessed by them, as if they had been stirred up by some divine power;
these powered out Oracles and answers, the Devil speaking through their mouths,
or belly, or Nauill, or some other part of their body. Herupon some were called
(...), or ventriloqui; to wit, speaking through their belly. These things may
not only be proved from the sacred Scripture, but also from profane history:
for the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos, and of Jupiter of Ammon, and diverse others
were most famous for many ages. The Devils (seconded by this imposture and
deceit) did propagate and spread Idolatry, procuring themselves by this means
to be worshipped as Gods, or divine powers in their images throughout the whole
world, for diverse ages together. And even at this day they are so honored in
India, China, Iapon, Ta^tarr, Brasil, Peru, and several other countries. So as
we see, it was truly said of the Prophet Psalm. 95 Quoniam omnes dij etc. For all the Gods of the Gentiles are Idols, but the Lord made the heavens. Secondly,
the same is made demonstrable from the doctrine and practice of Nigromanticks,
and Magi, or Wisards, which are found in all places For these through certain
ceremonies and verses are able to call up the Devils, and do cause, that they
not only show strange effects (which necessarily imply their presence) but also
make them to appear in a visible form, and to converse familiarly and talk
with men. The form of this raising up of spirits is described by ( l. 11.
Odiss.
) Homer, where Ulysses calls up Tiresias, and the spirits of Orcus,
questioning of them touching his return. The like Negromantical euocatio^ to
be made by Scipio, is read in Siluius, by Tiresias in Statius, by Oeson in
Flaccus, by Canidia in Horace, and by Ericthon in Lucane: from all which it is
most clear, that this thing was much used in those former times; yea that it
is most ancyent, appears from Gods sacred writ, which speaks of the Wiseme^
( Exodus 8. and 9. ^. reg. 28.
) of Pharao. and of the Pythonissa; and the same is made most plain even in
this our age (I mean touching the commerse, association, and confederacy of
sorcerers and witches with the Diue^l) (...) the judicial censures against
such persons, and the great and daily experience had herein. Thirdly this
verity is further confirmed by those, which are obsessed, which are called
Energument: for two things appears in them, which are above humane power.
One, that such as are possessed, do speak strange tongs, which themselves
neither understand, nor ever did learn. The other, that they discover things
secret, or do relate things done in great distance of place, as if they saw
them openly. Both these two things afford an evident demonstration of a
certain superior invisible nature, by the power whereof they are performed. To
conclude this point of the being of spirits, is euicted from the many
apparitions of spirits, which are affirmed to have been from the testimony of
diverse most probable histories.

From all these proofs then it may be concluded, that there are in the world
spirits, and that in a wonderful great number. Since in all places, and from
all antiqui^ty they have most often manifested themselves. In so much as there
is no kingdom, no province, no city, no village, but there remains some
memory of their apparitions. Pythagoras was of opinion (as Laertius writes)
that all the air was full of spirits or souls; And this also was the
judgment of many of other ancients, who taught, that every one had his genius,
or spirit assigned by God. Thus did Hesiode, Homer, Menander, Trismegistus,
Plato, and the Stoickes affirm. Now i^ there be many spirits, then it
ineuitably may be concluded, that there is one supreme spirit, to the which all
the rest are subject, and at whose command they are governed: for every
multitude of things (except there be a dependency and subordination to one most
high) begets disorder and confusion. And hence it is, that even among
bodies, there is a superiority and predomina^cy of one above all the rest, at
whose command all the others do move or rest quiet. Now then by force of this
reason, there ought much more to be the like order among spirits, so as all are
(in regard of sovereignty over them) to be reduced to one supreme spirit: for
by how much any thing is more excellent, by so much it ought to enjoy a more
perfect order in the world: but spirits are far more worthy in nature, then
corporal things; therefore among the^ there ought to be the perfectest order,
to wit, of subjection and domination. For it were most absurd to grant an (...)
and confusion in the noblest rank of Creatures; seeing we find the lowest and
most inferior degree of things, to be so orderly disposed and distributed.

This point is further confirmed from the most dangerous and imminent
inconveniences accompanying the contrary doctrine; for if among spirits there
were no order, and that the rest should not be subject unto one, at the command
whereof the power of them were to be restrained; then might every one of them
trouble and afflict the world at its own pleasure, might take away men's goods,
burn and destroy all things, might infest men's bodies with griefs, diseases
and death, to be brief might destroy and overthrow all mankind; neither could
any redress be found to the contrary, seeing there were no supreme spirit, to
the which this other did stand subject, and so the world could not in any sort
long consist. For how prone wicked spirits are to hurt and afflict men,
appears both from the history of Job, (all whose substance the Devil
destroyed, killed his sons and daughters, infected his body with most
grievous ulcers) as also from the innumerable sacrifices of the heathens, in
the which the malignant spirits commanded that men's bodies should be sacrificed
unto the^; still making choice of that, which was most dear to the sacrificer,
as his son, his daughter, or one who was in great estimation in the Common
wealth; finally from the wars and tumults, to the which the Devils under the
show of divine and celestial powers, have stirred men. Now if they are thus
cruel and merciles toward men, God but giving them in some sort the bridle
for the offenses of men, what would they not do, and with what calamities would
they not afflict men, and what honors and worships would they not extort at
our hands, if they were at their own power and liberty, receiving from no
superior spirit any restraint or inhibition? Yea among themselves, wars,
emulations and disse^tio^s would grow, if there were not one, that could impose
a command over them. For as among Princes, who acknowledge no superior,
oftentimes wars are stirred up (with the which the world is miserably
afflicted) because there is none, to whose souerainty they stand subject, and
who is of power to compose the rising controversies among them; Even so among
spirits there would grow repinings, contentions and wars, (with the which the
world would be utterly extinguished) if they stood not in subjection to some
one supreme power: for every one of them would seek to advance himself, and
labor to draw all things to his own pleasure and desire: wherefore Homer most
truly did leave it registered: (...): that is, It is not good, that there be
many Princes in one kingdom: let one Prince, one King be. And answerably
hereto Aristotle (as borrowing it out of Homer) thus writes in the twelth
book of his Metaphisickes c. vlt. (...) that is, Things in nature do not covet
to be governed in an evil sort and manner.

To conclude, seeing there are many spirits (as is showed above) I would here
demand, from whence this multitude had its beginning? Or who brought the^ into
the world? They proceed not from bodies, in that they are of a more excellent
and eminent nature, then bodies are; as also in that bodies do bring forth only
bodies. Neither is one of them engendered of another (as we see living creatures
are propagated) seeing this kind of generation is peculiar to things, which are
subject to corruption, to wit, that by this means, the species and kinds of
things may be perpetuated, whiles the nature, being extinct in the parent, is
conserved in the issue. Neither can it be said, that every one of these spirits
have their being from themselves, so as they depend of no other cause,
granting, that any thing receaueth its existence and being from it self, it is
far more probable, that this so taking it existe^ce should be but one, not
many. For it is much more fitting, that there should be one certain Nature
independent of any, in the which the whole fulness of being rests eminenter,
and vnitedly; and from which one nature, the being of all things is derived,
according to the degree of every such thing the^ to maintain, that there are
many Natures, which depend not of one supreme nature. For where there is a
multitude of several species, or Indiuidua, and particular things, there is
also a limitation and imperfection; seeing those many things are altogether
distinct and several; neither do one comprehend the perfection and virtue of
another. And hence it ryseth, that none of those is for it self, but for
another, and all together conspyre and meet in one, and are (as it were) parts
of one entyre whole, which rises out of them. Thus do many bodies make the
world, many men a Common wealth, many spirits one kingdom or common wealth of
spirits; but what is of it self, ought to be altogether perfect, and sufficient
to it self, needing not the support and help of any other thing. And what may
be the reason thereof? Even this, that what is of it self, is also for it
self, according to that: Quod caret principio effectiue, caret etiam fine.
What wants an efficient cause, wants also a final cause; and therefore it
self becomes the end to it self, not seeking out of it self any aid, light,
truth, joy or beatitude; but having all these things in it self, and from it
self. Therefore that, which is of it self, and independent of another, must
needs be but one, not many; to wit a primordiall or illimitable essence,
sufficient by it self, being the fountain of every thing, and of each
limitable nature. We may ad hereto, that to grant a being of many spirits
independent of any, is to introduce a (...) or confused company of Gods, and
many first beginnings, as blind Gentility was accustomed to do, assigning
proper and peculiar Gods to every particular business and affairs of man; who
should be the authors directours, and upon whom that kind of particular
negotiation should be peculiarly incumbe^t. So they made Venus the goddess of
love and lust, Diana of hunting, Ceres of fruit, Mercury of negotiation,
Esculapius of curing diseases, Mars of war, Pallas of wisdom, Apollo and
the Muses of Poetry, Fortune, of casual events, and the like in diverse other
things, but all this with a strange blindness of judgment; as if one supreme and
divine power were not able to undertake the charge of so great a multitude of
affairs, or had not sufficient power and wisdom to direct and moderate them
all, without any tedious molestatio^, saying herein with Pliny: Frail and
laborious mortality has divided Lib. 2. cap. 7.
all these things into parts, being conscious to it self of its own weakness*
that every one should attend to that, which chiefly is needful.

Now from all this it is (I hope) sufficiently demonstrated, that there is one
supreme spirit, to the which all other spirits are subject, and at whose
command they rest obedyent, and of whom they are all procreated and made, and
this supreme spirit we call God.

THE TWELFTH REASON, TAKEN FROM the absurdities rising from the contrary
doctrine. CHAP. XIIII.
IF there were no divine Power, nor any Providence, by the which men's affairs
and negotiations are to be governed, the^ many absurdities and irremediable
inconveniences, and such as do mainly cross all true judgment and reason,
would follow, which points do evidently convince the falsity of this supposed
doctrine.

And first (supposing that there is no celestial power or Providence) it would
from hence follow, that the first and supreme truth (to wit, that there is no
such Providence) should open the sluice to men to all impurity of life, to all
wickedness, injustice, pride, arrogance, tyranny, and briefly to all perfidy,
perjury, sacrilege, and any other villainy whatsoever. For nothing is so
facinorous, hemous, or wicked, which (taking away all fear of divine power)
man would not undertake and do, according to that of the psalmist: Ps. 51
Dixit insipiens etc. The fool said in his heart, there is no God: they are
corrupted, and have done abominable wickedness etc.

See here the fruit and success of this doctrine and persuasion, to wit, all
turpitude and abominable eno^mity of wickedness. That this is true, is most
evident: for, as granting that there is a divine power, then the first and
supreme truth is this, That there is a God, who governs the world; so one the
contrary part, supposing that there is no such power, the first and chiefest
verity is, that there is not a God* which governs the world. For that must be
acknowledged for a truth, which is apprehended and taken by all me^ for the
first highest principle of all things. Now this truth (supposing it for such)
would extinguish and cancel in men's minds all fear and reverence. Which
reverence and fear being lost, the way lies open to all wickedness. But what
can be said or conceived, more absurd, then that the primitive and supreme
Truth, and the chiefest secret and mystery of all (being acknowledged and
apprehended of all men) should give An impossible figment cannot be the cause
of al virtue
passage to all nefarious and wicked courses whatsoever, making men to exceed
in all vice and impurity? Secondly, it follows, that, that which is in it
self false, impossible and a mere Chimera or imagination, should be the cause
of all religion, p^ety, justice, temperance, modesty, benignity, patience, and
briefly of all virtue and honesty, as also of all tranquillity in a Common
wealth, and of all goodness in mankind.

For a persuasion, that there is a God, and a love and fear of him produces
all these effects, and by how much this persuasion and fear is greater and
more vehement, by so much it works more eminent and remarkable effects of
virtue and goodness in the souls of men, and in a political state. And hence
it rises, that there was never common wealth well and peaceably governed, in
the which Religion, and a persuasion of a divine Providence was not well and
soundly planted in the minds of men; and the more that any one was privately
denoted to Religion, and to the reuerencing of a divine Spirit, the more
illustrious and famous he became in all innocence and probity of life: as also
on the contrary, how much the more any one became irreligious, by so much he
also became more wicked and detestable in conversation, as appears from the
testimonies of all sacred and profane histories. Now what madness were it to
believe, that there should be in a false and impossible fiction or imagination,
so great a power to the procuring of all virtue; and in a solid and undoubted
truth, so great an incytement and provocation to the perpetrating and
performing of al flagitious outrages, and wicked attempts?

Thirdly, it follows, that the chiefest and most true Wisdom extinguisheth
all If there be no God, the^ should Wisdom extinguish all virtue and Error
increase virtue.
virtue, and makes men most vicious: and that on the contrary part, the
chiefest Error stirs them to virtue, and causes them to become holy men.
For if there be no divine power or deity, then the greatest error that can be,
is to believe, that there is a deity or Providence; and the greatest wisdom
to think that there is no such celestial power at all; but all what is
delivered thereof, is but the fictions and figments of men. In like sort it
follows from the said ground, that truth and wisdom are to be concealed, as
being that, which impoysoneth men's mynds, and every common wealth; but Error
is to be advanced by all means, as the fountain of all virtue and goodness;
finally that the chiefest light of the understanding, begets the greatest
darkness in the mind, and will, touching manners; and the chiefest darkness of
the understanding ingendreth the greatest light, splendor, and beauty of
virtue in the will and mind; all which to affirm and maintain were no less,
then incredible madness.

Fourthly it follows, that all those, who have been eminent and remarkable
Upon the foresaid principle the best Men should be the most folish; and the
worst the most wise.
for wisdom, sanctity of life, prophetiall spirit, and working of miracles,
have been deceived in the chiefest matter of all, as not believing aright
touching the being, or not being of a God; since they al acknowledged a deity
and a providence, and honored the same: but such as ever were most infamous
for impiety and turpitude of life and all other wickedness, have only
apprehended truly this mystery and secret; for all such have been ever
contemners of God, and his Providence, therefore from this principle it may be
inferred, that the wisest men of all have been for manners the worst men of
all; and the most simple, ignorant, and erroneous have been the best, and the
most virtuous.

Fifthly it follows, that to love God, to fear revenge, to honor the supreme
Upon the former ground Blasphemies should not be evil.
power with due praises and lands, to keep an oath, and the like, are not in
themselves good, but vain, foolish, wicked, and adverse to true reason; that
to do these things are indeed but to love, fear, worship and adore a mere
Chimera, or a plain fiction of man's brain; for if all Divinity be but a
fiction (as a Chimera is) the^ is it manifest, that we ought to bear no more
reverence and respect to it, then to a Chimera. Sixthly it follows, that to be
wicked, sacrilegious blasphemous, and a contemner of all divine and
supernatural power, is not evil in it self, nor repugnant to the true use of
reason; but that these things are good and praise worthy, as being agreeable to
the ^^ue doctrine of the being, and not being of a Deity. For if there be no
supreme o^ celestial power, then all these acts, by the which he is contemned
and ignominiously treated, are good; both because they are certain
protestations of an infallible and secret truth; as also in that they fitly
serve and are of force to take away from men's mynds the false persuasion of the
being of a God, and his Providence: no otherwise then, as Contumelyes and
disgraces committed against the Idols of the Gentiles are laudable and good,
because by those actions, we testify no true divinity to be in those Idols, for
nothing is more co^temptible, then that which neither is, nor cannot be.
Seauenthly, it might seem to follow, that the world were, as a ship floating
on the sea without any Mast or Pylot; or as a mighty Commonwealth consisting of
all kynds of men, in the which there is no laws, no Judge, no governor, nor
any Procurer of tranquillity, peace and common good. And if it be so, how then
can the world continue, especially seeing it consists of so different,
contrary and repugnant things? For as a ship without a directour is violently
tossed to and fro, till it fall upon some Rock, or sands, or be overwhelmed
with floods; or as a Commonwealth wanting a magistrate and ruler, wastes it
self away with intestine, seditious, murders, and other calamities; so must
the world be most exorbitantly and inordinatly menaged, and in the end be
dissolved through a colluctation and fight of contraries, if there be no power,
which is to stern the same, and to procure a simpathy and accord among those
contraries.

Eighthly it follows, that all this universe, and disposition, and framing of
the parts thereof existeth thus by chance. For if there be no divine power,
which framed the parts of it, digesting them into this form, which now we see,
then is it necessarily to be acknowledged, that it has its being by chance,
according to the opinion of Democritus, who maintained, that all things were
first framed of a casual force and concourse of Atomi, or small indivisible
bodies. But what is this, but mere doting madness, and want of reason? for how
can it be, that that, whose frame and making existeth with so great reason,
providence and judgment, should have its being by chance? One sees a most
sumptuous building, framed withal art and skill; all Architects admire the
structure of it; question being asked, who made this curious edifice? It is
answered, that it is made by no body; but that there was long since a
mountain in the same place, stored with trees, and that it falling a su^der
through an Earth quake, the parts of this mountain being thus shiuered, did
through means of this collision and fall, cast and frame themselves casually
into this curious form of a palace. Now who is so simple, that would believe
this? And yet such is the like case in the stupe^dious fabric of the whole
world, maintained not to be made by the hand of any divine Power.

These, and many other like absurdities, incongruences and impossibilities do
rise and result from the foresaid denial of a Deity, and a Providence; all
which how adverse they are to all show of truth, how repugnant to the very
light of reason; and how fearful and dreadful to be but spoken in words, who
sees not? Wherefore it follows, that that principle, which is the fountain
of such pudled and stinking waters, must of necessity be most far distant and
estranged from all truth. But here some may reply, that even a false
persuasion in matters of religion conduces much to the deterring and
withdrawing man from wickedness; and to the persuading and inuiting them to
probity, justice, and other virtues. For the Heathens, who believed diverse
Gods* to be according to the multitude and diversity of humane affairs, and
that their negotiations and businesses were guyded by the providence of the
said Gods, and that they rewarded and chastised men according to their
different deserts (al which things were false and impossible) did
notwithstanding from this strong and settled co^ceyt of theirs, abstain from
many injuries, offenses, and enormities; as thinking the Gods to be offended
therewith, and that themselves should be punished by them for the same, either
in this world, or in the world to come. I answer hereto and say, that this
persuasion of the heathens was false in particular (to wit in thinking, that
there was such a multiplicity of Gods, as also in thinking that such, and, such
were Gods, as Jupiter, Saturn, Pallas etc. and the like) and that they had the
charge of men's affairs; but their persuasion was true in general, that is in
thinking that there was a divine power, that men's affairs were subject to his
providence, and that he exacted an account of them.

Wherefore when the Heathens either abstained from evil, or did good through
fear of offending their Gods, or desire of pleasing them, they were moved
thereto, not through any persuasion, as it was false in respect of such a God,
but as it was true in general. Only they did ^rte in the Object, to wit, in
ascribing a divinity and Providence to those* to whom they ought not, and in
worshipping it in them. Therefore they did not take away, or deny the true and
formal reason of a deity and of Providence; but they affirmed and maintained
it, and therefore retained after a certain manner the true foundation of
Political justice. But if there were no divine Power, nor any Providence, then
were this foundation of theirs most fictious and false, even in general; and
consequently it could have no force toward virtue and probity of ma^ners; or
if it has any (as by experience we find it to have) then follows it
evidently, that it is not a thing forged and invented, but most true and
undoubted.

THE 13 REASON* DRAWN FROM the Immortality of the Soul. CHAP. XV.
IF it be so ordained, that the reasonable soul shall not be extinguished with
the body, but after the death of the body it shall live and be immortal; then
there can be no reason pretented for the denying of a divine power, and a
Providence: for if the lowest spirit be incorporeall, intelligent, and
immortal, why should not then there be a supreme spirit, endued with the same
proprietyes? Since, where there are several degrees of natures, it is as
necessary, that there be found one supreme degree, as well as the lowest and
middle degrees. Now it is showed above, that there are certain degrees of
spirits far more excellent then man's soul, but under the soul of man ^ there
is no lower degree, for it self is the lowest; seeing that it is manifest, that
the souls of beasts do dye with their bodies. Furthermore, if man's soul be
immortal, then can we not doubt, but there must be after this life a
retribution of deeds and actions; to wit, reward for virtue and punishment for
vice: for it is most absurd to affirm, that those Souls, which while they
were here invested with their bodies, did live wickedly in all affluence and
abundance of riches and pleasures, and in committing of wrongs, and which
(before their departure from hence) made no recompense for the same, should
after this life be equal in state to those, who wrongfully have suffered many
tribulations, and yet lived very virtuously; and that there is to be had no
account for things committed here; therefore it follows, that there ought to
be a Providence, which is to give a retributio^ answerable to every ones
deserts. And hence it is, that all Philosophers and all religions (who
maintained the soul to live after the body) did withal maintain, that there
were future rewards and punishments, and did confess a Providence of a supreme
spirit, by the which these rewards and punishments are justly dispensed. S.
Chrysostom in his fourth sermon de Prouidentia, handles this point elegantly
in these words. If nothing be to follow after this life, then is there no God;
for granting that there is a God, that God must needs be just, and if he be
just, then does he recompense every one according to his deseruings; And if
nothing be after this life, then where shall every one be rewarded according to
his deserts? Many wicked men do live here in all pleasure and honor, a^ also
many virtuous suffer great pressures and afflictions. If therefore nothing be
to follow hereafter, the just shall finally depart, remaining still wronged,
and the unjust with undeserved felicity. If then this should be so, where is
justice? For if Man do not receive retaliation for such things, as he has
done, then is God not just; and if not just, then he is not God etc. But that
there is a God, all Creatures do preach it; therefore it follows that that
God is just: and if he be just, then dispenses he justice to every one. And if
he gives what is just to every man, then follows it, that there must be a
time after this life, in the which al shall receive, answerably to their lives
and actions. Thus far this Father. Therefore once gra^ting the immortality of
the Soul, it necessarily is to be inferred, that there is a God, and that he
exercises his providence upon all men's affairs: as also on the other side
taking away and denying the Souls immortality, then is all Justice and
Providence of God, yea God himself is taken away, and flatly denied to be.
Therefore it rests upon to prove and demonstrate the immortality of it; but
because this point requires a more long and prolixe discourse, it shall be
handled largely in the second book here following seposed, and appointed only
to that end.

THE 14. REASON TAKEN FROM Diverse examples of divine revenge, and benignity.
CHAP. XVI.
ALTHOUGH the chiefest punishment of sin be reserved to be inflicted in the
world to come, when there shall be made to all a just recompensation for their
demerits; nevertheless even in this world often times there are showed diverse
examples, to put men in mind, that God does not sleep, but that he watches
and observes men's actions; and to intimate unto them, how severe punishments
do attend wicked men after this life. Therefore though the bridle and liberty
of living according to each man's will and mind be given in this life; and that
diverse things may be thought to be carried so troublesomly and confusedly; as
that for the time no Providence of any divine power may seem to be in men's
affairs, the wicked doing all things according to their sensuality, and the
virtuous being miserably oppressed and afflicted; Notwithstanding, if Man will
take into his consideration the passages of all times, he shall see, that Gods
providence is not so quiet, still, and silent, but for the most part after some
time passed (the measure of the sins being once complete and filled up in any
one Country) it discovers and bewrays it self by taking revenge of the
said country with some heavy and notable punishment; of which point there are
many examples extant both in the sacred Scripture, as also in profane
Authors; the store whereof being so great, we will insist in some of the most
remarkable of them.

The first then may be the general deluge, in the which al mankind (except
eight persons) was utterly extinguished for their enormous lives. The great
Prophet Moses has discribed most elegantly this heavy punishment with all its
due circumstances in the 6. 7. and 8. of Genesis, in the procedure whereof, the
divine Providence* has several ways displayed it self. First in decreeing
the abolishment and death of mankind in revenge of their sins, and in
foretelling it to Noe a hundred and twenty years before it came to pass.
Secondly, in that God for a new increase of the world, caused an Arc to be
made in that prescribed form and measure, which might contain the kinds of
all living Creatures both upon earth, and such as did fly, and might reserve
the^ from destruction; to wit, it being 300. cubits in length, fifty in
breadth, and thirty in height: which measure and largenes, that it was
sufficient for the receite not only of all living Creatures, but also for meat
for them for one year, may easily be demonstrated, and has already been made
evident by learned men: so as it is clear that this proportion or quantity was
appointed not by ma^s advise, but through the special direction of the divine
Wisdom.

Thirdly, because it proceeded from the foresaid Providence of God, that at the
beginning of the deluge every kind of living Creature should resort to the
Arc, and take its fitting mansion. Fourthly, in that the globe of the water
with the increase of the rain, which fell continually for the space of forty
days and forty nights, was so great, as that it exceeded in height the highest
hills fifteen cubits. Now that so much rain could cause so great an inundation
and ouerflowing of water, may be made iustifyable partly by reason, and partly
by experience. Fifthly, the providence of God was further manifested, in that
both so much water could fall upon the earth, and yet after could be exhaled up
in vapors and clouds, and all this in the space of one yeate; for at the end
of forty days the flood was come to its height, and so continued during a
hundred and fifty days, the rest of that year (to wit 175. days) it was so
wasted away and dissipated and dissolved into clouds that the last day of the
year, the earth being become dry, Noe with his whole family and the living
Creatures came out of the Arc: therefore he continued in the Arc a whole
year measured by the course of the Sun (that is 365. days) for he entered
into the Arc, the six hundredth year of his life, in the second month, and
17. day; and he came ou^ in the 601. year, the second month, and 27. day; so
as he continued therein twelve months of the moon and eleven days, which
make precisely one solare year. Sixthly, in giving to those miserable men space
of repentance through the length and ^lownes of their punishment, for it cannot
be doubted, but that innumerable persons (feeling the dreadful hand of God in
so horrible a castigation) had true penitency and remorse of their Sins, and
obtained mercy and pardon for the same: As the like is accustomed to fall out in
dangers of shipwreck, where many most wicked men fly to God with great show of
piety; who conceauing a deep remorse of their former iniquities, and promising
an ame^dment, do purchase their souls salvation, by the loss of their bodies.
All heathen historiographers make mention of this flood and the Arc, as
witnesses Josephus in his first book of Antiquities, c. 4. where he adds,
that even in his time the remnants and broken pieces of the Arc were
accustomed to be showed amongst the Armenians.

The second example of divine revenge may be the overthrow of Sodom, and those
other adioining cittyes, when God destroyed all that region with their
inhabitants for their abominable wickedness with a shower of brimstone sent
from heaven. This inexplicable calamity Moses thus descrybeth, Genes. 19. Sol
egressus est etc. The Sun did rise upon the earth, when I o^ entered into
Zoar, then the Lord rayned upon Sodom, and upon Gomorrha brimstone, and fyar
from the Lord out of heaven, and overthrew those Cities, and all the plain,
and all the inhabitants of the Cittyes, and that, that grew upon the earth.
There had scarcely passed four hundred years from the floods, when this
happened, by the which they were made less excusable; who notwithstanding the
late and fresh memory of so great a chastisment, would ingurgitate themselves
into all kind of wickedness, and chiefly into most filthy and beastly lusts,
which was indeed the chiefest cause of the foresaid inundation. Certainly both
the mercy and justice of God did shine most wonderfully in this work; His
mercy in that God (at the prayers of Abraham) showed himself most ready to
spare Sodom, if therein could be found, but ten just persons. Now what greater
benignity and favor can be conceived, then to spare ten thousands wicked
persons for the sakes often holy men living among them? So preciable and
estimable is the life of virtuous men in the eye of God. His justice in like
sort appeared, seeing that so unexpectedly, as not fearing any such matter, and
in so short a time of repentance, God oppressed them with so cruel and
dreadful a torment: for what is more terrible, then an impetuous precipatio^
and falling down from heaven of burning sulphur or brimstone in so great
abundance* The waters all round about became so bitter hereby that no living
thing remained in them; yea the neighbor places also by reason of the filthy
stench thereof were made sterill and barren; so as even to this day, they bring
forth nothing, but certain aples full of a stinking dust, serving only as
signs and remembrance of Gods ire and indignation. For God was willing by this
example to manifest unto sinners, what they were to expect after this life, to
wit, sulphurous fire, and eternal vastity, or destruction.

The third example may be that manifold Exodus 7. c. 9.
castigation of Pharao, and the Egiptians for not dismissing and setting at
liberty the people of God. Moses describes this most evidently, who was not
only present among them, but also an arbitratour or governor, whom God used
as his instrument both in inflicting, continuing, and ceasing those
punishments. First, God converted all the waters in Egypt (whether rivers,
lakes, or welsprings) into blood, and this thus continued for the space of
seven days. Secondly, he brought into Egypt such an abundance of frogs, as
that they filled all the houses of the Egiptians, infecting all things with a
loathsome smell. Thirdly, next after the frogs, the Cimises succeeded; all the
dust in Egypt being suddenly converted into the^. These Cimises were a small
kind of Gnats armed with a very sharp sting in the forhead, pricking the skin
of a ma^s body with pain, and sucking blood; though Josephus l. 2. c. 5. is of
opinion, that they were lyce breading among so great a multitude of the
Egiptians, and feeding upon their flesh. Fourthly, all these several plagues
ceasing at the earnest prayer of Moses, and Pharao notwithstanding persisting
in his former contumacy, God did send whole swarms of flies, with the which
the Egiptians were wonderfully molested. Fifthly, after the flies, came a
general infection of the beasts, by means whereof all the Horses, Asses^,
Camels, sheep, Oxen and Kyne throughout all Egypt, (those only preserved, which
belo^ged to the children of Israel) did perish. Sixthly, after this plague
presently followed the scab or scuruy extremely exulcerating and afflicting the
bodies of men and beasts yet remaining. Seventhly, ensued a most cruel hail,
mixted with thunder (the like whereto was never seen in Egypt before) through
the impetuous violence whereof all living Creatures (which were abroad in the
fields) were killed, as also all groves, and vndergroaths, and the like were
pulled up, and overthrown. Eighthly, followed a huge number of Locusts, these
devoured every thing, that the hayle and thunder had spared; in like sort they
wonderfully afflicted men's bodies with their by ^ings, sharp nails, beating of
their wings, filthy excrements and smell. Ninthly, this chastisement at the
intercession of Moses also ceased: but when as Pharao would not stand to his
promises, succeeded most horrible darkness throughout all Egypt (that place
where the Israclites inhabited, only excepted:) this continued three days, it
being such, that no man could see another, neither durst any through fear move
out of the place, wherein before they were. Tenthly, after the light was
restored, and the King continuing still obstinate, there fell out a great
destruction, to wit, in the midest of night in the compass of one hour, there
were slain by an Angel all the first borne of men, and beasts; so as no house
or family was without grief and lamentation, as being deprived of that, which
was most worthy and dear to the^. This plague happened in the fourte^th moon of
the first month. The memory of this is yet so markable among the Jews, that
they even to this day do celebrate it with peculiar ceremonies, to wit, with
the sacrifice of the Pascall Lamb, the use of their Azimes, and the oblation
of their first borne of any thing.

The Egiptians being consumed and wasted with such diversity of calamities, at
length gave liberty to the Israelites to depart away; but a little after
repenting themselves of their former grant, they followed the Israelites with
a mighty army thereby to bring them back again into their servitude; but they
being almost overtaken by the other between the sea, and the mountains, and
when there was no hope to escape; God suddenly opened the sea, so as a very
broad dry way (and great enough for the swift passage of an army) was made in
the channel from one shore to the other on the contrary side, through which the
Israelites securely passed over: but the Egyptians pursuing them in have, and
being all in the midst of the said dry cha^nel, God loosed his hand, and
Moses at his command stricking the water, all those huge hills (as it were) of
waters, which being thus restrained, and served as walls on both sides, fell
down with a frightfull noise, and running into their wonted chanel, so over
whelmed the Aegyptia^s with their horses, chariots, and other provision, as
that not one of them escaped. These calamities of the Egyptians (persecuting
the people of God) are (as it were) a certain type and adumbration of the
torments, wherewith the wicked after the end of the world (when God shall free
and deliver his servants from the tyranny of the reprobate) shall be punished.
For after he shall send to them diverse afflictions, thereby that they may
reclaym^ themselves from their enormities and sins; and if notwithstanding
they will persist in their former courses, then shall they all in the end (the
whole world being in a general conflagration of fear) be utterly and
eternally extinguished.

Fourthly, there do occur diverse examples of the divine providence
(especially of Gods benignity and severity) showed to the Israelites, whiles
they were in the desert. For when as he had brought into a vast desert so many
of them, as amounted to twenty hundred thousand persons; and that the meats,
which they had carried with them from Egypt, were spent; then after a new and
unheard manner he provided sustenance for them: for every day (the Sabbath
only excepted) there did rain down from heaven upon them Exodus 16.
Manna, being a substance like unto a small hayle, wherewith for the space of
forty years they were nourished. Ibid. c. 15.
Next, when the waters were salty and bitter, God presently made them sweet and
potable.

3. The fiftith day from their departure out of Egypt, he gave a law in the
sight and hearing of the^ all, making himself in a sort visible to all their
eyes, in the hieght of the mountain Sinay, in the show of a mighty fyar, and a
dark cloud, with the sound of trumpets and great thunder; the earth it self
trembling, and the mountain somewhat moving and leaping.

4. For the space Exodus 40.
of forty years, he exhibited his presence to them continually in the day
time, by defending their camps or tents from the heat of the sun, in the
form of a great cloudy pillar; by night, by lightning their tents with the
said pillar in form of fire; when the Camps were to be removed from place to
place, this pillar did lift it self high in the air, going before them, with
a slow pace, that they might know, what way they were to go, and staying when,
and where, they were to rest; in so much that all the profection, or going, and
staying of their camps depended only upon the providence of the highest power.

5. Moses (by Ibid.
the commandment of God) did build in the first year of his egresse out of
Egypt a Tabernacle, and in the second year, the first month and first day
thereof, erected it in the midst of the ca^pe, the which was no sooner set up,
but that insta^tly the foresaid pillar continually stood over the tabernacle,
as it were covering it; excepting the tabernacle were to remove, and then the
pillar advancing it self on high, went before (as is said) to show whither they
were to go, and when to stay. When Exodus 33.
Moses entered into the tabernacle to pray unto God, then God in the sight of
all the people descended down upon the Tabernacle under that cloud, and the
prayer being ended, the cloud ascended up again into his accustomed place.

6. When the people of Israel Exodus 17. Number. 20.
were afflicted with the extremity of thirst in the eleventh mansion in
Raphidim, Moses by divine commandment did strike with his rod a dry Rock,
out of which presently gushed great store of water; the same also was done in
their thirtith three stay in Cades. At which place Moses somewhat doubted (in
regard of the Israelites incredulity) whether God would give them water or no,
and was therefore chastised with this punishment from God, to wit, Thou shall
not bring the people into the Land of promise; for thou shall dye before that
time.

7. When the children of Israel desired to feed upon flesh, and for that cause,
coveting after the pots of Egypt, murmured against Moses; God (though offended
therewith) promised them flesh, and thereupon the day after did send into their
camps such a multitude of quayles, as that they served them all for a whole
month after. It might be probably thought, that there were scarce to be found
in the whole world so great abundance of this kind of birds. But God Number. 11.
presently punished this their inordinate desire of eating flesh, with the
death of many of them, and thereupon the place, where they were buried was
called, Sepulchra Concupiscentiae.

8. The spies being returned (which were sent by the Isralites abroad) and
extolling the strength of their Enemies, and calu^niating and debasing the land
of promise, the people through fear showed great diffidence in Gods promises;
in so much, that they disclaymed from al interest in the land of Promise, and
desired to return into Egypt; For which cause our Lord being angry, condemned
to death all those, who were twenty years of age or above (which number came
to 63. thousands of Men, and five hundred) two only excepted, to wit, Caleb and
Iosue, which trusting in the assistance of God, much animated the people; for
he decreed, that none of them should enter into the land of Promise, but that
they all (as being murmurers against his divine providence) should dye in the
wilderness, for which cause he detained them forty years in the desert,
leading them now hither, now thither until they were all consumed and wasted
away. Yet their children, Number. 26.
which arrived not to the years of twenty, were reserved alive, and substituted
in their parents places. Whereupon it followed, that although in the fortith
year (when the land of Promise was to be possessed by them) all the murmurers
were dead, yet in regard of the many thousands proceeding from their children,
and those of the tribe of Leui (which amounted to 23. thousand) there were then
more to enter into the land of Promise, then were in the first year.

9. Core, Dathan, and Abiron being the chiefest men among the Israelites
(seconded by two hundred and fifty of the noblest among them) raised a sedition
against Moses and Aaron; and thus the minds of the people were auerted from
performing their Number. 16. and 28.
obedience, as if Moses and Aaron had ambitiously sought the Principality and
Pontificality, and did not undertake it at the commandment of God. Therefore
for the indignity of the matter, Moses appealed to the judgment of God
herein, who decyded the cause by inflicting a most horrible chastisement upon
them, in the eye of all the rest; for Moses had fearce made an end of his
co^minations and threats, but the earth underneath them began to tremble, and
(as a Sea) to floate to and fro. And then gaping with a vast opennes, and
mighty fragour and noise, it did absorpe and swallow down Core, Dathan, and
Abiron, with all their tabernacles and goods, and after closed it self
together, not leaving any print or show of its former opening; and as touching
the other two hundred and fifty, being their associates in rebelling, a huge
fire from heaven rushed upon them, and consumed them, so as no parcels of their
bodies remained. The day after, when as the people began another insurrection
against Moses and Aaron, as esteming them the authors of the former
destruction, and that God (for their sakes) punished with death (as they
thought) innocent men, at which God was so highly offended, that he sent a fyar
among them, with the which fourteen thousand and seven hundred were instantly
burned to death.

10. Another time in like sort, the people (through the tedious wearisomnes of
their journey) murmuring against God, he again sent a fyar among them, which
devoured Number. 10.
and consumed the uttermost parts of their camps, and tents; and had wasted
further therein, if Moses had not prayed to the contrary; at whose prayers the
earth opening, the fyar descended downwards, and so ceased.

11. Not long after this, the people again murmuring against the divine
Majesty, by reason of the length of their travel, God sent among them certain
fiery ^bi supra ^ 2^
serpetns, at whose stingings and by*tings, many of the people submitted
themselves to Moses, with acknowledgment of their sin. Thereupon Moses (by
the commandment of God) erected the brazen serpent, hanging it upon a high
Pole, or forke, at the beholding only whereof, all those were cured, that were
before wounded by the foresaid dangerous serpents. This Joan 3.
was a most illustrious and clear type or figure of Christ our Lord hanging
upon the Cross, in the belief and faith of whom alone, the wounds of the old
serpent are cured, and eternal salvation is purchased.

12. To conclude, during those forty years of the Israelites stay in the
wilderness neither their clothes, nor their shoes became worse, or old with
wearing; Gods good providence so preserving them, in that they had not there
convenient means of procuring of new. Add to all these former, so many helps
and furtherances in their wars, so many famous victories obtained through Gods
particular assistance, so many of their enemies slain either with no loss or
with very small on the Israelites side; we read that the Army Exo. 17.
of Amalec was overcome by the Israelites, through the prayers of Moses; for
during all that time that Moses was lifting up his hands to God, Israel
overcame, and when he suffered his hands to fall down, Amalec vanquished:
which point no doubt served, as a great mystery. The river of Iosue 3.
Jordan did divide it self in the presence of the Arc, to wit, the higher
part of it swelling, as a mountain, and the lower part altogether dry, and
gave passages to all the people. The Ibid. cap. 6.
walls of Iericbo being most strong, fell down to the ground only at the
sound of the trumpets, and voice or clamor of the ^^^ple. Many of the army of
the five kings of the Ibid. cap. 10.
Amorrheans being discomfited by the Israelites, and flying away, were in their
flight killed by hail stones sent from heaven. The Sun and the Moon at the
commandment of Iosue (God yealding to his petition) for the space of ten or
twelve hours stayed their motions, until he had vanquished his enemies. I
omit many other favors granted to the people of Israel for their obtaining of
the land of Promise; all which do evidently demonstrate the peculiar providence
and assistance of God. Now all these events served, but as figures and types of
such things, as should happen in the Church during the time of the new
testament; also they are of force to secure us now in time of grace, of Gods
providence (besides in freeing his servants from the bondage of the Devil) for
our entrance into the heavenly country.

Fifthly, those things are to be considered, which chanced to the Israelites,
when they were governed by Judges, and after they entered into the land of
Promise; for as often as (after the custom of other countries) they fell to
the worship of Idols, they were most grievously afflicted by God, as being
brought under the yoke and servitude of their enemies, but when soever they
grew truly penitent of such their Idolatry, returning unto God with a contrite
and sincere mind, then God (being at hand ready to commiserate the distressed)
raised unto the^ a Captain or leader, which did vindicate and free them from
their thraldom and oppression, and did reduce the^ to their former liberty.
For seven several times (a thing most strange and wonderful) while they were
governed by captains this happened; for as often they relapsed into Idolatry, so
often they were delivered into the hands of their enemies; and so often, flying
with true penitency unto God, they were succored. And first Iosue and others
of the more ancient, being dead, (who were behoulders of the wonderful works
of God, and contained the people in the true religion) they left God, Iud. cap.
3.
mancipating and subiecting themselves to the worshipping of the Idols of
Baalim and Astaroth. For which sin God delivered them into the hands of
Chusan Rathasa^m King of Mesopotamia, whom they served eight years. Now this
subjection seeming in the end very heavy unto them, and they (through the
admonition of holy men) acknowledging it to be inflicted by God for their sin
of ^dolatry, and being penitent for it, earnestly beseeched mercy and help;
therefore our Lord taking mercy of them sent them Othoniell, who gathering
forces, overthrew the King of Mesopotamia, and freed the people from their
bondage. After the death of Othoniell, the people again (forgetful of Gods
benefits and commandments, and led with the custom of other countries)
returned to Idolatry; for the punishment of which their sin, our Lord stirred
up Eglon King of Moab, with the Amalites and Amalacites, by whom they Iud.
cap. 3.
were badly entreated for the space of eighteen years; but they after
loathing their former sins, and flying unto God for pardon, God sent them
Aod, who with the death of the King and destruction of the army of the
Moabites, set the people at liberty. Aod being dead, they returned again to
Iud. cap. 4.
Idolatry, in revenge of which wickedness, our Lord delivered them up unto the
power of Iabin King of Chanaan, who afflicted them twenty years together; but
tribulation giving them again understanding, they grieved for their sins,
and supplicated Gods mercy, who moved there with raised up Debora a
prophetess, and Barac a man of arms, who gathering an army, vanquished the
forces of the King of Iabin, with the death of Sisara his captain, by the
hands of a woman called Iahel.

The people of Israel enjoying peace, and quiet, fell again to idolatry, and
became therefore subject to the Iud. cap. 6.
Madianits, by whom during seven years they were grievously oppressed. But
they being in this calamity, repented and prayed help from God, whereupon they
were first sharply rebuked by a Prophet, because they being so often delivered
out of the hands of their enemies by God, and having received so many benefits
from his divine bounty, did nevertheless so often depart from his service and
worship. But when they were most importunate and instant with God in their
prayers for their delivery, he raised Gedeon, to whom an Angel was sent in
man's form, encouraging him to so great a work; who when he was assured by
pregnant signs from heaven of the victory, he alone with three hundred unarmed
men, furnished only with a trumpet, and a vessel of earth containing in it a
firebrand, undertook so great an enterprise. These sounding the trumpet in
three places of the army, there instantly did rise so great a tumult among the
enemies, as that they being stricken with a sudden fury, partly by killing one
another with their own swords, and partly by being slain in the pursuit,
there were dead of them more then a hundred thousand. Gedeon being dead, they
relapsed again to Idolatry Iud. 10.
for which cause our Lord delivered the^ to the power of the Philistians and
the Ammonites, from whose hands they received great afflictions and pressures,
during the time of eighteen years: they returning again to our Lord, and
asking pardon of him, obtained for their captain Iephte, who being provided of
an army fought with the enemies, and got at one time twenty of the Ammonites
cities, restoring the Israelites to their former liberty.

Scarcely had five and twenty years passed from the death of Iepthe, but the
Israelites returned again to their old vomit by abandoning of God (of whose
benefits they had before so often tasted) plunging themselves a new into
Idolatry, the chief cause of all their miseries, and therefore they were made
again subject under the yoke of the Iud. c. 14. 15. 16.
Philistians during the space of forty years; but in the end God being moved
with mercy, sent them Sampson, whose strength of body was such (seconded with
the peculiar force of God) as nothing was able to withstand him, for he toare a
sunder with his hands a Lion, that came fiercely upon him, and carried upon
his shoulders the gate doors of the city Gaza, within which, being besieged
by his enemies, he was shut; in like sort, he being unarmed, invaded the whole
army of many armed soldiers only with the Iaw bone of an Ass, wherewith he
killed a thousand, and drove the rest into flight. Again he over threw the
house of Dagon, two of the chief pillars thereof, being shaken down by the
strength of his arm; many thousands of the Philistia^s (who were present)
being killed with the fall. Which afflictions gave to the Israelites some
breathing time of ease and rest: but they again enjoying a long peace and
increasing the mount of their former sins, with the access of more, they
were once more cast into the hands of Philistians, by whom there were slain
34. thousand Israelites: besides the Arc was taken, and the keepers of it (to
wit Ophni and Phinees, two principal Priests) were killed, as God fore^ould by
Samuel, that the same should come to pass. This calamity happened in the
fortith year of Heli. Yet here were the Israelites (though overcome) so
punished, as that the Philistians (though conquerours) were afflicted with
far more grievous miseries; for when they offered the Ark of God to their
Idol (as a spoil to to the Victour) God in revenge of so great an indignity,
punished them several ways: for the Idol did not only fall twice down before
the Arc, the head and hands of it being maimed and broken; but also the
bodies of the Philistians throughout all the cities were stricken with a most
loathsome disease, to wit, their hindermost intestine or gut became putrifyed,
and stood far out, so as innumerable dyed thereof. Besides al their fruit,
of the earth and their years provision aforehand were eaten and consumed with
abundance of myce, coming out of the fields and villages. Doubtlesly these
tribulations were far more heavy, then if they had been brought under the
yoke of the Israelites. Therefore the Philistians were in the end enforced to
confess the power of God of Israel, and honorably to send back the Arc,
with all its dowryes, and gifts, even by those men, who were witnesses of the
calamities inflicted by God upon them. All this is at large set down in the
books of the Judges.

1. Sixthly, those things are to be taken in our consideration, which chanced
to the Israelits being under the government of the Kings. First ( 1. Re 13. and
15.
) Saul after a wonderful manner, and by the special favor of God (to wit by
divine election, and also by lot) was advanced to the kingdom, who when he
would not obey Gods commandments, was with all his posterity deprived by God of
all regal authority, and in the end his army being vanquished, and the
kingdom transferred upon David, himself with his eldest son was slain in
the war.

2. David (although a great worshipper of God) had his sins (to wit the one
of his adultery, and the other of his homicide) most severely punished of God
even after his repentance: for his Son (to his great grief) was deprived of
life, and the fairest of his daughters was violated, and defaced with an
infamous incest by his eldest son, and the said son was afterward
treacherously slain by his own brother, and David himself was contume^^ously
cast out of the Kingdom by his own son, and his wives were constuprated and
abused by his son. All which adversities, that they should fall to him in
punishment of his adultery and homicide, were foretold by Nathan the Prophet.

3. Again, when David sinned through elation ( 3. Reg. 2. 4.
) and pride of mind, in numbering the people, God in punishment there of, by his
Prophet Gad, sent to him, gave him choice of one of these three chastisements,
to wit, whether his kingdom should be afflicted with famine for seven years;
or himself should be overcome by his enemies for three months; or should be
infected with pestilence for three days. Whereupon David seeing himself brought
into these straights, thus answered: Coarctor nimis etc. I am straightened
overmuch, but it is better, that I fall into the hands of God (for many are his
mercyes) then iuto the hands of men. And answerably hereto, he made choice of
pestilence, with the which being suddenly sent from God, there dyed seauenty
thousand men in three days; but after sacrifice being offered up for the
appeasing of Gods justice, the plague instantly ceased.

4. Solomon succeeded David, who being endued from God with a greater measure
of wisdom, then any other man, and enjoying more riches, honor, glory, and a
longer peace, then any of the former Kings of that people, at length being
given over to the love of women, was so absorpt with the pleasure of them, as
that for their sakes he was content to worship Idols: In revenge of which so
great an offense, God presently after his death divided and shared his
Kingdom, ten trybes whereof were transferred upon Ierobam; and the other two
only left to the son of Solomon; with which point Solomon in his life time
was threatened certainly. The providence of God appeared wonderfully in the
execution of this division, as is to be seen in the third book of the Kings,
cap. 11. and 12.

5. Jeroboam advanced from a mean estate to the Kingdom, was mainly bent to
fortify and settle himself by all means whatsoever; he fearing then, that if
the People went yearly to Jerusalem, to sacrifice in the Temple of the Lord,
that his Kingdom might be lost, the people turning themselves to Roboam King
of Judah; therefore for the better prevention hereof, he caused two golden
calves to be erected up as Gods, and diuulged an Edict, whereby the people were
commanded not to go to Jerusalem, but to sacrifice to those two Idols. This
proceeding might (perhaps) seem much conducing to the preservation of his
politic state; and yet in a mature consideration of the matter, nothing could
be invented more sorting and fitting to the utter subversion thereof; for it is
said in the third of the Kings cap. 13. For this cause the house of Jeroboam is
overthrown, and blotted out of the roundnes of the earth. He reigned 22.
years, not without great troubles and molestations; who being dead, his son
Nadab succeeded; but he scarce governed two years, being deprived both of his
life and Kingdom by his servant Baasa, who instantly so extinguished the race
and family of Jeroboam, as that there was not left one thereof. And this very
thing was threatened to him by the Prophet. But such (for the most part) are the
Counsels and proiects of politicians (of whom this Jeroboam may serve for an
example) who make religion to be subject and serviceable to policy, and who
embrace that profession of faith, which best sorteth either to the obtaining,
or keeping, or increasing of their States, and other such humane respects: for
although their subtle machinations and plots seem at the first to be specious,
fair, and convenient; yet in process of time they commonly inuolue and
entangle the Actours, with great difficulties, and such as in the end do
occasion their destruction; all which proceeds from the disposal of the
divine Providence, which ever has a predominancy and ouerruling over men's
actions and determinations.

6. After the death of Jeroboam and his son, the Empire of the Israelites,
was houlden by Baasa, whose indiscretion and madness was wonderful: for though
he knew, that Jeroboam with his whole family was utterly extinct for committing
of Idolatry, notwithstanding himself did not forsake it, wherefore the like
final destruction was denounced against him by the Prophet Ie^u; the execution
whereof was not long delayed. For when he had reigned two and twenty years (as
Jeroboam did) and that his son Ela succeeded him, even in the second year of
Ela, one of his Captains by name Zamri, did rise up against him, who being
killed, Zamri invaded the kingdom, and presently by death did extirpate all
the family of Baasa.

Some few years after, the same fortune happened to King Achab, and to his
impious wife Iesabel; for Achab himself after he had tasted of many
calamities, was slain in war against the Syrians, and after his death Iehu
(appointed by God captain or leader of the war) killed Ochozias the son of
Achab, and successor of the Kingdom, as also all his progeny; and caused
Iesabel the Queen to be cast from a height headlong down, to be devoured of
dogs. Al which miseries God by his Prophets did foretell to fall unto them, by
reason of their idolatry, and their other sins.

8. At the length, seeing the Kings of Israel, and the people would never cease
from sinning, and particulerly from worshipping of Idols (notwithstanding so
many comminations and threats, so many admonitions and increpations, and so
many chastisements inflicted by God for this their offense) they were in the
end deprived of their Kingdom, Cities, houses, grounds, possessions, and
liberty, themselves being carried away into Assyria to live in perpetual
bondage and slavery. Just after this manner, the providence of God carried
itself toward the Kings of Judah, and that people; for as often as they
yielded to the committing of Idolatry, they were worn out with diverse wars
and calamities, till they became penitent of their former sins; but when they
worshipped God truly and religiously, then they enjoyed great prosperity, and
were honored with many victoryes, as also flowed in all opulency and wealth,
as it falled out in Abia, Asa, Iosaphaet, and Ezechias. For against Abia ( 2.
Paralip. c. 13.
) King of Judah, Jeroboam came with fourscore thousand men: but Abia finding
himself much inferior in forces, put his sole confidence in his prayers to
God, beseeching his help and aid; whereupon God sending a terror into the
army of Jeroboam, forced it to flight, the which Abia following, killed fifty
thousand of his men, and took many of his cities. But Asa ( 2. Paralip. c. 14.
) had a far more famous victory; for Zara the Ethiopian, with a huge army
consisting often hundred thousand armed men, made war upon Asa, who though
far inferior in force, yet putting his trust in our Lord, met him in the
field, and upon his humble prayers made to him, the Ethiopians were suddenly
affrighted and dismayed, and thereupon began to fly, but Asa following them,
killed most of the army, and returned enriched with in finite spoils of the
enemy.

Neither was less wonderful that victory of ( Ibidem. 20.
) Iosaphat, who only with his prayers, virtue, and assured hope of Gods
assistance, without any weapons at all overcame a mighty army, which was
gathered of three very populous nations, to wit, the Ammonites, Moabites, and
the Idumeans. For his small forces being drawn out against the enemy, he
commanded his Quiristers, who did sing divine service and lauds, to go before
his soldiers, singing; at which sight the Enemies were by Gods special
providence possessed with such a fury, as that they killed one another, leaving
a great value of spoils to the Jews.

To the former may worthily be adioined the victory of ( 4. Reg. 19. and 2.
Paralip. 32.
) Ezechias, who as being brought to great extremities by the Assyrians, made
his recourse to God by prayer, who hearing him, sent an Angel to assist him,
who in one night killed one hundred sourscore and five thousand Assiryans.

I omit the captivity of Babylon, the history of Esther, the history of Judith,
the history of ^obias, the wars of the Machabees, the besieging of the
Romans, and the utter overthrow of the Jews; in all which the providence of
God has wonderfully appeared* It were an infinite labor to set down all
those examples, in which the Divine Providence has helped, succored and
extolled the godly and virtuous; and on the other side has depressed, humbled,
chastised, and punished the impious and wicked. For indeed the chiefest subject
of the holy Scripture is this; seeing all their narrations do tend to this
end, to wit, to instruct men, that prosperity and adversity do depend of the
providence of God; and that both these several fortunes are allotted unto men,
according to the quality of their works; neither can any one decline and avoid
the power of the said Providence. In which point the sacred Write of God
differs from all profane histories; for that being written by the peculiar
incumbency and direction of the holy Ghost, relates humane matters as they are
governed by divine providence. Whereas these other, as penned by a human
spirit, make narration of them, ^^ they proceed only from man's prudence and
industry. Therefore that forme^ teaches divine wisdom, by the which, man with
a godly worship of him, adhereth unto God: these later humane wisdom, and
certain small trifling cautions and observations invented, through the wit and
industry of man; which for the most part are but of little power, yet often are
accompanied with danger and destruction. Wherefore it may be justly concluded,
that nothing is more agreeable to the education and framing of Princes, then the
reading of sacred and divine histories; especially of the books of the Kings;
for there they shall be instructed, that the foundation and groundwork of a
kingdom and of true policy, is seated in true religion and justice, without
which any Christian state cannot expect any firmenes or tranquillity. This very
point was most profitable to Charles the fifth, unto who^ Adrianus his
Schoolmaster did read the books of the Kings, from whence he took those
principles, mysteries, and documents of gouernemet, which made him not only
virtuous, but also a most great, potent, and fortunate prince. Now that these
books are to be altogether credited, as being written by the concurrency and
direction of the holy ghost, is above made most clear and evident.

THE 15. REASON TAKEN FROM THE secret punishing of Blasphemy, Perjury, and
Sacrilege. CHAP. XVII.
THESE sins of blasphemy, perjury and sacrilege are directly against the
reverence of a Deity and divine power; wherefore seeing it is evident from the
experience and observation of diverse examples, that these are more severely
punished by Gods invisible hand, then other sins are, we therefore may
infallibly conclude, that there is a Deity and a divine Power, which has a
sense and feeling of these injuries and indignities committed against it. For
if there were no divine power, then were these former actions no sins, as it
is no sin to speak co^temptuously of a chimera, or imaginary thing, or to
swear by it, or to co^culcate, and with disgrace to tread the sign of it
under our feet. Again if these former things be no sins, the^ is there due
to them no castigation or punishment; But the contrary to this is evident by
many examples. Pharao (the King of Egypt) when he misprised God, and spoke of
him with contempt in those words: ( Exodus 5.
) Quis est Dominus etc. Who is the Lord, that I should hear his voice, and
let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go: was for
such his offense afflicted with many Calamityes, and in the end utterly
overthrown with his whole army. ( 4. Re^s. 19. (2) Pa^^. lip. 32. Tobias. 1.
) Sennacherib the King of the Assirians, inuading Judea with a powerful army,
commanded it to be related by his captains to Ezechias the King, that in vain
he reposed his trust in any divine power; for seeing (said he) the Gods of
other nations were not able to defend their worshippers against the puissance
and might of the King of the Assyrians; therefore neither could the God of
Israel. For which horrible blasphemy God in one night destroyed almost his
whole army, there being a hundred eighty five thousand armed men slain by an
Angel. And the King himself after his return into Niniuy his city, and
sacrificing to his Gods (who could not defend him) was murdered by his own
sons. ( Daniel c. 3.
) Nabuchodonos^r (King of Chaldaea) when in his fury he cast the three children
into the burning Furnace, for that they refused to adore a Statua erected by
him, and further blasphemed against God, in preferring his own power before
the power of God, in these words: Quis est Deus? Who is God, that can take you
out of my hands? did immediately after acknowledge the contrary, and confessed a
Deity through the sight of that stupendous miracle, by the which the children
being in the midst of the flames remained unhurt and not burned. But after
when he had forgot the same, and bare himself with his former elation and
pride of mind, maintayning, that his power and glory stood obnoxious or subject
to none, he was suddenly punished by God; a voice from heaven rushing upon him,
and speaking thus: Tibi ( Daniel 4.
) dicitur Nabuchodonosor rex etc. O King Nabuchodonosor, to thee be it spoken:
thy Kingdom shall depart from thee. And they shall drive thee from men, and
thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field; They shall make thee to eat
grass, as the oxen; And seven times shall pass over thee, till thou know,
that the most high ^eareth rule over ^he Kingdom of men, and gives it unto
whomesoeuer he will. Which voice being ended, he was presently deprived of
reason and grew madd. Whereupon being driven from all men's society, he begun to
live in the woods among beasts, and during seven years lived after the manner
of beasts. Which period of time being ended, he was restored to his wits and
senses, and presently thereupon most excellently confessed a divine power. That
this was to happen unto him, God foreshewed it a year before in a vision,
which he had, while he dreamed; which vision Daniel did interpret.

Agripp^ ( Acts 12. Joseph. l. 19. ^ntiquit. ^. ^.
) the elder being in Cesaraea, and clothed with sumptuous apparel* and
sitting in a high and regal seat, began to make a speech to the people; but
some of his flattters cried out, that it was the voice of some God, and not of
man; which words being grateful unto him, (who could be willing to assume
divine honor to himself) he was suddenly stricken with an Angel, and so his
flesh and bowels putrefying, he was consumed with lice.

The (6) Syrians being overcome in war by the Israelites in certain
mountanous places, ascribed their overthrow to the Gods of the mountains, who
(they said) did favor the Israelites; Therefore they would fight with the
Israelites in the valleys, where they thought the God of Israel was not
interessed; upon which cause, God by his Prophet thus spoke to the King of
Israel; Quia dixerunt Syri etc. Because the Syrians said, the Lord is God of
the mountains, and not God of the valleys, I will give all this great
multitude in thy hand, and you shall know, that I am the Lord. And thereupon
both their armies joining battle after, the Israelites (though but few in
number) killed in one day a hundred thousand footmen: And there remained in a
near place twenty seven thousand Syrians, who flying into the city, were
killed with the fall of the city walls: doubtlesly this was a manifest revenge
and punishment of the former blasphemy.

Nicanor ( 2. Ma chab. 15.
) being leader of the army of Demetrius the King, and intending to invade the
Jews upon the Sabbath, was admonished that in honor and reverence to God (who
sees all things) he shoud forbear that sacred day: to the which advise he
thus answered: Estne potens quispiam in caelo etc. Is there a Lord in heaven,
that commands the Saboth day to be kept? to whom when it was answered. Est
dominus viuus etc. There is a living Lord, which rules in heaven, who
commanded the seventh day to be kept: he replied; Et ego potens etc. And I am
mighty upon earth to command them, for to arm themselves, and to perform the
Kings business. Upon which occasion the day of war being begun, though Nicanor
had a most powerful army, furnished with all kind of munition and armor; yet
was he overthrown by very few, with the loss of thirty five thousand men. His
blasphemous tongue likewise was cut of, and by small pieces cast unto birds;
and his hands, which he lifted up against the Temple, were set up in an
opposite place to the Temple.

In the 24. of Leuiticus, the Lord commanded, that the son of an Israelite
woman, who had blasphemed against God, should be stoned to death; and even in
that place this law of stoning is established, and two several times repeated
in these words: ( Leuitieus* 24.
) Qui blasphemauerit etc. He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, shall be
put to death; all the congregation shall stone him to death, as well the
stranger, as he that is borne in the land: When he blasphemeth the name of the
Lord let him be slain Certainly this repetition does intimate and insinuate
the firm and resolute will and mind of the law giver herein.

All what time Achior ( Judith 6.
) commended the power of the God of heaven, and auerred, that the Jews were
secure and safe, in that they worshiphed God religiously, at which words
Holofernes in great indignation thus answered: Quoniam prophetasti etc. Because
thou have prophesied among us to day, that the people of Israel is defended by
their God, I will show thee, that there is no other God, but Nabuchodonosor
etc. For which blasphemy pa^^d dear, for his own head was cut of by the hand
of a woman ( Ibid. 23.
) and his army being driven to flight, a great part thereof was put to the sword
by the Jews.

Antiochus ( 2. Machab.
) for his pride and blasphemy, was stricken from God with an invisible and
incurable disease; for first suddenly a violent pain of his bowels invaded
him; and then quickly after he fell out of his chariot, wounding himself
da^gerously; lastly his body putrefying with a filthy consumption, and
breathing out a most loathsome smell was consumed alive with worms.

The Philistians ( 1. Reg. c. 6.
) were oppressed with most heavy afflictions from God, in that they handled the
Ark of the Lord unworthily; and except they had sent it back again within a
short time, perhaps they all had then perished: but within seven months they
restored it with honor and reverence, upon which their so doing, the plague
before among them instantly ceased.

When the Bethsamites ( Ibi^^ ^.
) behoulded the Ark of the Lord curiously and with small reverence (contrary to
the divine precept in that behalf, expressed in the fourth book of Numbers)
there were slain of the chiefest among them seauenty men, and of the common
multitude fifty thousand: thus did the Divine Providence of God punish with
death that curious and irreligious sight of theirs.

Balthazar ( Daniel ^.
) (King of the Chaldeans) when he commanded the holy vessels to be brought to
him (which were taken out of the temple of the Lord at Jerusalem) and did
drink in them with his noble men and his Concubines; for such his profaning
of the^ did presently feel Gods just revenge, for in the midst of the
banquet and iollity with his guests, it is said, apparuerunt digiti etc. There
appeared fingers of a man's hand, which wrote over against the candlestick upon
the plaster of the wall of the Kings palace. And this appeared in the sight
of all men, and with great consternation of mind and fear to the King
himself. The words there written were these three: Man's, Thecel, Phares. Of
which words (according to the interpretation of Daniel) this was the meaning:
Mane, that is, God has numbered thy Kingdom, and has finished it: Thecel:
thou art weighed in the balance, and art found too light. Phares; thy Kingdom
is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians. To conclude, that very night
the City* was taken, and the King with infinite multitude of men, and with the
greatest part of his nobility was ^laine. Now three observations we collect
from this one fact: first, that there is a certain period of time given by God
to all Kingdoms; the which being once expired, the Kingdoms are changed, and
the Souerainty of them transferred to others. Secondly, that the works of
every Prince and King are to be expended and weighed, and that for the most
part the time of their government is appointed by God. Thirdly, that the
beginning of principalities and Kingdoms, their destructions, their
continuance, and translations are disposed by the Providence of the Almighty.

3. When Heliodorus ( 2. Machab. 3.
) endeavored to rob the sacred Treasury by profaning the sanctuary of the
temple; the Jews praying devoutly to God for the preventing hereof, he was not
only restrained by God of his purpose; but was greatly punished with stripes
for such his sacrilegious attempt; and his soldiers, which he brought with him
to that end, were possessed with a great fear and dismayednes. For there
appeared unto him a horseman of a terrible aspect, and rich in apparel, whose
horse coming violently upon Heliodorus with his former feet, did greatly hurt
him; and then there were seen two young men of excellent strength and beauty,
who on each side inuading Heliodorus, did so whip him, as that he dispayred of
his life. But sacrifice being offered up for his recovery, he was presently
cured. And thus much of these examples* which are taken out of the holy
Scriptures: for if we should insist in all other examples of this subject,
which do occur in profane Histories, and other Ecclesiastical writers, we
should find almost infinite of them: for there is no Nation, no Province, no
city, no village, where blasphemies, sacriledges and periuries have not very
often been most dreadfully punished by Gods own hand; In so much that the
very terror and fear of his chastisements here in has been sufficient to
deter many men from the perpetrating of so heinous sins. It may perhaps
seem strange to some, that we do often read those, who were contemners not
only of one true and supreme divine power, but also even of false Gods, to have
been punished most strangely. Answerably hereto we find, that the soldiers of
Zerxes, who through hope of spoil entered into the temple of the Cabiri in
Thebes (wherein Ceres was worshipped) became al presently madd; some of them
casting themselves into the sea, others of them hurling themselves
precipitately down from the top of high rocks, as Pausanias in his Beotici^
relates. Again, when Alexander the Macedon did take by force Miletum, a most
strong city in Ionia, and that some of the soldiers burst into the temple for
the spoiling of it; suddenly a flame of fire burned and blinded the eyes of
them all, as Lactantius writes lib. 2. cap. 8. and Valerius Maximas lib. 1. c.
2. Appius Claudius the Censour for taking away of sacred things of the false
Gods, was stricken blind. Fuluius the Censour, in that he took certain marble
tyles or plate out of the temple of Juno Lascinia, with the which he covered
the building which he made at Rome, called Aedes Fortunae Equestris, became
madd, and in the end dyed through grief, conceived for the loss of his two
sons in the wars in Greece. Pirrhus (King of the Epirots) for robbing the
treasury of Proserpina Locrensis, suffered shipwreck upon the shores nearest to
that Goddess, where there was after nothing to be found safe, but the silver,
which he had taken before. These things are related out of ancient writers by
Lactantius lib. 2. cap. 8. and diverse other approved authors make mention of
the like events in this kind. For answer hereto, it is to be said, that these
punishments do not proceed from the true God; but from the Devils, who are
emulous of divinity; who that they may be accounted Gods, and that they may the
more easily extort divine honors, endeavor to imitate the custom and
proceeding of the true God. And from hence it rises, that there are so many
visions, apparitions, and Oracles; so many false and adulterate miracles
performed by them; so many benefits seeming to be bestowed by them upon their
worshippers; and so many punishments inflicted upon such, as seem more
negligent in their honors: for by their prestigious sleights and endeauours it
was brought to pass, that a statua or Image of Juno Veiensis spoke to a
soldier, that it intended to go to Rome; that the Goddess Fortune was
accustomed to denounce peril and danger in a Woman's form or show; that a ship
(drawn with a string) did follow the hand of Claudia; that Rome should be
freed of the plague, if a serpent were sent from Epidaurus; that Ceres Theb^n^,
Ceres Milesia, Proserpina Locrensis, and Juno Lascinia did Ireuenge themselves
upon those, who bore themselves sacrilegiously toward them: finally, that for
the same matter Hercules took punishment of Appius, Jupiter of Atinius, and
Apollo of a soldier of Scipio. But of this point see more in Lactantius l. 2.
c. 17.

God suffered these events both for the sins of those men, who deserved to
live under the tyranny of the Devils; as also because the Heathens in
committing indignities against their false Gods, did either sin against their
conscience, which persuaded them, that there was a kind of divinity in them; or
otherwise committed these disgraces with contempt, not only of false Gods but
also of all divine and supernatural power whatsoever. For seeing, they were
ignorant of the true God, the creator of all things, and with all did know by
the light of reason, that those vulgar powers, which were worshipped of the
common sort were no Gods, they might more easily be induced to think, that
there was no divine power at all, by the which the world is governed; but that
all things had their being and event by a fatal necessity, or bytemerity and
rashness of fortune. And from this ground it is, that among the Iaponians and
the^ of China, such as are ignorant, are either Atheists, and open contemners
of all divinity; or at least, do greatly fluctuate and stagger in their
judgments therein.

Therefore when the Heathens (as in the examples above related) do commit any
sacrilegious act against their false Gods, either they sin against their
conscience, in the which they believe, that there is a certain divinity in
those Gods; or else they sin through a general contempt of all divine power;
wherefore (whatsoever the reason is) it is not strange, if the Heathens suffer
punishments for such their actions. Neither is it any prejudice to what is
delivered in this Chapter, that among blasphemous, sacrilegious, and perjured
men, there is a far greater number of those, who are not punished in this life;
then of those who are punished; Seeing this is no sign or argument of any
defect or want of Providence, but only of the delaying of the punishment. For
it does not necessarily belong to the nature of providence, to punish all
sins in this world; but to suffer actions and things for the time to be
carried according (for the most part) to the forces of the worker; the chiefest
punishment being reserved for the time to come; Since otherwise, mankind would
shortly be extinguished, and the offices or operations of virtue would rather
seem to be seruilely coacted and enforced, then free, or proceeding from any
ingenuous or generous lyking of virtue. It is certain, that Providence
manifests it self sufficiently, if it takes punishment of some particular
men in this world after an unaccustomed manner; and this in the eye of the
world, with admiration and astonishment of all; as acknowledging the secret
hand of Gods power, and omnipotency therein.

THE ARGVMENTS ANSVVERED, which are brought against the being of a Providence,
and a Deity. CHAP. XVIII.
THE first argument against a divine Providence may be this: If the world be
governed by the Providence of some supernatural power, then would not impiety
and wickedness so much prevail and predominate, nor have such prosperous events
against virtue and innocence: for it may seem chiefly to belong to the
providence of a governor, not to give the bridle of living loosely to the
wicked, but to curb them, and force them to better courses; and on the other
side to defend and cherish the pious, and to advance them to honors and
riches. If in any great City the most licentious and profane persons should
continually govern and stern all matters, wronging with all impunity others;
and the virtuous should ever rest thus afflicted; who would say, that this
City were governed by a provident and just Ruler? Wherefore seeing in the world
we may observe such a perturbation of Order, as that a greater can hardly be
conceived; to wit, the wicked ruling and doing every thing to their own
sensuality, and the virtuous miserably afflicted and oppressed; all which may
seem to impugn, that the world is governed by one supreme Providence, which
justly disposes and measures all things.

I answer hereto, and say, that the profane Athists do chiefly ground
themselves upon this argument; as also that the faithful are sometimes troubled
and distracted therewith, as the Prophet David in his Psalm 72. insinuates
himself to have been moved herein. But the answer hereto, is obuious, facile,
and easy. For as there is a double end; the one belonging to this temporal
life, to wit, the tranquillity and peace of the common wealth; the other to the
life to come, and this is the eternal glory in heaven: even so we are to
consider a double Providence, whereof the one disposes the means for the
obtaining of the temporal end; the other of the eternal end. The first is
humane and political, as resting upon man's wisdom, and tending to a political
and temporal good; this other is divine, as being grounded upon divine wisdom,
and directed to an eternal good or benefit.

Therefore where it is said, that it belongs to Providence to bridle the
wicked, not to suffer them to afflict the virtuous without control, and the
like; this is true, if we speak of political providence, and of temporal
coercion and constraint; for seeing this Providence is ordained to obtain
temporal peace and rest, the function of it is to hinder (what in it lies)
all wickedness and sins, whereby the temporal peace may be disturbed. Wherefore
it may be truly granted, that in what Commonwealth soever outrages are
committed without any fear of punishment; the same either wants a governor,
or at least the magistrate thereof is unjust, partial, and tyrannous.

But if we speak of that Supreme Providence (before mentioned) then is it false
to affirm, that it belongs to its function, not to suffer the impious to
govern and rule temporally; since indeed the contrary rather appertains to
it, to wit, to suffer all things (as they are here furnished with their own
faculties and abilities) for the time to take and enjoy their proceedings and
desires; and this for many causes.

First, that we may spontaneously and voluntarily be carried to the exercise of
Why divine Prodence suffers the courses of the wicked in this World.
virtue, and not be compelled thereto through any necessity: for virtue coacted
and forced, is not virtue, but rather a bondage of the mind; since true virtue
exercises it self not through any servile fear of punishment, but through
love of honesty: therefore to the end, that true virtue and perfect desert may
have their due place, it was necessary, that the Divine Providence should not
constrain men thereto, but should leave every man to his free choice and
liberty herein.

Secondly, because the dignity and worth of eternal reward is so great, that
if it be duly considered, it is abundantly sufficient to inflame our desires
to the love of it, and to excite us to all virtue and sanctity; therefore it
should much impugn the excellency of so inestimable a felicity, if men through
compulsion were driven to the seeking of it.

Thirdly, if eternal punishments be maturely expended and considered, they are
fully prevailing to deter men from all flagitious and impious attempts.
Whereupon if God should not chastise men in this world, yet were they not
destitute of his Providence; for it is sufficient, that he promises rewards,
and threatens punishments for the time to come.

Fourthly, if by Gods disposal and his providence, wickedness should ever
receive its retaliation and recompense in this world (as we see, political
Providence inflicteth the same) then would the world be in a short time
extinguished and ended; whereupon it would follow, that there should be few
imbracers of virtue, and the means for the wicked to their salvation should be
recluded and shut up.

Fifthly, the malignity of the wicked is not in vain permitted by God, seeing
by reason thereof the virtue of the just is often more stirred up and exercised,
and appears more worthily; as also there is given them thereby an occasion of
a greater merit, and a more glorious crown. For take away the severity of
tyrants, and then there shall be no glory of Martyrs; take away the wrongs
proferred by evil men, and there shall not appear the patience or longanimity
of the just and virtuous; briefly, the world would be deprived of an infinite
seed of goodness, if God should ever restrain and curb the wicked in this
world. The same malignity serves to punish as well the sins of the just, as
of the impious (as is evident out of the holy Scripture.) So God diverse times
used the malice and ambition of the Assyrians, Chaldeans, Persians, Egiptians,
and Romans, as a means, wherewith to chastise the Israelites and other
nations; suffering them according to a limited proportion of times, places,
persons, calamities, and punishments, to afflict and molest the people of God,
and otheer countries; and this order God has observed in all ages, and will
observe it till the consummation of the world.

Sixthly, we are furthermore instructed from this Providence, that temporal
benefits are not much to be esteemed; since both the virtuous, and the vicious
do promiscuously participate of them; and in the which the wicked do commonly
more increase, then the pious and the just. Which point being so, then how
great are those benefits, which God has promised and prepared for his
servants? For if he does not give these temporal commodities (so much prized)
to such as daily dishonor him with their bad lives, then what, and how great
are those rewards, which he has reserved only for such, as do truly fear and
serve him? To be brief, this temperature of Gods prruidence does greatly
commend and magnify the wonderful benignity and clemency of God, which while
it slowly proceeds to revenge, it daily expects the conversion of sinners.
And yet it proceeds in such sort, as that it is not altogether void of
justice and severity; because often by unaccustomed means even in this life,
it punishes sins, to show that God does not sleep, but that he will in due
time exact an account of all men. From all which, it appears, that this
Providence, which suffers so great a perturbation in humane and temporal
things, is perfect and grounded upon most forcible reason; since the wrong of
the virtuous is temporal and momentary, and is to be changed hereafter for
eternal rest and beatitude. He that diligently weighs this point, will not
only, not be scandalized at the uneven dispensation of these humane things; but
will greatly admire and praise the Providence of God, who upon so just motives
permits the same.

THE SECOND ARGUMENT AGAINST the divine Providence, answered. CHAP. XIX.
EXPERIENCE instructs us, that men's negotiations and business have (for the
most part) events and success, answerable to the industry and care used by
them therein, and not according to the right or equity of the cause; whereupon
it often falls out, that who maintains the most in just causes, does
prevail in the^; which consideration may seem to insinuate, that each man is
to be left to his own Providence, without disquisition or search of any other
Providence. Accordingly hereto it is to be remembered, that a great General or
Leader in the wars (who had gotten diverse worthy victoryes, and had taken a
Prince prisoner) discoursing with him of the Providence of God, in matters of
wars, and laying his hand upon his sword, said, That (and no other) was the
Providence, whereupon he was to rest and depend.

I answer, that the solution of this argument much relyeth upon the former;
for Men's affairs for the most part do succeed according to their labor, care
and solicitude used therein, in that the divine and supreme Providence has
decreed to suffer, that matters (during the season and time of this world)
shall be carried according to their own peculiar motions and forces, the reins
of working thus, or not thus, being freely granted to man's nature. Therefore
where greater industry or power is found (though less justice or equity) there
it is commonly acco^panyed with more happy and fortunate events. The reasons of
Gods permission here in are above set down and unfolded. Ad hereto, that
though the endeauours of the wicked may (for the time) be over prevailing, yet
there is no perpetuity or continuance thereof; for this prosperity is for the
most part tempered, or rather over balanced with many adversities and
afflictions. Seeing many there are, who either in their first beginnings, or in
their progress (at what time they hold themselves most free from all sudden
conuulsio^s of misery and infelicity) are utterly overthrown. This appears
first in the most celebrious and famous Monarchies that ever have flourished:
for we read, that the Monarchy of the Assyrians was overthrown by the
Chaldeans; that of the Chaldeans by the Persians and the Medes; this of the
Persians by the Grecians; and the monarchy of the Grecians by the Romans, which
is at this present much obscured of its former honor, and brought to great
straits. Again the same point is also made clear in the persons of the
Monarchs themselves, if we but consider the calamityes and miseryes, which the
most powerful and most formidable among them have sustained. For
Nabuchodonozor being placed upon the highest pinnacle of prosperity, and after
the overthrow of so many Countries and nations, was sudde^ly stricken with a
sentence from heaven, and compelled to live in desert places after the manner
of beasts. Baltasar (nephew to the former) being devoted and given to
epicurisme and sensuality, was flame in that very night, when his City was
taken. Cyrus, when he had obtained the honor of so many victories, was (with
the losle of his army) pitifully massacred by the Scithians. Xerxes, with his
forces, consisting of three hundred thousand fighting men, was shafully
overcome by the Grecians, and almost extinguished. Alexander the great after
the dissolution of the Persian Empire, and subiugation of diverse other
kingdoms to his command, dyed without any heirs, and left his kingdoms to be
shared by his Generals and Leaders, who after through mutual and inward
afflictions so weakened and impouerished themselves, as that in the end they
were brought under the yo^ke of the Romans. Now for the Romans, with what
sweating, pains, and labors did they rise and grow dreadful? With what
calamityes were they often worn out and wearyed? With what intestine and
civil wars were they afflicted? What exorbitant and unaccustomed crueltyes
suffered they of their Generals and Emperors? Finally how many of their
Generals and Emperors after their incessant and indefatigable pains
vndertake^for the honor of their countries, were ignominiously and basely
handled, and in the end cruelly butchered? Certainly it were an infinite labor
to insist in all the particulars of this kind. For if a man will but peruse
either the ancient, or modern, and later historyes, he shall find many in
every age, whose unlawful attempts and labors (though they were
extraordinarily furnished and enabled with power and forces) had most
unfortunate and deplorable successes: the Providence of God interposing it
self, and disturbing al their wicked motions and endeauours, according to that
of the Psalm 32. Dominus dissipat co^silia gentium etc.

THE THIRD ARGUMENT. CHAP. XX.
WE see, that all natural things do ever proceed after one and the same
manner, and do retain one course and order. As the Sun (for example) we
observe to rise, to set, to run, or renew his circles, and to make with his
approach and departure the accustomed seasons of the year. In like sort all
sublunary bodies to grow and decay and one to be procreated and generated of
another (without end) to the perpetuity or continuance of it species or kind.
Now all this procedure and carriage of things rises from the force of nature,
which is accustomed to hold so perfect and constant an order. And therefore
(says the Atheist) no other Providence or Deity (besides nature) is to be
sought after, neither any rewards or punishments are to be expected. I answer;
and first say, that the Atheists of these days do chiefly support themselves
with this argument, as S. Peter prophesied in his second epistle c. 7. Venient
in nouissimis diebus etc.

To the which point himself does answer: to wit, that the promises of God by
the which he has promised his eternal kingdom, are not to be accounted as
vain, because they seem to be deferred, for a long time; since what is long
in time to us, is most short to God: for a thousand years to him (who
comprehends Eternity it self) is but as one day, or rather as a moment of
time. Again all that procrastination and delay proceeds from the benignity
of God by the which he expects each man's salvation. Furthermore, they err,
who affirm the world ever to continue in one, and the same state; for long
since it was ouerflowed with water, and hereafter it shall be consumed with fyar,
and then there shall be created new heavens and a new earth. Besides, all such
things, as may seem to proceed by force of nature, are indeed the works of an
intelligent mind and of Providence; for these two do not impugn the one the
other; for the motion of the heavens, the situation of the stars, the disposal
of the earth, mountains, rivers, and seas, the forms of living Creatures and
plants, as also their beginnings, increase, and propagation are the works of
Providence (as above we have fully demonstrated.) Neither is the constancy of
things incompatible or repugnant to Providence, seeing this consta^cy is
assigned to things by an intellectual Providence, that they may the more
commodiously serve mankind, until the end of this world, appointed and
determined by God, be come.

THE FOVRTH ARGUMENT. CHAP. XXI.
THE fourth argument is taken from the similitude of being borne, of growing,
increasing, waxing old, and dying (which is indifferenly common to men with
beasts) as also from the conformity of corporeal members in them both. From
which consideration the Atheist argues, that men are absolutely and utterly
extinguished by death, as well as unreasonable creatures. I answer, that this
illation is most inconseque^t, for although man, in respect of his affections
or passions of the mind, be like to beasts; yet with refere^ce to the nature of
his soul, he is infinitely more excellent, then they are. In which
consideration man approaches more near to God and incorporeall spirits, then
to beasts; And therefore it is no wonder, if the body being corrupted, the
soul remains immortal. But this argument rather belongs to the second
book, whereof the subject is, touching the Immortality of the soul; though
secondarily and by way of consequence only, it impugneth the nature of
Providence.

THE FIFTH ARGUMENT. CHAP. XXII.
IF there be a Divine Power, it is credible, that it does not intermeddle with
humane affairs; but being happy and blessed in it self, is content to enjoy
its own Eternity, and to be freed from the cares of men. This may be probably
coniectured, both because it may seem unworthy of such a majesty to descend to
so base and vile matters; as also in that he being blessed in himself, sees
nothing out of it self; and lastly because the undertaking the charge of any
such matters cannot be aduantageous or beneficial unto him.

I answer, that in this sort, Epicurus, Lucretius, Pliny, and some others of
the ancients did dispute, who measured God by the narrow straits of their own
understandings. And certainly, if the Supreme Intelligence, or God were a
limited and bounded nature, and had not an infinite power of understanding, this
former teason might seem probable. For then it would follow, that it were
better for God not to attend to humane affairs; both because he could not
without molestation and distraction perform the charge, tam multiplicis and
tristis ministry, (as Pliny says) of so multiplicious, and ungrateful a
ministry, or function; as also in that this labor would call him from better
and more pleasing business: but this conceit of God is over gross and dull;
and unworthy of him: for as the Divine Essence is infinite, in whom every
thing is contained eminenter, after an eminent and peculiar manner; so his
understanding is infinite, extending it self to every intelligible thing, and
this without labor, or pain, but only by the necessity of his own nature.
Neither does the multiplicity of business hinder his attention to particulars;
for he as perfectly considers every particular thing, as if it only were
proposed unto him; seeing to every such particular he sends forth an infinite
beam or light of understanding. The holy Scripture insinuates this point most
excellently in many places, and especially in the 23. of Ecclesiasticus in
these words: Oculi domini decies millies etc. The eyes of the Lord are 10000.
times brighter, then the Sun, behoulding all the ways of men, and
considering the most secret parts. That is, all things whatsoever which lie hid
and latent in the most secret corners of the Heart.

Therefore this consideration or care of small things is not unworthy the
Divine Majesty, but very worthy, or rather it is necessary; since otherwise it
would follow, that God should be ignorant of many things. And though such
things, and diverse of man's actions be but base, sordid, and vile, yet the
understanding and judgment of them is not base and vile, neither is the reason
or nature of Justice vile, by the which a fitting retribution or reward is
allotted unto them.

Neither is it prejudicial, that God is in himself most fully blessed; since
this only proves, that he takes not the care of things to the end, that he
might become more blessed or happy thereby, or that he might reap some benefit
by such his doing; but it proves not absolutely, that he endeavors nothing
out of himself. For because he is Summum bonum, and the fulness of all goodness,
as containing in himself eminenter all goodness whatsoever; it was most
convenient, that he should not keep this fountain of goodness shut up within
himself; but should suffer it to flow into his creatures, according to the
several degrees and kinds of things, and the measure of the capacity of every
one, by creating, framing, conseruing, and directing each thing to its peculiar
end. For that saying is most true: Bonum est sui diffusiuum. Goodness is of a
spreading and dilating nature. Therefore no want, nor expectation of any
private benefit, invited God to create and preserve things, but only Gods own
supereminent goodness: to wit, that his goodness might be diffused into things
created, according to the nature of every one of them, and might be
communicated with them. To conclude this point, it is fully and copiously
proved above, that, God has a knowledge and care of the least creatures that
are, as of mice, gnats, worms and the like; then with how much more reason is
he to shroud man under the wings of his Providence, who in regard of his Soul
bears a great conformity and resemblance with God?

It may be here replied, That God knows (indeed) what men do, think, or
say, but yet he takes no care of these things; Like unto potent and mighty
Princes, who in regard of the security of their state, little respect, what the
Communalty speak of them. But in answer hereof, I say, this is most absurdly
spoken: for seeing man is the work of God, in whose soul he has implanted
the laws of Justice, and of all virtue, it is a charge (even in reason)
peculiarly incumbent and belonging to him, to see, that man lives according to
those laws; for the workman ought ever to be most solicitous and careful,
that his work be perfect; the Law giver, that the laws prescribed may be
observed by his subjects; And finally, the Parents, how the children do bear
and carry themselves. Now, God is the parent and Father of all.

No man will commend that architect, who leaves a palace builded by himself
unfinished and neglected, so as it cannot be serviceable for dwelling: Neither
is that Law giver to be praised, who (though he has set down many wholesome
laws) is careless of the execution of them, permitting all things at the
freedom and liberty of the subjects. Finally, that father is much to be
reprehended, who takes no care for the education and bringing up of his
children. How much less then are the proceedings of that God to be approved,
who should show a dereliction, and open neglect of so worthy a work made by
himself, and should free himself of al care of humane affairs; especially
seeing with great facility, and without any labor he could govern and stern
them? To conclude, what Prince is he, who is indifferent how his subjects bear
themselves in his sight and presence, what they speak, or what they do,
whether they observe or violate his laws, whether they affect him with honor
or contumely, with praises or conuitious and railing inuectiues? Yea what
private man is so rude and brutish who is not sensible of honors and
disgraces? But now God is every where present, hears all things, sees all
things, penetrateth into all the secrets of the heart; for all things
whatsoever are done in his eye sight and presence. Therefore it is madness to
think, that God is not touched, offended, and delighted with the words,
deeds, and thoughts of men: for by how much his majesty, wisdom, and power is
greater, and how much more worthy are his benefits bestowed upon us; so much
the more sharply and feelingly he considers all iniuryes and transgressions
of his laws, and will in due time take just revenge for the same.

Thus far I have disputed of the Providence of a supreme and divine power,
and of the being of the said power. And here this first book shall end. The
second follows, which is of the Immortality of the Soul.

THE SECOND BOOK.
WHEREIN Is proved the Immortality of the Soul. CHAP. I.
IN the former book we have demonstrated, that there is a God, and a divine
Providence; In this second the Immortality of the soul is to be proved. For
these two Articles are in themselves so linked together, as that they do
reciprocally presuppose the one the other; for admitting the one for true, the
other does ineuitably follow. For if there be a God and a Providence, it is
necessary, that the Soul after this life be immortal, that it may be rewarded
according to its merits; and if the Soul does live after death, it then must
needs be, that there is a God, and a Providence, which is to dispense to every
one answerably to the deserts of each man's life, as incide^tally we have showed
out of Chrysostom. Again, supposing that there is no Providence or deity,
then is the immortality of the Soul taken away; and supposing no immortality
of the soul, then is the being of a Deity denied; of which point we shall
heearefter speak. Now because this sentence of the Souls Immortality may be
fortifyed and strengthened with many other reasons; and that there are not few,
who do doubt thereof, although perhaps they may seem, not altogether to doubt
of a deity, or of a Providence; I hold it worthy the labor to discuss this
point more elaborately and particulerly.

And here we dispute of the Soul of man, not of beasts, for it is evident,
that this is mortal and corruptible, since it desires nothing, nor reposeth
its delight in any thing, but what belongs to the benefit and pleasure of the
body. Therefore that the soul of man (which as it is endued with understanding
and freewill, is called Animus, or Men's) is immortal, may be demonstrated by
many arguments, which we will here briefly and clearly set down.

And first, if authority should sway or determyne the point herein, it is
certain, that whosoever have been at any time noted for eminency of wisdom,
have believed the soul of man to be immortal: to wit the Sagi, and wisemen
among the Hebrews or Jews, among the Chaldeans, the Egiptians with their
Trismegistus Mercurius, among the Indians, the Gauls (whom they called
Druides) In like sort the Pithagorians, the Platonicks (with their first
Masters) and the Stoics unanimously maintained the Souls Immortality, though
diverse of them were deceived in this, that they thought all the Souls of men to
be certain parts or particles taken from Anima mu^di, or the Soul of the
world (which they said was God) and that they were to be dissolved in the
conflagration and burning of the world, and being then dissolved they were to
return to their simple form, to wit, into the soul of the world; like as
mixted bodies are resolved into the Elements, of which they are framed. What
Aristotle thought herein is somewhat doubtful, because he speaks variously
and uncertainly; yet in his second book de ortu animalium c. 3. he thus
writes: Solam mentem etc. Only the soul of Man enters into the body from
without: and it only i^ a certain divine thing; and the reason hereof is,
because the operation or working of the body does not communicate it self,
with the operation of the Soul. Now the souls of other living Creatures he
affirms to be engendered in the matter through the force of the seed, in that
all their operations depend upon the body. Now here he evidently teaches,
that man's Soul does not depend of the body; and therefore it is not engendered
by the virtue of the seed, but proceeds from without. Upon which ground or
reason diverse followers of Aristotle do ascrybe the sentence of the Souls
immortality to Aristotle. To conclude all men whosoever, that have been
illustrious and markable either for sanctity of life, the gui^t of Prophecy, or
working of miracles, have evidently and indubiously houlden the Souls
Immortality; and who have denied the same, were for the m^^^ ^art most impious
and wicked men, as the Epicureans, and the Atheists.

Now if this point should be discussed by The argument of the Contrary opinion.
Philosophical reasons, the adverse opinion would ^ynd small firmnes therein;
seeing that reason, whereupon it chiefly grounds it self is most weak. This
reason is taken from the similitude of bodies, which is found between Man and
Beast. For we see (say the Patrons of this heathenish opinion) that men and
beasts are conceived, formed, borne, nourished, do also increase, grow old, and
dye after one and the same manner. In like sort they consist of the like parts
of the body, both internal and external, which like parts have the like uses
in them both; Therefore (conclude they) that when a beast dies and breaths
out his last, the Soul vanishes and euapourateth it self into nothing, nor
any thing of it remains after life; so also it may seem to be said, that man
dying, his soul also dies, and turns into nothing.

But this reason is most feeble, and of no force, for though there be a great
affinity between the soul of Man (as it is endued with reason, and is called
Men's) and the soul of beasts, the difference is infinite; from the which great
disparity, we may deservedly gather, that the Soul of man, as being of a high
and divine order or nature, dies not; though that of beasts is absolutely
extinguished even with the body. For beasts do not perceive in any sort those
things, which belong to men; neither is there any communication or commerce of
business or deliberation between man and them. As for example, dogs, and horses
know not whether their master be rich, or poor, noble or ignoble, old or
young, healthfu^ or diseased, married or unmarried, virtuous or wicked, an
Italian or a Germane. None of these (I say) do beasts understand or make
difference of, whereupon it follows, that they neither conceive grief, nor
joy of those things, which happen to men. Again they see the Sun, the
Moon, trees, houses, cittyes and villages, but they know not, nor think what
they are; to what end they are directed, or from whence and how they proceed.
All their knowledge is restrained to few things; to wit, to those things, as
are pleasing, or displeasing to their nature. Of these only they judge, and
this after a confused and brutish manner, conceauing them under the show and
title of being profitable or disprofitable, conuenyent or inconuenyent; for
they love not their master for any other respect, but because by the help of
their phantasy they apprehend him under the show of profit, in that he gives
them meat, or the like. In like sort on the contrary part the sheep^ flies the
wolf, for no other cause, but by reason that by instinct of nature he
conceaueth him as his enemy.

Therefore seeing beasts have a knowledge so imperfect and limited, and apprehend
nothing, but what appertains to the co^seruation of their bodies and lives,
nor are delighted, or grieve at any thing, but in respect as that thing
affects their body well or evil; it hereupon manifestly follows, that the
Soul of beasts does perish together with their body.

For if the soul of a beast cannot eleuate it self (in knowing and
apprehending) to some thing, which is above the body and which properly
belongs to a spiritual nature; it is evident, that that soul is not
spiritual, nor elevated above its body, but altogether immersed and drowned in
a corporeal and bodily nature. For the substance of any thing is known from
it, operation; and the operation from the object, about which it is conversant,
or busied. Therefore seeing this Object, and its ratio formalis, or the true
and native reason (which is the profit or hurt coming to the body) does only
respect the body; it must of necessity be granted, that the substance of the
soul in beasts is tied and restrained to the body. But this point is far
otherwise in Man.

THE FIRST REASON, PROVING THE Souls Immortality. CHAP. II.
THE first reason may be, in that the knowledge of the Soul is altogether
illimitable. The knowledge of man is illimitable.
For it conceaueth and apprehends all kinds of things, all degrees of
natures; neither does it apprehe^d only things, which are, but also things,
which are not; for if forgeth in the understanding any thing, and frames
therein new worlds. It also conceaueth the universal reasons of things, as
they are abstracted from particulars, from sensible matter, from place and
time, and contemplateth the same, as they are in themselves. It searches into
the reasons, causes, effects, and proprietyes of al things, and finally
judges of all things. Al which considerations are manifest arguments, that the
Soul of Man is not immersed in the body, but that it is a spiritual substance
separable from the body: since all these actions and operations bear no
reference to the benefit or profit of the body; but are ornaments only of the
mind. In like sort the very Objects of the former operations are not
apprehended, as they are advantageous to the body or sense (to wit of taste and
feeling) but they are apprehended according to their proper reasons; as they
are true and conformable to universal and eternal principles or reasons, in
which respect, they belong only to the mind, or soul, and not in any sort to
the body.

THE SECOND REASON, Proouing the same. CHAP. III.
THE second reason may be taken from Man's desire, which is in like sort
infinite and boundless; for the soul does not only desire such things, as
belong to the body, to wit, to satisfy their sense of tasting and feeling (as
beasts do) but it stretches it self forth to every truth, desiring the
knowledge and contemplation of every verity. Neither is it enlarged only to each
truth, but also to every thing that is good; to the which goodness the appetite
and love of all things, is finally directed. For all particular things
whatsoever do affect and love (after a certain manner) that, which is best
sorting, and agreeable to their natures. Now man comprehends al those things
within his love, seeing he desires not only those things, which are profitable
to himself, but wishes to every thing, whatsoever is best fitting to it, and
(as much as in him lies) procures the same. Therefore he coueteth both to
himself and al other things besides, what is best agreeable to them: to
himself he wishes those things in knowledge, or as the Philosophers do
speak, in esse cognito; to all other particular things in esse real^, that
they may really and truly enjoy them. Here then appears how much the power of
desiring in man is elevated and advanced above the matter and condition of his
body.

THE THIRD REASON. CHAP. IIII.
THE same point is further confirmed from the delights and pleasures, wherewith
the Soul so^aceth her self. For she is delighted chiefly with the
contemplation of truth, and with truth it self: She is delighted with the
pulchritude and beauty of all things, and in admyring the art and skill, which
appears in every thing; She is delighted with proportions and mathematical
disciplines; She is delighted with the works of Religion, Piety, Justice, and
the exercise of other virtues; Finally she is delighted with fame, honor,
glory, rule and domination: All these are proper goods of the Soul, and are so
esteemed by man, as that in compare hereof he contemns and vilifyeth al
profits and pleasures of the body.

Therefore seeing the capacity and the largenes of the soul of man is so ample
and great, that it comprehends all things, and compasses about (as it were)
all the latitude, altitude, and profundity of Ens in general, containing it
within it self; seeing also the soul has her proper motions or knowledge, her
desires, loves, delights and peculiar ornaments; none of all which belongs to
the benefit of the body, but all are touching spiritual objects, or at least
concerning such things, which are estranged from the benefits or pleasures of
the body; and lastly seeing the Soul esteems all these things far more
then any corporal goods; It is therefore most perspicuous and evident, that
the Soul is of a far higher and more worthy disposition, then the body; and
of such a divine nature, as that it depends not at all of the commerse, or
intercourse, which she has with the flesh.

THE FOVRTH REASON. CHAP. V.
THIS verity is also warranted from the dominion which the Soul has over the
body, and from the souls enjoying of Freewill. For the Soul does so direct,
govern and ouerrule the body in her affections and passions, as that neither
the expectation of rewards, nor the fear of torments can force the body to
say, or do any thing, then what the Soul wills; which point is evident both
from many examples, as also from the testimony of Josephus in his small work
or book bearing this title: Quod ratio affectuum sit Domina; Now of this
matter no other reason can be assigned, but because the Soul does not depend
of the body, but is sui iuris, of its own freedom, liberty, and and final
determination; whereupon it rises, that the soul so valueth those things,
which appertain to the body, as if they did not belong unto her; she being
contented and fully satisfied with her own proper goods and delights: but the
contrary falls out in beasts, for seeing their Soul is altogether mancipated
and enthralled to the body, depending of it in regard of her own essence, she
is necessarily (and as it were violently) carried to such things, as are
pleasing and beneficial to the body, and flies all those things, which seem
adverse and distasteful to it; and hence it is that the Soul in beasts has
neither her passions nor external motions in her own power, and at her own
command.

THE FIFTH REASON. CHAP. VI.
IF the the Soul should have all her dependence of the body, and could not
consist, the body being once extinct; then should she have against nothing, a
greater horror and auersion, then against Death; nor would she prize any thing
at so high a rate, which willingly she would not loose for the preventing of
Death; for Death of the body, depriving the soul (supposing it to be mortal)
of all good, should become her chiefest infelicity and evil, and present life
her greatest good and happiness. And therefore it follows, that the soul
should fear nothing so much as Death, and on the other side affect, desire,
and defend nothing, so much, as present life. But now daily experience teaches
the contrary: for many do make so small an estimate of life, (though abounding
with all the goods of fortune) as that they willingly spend it for praise,
fame, liberty, avoiding of reproach and dishonor, and for the exercise of
virtue. Yea some there are, who for the declyning and shuning of disgrace, or
grief and affliction of mind, or for the purchasing of a very little
reputation, stick not to become their own parricides and murderers. So much
more do those things, which belong to the soul or mind* preponderate and
ouerballance all that, which appertains to the body.

THE SIXTH REASON. CHAP. VII.
SO great is the capacity and largnesse of the soul or mind, as that no
riches, no dignities, no Kingdoms, not the Empire of the whole world, no
pleasures, briefly no finite and limitable good can quench her insatiable
thirst and desire; but to this end it is needful, that she enjoy some one
immense, infinite, and boundless good, and such as contains in it self by
way of eminency or prehemine^cy the fulness of all good whatsoever. This the
Prophet David insinuates Psalm. 16. when he says: Satiabor cum etc. I shall be
satisfied and filled, when thy glory shall appear, as if he would say, no
other thing can give me full contentment, except the manifestation of thy
glory, which is an infinite and illimitable good. And to the same end Lib. ^.
Confess. c. ^.
S. Austin says: Fecisti nos etc. Thou have made us like unto thee, and our
heart is unquiet, till it rest in thee. Now if the Soul were restrained to the
narrownes of the body, it should not be capable of an infinite good, neither
should her desire be extended to any thing but what were conducing and
accommodated to a corporal life; as it appears in other living creatures For
the Body and the matter does restrain the appetite, desire, and capacity of
the form. From whence it proceeds, that by how much the form of any body is
more material, by so much it is more narrow and less capable; but the more
spiritual and more elevated the form is, the more ample and the more enlarged
it is, and extends it self to more things, thereby the better to perfect it
self. For bodies wanting life (as stones and metals) as also their forms,
because they are material and gross in the highest degree, do desire nothing
out of themselves, neither do they endeavor any thing to further their
perfection, but rest in themselnes quiet and dead* But Plants (because their
form is more pure and perfect) do covet (after their manner) nourishment, and
do attract it from without, as also they change it, distributing it through the
whole body, and converting it into their own substance: Besides they send
forth flowers, fruits, and seeds; and so they continue daily working to the
augmentation, conservation, perfection, and propagation of themselves; but
because they have no sense or feeling of their nourishment, they therefore
receive neither pleasure nor grief thereby.

Living Creatures (in that their form is in a higher degree) do not only
perform all those operations, which plants do; but with all they have
knowledge and sense of their nourishment; yea they move themselves to it* they
seek it, from the use of it they take pleasure, and from the want of it they
receive grief and molestation. Notwithstanding all their knowledge, and
affection or liking, is limited within certain narrow bounds; for it only
extends it self to the profit or hurt of their bodies; so as they apprehend
no other thing, they covet and fly no other thing, they are delighted and
grieve at no other thing; which is a manifest demonstration, that their Soul
depends only of their body: for their soul therefore perceaues and desires
nothing, but what conduces to the rest and good of their corporal life,
because their soul depends of the felicity of their body. Above all other
living Creatures, is man endued with a reasonable soul or mind, whose
knowledge and affection is not limited to things belonging to the body, but is
altogether illimitable, extending it self to every truth and to every kind of
good, (as is above said) both which bear no reference or respect to the body;
And from hence it follows, that the Souls capacity or ability either in
knowing, desiring, or in taking delight is infinite; no otherwise then the
ability of spirits or celestial Intelligences, which is an unanswerable
argument that the soul of man is not wholly depending of the body, and
necessarily tied to the same.

This point is further thus confirmed: Substantiae separatae (as they are
called) that is incorporeall substances, do therefore enjoy the force of
understanding, and do extend themselves ad totum ens, to every thing; and ad
totum verum and bonum, to every verity and goodness, because they are simple
forms elevated above all matter, and not depending of the same, as Philosophy
teaches. And Aristotle 12. Metaphys. c. 9.
hence it is, that there is no spiritual substance, but even in that respect
it is intelligent and understanding. Therefore seeing the Soul of man is endued
with the faculty of understanding, and is in her self of that expansion and
largnes, as that she stretches her self to the whole latitude of Ens in
general; that is, to every truth, and every thing that is good (by
understanding what is true, and affecting and loving what is good) no otherwise
then spiritual and separated substances do; it follows, that the soul does
not depend upon any matter or bodily substance. For where there is effectus
adaequatus, there is also causa adaquata; that is, where there is a proper and
peculiar effect* there also is to be found a proper and peculiar cause, from
whence the effect rises. But in the Soul of Man the effect is found, to wit,
the force of understanding, and the capacity of every truth and every good;
therefore the cause also is to be found, that is, a spiritual nature
independent of matter or of a body.

THE SEVENTH REASON. CHAP. VIII.
THere are in the nature of things some living forms, which are separated from
all matter both in their essence and manner of existence, with the Philosophers
do call Intelligences, or substantias separatas, separated substances, and
Christians term them Spirits, or Angels. There are also some others, which
both in their Essence and existence are altogether tied and immersed in the
matter, wherein they are, and such are the Souls of beasts. Therefore there
oughtto be some other forms between the former two; which in regard of their
Essence, may not depend of their body, that so they may be like unto spirits or
Angels; yet for their existence (that is, that they may exist after a
convenient manner) they are to have a body, that therein they may agree with the
souls of beasts, and these are the souls of men. This argument is confirmed
from analogy and proportion; in that this degree of things seems to be best
fitting, least otherwise we should pass from one extreme to another without a
mean; to wit, from a nature absolutely mortal and drowned in a body, to a
nature absolutely immortal and separated from a body; therefore between these
two, there is to be a nature, partly mortal, and partly immortal: mortal
according to the body, and immortal according to the Soul: And the very Soul
it self according to its Essence is to be immortal, and to be ranged with
spirits; though according to the manner of its existence, and as informing a
mortal body, it is to be like the souls of beasts. For the union of the Soul
of man with the body, as also the informing and the viuific^tion (as I may
term it) of the whole body decays no less, then in beasts. And thus it
falls out, that man contains in himself the powers and faculties of both
the extremes, I mean of spirits and beasts; being for the body and sense, like
unto beasts; for the soul, to spirits or intelligences. Upon which occasion
the Platonicks do call man the Horizon of the whole Universe of things created.
For seeing the universe of things does consist (as it were) of two Hemispheres,
to wit of a spiritual nature, and a corporal nature; Man partaking of both
these extremes, does join the spiritual nature (being the higher Hemisphere)
with the corporal nature, the lower Hemisphere. For this very same reason also,
Man is called (...), that is, the lesser world, as co^prehending within
himself all the degrees of the universe, no otherwise, then the greaer world
contains.

THE EIGHT REASON CHAP. IX.
FOR the more accession of reasons in this point, it may be alleged, that
there is a greater association and affinity in nature between the Soul of man
and spirits, or Angels, then between man and beasts: For as spirits or Angels
have their knowledge and desire circumscribed, or encompasled with no limits,
and are delighted with the beauty of truth and virtue; in like sort is the
soul or mind of man; In so much that in this respect there is no disparity
between a soul and a spirit, though there be a difference in the perfection of
the operations, proceeding from the understanding and the will in them both.
Now the sense, knowledge, and affection or desire of beasts is restrained to
their feeding, and to venery. Furthermore the Soul of man has society and
familiarity with spirits, conuerseth with them, entreats help and aid from
them, discourses, disputes, and judges of their ^states, and wishes her
self to be like in dignity to them: But no like affinity is discerned between
man and beasts; for beasts can neither apprehend nor desire the state of man,
neither is there any communication of Counsel or advise between the^.
Therefore so far forth, as belongs to the condition of Mortality and
immortality, it is not to be wondered, if man's Soul does rather follow the
condition and nature of spirits (between whom there is so great a similitude
and resemblance) then of beasts from whom the Soul does so infinitely differ.

THE NINTH REASON. CHAP. X.
IF the Soul could not consist without the body, then should the souls
chiefest felicity be placed in a corporal life and pleasures of the body, and
her greatest misery in the affliction and death of the body; upon the force of
which inference the Sect of Epicures and others (who did hold the soul to be
utterly extinguished with the body) taught the chiefest good to rest in the
pleasures of the body. This is further made evident from the testimonies of
those, who in the second of the book of VVisdome conclude, that during the
time of this life, we are to give our selves wholly to pleasure, holding this
to be man's felicity, in that nothing remains (say they) after this life; as
also from the like sete^ce of others, who in the 22. of Esaias say: Consedamus
and bibamus etc. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. But if
this illation were true, then were it laudable in a man to indulge and pamper
his belly, and studiously to affect and seek after, whatsoever may conduce to
the same end; and the warrant hereof should be, because it is most laudable
(for all things) and particularly for man to follow its most supreme good or
felicity, and to enjoy it at all times.

But now just contrary hereto, we find, that this coporall sensuality of eating
and drinking, and the like, is holden as a thing dishonorable in man, and
unworthy his nature, as also that those, who abandon themselves wholly to their
corporal pleasure, are ranged among brute beasts: for nothing draws more
near to the nature of beasts, then the pleasure of the body consisting in the
senses of taste and feeling. And therefore as Tully witnesses in his book de
senectute, Architas Tarentinus was accustomed thus to say: Nullam capitaliorem
pestem, quam corporis voluptatem a natura hominibus esse datam: That Nature had
not given to man a more capital plague, then the pleasure of the body.

Again, if the chief felicity of man did belong to our corporal life; then
were it lawful for the avoiding of death and torments (at the commanding and
forcing of a tyrant) to commit perjury, and blasphemy, to worship Idols, and
finally to re^^^quish and shake hands with all piety, justice, virtue and
truth: for it is the law of nature, and of it self ingrafted in all men, that
nothing is to be preferred before Summum bonum or the chiefest felicity, and
that is to be embraced before all other things; and that on the other side,
nothing is more to be avoided, then Summum malum, the chiefest infelicity. From
which position or ground it rises, that in every event, wherein is necessarily
enda^gered the loss of our greatest good, or of some other lesser good, we are
taught even by nature and reason, that every inferior good whatsoever, is to
be willingly lost, for the retaining of the chiefest good; and every lesser
evil to be endured, for the avoiding of the greatest evil. But now what thing
can be imagined more absurd in it self, or more unworthy a man, then that for
the preventing of death any flagitious or heinous wickedness whatsoever may and
ought to be cnmmitted?

THE TENTH REASON. CHAP. XI.
A NATVRE which is intelligent, and endued with an understanding is the
worthiest nature of all others, which are in the world; this is proved, in
that, such a nature is capable of all natures; for it comprehends them all,
it uses them al, and applies them to its own benefit; for it takes profit
not only from terrene and earthly things, but also from celestial things, as
from the light, darkness, day, night, wynds, showers, heates, coldes, and from
the four Elements themselves. Therefore a nature enjoying a mind, reason, and
understanding, is in this world, as in its own house, furnished with all kind
of provision, most fitting either for use, benefit, or delight, Hence it is
gathered, that it is an absurd opinion, to maintain this nature utterly to
perish and to be mortal; since so it should follow, that what is most
excellent in this world, and what has sole dominion over other things, and to
whom all other things, are subject and serucieable, should dye and become
absolutely extinct; an inference is warranted with no show, or color of reason;
for if the earth, sea, and stars (al which were created for the use of this
reasonable or intelligent nature) do never decay, but continue eternal, and
for ever permament, the^ with what tecture or pretext of reason, can it be
auerred, that this intelligent nature, which is the end, scope, and mistress
of the former, should become mortal and passible? If the Soul of man (which
is this intelligent Nature) be so worthy in it self, that those things (which
never shall decay, and be ruined) were created for its service; then how can it
stand with any probability, that it self shall perish and resolve to nothing?
Certainly it is altogether unjust and unlawful to affirm, that nature to be
mortal, to the which, things, that are immortal, become serviceable.

THE ELEVENTH REASON. CHAP. XII.
THE nature of man (according to his Soul) is infinitely more worthy, then all
other Creatures; for it is of a higher degree, then they are, and extends it
self to infinite things, (as appears out of the former considerations;)
therefore it follows, that the Summum bonum or chief felicity of Man's nature
ought to be infinitely more excellent, then the summum bonum of beasts. In like
sort the action of Ma^s soul, by the which it apprehends and feels its
felicity, and the pleasure, that it takes from thence, ought infinitely to
excel the action and pleasure of beasts in the fruition of their felicity. For
such ought the proportion to be between the objects, between the operations,
and between the pleasures, which is between the natures and the facultyes, by
the which the objects are apprehended and perceived. But now if the Soul of
man be extinguished together with the body, then nothing is attended on with
greater calamity, then Man's nature, since almost all the kinds of beasts would
be more happy then Man. For in this life man's nature stands obnoxious and
subject to innumerable afflictions, from which beasts are most free. For it is
incessantly solicited with cares, vexed with fears, pyneth away through envy,
worn out with grief, burned with desires, always anxious, sorrowing and
complaining, never content with its own state, nor enjoying any true
tranquillity of mind. Besides it often endures poverty, banishments, prisons,
servitude, infamy, the yoke of Matrimony, bringing up of children, the loss
of temporal goods, a repentance of actions past, a solicitude and care of
things to come; many labors and pains taking, that the poor flesh may be
maintained, and that it may be defended from the iniuryes of the air and
weather; to conclude it is encompassed with so many suspicions, frauds,
calumnyes, diseases, languors and sicknesses, as that it was worthily said of
one;

-- (...)
(...).
That is,

Nothing is so grievous, and full of calamity,
The weight whereof man's nature cannot bear.
But now beasts are freed and delivered almost from all these former
calamityes, and live in great peace, quyetnes, and liberty: for they are not
vexed with any cares, with any fears of future evil, or with any discontents
through adverse fortune; Neither are they solicitous of things to come, nor
repent them of actions past, nor dismayed at any imminent dangers; They are not
moved with ambition or envy, but rest quiet and peaceable in the enjoying of
their own states.

Besides nature does provide them of all things necessary for their lives,
without any labor or toil on their part. If we consider the length of their
age, we find that many living creatures live a longer time, then Man; as Hearts,
Elephants, and Crows. If, the place or Region wherein they live, what may be
more desired, then to live in a high and eminent place far distant from the
dirt or mire of the earth, and to pass through a great part of the air by
flying in a most short time? If the habit or clothing of the body, it is far
more commodious to be covered with hair or feathers (which are no hinderance
to the agility of the body) then to be oppressed with the weight of outward
vestments: fiually if the pleasures of the body be compared, it is certain,
that beasts do use them more daily and freely, then Man; since they are given
to their feeding by the space of whole days, and more frequently exercise the
act of copulation, and this without fear or shame: from all which it is most
clearly gathered, that other living Creatures are far more happy then man, if
the Soul of man does presently dye upon the dissolutio^ of the body from it.

THE TVVEFTH REASON. CHAP. XIII.
It would not only follow from the former reason, that all other living
Creatures should be more happy, then Man; but it also would follow, that among
men themselves, those should be more happy, who were more wicked, and more
given over and addicted to the flesh and to sensuality; and those more
unfortunate, who contemning the pleasures of the body, do embrace virtue and
justice; yea the best and most holy me^ should be the most miserable; who most
estranging themselves from the pleasures of the body, do afflict and punish
their flesh several ways. Whereupon the Apostle in the first to the
Corinthians c. 15. Si in hac vita etc. If in this life only we have hope in
Christ (that is, if nothing remains after this life) we are of all men the
most miserable; and the reason hereof must be (according to the Apostles mind)
because we are deprived of the goods and pleasure both of this life, and of the
next, and further we do endure daily labors and sharp persecutions.

THE XIII. REASON. CHAP. XIIII.
WE see, that things are brought to that perfection, whereof they are capable;
for example, Plants and all other kinds of living Creatures do by little and
little increase, and are strengthened so far forth, as belong both to their
body, and to all the facultyes of the vegetative or sensitive soul, that so at
the length they may come to that height of perfection, whereof each kind of
them is capable. Therefore it must needs be expected, that man's Soul should in
like sort arrive and ascend to the highest top of its own perfection: for
seeing these inferior and most vile creatures do obtain the perfection of
their own nature, why should not then that, which is most precious and most
worthy among them all, in the end gain the same? But this the Soul of man
cannot possibly perform, except it continues after this life, immortal. Now
the perfection of Man's Soul consists in wisdom and virtue, with the which
her chiefest powers are beautifyed and adorned, and by means of which, those
powers obtain their ends and chief perfection: But few there are, who in this
life give themselves to the obtaining of wisdom, and therefore the greatest
part of men make small or no progress therein; and those who spend their time
in the search or purchasing of it, do scarcely get the hundredth part of that
abundance of wisdom, whereof the mind of man is capable: for though a man
should live a thousand years, yet might he daily profit and increase therein,
and yet not obtain it in its highest measure. Therefore it is necessary, that
the Soul of Man does live after the death of the body, that in the next life
(seeing in this it cannot) it may come and arryue to its perfection; since
otherwise in vain should that capacity and extension of the Soul be given
her; in vain should that vnquenchbale desire of knowledge be engrafted in her;
for that capacity and desire is in vain, which cannot be filled and satisfied.
Besides, it is most absurd to say, that Nature, which in the smallest and most
despicable things never does any thing without a due purpose and end, should in
the most noble creature of all, work and labor so much in vain, and to no
designed drift, or project.

THE XIIII. REASON. CHAP. XV.
IT is certain, that the Soul of man cannot know it self in this life,
except it be very obscurely and confusedly; (even as he which sees a thing
far of through a cloud perceaueth it imperfectly, as not being able to
discern the colors or lineaments of it.) Now this want of the Souls perfect
knowledge of it self, was the cause of so many different opinions of the
Philosophers, touching its own substance, some of them teaching it to be of a
fiery substance; others an ^yery; and some others, that it was a substance
taken from the air and from the soul of the world (as their phrase was.) The
Soul then knows not, either what it self is, or of what quality, whether a
simple or pure spirit, or consisting of a most thin body; whether it has
distinct faculties and powers in it self, or that it performs all her
operations immediately by it self; what is the power and nature of those
faculties; how they perform their functions; how the objects do meet and
associate themselves with their faculties; how the organs and instruments of
the senses do concur and cooperate with the animal spirits. In these and
almost all other things belonging to her self, the Soul is strangely blind,
and diuineth, and coniectureth of them, as it were in a dream. Therefore if the
Soul does perish together with the body, she never knows her self, but
remains ignorant thereof, both when she is first engendered, while she lives,
and after her death. But now it is most fitting both in nature and reason, that
sometimes she might be able to contemplate her self, to see and perfectly to
apprehend her own beauty, nature, and ornaments: for as nothing more clearly
belongs to the Soul, then her own Nature, and such things as are
intrinsecall and inward to her; so no knowledge is more necessary to her, then
the knowledge of her self, and things appertaining to her; for she is most
near and de^re to her self. Therefore it must necessarily be granted, that
she is not extinguished after this life, but that, after she is once freed of
the body, and of all corporal objects (which before she apprehended by help of
the external senses) and that by means thereof, she enjoys her own
simplicity, then shall she see her self distinctly and clearly; and shall
daily esteem those her goods and ornaments, which in this life she so smally
prized. For one kind of understanding agrees to her, whiles she is tied to this
mortal body; another, when by means of the bodies death, she shall be set at
liberty, and shall nakedly exist by her self. For while she remaynes in the
body, she can know nothing perfectly, but what is corporal, and under a
corporal show; whereupon it follows, that she cannot see, or know her self;
but after she is once divorced from the body, she shall then take the form and
manner of understanding answerable to spirits, and then shall discern
spiritual things, as now she apprehends by her eyes corporal things. For
the manner of knowing does ever answer to the manner of existence, and agrees
to the state of the thing which knows; since every thing works according to
the manner of its own nature.

THE XV. REASON. CHAP. XVI.
THIS corporeal World, as also all things contained therein, were made for man
(as is above showed;) for all things are disposed in that sort, as they may
best serve to the benefit and profit of man. Thus the world seems nothing
else, then a vast house furnished withal things necessary, whose inhabitant,
possessour, or Fructuarius is man. So that supposing man were not, then were
there no use of the world, but it should be, as a desert serving only for a
den of wild beasts, and for a wood of thorns. Therefore seeing all things are
first instituted for man, it follows, that man is a most excellent thing, and
created for a far greater and higher end, then it can attain in this life; for
seeing so many different services of things, and so wonderful riches are
prepared for man, for his better and more easy leading of this short and
mortal life; how can it be thought, that no good or happynes expects him
after his death, but that his Soul utterly decays with his body? Doubtlesly,
this is a great argument, that he is ordained to enjoy (after his emigration
and passing out of this life) a most noble, honorable, and admirable felicity
and happiness.

This point is further confirmed. If the Soul does perish with the body, the^
it follows, that the world, and al its admirable furniture was only framed by
nature, that man for a short season and time might live, eat, drink, sleep,
in gender, and then presently for ever decay. Thus this should be all the good,
the end, and the ^ruite o^ so worthy and admirable a work. But it is not
likely, that to so mean and small an end the heavens should be incessantly
carried about, with such a daily motion: That the Sun, Moon, and Stars
should still continue their courses; that the change of day and night, and the
vicissitude or continual circles of times and seasons, as spring, summer,
autumn, and winter should be ordained. Again, that winds should blow, the
clouds should be gathered together, the showers should be powered down; that
the earth should cause so many kinds of flowers and fruits, and should contain
within its bosom such inestimable treasure; that the Sea should bring forth
such several sorts of fish, the air should abound with so great store of
byrds, and Nature her self should so painfully labor in the producing of all
things; And all this to no other end, but that man (being a mortal creature)
should for a small time live in great misery, great ignorance and prauity of
mind, and then instantly should return to nothing. If there be no other end
nor fruit of so wonderful a work, as the world is, then in vain is it, and
all therein created; and in vain does Nature labor in all her actions. For
what good does man reap by living a short time in so many afflictions of mind
and body? since this temporal life in it self is not good, nor to be wished
for, both in regard, that it is mixed with so many calamities, as also in that
no corporal good or benefit is for it self alone to be desired. For as the
body is made for the soul; so the corporal goods are to be referred, and
finally directed to the good of the Soul. Neither is this temporal life to be
wished, as being a means to a greater good, because it is presumed by these
men, who deny the immortality of the Soul, that no such future good remains
after this life. Solomon had a feeling understanding of this point, who, after
he had abundantly tasted all the pleasures of this world, did burst out into
this sentence: Vanitas vanitum, and omnia vanitas. And then after: V^di cuncta
etc. I saw all things, which are under the Sun; and behold all is vanity, and
affliction of spirit. Solomon also in that his book of Ecclesiastes,
prosecuteth many other points of this nature, but in the end he (as it were)
preaches to al men, that all the goods of this life, delights, riches, honors,
and pleasures are to be esteemed as of no worth or price; to wit, as they are
considered in themselves alone, and as they conduce nothing to the life to come.

I ad further, that this temporal life has not only in it no true good, for
the which it should be desired, but it is also intricated and entangled with so
many evils, that it were far better, and more convenient for man never to have
been, then to receive a soul liable and subject unto death. For (besides that
man is wasted away with infinite cares, diseases, and miseries) he does little
or no good; or rather in lieu thereof, he commits much evil, spending his
life (for the most part) in all turpitude and baseness of manners and
conversation, Now let the evil, which he perpetrateth, be balanced with the
good he does, and we shall find, that his wickedness by infinite degrees does
preponderate and weigh down his virtuous actions. If so, how then can it be
truly conceived, that that creature which is the author of so great evil, and
worker of so small good, and from whom no future good can be expected, should
be accounted as profitable and necessary to the whole universe? Yea rather (as
being a thing most pernicious and destructive) why should he not be instantly
exterminated and banished from thence? If in a kingdom or Commo^wealth there
be found any any Family, whose endeauours in no sort tend to the common good,
but only rest in the violating and breaking of the laws of the said state; it
is thought necessary, that the said family should be utterly extirpated and
rooted out, as threatening (if it should continue) no small danger and ruin to
that kingdom or commonwealth: why then (by the same reason) should not all
mankind (which betrampleth the law of God and nature under its feet, be exiled
from all this most ample and large Commonwealth of the whole Universe, as a
professed enemy to justice and virtue? From these premises we may further
conclude, that man and the world it self were not only made in vain (since
from thence proceeds so small good) but also that Nature much erred in
bringing forth mankind. For as he deserves evil at that state, who brings in
an improfitable nation, contemning the institutions and decrees thereof; Eue^ so
should nature be much blamed for her producing of mankind. All which things how
far dissonant and estra^ged they are from reason, who sees not? Therefore for
the avoiding of these (otherwise) inevitable absurdities, we must confess,
that the Soul of man remains after this life immortal, and that then she
shall be partaker of most high and inestimable rewards, or else of insupportable
torments, according to her different carriage in this world.

Thou may here reply, that granting the former reason for good and
sufficient, it follows, that all wicked men should be now borne in vain, or
rather that in reason they ought not be borne; since their being in the world
conferreth no good or benefit thereto, but only dishonors and wrongeth the
same, abusing nature her self, and all the gifts of God to their own
improbity and impiety. Whether wicked Men are made in vain to live in the
world.


I answer hereto, and grant that al me^ in the world, who before their deaths
shall not be converted, but shall leave this world in a final impenitency, may
(in a certain manner) be said to be borne in vain; since they declyne and
swerve from that principal end, whereunto they were created: and far better it
had been for the^, never to have been borne, then so to live and dye. Yet from
this acknowledgment, it follows not, that all Mankind and the whole world it
self should be created to no purpose. First, because many men do here live
virtuously, and shall hereafter be partaker of infinite remuneration and
reward. Now these men alone are worthy, that the world should be created to
their use, and serve them for the better gayning of so great a good, according
as the Apostle says: Omnia propter electos etc. All things are for the elect,
that they may obtain salvation.

And though the number of the reprobate be imcomparably greater then of the
Elect; yet this is not either so few, nor of so small importance, as that God
should repent himself of creating the world and mankind: for as he, who
husbandeth an Orchard, and planteth in it many trees of a strange kind, of
which the greater part prove dead and fruitles, the rest do bring forth good
fruit, and sufficient for the maintaining of his household, cannot be justly
said to have spent his labor in vain, but rather solaceth himself at the
thought of his own pains, since the excellency of the fruit recompenceth the
small number; especially seeing the store is able to nourish his family. The
like (by way of proportion and analogy) may be conceived and supposed of God,
who is the workman of the world and men, who are (as it were) his engrafted
plants or seeds.

Secondly, upon the former confession, it follows not, that the world is made
in vain; because wicked men are not altogether in this world to no purpose.
For they serve to sharpen and stir up the virtue of the just. For while they
afflict the virtuous by several means, they minister unto the other abundant
matter of patience and humility, and give them plentiful occasion of ^^ore
full exercise of their virtues. Since by this means the just do learn to
conte^ne all earthly things, to follow and seek after heavenly matters, to
fly to God, to repose al their confidence and hope in him, to give alms
deeds, and finally to practice all kinds of good works and virtues. This is
evident even by daily examples, and therefore S. Augustine well said, upon the
Psalm. 54. Ne putetis etc. Do not think, that the wicked are in vain in this
world, and that God works not good from them: for every bad man therefore
lives, that he may either repent, or that by him the godly and virtuous may be
exercised. Thus in this sense God is said to use and apply the wicked to the
benefit and health of the virtuous. Again the greatness of Gods goodness and
mercy touching the wicked in this life, mightily shines since he bestows on
them so many benefits and gifts, and inuiteth them with such a wonderful
longanimity and patience, that they may be only partakers of heavenly felicity.
To conclude, the severity of his divine justice appears in them after this
life by taking a most just revenge of their sins; and withal from hence we
may gather, how great the malignity of sin is, which deserves so dreadful a
castigation and punishment, and lastly there is ministered hereby to the Elect a
just occasion of praising and thanking Gods holy name, that they are delivered
from these punishments. Therefore, although the wicked do not arrive to the
principal end of their creation (in which respect they may be said to be borne
in vain) yet this cannot be absolutely pronounced so of them, because they
attain the second end, whereunto they were ordained under condition (as it
were) to wit, if through their vicious lives they made themselves unworthy and
incapable of the first and chiefest end. Now if the Soul of man should perish
with his body, none of these conueniences or profits could have any place, but
in lieu thereof it would clearly follow (as it showed above) that both man and
the whole world should be created to no auailable purpose or end.

THE XVI. REASON. CHAP. XVII.
THE beauty of the world, and of all the things contained with in the vast
circumference thereof, is made by the author of the world, to the end that it
may be seen, known and esteemed; to wit that we behoulding the wonderful
magnificence of such a work, may admire, praise and love the workman of it.
So the pulchritude and goodly structure and artifice of Churches, palaces,
pictures, and other humane works is framed, that it may be looked upon, and
worthily prized. For if it be not seen by any, it is houlden altogether as
unprofitable: for to what conduces fayrenes, and due proportion in
pourtrature, remaining only in darkness? For as smells, sapours, and pleasing
sounds are but superfluous and needles, if there be no senses of smelling,
tasting, and hearing; Even so al beauty and splendor of things, all subtility
and perfection of art is but redundant and in vain, if there be no eye either
of body or mind, which cansee, apprehend, and observe it. But if the Soul does
perish from the body, the beauty of the world, and of all things in it, remain
unknown, vnapprehended, and buried (as it were) in eternal darkness. For in
this life we hardly attain the thousand part of what is to be known, and this
but confusedly and imperfectly; like a man of bad sight behoulding pictures a
far off. For we wholly rest in the external and outward grain of things, never
penetrating into the internal and secret essences of the. And yet there (I
mean in the essence) is shut up all the beauty and truth of things, there is
the native and special ^orme; and there lies all the artifice, and wit of that
great m^^d and supreme intelligence, which with its wisdom has invented and
framed all things; there are contained the reasons of al things; briefly, so
great is the beauty of things in their essence, and so admirable is the
excellency of the divine art therein, as that it may be boldly auerred that to
behold clearly the nature of a fly, or such like small creature, (as the
A^geis do see) is more to be desired, then to obtain the empire of the whole
world. For the Soul and mind would doubtlesly draw more (...) pleasure from
this intellectual light and contemplation, then from all corporal delights
and honors whatsoever. Such will easily believe, what I say, who have at any
time tasted the plea^sure of truth, which lies hidden in these small things.
And the an^yent Philosophers do conspire with me herein, who were so rapt and
(as it were) drunk with the fairenes of truth and wisdom, as that for their
better leisure therein, they co^re^ned all riches and delights of the body.
Seeing then it is imcompatible with reason, that the beauty of the world, and of
all other things, and the inward art discouerable therein, should be ordained
but in vain, or but to continue even in darkness; it is not to be questioned,
but that the soul of man suruiueth the grave, and shall after this life
attain to the perfect knowledge of all things. For then all hidden truths and
the countenance of nature her self (which now is latent) shall appear in
light, and the^ shall the soul admire and praise the artificer of all, who
has impressed a peculiar form in every body, and has so framed and disposed
it through his infinite wisdom.

Some men may here say, that spiritual substances (such as we call Angels) do
perfectly know the structure of the world, and of all other things therein;
Therefore though man never have any full knowledge thereof, the world was not in
vain made.

I answer hereto, and deny the inference; for the structure of the world ought
to be known of him, for whose cause it was made, that by such his knowledge,
he may give thanks to his Creator. Now it was framed for the use and benefit
of man, not of Angels (who have no need of a corporeal world:) Therefore man is
to have knowledge of it, since to man it is made serviceable, and that in a
double respect; to wit, with it profits and fruits conducing to the leading of
a corporeal life, and with it splendor and pulchritude, for the exercise of
wisdom and contemplation; that so from the work he may know the workman, and
in knowing him, that he may admyre, honor and reverence him, and carefully
obey and keep his laws.

THE XVII. REASON. CHAP. XVIII.
THAT sentence and opinion, which banisheth away all virtue, and introduces
all impurity and vice, cannot possibly be holden, as agreeable to truth: For
Truth and VVisdome do auert men from al turpitude and uncleanness of
conversation, and ^^cite them to the love of honesty and virtue. For the
virtue, which is in the understanding, is the cause of all virtue, which is in
the affection and will; and this from the other proceeds no otherwise, then
the beauty of any work rises from the art which is in the workemans mind.
Furthermore light cannot occasion darkness; But truth is light, and the square
of what is right; and vice is darkness, a lie, and a deuiation or declining
away from the path and rule of truth. Now this opinion, which teaches the
Soul to be mortal and corruptible, does subvert and overthrow the foundation
of al probity and virtue, and gives the raynes to all licentiousnes and
sensuality. For who would walk in the cragged way of virtue refrain his
desires, tame his lusts, abstain from doing wrong, and worship a divine power,
if he did expect no reward for such his deportment and carriage, nor fruit of
this his labor? Wherefore we find even by experience; that such as maintain
the Souls mortality, are of a most licentious and profane life and
conversation; for as in a commonwealth it cannot be brought to pass, that
external justice and political honesty be observed, and violence and injury
be restrained, except rewards and punishments be ordained by force of
established laws; Even so virtue in mankind cannot be practiced, and vice
prohibited, where there is no expectation of reward and commination of
chastisement set down by the decree and ordinance of God: The which
remunerations and recompensations, seeing they are not ever paid in this life,
it follows, that they are to be reserved for the life to come; since
otherwise it might be said (which were a heinous offense to auerre) that a
commonwealth is more wisely and prudently ordained and governed by man, then
mankind is by God.

The Wiseman in the second chapter excellently describes the improbity of such
as deny the souls Immortality in these words: Exiguum and cum taedio etc. Our
life is short and tedious, and in the death of a man there is no recovery;
neither was any known, that has returned from the grave. For we are borne at
all adventure, and we shall be hereafter, as though we never had been etc. Come
therefore let us enjoy the pleasures, that are present, and let us cheerfully
use the creatures, as in youth etc. Let us leave some token of our pleasure in
every place, for this is our portion, and this is our lot. Thus we see how
these men do place their chief felicity in the pleasures of the body. Now
after this, Solomon proceeds further, showing how such men bear themselves
to the virtuous, how they spoil them, afflict them, and kill them, making
their own power and might the law of justice, so holding that for lawful,
which they can and will execute; then the which nothing can be reputed more
injurious: for thus he brings in them saying: Fortitudo nostra etc. Let our
strength be the law of our unrighteousness, for the thing, that is feeble is
reproved as unprofitable.

To conclude, the Wiseman ends thus in his own person: Haec cogitauerunt
etc. Such things do they imagine, and go astray, for their own wickedness has
blinded them; and they do not understand the mysteries of God, neither hope
for the reward of righteousness, nor can discern the honor of the souls, that
are faultlesse: For God created man without corruption, ^ made him after the
image of his own likeness. In which words he gives a reason, why man according
to his Soul is inexterminable, without end, and incorruptible; to wit, because
he is like to God, as being his image: For in respect of his mind and soul,
man is capable of divinity, as also of every truth, and goodness: Therefore
seeing this persuasion of the death and mortality of the soul is so pernicious
to all virtue, morality and conversation, we may infallibly conclude, that it
is most false, as being not warranted with any just show of truth.

Again, that sentence, which is the source and welspring of all justice, piety
and virtue, cannot be false; for as light cannot proceed out of darkness; so
the shining sple^dour of truth cannot rise from the obscurity of errors. And
certainly, it is absurd in it self, that the error of judgment and a false
persuasion of mind, should become the fountain of all justice and probity. But
this article, which teaches the souls immortality, and that after this life
it is to be rewarded or punished, is the groundwork of all justice and
probity; since through this expectation man is deterred from vice and impelled
and persuaded to virtue. Whereupon it has been ever observed, that such men, as
ever grew eminent through the praise of virtue, were incited to the practice of
it through the persuasion of the souls immortality: from thence then it
follows, that this sentence must be most true; since it is is incredible,
that the nature of the mind or soul should be so ordained, as that the true
and perfect knowledge of it self should be the cause of all improbity and
lewdnes, and an erroneous persuasion the occasion of virtue. For so it would
follow, that nothing would be more necessary, and convenient for the Soul,
then to be ignorant of its own nature; and nothing more dangerous, then to
have a true knowledge of it self, which paradox is most incongruous and
absurd; since all wisemen esteemed this sentence: (...), Nosce teipsum, as an
Oracle; in so much that Plato in Charmide witnesses that these words were
inscribed in the front of the temple of Apollo at Delphos, to the end (no
doubt) that all should take notice, that the observing of this sentence is the
only way to true felicity, revealed to man by a supernatural power. Whereupon
I^uenal thus writes: E calo descendit, (...): that is, this sentence, Know thy
self, descended from heaven.

Perhaps thou m^ist here say, that virtue is a reward to it self, and vice
its own punishment; therefore though the Soul be mortal, and that it is not
to expect after this life either reward, or to fear punishment; yet by this
means it is sufficiently incyted and stirred up to embrace virtue and fly
vice.

I answer hereto and say, that this Stoicall imagination is but weak, and of
small Whether virtue be a reward of it self.
force to govern the affections of men; (though at the first appearance it
hears some show of probability) and this for several reasons. First, because
the beauty of virtue and deformity of vice, is a very secret and hidden thing,
and apprehended but by few, whereupon it rises, that it cannot efficaciously
move the mynds of men: since nothing, which is unknown, stirs the
affection.

Secondly, because this reason is little prevailing, even in those minds, which
make show to admit the force of it; for who is he, which flies pleasure only
by reason of its inward turpitude, and as it is adverse to the law of reason;
and imbraceth the way of virtue* only because the virtue is in it self fair;
and agreeable to reason, not being, induced thereto through any other motives?
For the Stoics themselves (who first did venditate and teach this doctrine)
were not persuaded to ^ine answerably hereto, as moved only through the force
of virtue and vice, but rather through honor or co^tumely and disgrace; as
those which were famous among the Romans and Grecians were accustomed to do.
This T^u^ly witnesses in many places: Trahimur omnes etc. We are all drawn
with the desire of praise, and even the best are led with glory: yea those very
Pro Archia. Poeta.
Philosophers, who have written of the contempt of glory, have notwithstanding
subscribed their names to their own books; And thus in despising of honor
and reputation, they seek after honor and reputation. For the incytements and
allurements of pleasures (which are obuious and near to the senses) are far
more preuayling to draw men to pleasures, then their vglines and foulenes,
(which is very subtle and scarce conceyned in mind) is of force to restrain
them; since things and objects, which are acco^modated to the senses do
vehemently and forcibly move. In like sort the asperity and unpleasing sharpnes
of virtue (which is repugnant to the flesh and our innate desires and
affections) is more powerful to deter the mind (naturally ever confederate
with the flesh) from the practice of it, then the beauty of it is forcible to
procure love and admiration thereto.

Therefore, from hence it is most evident, that man stands in need of other
more strong incentyues, by the which his mind may be impelled to the study and
pursuit of virtue, and to the profligation and driving away of vice and
impiety.

Thirdly, because that Paradox of the Stoics* virtus sibi iustum est praemium:
Virtue is a sufficient reward to it self, is most false: for nothing works
only to the end, that it may work; and that it may rest, and be contented in
the worth of its own operation; but it ever intends something further, which
it may obtain by such its action, as is evident both in those things, which
are wrought and performed by nature; as also by Art: for the Heavens (for
example) are not moved, as taking delight in such their motion, but for the
conueniency of the inferior world, and the benefit of man.

In like sort, the seminall virtue, which is in seads, plants, and living
creatures, works not to the end, that it may please it self with such its
operation; but that thereby things may be formed, borne, grow, nourished, and
bring forth fruit: neither do living Creatures work for the work it self,
but that thereby they may procure and get such things, as be profitable to the^,
and avoid, what is dangerous and hurtful. After the same manner Artificers do
aim at some things beyond the practice of their art, for the which they
work. The like may be said of the operations of virtues which are no performed
by reason of that good and beauty, which is in them; but are finally directed
to some one thing, which is most good, and which is chiefly to be desired. And
although several virtues do not extend themselves in their actions beyond the
peculiar and formal reason of what is good, which is set down to every one of
them; yet the mind, which possesses the^ and uses them, as it instruments, is
not satisfied with that good, but expects some further end thereby; whether
it be honor and glory, or the joy of future felicity, which is to be given by
God after this life. And hence it proceeds, that those, who are either
ignorant, or do not think of the reward of the future life, have in all their
famous and most celebrious actions been moved with the desire of glory. And
hereupon we find Tully thus to write: Ex Pro Milone.
omnibus praemijs etc. Among all the rewards of virtue, glory is the most ample
reward, by the which the shortness of man's life is comforted with the memory of
posterity. As also in another place ( Pro Archia Poe^^.
) Nullam virtus etc. Virtue desires no other reward for her labor and pains,
then this of glory; of which it we should be deprived, to what purpose should
we undergo so great pains, and labors in this so short a course if man's
life? This was Tullies opinion, because he was ignorant of greater rewards. So
the ancient Romans, who were wont to make a specious and fair show of virtue
in their actions, were for the most part led thereto through the desire of
praise, as S. Augustine ( l. 5. de Ciuit dei c. 12.
) shows. So evident it is, that man's nature in performing the works of
virtue, does desire and expect somewhat more, then the beauty, and goodness,
which is in these actions. And this which is further expected ought to be such,
as that it may more powerfully draw and impel man's will to virtuous operations,
then the pulchritude and inward fayrenes of it is able to do. Which point is
made more evident by this consideration following.

God (the author of nature) has mixed those functions, which belong either to
defend life, or to propagate and continue the kind of any Creature (to wit
taking of meat and procreation of offspring) with great pleasures; least
otherwise (perhaps) living Creatures, as being weary of the labors and
troubles accompayning the same, should neglect those functions; or at least
should not perform them so diligently, as were necessary for the conservation
of the particular or continuance of the species and kind. But with the most
operations of virtue, either no pleasure or very small is adjoined, but for the
most part great labors, solicitude and trouble. For the way of virtue is hard,
and is not passed over without toil or molestation.

It is hard for men to bridle the passions, to curb the affections of the
mind, to moderate desires, to extinguish malice and envy, and to encompasse all
motions within the circle of reason. It is a laboursome thing to suffer
iniuryes, to restrain hate and anger, to relieve the needy with their goods,
and duly to pay debts. Therefore seeing in the exercise of virtue, there is
either none or very small allurements; but on the other side, many asperities
diuerting the mind from thence, it was requisite that (besides the force of
virtue) there should be some other causes, which must forcibly impell the mind
thereto, and deter it from vice, to wit rewards and punishments without the
which no man would enter into the thorny path of virtue, or being entered would
go forward therein, or would contemn the inuitements of sensuality: for if the
Providence of God has much sweetened these lowest functions, consisting in the
preserving of life, and perpetuating of posterity, lea^t otherwise they might
be pretermited and neglected; who then can be persuaded, that the chiefest
operations of the soul of Man (by the which we are made like to God) should be
so little respected by the said Providence, as that we should want al
incytements for our greater encourageme^t therein? Certainly this care of
Providence were most preposterous. For although virtue be sharp and adverse to
the flesh, and vices grateful and pleasing; notwithstanding the consideration
of the reward, which is adjoined to virtue (wherein is contained an eternal and
inestimable pleasure) does so temper and gentle the bitterness thereof, as that
it makes it to seem sweet and to be desired; and on the contrary part, an
inward and serious reflection and meditation of the most severe punishments
prepared hereafter for vice and wickedness, causes the pleasure of it to seem
bitter and loathsome.

Now, what is hertofore spoken of the operations of virtue (to wit, that it
self should not be a sufficient remuneration for it self) is to be understood
of those actions of virtue, which can be performed in this life. For we do not
deny, but after this life there is an action of virtue, which is a reward of it
self, and of all other precedent operations of virtue. And this is the clear
vision of God, and the love and joy flowing from thence: for these functions or
actions of virtue are chiefly to be desired for themselves, so as no other
further commodity is to be expected therein; seeing in this vision our supreme
felicity, formalis beatitudo (as the Schoolmen speak) consists. Now that
these operations make us happy, this rises not from thence, that they are the
operations or functions of any virtues, but in that they conioyne and unity the
Soul with God, who is summum verum, su^mum pulchrum, and summum bonum: our
chiefest truth, chiefest beauty, and good. Wherefore from hence we may observe,
that we do not place in these actions our happiness, as the Stoics did in
virtue: for they reposed their supreme happiness in virtue it self, and in a
resolution of the mind subject to reason, and not in the Object, to the which
virtue tyeth our mind; thus they made virtue it self to be both the formal
and obiectiue beatitude; that is, the subject from whence this beatitude
rises, and the formal cause, why in these functions of virtue consists ma^s
beatitude. But we place not this our felicity principally in these operations
of virtue but in the Object, to the which these operations do unity our soul
and mind; so as these operations cannot be called our felicity, but with
reference, as they are a certain perfect union and vital conjunction with our
summum bonum, or supreme happiness. Besides the Stoics taught, the operation of
virtue to be in our power, flowing (at our own pleasure) from the freedom of
our will; whereas we maintain that blessed function not to be in our own
power; but to be a celestial, constant, immutable, and sempiternall gift,
divinely infused.

But it may be here objected, that glory and praise is a sufficient incytement
to the study of virtue, and consequently, that there is no need of rewards or
pains after this life. And of this opinion Tully may seem to be, who
wonderfully magnifyeth this reward in these words following. Nulla merces a
virtute etc. No other reward is to be expected for virtue, then this of honor
and glory.

Of all the rewards of virtue, glory is the most ample and large: which
comfort the shortness of life with the memory of posterity: which makes that
being absent, we are present, and being dead we do live; by which degrees of
honor, men may be thought to ascend to heaven. In like sort in another place
he thus writes; Non vita ha^ etc. This is not to be termed life, which
consists of the body and the soul or mind; but that, even that is truly
life, which flourishes in the memory of all ages, which posterity nourishes,
and which eternity it self ever beho^deth.

I answer hereto and say, that glory and humane praise is no sufficient reward
for virtue, and this for diverse reasons. First, because the desire of glory
corrupts the good and perfection of virtue, leaving thereof only an outward
show, and a mere representation: for virtue (as Aristotle and al Philosophers
2. Ethic. c. 4.
defyne it) is a love of that, which is good, or honest, only in that respect,
that it is good; Therefore if one do a virtuous work, not through any love of
virtue, but through the hope either of profit, pleasure, or praise, it is not
the work of true virtue, but only an external pretext thereof; for the inward
life, and (as it were) the soul of virtue is absent here; for as a living
creature consists of soul and body, so a perfect work of virtue is grounded
upon an inward liking of what is good, and an outward work. And as when the
soul leaves the body there remains only a dead Carcas; even so the desire
and affection of what is good and virtuous being extinguished, nothing is left,
but only an empty show or image of virtue.

So far short then is glory and praise from being a sufficient and efficacious
incyteme^t of virtue, as that true virtue is even corrupted and depraved
thereby; no otherwise, then certain hot poisons do so stir up and awaken the
sleeping spirits of a man, as that they do utterly dissolve, dissipate, and
extinguish them.

Secondly, Glory is not sufficient hereto, because the scope and End of glory
is prevailing only in certain few external actions, which are performed upon
the open stage of the world; for (as it is above showed) it does not excite and
persuade a man to the inward affection and love of virtue, but only to the
outward action; and this not to every action, but to such as may be most
conspicuous and markable in the eyes of many. For the humor of glory and
praise is fully satisfied, if a man seem externally virtuous, honest and
valorous, though in the secret closet of his soul he is found to be wicked,
and cowardly. Therefore this desire of praise (which is but an idle
diuerberation or empty sound of air) rather engenders Hypocrites, then true
followers of virtue.

Thirdly, because the reward of virtue ought to be a certain solid and
intrinsecal good, which may affect the soul it self, and which is more noble
then virtue; since the End ought ever to be more excellent then the means. But
humane glory is a thing merely extrinsecall, resting only in Why are men so
desirous of praise
the persuasion and judgment of men; but bringing no perfection or worth to
the mind. For what can the opinion of a company of poor mortal men advantage
me? Or what can their speeches and words avail me? Thou may here reply,
from whence then proceeds it, that almost all Valerius Max c. 8.
men are ouerruled with the desire of praise and glory? For as one says. There
is no such humility of mind, which cannot be mollifyed with the sweetness of
glory. Which saying is so true, as that this affection of Philotimy, and love
of honor and reputation has suddenly crept into the mynds of most holy and
devout men.

I answer, that there are three causes hereof. First, because there is in all
men an innate appetite and desire of excellency, which mightily rules and
swayeth in the mind: for there is nothing more to be desired in that, which is
good* (whether it be virtue, power or nobility) then to excel others in the
same good. Now honor is the testimony of this excellency; glory a knowledge
and opinion of the same excellency, and praise a diuulging and dilating of the
same. Whereupon when these are ascribed and given to any one, there rises in
him an apprehension of his own excellency, with the which he is wonderfully
delighted. Even as (on the contrary) by conuicious speeches and reproach there
is stirred up a cogitation of ones vility and baseness, which is displeasing and
distasting to every one. Therefore all men love praise and glory, because these
are signs of excellency; and hate, contumely and disgrace, as marks and
badges of abiection and unworthiness of mind.

Secondly, all men covet honor; because as the mind greatly desires to be
eminent and excelling; so it desires to be so reputed in the judgments of
others; for the soul or mind of man deemeth this to belong to it, as a
certain new essence, or as a new intelligible life (as I may call it) under
the glorious show and form whereof, it being known, it seems to live in the
mynds of men. For as the Philosophers do say Intelligere, est quoddam rei
intelligibilis esse: to understand and know a thing, gives a certain essence
and being to the thing so known.

This point Tully may be well thought to insinuate in the words above recyted:
E^ est vita etc. That is the life, which flourishes in the memory of all ages
which posterity nourishes, and through the which we being absent, are present,
and being dead, do live. Therefore this memory, this estimation, and eternizing
of ones fame is a certain life of the soul, and her endowments; which is not
discerned by the eye, but understood by the mind; consists not by nature, but
by the judgments and censures of mynds; does not intrinsecally in here to the
soul, but is extrinsecally possessed; by which means the soul may be said to
live in the mynds of men, and to have so many lives, as there are men, in whose
hearts it is highly magnified and valewed. This life is so much esteemed
sometimes by the soul, as that it is content oftentimes to contemn corporal
life for the preserving of it, and to expose the body to most certain death,
before it will suffer the least blemish and loss of reputation and name, so
holding it more worthy to live by memory in the mynds of others, then in his
own person and body by nature. Which is an evident argument, that glory
(although it be but an imaginary and empty thing) is more worthy and preciable
then riches or pleasures. For such is the excellency of the mind, as that it
prefers the least goods properly belonging to it, before the greatest
corporal goods.

Thirdly, All do seek after glory, because glory is conducing and profitable
to many things; for it retayneth and keeps man in his duty, withdrawing him
from all turpitude, ^loth, and improbity, least otherwise he should loose his
good name; for want of shame, and an utter contempt of what honest men do
think of one, is a point most dangerous. Furthermore, Glory makes, that men
may with pleasure, grace, and credit negotiate with others in public and in
the eye of the world, where base and degenerous persons dare not appear.
Again it procures, that men are advanced to magistracy and public government;
since the gates of honors and dignityes are shut to the infamous, and such as
are abject. Lastly, it causes, that we converse among men with fruit; for
whether it be in a course of doctrine and learning, or in the administration of
justice, neither of them can be performed without the reputation of a good
Prouer b. 22. Eccles. 4. 1.
name; and therefore the Wise Man truly said: Melius est etc. A good name is to
be chosen above great riches: as also in another place; Curam habe etc. have
regard to thy good name, for that shall be prized with thee, above a thousand
treasures of gold.

THE XVIII. REASON. CHAP. XIX.
AGAIN, if the Soul dies with the body, then (besides all the former
inconveniences above alleged) these two do follow. First, that injuries and
wrongs should remain unrevenged, and that any wickedness whatsoever in mankind
should be committed with all impunity, and without any suffering on the
delinquents side. Secondly, that there should be no reward allotted for virtue
and piety, nor no fruit thereof. That in this life oftentimes there is no
revenge or compensation taken for wrongs, is manifest: for we see daily many
most wicked and impious men, and oppressors of the innocent to flourish
greatly in this life, and to abound with all kinds of temporal goods, as
riches, honors, and delights; but the just and virtuous to be still entangled
with diverse calamities, and to pass their whole time in affliction; as if
Prosperity should be the reward of Impiety, and calamity of justice and piety.
Therefore of there be no retribution of these matters after this life, then in
this (...). or perturbation of order it is most evident; to wit that all
heinous offenses and crimes should be unpunished, virtue unrewarded, Justice
trodden under foot through contempt, and iniquity erected. For wrongs and
flagitious sins are supposed to continue, and to pollute this Common wealth
of the whole Universe, till they be revenged, and become expiated by due
punishments, as is evident from the common judgment of all men.

It also further might be inferred, that if there be no chastisement of vice,
nor remuneration for virtue, there were no divine power or providence,
undertaking the care of men's affairs; but that all things are carried with
temerity and rashness, and that every ma^s will and power becomes a law to
himself: for nothing can be more adverse and repugnant to the nature of
Providence, then this kind of license and impunity. For as we may truly say,
that, that Kingdom or State (if any such were) either wanted a governor, or
that the governor were iniust, and a defender of wicked men; if therein there
were decreed no revenge for notorious and public transgressors; Even so if
in this Kingdom (as it were) of all mankind, all actions should proceed freely
without any expectation either of rewards, or fear of punishments, we might
well collect, that there were no providence, nor any supreme moderatour, by
whom humane affairs are governed, or if there were any, yet that he is
unjust. This is confirmed, in that the first office of a governor is, that
Laws may be observed with due distribution of rewards and punishments,
according to men's different co^portment and carriage* for thus all actions are
brought to the balance of justice, then the which nothing is more desired in
this world.

Now where this is wanting, it is certain, that providence and true government
is also wanting. The same point is also further made evident, because it
chiefly belongs to Providence, to give to every one, what is his own; this
being the inviolable law of justice, which in government and true administration
of things is most religiously to be observed: whereupon Divine Providence
observes this most precisely in all things created (according to their
different capacities) giving to every one what is agreeable to their nature and
condition. Now if this order be kept in the lowest and meanest creatures, then
with much more reason ought it to be observed in the worthyest thing of the
world, which is man's Soul, which only is capable of Justice and injury, right
and due. Certainly, it is absurd that all things agreeable to their natures
should exactly be measured and given by the Providence of God to myce, gnats,
worms, and the like (who are not capable of justice or wrong) and yet those
things should not be given to the soul of man, which are due, and best sort to
it; and which the soul it self through her good or bad actions deserves. We
cannot but think, that the care of divine Prodence is about small matters very
preposterous, if it be wanting in the greatest things. For from this then would
fall out not much unlike, as if a Prince should carefully provide of al things
necessary for horses, mules, and dogs, and yet should absolutely neglect his
own family, without setting down any recompensations to his most trusty
servants, or chastisement to malefactors. The^ the which proceeding what can
be imagined more exorbitant, or less agreeable with reason? For by how much any
thing is more worthy and more near to God, by so much it requires a greater
care of Providence, that it may attend its end. A reasonable nature is the sole
family and household of God; since this nature only acknowledges God, and
prosecuteth him with honor and reverence. This also alone contemns and
offends him; and therefore it alone deserves reward and punishment.

Now from these premises it is manifestly convinced, that there is no divine
power, nor any Providence, if the soul be extinguished with the body: for if
it be extinguished, then is there no retribution nor any justice; but iniuryes
and wrongs remain unsatisfied, virtue becomes dishonored; and finally there
is found in the worthyest creature of the world, the greatest perturbation and
inuersion of order, that can be imagined. All which inferences being granted,
do evidently prove the world to be destitute of a Rectour or Governor. And
hence it is, that this consideration chiefly has in all ages perplexed the
minds of men, and has impelled them to deny divine providence, and to satisfy
their own affections and desires. And the greatest motive to withdraw men from
this false opinion, was to consider good or evil was prepared for man after
this life, as the Prophet most excellently explicateth in the 72. Psalm. Only
the mature ponderation of this, appeaseth the mind, and causes it to tread a
virtuous and resolved course in all adversities.

But it may be here answered, that the souls of the wicked are sufficiently
punished for all their wrongs, injustice, and other their transgressions, in
that they are extinct with the death of their bodies: but against this I say,
that this perishing and death of the soul (if any such were) is ordained not
as a punishment, but as a condition of nature; which no less the virtuous and
just do undergo, then the wicked. Like as in a Commonwealth, if there were no
other other punishments to be inflicted upon delinquents, then the natural
death of body, which according to the course of measure is to fall to every
one; it might be truly said, that no pain or chastisement at all were
absolutely set down for malefactors; but that all liberty and impunity
prevailed therein; for punishment ought to be inflicted for the fault, as a
just recompensation of the same. So as if there be no fault, then is there not
any place for punishment. Now this supposed extinction of the soul (above
understood) is not inflicted for any fault; seeing the virtuous are no less
subject to it, then the wicked.

THE XIX. REASON. CHAP. XX.
THE world was created by God, to the end that the perfection of his Divinity
might shine, and appear in it, as in his most beautiful and admirable work:
for this manifestation is the last end of God, or of the first age^t in the
framing of the world. For nothing is more worthy then God* who works for his
own sake, and intends lastly his own good, which good is not intrinsecall
to God (for this kind of good is ever present unto him, neither can it be
increased or diminished) but only extrinsecall, which is nothing else, then an
open declaration of his perfections in his Creatures, and by his creatures, in
the which his extrinsecall glory consists. And in this sense the Philosophers
are accustomed to say, Idem est primus agens, and vltimus finis. One and the
same thing is the first agent, and the last end. The reason hereof being,
because the first agent does not necessarily intend in the last place his own
good. Which point is warranted out of the holy Scripture, Omnia propter
Proverb. 16.
semetipsum operatus etc. The Lord made all things for his own sake; yea even
the wicked for the day of evil. God works all things, not only by a positive
action in doing, but also by a negative action, in suffering and permitting,
for the word, to work, is here taken in a large signification: God works
propter semetipsum, that is, for his own glory, that thereby the perfections
of his excellency may be manifested and known: Impium quoque, yea even the
wicked etc. because he suffers a man to be wicked, and being wicked he
ordains him to damnation and eternal punishment, and all this, which God
does, tends to his glory. But if the soul be mortal, the divine perfections
in God are so far off from shining in the fabric and disposition of the
world, as that they may rather seem to be obscured: for it is no sign of the
power of the Creator, but rather of his weakness, that he could not make the
Soul of man (which is the Lord of things) immortal, seeing that condition is
best sorting to the dignity of the soul. It is not a point of wisdom to make
such things eternal, as are serviceable, and (as it were) slaves to man, as
the world (which is his house) and the like; and yet to shut or confyne the
Lord of all within a narrow conpasse of time, and that being once ended,
himself for ever to be extinguished and to resolve to nothing. It is not the
office of goodness to bring all other things to that perfection, which is
agreeable to each of the^; and yet so to neglect the Soul of man, as that he can
never attain unto the hundredth part of that good, of which it is capable. It
is no Providence to leave the soul to its own appetites and desires, without
setting of any rewards, which may allure it to virtue, or punishments, which
may deter it from vice; to leave sin unpunished, and justice violated, and
to permit in the world so great a disorder and confusion; the impious ruling
and tyrannizing, and the just and virtuous remaining oppressed, and this
without any future hope of bettering of things, or of reducing them in any more
convenient order.

What should I here speak of Mercy and Justice? For what mercy is it, that
man should live so short a time, and lead his corporal life afflicted with so
many miseries, without any expectation of happiness for the time to come? Or
what pleasure can this life afford, which is mixed with such store of worm
wood, as that to a prudent man it seems most bitter, except the sweetness of a
future expectancy does te^per it? Or what equity and justice is it, that good
men should be oppressed, afflicted, and murdered by the wicked without any
revenge or recompensation of so great and insufferable wrongs: that there
should be no rewards proposed for piety, justice and virtue; nor punishments
for wickedness and in justice? that the wicked* should abound withal the goods
of this life (as riches, honors, pleasures, and domination or rule) and the
godly and pious should live plunged into all afflictions and calamities? Who
considering these things, will not repute them rather signs of cruelty and
injustice, then of mercy and justice? And that the divine power is a favorer
of the wicked, and an enemy to the virtuous, if there be not after this life a
just compensation and retaliation made to both these kinds of men? And hence it
is, that the Heathens, who thought little of any retribution after this life,
did often accuse the Gods of cruelty and injustice. Of which point many
examples are extant in Homer, Euripides, Athan^us, and others. Yea such a
cogitation will enter into the minds of some Christians, whiles they do not
cast their eye of things to come after this life. And certainly if nothing were
to chance to the soul after its separation from the body, it were not an easy
matter to vindicate and free God from the aspersion and note of cruelty and
injustice, as above is showed out of Chrysostom. For who would esteem that
King to be just and benign, who should suffer in his Kingdom so great a
confusion, as that no reward should be proposed for virtue, nor punishment for
most facinorous crimes; but that the wicked should perpetrate any mischiefs
(though never so heinous) without any fear of law, or feeling of any due
punishment or castigation! But now acknowledging the souls immortality, all
the former inconveniences do cease, and all secret murmuring and complaints
against God are silent. For this foresaid confusion lasts only for a small
time; which (being once passed) shall hereafter be corrected in an eternal
order, for to every one after this life shall be allotted his place state, and
degree; and there shall be a just retribution for all actions whatsoever; there
no evil shall remain unrevenged, nor good irremunerated and unrewarded. For as
a skilful painter is not ignorant in what place he is to put each particular
color (as black, white, and the rest:) so God knows where to range every one
in this whole Universe, be he virtuous or wicked.

And as from that fitting distribution of colors rises the beauty of the
picture, even so from this disposal of Souls, the splendor of the Universe
proceeds; which Universe is (as it were) a certain portrature of Gods
divinity, wonderfully exhibiting to us his power, wisdom, goodness,
Providence, mercy and justice. Therefore there is no true reason, why the just
should complain of the Providence of God for their suffering of calamities in
this life; since the pressures and afflictions here are but short, and but
small in a generous mind; but the the fruit there of most great, magnificent,
and eternal. It being true which the Apostle says (then whom no man perhaps
in this world has suffered more) Momentaneum and leave etc. Our affliction,
which is but for a moment, works in us a ^arre more excellent and eternal ^.
Cor. 4.
weight of glory. Now that ought not to be accounted grievous, which is
recompensed with so great and inestimable a reward. Besides Tribulations are of
force to fyle away the rust of the soul, and to cause an abstertion and
washing away of its daily spots; for no man in this world is so pure, but some
small blemishes are daily contracted in his soul, which by means of
affliction are obliterated and removed.

In like sort, there is no cause, why the virtuous should stomach the
prosperity of the wicked, since this is short, momentary and mixed with much
bitterness; and is hereafter to be attended with everlasting complaint and
lamentation. There is no man, which will envy a draught of wine to be given to
a thief, or the enjoying of solace for some few hours, which is already
condemned to the wheel and death. And the Prophet says, Noli aemulari etc.
Fret not thy self, because of the wicked men, neither be envious for the evil
doers etc. for they shall wither, ^^ Psalm. 36.
the green herb. In like sort the wiseman thus teaches: Stuppa collecta
etc. The Congregation Eccles. 21.
of the wicked is like tow wrapped together; their end is like a flame of fire
to destroy them. The harvest will come, when all sinners like hurtful herbs or
chafe shall be gathered together, and cast into the fire, as our Lord himself
has taught in that wonderful parable of his, in Matthew. cap. 13.

THE XX. REASON. CHAP. XXI.
IT is so provided by nature, that who have committed grievous sins, do
suffer a secret sting, and touch of Conscience, with the which they are
sometimes so tormented, as that they deprive themselves of their own lives.
For their conscience does daily accuse and condemn them, and pronounce the^
worthy of punishment, and cause them ever to stand in fear, as if some
dreadful evil were hanging over their heads. From hence it proceeds, that
these men (that they may the more divert their minds from these thoughts, and
free themselves of all such trouble) give themselves over to all sports,
recreations, bankettings, and to other external societyes; thus avoiding their
inward accuser and torturer, for nothing is more displeasing to them, then to
be solitary and alone, and to enter into any secret discourse with their own
souls. Now this horror of mind and prick of conscience is a presage of a
future judgment and revenge, which expects the souls of the wicked after
this life. Their sins and offenses are (as it were) seeds of eminent
punishments; and therefore this their trouble of mind ryseth even by an
instinct of nature from the remembrance of their own sins. But now, we are
not to think, that the presages and foretellings of nature are but idle and
needless instincts; for if nothing were to be feared after the bodies death,
and that no evil were to ensue thereupon, then should in vain this instinct
be implanted in man's soul, and in vain should an evil conscience project and
forecast any such dreadful and dyrefull matters.

In like sort a conscience privy to it self of its well doing, brings great
solace to the mind, and therefore Tully says: Magna est vis conscientiae etc.
The force of conscience both in the good, and in the bad, is great; that they
who committed no evil, do not fear, and those who have offended, may ever
have their punishment before their eyes. He also in another place thus writes:
Si optimorum consiliorum etc. If our conscience be ever a witness throughout our
whole lives of our good deliberations and actions, then shall we live without
fear in great integrity and honesty of mind. And the reason thereof is,
because the soul does presage that good and happynes, which is reserved after
this life, for all true worshippers of virtue.

THE XXI. REASON. CHAP. XXII.
THE Immortality of the Soul is further euicted from the return back of
Souls after this life. For it is evident even by infinite examples, that the
dead have been raised up, and that the Souls of the dead have returned from
the places, wherein they were, and have appeared to the living. We read in the
first book of the Kings cap. 28. and in Ecclesiasticus cap. 49. that the Soul
of Samuel (then dead) appeared to the Enchantresse Pithonissa, and to Saul, and
did prophecy unto him his destruction. Again the soul of Moses (whether in
his own body restored unto him at that time by divine power, or in a body
assumed by him) together with Elias appeared in the mount Thabor to Christ,
and to the three chief Apostles Peter, James, and John, as is related in
Matthew cap. 17. and Luke cap. 9. The souls of Onias and Jeremy the Prophet
exhibited themselves to the sight of Judas Machabeus, and much encouraged him
to the vanquishing of his Countries Enemies, as appears in the first of the
Machabees c. 15. The Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul appeared in sleep to
Constantine the Emperor, and showed him a means to cure his leprosy, as it is
recorded in the seventh Synod Act 2. and testified by many Historians. S. John
(the Evangelist) and S. Philip the Apostle appeared to Theodosius, and promised
him victory against Eugenius; which presently followed and not without great
miracle. The same apparitio^ was seen also by a certain soldier at the same
time, least otherwise it might be thought to be forged by the Emperor, as
Theodoret writes, l. 5. histor. c. 24. The same Evangelist with the blessed
virgin exhibited themselves to the ^ight of Gregorius Thaumaturgus then waking,
and instructed him in the mystery of the Trinity. This point with the form of
the doctrine is recorded by Gregorius Nissenus, in the life of Thaumaturgus.

I omit many other apparitions of our blessed Lady recorded by Gregory the
great and other more ancient authors. In like sort Amb^rse sermon. 90. writes,
that S. Agnes appeared to Constantia the daughter of Constantine, and cured her
of a most dangerous impostume or swelling. Eusebiu^ reports l. 6. histor. c.
5. how S. Po^^mi^^^ (the third day after her martyrdom) appeared to her
Executioner in the night, and told him, that she had obtained favor from God
in his behalf in reco^pense of his gentle proceeding with her; upon which
apparitio^ the Executioner insta^tly became a Christian and after his constant
profession of the Christian faith, suffered a most glorious death, and
martyrdom.

It were over labor some to recount all the apparitio^s both of the holy and
wicked souls, which are found in approved authors; all which to say to have
been forged were over great impudence; since this were to take away the credit
of al historyes and to cast an aspersion of falsehood and deceit (without any
show of reason) upon many most holy, learned, and grave authors; for many both
of the ancient Fathers, as also of historiographers (especially Christians)
have made frequent mention of this point; yea even among the very heathens,
Home^* ^ 11. and a^^bi virgil. ^. 8. Aenead. Ovid. l. 4. Metamorph.
it was a thing generally acknowledged, as appears out of Homer, Virgil and
others.

Therefore seeing it is a matter most evident by so many examples, that the
Souls of the dead have appeared to the living, we may demonstratiuely
conclude, that those Souls did not dye with their bodies; but do continue
immortal, and have their reward of glory of punishment, according to their
actions performed in this life.

This point of the Souls immortality is in like sort made clear from the
raising of the dead to life. Now that the dead have been recalled to life, is
proved by many unanswerable examples. And first the Prophet Elias restored to
life the dead Son of the widow Sareptana, as appears in the third of the
Kings c. 7. Elisaeus also raised the son of Sunamice, as we read in the
fourth of the Kings c. 4. Yea Elisaeus (being himself dead) only by the touch
of his bones restored to life one, that was dead, as we find in the 13. chapter
of the said book.

Christ (our Lord and Savior) besides others raised, to life Lazarus (being
dead four days before) and this was performed in the eye of all Jerusalem, as
S. John relates c. 11. Finally to avoid all prolixity, diverse were restored
to life by the Apostles, and other most holy men, as appears from
Ecclesiastical historyes, and other approved authors. Now the resurrection
and rising of the dead, is an evident sign, that the souls are not utterly
extinct; but that they remain separated after death, till through a convenient
disposition of the body, they be reunited to it. For so soon, as the whole
disposition of the body (which is necessary to this union) shall be perfected,
and that the soul shall there exhibit it self in wardly present, then does
this union imediatly and freely follow: partly like as fire touching chips, or
any other such combustible matter, does through a mutual attraction, naturally
cleave thereunto. For the body being made apt, and rightly disposed does covet
through a natural propension, to be united with the soul; as in like sort the
soul desires to be conjoined to the body, which propension or inclination is
reduced into Act, when the Soul and the body (after the last disposition once
finished) are mutually and inwardly present together.

THE XXII. AND LAST REASON. CHAP. XXIII.
TO conclude this point touching the Souls immortality; it may be further
alleged, that the Souls Immortality is the foundation of all religion,
Justice, Probity, Innocence, and sanctity. Now if this groundworke be false,
then is the whole sacred Scripture false and a mere fiction; then are the
Oracles of the Prophets false; false also is the doctrine and preaching of
Christ; false his miracles. Finally, false are all those things, which are
delivered by the Evangelists touching the resurrection of Christ, his
conuersing with the Apostles forty days after his resurrection, his
ascension, and the descending of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, and other
the faithful. And thus are all deceived, who have embraced the religion of
Christ; And therefore in vain have so many thousands Saints tamed, and brought
under their flesh, practiced justice, innocence, temperance, and all other
virtues, with indefatigable and incessant pains. In vain are all the
Sacraments of the Church, all the institutions and divine lauds and praises,
all Ecclesiastical Orders, all sacred assemblies, all labors of prelates and
Pastors, all doctrine of the ancient Fathers, and all manner of living among
Christians.

For all these things are bootlesse, and of no fruit or benefit, (as being
grounded upon a false foundation) if the Soul be extinguished with the body.
Finally all those men, have been extremely deceived, who at any time have been
excellent for sa^ctity of life, gift of prophecy, glory of miracles, or
heavenly wisdom; and on the contrary part, the truth of this point has been
revealed only to profane, wicked and sesuall Epicures, all which things are
most repugnant even to the light of Reason.

Thus far now (to draw toward an end) have we alleged reasons and arguments,
by the which, the Immortality of the soul is established and confirmed, which
if they be seriously weighed, do so convince the judgment, as that they take
away al ambiguity and doubt of this point. Now to these we will adioyne a
testimony or two of a heathen. Therefore Seneca in his 102. Epistle thus
writes. Magna and generosares est humanus animus etc. The Soul of man is a
great and generous thing; It suffers it self to be limited with no bounds,
but such as are common with God. Seneca here means, because the Soul
exte^deth it self to all place and time. Now this author further explicateth
this point in these words: Primum, humilem non accipit patriam etc. First the
Soul admits not to it self any obscure or mean Country, whether it be
Ephesus or Alexandria, or any other one place, though more populous, and better
furnished with buildings and edifices: but its Country is all that, which is
contained within the compass of this universe; yea all this conuexity, within
the which the Air, which divides all celestial things from humane and
earthly, is comprehended; within which so many Numina or powers (still ready to
perform their operations) are included. Now here the word Numina, Seneca
understands the stars, and perhaps also the Intelligences or spirits. And
thus far of the place or Country of the Soul. Next touching the age or time of
it, he thus writes, Deinde arctam aetatem etc. Furthermore the Soul suffers
not any small time to be allotted to it, for it thus says. All years are
mine: No age is excluded from high Wits, and each time lies open to my
contemplation. When that shall come, which shall dissolve this mixture of what
is divine, and what humane, then will I leave the body, where I did find it;
and I will restore my self to the Gods. Neither now am I altogether estranged
from them, though I be here detained with a heavy and earthly matter. By
means of these delays of this mortal age, preparation is made for a better,
and longer life. Even as our mothers womb, contains us nine months, and
prepares us, not for it self, but for that place, whither it sends us; that
so we may be fit to breath, and to live here in sight: So by the help of this
time (which indureth from our infancy to old age) we are made ripe and ready
for another birth. Another beginning expects us, and another state of things.
As yet we cannot enjoy heaven, but (as it were) a far off; therefore behold
that appointed day without fear or dismayednes; since it is not the last to
the Soul, but to the body. What thing soever does here compass us, all is to
be esteemed, but as an unprofitable carriage or burden in an Inn; for we are to
depart. Nature leaving this world, is deprived of all things, as well as
entering into it. It is not lawful for thee to carry more out of the world,
then thou did bring in. Yea a great part of that, which co^duced to our life,
is to be left off. The skin, wherewith thou art covered, as with thy next
garment, shall be taken away, the flesh and blood shall be taken away, the bones
and sinews (which are the strong things of the weaker parts) shall be taken away.
That day, which thou fear as the last, is the birth day of Eternity. Cast of
thy burden. Why delayest thou, as if thou had not before come out of that
body, wherein thou didestlye? Thou now pawsest and struglest against it, and
yet even at the first thou was brought out, with the like pains, and labor of
thy mother. Thou cryest and bewaylest, and yet to cry is most peculiar to a
body newly borne* And the^ Seneca thus further enlarges himself. Quid ista
sic diligis etc.

Why do thou so love these terrene and earthly things, as if they were thine
own? Thou art covered and overwhelmed with these. The day will come, which
shall reveal or lay thee open, and which shall free thee from the company of a
filthy and smelling belly. The secrets and mysteries of nature shall be once made
evident unto thee, this darkness shall be dispelled, and thou shall be encompassed
on each side with a shining light. Imagine, how great that fulgour shall be, when
so many stars do mingle their lights together. No shadow shall hinder this
brightness. Every part of heaven shall equally shine. The day and night are but
alternations and enterchanges of the lowest part of the air. Then shall thou
say, that before thou liuedst in darkness, I mean, when thou shall at once
behold all the brightness and splendor together, which thou now darkly see by
the narrow help of thy eyes; and yet do admire it being so far of from
thee: what shall that divine light seem to thee, when thou shall se it in its
own native place? This cogitation admits no base, vile, or inhumane thing
in the mind. But in lieu thereof it says, that the Gods are witnesses of all
things; it commands us, that we seek to be approved and accepted by the
Gods; and teaches us, that they provide and prepare Eternity for us. Thus
far Seneca of this point: in which discourse he has delivered many excellent
things as concerning the Soul of man. First, that the Soul is like unto God;
since it extends it self to all places, and to Eternity. Secondly, that when
it leaves the body, it is ranged amongst Gods and spirits. Thirdly, that we
here stay upon the earth, as but in the way of our journey; heaven it self
being our Country. And that al things in this world, which are external or
independe^t of the soul, are to be reputed in that degree, as burdens or
provisions are, which serve only the more conveniently to finish our iourneys.
Fourthly, that as an Infant is prepared in nine months for to live in this
world; so ought we (during all the time we live here) to learn to dispose our
selves for the entertaining of the immortal life of the world to come. Fifthly,
that the last day of our mortal life is the beginning of Eternity. Sixthly,
that the Soul being departed from the body, is then clearly to see the
mysteries of nature, and a divine light and splendor. Seauenthly and lastly,
that Eternity is ever to be set before eyes; as that we may make our selves apt
to enjoy it, and that we ought to lead our life in such sort as it may be
approved of God, who is the beholder of al things. The like matter hereto we
may find in Plato, Plotinus, Cicero, Epictetus, and other heathen writers. But
now it next follows in Method, that we produce such arguments (and after
dissolve and answer them) as may seem to impugn the former verity of the
Souls Immortality.

THE ARGVMENTS, OBJECTED* against the Immortality of the Soul; and their
Solutions, or Answers. CAAP. XXIV.
THE first may be this. That Soul, The 1. Argument
all whose operation and function depends upon a corporal Organ, or instrument,
cannot consist separated from the body; But the reasonable Soul of man is
such: Therefore the reasonable soul cannot consist separated from the body.
And thus is this first argument contracted. I answer, and distinguish of the
Mayor, or first Proposition.

Two ways then may the operation of the Soul depend of a corporal or bodily
organ or instrument. First by it self and immediately. Secondly accidentally
and mediatly. If the operation and working of the Soul depend of the body in
the first manner, then is it evident, that such an operation cannot be
performed without the help and assistance of the body; and consequently, that,
that Soul (whose working depends after this sort) cannot exist separated
from the body. And such is the soul of beasts. And so in this sense the Mayor
Proposition is true. But if the operation of the soul depend of a corporal
instrument after the second manner, then is the foresaid Proposition false. And
the reason hereof is, because what agrees to another thing per accidens (as
the phraze is) and per aliud, that is accidentally, casually, and in regard
only of a third thing, may be taken away. Therefore, seeing the function of the
understanding (which is an essential faculty of the reasonable soul) does not
depend of the body, by it self, necessarily and immediately, but only
accidentally and mediatly; there is no hinderance, but that it may be performed
without the body. Now that the function or operation of the understanding does
not depend of the body by it self and immediately, may be proved by many
reasons. And first, the function of the understanding chiefly consists in
judging; but to judge of a thing the phantasy (which is a corporeal internal
sense) or any Idea, or image framed therein, is not in any sort furthering or
co^ducing, but rather an impediment thereto; as giving an occasion oftentimes of
erring. For the understanding ought not to follow the imagination and conceit
of the phantasy, neither ought it in judging to be guided thereby; but rather
it is to correct the phantasy, that it self may by this means arryue unto the
truth. Now if the force of the understanding be so great, that it is able to
correct the errors and mistakings of the phantasy, and to attain unto the
clear truth of things (which transgresses the nature or working of the
phantasy) then may we from hence conclude, that the working of the
understanding does not immediately, or in its own nature depend of the
phantasy. Secondly, the former point is further proved, because we chiefly
covet to know things spiritual; of which things the phantasy is in no sort
capable.

Thirdly, because the knowledge of truth is not reckoned among the goods of the
body, but of the mind only; and therefore is to be desired for the perfection
only of the mind. Fourthly, because devout and holy men are sometimes elevated
in an Extasis to that spiritual contemplation, which cannot be expressed in
words; and consequently not to be represented by the imagination or phantasy;
as may be gathered out of the Apostle in his second Epistle to the Corinthians
c. 12. But because I strive to be short, therefore, I omit here to iterate
diverse things above set down, touching the force of understanding and desiring.

But some here may demand: How the^ comes it to pass, that we cannot
understand any thing, except we forge a certain image of it in the phantasy?
And from whence proceeds this necessity? To which I answer, that this
proceeds from the present state of the soul; to wit, because the soul is the
form of the body, actually informing and giving life to it. For as during all that time, that the soul remains in the body, it (after a certain manner)
puts upon the state and nature of the body, and becomes in a sort gross
and dull, that thereby it may better acco^modatate it self to the body. So all
things, which then it conceaueth, it conceaueth and apprehe^deth under a
certain corporal show and form. For it is an axiom in Philosophy, that the
manner of working follows the manner of existence. But when the soul shall be
separated from the body, and shall be gathered (as it were) into it self and
subsist by it self; then shall it enjoy another degree or kind of
understanding; neither shall it have any necessity of framing the Idea's and
images of things in the phantasy; no otherwise then the Intelligences have,
which we call Angels. To conclude, as long as the Soul is in the body, it
cannot rightly exercise the understanding and reason, except it have the
external senses loose, and it liberty; as is evident even from those dreams,
which we have in sleep. Now the cause hereof is not, that the function of the
senses do advantage the function of the understanding, or that this does depend
of that other; but because the faculty of the understanding, is the supreme and
most excellent faculty of the soul. Whereupon it rises, that for the perfect
exercise of the understanding, it is requisite, that the soul be altogether
free and unbounded; that so it may bend and bestow all the force and power of
its essence upon such an operation. And of this point a sign is, that when we
vehemently apply our mind to understand, and apprehend any thing, we scarcely
observe and note such things, as do occur our sense; the force of the soul
busiyng it self in its most supreme and most noble action of all. Ad hereto,
that there is such a connexio^, association, and sympathy of the powers of the
soul in the body, as that the soul cannot exercise the highest and most
worthy of the^, if at the same present it does alienate and estrange it self
from the lowest. Here I mean of the reciprocal affinity of these powers only,
which belong to knowledge.

The second argument. If the soul, after, The 2* Argument
it is disuested of the body, be immortal, then shall it either continually
remain separated from the body, or else sometime be restored to it. But it
seems, that neither of these can be warranted with reason. Not the first,
because it so should continue in a state, which is violent and adverse to
nature; for seeing the soul of man is the lowest and meanest of all spiritual
substances; it requires to be in the body, as the form of it; and therefore
it has a natural propension to be united with the body; therefore to be
separated from the body, and to exist and continue separatly, is contrary to
its natural inclination, and in some sort violent. But Violence and perpetuity
are incompatible. Not the later (I mean that sometime after its separation the
soul is to be restored and reunited with the body) because from hence it would
follow, that the resurrection of the body should be natural, and due to the
natural course of things, which point is not to be granted; both because it is
a high mystery of Christian faith, as also in that all ancient Heathen
Philosophers were utterly ignorant of this doctrine of the resurrection of
bodies.

I answer: first that Origin and the Platonicks utterly denied the reasonable
soul to be the form of the body, who placed the same in the body, not as a
form in its natural subject for the commodity, and benefit of the subject;
but as one, that is guilty, and detained in prison for a revenge of its former
errors. Whereupon they taught, that one substance (to wit Man) was not
properly compounded of the soul and the body; but they auerred, that only the
soul was man, and the body the prison; and therefore they said, that every body
was to be avoided. But for confutation of this errou^ it is manifest, that it
is repugnant to reason. For if the soul be with-houlde in the body as in a
prison, why then does it so much fear and avoid death? Or why is it so
grievous to the soul to be disioyned and separated from the body? Why is it
not painful to the soul to stay in a body so stored with filth and impurity?
As we see it is most displeasing to a man of worth, and accustomed to places of
note and regard, to be kept in a sordid and obscure dungeon. Why does it so
much affect the commodities and pleasures of the body, and is so greatly
delighted therewith? Why at the hurt and loss of the body, is it so infinitely
afflicted and molested, since otherwise it has just reason to rejoice at these
corporal endomages, no otherwise, then captives and imprisoned persons, who are
glad to see their chains fall asunder, and their prison laid level with the
ground? Therefore seeing the reasonabie soul is no less se^sible of joy or
grief, touching the pleasures or adversities of the body, then the souls of
beasts are; it is evident, that the reasonable soul is the natural form of
man's body, and that it does affect and covet to be united with it. Yet because
it is not so immersed in the body as that it ought to be extinguished with it,
but is able (through the benefit of its own sub^ilty and spiritual substance)
to subsist by it self; Hence then it rises, that it predominateth over the
affections of the body, contemning them at its pleasure; so as it yealdeth (if
it self will) neither to pleasure, nor grief, nor death it self; which
privilege is not found in irrationable creatures.

This opinion then being rejected, we affirm that the soul is not to continue
separated, but sometimes to be ^eunited to the body; because it was not first
ordained to be an entyre and complete substance (as an Angel is) but to be
only a part of a substance, to wit the form, and consequently an imperfect and
incomplete substance. Whereupon it is needful, that we admit the resurrection
of bodies. And yet we cannot term this to be natural, for although the
forming of the body, and the union of the soul with the body be a natural
thing, and due to the natural state and perfection of the soul; yet this
cannot be accomplished by natural causes, but only by divine power; and
therefore it is to be called supernaturalis; even as giving sight to the blind
is so reputed, or restoring of decayed and feeble parts of the body, and the
curing of incurable diseases.

Neither ought it to seem strange, that the soul of man cannot obtain for
ever its natural perfection, without the power of God, and his extraordinary
assistance; the reason here of being in that it is capable of a double, and (as
it were) of a contrary nature; to wit spiritual and corporal, mortal and
immortal. Therefore the Soul requires the body (once lost) to be restored to
it; but to be restored so firmly and strongly, as that it is never more to be
lost, is supernatural, since otherwise there ought to be infinite times a
resurrection of bodies.

The Philosophers were ignorant of this resurrection, either because they
thought the soul not to be the natural form of the body, but a complete
substance, or else, in that they thought it less inconuenyent to teach, that
the soul remained after death perpetually separated, then to introduce and
bring in (as a new doctrine) the resurrection of the body. For though it be
natural to the soul to be in the body, yet in that respect, only, as it is
separated from it, it feels no grief, but rather it is freed thereby from all
the inconveniences and disco^modities of this life, and obtains a more high
and more worthy degree, and becomes more near to divine and celestial
substances. Wherefore I do not think, that the soul (being separated) does of
it self much covet to be reunited with the body; though by the force and
weight of nature, it has a propension thereto; And the reason her of is,
because those goods and privileges it possesses, as it is separated, are more
to be esteemed, then those are, which it enjoys in the body.

Neither is it true, that this separation is violent to the soul; for although
the want of this union be in some sort violent to it, to wit by way of
negation; as it is a privation of that, to which the very essence of the soul
does efficaciously propend and inclyne, yet that liberty, which it then
enjoys, and that vigor of the Soul and manner of understanding is not in
any sort violent, but most agreeable to its nature, as it is in state of
separation.

The third Argument. The structure of The 3. Argument
the body may seem to intimate and imply the mortality of the soul; for it is
almost wholly framed for the temporal uses of this mortal life; to wit that the
body may be maintained and preserved, and nature propagated and continued.

Thus the teeth and stomach are ordained to chew and concoct meat; the
intestines and bowels to avoid the superfluous and excrementall matter; the
liver to confect blood; the gall to receive the sharper and more bitter parts
of the nutriment; the splen or milt to contain the more gross blood; the
reins to part and diuyde the serasus, and wheish matter of the nourishment
from the blood; the bladder to receive and send out this wheish matter; the
instruments of the sex to procreatio^. But after this life, there shall be no
need either of the use of meats or of procreation: therefore there ought not to
be these members, which are ordained to those ends; and consequently there
ought not to be the soul, which requires such members, and a body so framed
and compacted. For those members are to be accounted in vain and superfluous,
of which there never shall be any use.

I answer; This argument directly and immediately oppugneth the resurrection,
and secundarily and by way of consequence, the immortality of the soul. For
the composition and structure of man's body proves, that in it self, and by
its own nature, it is mortal; but it does not prove the soul to be in like
sort mortal. But although the body be disolued and do perish, yet it is a
facill and easy matter for God to frame it again in its due time, and to
reinfuse the soul into it, and so to cause, that the body shall never after be
dissolved: for as Plato in his Timaeo, teaches; Quod natura sua solubile est
etc. What in its own nature stands subject to dissolution, and obnoxious unto
death, the same by the commandment and will of God may be made immortal, so
as it shall never dye. Certainly those functions of the members, which belong
to nourishment of the body, and to generation shall cease, notwithstanding it
follows not, that those members shall be superfluous; because they shall serve
to the natural constitution of the body, as parts necessary to its perfection
and beauty: for this is their chief and principal use, to wit, to conduce to
the making of a perfect and complete body, and such, as is fitting to the
condition and state of the soul.

Now these functions are only a secondary end, because they are ordained only
for the time, and serve only to repair the ruins of mortal body, the
natural heat feeding upon, and consuming the substance of the flesh: whereupon
it follows, that as the augmentation or increase of the bodies greatness
cease, when it once has attained its just stature; Even so shall nutrition
or nourishment of the body cease, and the functions belonging thereto, when the
body by a divine hand and power shall become immortal. For seeing these
functions are o^ the lowest degree, as agreeing to the soul according to its
meanest faculty and part, wherein it participateth with plants, and is herein
attended with much dross, filth, and rottennes, it was not convenient, that
they should be perpetual, but that in due time they should be taken away, God
reducing the body into a better form; Notwithstanding the function of the
senses, because they are made after a spiritual manner without corruption,
they shall be perpetual: In like sort the function of the voice and speech
shall be perpetual, to the which those members shall after their manner either
nearly or remotely be serviceable; and therefore in this respect also they
shall not be in vain and superfluous.

The fourth argument may be taken from those words, which Pliny in his seventh
The Argument of Pliny.
book of his history, c. 55. sets down, though they be of small force and
validity. First then he to this purpose says, Omnibus a suprema die etc. The
same happens to all things after their last day, which was at their
beginning. Neither after death is there more sense to the body or soul, then
there was before its birth. I answer and say, that that is here assumed,
which is first to be proved, and therefore it is denied with the same
facility, wherewith it was affirmed. And that this saying of his is false, it is
proved from the whole school of the Platonicks, and the Pithagoreans. For
there is no necessity, why that, which once begun, should sometimes cease,
especialle if it be a simple and uncompounded substance, as the soul and every
spiritual nature is. But indeed it is otherwise of corporal things consisting
of the Elements, of whom only that sentence is verifyed; Omne genitum potest
corrumpi: Every thing that is made, may be corrupted. Certainly materia prima
(because it is simple and uncompounded) though it had a beginning, yet can it
not be corrupted. The same also (according to the doctrine of the Platonicks)
is to be said of the celestial Orbs. Therefore although there was no sense of
the soul before its creation, yet follows it not, that therefore after death
it shall have no sense. And the reason hereof is, because though the birth (as
it were) of the soul be joined with the birth of the body, and thereupon the
soul did exist before the birth of the body; notwithstanding the destruction
of the soul does not follow the destruction of the body, for death is not a
destruction or extinguishme^t of them both, but only a separation of the body
from the soul.

In the next place Pliny demands, Cur corpus etc. why the body follows and
coueteth the soul? I answer, that no body follows the soul departing from
hence, because the soul (as being a naked and simple substance) can consist
without the body. Then says he, Vbi cogitatio illi? From whence has the soul
separated its cogitation or discourse? The soul being in state of separation,
has no need of a brain or a body, that it may think, imagine, and discourse,
(even as we grant that God and spiritual substances have not those Organs)
because the force of understanding, by how much it is more remote and distant
from the body, by so much it is more excellent. Next asks Pliny; Quomodo
visus and auditus? From whence has the soul separated seeing and hearing?
Whereto it is replied, that the soul needs not the function and operation of
the outward senses seeing, that it perceaueth all things in its mind. For the
the mind then does not only serve to cogitate, or think, or to know things
abstractiuely; but also to behold and apprehend all things, which in this life
we apprehend with our external senses; even as Pliny himself speaks of God;
Quisquis est Deus etc. Whosoever God is, he is all sense, all sight, all
hearing, all soul, all understanding, all himself.

In like sort we say of the soul being separated, that it is all sense, all
sight, all hearing, all understanding, all vigor and life. Again he
questioneth; Quid agit? qui vsus eius? What does the soul separated? Or what
use is there of it? Of whom by retortio^ I demand, what do other spirits and
incorporeall substances? As if it were nothing to contemplate, praise, and love
God, and to enjoy the fellowship of celestial spirits. Certainly the cecity
and blindness of this man is wonderful, who may be thought not to have
acknowledged the being of any spirits. Therefore how much more wisely and
deliberatly did the Platonicks, and the Peripateticks teach, who placed ma^s
chief felicity in conte^plating of the first beginning and cause of all
things? Pliny proceeds yet further: Quid sine sensibus bonum? What can be
good, which is not to be apprehended by the senses? I say to acknowledge no
good of the soul without the senses is incident to swyne and beasts, not to
Philosophers: next, Quae deinde seeds? What seat or mansion for the souls
separated? The answer is expedite and ready; to wit the mansion for the pious
and virtuous souls in heaven, for the wicked Hell. And this opinion all
Antiquity ever did hold. Next he asks: Quanta multitud^ etc. how great a
multitude is there of souls, as of shadows for so many ages? To which is to
be answered, that the multitude of souls is as great, as there is number of
men, which have lived from the beginning of the world unto this day. For seeing
the world took a beginning, the number of the souls is not infinite, but it
is comprehended within a certain number, and that not exceedingly great: for
it were not very difficult to show, that this number exceeds not two or three
Myriades of millions. Now the souls are ignorantly called by Pliny Vmbrae,
Shadows, seeing that they are like unto light, and the body is to be resembled
rather to a shadow, as the Platonicks were accustomed to say. After this Pliny
thus expostulateth: Quae dementia etc. What folly is it to maintain, that
life is iterated, and begun again by means of death? But herein (as in all
the rest) he is deceived; for the life of the soul is not iterated after the
death of the body; but the body dying, it continues and perseuereth. After he
further enquireth: Quae genitis quies etc. What rest can ever be, if the sense
and vigor of the soul remains aloof of in so high a place? To which is to
be answered that not only rest, quiet and fredome from the troubles and
miseries of this life belongs to the souls separated, but also wonderful
pleasures and joy, if they have here lived well; but misery, if they have spent
their time in wickedness without final repentance. And this the Platonicks also
acknowledge. In the next place he thus further discourses, saying, that, the
fear of what is to succeed after this life, does lessen the pleasures of this
life. Thus we here see, that this is the chief reason, why wicked men are
loath to believe the immortality of the soul, to wit, because this their
belief confounds all their pleasures, and wounds their mynds with a
continual fear of what is after to come. For being conscious and guilty to
themselves of their own impiety, and of what they justly do deserne, therefore
they wish that their soul might die with their body, since they cannot expect
with reason a greater benefit. For so they should be free from misery and
torments, which hang over their heads. And because they earnestly desire this,
they are easily induced to believe it to come to pass. Now the extinguishing
of the soul is not the chief good of nature, (as Pliny thinks) but the
chief evil rather of nature, since every thing chieffly auoydeth its own
destruction, as losing al it goodness in Nature thereby. For how can that be
accounted the chief good of nature, by the which all justice is overthrown,
all reward and remuneration is taken away from virtue, and all chastisement
from vice? For though it were for the good of the wicked, that the soul were
mortal, yet it were most injurious to the virtuous, and hurtful to the
public good of the universe, no otherwise then it would be inconvenient to the
good of a temporal commonwealth, if no rewards should be propounded for virtue,
nor revenge for exorbitancy and transgression of the laws. Certainly the
cogitation of death, and the souls immortality increases the anxiety and
grief of the wicked; since they do not only complain for the death of the
body (which depriueth them of all pleasure of this life) but also (and this
with far greater vehemence) for the punishments, which after the death of the
body, they are persuaded (through a secret feeling of nature) their souls are
to suffer. But now on the contrary part, the former cogitation does increase
the joy and comfort of the virtuous; seeing they not only rejoice at the death
of the body (by means whereof they are discharged of all the afflictions of the
world) but also (and this in far greater measure) at the certain expectation
of that felicity and happiness, wherewith after their death they shall be
replenished.

Now from all this heretofore delivered and set down it is evident, that the
objections and reasons of Pliny are most weak and frivolous; as proceeding
rather from an inueterated hate and auersion of the contrary doctrine, then
from any force and ground of reason.

But here one perhaps may reply and say; Be it so, that the soul is immortal,
notwithstanding it may so be, that after this life it shall suffer no evil,
but enjoy great liberty, busiyng it self in the contemplatio^ of things. Or if
it shall suffer any punishment, yet this sufferance shall not be perpetual,
but longer or shorter, according to the proportion and nature of its offenses
committed in this world: and that greater sins shall be expiated with a more
long punishment, or at least with a more grievous; and lesser with a shorter or
more gentle chastiseme^t. Indeed I grant the judgment of the Stoic to have
been, that the soul after this life suffered no evil, but that instantly
after death, it returned to some one appointed star or other; and there
remained either until the general exustion and burning of the world, if it
were virtuous and wise; The vain judgment of the Stoics touching the Soul.
or else only for a short time, if it were wicked and foolish; which period
being once ended the soul was to be turned into the Element, from whence it
was taken. But these assertions are frivolous, and not warranted with any
reason; for granting that souls do live after this life, what then is more
easy to be believed, then that they receive either rewards or pains, according
to their different comporttments in this world? Since otherwise where should
the Prouidance of God be? Or where Justice? But of this point we have
abundantly discoursed above. Furthermore, if Souls for a certain time can
subsist without a body, why can they not for ever continue so? For seeing they
are simple and uncompounded substances, they cannot in process of time grow
old, or loose their strength and vigor (as bodies compounded of Elements do.)
Now if they can (but for one instant) exist and live without a body, the^ can
they for all eternity persevere in that state, as being not subject to any
extinguishment or destruction, as the whole school of the Peripatetiks, and
Aristotle himself do teach. For there is nothing, which can destroy or corrupt
a simple substance, subsisting by it self. And therefore it is houlden, that
Materia (as being a simple substance, and inhering in no other thing, as in a
subject) is incorruptible, and inexterminable.

Now touching that, which is spoken of the burning of souls, in that sense, as
if they could be dissolved and vanish away into air, by means of fire (as
bodies) is no less absurd. For the soul is not a body, or an oyle-substance,
which can be set on fire; but it is a spirit more thin, pure, and light, then
either air or fire. But what is dissolved with fire, ought to be corporeal,
and more gross and corpulent then the fire it self, or that, into the which
it is dissolved. It may be further added hereto that the foundation of the
Stoics, whereupon they grounded themselves, that souls were to suffer no evil
after this life (notwithstanding their great sins and enormities here Vid.
Epictetus dissert. 1. c. 14. Seneca epist. 92. Cicero Tusc. 5.
committed) was, because they were persuaded, that our souls were certain
particles or relics of a divinity. And this divinity they did hold to be anima
mundi, the soul of the world, from which soul they further taught (as being
the common and universal soul of al things) that the particular souls of
living Creatures, and chiefly the souls of men, were decerpted and taken; the
which being after freed of their corporeal bonds and chains, were to return
to that principle, from whence they are deryued; meaning to that universal
soul of the world, with the which they finally close themselves. All which
assertio^s are in their own nature so absurd, as that they need not any
painful refutatio^. For if the souls be parcels of God, how can they be
dissolved with fire? Or finally how ca^ they be depraved with so many
facinorous crimes and impieties? Yea it would from hence follow, that Divinity
it self should consist (as bodies do) of parts, and should be obnoxious to all
evils and inconveniences whatsoever. Therefore this vain imagination of the
Stoics is to be rejected, which heretofore has been well refelled by Tully.

Origin did indeed confess, that souls were immortal, and that they were
never to lose their own proper kind and nature; notwithstanding he taught,
that the punishments of them were not sempiternall, but were to take an end
after certain ages. The same he in like sort affirmed of the pains and
torments of the Devils. But this error of Origin (which he borrowed of the
Platonicks) was further accompanied with many other errors.

1. First that all Souls, Devils, and Angels were of the same nature, and
consequently, that souls were as free from all corporal commere, as Angels
were.

2. That Souls, before they were adjoined to the body did sin, and for guilt
of such their sins, were tied to bodies, and enclosed in them as in prisons.

3. That souls were coupled with bodies in a certain prescribed order; As
first with more subtle bodies; then if they continued sinning, with grosser
bodies; and lastly with terrene and earthly bodies: and further Origin taught
that these several degrees of these souls desce^ding into bodies were
represented by the ladder, which appeared to Jacob in his sleep Genesis 24.

4. That all souls, as also the Devils, should after certain ages be set at
liberty, and restored to an Angelical light and sple^dour; to wit, when they
had fully expiated their sins with condign punishments.

5. That this vicissitude and entercha^ge of felicity and misery should be
sempiternal* and for ever in reasonable creatures: so as the same souls should
infinite times be both blessed and miserable; for after they had continued in
heaven for many ages blessed and happy, then (as being again satiated and
cloyed with the fruition of divine things) they should contaminate and defyle
themselves with sin; for the which they were again to be detruded into
bodies, in the which if they lived wickedly, they were to be cast into the
pains of hell, which being for a time suffered, they were to be restored unto
Heaven. This condition and state Origin imposed upon every reasonable creature,
by what name soever it was called, whether Angels, Principalities, Powers,
Dominations, Devils, or Souls. See of this point S. Jerome in his Epistle ad
Pa^mach^um against the Errors of John of Jerusalem, and Augustine l. de
h^resibus c. 43.

But Origin extremely doteth in these things.

1. As first, in affirming, that all spiritual The Errors of Origin
substances are of one nature and condition. 2. That Souls are not the forms
of their bodies; but separated substa^ces, which are enclosed in the bodies, as
in certain prisons. 3. That all souls were created from the beginning of the
world. 4. That blessed spirits could have a fastidious and cloyed conceit of
divine contemplation, and that they could sin. 5. That for such their sins
they were sent into bodies, there (for the time) to be detayned, as in prisons.
6. That the torments of the Devils and of all souls are once to be expired and
ended. 7. That all the damned are at length to be saved. 8. Finally, that this
Circle, by the which the Soul goes from salvation to sin, from sin into
the body, from the body to damnation, from damnation to salvation, is
perpetual, and continues for ever.
Al which dreams of Origin might be refuted by many conuincing and
irrefragable reasons; but this is impertinent to our purpose, and would be over
tedious to perform. Only it shall suffice at this present to demonstrate out of
holy Scripture, that the pains of the wicked and damned are to be most
grievous, and never to receive a cessation and end.

Of the Punishments of the life to come, out of the holy Scripture. CHAP. XXV.
ALTHOUGH it be most sorting to natural reason, that Gods divine Providence,
should allot after this life to every one a just retribution according to the
different comportment of each man in this world; Notwithstanding what this
reward shall be (whether it be conferred upon the good or the bad) and of what
continuance, neither can man's reason nor the disquisitio^ and search of the
best Philosophers give any satisfying answer hereto. The cause of which
inexplicable difficulty is, partly in that it depends of the mere free
decree of God; and partly because the nature of sin (and consequently the
puuishment due to it) is not made sufficiently evident and perspicuous by
natural reason. Therefore to the end we may have some infallible certainty
herein* we are to recurre to the divine Oracles of Gods written word, in the
which we are able to see what the holy Ghost by his Prophets and other pious
men, have pronounced of this point; and especially of the pains of the wicked,
whereof we now entreat.

1. The first testimony then may be taken out of Deuteronomy c. 23. in that
most admirable and prophetical Canticle or song of Moses. Ignis succensus est
etc. Fire is kindled in my wrath, and shall burn unto the bottom of hell, and
shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundation of
the mountains. In which words five things are to be considered. First, that
the fire (with the which sinners shall be punished) is already kindled; both
because the fire of hell is prepared from the beginning, as our Lord
insinuates in Matthew. 25. and the like is in Esaias 30. as also in that though
that fire with the which the world shall be consumed be not already enkindled,
yet it now existeth in Gods most certain prescience and preordinance. For what
is certain to come by the force of Gods decree, is said after a prophetical
manner now to exist, or to be done. Of this fire David the Prophet speaks
Psalm. 50. Ignis in conspectu etc. A fire shall devour before him, and a
mighty tempest shall be moved round about him: as also Psalm 97. Ignis ante
ipsum etc. there shall go a fire before him, and burn up his enemies round
about. Both which places are interpreted of the fire of the last judgment.
Secondly in the foresaid words of Moses we are to note, that this fire is
kindled in the wrath of God that is, his will and firm resolution of punishing
the wicked: and this not after an accustomed fashion, but after a horrible and
unheard manner, and such as fury is wont to suggest and invent. For the anger
and wrath of God are not passions in him, (as they are in us) but a peaceable
and quiet will in him governed with reason, notwithstanding it is most severe,
efficacious, and most powerful inflicting eternal punishments. Seeing then
that the effect of God herein does equal, and indeed transcend all fury, it
may therefore most deservedly be called fury, wrath, and indignation. Thirdly,
that this fire is to burn unto the bottom of hell; meaning hereby, that that
fire shall not only here on earth burn the wicked, when God shall judge the
world, but also in hell, and this for all Eternity. Fourthly, that this fire
shall consume the earth (that is the whole superficies of the earth) and what
proceeds from the earth, as trees wood* herbs, and all works of man now
extant, as Houses, Cittyes, the proud Palaces of Princes, Towers, Munitions,
and all riches contained in them. All these things shall be consumed with that
fire, and turned into ashes, as S. Peter (whose testimony hereafter we will set
down) plainly witnesses.

Fifthly and lastly, that the foresaid fire (being the minister of Gods
indignation and revenge) shall not only wast the upper and exterior parts of
the earth, and what it shall find thereupon; but also shall penetrate unto the
bowels of the earth; so as it shall consume the very bottom of the highest
mountains. Whereupon it follows that all metals, precious stones, and all
other riches of the earth (with the pride whereof the world now vaunteth and
insulteth so much) shall be destroyed by the same fire; Since all these for the
most partlye in the lowest part of the mountains, and in the bowels of the
earth. Thus nothing shall be found of that solidity, as to be able to resist the
rage and fury of this fire. Yea all such bodies (compounded of Elements) which
by a general name are called by the Philosophers Mixta, shall in a short time
be dissolved with the force of the said fire, and shall be reduced to their first
principles. This is insinuated in the 97. Psalm. which entreats of the
Judgment to come, though in a prophetical manner, it speaks of things, as
though they were already performed; for thus the Prophet there says: Montes
sicut cera etc. The mountains melted like wax, at the presence of the Lord of
the whole earth. And in Judith likewise c. 16. we thus read. Montes a
fundamentis etc. The mountains leap up from their foundations etc. The rocks
melt at thy presence like wax. We know by experience, that through vehemence
of heat stones are dissolved, and ^u^ne through the plains of the fields, like
to a fiery torrent* Now all these effects, which are wrought by this fire, are
shows and forerunners of the horrible and interminable punishment of the
wicked.

2. The second testimony is taken out of Judith 16. Dabit ignem etc. The Lord
shall se^d fire and worms upon their flesh, that they may feel, and be burnt
for ever. In which words we find expressly, that the punishments of the wicked
shall be for Eternity. The like place hereto is that of Ecclesiasticus c. 7.
Memento irae etc. Remember that vengeance will not slack. Humble thy mind
greatly; for the vengeance of the wicked is fire and worms. But to return to
the former text of Judith, The Lord shall send fire upon their flesh. This is
said, because the very bodies of the wicked shall instantly after the
resurrection be punished with fire, and shall so burn like wood, as that they
shall not need any external matter to nourish the same although this also
shall not be wanting; both which two things shall hereafter be explicated out
of other passages of Scripture. But to proceed to the words following of the
foresaid text And worms etc. I do not think that these worms shall be
corporal, so as they shall hurt the flesh of the damned with their teeth
(though some grave Authors may seem to hold the contrary) for to what end
shall it be needful to make such base and vile creatures immortal by force of
a new miracle, and to live in a most raging fire, for the punishing of men,
seeing the bytings of any beast whatsoever in comparison of the pains of that
fire, are to be esteemed, but as sports and of no moment? I here omit, that the
damned by reason of their fury and impatiency shall wound with their teeth both
themselves, and their fellows. Therefore by the name of worms in this place
may be understood those very small sparks and flames of fire, which in a
thousand places break out of the flesh of the damned like unto little worms;
or else the worm of Conscience may be signified thereby, whose most bitter
biting and gnawing does in hell afflict even the body. And ^ that this
construction The worm of Conscience.
may the rather be admitted, it is to be known, that two several cogitatio^s
do daily present themselves to the minds of the damned; to wit, not only that
through their sins they are deprived of eternal glory, the which they might
with small labor and pains have purchased; but also that they are mancipated
and bound to everlasting torments, which easily (whiles they lived) they might
have avoided. Now from hence is engendered a double grief, which with extreme
bitterness gnaweth and byteth (like a worm) the heart of those miserable souls.

And these former cogitations and afflictions of spirit are most stinging
worms* whose bytings are the chiefest torments of the damned. For the
apprehension of so incomprehensible a good lost, and so infinite and
insufferable a punishment to be endured (and both these for all eternity) more
afflicts the wicked, then the only pain of hell fire does.

This point may be confirmed in that out Lord in the Gospel, and the Prophet
Esaias Mark. 9. Esaias. 66.
in his book, do express the torments of the wicked by fire, and by the word
worm. If then the foresaid double cogitation, and the double grief proceeding
from thence be not understood, thereby, the^ the chief torment of the damned
may seem to be omitted, and not spoken of by either of the^.

3. The third is in Job. 21. Interrogate quemlibet etc. Ask them that go by
the way etc. For the wicked is kept unto the day of destruction, and he shall be
brought forth to the day of wrath. In these words holy Job insinuates, that
the doctrine concerning the punishment of the wicked after this life, was
generally known and made vulgar to others, besides the nation of the Jews,
eue^ in his own time, that is, long before the days of Moses; for Job is
supposed to be more ancyent then Moses. In like sort Job c. 20. thus further
says. Luet quae fecit etc. He shall pay for all things he has done, and yet
he shall not be consumed; he shall suffer according to the multitude of his
inventions. In which words is signified the eternity of the torments of the
wicked; for the damned person shall so suffer, that he shall never be consumed
and wasted away, but ever shall remain whole to suffer fresh torments. Again
in the same Chapter we read. Omnes tenebrae etc. All darkness shall be hid in
his secret places; the sire which is not blown (to wit by ma^s endeavor)
shall devour him; that which remains in his tabernacles shall be destroyed.

4. The fourth. Psalm. 11. Dominus interrogat etc. The Lord will ask (that is
he will try) the just and wicked; but the wicked, and him that loves iniquity,
does his soul hate. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire, and
brimstome, and stormy tempests; this is the portion of their cup. For the more
full explication of this text it is first to be observed, that a sinner (whiles
he loves sin) hates his own soul (as here is said) because he procures
to it an everlasting evil; for what hate can be greater then that, which
purchases to the hater so great a calamity* Therefore every sinner while he
seems most to love himself, (in doing all things which are grateful to his
lust, affections, and ambition) does then most hate himself, to wit, by falling
into the greatest evil that is, through an inordinate and intemperate love of
himself.

Upon the wicked he shall rain snares. These snares or nets are inextricable
and indissoluble links of misery and evil; for all future punishments shall
become snares, because they shall so firmly cleave to the wicked, as that by
no art, or means possible shall they be of force to free themselves of them
for the shortest time. By the word shall rain two things are insinuated. First,
that these evils shall come from a height, to wit from the decree and sentence
of a heavenly judge, as rain descends from heaven. Secondly, that with great
force and wonderful abundance they shall precipitatly rush and fall upon them:
fire, and brinstone, and stormy te^pests etc. to wit; their hereditary portion
which for ever they shall enjoy: Fire, with which their bodies shall burn;
Brimstone with which they on each side shall be enco^passed; And stormy tempests,
with the which the fire of hell, and the brimstone shall be blown. In the greek
text it is (...), that is, the spirit or force of a whirle wind. In which words
it may seem to be employed, that a most rugged wind shall be stirred up by divine
power, by means whereof the fire and those sulphurous lakes shall with a
horrible noise continually be blown. This kind of fragour and sound is sometimes
heard for the space of many days in burning mountains, when they se^d out
fire and such burning and sulphurous matter. Some Deuines do understand by the
former phraze stormy tempests, a divine Power, by the which hell fire shall be
enkindled and continued.

5. The fifth is in Psalm. 21. Pones eos etc. Thou shall make them like a fiery
Oven, in time of thine anger. The Lord shall destroy them in his wrath, and the
fire shall devour them. The meaning of which place is, that at that time when
the Lord shall show his anger, (that is, when he shall judge the world) he
ouerwhelme his enemies with a mighty fire; so as they shall burn, as if they
were in an Oven; and then after he shall detrude them in his wrath into hell,
where they shall be tormented with everlasting fire. S. Jerome translateth the
foresaid words, praecipitabit eos: he shall cast them down headlong, because
after the fire has once enco^passed them (the earth gaping wide) they shall be
precipitated and cast into the gulf of Hell. In the Hebrew, it is, deglutiet
eos, because the earth shall swallow sinners up.

The fire shall devour them. Yet not so, as their bodies shall perish and
decay; but that they shall be on every side so encompassed with fire, as that
they may seem to be absorpt and devoured with it.

6. The fixed. Psalm. 140 Cadent super eos carbones etc. Let coals fall upon
them, let him cast them into the fire, and into deep pits, that they rise not
again. In which words is signified, that not any momentary flame, but a solid
permane^t fire (such as is of burning coals) shall fall upon sinners, from the
high commandment of the supreme judge. This shall promiscuously happen to all
them at the last judgment, when through Gods appointment the fire, wherewith
the world shall burn, shall torment sinners. Let him cast the^ into the fire,
that is, first they shall here be punished with fire, and then after they
shall be cast into another fire, to wit, into Hell. Those words, and into deep
pits, that they rise not again, signify according to the Hebrew reading. That
after the wicked are here punished with fire, they shall be cast into that fire,
which is in the lowest ditches, to wit, into the infernal gulf, out of which
they shall never be able to rise.

7. The seventh. Psalm. 49. Laborabit in aeternum etc. He shall labor for
ever etc. that is, the sinner shall be punished for ever, and shall never be
extinguished, and consumed away. Again in the same psalm we thus read: Sicut
Oues etc. Like sheep they lie in hell; death deuoureth them: that is, sinners
by ^eards and flocks shall be shut up in the internal foldes, like weak sheep,
which cannot help themselves, and death shall be their shepherd, who shall feed
them with all bitterness, for so the word, feed, is to be taken, as appears
out of the Hebrew and Greek text. For in the Greek it is, (...), that is,
death shall govern them, as a shepherd. And the Hebrew signifies the like.
Behold here the shepherd and Prince which governs the damned. By the name
of death, is understood either the Devil (the author of death) or else it is a
Prosopopeia, or forging and assigning of a person unto death: And deservedly
shall they have death there, for their shepherd, who here refused life for
their shepherd, which was Christ. In the foresaid psalm, we also thus read.
Introibit etc. He shall enter into the generation of his fathers, and he shall
not live for ever. And Psalm 92. Quam magnificata etc. O Lord how glorious are
thy works, and thy thoughts are very deep. An unwise man knows it not, and
a fool does not understand it. When the wicked grow as the grass, and all
the workers of wickedness do flourish, then they shall be destroyed for ever. But
thou O Lord ^rt most high for evermore. For lo, thine enemies, O Lord, for lo
thine enemies shall perish: all the workers of iniquity shall be bestroyed etc.
Th^^ far in this place^; and certainly the books of the Psalms is full of
such comminations and threats of punishments after this life, and of most
severe sentences of future retribu^^ and recompensation according to eu^y man's
works and merits.

8. The eight. In the book of Ecclesiasticus c. 21. Stuppa collecta etc. The
congrega^^ of the wicked is like to tow wrapped together* their end is a flame
of fire to destroy them. T^^ way of sinners is made plain with stones, but ^^
the end thereof is hell, darkness, and pains. The sense of the firster verse,
is, that the whole multitude of the wicked shall be gathered together in one
bundle, and shall be like to tow, folded together, the which being thus made
shall burn eternally. For as a bundle of tow quickly takes flame, so the
multitude of sinners being gathered together shall with small labor be set on
fire. This shall be effected in that terrible and great day of the general
judgment, in the which all the chafe shall be heaped together to burn, and the
wheat gathered, to be laid up in our Lords garner, even as Christ himself has
foretold. Their end etc. in t^^ Math. 13.
greek, it is (...) that is, the last consummation and end, which the wicked
shall have; after the which nothing is further t^ be expected, because they
shall thus con^^^^e without end. Thus in this word it is ^^^muated, that the
whole multitude of the ^^^ked shall be fit for nothing else then eter^^^^y to
burn. The other verse (to wit, T^^ way of sinners is made plain etc.)
signisi^^^* that the way and co^rse of wicked me^ s^^^^es easy, commodious,
sweet, and like to away fairly paued; but it ends in a precipitious and
steepe-downe place, from whence who falls, falls suddenly into h^ll; where
there is nothing, but darkness and eternal punishments.

9. The ninth is out of the book of Wis^^^^e c. 5. Where the lamentation of
the da^n^d is descrybed, the which they use in hell, when they see the just
translated into glory, and themselves east into such insufferable m^^eries.
Their complaint is this: Nos insens^^^ etc. We fools thought their lives
madness, and their ends without honor. How are they accou^t^^ among the
children of God, and their portion ^^ among the Saints? Therefore we have
erred from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness ^^^h not shined unto
us, and the sun of understanding rose not upon us etc.

10. The tenth, in Esaias c. 30. Praparat^ ^^^ ^^ heri Topheth etc. Topheth is
prepared of ^^^^^; it is even prepared by the King: he has ^^^^^ it deep and
large. The burning thereof ^^ fire and much wood. The breath of the Lord (li^^
a river of brimstone) does kindle it. This text is interpreted by S. Jerome,
and some other ancient fathers of the place of Hell, which long since was
prepared by God (the supreme King and judge) for the Devils and his adherents:
which place is deep, as being in the lowest bowels of the earth; and large,
that it may be capable of all bodies. The burning of it is fire, meaning
sulphurous fire, and much wood, that is the bodies of the damned, which shall
burn like to dry wood. The sinners are termed in the Scripture, dry wood, and
the just, green wood; according to those words of S. Luke. If these things
happen in the green wood, what shall become of the dry wood? The same
signification of wood is in like sort gathered out of that passage of
Ecclesiastes c. 11. If the tree do fall toward the South, or toward the
North, i^ the place, that the tree falls, there shall it be.

Now if it be demanded by what force Hell fire is kindled, the Prophet answers
in the former place. The breath of the Lord like a river of burning brimstone
does kindle it. And here by the words, The breath of the Lord, is understood a
stormy blast, there caused by Gods power: Or else a divine and supernatural
force of God, by the which that fire shall continually burn without consuming
or* wasting away. And this ^^eath shall so kindle the fire in hell, as if a
^^rrent of burning sulphur were powered ^^erein. Now what can the mind conceive
^ore horrible and dreadful then this?

11. The Eleventh, is also in Esaias c. 33. ^onterriti sunt etc. The sinners in
Sion are afraid; a fear is come upon the Hypocrites: who among us shall dwell
with devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Which
passage of Scripture is expounded by many of the Ancient authors, of the
pains and torments of Hell.

12. The twelfth, in Esaias. 50. Ecce vos omnes etc. Behold, all you kindle a
fire, and are compassed about with sparkles; walk in the light of your fire,
and in the sparkles, that you have kindled. This shall you have at my hand; you
shall ^ye down in sorrow. This place of Scripture is not only understood of
that fire, wherewith the Romans vanquished the Jews, and which through their
sins they deserved; Sin the seed of Hell fire.
but also of Hell fire, which all sinners hau^ kindled to themselves, as S.
Jerome and other Fathers do interpret: for Sins are (as it were) certain
fiery seeds, containing within them, a secret flame, which, in its due time
breaks forth into an open fire. Therefore how many sins each Man has, so
many hot ashes of fire, and so many seeds of flames he has, as being
inuisibly enco^passed with so many flames. Again, Sins in the holy Scripture
are compared to a matter easy to be set on fire, as dry wood, hay, chaff,
straw, and thorns. Who therefore increases the number of his sins,
gathers together a combustible matter, with the which he shall be eternally
burned. But Esaias. 30. Malach. 4. Math. 25.
to return more particularly to the formet text: Walk in the light of your
fire, that is, continue in your sins, and increase flames, which you begin to
kindle. This shall you have at my hand. Those are the words of Christ, through
whose judgment and sentence the Jews were destroyed by fire; and all sinners
(not repenting) shall hereafter be tormented with the same.

13. The 13. Esaias 60. Et egredientur etc. And they shall go forth, and look
upon the carkases of men, that have trangressed against me. Their worm shall
not dye, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring of
all flesh. The Prophet here calls Carkases, the bodies of all the wicked, both
because they shall be like to dead carcasses for their filth and stench; as also
in that they shall be hurled and cast upon the earth; and finally, by reason they
shall in H^ll (like carcasses) lie upon heaps, therefore the sense of this
place it this* Even as the inhabitants of the heavenly ^erusalem shall enjoy
peace, and see themselves abounding with all goods; so shall they go forth in
consideration and contemplation, and shall behold sinners subject both in body
and in soul to most cruel torments. Their worm shall not dye, because
inwardly in their soul, they shall be continually afflicted with the grief of
so great a good lost, and so infinite an evil contracted through their sins.
Neither shall their fire be quenched; because they shall burn for all
eternity, and these pains they shall suffer in the sight of the Elect.

14. The 14. is in Daniel c. 12. Multi de his etc. Many of them, that sleep in
the dust of the earth, shall awake; some to everlasting life, and some to shame
and perpetual contempt. That is, the just shall rise again, that they may
enjoy eternal salvation; and sinners, that they may suffer and sustain endless
reproach.

15. The 15. in Malachy c. 4. Ecce di^^enit etc. Behold the day comes, that
shall burn as an Oven; and all the proud, yea and all that shall do wickedly,
shall be stuble; and the day, that comes shall burn them up (says the Lord of
hosts) and shall leave them neither root no^ branch. The reason hereof being,
because sinners shall utterly be rooted out of the earth, so as no remembrance
of the^ shall be left; for here the Prophet speaks of the day of judgment.

16. Now we will descend to the new testament. And the 16. authority may be
taken from the testimony of S. John Baptist, who in Matthew 3. in one short
admonition does thrice insinuate the pains of the life to come. And first,
when he speaks to the Pharisees: Genimina viperarum etc. O generation of
vipers, who has sorewarned you to fl^e from the anger to come? meaning from
that eternal revenge, which hangs over the heads of sinners. Secondly, where
he says: Omnis ergo arbor etc. Therefore every tree, which brings not forth
good fruit, is hewe^ down, and cast into the fire. Thirdly, in these words:
Cuius ventilabrum etc. Who has his fan in his hand, and will make clean his
flower, and gather his wheat into his garner; but will burn up the chafe
with unquenchable fire. For as the husbandma^ with his fan seuereth the
chafe from the corn; so Christ by his judging power shall separate the good
from the evil, assigning to them their fitting place, lot, or portion.

17. The 17. is in Mark c. 9. Si scandaliz auerit etc. If thy hand cause thee
to offend, cut it off; It is better for thee to enter into life may med, then
having two hands, to go into Hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched;
where the worm dies not, and the fire never goet hou^. The like he says,
touching the wanting of a foot and an eye. In which words he instructs us,
that all things which give occasion of sinning, (though they be as profitable
to us, as the hand, the foot, and the eye are) are to be forsaken; since it is
^arre more secure to want temporal benefits and solaces, then to be cast into
eternal fire. And hear we are to observe, that this sentence is three times
repeated by our Lord, and Savior, thereby to insinuate both the certainty of
it; as also that by the often iteration of it, it might be firmly imprinted in
the minds of al Christians. Here also we are to note, that it was not
sufficient for Christ to say, To go into hell into fire that never shall be
quenched, but ingeminating and doubling the same, he adds: Where the worm
dies not, and the fire never goes out; thus suggesting to us twice in one
sentence the eternity of this fire. He further adds in the end: Every man
shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt: in which
words he insinuates the reason, why sinners are to be burned with fire: for as
every sacrifice, which according to the prescript law was offered to God, was
accustomed to be spinkled with salt, (according to that saying of Leuiticus 2.
All thy oblations thou shall season with salt) so all sinners, seeing hereafter
they are to become as certain oblations to be sacrificed to the Justice of
God, are to be seasoned (as it were) with fire, as with salt; for here sinners
are compared to a sacrifice, and fire to salt. And indeed we find, that the
holy Scripture in many places calls the punishment of the wicked a sacrifice
or oblatio^; as in Esaias 34. Victima domini etc. The Lord has a great sacrifice
in Bosra, and a great slaughter in the land of Edom. And Jeremy 46. The Lord
God of hosts has a sacrifice in the North country by the river Euphrates. And
finally in Ezechiel 39. Assemble your selves, and come, gather your selves on
every side to my sacrifice, for I do sacrifice a great sacrifice for you upon
the mountains of Israel.

For as beasts were killed in honor of God to expiate sins, and to appease
the wrath of God so the whole multitude of the wicked shall be slain in the last
night, and (after a sort) shall be sacrificed unto God, that their punishment may
in some sort satisfy for the sins, and so Gods indignation (as being appeased
therewith) may cease. Furthermore fire is rightly compared to salt for as salt
burns and conserueth the bodies, whereupon it is sprinkled; so fire burns
the bodies of the damned; yet in that sort, as it never consumes them, but
ever keeps them entyre and whole for further torments.

18. The 18. in Matthew 10. Nolite timere etc. Fear you not them, which kill
the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him, who is able
to destroy both soul and body in hell. And likewise in Luke 12. Dico autem
vobis etc. I say unto you (my friends) Be not afraid of them, that kill the
body, and after that, are not able to do any more. But I will forewarne you,
whom you shall fear: fear him, who after he has killed, has power to cast
into hell, yea I say unto you, him fear. Here S. Matthew shows that only God
is to be feared, and that all Evils of this life are not of any moment or
importance, if they be compared with the evils of the life to come, which God
can afflict.

19. The 19. Matthew 13. where he expresses the pains of Hell in two
parables. The first is of the tares growing among the corn in those words:
sicut colliguntur zizania etc. As the tares are gathered and burned in the
fire, so shall it be in the end of the world. The son of man shall send forth
his Angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom al things, that do
offend, and them which do iniquity; and shall cast them into a furnace of fire.
There shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the just men ^hyne (as
the sun) in the kingdom of the Father. Here by the words, All that do
offend; are understood all those, that either in government, doctrine, counsel
or example do provoke others to sin; such are tyrants, heretics, wicked
counselors, and public offenders. But those other words: (...) which do
iniquity, do signity other sinners, which are the cause of their own
iniquities only, without giving occasion to others to sin: and all these are
as hurtful herbs which being gathered into a bundel shall be cast into an
everlasting fire.

The second Parable is of the Fishers. Net in these words: Sic erit in
co^summatione saeculi: exibunt Angeli etc. So, shall it be in the end of the
world. The Angels shall go forth, and sever the bad from among the Just. And
shall cast them into a furnace of fyar: there shall be wayling, and gnashing of
teeth.

20. The 20. is taken from the 25. Chap. of Matthew, where our Lord by diverse
parables laboreth firmly to imprint and pla^ this doctrine of future rewards
and punishments in our minds. As first, from the parable of the ten Virgins.
Secondly from the parable of the Lord of the family going from home, and
distributing to his seruats his talents, wherewith they were to negotiate.
Thirdly, from the smilitude of the shepherd, seuering the sheep from the
goats: for there we thus read: Cum venerit filius hominis in Maiestate sua,
and omnes angeli eius, tum sedebit super sedem Maiestatis suae.

And then he shall say to those of his left hand: Discedite a me maledicti in
ignem aeternu^. etc. Depart from me, you cursed into everlasting fire: but
touching the just, it is the^ said. Come unto me ye blessed of my Father etc.
Here we see the form of this judgment, the sentence of the judge, and the
eternity of punishment and reward is most clearly and evidently described by
the judge himself. To conclude, nothing is more frequently proposed and
inculcated, both in Parables, and in other most grave se^tences by Christ
himself, then punishment and rewards after this life.

21. The 21. The Apostle in the second to the Romans thus says: Secundum
duritie^ tuam, and impoenitens cor etc. After thy hardness etc. thou heapest
unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath etc. Here the multitude of
sins are to be accounted as the treasury of punishments; and each sin as a
seed of eternal fire, which except it be washed away in this life with the
tears of true repentance, it will hereafter cause an vnque^chable fire.

22. The 22. in the second to the Corinthia^s c. 5. Omnes nos manifestari
oportet ante tribunal etc. We must all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, that every man may receive the things, which are done in his body,
according to that, which the has done, either good or evil. The like he
repeateth in many other places.

23. The 23. in the 2. to the Thessalonians c. 1. Qui poenas dabunt etc. The
wicked shall be punished etc. Here the Apostle speaks of all sinners, who
believe not the Gospel; who being deprived of all the goods, which here they
enjoyed, shall eternally be punished, even by the judgment, sentence and power
of our Lord; and these pains they shall endure in the sight of God himself
and all his Saints; and this shall happen to all them, when our Lord shall
come, that he may remunerate his servants with eternal glory, and transfer
them into his most glorious kingdom.

24. The 24. in the second of Peter c. 3 C^li qui nunc sunt etc. And after he
says: Adueniet autem dies domini etc. Lastly S. Peter thus there adds.
Cumigitur haec omnia etc. to al which places for greater breuity I refer the
studious Reader; they co^taynig in themselves a most dreadful and fearful
description of the day of judgment, and of the punishment reserved for the
wicked.

25. The 25. is in the Apocalypse c. 14. Si quis adorauerit bestiam etc. Et si
quis Antichriste consenserit etc. And c. 20. Qui non est inue^tu^ in libro
vitae etc. And c. 21. Timidis autem and incredulis etc Here he calls those
fearful, who through fear of death or loss of goods depart from the true faith
of Christ; and those blinded, who live according to the manner of Idolaters;
and finally liars, who perniciously and dangerously do lie; as all perinrious
and calumnious men do. All which men (without final repentance) shall burn
(as the text says) in stagno ardente igne and sulphur, quod est mors secu^da:
in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. I
here omit many other testimonies of sacred Scripture, by the which the last
dreadful judgment, and a remuneratio^ after this life is most evidently
confirmed and warranted: for there is no sentence or article of faith, which is
more established and grounded in Gods holy word, then this is, it being the
foundation of all virtue and Justice; Since it more perswadingly inuiteth man
to piety and more vehemently deterreth him from vice, then any other motive or
cogitation whatsoever. Whereupon the wiseman in the 7. of Ecclesiasticus
deservedly said. In omnibus operibus tuis memorare etc. In all thy works
remember the end, and thou thalt never do amiss.

Neither is there any just cause to suspect that this doctrine of future
retribution was first excogitated and forged only for policy, and the more
easily to retain people in obedience and observation of the laws; since a
thing, which is a mere fiction and forgery cannot be so powerful, as to beget
probity, innocence, and justice (as above we have showed.) Furthermore, such
men as most labored in the diuulging of this doctrine, regarded nothing less
then external policy, and temporal domination or government. For they did not
only in their own persons contemn al worldly matters, as honors, dignities,
and all terrene principality; but also in their books and writings they taught
the same to be cont^ned. It is usual to flatterers, and such as gape after the
favor of Princes, to invent such proiects, which may best serve for policy,
and cause the states of those princes to become more illustrious, and more
permament; with which kind of Sycophants the world at this present swarms. To
conclude we may ad hereto, that al those, who were the most resolute
maintainers of the foresaid assertion, were endued with wonderful sanctity and
wisdom, infused even from heaven; as also most of them became admirable and
most eminent for working of miracles, and the spirit of Prophecy; so as there
is no show or color, why we should now call in question the irrefragable truth
of the former doctrine.

THE CONCLUSION. CHAP. XXVI.
QVo ibo a spiritu tuo, and quo a facie tua fugiam? Psalm. 138.
Si ascendero in caelum etc. Whither shall I go from thy spirit? Or whither
shall I fly from thy presence? If I ascend into heaven, thou art there: If I
lie down in Hell, thou art there. Let me take the wings of the morning, and
dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, yet thither shall thy hand lead me,
and thy right hand hold me. Woe be to the mynds of mortal men, blinded through
their own malice; woe to the hearts of the foolish encompassed on each side
with the darkness of their own sins. Thou ( O most mighty powerful, and most
wise God) fillest the heavens and the earth, and yet thou art not acknowled God
of many; thou art most intimately and inwardly present to al things, and yet
art not known. Thou createst, informest, nourishest, perfectest, supporst, and
gouernest all things, and yet they deny thee to be fountain and author of all
these things; thou give the being to all things, and yet they believe, thou
have no being. Thou manifestest by infinite means and ways thy power,
wisdom, goodness, mercy and justice to the eye of al; and yet diverse of these
eyes (as being blind) do not perceive this thy manifestatio^. The nature of all
things do preach and proclayne thee, and yet they are deaf to such a loud and
notorious a proclamation. Psalm. 18.
The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows the works of
his hands. All things do confess, saying, Ipse fecit nos etc. He made us, and
not we our selves; neither Psalm. 99.
are we thus become through any casual concourse of Atomies. It is he, that by
his own omnipote^cy even out of the darkness of nothing, brought us forth into
this light. It is he, who thus has framed us, and has imprinted in every one
of us this our several pulchritude, splendor, and beauty through the
infinitenes of his own wisdom. Finally it is he, who through his goodness
conserueth, and through his providence governs, and directs each thing to
its peculiar end. This is the voice and language of every creature in the
world; neither can any one be ignorant hereof, who is not possessed with a
deaf Devil. For from whence proced the most swift reuolutions of the heavens,
but from his power and wisdom? From whence is that most established and
certain harmony of those celestial motions, which never are intermitted,
never broke any wavering uncertainty, but ever indeclinable continue in one and
the same tenor? From whence are the structures of so many living Creatures,
and their multiplicious and wonderful forms? From whence those innumerable and
most fit and Symmetriall proportio^s both of the parts among themselves, as
also of the parts with reference to the whole? From whence that different
internal temperature of every part of a natural body, and that external most
congruent fabric and conformation of them to their proper function and
operations? From whence that stupendous force in seeds, by the which the
bodies of all things, and of all smallest parcels of those bodies are disposed,
framed, and made apt and sorting to their ends? Nothing of these ca^ be made by
it self, since nothing of these is for it self. No one of these is an end to
it self, and therefore no one of the^ is a beginning to it self. Neither can
they receive their being from fortune, or chance, for nothing that is firm,
constant, regular, and consisting of most due and precise proportions proceed
from these; all their effects being (indeed) changeable, uncertain, and full
of disorder, and confusion.

Therefore it is most necessary, that all these things do take their beginning
from some mind which through its wisdom was able to excogitate and invent so
many wonderful and infinite things, through its power, to perform them, and
through its Providence, to govern them. And this mind or intelligence we call
Thee, being our Lord and God. Therefore thou art the Origin and sourse of all
things, the efficient cause of all, the form of all, the end of all, the
supporter, foundation and conservation of all. In thee all things do pre-exist,
and this not confusedly, but most ordinately; yet after a simple and abstracted
manner, and in a most pure essence or being; like as the work of the artificer
lies inwardly hid in his understanding, and rests known to him alone,
before it becomes an external and sensible work. All things are in thee,
from thee, by thee, for thee, and thou art above all things. For thou art more
diffused and large, then any magnitude; more ancyent, then all eternity; more
strong then all power; more radiant and shining then all light; more fair then
all beauty; more sweet then all pleasure; more worthy and elevated then all
honor; more intrinsicall and inward then any secret; more high, the^ al
height; and more low, then any depth. Thou art most supreme, and yet best; most
stable, and yet incomprehensible, most powerful, and yet most benign; most
merciful, and yet most just; most secret, and yet most present and inward;
most fair and yet most strong. Thou art immutable, and yet changest all
things; never new, never old; thou renewest all things, and yet bring the
proud man to decrepit old age. Thou art ever working, and yet ever quiet,
creating, nourishing, and perfecting all things; supporting, filling and
protecting all things. Thou art above all, and underneath a^; internal with
all, and external to all; above all in governing of things, underneath in
supporting and sustentating of them; internal by penetration, external by
comprehending all things within thy large circu^ference. O how wonderfully and
bountifully dealest thou with us, most dreadful and infinite Majesty! Tu^solem
tuum etc. Thou make the Sun to arise on the evil, and the good; Mat^. 5.
thou sendest rain on the just, and the iniust. Thou most copiously powrest
out the treasures of thy goodness upon thy enemies, which betrample thy law,
blaspheme thy holy name, deny thy providence, and impugn thy Church; enriching
them withal the temporal goods of this life, and inuiting them to a contrite
repentance; that so they may be made partakers of thy eternal goods. Thou
seek us, yet want nothing; thou love, yet art free from heat of desire;
art angry, yet remainest quiet; repentest, yet grieves not; cha^gest thy works,
and yet not changest thy determinations. Thou art not poor, and yet thou
reioycest at gains; not covetous, yet expectest usury; thou repayest debts,
owing nothing; thou forgiuest debts, loosing nothing. What more shall I say, My
God, my life, Light, and sweetness of my heart? What can we say, when we speak
of thee who above all speech art ineffable, and above all understanding
inco^prehensible? Only this we may securely pronounce of thee, that thou art
more excellent, then either words can deliver, or mind conceive. Woe then be to
all those, that are ignorant of thee, woe, woe, to a^such who knowing thee, do
not serve thee, but contemn thy laws and commandments. Woe, woe, woe, to all
them, which do either oppugn or reject (as Atheists do) thy wholesome doctrine,
which thou have revealed by thy son Jesus Christ our Lord and Redeemer, and
have proposed to us by thy spouse the Church. Thou, who art the fountain of al
good, suffer the beams of thy infinite mercy to shine upon the miserable
souls of all such, that they may acknowledge their own cecity, blindness, and
errors; that they may see the danger of their own eternal damnation; that
they may embrace the certainty of thy doctrine; the which thou propoundest to
all by the Church; and finally, that they being thus illuminated, may
acknowledge, fear, love, praise and reverence thy Majesty and providence, both
here during the time of this temporal life, and hereafter for all Eternity.
Amen.

FINIS.
Gentle Reader.
Page 207. lin. 17. for (...), rea^ (...).

And if any the like verbal faults have in other places escaped; it is
desired, thou would b^ pleased to correct them, by thy own judicious reading


