CERTAIN LETTERS VVHERIN IS SET forth a Discourse of the Peace that was
attempted and sought to have bin put in effect by the Lords and States of
Holland and Zelande in the year of our Lord 1574.

ALSO A SVPPLICATION put up by the said States of Hollande and Zeland, and
other places of the Low Countries to the King: together with the aunsvvere and
a Reply upon the same, and diverse other particularities.

PSALM 28. O Lord God take me not away with the wicked, nor with them that
commit iniquity, which speak peace to their neighbors, and imagine mischief
in their hearts.

IMPRINTED AT LONdon in Fleetestreate by Thomas Marshe.

ANNO 1576.

TO the intent to give some light to such as are not acquainted with the
state of the affairs and controversies of Hollande and Zelande, and to stop
the mouths of malicious adversaries, which cease not to report al manner of
untruth and reproach of the noble valeau^t and virtuous prince the Prince of
Orendge and his adhere^ts, and of the just case which they maintein: here is
translated a short Discourse, of the orignial cause and ground of their
entering into Arms, together with a number of weyghtie and substantial
reasons, whereby they justify their doing by good conscience and equity. And
it is the rather set forth at this time, because some of the parties and
authors thereof be now here, as Mounsieur Saint Aldegond, and Mou^sieur
Champagny and others, who may justify the same (as need shall require) to the
open mainfestation of the truth with out further travel. Read with aduiseme^t,
and judge indifferently, as the right of the matter shall lead the.

Sum Dea, quae rara, and paucis, Occasi^ nota. To his very friend E. B. esquier
affectionate friend and deuotiste servant unto the fair and virtuous Lady the
Countess of Culenberghe.
THis old proverb (as commonly all other) has his ground upon known
experience, Malus animus, malamens, an evil affection makes an evil
construction. Men wrest or drive the interpretacio^ of doings to the frame of
their own coceits, which they derive from the favor or disfavor that they
have settled in their own persuasions. It is not unknown what extraordinary
discourses, and what private fancies in common meeti^gs, are daily made of the
case of our neighbors in the low Country. Such manner of debatinge where
contrary opinions have distracted you seem to be the cause of your question,
whereof you desire to be resolved in your letters. You could not have written
to a man more indifferent than I am: who am as far from parcialitie, as he
that loves, (that is to say prefers) neither party before other, but our
country before the^ both. I do therefore (as I wish you to do) set the pin of
the beam eauen, and examine the weight of either skale. Let us then compare
the sides, and begin with the sharper, that we may have the milder ending.

First I will call to mind, what the one of those sides obiecteth:

Secondly what the other answers: And thirdly what to draw to concern our
selves.

In the matter of objection, let us see what strength it has in justice:

In the matter of defense, let us see what weight it has in equity:

And for the matter of Our selves, let us see what necessity, what commodity,
what right, and what facility it is said to bear, to draw us to any side.

It is said by some, which are loath that Spain should be weaker or England
stronger, that the Prince of Orendge and his adhere^ts are rebels in Arms
against their natural Prince, and maintayners of a most dangerous president
against all Princes.

To this is answered on the other part (as in this book you shall see
discoursed) that there is difference of the band and manner of their subjection
from other. None of them holds that a king may be shaken of by his subjects:
but they all say, that Lords electible upon pacts and conditions are also
reiectible accordi^ge to the same pacts and conditions, specially in Dominions
subject to the civil laws, which are not the Laws of England. The order of
each state is to be regarded: not all States have kings. Some have other forms
of government. Not all kingdoms have like manner of admissions or receyuings of
kings. Some follow natural succession of blood: some Choice: some Lot or
chance. Some kings or rulers have simple and absolute power: some limited and
circumscribed. Therles of Holland and Zealand (as is well known and many
examples have proved, at their Joyous entree that is to say, at there
receyuinge to inauguration or seisen of their Estate) be bound by oath to
prescribed pacts and orders: whereby not only their form of rule is bounded,
but also upon diverse points the subjects homage and allegiance expressly
discharged. And that discharg in fact has bin executed, and by such fact, (say
they,) the auncesters of the Prince himself that now charge them, have bin
received. The Prince and states of that Country allege the oath of their
Earl, the precise form of assoylme^t upon his breach of their Privileges:
they produce one chief point, that they ought not to be pestered with
governance or garrison of strangers: they reckon up thintollerable,
outrageous and manifest oppressions done upon them, and the evident practice to
bring that free Nation to most insufferable servitude: they shield themselves
under the liberty and right of Nature, the provision of agreements, the oaths
of their Princes, their power of refusal upon their Princes perjury, with
many like matters, whereof they make the world Judges by their many
Protestacions, Apologies, Iustifications, and Supplicatio^s to the states of
thempyre, and other means: always seuering their case from other subjects of
Natural and absolute Kings.

FOR (say they) in their case of resistinge the King, these things are to be
considered: the nature of the Government and subjection, and the cause of
resistance, and thirdly the manner of the resistance. The nature of the
Government and the subjection stands in these two considerations. Whether it
he Merum Imperium, that all things may be done Pro voluntate Regnanti^: or it
be Moderatum, which is Temperatu^ Legibus, wherein the Ruler has his rule
prescribed him which way to rule, and the Subject a Pattern described him which
way to obey. If the Government be Merum and absolutu^, then is the Person
inferior, a slave and no subject. For in all due subjection there is Taxis,
which is never in Voluntate. If the Gouernmente be Temperatum, then is
thinferiour a subject and no slave.

IN all subjection there is an honest liberty given by Law it self, whereby all
Actions and Pleas in Law are as open to the subject as to the ruler, for the
maintenance of truth and equity. In slavery there is none such: because he
is not to be measured but by the will of the Ruler, which howsoever it turns,
is his right: and he has no actio^ of Appeal or Plea to the contrary.

Then it follows that the Law is the rightest Authority, and the same is to
be maintained by all the just and rightful executers of it: for if the Law be
not maynteined, the life of the whole common wealth is lost.

This mayntenaunce of the Law no man doubts whether it ought to be or no:
for it is the end why Counselors and under magistrates are appoi^ted: yea it is
the cause of placing the highest Magistrate himself. So that to maintain the
Law, is judged meet by all men: if the Law be just.

But whether the Law may be mayntayned against the Highest Magistrate or no,
that is the doubt. For here upon this maintenance of Law is called resista^ce,
and is called Rebellion?

This question does imply a contradiction: for it imports that the one is
against the other, and no man can serve two Masters: and so stands the whole
case in the righteousness of the Law, which for the present purpose is presumed
to be most just and most holy. Why then? The Person that is against this Law,
goes about to disanull that that is most just and most holy, and labors to
bring in that, that is most unjust, most unholy. For touching his own person
the question and debate stands not, but for thinforcing of the subjects to
the same.

WHY then, there is no doubt but as it is confessed of all me^, both that
never knew God, and of them that do profess God, that justice is to be
maintained against injustice, Godliness against ungodliness, and God against the
devil: else were the law no law, neither the subject a subject: being (as I
said before) a person licenced to live in liberty of law.

Thus by the nature of Government and the subjection, it is euidente that the
rightest Magistrate may be resisted, and this resistance is truly a
maintenance of Law and equity and so to be termed, and untruly and unjustly
called Rebellion. For these words of rebellion and such like cannot iustlye
be used, but where the will of the Ruler and the law are concurrent and agree
in one.

By this that has bin said of the Government it self, ensues a right
answer to the cause of resista^ce. Nothing may cause resistance to the
Magistrate but the maintenance of right and equity: for there is no equity
in this, that the will of the subject should stand for a law to the Prince,
where the subject thinks it unmeet that the will of his Prince should stand
for a law of his subjection. This is against Justice distributive, which the
Heathen teach in their common wealth, and flatly against the rule of GOD: Thou
shalt not do to thy Neighbor yt thou vvilt not have don to thy self.

SO then he that has law and maintains the law, is resisted on which part
soever he be: and he that resists the law is a rebel and traitor whosoever
he be: for the law is ye life of the common weal. And the consideration of
resistance stands not in the person, unless he have the law with him: if he
be not Lex loque^s, he is not resisted, but resists.

But every man may not resist. They only that are made keepers of the Laws,
to the^ it belongs: otherwise there would be a confusion, and every man
encroche upon an others office. The shedding of blood is murder in every
private man: but if a Magistrate do it, he does it lawfully, and is excused
before man, and does his duty to God: For he bears not the sword in vain.

IN sum, where the kind of Government is tempered by Law, and the Prince has
as well to live by law as the subject: if the Prince will break this Law which
is just, and enforce an obedience to a law unjust against the will of the
Subjects: the law may be maintained against him, by such as are appointed from
God and the law, to be Gardians and kepers of the law. But the case of the
Prince of Orange and his associats stands in ye same terms. The king with
whom he has to deal had authority Temperatam Laegibus: he was sworn as well
to the keeping of those laws and bringing in of no new, as the subjects were,
and if he brake his oath, they were quit of all obedience. This appears in
Forma iuramenti, which he took at his Joyous entrance.

This oath and Law was broken by bri^ging in a new law of Inquisition,
which tended to the utter suppla^ting of the Prince and states of the country,
which notvvythstanding they endured for a season, using al dutiful means by
complaints made from the counsel and states at diverse and so^dry times, as are
to be seen, but could have no redress in deed, though oftentimes they had
fair promises. When justice could not be had by way of just complaint from
the Counsel and States: the Prince and States took the maintenau^ce of the
law into their own hands, and so retain it by Justice, reserving the
ancient liberties and laws to the benefit of all the subjects, so yt none
co^playneth of wrong done unto him, but the will of that Prince who would his
will should prevail against Law to the subversion of the whole state, as
appears in their Records.

Therefore this maintenance of law by the Prince of Orange, is right, against
the breaker of Law and bringer in of Tyranny, the Spanish king. They say,
bri^ger in of Tira^ny and breaker of Law, for that contrary to his oath, whereby
both he and all the Earls of Holland and Zela^d have bin received into yt
government, and no otherwise but upon those conditions limited to them by
their said oath, he alters the whole state of gouernmente, leaves no law but
his own will, and so uses himself, as though he had never bin sworn, nor taken
the countries with condition, but had entered as an absolute conqueror: Far
inferior therein to Heathen and barbarous Princes. We read of Cyrus the great
Monarche of the East, that above all his singular virtues, which purchased him
so great a Fame as ever any Prince had, he had this in him, that he suffered
all Nations under his Monarchy to enjoy their own Laws, customs, liberties
and religion, and made no alteration against their wills. The like we find
recorded of Alexander the Great, who used himself after the same sort in all
his co^quests, contenting him only with the Soueraignties over ye Nations
which he subdued, without any alteration of their Estate. And did not the
ancient Romans walk after the same sort, when they subdued any Nation to
their obedience? Did they ever alter the state, of any country which they
conquered, and enforce their people to receive their laws and Religion? What
course used Julius Caesar in his Conquests of France* Did he chau^g any one
jot of the state of those Cities which he conquered?

Thus was the behavior of those barbarous Princes, even in their Conquests.
such moderation and equity used they eue^ in the mids of their fire and
sword.

The king of Spain came not in by force, he was received by courtesy, and
received as a Patron and Protector of their liberties, and upon this
condition only, had the Seigniories given him, as to his predecessors before
him, that he should keep those Laws and liberties safe and sound, by virtue
of which, and for preservation whereof they cast upon him the Erledom, as they
had don in former times upon his auncesters. Upon this condition he took it,
and to this conditi he swore, as all his au^cesters did, submitting and yelding
himself to the like dishonor that other had incurred before him, and by whose
fall his auncesters came into that preferment, if he committed the like
trespass against the states. To this, (I say) he was bound by oath, let himself
be demanded, if he ca^ deny it, they are content to stand to the condemnation
of all the world, as falsaccusers of so mighty a Prince, in charging him with
perjury, a most horrible crime both before God and man. But he will not, he
does not deny it, it is confessed of himself and published by Print in his
own books, under his own Privilege. How the^ stands his case and theirs?
was he not bound by oath to observe their laws? And in case he or any of his
officers and Ministers did not observe but break them, did he not expressly
charge and enjoin al his subjects by the same oath to make resistance against
him and them, and in no wise to yield him any obedience, until he stood and
yielded to the fulfilling of his oath? The matter, as I said, is to evident,
books impri^ted under his own Privilege vouch it to all the world. And
shall they that stand for the maintenance of a law so justly, being further
charged thereto by the kings own oath, be notwithstanding deemed for rebels?
Surely if there be no more than so, we have no reason so to esteem or judge of
the^. Me^ might do no more, if either the kings auctority over the^ were
absolute, or they had contrary to all right of obedience, made resista^ce
there, where they ought to have showed all obedience. But as the world is not
able to charge them with the one, so the king I suppose will not chaleng unto
himself the other. We find recorded by all that are learned as well heathen
as Christians, as well in laws of the Gentiles as in the laws of God: that
it is one thing to be Princeps supremus, a Superior and highest governor: and
an other thing to be Senior absolutus, an absolute lord. The one imports a
soueraintie and chieftie of all yt are within one list of law, as the highest
minister of the law, but yet he himself within the compass of the same
law: the other notes a person without the compass of al jurisdiction, a
co^troller of all men, and to be controlled of none. Whoso would chaleng this
latter point to be the right of the kings tititle in those cou^tryes, (I mean,
that he would make him an absolute Lord and not a Supreme and highest
Gouernoure,) he should greatly discredit his honor in taking his oath. For
force any person what soever he be, to take an oath and not to mind to
keep it, is in that degree of dishonor, as carries with it an impiety
against GOD himself, and ingendreth a just suspicion in all men that shall
have to deal with him: for who would contract with that man in any sort, that
can and will make so small account of that, which he has called God himself
to witness of, and vowed to his Majesty to keep, in the presence of the
Angels. I can not thinck so evil of the honor of a Prince, as that he would
enter into so great impiety: I judge honorably of the King of Spain, and
therefore I may not deem, that he was of the Nature of that wicked Heathen,
that said for excuse of himself, in a case of like quality. Lingua iuraui,
mentem iniuiuratam gero: I swore with my tongue, so that my tongue stands
bound by oath, but I carry a mind and heart about me that has not sworn, ne
stands so tied. Be it far from any Christian, to have so evil an opinion
of any Christian, we have not so to think of any Heathen, unless we hear
him speak and protest so, as that wretched caitife did. We see evidently by
his own confession, and testimony of all the world, that such an oath he
took, and the honorable opinion that we ought to conceive of the Majesty of
a King must needs persuade us, that he meant them as he swore. As he swore
(I say) when he in the same article exempted them from all obedience, and
armed them that should attempt ought to the contrary: If he swore this, and
mente this, then are they no rebels, in fulfillinge that, which he charged
them upon their oaths.

But what say they, that vvil (notwithstanding) justify the Kings doings
and blame the subjects with so grievous a crime. For no one jot of that that
is aforesaid can be denied. They say that the Pope, who has from GOD
Plenitudine^ potestatis, Fulness of power, did dispense with him from this
oath. First if that be so, that the Pope has freed him from his oath, then
has he by the same fact freed them from their obedience: for they were in
no wise, nor by virtue of any title subject to him, but by virtue and title of
his oath. Take the ground of their subjection away, and they are not subject
but free.

But whether it he so or no, that the Pope has through his absolute power,
(which he calls Plenitudine^, fulness of power) freed him from that oath, I
know not: only this I know, that the Bishop of Arras, afterward Cardinal of
Granuile gave him such Counsel, and said the Pope should do so. And if it
followed so in effect, as it may be well co^iectured by the sequel, (for no
doubt a king would not stand so stoutly to the defense and maintenance of
such impiety against God and man, as perjury is, unless he had some better
ground and warrante) this will be a Caveat, and a lesson for all Princes and
States to teach them to bevvare how they deal any more with the king of
Spain, or any other that gives such credit to ye Pope. For what assurance
ca^ they have of all their Contracts and Leagues that pass and are made
between them, if the oaths taken, may be dispensed withal at the Popes
pleasure? That were nothing else in deed and effect, but to bring all true
Christian Kings and Princes, which make conscience and put a Religion in the
bretch of their oaths, into bondage and slavery: to make them serve the
pleasure and profit of the other Romish king: who minds no further to
observe his, then shall stand with his benefit, or pleasure of that higher
power of Rome. If the case stand so, what faults soever Princes have committed
in former time in this behalf, I doubt not but they will be wyser and more
circumspect hereafter. I mean they will make no leagues nor take any oaths of
the Pope or any Princes and States of his adherentes, seeing they have so plain
a president in this case, that their oaths may and shall be dispensed wythall,
when and how often soever they list. I suppose there was such a clause in the
Contract that was made with the king of Spain for the marriage of Queen
Mary, that he should not alter or change any one jot of the Laws and
Customs as well public as private of the Realm of England, if he had broken
this branch, and vouched the equity of his dealing therein, upon a license and
dispensation from the Pope, I doubt sore whether the people and States of
England would have taken that for good payment: I doubt I say, whether the
Nobility and Commons of England, would have suffered him under that cloak, to
have banished all the Laws of England and brought in the government of
Millan or Naples? I doubt, whether the Nobles and people of England would have
bin accounted rebels for vvithstanding such breatch of Contract. I doubt,
whether they would have suffered him so quietly to have carried away the
Crown from the Queens Majesty to have set it upon his Spaniards heads? And
yet he might as justly have done that, as this, if this rule be good. We may
thanck God we are delivered from him, we cannot tell what he would have done,
though we may surmise by this president, what he might have pretended. I tell
you, this excuse of perjury may seem reasonable to them that are of his
Court, for such a God they have: but it is a perilous president for us,
unless we bevvare of it. If it seem a good plea for king Philip to say, he
has not broken his oath herein, because the Pope dispe^sed with him, what may
all Princes that have made Contracts with him look for, but just quarrel
against themselves to be revenged both with fire and svvord, when soever the
Pope shall list to dispense? And I am afraid the benefit of this dispensation
will be used, if at any time they may have opportunity (which God forbid) for ye
Q. Ma. and the realm of England as they say, stand exco^municat: if so the^ all
oath is dispe^sed withal, you know that very well. How be it if Christian
Princes, which profess God and conscience, shall judge this dealing to be
good, and if they can so easly persuade themselves, that such manner of dalying
with oaths, is Christian and Pri^celike, surely then will I as they say and
conclude yt the K. of Spain has right, and the Prince of Orange and States of
Holland and Zelande have wrong, that his bretch of oath, law and custom, is
lawful, and they in withstanding it, are rebels and traitors.

But if they shall judge with the truth, as truth is in deed, that no mortal
man can dispense with an oath that binds the conscience of man, for it is a
matter within the jurisdiction of God alone, and again, if they shall consider
this with the^ selves, that all the right and title that the King of Spain
has to those countries is only by virtue of this oath and no otherwise, so
that his superiority over them stands but by way of Stipulation, if he
perform those conditions, (for he has no better title then all his
predecessors had) then will they easelie resolve, that there is great fault in
that pretense, yea very preiudicious and an evil presidente to all Princes
that have to contract with him: and on the other side, that the Prince and the
States do in justice and equity both before God and man what they do: and are
not to be charged with these grievous terms of Rebels and Traitors.

NOW for our own case, (say they that like of that part) it is good to
remember for the necessity, what neighbors we have and what mi^ds our
neighbors have: what affections have bin uttered, in subscriptions to the
Counsel or conspiracy of Trent, wherein the destruction of all Protestant
Princes (and namely of ye Queen and Realm of England (have bin determined:
what practices have bin used and furthered to aduau^ce ye prete^sed title of
the co^petitrice of her Majesty's crown: what intellige^ces entered with the
rebels of England: what ayds promised to them in their actual rebellion: how
the rebels have bin received, succored and relieved with pensions, and
maintained there, since their overthrow here: what letters of Marck or
disguised Pyracie against English subjects granted to Don Thomas Coppley,
graund Lord of the Maze, Gatten, Roughey, and of many othergaping sounds of
petie titles, and such other little fellows, besides Stories Commission: How
in those dominions daily books have bin published with open warrant,
privilege, and allowaunce most slanderous to the Queen, and seditious
against her state: How the traitorous Papists are there vpholden in credit and
dignity, who doubt not continually to affirm, that he cannot err that has
pronounced our Queen deprived: what devises have bin used by one Ambassador,
a holy bishop, the Bishop of Aquila, against her Majesty and her Counsel: How
by an other Ambassador De Spese, lewd and uncomely letters have bin written
under saucy signs of the names of Oriane Amadis, and such unprincely toys,
audaciously to reatch at the honor of such a most virtuous, high and noble
Queen: How the same rash personage has not bin misliked there for his so
doing: How the Bull of her Majesty's deprivation, and of the assoyling of her
subjects from their all giau^ce, has bin printed, spread abroad, set upon
posts, and magnifice^tly delivered to knowledge in the low Countries remayninge
under that Princes rule: How in Spain it self, her Ma subjects are daily taken
and imprisoned, manacled tormented and exquisitely murdered in co^te^pte of her
Majesty's honor, and ye safe freedo^ of mutual trafique: How ye holy
Inquisitio^ is permitted daily to rage against Englismen, for praying to God
even on Seabord, according to the laws of the Church of England: How the
Prince excuses the^, by saying he cannot disobey the Church. And must he obey
the Church, in following their sentence that the Queen of England is deprived
of her Crown? The evident appearance that he lacks only opportunity to
invade England: a thing most apt for extending his conquest, and a thing most
needful for him, wherewith to reteyne the rest of his own.

One most urgent need, not to have him to strong. One most important policy,
to hold war farther of, rather tha^ to draw it home. Infinite are both the
reasons and occasions that this cause delivers.

For the commodity, behold (say they) the fruitful land: the dominion of Sea
by situacio^: the neerenes of the Contine^t to hold our wars, or do
displeasures farther of from England: the rule of trade both of the river of
Rhene, and land of Germany: the commodities passing that way both for
Merchandise and Navigations: as Cables, Pitch, Tar, Mastes and other matter
for Ships, to be plentiful to ourselves, and scarce to our enemies at our
pleasures, the greater increase and safety of the trade of our merchants every
where. But of these profits there is no end. And among other this is the
greatest, that they will not (like Ireland) be chargeable, but a most Noble
increase of reuenevves to the Crown, able at their own charge to defend
themselves under her Magisties name and protection, and to serve the Realm of
England: a Navy joined with her Majesty's Navy, and mariners able to hold and
drive from Sea all Princes in Christe^dom. Finally Safety, Riches, Strength,
and honor.

For right, their offers (say they) make it apparent both by descent in her Ma.
(if the holder against his oath vvil stand upon descent alone): election by the
States upon breach of oaths and pacts: on the other part rightful conquest
upon just causes, for so manifest injuries and perils: a conquest I say, yet
with a sweet and easy yoke to ye people willing to receive it. For facility,
is to be marked (say they) their own offer, the readiness of the people to
embrace, their own stre^gthe to have stand thus long alone, the distracting of
the adversary, and all commodious opportunities, delivered by God him self. And
to all these good means, the most glorious act to releue the Church of God
against Papists, the violators and enemies of public natural and Christen
faith, the great mean to appease the controversies of Christendom for
Religion.

Add also the noble policy and fitnes, to enter into universal league of
Christians against the Pope and Popish conspiracies: the aid of so noble a
Prince, ye Prince of Orange, so able, so worthy and so likely a man to serve
Christendom against the Empire of the Turcke, and tyranny of Rome: the greedy
joy of her Majesty's people to follow her pleasure in pursuing of such a noble
enterprise.

Thus you see what I have heard say on all sides: I leave to you the judgment
of all these conceits: I leave to Counselors the governing of us all by the
best aduises and directions: who (I doubt not in their wisedoms) do see the
best: and in this Parliament ca^ lack no help of consent and sinews, that this
Realm ca^ give. And I leave to God the guidinge of hearts and successes.

But beside all that I have noted before as ye opinions of other, this you
shall take as mine own full believing: that it is not in our will to have peace
by letti^g them alone, when the adversary tarieth but to subdue them, that he
may aduau^ce himself against us. But to hold war further of, both in place
and time is now offered to her Majesty's Election. Peace she cannot have sure,
by peace.

And one notable matter I hear of: they be most desirous yt England will
receive them: but rather then they will return to their old thraldom, they
will creep under the yoke, even of the Muscouite or Turk himself. Much
rather will they yield them to France, that has now so many armies ready to
take hold of the^, if England reject the^. That consequence may prove ill for
us: And I do not take it certain that France shall for ever have civil
wars. It may be that God after the blood of so many Martirs, will give peace
to his Church in France. You see there is but one life between them and the
successiue reign of many tollerabl^ Princes. If God should bereave the world
of the present French king suddenly, or otherwise bless France with an other
or that the King of necessity yield to a firm peace: How easly upon our
refusal will the alliance of the Prince of Orange with the house of France,
draw Holland and Zeland to France. O merueylous advancement of Fraunc^ by sea
and land! Shall they be lords o^ Trafique, Lords of furniture, of Shippi^g*
Lords of great and many ships and goo^ harborowes, and (that most is) so
greate^ so near us? I pray God it never be, tha^ may be so dangerous.

To the Reader.
LIKE AS in time paste, our adversaries have always from the beginning pickte
quarrels against our cause, with intent to procure a greater mislike thereof
in all men's minds, and to that effect have framed many feigned slanders, in
layinge to our charge, that we are not only fallen away from the faith, but
also become rebels against the Majesty of the King of Spain our sovereign
and natural Prince, to the end that under the shadow of such fine colors,
they might both blemishe the eyes of the simple sort which are altogether
ignorante of the cause, and also seem closely to cover their own disordinate
greedines of gain, even to the face of the wysest, unless they be the better
acquainted with those affairs: Even so we ascertaine our selves, that they
will not stick (by all means they may) hereafter likewise to practice the
drowninge and utter suppressinge of all such true dealing, as does now but
begin by little and little to come to light. They publishe and proclaim,
(although most untruly) that we are the persons that will give no ear to
any agreemente, be it never so reasonable: and that we endeavor our selves to
seek nothing else but how we may maintayn this civil dissension and dangerous
wars within our own boosome, although it procure the utter destruction of
this our poor Country: and all for our pleasure (they say,) because we are
minded to bend our wills and appetits to cross his Majesty. Thus do they
still cauil. Wherefore to thend that none may hereafter by giving to light
credit to their false reports, so much abuse themselves, as to condemn those
that are innocents, and to justify such as be most cruel enemies to
justice: We thought it most necessary (after many supplications at diverse and
so^dry times exhibited unto his majesty) yet once again to publish this our
last request made unto him, and therwithall to lay before your eyes, all such
means as have bin made on our part for the appeasinge of this war, as ye
may most plainly perceive by seeing of such letters, as have bin written on
either part to that effect, without adding or deminishing any thing therein, to
the^d that every man may judge without any suspicion, according to the truth of
the matter. Meaning thereby most manifestly to show forth, both in who^ lies
the original cause and beginning of this war, and also who is most to be
blamed, for that we attain not unto a perfect peace and unity. Moreover, that
we have always acknowledged the king of Spain to be our Sovereign Prince
and liege Lord, as one given unto us of God to rule and govern us with all
justice and equity, according to such contractes as we wear both bound unto,
and according to such aunciente Rights, Vsages, Liberties, and Privileges, as
he has bin most solemply sworn unto: and that we have always had our
recourse unto him most humble and with all due reverence. For albeit that some
pretending a feigned desire of quietness and unity in our Country, have privately
persuaded us, that in our treaty of peace, we must look especially to the
observing of two points, that is to wit, that respect of the dignity and
Majesty of the King be kept most inviolable, and that in any wise no mention
be made of the alteringe of Religion: and although we have had most evident
proofs to persuade us, that this is not the way to mittigate the mortal
hatred of our enemies, but rather to increase and sharpen it: Yet
nevertheless we have in all points behaved our selves so reasonably, and
with so great humility, as even our enemies them selves cannot accuse us (and
say truly) but that we have in all points observed a dutiful order, as most
plainly shall appear by the discourse followi^g. Considering that we have
franckly remitted the whole justice of our cause, unto the Judgment of his
Majesty, and the general estates of our Country. Hoping that they, both
being better acquainted with our estate, and also better affectioned, both to
the King and country then Strangers can be: might the rather have both the
means and the will, to give such counsel unto the king, as may be most
expedient for the service of his Majesty, for the establishi^g of a perfect
peace and unity amongst us, and last of all, for setting our country in her
ancient prosperity. Hereuppon our adversaries (contrary to our expectacion)
have behaved themselves with such parcialitie, as they would not once so much
as have any regard or respect unto our request made unto his Majesty, but
vsurpi^g the sovereign dominion of our Country, they have clean deprived his
Majesty from all liberty of Judgment, and according to their own appetite
and will, clean barred our cause from all knowledge of Justice, of set
purpose to hinder all concord. And that have they done principally (as they
themselves confess) for because we have urged the general assembly of the
Estates, which beyond all memory of man, has always ben used heretofore
amongst our auncitours and Predecessors. Besides this, to make their malice
more manifest, they have ever since committed greater cruelties in burning and
scorchi^g such as were of our Religion, than ever they did before. Moreover,
they have sought to bring in all the rest of the Estates of our country with
threatenings and force, of purpose to make the^ serve their turn toward
thexecutio^ of their tyra^nical appetites. VVherby it appears most plainly,
that they are not content with having once raised this great bloody war to
the prejudice of his Majesty, and utter destruction of his Country: but do
shall endeavor themselves to proceed with their tyra^nous devises, to thend
they may subdue the Country at their own pleasure, and bring it into
perpetual servitude and bondage. Moreover whereas they make show at some times,
of a desire to enter into some treaty with us of agreement: they do not pretend
that to any other end, but only to deceive us, and by such a feigned
dissimulatio^, to hold the other Towns and Villages in some good hope, that
they may not join themselves with us to resist their tira^ny, hoping that by
this means they may come to their purpose, Like as they have already procured
in France by their indirect and privy practices. But such is our trust in ye
bountiful mercy of our good God, by who^ we have bin so myraculously defended
hitherto from their wicked enterprises, as we not only hope to escape from
the danger of their devilish devises, but also that all people and nations of
Christendom, all Kings and Pote^tates, and especially the Majesty imperial
with the Electours and Princes of the Empire, seeing here by most clearly our
faithful and sincere humlity, and our most sure and certain equity, joined
with our fervent desire to attain to peac^ and unity, and co^paring the same
with the disdainful pride and cruel tira^ny of our adversaries: will yield unto
us their indifferent fauour^ and maintain the justice of our cause by
aco^uenient means they may. And if peraduiture it fall out hereaster, that we
be forced by the unjust and unreasonable procedings of ou^ adversaries, eue^
against our wills to seek and search for some other relief more to our
assurance and safety, tha^ we have don heretofore: we hope that even then they
will not impute the fault thereof unto us, but unto our enemies, who have
forced us thereunto. VVherof we require all and every person by manner of
protestacion, ^o be advertised herein, that we only have recourse unto the
Justice, equity, and wisdom of the most high, and renowned Majesty of the
Emperor, and to all the most noble and excellent Electours and Princes of the
Empire of Almaigne, together with all the potentates of Christendom, that they
may take some care of our cause, and not give credit or hearing unto the
slanderous reports of our adversaries, but consider somewhat nearer the
indiffere^cy of our cause and mainteigne the same, so far forth, as duty to
God and the world does require. Also we do advise all the Estates of these
Low Countries, to consider herein as it were in a glass what estimacio^ our
enemies make of them, and withal to imagine how they determine to handle them,
if their devises take such effect as they do desire. Wherefore let them
beware that for want of courage or other occasion they suffer not themselves to
be abused by their feigned and double dealinges, Although they make show of a
feruente affection for the perfect peace and quietness of our Conutry. But
rather having regard unto their tyrannical call evil meaninges, which they
bear in general unto the Estates of our Country. Let them resolve themselves,
courageously to resist such insolences, and call to mind both their oath and
duty that they owe to their Country and by all industry seek the maintenance
of the good and lawful rights, contracts aend liberties of their foresaid
country. In the doing whereof, they shall not only do a good deed in their life
time, but also leave unto their posterity a good report to their immortal
glory. Now then to the end you may the better understand theffect of the letters
following, and the ground of all the matter: You must be advertised, that at
such time as Mounsieur Philip of Marnix, and Mounsieur of Mont Saint
Aldego^dy, being prisoners at Vtrecht, had (by the license and commandment of
Mounsieur of Noircarmes) written diverse and sundry times unto the Prince of
Orange as touching the means to enter into some communication for finishing
of these present wars: the matter was brought to such perfection, as that
after the death of the forenamed Seig. of Noircarmes, the persons were
nominated, which were to be employed in this matter. But in the mean time
happened the overthrow of Mounsieur the Count Ludovvyk, and for that cause it
seemed not good unto the great Co^maundador, to proceed any further herein:
alleging that thereby, the aucthoritye of the King should be somewhat
dyminished. Nevertheless the said Co^maundador wished and advised all the towns
of Holland and Zeland to address them selves unto the King by manner of
supplication, to this end, that the effect of the agreement which might ensue
thereof, might be attributed rather unto the bountye, and liberalitye of the
King, than to any right or equitye that we might look for of duty. This
Kind of dealing was cause sufficient, why this treaty ceased, until such
time as Mounsieur de Champaign, sent a letter unto Mounsieur Charles de Boisot
Governor of Mydleburch, the tenure whereof follweth her-afterword forword,
with an anuswere thereof made by his Brother Mou^sieur Lois de Boisot, being
marked with. A. and. B. But understanding that he was absent by reason that he
was sent of a message into England from his excellency, he thought best, him
self to make a voyage unto Vtrecht, whether it were to assist his brother in
law Mounsieur the Coente de la Roche toward the obteyning of a pardon then
published as him self said, or for some other pryuate affairs of his own, I
know not. But this I am sure of, that when he ca^me thither, he talked at
landge of the matters aforesaid with Mou^sieur de Saint Aldegond who remained
then prisoner, as with one whom he fownd yet still so affected to the
furtheraunce of our peace, as that he requested most earnestly, that
notwythstanding the difficulty before rehearsed, yet the pursuit of a thing so
necessary for our public weal might not be left of upon such a soden.
Herein, he made promise on the behalf of the Prince of Ore^ge and of the
Estates of Holland and Zeland, that they would rather be co^te^t to leese so^me
part of their own right, than seek to usurp any thing upon the Kings
Majesty, for the which cause it was thought good to ymploy the forenamed
prisoner, who presently was sent to Roterda^ toward his excellency, to treat
upon exchange of prisoners, to thend that there with all he might work sum
good effect in the matters before rehearsed. Provided always that he took
great regard to the aucthority of the King, and that no points of religion
wear in any wise mentioned It happened also that Signeor Ian de Mattenes,
Mou^sire de la Rinicre and the Aduocat Treslo^g ca^me a little before this, by
lyce^ce also unto Rotterda^ for certain particular affairs, as they said and
had by and by committed unto them a specialchdarge to deal with his
excellency, and with the foresaid Estates, touching so^me good mean of
pacification. The answer that these estates gave unto the^ follows
hereafter, word by word, and is marked with the. C. But as it appears, this
aunsuere pleased not Mou^sire de Cha^pagni. Wherefore during the abode of
Mou^sier de S. Aldegonde as yet in Rotterda^ he wrote a letter unto him to the
same effect, declaring therein his mind more at large This letter likewise
follows in order, and is marked with D. hereupo^ yt followed that Mou^sier
de. S. Aldego^d treated yet so^what furtherwith the foresaid Estates in such
ernest sort, as that they wear content to make their co^plai^t unto the Kings
Ma. in form of supplication with out attributi^g the name of the Estats there
unto, which of duti belo^ged un to the^, and also with out making any mecio^ of
any point of religion, but only requesting most humbly that it would please his
Ma. to set order in all things by his own anothoriti and by the general advice
of the estates, but first that it would please him to cause all the strangers
which troubled the conutrye to avoid from thence: submitting themselves in all
things besides to any such order as his Maitstie, and the Estates general
should thinck most meet for them (as appears by there request) which is
marked with the letter. E. the which request the forenamed Mounsieur de S.
Aldegond carried him self unto Mounsieur de Champagini to Mou^tsort, yelding him
self again in to his prison at Vtrecht. But with in a while after, Mou^sieur
de Cha^pagni having been at the court in Bruxels, sent back the foresaid
request unto Mounsieur Iunius Governor of the Vere, who together with
Mou^sieur de Carnes, had remained in hostage at Mountsort for Mounsiur de S.
Aldegond during his absence, and by that means also were admytted by Mou^sieur
de Champagni to treat of this matter, as may well appear by a letter he sent
to Mounsire Iunius which follows likewise marked with. F. whereupon the said
Iunius made him an answer by writing again, as appears with the marks of
G. and H. We leave the rest unto the good reader to consider of, desyring God
te give us the grace that all may redou^d unto his glory, and the edifying of
his Church.

A. To Mounsire' M. Charles Boisort, my very friend.
Mounsire Boisot: the great league of amytie which has been between M. de
Granuill and M. Thresorier our fathers (whom God pardon) the frendeship of the
Cardynall my brother, and mine own goodwil toward you, which still I observe
inviolable with my Ladies your sisters, and with all the rest of your free^des
here, have caused me oste^tymes to be sorye for your absence, and grieved for
your troubles. Now therefore sythence that his Majesty at this present shows
a great desire of the peace and tranquillitye of these low countries, and a
great affection that all such as have absented them selves from his favor,
should return again unto his good grace (the which thing I assure you I have
both wished for long, and also procured to my power, in all times and places
convenient for that purpose:) and since that I my self by the appoyntme^t of
his excellency, am come un Vtrecht of purpose to confer with my Brother in
law Mounsire' de la Roche, touching the bringing home again of these lost
sheep: All these things, and our old friend ship considered, I thought good to
write unto you, to the^d that throwgh your furtheraunce aunswering to my well
meaning, we might endeavor owrselues to deliver this poor cu^ntre from those
great miseries, which we se embra se it on every side: promising unto you by
the faith of an honest man and true free^d, to strain my self to the vttermoste
of my power therein, and to procure for you (if you do here any notable
service toward the bringing aganie of this people to the obedience of his
Majesty) not only a full restitucion of that which was yours, but also
peradventure a good reward, and this does he will me to offer unto you upon so
good a grownde, as (in mine opinion) neither you ought to refuse, nor the
Towns which are revolted from his service, to omytt. And if I had any means
to confer with you, I would not doubt, but we two should make so good an
entrance into those matters, as that not only your self and those towns, but
also agreat many of others, should find better fruit thereof, then you would
thinck for. I have fownde both better access and creditt then I can tell you
by writing, and also a singular bownty in the Governor that now is, at all
times when any speech happens between him and me touching the appeasing of
those callamities, unto the which I pray you to give ear, and to accompany nay
zeal with yours: which if you do, I doubt not but (by the grace of God) we
shall work agreat good turn unto this common weal. M. Boisott I recommend my
self heartily unto you and commyt you to God, whom I pray, to send unto you
your hearts desire, and unto us alla good end of all our afflictions.

From Cantecroi this. 14. of June. 1574. Entirely your best friend I. Perrenot.

B. To Mounsire M. Perrenot my very friend.
Mounsire de Champagni your letters of the date of the. 14. of this mo^neth
which you sent to my brother, are happened to my hands, which in his abse^ce I
have opened and red, rejoicing very much to find therein the desire that his
Majesty: has now of the qu^etnes of his country, and that he would have his
subjects return again into his good favor* which you say, that both he has
wished for long since, and your self have procured to th'utmoste of your power.
Whereas you desire to se^ my brother apply him self (if it wear possible) to
the joining with you in zeal toward the helping of his poor country out of
those myseries, that on every side compass it about, promysing your aid and
endeavor vnde^ the oath of a sincere honest man and true friend, and that his
Majesty does offer him no^ only a restitution of his own, but also a good
reward, which courtesy, neither he shall do^ well in refusing, neither the
revolted Towns in rejecting: And whereas, you wish for hi^ person to confer
withal, assuring him of the good hope you have in the singular bountye of this
new governor: To all these things my brother (if he were present) might make
aunsuere at large, with the consent of the Prince of Orange. But forasmuch he
is absent, I will say no more, but that this zeal of his Majesty, in desyring
the peace and quyetnes of his subjects, is a noble and worthy such a
Cristian prince as he is, and that no man would be gladder nor better content
therewith than the Prince him self, as at your coming to Vtrecht yowr self
shall very well perceive and understand by yowr brother in law the Conte de la
Roche, who knows very well what has already passed from him in
communication hereof and also by letters written in that behalf. But this dare
I say of mine own head, that in my simple judgment there is no means to
appease these troubles, but only by drawing of these strangers out of owr
country. For they are such a kind of people, as both by hearesay in times
past, and by proofs in times present we find to be no men of their word, nor
such whose promises any man may trust. For always they find sum bypathes
to escape by following therein the manner of the counsel of Constans whereof
they pratle daily. Where upon, I may conclude, that at their hands there can be
no assurance looked for, so long as they remain in the country. I did send
your letters unto his Excel. to the^d he might both see and know the great
desire you say you have of the welfare of owr country, requesting you M.
Cha^pagni to co^tinew that good zeal that you pretend to bear to owr quiet.
Prayng God to give, unto you the co^tentme^t of your mind, and unto us an
easement of owr afflictions.

From Mydleburche this 17 of June. 1574. Entyrely your good friend, Lois de
Boisott.

D. The answer of the Estates to the Questions propounded.
AS towching that which has been propounded unto the Estates of Holland and
Zeland, concerning the troubles of this present wars, and how to bring the
same to a good and sure pass, for the rest and quyetnes of the country, and
the saffety of his Majesty's subjects: These Estates do openly declare that
they wear never of opinion, nor be at this present, of taking any weapons in
hand, in any cause that might be prejudicial against his Majesty, his
country, or provinces: but that they in acquitall of their bownden duty and
chardge, with intent to co^serue the reputacio^ and highness of their seignories
and Lord ships, together with their Privileges, oaths, rightes, worthy
customs, and liberties of their countri, and subjects, have been constrained
to with stand by main force, the hard Government, tyranny, and violence of
the duke of Alua, and of the strangers his adherentes, who by unaccustomed
exactions and oppressions of the poor subjects, have troubled owr common
wealth, not seeking for any thing else, than by their Insolency to make them
selves Masters of his Majesty's country and subjects: and by that means to
bring them into perpetual bondage, to the great prejudice both of his service
and of their maintenau^ce, as the fore said Estates have heretofore declared
and protested, in such sort that they will not at this present make any
articles of pacificatio^ with his Majesty, whom they have allwaies heretofore
sought to obey and serve in all humilitye as their liege Lord and Prince: but
like humble suitors, they request that yt will please his Majesty, like a good
father to have regard unto the pouerties and afflicions of these his low
countries, with a merciful eye, to the^d that they may be brought again to
unity, quiett, and liberty, to traffic as they were wont to do. The which,
will both advance the dignity of him self, and increase the prosperitye of
his subjects. And certainly this cannot be brought to pass: so long as these
straingers shall be suffered to exercise their force, and tirannie, whose gain
and proffit does more consist upon troubles and disordres, than in any good
government of the country. For they be such persons, as naturally are most
sludious of their own particular proffit. Lo here the special cause and
mocion of this war. Wherefore it may please his Majesty: to cause these
strangers to retire them selves, and afterward by a frank communication
together with the advice of the general estates of the country, dutifully
assembled, to set so good order, pollecy, and government amongst us, as that
the Subjects of his Majesty may from henceforth assure them selves from all
perrils and inconveniences that may happen unto them. And forasmuch as (of we
may speak franckly) naught else can be looked for, by the continewance of
this war, but only a dispeopling, a solitarynes, and an utter Ruin of all
his Majesty's countries in these parts, specially for because that the more
thinhabitantes thereof do give them selves daily to thexercise of Arms,
clean forgettinge and laying aside their woonted traffic and trade of
merchaundize: the less good is to be looked for at their hand: For we se
ordina^^l to what lycentious lives and liberties, soldiers are commonly
inclyned). By mean whereof it is to be feared, least there will happen a most
domageable and dangerous diminishing of all kind of traffic and
merchaundize, both by sea and land, redownding to the utter shaking of his
Majesty's estates, or the slipping aside of his service:) The said Estates do
humbly request, that better regard be had here unto, so as both Holland, and
Zeland and also their provinces and contries adjoining, being by aucthoritye of
his Majesty in all parts dischardged from the troublesome multitude of
foldiars and strangers: all manner of preparacion and prouicion made for wars
may presently surceasse, and have end on all sides, in such sort as the
natural inhabitants of the countries may once again be settled in some surety,
and the one being reconciled, to the other, may with free liberty talk and
traffic together. This suite being obtained, the said Estates do promise on
their parts to perform in all points the Duties of good and faithful
Subjects, hoping that the letters, of the great Co^mau^dador, and all other
faithful vassalles and servants to his Majesty, will herein put to their
helping hand, the which we do request and pray with all reverence, and
humility.

D. To Mounsire' M. de Saint Aldegondi.
MOunsiere de Mont S. Aldegonde we marvel not a little, that all this while we
have not herd any thing from you. Yesterday there arrived here M. de la
Rinicre, and the Advocate Treslonge: who under the pretense of sum private
affairs went to Rotterdam, where they did assay certain means touching the
appeasing of these present troubles, following therein no more tha^ I permitted
them to do. But upon certain questions propownded of them of that side unto M.
de Rihicre, they grew into farther talk of the matter at their own pleasure,
being moved there unto (as I guess) by a fervent zeal they had to do their
country good. But the return of their answer grows nothing nere to any
quyetnes. Wherefore you can not make me believe that you desire to have peace,
to the obteyning whereof you promised me faithfully to ymploy your self. For
neither can the title that they take upon them, as appears by that writing
which was brought unto me, be so usurped by them: neither ca^ those reasons
which they allege for their reuolting, be admitted by any means, for that they
touch to near the reputacio^ of his Majesty, although they say they would
mainteigne the same, wherein I find no reason. And as touching the means that
they make, they are not accompanied with such respects as I hoped for. It
seems by their speeches and writing, that the towns revolted from the
obedience of his Majesty, do nevertheless behave the^ selves like good
subjects to their prince and Sovereign. Wherefore you must bring sum
other news to that affect, that you and I taulked of, or otherwise I fear,
that we shall do no good in this matter. I know very well your capacitye to
be sufficient to persuade any reasonable matter. I know likewise what you are
able too do (if you list to ymploy your self,) considering what credit you be
of with all the^ of that side. Remember your promis: by following the which,
you may chance to come to that which I assured you of. For my part I will
procure you all the means I may, to thend that all things may end well. Thus
leaving for this time I pray unto God, to give unto you a long and happy lief
with health from

Montfort this 21, of July. 1574. Entirely your very good friend I. Perrenot.
M. de Carmes and M. Iunius be in health



E. A Supplication to the King
In most humble wise do all the Knights and Towns of Holland and Zeland,
protest that at all times and places they have yielded both unto your Majesty,
and to your Predecessors all humble obedience, reverence and service,
whenever it has bin required for the maintenance of the greatness, glory and
Majesty of your highness, as became good, and faithful vassals and subjects to
do: in respect whereof they nothing doubt but that your Majesty's affection
is increased thereby, the rather to conserve and mayntaine the^ in all their
rights and liberties, with all quietness and tranquillity, under sound Justice
and good policy. Now whereas the Duke of Alua being then Governor for your
Majesty ought by good reason to have showed himself conformable to all things
before said: Yet has he clean contrariwyse under the title of his
government, committed such injuries and violences upon your countries and
subjects, as well spiritual as temporal, as well noble as not noble; as that
your poor subjects for the preseruinge* and keepinge of their privileges,
rightes, aunciente customs, and allowed liberties, have bin forced against
their will to withstand with force and arms, the proud and violente kind of
gouernmente of the said Duke of Alua, and his adherentes and strangers. Who
have sought by all means to hinder the quietness of your common weal, by
raysinge up pernicious newelties, unwonted exactions, and general oppression
of your Majesty's subjects. We see they shoot at noone other mark, but only
to subdue thinhabitants of your Country to their appetits, and insolences,
only to impouerishe them, and bring them to bondage to the great hinderaunce
of your Majesty's service, dignity, and dominion. Whereof your said orators
have already most openly made suite and protestacio^, even as other estates
and proui^ces have often sued for the same respect. This notwithstanding, the
said Duke of Alua persisteth and continues still in his wicked determinacion,
whereby not only the forenamed Countries of your Majesty's, and thinhabitours
thereof are brought into great alteracions, calamities and troubles of war:
but also the kingdoms, countries and nations adjoining, have conceived a
marvelous hatred and horror of the disdainefull pride of these strangers and
ill willers, enemies to the common quiet, for that by them they find both
loss, and laying a side of all trafique and handicrafts, of all merchants
trade, and prosperity.

Now therefore, seeing that your poor Orators have not hitherto sought,
neither do at this present seek for any other thing, than to procure as much
as they may, thaduauncemente of their Country cause, for the better service of
your Majesty, as becomes loyal subjects to do: They most humbly request
with all reverence, that it would please your Majesty like a most gentle
father, to behold and look upon the miserable and pitiful Estate present of
these Low Countries, and to set them again in some good unity, trade, and
tranquillity. Whereby both the greatness of your Majesty may maruelously
increase, and also the prosperity of our countrymen grow and flourish in your
service. And surely this cannot be brought to pass, so long as these
strangers shall be suffered to use, and exercise their tyrannical government, in
our country: Considering, that all their gains, and commodity, consists
more in disquietnes and confusion, than in any good order or rule. And surely
by daily experience we find, that they by nature are rather given to their
own gredie gain and appetites, than to seek for any good to these Countries,
where they be but mere strangers. And this is the occasion of our troubles and
present war. May it therefore please your Majesty, to cause these
strangers to be drawn away from hence, and by fre communication and advise of
the natural Estates of this Country being generally and lawfully called
together, to set and establish some such good order policy and rule, as the
said Countries and subjects of your Majesty's, may from henceforth be the
better mainteyned in one unity and assured tra^quility, and void of all
troubles and inco^ueniences that are to come hereafter. Moreover, consideringe
that at the length by the co^tinuaunce of these present wars, naught else can
be hoped for, than the pillinge, dissolution and utter destruction of your
Majesty's Countries on every side: and so much the rather, for that we see
thinhabitaunts thereof to give themselves every day more and more unto
th'exercise and feats of arms, forgetting quite, and laying aside their
wonted trafique and trade of Marchaundize: And sure it is, that men by nature
are most commonly inclined to all kind of licentious liberty that war
brings with it, in such sort, that by long use, and practice of the broils
in war, such rigor and hatred will increase daily among your May.
subjects one against another, as that it is to be feared, least all trades,
trafiques, Marchaundizes and saylinges will be clean left of to the great
hinderance of your Majesty's service: The said suitours do most humbly crave,
that it will please your Majesty to have regard thereunto with all clemency:
so much the rather, for that all other provinces and Countries adjoining, and
bordering, being by your Majesty's auctority discharged from the combensome
multitude of all straung souldiars, may presently by your good provision, lay
aside all arms, and surcesse from all enmity; so as the meeting and
co^uersatio^s of this country may be restored again with all surety: And that
being reconciled the one to the other, they may enjoy with quietness their ancient
possessions, and patrimonies, by the obtaining whereof, the said Orators will
not fail to perform on their parts all the duties of good and faithful
subjects to your Majesty etc.

To Mounsire M. Iunius Atauere.
M. Iunius I did not a whit miscaste my account, when as at our last beings
together in the presence of your self, and M. de Carmes, I did declare unto
Monsire de Monte Saint Aldegonde, that I feared greatly lest the writing which
he brought from Rotterdam would find but little favor in the Court. For from
the time that I first arrived there until this hour, having tried in every
corner how it might be taken, I find that the opinions of all men here do so
far differ from the desiers of all me^ there, as I dare not deal any further
therein: and therefore I thought it best, to send you this letter together
with the selfsame request, that M. de Mont S. Aldegond brought unto me annexed
thereunto, to whom I would not write, for that he may receive no papers without
perusing, neither could I write into your quarters, but by the same co^dicions.
As I have declared unto you before this time: so do I think at this present,
that some other form of writing had bin more fit for all parts. For albeit that
that which he brought was in the manner of a supplication, (as in deed all
subjects ought to do toward their Princes:) Yet this which they of Holland and
Zeland have offered, is to far besides the quallitie that should be looked for
in that respect. For first and foremost they would that the king should disarme
himself, and that he should not be served but with such as they like: not
considering at all, that it lies in his power both to take or leave arms,
when he himself lists. Who knows what is convenient for his subjects, and
his affairs, better than himself? or who can tell better then he, what kind
of people will serve his turn best for the profit and commodity of the same?
Whereas in deed, it is not permitted to subjects, no not in a good cause, to
take arms but by the appointment of their Lord, neither to call in any
strangers as those of Holland and Zelande have done: therefore their fault is
so much the more grievous, and inexcusable, in taking them up against their
Prince, or against his officers which is al one, since that they be ordained by
him to represe^t his person, and to occupy his place, because he himself
cannot be in all places at once.

But forasmuch as they have offended already by entering into arms of their
own private authority, and by taking the kings Towns, whereof, or of the
restitutio^ whereof they make no mention at all: in very deed, in steed of
their demanding of that thing at his Majesty's hand, which they of your side
ought to perform if reason mighie take place: they should trust to the
clemency of their Printe, and refer themselves wholly thereunto. On the other
side, it seems also very straung, that subjects, will seem to enforce their
Price to follow their appetite in assembling of Estates, yea and that generally
amongst a sort of Seignories, which in degrees, jurisdictions, and customs
have nothing in common, but only neighbor hode the one with the other. In deed
they have one Lord who oftentimes has given them leave to talk at their
pleasure for their own benefit, about their affairs, not meaning that this
his bounty should be wrested unto any prejudice against himself: for it
seems certain by the request of this assembly, that they would make laws,
and keep him as Ward. Of all other points which I pass under silence,
(whereof nevertheless I have often given my verdite, that his Majesty may not in
any point yield unto) I will rehearse no more at this present. Of all those
matters, I talked at lardge with Mon. de Monte S. Aldegonde. Nevertheless the
great desire that I had to do some good as touching the quietness of this
Country, if God would permit, and his earnest requiringe that I would not
lightly leave of from this enterprise, have made me to do the best that I can,
although I dispaired of any good issue before I began. Surely I am sorry,
besides the general cause, even in particular, for such as I thought very well
of. And for the friendship that I have borne unto the house of Mon. de Monte
Saint Aldegond, I would have wished that he had concluded somewhat more
touching the affairs of Mons. le Count de Bossu. For after that report was
made here, of the answer that was made touching that matter, by M the Prince
of Orange unto M. de Monte S. Aldegonde: it was determined here, that upon my
coming it should proceed no further, since that the good Seignior de Bossu is
never a whit the better. I have thought it good to make this rehersall unto
you of all that is paste since I returned from Mountforde, partly to let you
understand of my foreward good will, and partly to advertise you to seek
other means that were more expediente for the pacification of these your
calamities. And thus I leave, prayinge to God M. Iunius that he grant you
that which is for your health.

From Anwerpe this xviij. of August. 1574. Your friend to his power. John
Perrenot.

To Monsire my Lord the Baron of Renare of Aspremont, Seigniour of S. Loup, and
of Champagny. Governor of the City of Anwerpe.
SIr I have received not long since your Lordships letter, dated the xiiij. of
August, iogether with the request of the Estates, and towns of Holland and
Zeland, which Mo^sire de Monte S. Aldegonde brought unto you at Mountford, all
the which I delivered presently into their hands. I found that they marueyled
greatelye, and were persuaded that the reasons alleged within your letter were
in no point sufficient, to reject and send back their foresaid request after
such a sort, the which peradventure might very well have served to have done
some great good. Wherefore, saying themselves to be so handled, not like
subjects or vassals of the king, as they have always showed themselves,
especially where there has bin any question of the honor, pre-eminence, and
greatness of his Majesty, but rather like to the greatest Infidels, Turks or
Iewer that live in the world: yea and like enemies sworn against his
Majesty: they have hereuppon concluded, that they are not hereafter to hope
for any good at their hands, who seek by such means to abuse the name of the
K. to their utter ruin, and confusion. And therefore they have agreed by
Counsel, and determined amongst themselves, to imploye their whole power, to
seek out other means, by which they may better provide for their surety
hereafter, against that so barbarous iniquity and tyranny of those, who
cover their own private passions, with the cloak and color of the name of
the Royal Majesty: Protestinge, that since of themselves they have no access
to the ears of his Majesty, and are likewise forestalled from that means
which both by God and man's laws has bin ever granted to the vilest fellons,
traitors, and disloyal rebels, that either are, or ever were in the world:
surely they seele themselves to be forced by such excessive wickedness, and
tira^ny to seek for such means as shall please their good God to put into
their hands. Desiring you that you will be a witness to all the world, how that
they have presented the foresaid request, and thereby have satisfied some part
of their duty: And so may you most truly excuse and justify them, if any
question do arise hereof. And to thend that your Lordship may know the ground
and cause of their complainte, and wherefore they think themselves so
extremely injured by the sendinge back of their foresaid request: I have
thought good to gather together in form of discourse, the principal Articles
of all their complaint upon your last letters, the which I me^t to have sent
you before this time, but that I waited for your man's coming to me for my
aunsweare to yours, who being come received his dispatche without any long
staying. Desiring you, well to consider and thinck of the reasons and grounds
alleged by them upon your said letter. I have annexed them hereunto: but so
nevertheless, as that this my writing may in no point be prejudicial to the
said Estates, and Towns, or to their resolution. For my zeal is good, for
the quiet of the country, and my affeclio^ great to do your Lordship service.
Well, I will remit my self unto the discourse, whereof I pray you excuse the
length, and impute the fault thereof either to my vnabillitie, or else to the
difficulty of th'affayres that are treated of therein. Thus recommending my
self most humbly etc.

He that would be glad to take away the stop that hinders me from doing
agreeable service to your Lordship. I. Iunius de lenghe

H DISCOVRSE.
SIR, first men may thinck it strange, that the opinions of your Court
ingenerall have bin so far alienated from those agreements which our men did
most desire, that (as your letter mencioneth) you durst not once open your
mouth any further touching, that matter. For it is altogether unlikely that you
who^ I have accounted always, and do account to be a noble gentleman,
desirous both of the preservation of his Majesty, and of the quiet, and
tranquillity of the common weal: have withdrawn your self from a business so
much importing the service of the king, and the general quiet and safety of
the whole country: upon the opinion of certain private men, and of small
countenance in the Court. For therein you should not only do wrong to that
noble mind, and valiaunte courage which I have always seen in you: but also
it might be a discredit to the great duty, and trust you owe to his
Majesty. Wherefore, I say that their opinions of whom you spoke, have
proceeded from certain of the privy Council in these estates, upon whom the
king has reposed his chiefest confidence, touching the government and rule of
these Cou^tryes. The which Councillors, are sworn to reveal and make known
every thing, which in their consciences may any way be prejudicial to the
kings highness, or commoditye. They make us thinck assuredly, that you have not
conferred at all with the^ of any such matter: for if they had received any
incklinge at all thereof, of necessity it must have come to the kings ears,
or at the least to their ears who had full power and authority to deal
therein. We cannot comprehend nor imagine what should so much cool your
courage, and make you afearde to prefer openly our request, the which of
necessity (as you know) must come to their understanding. And the rather
because that with you they do altogether condemn and mislike the doings of
certain confederate gentlemen, who preferred the like suite unto Madame de
Parma, in the year 1566. especially, because that they did not rather use a
mean more ordinary, either by some of the Estates, or else by some one
principal man in the Court, who in their names might have exhibited their
supplication, and not to have advanced themselves so boldly, and in such
manner, as they did. Notwithstanding, by this your example you seem to allow,
and justify them. For you say, that if the Court cannot digeste a
supplication or suite, it is great folly for any one man, though of authority
(as your self is) to take upon him, the preferringe up of any such
matter, but rather by sendinge it back again to incur all dangers, which
may happen for want of exhibitinge the same in convenient time. But whereas
you say, that you have not broken the matter to any man, but only groped
their minds a far of: surely it seems to be nothing answerable to that
professed zeal, and great affection you have always seemed to bear unto the
Mat. of the king, and good of his country. The which in my judgment, seems
most manifest, in that you were aserd to present a request so expedient both
for the king and his country. Wherefore, if the event of things hereafter
shall happen to frustrate and deceive their opinions whose minds you have but
groped a far of: assure yourselfe it is impossible for you to eschew some
exceeding great blame, in that you rejected and sent back without any
occasion, a request of such importance. For though you meant not to follow the
matter your self, yet might you have uttered it openly, except by your own
authority you would seem to deprive both King and country of so necessary a
means, as to have consulted and determined, concerning the points of a
general pacificatio^. Moreover, if those Courtiers in authority and of the
privy counsel have seen the foresaid request, and would not make the King
acquainted therewith: yet should they at the least either have published that
self same thing, which they would not communicate, or else have given sum
good advice and counsel unto us, withowt usurping after that sort their
authority, in a matter that so particularly did touch the Kings own person.
For if you respect but the oath only (whereby his Majesty was sollemly sworn
(and there upon admytted in to this country) never to refuse, or reject any
Bill, or supplicacio^ whatsoever, of any of his Subjects, how mean soever,
and much less of corporacions and whole Provinces: Surely you night have
showed a singular care and earnest desyer for the perfourmaunce of the same.
Moreover, yt is altogether disagreeing from the law of nature, (the which
works effect in all people and nations) that a Prince (to whom the people
have committed their forces to thend they may be governed by justice and
equitye, and have their causes hard) should reject them withowt making any
care or countenance to understand them. This did Adrian the Emperor know very
well, being a Pagan and one that knew not God: who having a supplicacion
presented him in the streets by a poor woman, answered that he had not
convenient time to look upon such small matters: but she nothing dismayed,
replied, that if he had not leisure to peruse the particular requests of his
poor subjects, he shoud have far less leysuer to rule and command: her
reason was because yt was the duty of a King to do Justice. With which
answer he feeling himself touched to the quick, forth with acknowledged his
fault, and afterward perusing her request, gave her presently her right. By
these we are tolearne in how great fault they are, which make the King culpable
both before God and the world, in taking away from him the means to hear
and understand the requests of his subjects, yea and of his towns and whole
Provinces. The which is not only disagreeing from the natural care of Princes
to their Subjects: but also against the profession of a Christian, yea and
contrary to the particular othewhich he is sworn unto. And sure in these
respects owr Prince is more heauely charged, and has more to answer for,
than had that Emperor Adrian. But since you allege some apparaunce of
reasons, whereby it seems we ought many wise to commit the Judgment of this
Present quarrel to the arbitriment of the Prince: I beseech you consider of
what force your persuasions may be with them of Holland and Zeland. Mark
whether they ca^ be made to believe the contrary, but that by these means
they have been most yniurioustye dealt withal, and the Majesty of their
Prince the King of Spain and Count of Holland, most extremely abused and set
at naught.

You say, they would that the King shoudle disarme him self. Surely if it
wear so: Yet might they answer, that so long as the King did hold the
sword in his hand, ready to murder them at his pleasure, yt were great folly,
(but more danger) for them to humble them selves, and to show that duty which
ought to be in subjects to their Prince. For what could minister a greater
likelyhod to have all their throtes to be cut by creditt, than this? For if he
be not armed against them, they will never wish him to lay aside his
weapens. And contrariwise, if he be, it follows that he becomes, not as
their King (that is to say, as their father and pastor,) but (which is more
proper for him) their utter enemy and destroyer.

But God forbid, that those good Subjects of Holland and Zeland which have
always borne an especial duty and honor to their prince, and likewise have
fownde in him a singular kind of clemency toward them, should be
constrained to thinck that their king is in arms against them, and so bent to
their ruin and destruction, as that he will not give ear or harken to their
complaints. Nay, they compain rather that certain strangers, such as are
not known to the King, neither allied by blood nor affinity, nor that once
can carry good meaning to these low countries, are come in the Kings name,
armed at all points to exercise barbarous and Turkish Tyrannies of their own
aucthorities: nothing esteming the solemn oath and firm composicion which the
King had made, but have brought in with the^ a new world, as well contrary to
the ancient pollecie and custom of laws and privileges, As also against the
auctoritye of the Kings Maiestratie and officers, whom they pray with all
humility, that yt woolde please him by his aucthoritye, to cause them to lay
aside their weapons, and to retire the^ selves, leaving the country to that
government which was used before time, of long co^tynewaunce, by the
predicessours of the Kings Majesty: of glorious memory. The which if it were
brought to pass, there should be no subjects more dutiful* none more ready to
acknowledge the authority of the Prince over them, nor none more ioifull to
acco^plishe what soever should be commanded them. And I pray you, how could
you lay (I will not say any foundacio^ of peace) but only some fained appearance
of an agreement, except that these as ringleaders do first give up their
weapens and get them packing out of this country? unless you thinck that the
means to attain to peace, does consist in setting strangers (yea and
strangers of such co^ditio^) in possession of the Subjects goods (moueables,
and ymmoueables,) and to let the^ vyolate their wynes and children: and that
for a full end of such their benifites and favors, the subjects might do
well to interteme and cherish them to cut al their throtes, so as they might at
once plead full possession, and the King be ryd of his true subjects.

But you say, that they demand that the King should not be served of any,
but of such as they themselves vvoulde appoint him. It shall never be found,
that ever they did so much as ymagine, that the Ki. might not make war
against his enemies, whosoever or of what condition soever they wear, with
such and so many as he thought good, and that they be not so evil advised as
to prescribe any laws to his Ma. especially in a thing sovnreasonable. But
they humbly beseech his Ma. that Strangers be not lycensed, (only upon
private quarrels) to make war against the country, and towns of the King
and his subjects: And that Spaniardes* Italia^s, Swissers, and an infinite
number of others, miht not divide among the^ the booties, and spoils gotten
within his Ma. dominions, or at least that their goods, their wives, and
children, be not made prays nor subjects to the thraldomme of so barbarous,
and unknown people in these parts. The which suyte, can not be construed
anywaies that the King should altogether lay a side weapens. For if at any time
his Ma. would make wars in these parts or in any other, he might be hable
to leauy as great an army of Holla^d and Zeland and these Countries on horse
back or on foot, by sea or by land, as easily should be hable to resist, or
rather ouerco^me his greatest enemies, as yt has been appare^tly seen by the
Predecessors of the Kings Matestie the dukes of Burgo^dy, and Lords of this
country. Who when they had no strangers neither Spa^iardes, nor Italia^s,
yet wear never destitute of such souldiars, as were sufficient for the
defense of their country. But on the other side Duke Charles the hardy, as long
as he did put his trust and confidence in these cou^triemen and thinhabitantes
of these parts, and gave no entertainme^t to any but Burgonio^s and VVallons:
he prospered always and had the victores, in so much as he was feared of all
his neighbors. But after he begane to give credit to strangers, and would be
served of Italia^s, and such like which were under the charge of one called
Campobasso, the case was altered anon after. For by the treason of this
foresaid Ca^pobasso (corrupted either by money, or by somother means) the Duke
having received the worse at two battles, at the third being before Nancy
lost both his lief, and all the honor which his faithful Subjects of those
countries had gotten before. Not with standing if it be not lawful to entreat
the King not too be served in these wars of any but these cou^trymen his
Subjects: Why then have the Estates generally desired the same of the
Commandador at Bruxels? or why has their suit ben accepted, since yt bare all
one show of Rebellion against the King? For as concerning this, where you say,
it is lawful for the King to be at wars or at peace with whom or when he
lists: Surely you accuse in this the Ancestors of his Majesty, who have
always vowed and sworn to the estates, not to make war or to take any
quarrel in hand, withowt their co^sentes. A thing which has been observed
amongst Princes since the world was a world, and by all such as would not
publicly be esteemed as Tyrans. For seeing that not only the expenses of the
war, but also all thinconueniences, damages, and mischaunces of the same do
fall principally upon the necks of the people: surely both natural reason,
and equity requyres, that some in their behalf (as the Maiestrate in some
place, in other places the Estates, in other places the Cou^sailes, assiste^ts
and Parliame^ts of Princes) should be admitted to speak and sit in counsel
for their be hoof. Except they had rather follow Xerxes: who after he had
assembled his Counsel of Estates, and all the Princes and Maiestrates of
Persia concerning the wars he took in hand against the Gretians: protested to
them, that the chiefest and only cause why he sent for them, was not to thend
they should give him any advice, or counsel: but that they might hear and
allow of his device and enterprise which he had already determined and resolved
on. Where upon, he was not only accounted a Tyrant, but fell into most
opprobrious and detestable in famye, which continewed, to the loss all most
of all his dominion. But for all this, here is nothing spoken to appoint the
King what wars, or with whom he should wage the^. For let him but only say
the word, when or with whom, and he shall find both Hollanders and
Zelanders in such redynes, as if the dru^ do but sound, their bodies and
their goods shall be sufficient pledges to show their willing minds, and true
hearts they bear to their Prince, the which their predicessours before them
have always showed to the King, and his ancestors. But here is war made
against the Kings own countries, to ouerrunne the provinces of his own
demaynes, to pil, to sack to put to Ruin and destruction, his own Subjects.
And to be short, he makes war against him self. A Prince withowt his
Subjects is no Pince. Wherefore I marvel you do so much mislike that these
poor molested people should humbly beseache his Majesty, that by his
aucthoritye and commandment, this war so hurt full to them, so unprofitable
to the King, so detestable before God, and so to be lamented and pitied of all
honest minds, might cease. You say the King knovves what his subjects have
need of. Would you by this maintayn that it is conueniente that the Kings
Subjects should be robbed, undone, and murdered by strangers, their howses
burnt, their towns spoilled, their feelds wasted, their inheritau^ces decayed,
their wives and daughters deslowred, and their children led under the servitude
of Strangers? The which if it be conuenyent and necessary for the Kings
Subjects: surely it were better for the^ to be under the protection of the
most cruellest Tiraunt that ever reigned. Except (as in deed yt appears) the
King has not so commanded, since he understands so well what is most
conuenyent for his Subjects. Therefore have they great reason, with all
humillity to refer them selves to his most gracious order, commanding all
foreigners too get them packing out of the country. But if you say the
woorst you can, and think to cut all their throotes by a word speaking, in
saying these men are rebels to the King, and therefore cannot be accounted as
his subjects: Leaving to debate this question presently, which would be both
long and tedious, they will only answer you thus. That if they be rebels, you
ought to leave that to the Judgment of his Majesty, unto whom they submitted
them selves by their foresaid request, and that you ought not (by sending the
same back again) to take away from his Ma. al his right of equity, and
Justice, and from the^ all the means they had for their justification. And as
touching that which you take for a Maxim That it is not lavvful for any
subject to take arms in hands, without thorder and appointment of their
Lords: It will appear to al me^ of Judgment, that it is such a kind of
speech, as can have no good ground of truth, because yt is so general. For
if the Lord be out of the country, and the said country be suddenly in vaded
by enemies, I do not thinck that your meaning is in this case by this your
law, that men should make adoubt of taking weapens in hand, until their
country wear clean ouerrunne and spoilled. For by that means you must
condemn the Dukes of Burgo^dy the Predicessore of his Majesty, of felony and
treason, for that they being then the vassals of the King of France, yea (and
that more is) lincked very nere unto him in ba^des of blood, and having yielded
unto him their homage and fealtye, did take arms, not only withowt his
appointment, but also against his own person and estates in the feeld. Surely
no man ca^ make me believe, but that the good Duke Phillip knew very well, what
was the duty of a subject, when as (to revenge the death of Duke Ihon his
father, who alitle before had slain the Duke of Orleans brother to the King
(he caused the King of England to comme into France, and made him Lord of the
Cittye of Paris, and of the best part of the whole kingdom. If this law
which nou set down here, were so general as you would make it surely he had
never atteined unto the name of so good a Prince as he was accounted, neither
had he left behind him to his posterity so good a report of immortal glory
as we know of. Likewise his son Charles the hardy, when he took arms
against Lois the. 11. and defeated a part of his army at Monthelery: knew not
he very well that subjects might make no stir withowt appointment or
authority from their Lord? will you say then that owr King doothe wrongfully
enjoy the countye of Burgondy, the which was granted by the same Lois and
Charles, under the title that the subject did bear arms against his liege
Lord? But how often has it been seen, and judged to be right and
reasonable, that the subjects in particular, and the Towns and Provinces in
general have taken Arms in such cases as this, not only withowt the
appointment of their Lord, but also even against their sovereigns them
selves, and yet has nether your law nor Maxim been of sufficient weight
against the reasons, and arguments that they alleged in defense of their
equytie. Wherefore of force your conclusion cannot hold, when as you infer
by this your Maxim, that they of Holland and Zeland have committed an offense
inexcusable, in having taken arms against their Prince. For first you should
have declared that the grounds, and occasions that forste them thereunto were
not reasonable, or at the least not sufficient to maynteyne the equitye of
their cause: and then might you have had sum better appara^ce of reason. But
surely it seems, that for because you would have the equitye of their cause
quyte suppressed from the ears of the world, and from the knowledge of his
Majesty, you have clean trodden under foot and sent back again their
request: grownding your self only upon the opinions of such of the court, as
you knew before to be adversaries to their attemptes. And I pray you, what if
these of owr side shall say, that they not only have not taken arms against
his Majesty, but also that they have not stirred, but by his consent and
authority? Does it not seem unto you reasonable, that the oath (which the
King has taken, and the express article wherein he commands that no man
shall any longer yield obedience unto him self, than he observes the points of
the artiles that he is sworn unto) may iustifye their doings, especially
seeing that both his Majesty is absent, and that strangers, under the title
of his name, have not only broken these articles, but also sought vtterli to
disanull that sollemne contract, the which he made at his entrye into Brabant,
which is the chiefest of all the Provinces he possesses in these parts? for
as touching that which you say, That to bear arms against his Majesty or
his Ministers is all one: I cannot comprehend, where of that should be
grounded, considering that the King him self at his foresaid entry and
acceptacion, does promise, swear, and declare, that presently and ipso facto
all officers, Maiestrates ad Mynisters, shall be taken but for sciphers, and of
no validity, who either have been here before, or shall be hereafter placed in
prejudice of those articles, which he is sworn unto, or that shall commit any
thing against the same. So that the King him self does by his oath disgrade
all such ministers, and does put weapens into owr hands, to resist their
iniquitye and violence. And if that you grant that all this is true, in
respect of the^ of Brabant, but that Holla^d and Zeland may be no partakers
thereof: the^ must you needs Justify the Prince of Ore^g, and all those that
serve him, being both inhabitants and naturally borne in Brabant, in that
they would not acknowledge such ministers, as have violated and broken the
oaths and contractes of the King. And since that they wear not bound to
acknowledge or allow the^, but might take arms against the^ it follows that
they might with good reason occupy and enjoy all those lands and Provinces
which did yield any favor, or devotion at any time to such mynisters, being
disanulled and disgraded. And as touching the rest of Holland and Zeland, their
fault and offense can be none other, but that they be not borne in Brabant.
For I cannot thinck that you will deny, but that the said ministers against
whom they bear arms, have broken and violated in a manner all those articles
which the King was sworn unto at his first entrye. And if thies things were
not thus: what is he that sees not plainly, how that in this point the Kings
hands be fast tied together, since that your selves do confess, that in all
matters Ecclesiastical and touching faith, he is bound to be obedient unto
the Pope, his legates, and vicars. Do not we know how that, that Commission
which was concluded upon, and ordained amongst your ecclesiastical persons,
and Bishops, to root out this owr religion, which you call new, was invented
and forged by Pope Pius the fourth, being solicited thereunto by Docter
So^nius who for that cause remained at Rome by the space of three or four
years, and afterward brought amongst us into these quarters the pestilent
seed of these troubles, and calamities, that we feel at this day? Do not we
know that it was only the Pope, which gave commandment to the king, that
thordinau^ces of the Council of Trent should be published here, against the
which all the Estates both Ecclesiastical and Temporal did set themselves to
withstand, as a thing prejudicial against the aunciente laws, customs and
privileges which the king has sworn unto us? Briefly, have not all the
Instruments and Authors of this Tragedy bin created only by the Pope? And who
is ignorant I pray you, that the Pope in his decres does openly vaunte that all
kings and Princes are bound to hold all their Crowns and Scepters of him, and
to obey him in every point? Have we no learned of our ancestors, how that the
^opes of Rome have commanded at their plea^ure, the most noble Emperors and
Prince* of Christendom, and sought to execute their wills by excommunicating
and accursinge of them, as often as they would resist their pleasures? From
whence proceeded those cruel and bloody wars between the three Henry's,
Frederick and Philip, and an insinite number of other Emperors against the
Popes of Rome: but for because that the same Emperors, would not obey their
Commandments, sometimes when they willed them to make war in all have
upon the Sarrasins, sometimes when they would have them leave of that title
which they had received by succession of their ancestors, sometimes when the
Popes themselves would be put in possession of certain towns and territories,
which they said, they should inherit as the patrimony of S. Peter, and finally
upon any cause that it pleased them to pick, whereof all the Chronicles and
Histories be filled. And what was the cause why Pope Alexander marched in
public place upon the neck of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, adding
thereunto many words full of reproach and shame? And what is the cause again,
why even at this day they make the Monarks and kings to kiss their feet, but
only in sign and token of subjection which they claim as due? And presently
if they be not obeyed, they thunder against them: and pronounce absolution
unto all their subjects, although they revolt from that fidelity which they
owe of duty. Wherefore seeing that the king is so much subject to the Pope of
Rome (who^ in no wise we ca^ acknowledge to be our superior) and since yt he
fears so much his thu^drings and exco^munications: How can you either say or
believe, that his Ma. does co^mau^d absolutely amongst us what he lists
himself, specially in such a matter wherein ye Pope pretends to have more
interrest than any man alive? I beseech you if the king would here our
requests, and finding the^ grounded upon good reasons, were willing to grant
us the exercise of our religion: do you thi^ck that it were lawful for him so
to do? Your self have told me very plainly, yt if the king would co^disce^d
to any such matter, you would take arms against him, and cause (to your power)
the whole country to rebel. And this I am sure your self will not deny to
have said, when I was with you at Mountford. Where the^ remains the fre
authority of the king to command? where is ye greatness of his Ma. yea rather
what becomes of his liberty and of your Maxim, that no subject may take
arms in hand without ye appointment of his king and lord, seeing that one only
vassal will to his power cause al his Estats to rebel, if that the advice and
opinion of his Majesty, touching the cause of his Country and subjects, shall
not agree with his co^ceite? But I am content to pardon you herein,
consideringe the zeal which you bear to the Romish Religion, upon condition
that you will imagine that our zeal which we bear unto our Apostolical
Religion of the Gospel, is not a whit less, although peradventure it is
nether so plausible in man's capacity, neither so profitable to them that
maintain it. Yet have we examples very fresh of the Emperor Charles of noble
memory, who escaped very hardly from being excommunicated by Pope Paulus 3.
for that he granted unto the Almaynes but only the Interim, which was almost
conformable in all poincts unto the decrees of the Pope. And I pray you what
ado was there when he willed that a general Council should be called in
Almaine, where the Almaynes might be hard in free disputacion? And finally was
it not the Pope, that constrained him to make war upon the Christians, and
did oftentimes threaten him with thundringes, if he went not to work with
speed, in such sort that the Emperor was constrained to cover the pretense of
his war with the cloak of rebellion, to the^d he might draw unto him Mawrice
and the other Princes which were confederates of the Smalcaldiens? I speak
nothing here of the holy Inquisition of Spain, nor of the Prelates of the
Counsel, which be of the Popes creation, and have made a solemn oath unto
him, never to agree to any matter that they shall thinck to be prejudicial to
the aduau^cement of the Sea of Rome, but that they shall reveal the same, and
resist it with all their power. Who sees not how that our king is so possessed
with them, as he is not able by any means in the world, to judge any thing
in this matter contrary to their opinions and advice, upon pain of being
condemned for a rebel unto the sea of Rome? How then can that be true where
you say, that we make war upon the king? Take away once the respect of the
Pope and his Prelates, and bring to pass that either the king himself be not
subject unto him or else that he be content that we may be free from his laws:
and then shall you see how soon and how soundlye, we will yield our selves
unto the perfect obedience of our king and natural Prince, as to one anointed
of God himself to do us right and Justice? And if you esteem this to be
utterly unreasonable, and that you mean to make the mind of our Prince to be
at the commandment of other men's wills: do not marvel I pray you, if we
pretend to be no rebels in seeking that he may govern us by his absolute
Authority, without receiving laws from others. I come now to that other
poinct where you say, That it is a very straung thing for subjects to force
their Prince to assemble Estats at their pleasure. Surely this seems very
wonderful, considering that you cannot be ignorant, how that the king himself
by his own pure will, has tied himself thereunto, as to the firmest ground
and surest staff whereupon, his auctority and power Regal does chiefly (yea
I may say, only) lean and rest. For seeing the Estates in a form of
politic government, are none other thing but the chief and principal heads
of the people representing the body of the multitude: What thing is there, that
can be so naturally united unto a good king, who desires to be both father
and Pastor of his people, as are the Estates of his Country? Eue^ as for
example, there is nothing that has such affinity with the head of a ma^s
body, as those members which are called vital, for that they be the chiefest
Instruments by the which the vital spirits proceeding from the brains to
diverse sinews, are communicated in general to the whole body, and to every
member, and by the which likewise, every member retayneth his perfect unity,
and natural knitting to the body. Even so a good king, being the head of his
people, does by the means of his Estates, communicate and imparte unto the
whole body of his common wealth, not only his favor, grace and privileges,
whereby he keeps them in unity: but also his bounty, Justice and wisdom,
from the which as out of a quick fountain, do spring good laws and
Ordinances, whereby the people are still governed in good discipline, as it
were in the lively being and natural motion of the same. This is the cause why
our ancestors excelling in wisdom and perfect pollioy, have very well
ordained heretofore, that especially the king should very straightly be bound
and united with the Estates of the Country, not to do any thing of importau^ce
without communicating the matter unto them first, as they on the other side
ought to behave themselves unto their Prince, as to their head given to them
of GOD. From hence is proceeded the great and uniform love and Fidelity,
which Princes in these parts have borne to their people, and they likewise to
them. And surely this principle appeared in the person of the good Duke PHILIP,
who at the first united all those low Countries into one body, and made many
laws, the assured unity which either is or ought to be between a Prince
and his people. Esteeminge it better to be beloved and called father by them,
than to be feared and redouted of the^. For he knew well enough, that love is
the surest ground and faithfullest guard of all gouernme^ts and prehemine^ces,
in such sort, that they be greatly to be detested, and to be accounted public
pestile^ces, who to bring themselves in credit by villainies and servile
flatteries, under the pretense of maintayning the authority of our Prince,
have whispered in the ears of his council, that whosoever talks of the
general assemble of the Estates, does catch at the Crown from his Majesty's
head. For surely these be the auctours of all tyra^nies, troubles, and
insolences: these be the disturbers of our common quiet: these be the enemies
both of God and the world, although they attribute never so much wisdom and
experience unto themselves: doing in this case not unlike unto him that would
dismember the parts of the body from the head, and deprive them of their
virtues and natural actions, under the pretense of doing good to the head.
True it is, that for a time they seem to yield as it were a stay and proppe
unto the power of Princes in causinge them in general to be more feared than
loved: but in the end they show themselves to seek naught else, but the fall of
Princes, and the overthrow of all their people at one time: as we see most
clearly by the example of the kingdom of France, the calamity and ruin
whereof, has not proceeded from any thing else, but by the breaking of
thordinaunces of the Estates general, and by sufferaunce that the king might
govern at his own appetite with absolute authority, without having regard
either to the body politic, or to them that should represent the same. I
would to GOD that this poor Country of ours would behold it self in this
glass, which is so clear and so near unto it, without fallinge into the same
inconveniences. But our sins being already grown to a certain rypenes, have
hastened our utter overthrow, in blindinge the eyes of such governors, as
have persuaded our Princes to thinck, that their ruin consists in the
Assembly of the general Estates of the country, whose order is a common
consent to resolve upon such points, as do concern the tranquillity of the
same: whereas, if at the least this had bin looked unto in the begi^ning, before
that those troubles did break out into so great a flame according to those
instructions which the Gentlemen of the confederates gave unto his Majesty:
surely then might all the inco^ueniences which have happened since, have very
well bin avoided. Yet at length let us look, although very late, first which
be the grounds and occasions that hinder us from having recourse unto that so
ready and wholesome a remedy, which in times past has always bin the refuge,
both of Prince and People, when any inconvenience did threate^ them. You say
That since yt these Countries do consist upon diverse Seignories, which in
degree, jurisdictions and customs have nothing to do the one with the other,
but only a neighbourhode under one Lord: therefore they are not to compel the
king to assemble the estates generally. I beseech you then sirs, If we should
demand of the king to assemble only the Estates of Holland and Zeland,
which Provinces have always bin joined together, and that by their advise he
would ordain some convenient remedies for these present troubles and
calamities, even as his Majesty's predecessors the Princes of Bauier were wont
to do in the like cases, not adding any other to these Provinces, except it
were Hainault and Ostrenant: would you judge then that we had any reason on
our sides? At the least your argument whereon you seem to ground most,
would seem to be of no force. And I surely do think that this particular
assembly (since that you cannot abide the general) were much fitter for the
people of Holland and Zeland, than the other wear which they demand. But I
pray you consider what wrong they of Holland and Zeland have committe^d in
submitting themselves in their foresaid request unto thorder of their Prince,
without presuming to prescribe any law unto him, or in referringe themselves to
the Judgment of the general Estates of all the low Countries, to who^ they
were content to submit themselves, to thend that they might not seem to seek
to be judges in their own cause? And if there be no reason at all to assemble
the general estates of so many and diverse Proui^ces, in a matter yt touches
only one particular Province: then I pray you, why should yt protestation which
the Estats of Brabant and Flanders preso^ted, wherein they would admit Religion
but that of Rome: be prejudicial unto them of Holland and Zeland? How be it
surely (if all be well considered) this disease is grown so general in all
these provinces, as it cannot be remedied but by a medecin generally taken.
For who knows not how that in this cause, there are joined to Holland and
Zelande, in a manner all Gelderland, Phriseland, and Ouerijsel with many both of
the towns and peoples of Brabant, Flaunders, Hainault and Arthois? who
understands not, that (when this request was presented by those gentlemen in
the year 66. there were almost as many of our Province, as of any other, yea
and that the number of them of Hainaulte, Arthois and Nanin did far exceed
them of Holland and Zelande? Wherefore if some have bin frighted by force and
threatninges, some other oppressed by the tyranny of the Duke of Alua, and some
again have not bin able to find out the oportunities and open ways which
they of Hollande and Zeland have found: is it therefore to be said that they
ought to be barred from giuinge aid and remedy to quench this great fire, and
general cause of Ruin? No: for this is certain, that the harm which
proceeds of these wars, does touch the other Provinces as near as it does
Holland and Zeland. For if it happen that these Countries be either destroyed
or alienated from the obedience of the King. Consider I pray you whether
Braband and Flaunders with many other Provinces shall be subject to any invasion
that first will assault them or not, and how in such necessity, having lost
the commodity of the Sea, they may be releaued with vitaile, or succored from
Spain or Italy? In so much that to bar alother Provinces from this
generality, is naught else than to seek the means to deprive the King and
his successors from all possession of any estate or Province in these parts.
But let us see how these matters will hang together. You say, That it is but by
special grace and favor, that the auncestoure of our king have suffered and
permitted a general Convocation of the Estates in vrgente affairs. Admit that
it were so: yet surely it were a great discurtesie to persuade the king to show
less favor unto these Countries than his predecessors have done: and it were
the way to force him to seek some other kind of superiority, and
gouernemente, clean contrary to that which they followed, in such sort that
thereof naught else can be hoped for, tha^ a contrary fruit to that which they
gathered, that is to say, the hatred of subjects in steed of love, and tyranny
in place of good government, and finally utter destruction in steed of
flourishing prosperity. But sure I cannot imagine that you are so ignorant of
the Chronicles, or such a stranger to the knowledge of the state of these
Countries, as that you know not how that since the time of Charlemayne, these
Countries and Provinces have ever bin united in one body together, with many
other neighbors and borderers, under the title of being called Austrasia or
Lorein, which took that name, for that in division, that part fell to one of his
nephews called Lhothayre: and how that afterward by diversity of successors,
being dismembered the one from the other, yet they did always keep a certain
unity of Amity and alliance together, even until the time of the good Duke
Philip, who brought them again into one body, and tied them fast and
inseparable by many good ordinances, laws and privileges, which he gave unto
them in general, showing him self therein to be both a father to his Country,
and a pastor to his people, in such sort that it was offered unto him by the
Emperor and Pope for that time, to make thereof a kingdom, the which he would
never agree unto, both because that he would not offer by such innouations any
kind of prejudice unto the Privileges of the Proui^ces and Towns
particulerly, neither yet go against the oaths that he had sworn unto them.
And if you list to allege, that our King does at this present occupy
certain provinces which then had nothing a do with them: I will answer, that
likewise the foresaid Duke did at that time enjoy certain others, almost of
like importance, the which have since that time bin separated, and dismembered
in such sort, that the said good Duke Philip being received into the possession
of Hollande and Zelande almost in the end of his reign, did leave this
conjunction of these Provinces unto his son and only heir CHARLES the
hardy, who being of a more hauty mind went about openly to make these
Countries a kingdom, had he not bin hindered partlye by the Estates of the
said Countries who withstoode the same, and partly by the disfavor of the
Emperor Frederick 3. who reigned at that time. But let the cause be as be may:
he left unto his daughter and heir, the succession of all the said countries,
as one body united and knitte together with many fast and straighte bands:
after the which sort Maximilian her husband the Emperor, and his son the
Archeduke Phillip, received the same, and in such sort left them unto the
Emperor of noble memory Charles the fifte father to our King: who being not
content with the foresaid conjunction and bands, and as it were foreseing how
that afterward some would go about to sow hatred amongst them, and to set
the one against the other, under this pretense that they had nothing common
among themselves: took away and abolished from them all the diversity of
Questions that might encounter them, some from under the Crown of France,
some from the title of the Empire, and some from other places. And at a
general diet of Almaigne, by the consent of all the Electours and Estates of
the Empire, he united and brought together all these provinces into one
compass or Circle of the Empire, ordayning and appointing that from that time
forward, all they should jointly and unseperably be acknowledged too be of the
Empire, and that for that cause, they should pay in thordinary contribucions
of the Empire, as much as twoe Electors did. And this has been inuiolablye
kept both of his Majesty: of noble memory, And also by own king and Maistar
that now is, so far forth as that his Majesty did send one S. of
Hoochstrate into Almaigne in his name, to acknowledge the foresaid provinces as
one body politic joined to the Empire. And for such were they taken at that
time: so that I cannot sufficienly marvel, how you can say that in degrees
and Jurisdictions they be so diverse, and that there is nothing common amongst
them, but only neighborhod. And I pray you how happens yt then, that in all
Co^tribucions and reliefs, they be ever assembled generally, and that the
participacio^s of each relif, is gathered according to the abillitye and
faculty of every province? Would you wish that in the time of contributing,
the provinces shoul be but one body, and that when they seek to remedy the
evident Ruin of the whole country in general, each should seek for their
remedy in particular, with out joining the one to the other? surely in my simple
Judgment this thing is not only withowt all reason, but also does simell of
tooto tyrrannius wyckednes. But what shall we say? when his Majesty propounded
the necessity of his war with France in the year 1557: in what sort did
the Estates then chardg them selves with that great burden, but only in
general? the which war in thend of nine years with a single fidelitye showed
toward their King, and a wonderful unity kept among the^ selves, they
brought to happy end by their nine years co^tribucio^, to the great glory and
honor of his royal Majesty. Is it reason then that in making war upon a
strange Prince, theys provinces shall be but one body, and the Estates united
together: and that in turninge away from themselves an utter overthrow procured
by this civil war, they shall be counted diverse and dismembered, and not be
suffered to assemble the estates general, to the end that by a general remedy
they may help and cure a common malady? But is it not plain how that in all
things wherein any provinces bordering together, may by any means be joined
and united: these countries be and have been always in the same sort vnitid
more than any others? for from whence proceeds that custom which they have
ever had to assemble the Towns and provinces in the exercise of the bow, and
other arms left unto us by our predicessours, but only by this unity? How
comes it to pass, that at feasts and public places, the towns and
provinces have bin always called together by public aucthority: but only to
show the unity of the poor country, even as Greece did by the assemblye at
their Olimpiades? Is not the name of the Base Almaignes or Flemings (as the
Spaniardes do call us at this day) common unto us all? The speech although it
be distinctly of diverse sorts, yet is so common amongst us, that in the self
same towns they be used equallye. The jurisdictions out of owr sovereign
court, do they not almost generally proceed from Machlyne? and all spiritual
processes, Do not they of ancient custom proceed either from Coleigne or
from Maians? What should I say more, than that owr whole country is but one
Circuyte or Province of the Empire? Do you then thinck yt so strange, that an
Imperial Circuyt should assemble estates jointly, co^sydering that should
otherwise seem monstrous, if one Province should be assembled withowt the
rest? But paraduenture you will say, that this war in the respect of Brabant
is no Civil wars: the which saying no man of Judgment will affirm. And if
there were none other thing to allege, but that owr King and the Emperor
Charles had made al their Edicts and Plackartes of Religion in general to all
the provinces, wear not that a sufficient Argument to confute your saying,
that they have naught in common the one with the other? yea rather is it not a
full justification of the request of those of Holland, and Zeland in that
point, if you will be ruled by right and reason Quod omnes attingit, ab omnibus
probari debet? for if the rigowr of those Placartes laid upon all these
Provinces in general, has caused a general alteracion of the people: Why
should not we assemble and call together the general estates of these
provinces, to remedy such inconveniences as generally do light upon us all?
And sure this is the better confirmed by those two causes that you alleged,
for the which Princes in times past were wont to assemble general estates,
that is to wit, the benefit of their Country and the weal of their
affairs. For they could never be better spoken, of than at this present, when
we treat not of one simple benifitt, but of the whole saffetye of owr country
and especial restitucion of his Majesty's dignitye. Wherefore if ever there
wear cause to assemble estates in generallitye, surely now there is greater
cause so to do than ever there was. This notwithstanding (if I may speak of
mine own head, witheowt thaduise of the Estates and Towns in these parts) I
do thinck that if the King or his counsel be offended with this generallity,
they will be content to have agraunt from his Majesty that they may lawfully
assemble the states only of Holland and Zeland, and that it will please him to
ratify that which they shall find by sound counsel and deliberacio^, to be
fit for his Majesty's service, and for their countries saffetye. Considering
that herin (as I have said) they have had agreater respect to the Auctorite of
the King, than to any thing else. But it seems that there is some other hidden
cause which moves you to be so suspicious of this assembling of estates in
that you say that this request seems to be made as it were to tie him to a
law, and to keep him as a ward I cannot believe but that this proceeds
rather of some ill grounded conceytes, or sinister suspicions of such in the
court; as cannot digest owr simple peticion, than of your own good judgment
or advise. I cannot be parswaded that you can digress so far from all
reason. For surely you know well enough, how that the most true and
legittimate power and dignity of all kings, monarchs, and Emperors, and the
greatest unity and prosperitye of all people and provinces, does especialie
consist, and principally depend upon the assemble of estates: eue^ as it
appears in Almaigne and in all other Kingdoms and Provinces which are well and
quietly governed. For those assembles which we call Edictes in the common
wealth, are even the same which in the churce of God were called counselles,
the which owr au^cestors, holy fathers and doctors in the Primative church
held in such reverence and estimacion, as that they ordeigned that from half
year to half year, or at the furthest from year to year, general Sinodes
should be called as often as any necessitye required. Whereunto they ever had
a most sovereign recourse, until such time as that the great power of the
Popes did subdewe the Sinodes by their absolute authority, against the which
owr forefathers at mani times, and especially in the counsel of Basil, did
most openly resist. They ordeigned that from ten year to ten years a
general counsel and Synod should be called through out all Christendom
wheru^to the Pope himself should be subject. Which thing was so odious unto
the ambicion of the successors of that Pope, as that to their power they have
hindered ever since the assemble of the councelles, so far foor thas that in
the great necessitye of Christendom, and at the earnest soliciting of the
Emperor Charles, the council of Trent was at length called and prolonged
almost by the space of 30. years after with a 1000. Kinds of delays and
excuses to delay the same. After that likewise in the council of Constaunce,
Thoan the 32. one of the 3. Popes that were degraded at that time, being
accused of 50. articles at the least, and all those cryminall, sighing sore,
answered thus: that besides all those faults, he had committed a greater
offense, and that was for because that he had suffered such a free council to
be called as him self was bound to be ruled by, and the reby he him self was
with great infamye deposed. I do allege all this, to show that it is the
part of Tyrants only to mislike general assemblies, and that all good
Princes Kings and Emperors have always desicred these diettes and
assemblies, as all good prelates have (to their power) procured the assemble of
Synodes and councels in the Church of God. For this is certain, that whereas
many do assemble together and consult, (whether yt be for the affairs of the
common welthe, or of the church of God,) there ordinarily is God him self
president, and sends his goodspirit, lightninge most commonly the eyes of a
number in such cases, as paraduenture one alone or a few cannot discern
awhit. Wherefore me thineketh that in this case they of Holla^d and Zela^d have
declared what great confidence they have in the merciful government and
clemency of the King, in having set be fore his face the true and only mean to
pacify the troubles of this country. For since that in any wise they must
make no questions of Religion what could they in this world offer with more
humilite and better right, than to submit the^ solues to the Judgment of his
Majesty: in a general assemble of all owr estates, showing therein that they
feared not at all to have their cause brought to light before the face of the
whole world and of his Majesty, because they felt themselves clear from all
crimes which wrongfully were laid to their charge? And if their religion were
so wicked as the King is informed that it is: what can they do more sincerely
than with humble suit to request that it might be judged and tried, eue^ by
those who have protested most plainly, that they will by no means admit or
receive the same? Ca^ there be any thing more conuenie^c for the dignity and
honor of his Majesty, or for to express their own faithful service, than
to submit themselves wholly to the judgment of his Ma. and of those Estates
which he shall lawfully call together? It seems certainly that you amongst
you do fear and fly from the judgment and advice of the king, and that you
take him to be so childishe, as that he cannot discern white from black, or
else that your selves must prescribe him what he shall do. For you hindered our
request from coming to his cares. It falls out now, that your selves are
they yt make the king a Ward, in that you will not suffer him to here the
complaints and suits of his subjects. This is to take the Crown from his
Maiestyes head, and to make your selves kings: Considering that the dignity
and prehemie^nce of Royalty, does not so much consist upon titles and riches,
as in the discerninge and judging of the complaints and requests of his
subjects and in administri^g Justice unto them. The pretense then of these
Holla^ders and Zela^ders is so far from maki^g him a Ward, as that ye only
mark that they te^d unto, is to set him at his full liberty again, which is to
judge lawfully (according to the custom of his Ancestors) upon all the
controversies, and complaints of his people: which liberty you have clean
berest him of, and yielded the same unto the Italian Pope, and to the Prelates of
the inquisicio^, and barred him clean both from hearing and judging of his
subjects causes. As touching the last point, wherein you say, That in your
opinion his Majesty ought not to yield unto our request, no not one jot:
Surely I do most of all marvel, that you would wish the K. to judge no
otherwise than as you list. If you be vassal to the K. leave the choice to his
Majesty, whether he will yield or not, and do not you prescribe a law, before
that he himself have first herd our requests, and afterward given his
judgment upon the same. Otherwise you will give the world to understand, how
that you take the king to be so ignorant, as that he cannot judge of his own
affairs, or else that your opinion must be a law, whereby his Majesty must of
force be ruled. Well, if your opinion which you have grounded upon your own
conceit, be so fast settled in your stomach as that you will not alter the
same: Yet I would ye considered, that all the Estates and Cities in these
quarters, be of an other mind. And peradventure it may be, that if the
opinion of all the Estates in general may be understood the greater part of
the^ will be of our mind. If you thinck otherwise, why do ye not suffer the
matter to come to proof, by leauinge to his majesty full liberty to judge and
discern of all suits and requests? except your meani^g be, that we must of
force take your opinion for the kings determinacio^. But surely for mine own
part, I cannot yet be so well persuaded of your great modesty and wisdom.
Wherefore I am to request you, that (without suffering your self to be any
longer blinded with these cauilling pretenses) you endeavor your self in good
faith and true meaning, to further the tranquillity and quiet of these
Countries, the which cannot by any means be reestablished, but by this, that
the king may have his authority kept to himself inuiolablie, in hearing and
considering the requests and controversies of all such his Subjects, as cry
and call for his help and mercy: that he may see some remedy for the same,
by the common advice of the general Estates of the Country, and that he
suffer us not to be oppressed by the cruel tyranny of Strangers, who seek
nothing else but to satisfy their covetous minds and greedines of gain, with
the price of our blood and with the utter overthrow and desolacion of his
majesty's inheritance in these Provinces, to the great diminishing of his
Majesty's Royal Estate, not caringe a point though all this go to wrack, so
that they may return into their Countries again, laden and charged with the
spoil of us, from the which I hope that Almighty God will defend us with his
puissant Arm, as he has done heretofore.

IMPRINTED AT London in Fleetestreate by Thomas Marsh.

Anno. 1576.


