The Innes of Court ANAGRAMMATIST: OR, The MASQVERS masqued in ANAGRAMMES.

Expressed in Epigramique lines, upon their several Names, set down in the
next Page.

Composed by FRANCIS LENTON Gent. one of Her Majesty's POETS.

Plectra gerens Erato saltat pede, Carmine vultu.

LONDON: Printed for William Lashe. 1634.

Sir THOMAS DAYRELL, Marshall. Grayes Inn.
JOHN READ. JAMES AISKOVGHE. EDWARD PAGE. JOHN CRAVVLEY.
Inner Temple.
EDMUND CAREVV. ARTHVR BAKER. JOHN FARVVELL. REGINALD FOSTER
Middle Temple.
ROBERT OWN. PHILIP MORGAN. MARTYN HARVEY. ROBERT COAL.
Lincolnes Inn.
JOHN NORTH. EDWARD HERNE. HENRY MACSEY. STEPHEN IAY.

TO THE FOUR HONORABLE SOCIETIES, AND famous Nurseries of Law, the Innes of
COURT.
YOu Noble stocks of Gentry, Plants that higher
Grow, till you unto the Cedars height aspire:
You cream o'th kingdom, either in your wealth,
Wit, learning, valor, or just laws loved health,
Who, by your worthy breedings, births, and blood,
Are chose for Guarders of your Countries good:
And to that end are here trayn'd up by Fate,
To be the glory of great Britains state:
I here present you with the Masquers names
Of your four Houses, in quick Anagrams,
Led by that then made Knight, who first I place
In these conceits, as Captain of that grace;
Which each of you deserved, and in high merits,
Showed Englands Gallantry, and Noble spirits.
Accept my Muse then, which shall make you merry,
Like rich Nepenthe, Nectar, or old Sherry;
And for your grace that way, my best endeavor
By hand, head, heart, shall wait on you for ever:
Let not rash anger then, blame my intent,
To gain your loves with mirth, I only meant.
The true honourer of your persons, pedigrees, and dignities, FRA. LENTON.

To my friend, Master Francis Lenton, upon his ANAGRAMS.
HE that upon so many several Names,
Dares undertake to write true Anagrammes,
Had need well know how dangerous a path
His Muse does tread; the narrow scope she has,
Confines his Fancy to so strait a list,
As not to be condemned, if she has mist
In some, his higher aim; yet if in one
Or two, or more, his happy Fate has shown
A Poets Art; the world may well excuse
Other defects, if not applaud his Muse:
For, knowing men will all conclude in this,
Where one proves fortunate, a hundred miss:
And if it chance some do the rest excel,
(Of which detractors cannot speak, but well)
He stands indebted to that name affords
An Anagramme significant; those words
That do sufficiently themselves express,
Acquit his pains, and make his labor less:
Others that more obscure Enigma's were,
His lines lick into form (like a She Bear)
Who newly has produced a shapelesse whelpe,
Makes it a perfect creature by her help:
Read then, and laugh, and censure, if you be
Impartial Judges, and from Envy free,
But Monsieur Critique, I Would have you suspend
Your mewes; and not cry down, what you will never mend.
Thine ever, JOHN GOYSH.

In commendation of the Authors late ELEGY, and present ANAGRAMS.
WHo vayl'd in blackes, Melpomene's sad face,
Trips now with Erato in a masquing pace:
You that would read a lamentable strain,
His dying Swan, behold with Royal Chain:
Gentiles, if Here you laugh, it is enough,
His Muse (he swears) dispatched it with a puff.
I. M.

Anagramme upon the Martial Leader of the glorious Innes of Court Gallants,
the noble minded Knight, Sir THOMAS DAYRELL. Anagr. LED AL TO HIE MARS.
GReat Jove and Juno, once desiring sport,
To show the glory of the Innes of Court,
Commanded them a most renowned task,
Only present them with some pleasant Mask;
The Nurseries of Law, and best bred blood,
Fulfilled their pleasures, with one passing good;
Whose rare performance, and whose every name,
In foreign parts set forth their peerless fame:
The brave Conductor of this Courtly train,
This worthy Knight was chosen, and did gain
Immortal Honor by his graceful pain.
For, as he led them all to Mars his Court,
To beauteous Amazons of every sort,
Who like to Basiliskes, kill with their eyes,
(If Cupids shafts do once our souls surprise)
So gracious Jove, viewing his Martial spright,
Crowned his deserts with Title of a Knight.
And now that Worthy, who to Mars led all,
Sir Thomas Dayrell, we delight to call:
No Captain in these latter times was seen,
Trayning so rich a troop to King and Queen:
Miles, both Knight and soldier signifies,
From which may He to higher honor rise.
Grayes Inn. Two Anagrammes upon the name of that proper and well proportioned
piece of Nature, the courteous accomplished, JOHN READ, Esquire. Anagr. 1 DEAR
HONEY. 2 AID HER ON.
A Mother Lady (in familiar phrase)
Ravished with his rare presence, and his praise,
Does (not unaptly) by her language sweet,
With lips of honey, this young Gallant greet,
Thou dearest life, o'th hive, thou sweetest honey,
(Which common markets yield not for our money)
Whose looks are pure, and whose melting taste,
Deserves to be in Ladies Closets placed,
Though furrowed years upon my forehead's set,
And little unto Nature am indebt,
Though we are almost at our journeys end,
Think not we dote, when we your form commend
Nor judge amiss, when our weak pulses beat,
Whilst we are living, we retain some heat,
Then though your activenesse refuse our task,
By dancing Revels at this glorious Masque;
Yet here is a Daughter young, pray aid her on,
For she may prove to be your Paragon;
No doubt but she will please you every way,
In the majestique Dance, the Song, the Play,
On Lute, Theorbo, Voyall, Orphorion,
Or any other music you shall try on;
Assist her gently then, and (with a grace)
After the action, aid her to her place:
So shall the sweetness of your nature done,
Merit her love, by ayding of her on:
And if there ever was in the Hive such honey,
Give me this Gallant, for he is for my money.
Anagramme upon the name of that well compact proportion, most active body, and
free minded Gentleman, Master JAMES AISKOVGHE. Anagr. SO GAVE HIM A KIS.
Coming amidst th'heroick courtly Dames
Of Britains orb, whose fair and beauteous fames,
Outstrip the universe, and by election
Strike deep'st into each nations strong affection:
I saw this spark, a spark which kindled fire
On every side, and made flames mount the higher.
The lovely Nymphs which did on Juno wait,
With his quick active strength, were taken strait,
And save their modesties durst not advance
Their meanings; yet each mind with him did dance:
As well they might, and blame them not, for he
Rose with such spirit and dexterity,
Such nimble courage, and such active spright,
Up to each amorous Ladies Navels height,
That they were charmed, and in Loves silency,
Whisperd each other, Lord what a back has he?
And like retreat of a victorious Drum,
Or like the Universities grave Humme,
Or like the clapping of the hands that day,
In the applause of a well taking Play,
So Majesty's, Nobilities, and all,
(For cutting high) gave him the golden Ball:
And as his glory herein did abound,
(Whilst echo still redoubled the sound)
So each chaste Nymph (in her white souls desire)
Gave him a kiss, and all did him admire.
Anagramme upon the name of the courteous Gentleman, Master EDWARD PAGE.
Anagr. DRAVV DEEP AGE.
HOwever youth may vault upon this stage,
Yet know, all pleasures must resign to age,
And age to dust, when our small hour glass
Is run, and not a sand there left to pass:
The long'st lived vegitive must lose it is sap,
And fall by winds, or by some thunder clap,
The sturdy Stag (after a hundred years)
Dying, bedewes his cheeks with his own tears,
Old Nestor, and more grave Methuselah,
Have spun their threads, and gone the common way
Of all frail flesh, then think not to withstand
Deaths cruel dart, and most impartial hand;
Though once a King called age but pain and sorrow,
Sick here to day, and sudden gone to morrow:
Yet the same King did length of days uphold,
Fo^e Royal honor, or rich Ophir gold:
Then may your blessed years be multiplied,
And offspring like sweet Plants on every side,
Long may you draw fresh air before you sleep,
Or be as one gone down into the deep,
And wheresoever I lead my pilgrimage,
My dirge shall be, that you may draw deep Age.
Two Anagrams upon the name of that hopeful Barrister, and proficient in the
Law for his time, the courteous, and well spoken, JOHN CRAVVLEY, Esquire. Anagr. 1
I VALV HER COIN* OR, 2 I VALV HER CONY.
LAwyers (although they use not to purloyne
Like Usurers) yet by instinct, love coin,
And though distracted Clients do him curse,
If the cause cross them, he is nere the worse,
Valuing his or hers, if his due fee:
Or else his tongue will very silent be,
But if fair virtue in her soul does shine,
(Which makes a mortal creature half divine)
If coin he values more then that, his Name
Himself and Anagram, shall bear the blame,
Nor dare I think it, cause I know his merit
In that great Masque spoke his more noble spirit.
No, no, brave Masquers, all mark your loved Brother,
Values a little of the one, and other.
I heard some Lawyers, tho their fees be common,
Will take but small fees of a handsome woman:
But tell you truly, he may value either,
So that his valuation wrongeth neither,
Which his mature judgment can decide,
And safe twixt Scylla and Caribdis ride.
Thus you may value both, but (ruled by me)
Nor Coin nor Cony should have masterie.
On the same. JOHN CRAVVLEY. Anagr. CON HIE LAWYER.
EXalt thy honor, Con, apply thy way
In Law, that thou in Justice seat may sway
The righteous Cause, and make the quarrel even,
By which fair virtue, you aspire to heaven.
Go on then worthy Barrister, and be
Thy Fathers equal in sincerity:
Nor may the fallacies of time, nor age,
Eclipse thy glory on this terrene Stage.
Con then, and higher rise in the Laws lore,
Comfort the rich, timely relieve the poor;
Then shall your virtuous parts, and honor live,
Till I can lave the Ocean with a sieve.
Inner Temple. A converted Anagramme upon the name of that mild and sweet
natured active Gentleman, Master EDMVNDE CAREVV. Anagr. 1 WE CVRE DEMAND. OR,
2 WE DEMAND CVRE.
MIstake me not, We here does signify,
A speaker for this whole society,
The vigorous Masquers all, whose every name,
Triumphant rides upon the wings of fame.
If any Lady then of Iunoes train,
Of chaste Dianaes (poor Acteons bane)
Of Vesta's white sold Virgin sisterhood,
Or any other Nymphs of Springs; or wood,
Whose sacred knots, chaste thoughts, unspotted minds,
Each one of us unto allegiance binds,
Shall ought defending virtue, us command,
Lo here we all with valor armed stand,
In their defense, and (like a rock most sure)
VVhatsoe're they demand, we vow to cure,
If the expense of either life, or blood,
Can make an honored virtuous conflict good,
This only we (in loyal service) crave
(Which a good mind would grant unto it is slave)
If any of us be love struck in heart,
By Cupids secret arrows, conquering dart,
Which wounds us deep, and inwardly does bleed;
That then, oh then, even at the point of need,
As you are lovely, modest, chaste, and pure,
So let the Balsome of your loves us cure,
When we demand or beg in virtuous way,
To claspe you in loves sacred arms for aye:
Thus if your Noble souls keep touch, even then
You shall be honored both by gods and men,
Then both our sexes shall be known the truer,
We fought your battles, you our wounds did cure.
Two Anagrammes upon the name of the much loved Gentleman, Master ARTHVR
BAYKER. Anagr. REBVKE HER ART.
IF any Lady (never so highly borne,)
Good natures ornaments does seem to scorn,
And in her pride by chance forgets her duty,
By adding to her better formed beauty;
Thinking thereby to mend the Makers fault,
Who first that tenement did make of naught;
Forbear her not, though she thy soul does keep,
Nor let her in that sin securely sleep,
But tell her plainly what that Iesabell
Got, when she (painted) from her window fell;
And say no more, if then she will not relent,
Tho Grace her name was, she will nere repent;
But in her vain persist, till Deaths cold dart
Has made both dust of her, and her frail art:
For where good conscience is not woman's guide
No marvel if that sex do backward slide,
Then fear not noble Sir to speak your mind,
Not in an angry, but a modest kind:
For yet (I vow) I never saw bad face,
But looked the worse by that vermilion grace;
And good, the world may easily epsy,
Is quite deformed by such fond treachery;
Then well bred spirit be she nere so tart*
Although she hates you for it, rebuke her art,
For does she mend her face, she will mar the rest,
If art can find out a more abler guest.
On the same Name, ARTHVR BAKER. Anagr. HVRT A BARKER.
If It be your happiness a Nymph to shrive,
Your Anagramme is here imperative,
Or to your self, or others, when they boast
Of dainty cates, and afterward cry roast.
A guest invited to a curious feast,
Partakes some choycer dish amongst the rest,
But therewith not content his bulk to fill,
(His mind not fed) puts forth a question still,
When, where, and how that rarer piece came here,
Which makes them wish him choked with his good cheer.
Then Noble Sir, how ere you chance to speed,
Let not the open streets proclaim your deed:
The Dog that barks before he bites I ween,
Forewarnes us of the mischief might have been:
But he that robs, and after tells the shame
With his rude tongue, trusse him up for the same;
Therefore I wish all valiant sprites to hate
And hurt him who fares well, yet needs must prate.
An Anagram upon the name of that apt and forward Gentleman, Master JOHN
FARVVELL. Anagr. WE FALL O^ HER.
WE whose warm blood and youthful fire
Kindles quick flashes of desire,
When we beheld those amorous faces,
Decked with good nature, and the Graces,
Cannot refrain, but being charmed
By the blind naked child unarmed,
We marching to the Martial field,
Meet with a dart which makes us yield,
But not retire, for when that blow
Has wounded us, we forward go,
And neither fire, nor water flee,
So our adored Saint we see,
But (touched) our ardent souls do press,
Till we loves object do possess,
To which if we attain, our pleasure
Valued with all the worlds rich tr^asure,
Does far o'reprise it in the height
Of loves transcendent true del^ght.
Then if my Mistrisse chance to slide,
And (willing) trips down on her side,
I know not how to do her honor,
But imitate, and fall upon her:
For ever 'twas a woman's will,
To have us do as they do still:
If thus we opportunely watch,
Young or old* Dotrils we may catch.
An Anagram upon that cautelous and courteous Gentleman, Master REGINALDE
FOSTER. Anagr. TRIED NO FALLS GEERE.
THough hasty youth by natures apt to try,
Ought that delights the fancy, or the eye,
And still the mind of man is apt to range,
To several objects, and affects change;
Yet view a Mirror here, whose settled mind
In his minority is not inclinde
To such unstaidnesse, but does quench that fire,
Which youths loose blood does prompt to lewd desire,
And by employments of a virtuous way,
The heat of such rude flames he does allay,
And if there be (as noys'd abroad) I hear,
Ladies or Lasses that do wear false geere,
It may be so, but those he will not abide*
No counterfeit by this young blade is tried,
He is too cautelous, ere to be caught,
With an unnatural, or thing of naught;
But solely sets down wisdom for his guide,
Which quickly does the good from bad decide.
Scarce any of his fellow Masquers here,
Will swear they never tried such fictive ware,
Unless fair Hymen then afford it you,
It Is virtue if you try, nor false nor true.
Middle Temple. An Anagramme upon the Name of that valiant and martial minded
Gentleman, Master ROBART OWN. Anagr. BORNE TO WAR.
YOur Anagram brave Sir, revives the star,
Shinde at your birth, from Mars the god of war;
Which gives you of a stout, and valiant spirit,
To equal Tudor, or Glendores high merit,
Whose Christian was your surname, and whose fame
Lives in your true and ancient British name,
Aspire then by your Arms, worth to obtain,
And let not Venus pull Mars back again
Into her lustful lap? the Planet so
May alter, and enthrall you to the Bow
Of her blind Boy, where his fell totring harms
Are far more cruel then the god of Arms:
But if you must retreat, leaving that field,
And (conquered) unto Ladies laws must yield,
Iumpe on a Nymph of spotless Vestas quire,
Whose thoughts are pure, till Hymen gives desire,
(Or one of chaste Diana's daughters, who,
Though they may think, no lustful actio^ know,
But take heed of a new made face or skin,
That Is not so fair without, as foul within,
So shall you show your valiant temper, and
By your cool life, the chastest Dame command:
Thus if to Mars his brawles you are not borne,
Fight with a wife, but with a wagtaile scorn.
An Anagram upon the name of the courteous and affable Gentleman, Master PHILIP
MORGAN. Anagr. GO LIP HER MAN.
IF sober kisses silent Prologues be,
The further to endeare socie^ie,
The fair salutes of this our formal Nation,
Which first from holy Writ began that fashion:
If those be signs and pledges of our love,
Which inwardly a strong affection move,
If by the taste of those sweet cherry hills,
And interchanged breath, our love distills
Into each others inward secret parts,
And often times surpriseth both our hearts:
If those blessed meetings kindle such a flame,
As coldest winds can never quench the same.
Go lip or kiss her Sir, for now I spy
A spark new flown from her quick lovely eye,
Into your amorous bosom, which will hear
The chillest frozen heart, and make it sweat
Till it is assured, that she is it is friend,
Who did that bolt of Cupid to him send;
And so she is no doubt, else your exile
Had been decreed by frowns, but not a smile:
Go freely then, and kiss her once again,
For she is wounded too, and lives in pain,
Till legally that precious Iewel's lost,
Which her fond Parents have so often crossed,
Wear that thy kiss has won, kind natured man,
And thank not fortune, but Celestial Pan.
An Anagramme upon the name of the hopeful and prosperous sailing Gentleman,
Master MARTIN HARVEY. Anagr. ARIVE AT HER MINE.
EAch Microcosme is like a ship at Sea,
Tossed with storms and tempests every way,
Now with a gentle gale and prosperous ^a^le,
Then blustering Eolus his mirth does qua^le*
In The morning of his years with pleasant wing
He cuts the Ocean, whilst the Mermaid sing
On glistring sands, as if the sea Nymphs lays,
Did echo to the Rocks his early praise,
In his meridian flags do flourish still,
Seeming to offer winds unto his will.
And on he flies with his well ballast Bark,
Chirping sweet Music like the lofty Lark,
Till wasting downwards, after his full height
VVearied with pleasure, on the earth does light;
Thus hoary age accurs, as mortals strive
At some safe harbor, timely to arrive,
Whilst one is shipwrackt, and another crossed,
This gains the gold, and that the venture lost,
Then worthy Sir, if you intend to wive,
Strike sails, and into her rich treasure dive:
And doubt not (favored youth) but all is thine,
If happy pass arives you, at her Mine:
She values man more than her drossy treasure,
Sight she loves well, but touch is her true pleasure.
An Anagram upon the name of the heroic and high spirited Gentleman, Master
ROBERT COAL. Anagr. BEAR'T COOLER.
THough heat of spirit, vigor of the soul,
Loves masterhood, and hates the worlds control,
Making a pish at that which contradicts,
And violently spurns, if ought afflicts,
Which birth and wealth assists, and by this way,
Makes our rude passions, reason oversway;
Yet certainly it hurts, and such hot moodes,
Dry up the moisture of our vital bloods,
Nor does it well become a gentile mind,
By pedigree, to be so ill inclinde;
They should be courteous, affable and mild,
Which steals affection, seeming to beguile
The total world of its true love, and praise,
Which crowns such vertu's with eternal Bays,
Yet where the justice of the cause clayms merit,
Be Tigers fierce, or of a Lions spirit;
But upon every trifle that does thwart,
Draw not each vein o'th net unto your heart,
O bear it cooler; let wise Patience
Tell you, rash acts produce but penitence,
And he most valiant, is accounted still,
Who conquers his affections, and his will;
Should you by chance to choler then be given,
Bear't cooler, and you will sooner climb to heaven.
Lincolns Inn. An Anagramme upon the name of the Honorable and Noble minded
Gentleman, JOHN NORTH. Son to the Lord North. Anagr. THORN HONEY.
Here Is sweet and sharp, here is honey on a thorn,
Coucht in the name of him that is Nobly borne:
His nature unto honey may allude,
Sweet, mild, and healing, hating ought that is rude.
Thorn may imply his better natures wrong,
Hurts where it heald, if with ill language stung;
And both united, may be thus applide,
No virtue shines, but vice, that light would hide*
But i will explain it a more merry way,
A Nymph amongst the woods walking to play,
Seeing hony-combe on thorn, desired to lick,
Save that her nature feared the prick,
Yet thinking that she never plucked a Rose,
But her fair hand to hurt she did expose;
She ventured on, and as the Comb distills,
(Holding the thorn) her thawing mouth she fills,
And herewith not content, she loves it so,
She vows to fill her belly ere she will go:
Saying, O Lord, in truth should I be sworn,
Never did I taste such honey on a thorn:
This is the fable, you the Moral are,
And the sweet honey that she found so rare,
Then if your Mistrisse in blind love can see,
She may take honey from your thorny tree,
By whose most sweet concoction, amorous taste,
She may grow fat, and burnish in the wast.
An Anagram upon the name of that attractive Gentleman, Master EDWARD HERNE.
Anagr. DRAVV HER NED.
IN drawing out your real Anagramme,
You may conceive that I abridge your name,
In the word Ned; yet once the Poet spare,
If with your name he is too familiar,
For in his service, and obsequious ends,
You Will find his masking must make you amends:
That word Equivocall, which bids you draw
Her, is not meant by rigor of the Law,
Nor to compel her love by force of Arms,
(For Mars his shield fell down at Venus charms)
And some (though few) if you go ways uncivil
To virtue, you as soon may draw the devil,
But if you mean to win, and make her sure
By your fair carriage, draw, attract, allure
Her loving soul, then she half way will meet,
And in Loves Coelique orb your person greet:
Nor think that if you prosecute, she will fly,
Or if retire, she will be the contrary,
Like to the shadows proverb; but I ween
That Adage fayles, when Phoebus is not seen,
But where an able body she does find,
Linckt with essential graces of the mind,
A comely presence, and an active limb,
Which seems by lofty Capers, air to climb.
Her amorous soul cannot those parts withstand,
But (struck by Cupid) is at your command:
All which you do possess, thus draw her Ned,
And you may dance away her maydenhead.
An Anagramme upon the name of the generous spirited Gentleman, Master HENRYE
MAXEY. MACSEY. Anagr. I CAME NIGH HERS.
EAch lusty Masquer has the liberty
Of dancing, and may boldly then come nigh,
Or her, or hers; if in a fitting place
Her gentle nature does permit that grace:
So I of that society being one,
Sought to come nigh her best affection,
Which she accepted, and (without deferrs)
Came just as nigh to mine, as I to hers:
And had our tender souls thought it no sin.
As we came nie so one on's had gone in.
An Anagramme upon the name of the courteous Gentleman, Master STEPHEN IAY.
Anagr. A HIE STEP IN.
IT is the nature of the soul t'aspire,
And upwards fly, like sparks or flames of fire,
As not contented with this lower frame,
But seeking still the place from whence it came,
Which may the reason be as I suppose,
Why higher spirits do not here repose,
And set their rest up with a competence,
But strive for honor and magnificence.
Thus by or wealth, or friends they favor win
And to the height do climb, a hie step in;
So this brave spirit by his resolved endeavor*
Which in a virtuous path did still persever,
By person, parts, and graces of the mind,
The Fates to him a higher place assigned,
From Innes of Court (great'st Gentryes educatio^
Unto the Royal Court in near relation;
And that I must account a step in (...)
Which does approach such (...)
(...) step indeed, where I desire
(...) fair des^rts may flourish, and grow higher,
And that each Noble spark of this brave train,
May serve those Dieties without disdain.
Set on as this your Brother does begin,
From Innes of Court, to Court* a hie step in.
FINIS.

