GREAT BRITAINS SVNNES-SET, BEWAILED WITH A SHOWER OF TEARS.

BY WILLIAM BASSE.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1613.

TO HIS HONORABLE MASTER Sr RICHARD WENMAN Knight.

A Soul ore-laden with a greater Sum
Of ponderous sorrow then she can sustain,
(Like a distressed sail that labors home)
Some object seeks, wh^eto she may complain.
Not that (poor soul) her object can draw from
Her groaning breast the occasion of her pain:
But over charged with Tears she (widow-like) bestows
Upon her best friends ears, some children of her woes.
Not (like as when some trivial discontents
First taught my raw and lucklesse youth to rue)
Do I to Flocks now utter my laments,
Not choose a tree, or stream, to mourn unto:
My waightier sorrow now (Dear Sir) present
These her afflicted features to your view.
Whose free and noble mind (were not this grief your own
Would to my plaints be kind, if I complained alone.
But such true arguments of inward woe
In your sad face, I lately have beheld,
As if your tears (like floods that overflowe
Their liquid shores) alone, would have excelled
This general Deluge of our eyes, that so
Sea-like our earth-like cheeks has over-swell'd:
As if your heart would send forth greatest lamentation,
Or strive to comprehend our universal passion.
And as the occasion (Sir) may justly move
To maid-like sorrow the most man-like heart:
So may your grief (to your beholders) prove
The justice of His grace, and your desert.
For tears and sighs are the issues of true love:
Our present woes our former ioies imparte.
He loves the living best, who for the dead mournes most:
He merits not the rest, who not laments the lost.
To you I therefore weep: To you alone
I show the image of your tears in mine;
That mine (by showing your tears) may be show'n
To be like yours, so faithful so divine*
Such, as more make the public woe their own,
Then their woe public* such as not confine
These (...) to rimes* not yet forms from examples borrow*
Where loss is in(...), there boundless is the sorrow.
O let v^ (Muse) this heavynesse (that no
Just heart, vncleft, at one time can sustain)
By fittes, and preparations undergo:
Let Us fear, let us hope* tremble; and hope again.
O* let us this dysastrous truth never know;
But rather deaf and stupefied remain:
For happier much it were, the hearing sense to loose,
Then loose all sense to hear such an unhappy news.
Like to a changeling (in his sleeps) become
Robbed of his sex, by some prodigious cause;
I am turned woman: watrish fears benube
My Heat: my Masculine existence thawes
To tears, wherein I could again entombe
His tomb, or penetrate her marble jaws:
But, O, why should I twice entombe him! O what folly
Were it to pierce (with sighs) a monument so holy!
Here then run forth thou River of my woes.
In cease less currents of complaining verse:
Here weep (young Muse) while older pens compose
More solemn Rites unto his sacred Hearse.
And, as when happy earth did here, enclose
His heavenly mind, his Fame then Heaven did pierce:
Now He in Heaven does rest* now let his Fame catch fill;
So, both him then possessed* so both possess him still.
Or, like a Nymph distracted or undone
With blubbered face, hands wrong, neglected hair,
Run through moist Valleys, through wide deserts run
Let speech-lesse Echo echo thy despair.
Declare the untimely Set of Britains Sun
To sorrowing Shepherds: To sad Nymphs declare
That such a night of woes, his Occident does follow
That Day in darkness clothes, and mourner makes Apollo.
But of his parts think not to express the least
Whom Nature did the best in all things form.
First, borne a Prince (next to his FATHER) best;
Then, Framed a Man, to be, as he was borne:
Beauty his youth beyond all others blessed,
Virtues did him beyond his youth adorn.
What Muse, what voice, what pen, ca^ give thee all thy duties
O Prince of Princes, me: youth, wisdom, deeds, and beauties.
Fates, that so soon beheld his Fame enrould,
Put to his golden thread their envious sheeres:
Death feared his magnanimity to behold,
And (in his sleep) basely revenged her fears.
Time, looking on his wisdom, thought him old,
And laid his rash Sithe to his Primest years.
Stars that (in love) did long to embrace so fair a myrrhour
Winked at Fates envious wrong, Death's treason and Times error.
O Fates, O Time, O Death, (But you must all
Act the dread will of your Immortal GVIDE)
O Fates, How much more life did you appaule,
When you his lively texture did divide?
O Time, when by thy sithe this Flower did fall.
How many thousands did thou wound beside?
O Death, how many deaths, is of that life compacted,
That from all living breathes, his only death extracted.
How many brave Deeds has the wounded womb
Of Hope, mis-carryed now, before their time?
How many high designs have seen their doom
Before their birth, Or perished in their Prime?
How many beauties drowned are in his tomb?
How many glories, with him, heaven's do clime?
How many sad cheeks mourn, Him laid in Earth to see
As they to earth would run, his Sepulcher to be.
Like a high Pyramid, in all his towers
Finished this morning, and laid prostrate soon;
Like as if Nighte's black and incestuous hours
Should force Apollo's beauty before Noone:
Like as some strange change in the heavenly powers
Should in her Full quench the refulgent Moon:
So HE his days, his light, and his life (here) expired
New built most (Su^-like) bright Full Man, and most admired
But HEAVENS, Disposers of all Life and Death,
That our pied pride, and wretched lives mislike,
Took HIM that is gone (from us) to better breath
Us that remain, with (death from him) to strike.
His flower-like youth here, there more flourishes,
His graces then, are now more Angel-like.
Those glories that in Him, so shone, now shine much more
Our glories now are dim, that shined in him before.
And thou fair I Will, whose threefold beauties face
Enchants the Three-fork'd Scepter of thy Lover,
That with thine own eyes drown'st thy lap, the place
That his enamored arms and streams would cover:
Make true and twofold use of grief, That grace
May with affliction now, it self discover.
These tears thou do begin, to shed for HENRYES sake.
Continue for thy sin, which made Heaven Henry take.
That thy just James, who hither to has swayed
Thy Scepter Many-fold, and ample Frame,
Many more ages, yet, may live obay'd
T'enlarge thy glories, and to yield the same
Divine examples unto CHARLES that made
HENRY so noble, and so great in Fame.
For who but such a King, as He, can such another
In place of Henry bring? who match him but a BROTHER.
And neighbor Lands to whom our moanes we lent
May to our greater loss now lend us theirs.
Florence his old Duke mourned but we lament
A greater then a Duke in flowring years.
Spain for a Queen her eyes sad moisture spent:
We for a Prince (and for a Man) shed tears.
But France whose cheek's still wet, nearest our grief has smarted;
For she from Henry Great; we from Great Henry parted.
And thus, As I have seen an even, shower,
(When Phoebus to Jove's other splendent heirs
Bequeathed the Day) down from Olympus power.
When Earth in tears of Trees, and Trees in tears
Of Mountains wade. Like some neglected flower
(Whose sorrow is scarce visible with theirs)
Down to my silent breast my hidden face I bow:
My Phoebus in his Rest, has hid his heavenly brow.
FINIS.
A MORNING AFTER MOVRNING.
LEt me no longer Press your gentle eyes,
Be'ing of themselves frank of religious tears.
But stanch these streams with so lace from the Skies;
Whence Hymen decked in Saffron robes appears.
Let Henry now rest in our memories,
And let the Rest, rest in our eyes and ears.
Now He has had his Rites, Let Those have their adorning
By whose bright beams our Night of mourning has a morning.
And now (my Muse) vnmasque thee: And see how
A second Son in Henry's place does shine.
See Five great Feasts all meet in one Day, now.
Our MAKER keeps his Sabbath most divine.
Isis and Rhene are joined in sacred vow;
And fair Eliza's Fredericke's Valentine.
The Court in joy artires her splendent brow:
The Country shroues; And all in mirth combine.
Fiue-times he hallowed. The Day, wherein, GOD rests,
Saints triumph, Princes wed: and Court and Country feaste's.
FINIS.

