HYGIASTICON: OR, The right course of preserving Life and Health unto extreme
old Age: Together with soundness and integrity of the Senses, Judgment, and
Memory.

Written in Latin by Leonard Lessius* And now done into English.

Printed by Roger Daniel, printer to the Universitie of Cambridge. 1634.

The things contained in this following Book.
1. Lessius his Hygiasticon. 2. Cornaro's Treatise of Temperance, translated by
Master George Herbert. 3. A discourse translated out of Italian.
Ecclus. 37. 28, 29, 30.
Be not unsatiable in any daintic thing, nor too greedy upon meats.

For excess of meats brings s^cknesse, and surfeting will turn into choler.

By surfeting have many perished, but he that takes ^eed prolongeth his life.

To the Reader.
The Preface of the Publisher of the ensuing Treatises.
WE do not well: this day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our peace: if
we tarry till the morning light, some mischief will come upon us: now therefore
come, that we may go and tell the Kings household: -- Thus reasoned the L^pers
that first came to the knowledge of the Syrians flight, and Isreal's
deliveratice: And the application of their arguments has (in a much like case)
produced now the like resolution.

Having been a witness of the late discovery of a richer Mine, then any of
those which golden PERV affords, LIFE and HEALTH, and vigarous STRENGTH of
Mind and Body, general PLENTY, and private WEALTH, yea and VERTVE it self
(inasmuch as, for the (...) part, the conditions of the Mind ^ollow the temper
of the Body) being to be extracted thence with very little pain and cost, and
without any danger at all: I have thought my self bound so give public notice
thereof to the world.

And so much the rather, as having been a Spectatour only, I find my self
de^arred from that plca of modesty, wherewith the Adventurers excuse
themselves from the publication of this Treasure. But who knows whether I
have not in part been restrained from the credit of partnership, to mine own
private good; to this intent, that I might be enforced to become the Publisher
of it for common benefit? Surely, me thinks, as in some regard my want of
Interest in the business makes my testimony of the more validity (for who
will not believe a witness giving in evidence to his own prejudice?) so it
seems to impose on me a kind of necessity of acquainting the world therewith,
if happily by the promotion of others good, I may help to redeem^ mine own
negligence. This good effect, I hope, may follow to mine own advantage upon
this publication: as on the contrary I might justly be afraid of multip^ying
damage, and doubling punishment upon my head, for the unjust concealment, as
well as for the not practi^ing of that, which I cannot but approve most
excellent and beneficial to all those ends, that a wise man and a Christian
should aim at. In this regard, I hope the pious and charitable Reader (and none
but such I invite) will help me rather with his prayers, and a fair acceptance
of my hearty desires of his good, then censure or despise my want of absolute
conformity to that which I ex^ort him unto. And thus much touching my self,
and the reasons that have moved me to the publication of these ensuing
Treatises.

The middlemost of which, as it was first written in order of time, so it was
in translation; and therefore I will begin with it.

Master George Herbert of blessed memory, having at the request of a Noble
Personage translated it into English, sent a copy thereof, not many months
before his death, unto some friends of his, who a good while before had given
an attempt of regulating themselves in matter of Diet: Which, although it was
after a very imperfect manner, in regard of that exact course therein
prescribed; yet was of great advantage to them, inasmuch as they were enabled,
through the good preparation that they had thus made, to go immediately to the
practice of that pattern, which Cornarus had set them, and so have reaped the
benefit thereof, in a larger and eminenter manner then could otherwise possi^ly
have been imagined in so short a space.

Not long after, Lessius his book, by happy chance, or, to speak better, by
gracious providence of the Author of Health and all other good things, came to
their hands: Whereby receiving much instruction and confirmation, they
requested from me the Translation of it into English. Whereupon has ensued
what you shall now receive.

It was their desire to have the Translation entire; and finding no just reason
to the contrary, 1 have been willing to satisfy them therein. Mast^r Herbert
professes, and so it is indeed apparent, that he was enforced to leave out
something out of Cornarus: but it was not any thing appertaining to the main
subject of the book, but chiefly certain extravagant excursion^ of the Author
against the Reformation of Religion, which in his time was newly begun. Neither
his old blind zeal, nor the new and dangerous profession of Lessius, will (as
we hope) breed any scandal or discredit to these present works of theirs, nor
to the Imitatours of them, with any discreet and sincere Protestants. That they
wore both Papists, and the one of them a Jesuit, is no prejudice to the truth
of what they write concerning Temperance: In the prosecution whereof, we ought
not only to agree with them, but to seek to advance and excel them, in^smuch
as the purity of our Religion exacts a more perfect endeavoring after all
manner of true virtue, then theirs can do. We have not therefore judged it
meet, either to wave, or to disguise the condition of the Authors, but rather
to give notice thereof; esteeming, that as Treakle is made of Vipers, so from
this very poisonous superstition on their parts, an excellent Cordial may be
extracted, for the benefit of all that truly fear God, and sincerely desire
to serve him: who cannot but make a conscience of being inferior in the
practice of Virtue to them, over whom they are so much superior is the
knowledge of the Truth,

The quality of the Author being thus known, the Judicious Reader will not
find any cause of stumbling at his commendation of some persons, or
institutions, nor at his use of some kind of phrases answerable to his
Religion. That which was of notorious scandal, has received correction. In
those thing which may receive a favorable construction, or are not of any
great moment, it has not been thought fit to make any alteration; because it
could not indeed be well done without obsouring, or almost utterly dissolving
the frame of the Discourse.

The names of Hermites and Monks are perhaps offensive to weak minds, that
have only heard of the superstition and villainy of the late professors
thereof, and have not heard, or do not believe the verrue and true holiness of
those in the Primitive times. But since they are not brought in here for proof
of any controversall points, but only as instances to confirm the virtue and
power of Temperance, for the conservation of Life and Health; there is so
little cause of scandal to the most scrupulous-minded that can be, as it must
needs be interpreted desire of quarrel and contention in any that shall sound
Alarm on this ground. And for the surer binding of such it^hing fingers (if any
such shall be) to the Peace, I have thought it not amiss to make use of the
Decree of that Great Chancellor of Learning, as well as of the Law, the lat^
Vicount St. Albans, as I find it registered in his Book which he entitles, The
History of Life and Death.

Which, serving not only to bear me out in this particular, but summarily
ratifying the whole business, I have thought fit to prefix as a general
Approbation; sheltring my self thereby, as upon a warrant under the great Seal
of Learning and Ingenuity.

And so I come to the third Discourse: which is added to the other, as a
banquet of Iunkets after a solid Feast. The Author thereof was an Italian of
great reputation, living in the same age which Cornarus did. The change of the
time, and the diversity of our fashions, has necessarily caused some
alterations and additions in the English translation, to make it more
Domzon-like. If it give any delight, we have as much as we desire: although
there is no reason to exclude the hope of benefiting. For however it seems to
play, yet in very truth it strikes home, and pierces to the quick. -- Ridentem
dicere verum
Quid vetat? --
Oft-times lighter arguments effect, what stronger and more serious cannot do:
and that is taken in good part by way of mirth, which being done in earnest
would by no means be brooked.

Thus (good Reader) thou have as much as I conceive needful to be known
touching my self, or to be said touching the work. As for the Practitioners,
they forbid any more to be spoken of them then this, That as they find all the
benefits, which are promised by Cornarus and Lessius, most true and real; so
by Gods mercy they find no difficulty at all in the observation of this
course. They are sufficient witnesses in their own affairs, and I hold them to
be faithful: And therefore making no doubt of the truth of the latter part of
their report, as I can abundantly give testimony of the verity of the former,
I commend both to thy belief and consideration; and so commit thee to Gods
grace.

T. S.
DECEMBER. 7, 1633.
Out of the History of Life and Death, written by FRANCIS Lord VERULAM,
Vicount S. Albans, and Lord Chancellor of England, page 141.
IT seems to be approved by experience, that a slender Diet, and well-nigh
Pythagorean, or such as is answerable to the severest Rules of Monastical
life, or to the Institutions of Hermites, who had Necessity and Scarceness
for a Rule, does produce long life. And to this course appertains, drinking of
water, cold air, slender food (to wit, of roots and fruits and fish, rather
then that which is fresh and hot) the wearing of hair-cloth, often fastings,
frequent watchings, and seldom enjoyment of sensual pleasures, and the like:
For all these do diminish the spirits, and reduce them to that quantity, which
suffices merely to the services of life; whereby the consumption of the
Radical humor and Vital heat is abated.

But if the Diet be somewhat more choice then these rigours and mortifications
allow, yet if it be always equal, and after one constant proportion, it will
afford the same benefit: For we see it to be so in flames. A flame that is
somewhat greater, if it be kept const^nt and without blazing, consumes less of
its nourishment, then a lesler flame does that is stirred up and down, and
sometimes augmented, and otherwhiles aba^ed. Which was evidently demonstrated
by the Regiment and Diet which the V^netian Cornarus used, who ate and drank so
many years by one just weight; by which means he came to live above an hundred
years, continuing an able man both in strength and senses.

To the Reader, upon this Books intent.
Hark hither, Reader: would thou see
Nature her own Physician be?
Would see a man all his own wealth,
His own music, his own health?
A man, whose sober soul can tell
How to wear her garments well;
Her garments that upon her ^it
(As garments should do) close and fit?
A well-cloth'd soul, that is not oppressed
Nor choakt with what she should be dressed?
Whose soul's sheathed in a crystal shrine,
Through which all her bright features shine,
As when a piece of wanton lawn,
A thin a ^riall vail, is drawn
Over Beauties face; seeming^ to hide,
More sweetly shows the blushing bride?
A soul, whose intellectual beams
No mists do mask, no lazy steams?
A happy soul, that all the way
To heaven rides in a summers day?
Would see a man, whose well-warm'd blood
Bathes him in a genuine flood?
A man, whose tuned humors be
A set of rarest harmony?
Would see blithe looks, fresh cheeks beguile
Age? would see December smile?
Would see a nest of roses grow
In a bed of reverend snow?
Warm thoughts, fr^e spirits, flattering
Winters self into a spring?
In sum, would see a man that can
Live to be old, and still a man?
whose latest and most leaden hours
Fall with soft wings, stuck with soft flowers:
And when life's sweet ^able ends,
His soul and body part like friends:
No quarrels, murmures, no delay;
A kiss, a sigh, and so away?
This rare one, Reader, would thou see?
Hark hither, and thy self be he.
R. Crashaw, Pemb.
To the Translatour.
IF thy good work work good upon this nation,
Pray God reward thee with Enochs translation.
Upon the matter of the work.
TAke so much Ru^^^b, learned Galen says;
Take so much Cassia, so much Aloes,
So much of the other, Ana^ of such and such.
Give me this RECIPE, Take not too much.
WHat e're the Doctor gives, he does put to it
^asting: Take this, and fast; and it will do it.
See! without ^asting Physic can cure none:
But Fasting will cure almost all, alone.
To the Translatour.
How Is this? A book for Temperance? that first page
Will mar the sale on it. Our luxurious age
Expects some new invention to devour
Estates at mouthfulls, swallow in an hour
What was not scrap't in years: had ye but hit
On some such subject, that had been most fit
For these loose times, when a strict sparing food
More's out of fashion then an old F^ench hood.
But what (alas!) must modest Temperance, she
Live in perpetual exile, because we
Turn such voluptuous Epicures? No now
Sh' has got bold champions dare her cause avow
In spite of opposition, and have shown
In print to our shame, how we are intemperate grown.
The pearl dissolving Courtier may well here
Learn to make meaner, yet far better cheer:
The Scholar to be pleased with his penie bit,
As much as those that at kings tables sit,
Crowded with heaps of dishes. Here Is a diet
Never troubles nature; and who e're shall buy it
For practice sake, buys but his own content:
And that is a purchase he shall never repent.
J. Jackson.
To his enemy the Translatour.
IS this your temperate diet? here is no mean:
Fame surfets on it: Envy, that grows lean.
Is It now in the press? more weight: If It be ropriv'd,
Temperance, I fear, will make thy work longliv'd.
Could not one tongue serve temperance to tastes*
I Will go translate it back again: it is past.
If I can not devour it, yet I may
De^^act: for Temperance bids take away.
Peter Gunning.
To LESSIUS the Author.
HEnceforth I Will never credit those that say,
Contemplatists do only think and pray.
Sweet exercises! true: yet to the mind
Only they are sweet: but thou have so combined
The minds, the bodies, and the fortunes good*
That if thy writing be but understood,
To one thou Virtue giv'st, to another Health.
The third thou teach to preserve his wealth.
Wh' obeys thy laws in meat, drink, pleasures, sleep*
May ment^n san' in corpore san^ keep.
And (trust me, Lessius) I have paid far more
For one two lines, then thy two hundred score.
A Dialogue between a Glutton and Echo.
Gl. MY belly I do dei^ie.

Ech^ Fie.

Gl. Who curbs his Appetite's a fool.

Echo Ah fool!

Gl. I do not like this Abstinence.

Echo Hence.

Gl. My joy's a feast, my wish is wine.

Echo Swine*

Gl. We Epicures are happy truly.

Echo You lie.

Gl. Who Is that which gives me the lie?

Echo I.

Gl. What? ^cho, thou that mock'st a voice?

Echo A voice.

Gl. May I not, Echo, eat my fill?

Echo Ill.

Gl. Will'^ hurt me if I drink too much?

Echo Much.

Gl. Thou mock'st me, Nymph; I Will not beleeve'^*

Echo Beleeve't.

Gl. Do thou condemn then what I do?

Echo I do.

^l. I grant it does exhaust the purse.

Echo Worse.

Gl. Is It this which dulls the sharpest wit*

Echo Best wit.

Gl. Is It this which brings infirmities?

Echo It is.

Gl. Whither will it bring my soul? cans^ tell?

Ec^o T'hell.

Gl. Do thou no gluttons virtuous know?

Echo No.

^l. Would have me temperate till I die?

Echo I.

Gl. Shall I therein find ease and pleasur^?

Echo Yea sure.

Gl. But is it a thing which profit brings?

Echo It brings.

Gl. To mind, or body? or to both?

Echo To both*

Gl. Will it my life on earth prolong?

Echo O long!

Gl. Will It make me vigorous until death?

Echo Till death.

Gl. Will It bring me to eternal bliss?

Echo Yes.

Gl. Then, sweetest Temperance, I Will love thee.

Echo I love thee.

Gl. Then, swinish Gluttony, I Will leave thee.

Echo I Will leave thee.

Gl. I Will be a belly god no more.

Echo No more.

Gl. If all be true which thou do tell,
They who fare sparingly, fare well*

Echo Farewell.

S. J.
To the Translatour.
ME thinks I could b^intemperate in thy praise,
Fea^^ thee with forced words, and sugared lai^^
But that thy pro^e, my verse, do both command
Me to keep measure, and take off my hand.
There Is Gluttony in words: The mouth may (...)
In giving out, as well as taking in.
B. Oley.
To the Reader.
REader, what here thou'^t find, is so good sense,
That, had my self not seen the experien^ee,
I should subscribe. But I can tell thee where
^ull eighty years stand upright, look as clear
As some eighteens: A Glass they do not use
To see, or to be seen in; they refu^e
Such Mediums, because they strictly keep
The golden mean in meat, in drink, in sleep.
They hear well twice; and, when themselves do
talk,
Make others do so once: S^ns staff they walk,
Because they rise from table so: They take
But little Physic, save what cooks do make;
And part of that is given to the poor. (door!
Blessed Physic, that does good thrown out of
Thou Wilt scarce believe, at once to show thy eyes
So many years, so few infirmities.
And, which with beauty all th^s Beauty decks,
This strength I tell on is in the weaker sex. (says,
All Is due to God, some to this Book, which
(...)
Faults to be amended.
(...) Lessin^, page 124. lin. 14.

For, In a Turret, ^eade, On a Pillar.

In (...), page 39. lin. 5. For, right, read, ^ight.

^. 40. 1. 19. For, constivation, (...), cultivation*

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN CHRIST, D. RUMOLD COLIBRANT, President of
Postell. health and salvation.
YOu will marvel perhaps (Reverend Lord President) what has moved me being a
Divine by profession, and a Religious, to write concerning Health, a subject
proper to Physicians. But concerning this matter, I doubt not to have given so
just reasons in the preface of this work (where I have set down the aim of my
undertakings in this kind) as will take away all ground of wonderment.
Inasmuch as it is not my purpose to write like a Physician concerning the
preservation of health; that is, setting down a thousand observations and
cautions touching the quality of meats and drinks, and of their proper use
according to the several seasons of the year, and of timely purgation of
humors, and of sleep and watching, bodily exercises, and medicines whereby the
several humors are to be corrected, and whereby the Head, Stomach, and
Bowels are to be comforted and strengthened: I say, it was no part of my
intent to enter upon the handling of any of these matters. For how ever it
would have been no great difficulty perhaps to have gathered these things out
of sundry Authors, and afterward to have with judgment digested them
according to order and method: yet, that I might not seem to act the part of a
Physician rather then of a Divine, I have thought fit altogether to omit the
mention of them. There was a higher matter in my designs, and that which is
proper to Divines: that is, to recommend to all (and in particular to the
Religious, and those who are studiously addicted to the employments of the
mind) that Holy Sobriety, which is the procurer of so many singular benefits
both to the minds and bodies of men. For besides that it brings Health and
long life, it does wonderfully conduce to the attainment of Wisdom, to the
exercises of Contemplation, Prayer, and Devotion, and to the preservation of
Chastity, and other virtues; and withal causes all these employments and
functions to be performed with mavelous ^ase, and exceeding great
cons^lation. It befits not a Divine to busy himself in trifles, which
appertain to the body, and to engage delicate persons to the further pursuit
of such matters; especially considering that bodily health may very well be
preserved without them: but a Divine ought principally to have an eye to those
good things whereby we may become acceptable to God, and promote our own
salvation. Inasmuch then as Holy Sobriety does bring with it the good things
belonging to both parts of a man, I did not think it mis^eseeming my
profession, to write this short Treatise in the commendation thereof, and
withal to show and declare, by what way and means we might come to the just
scantling and measure thereof.

I have annexed a Treatise tending to the same purpose, of a Venetian Gentleman
Lodowick Cornaro, a man of great eminency, and of a sharp judgment: who
having learned by experience of many years the great virtue and power that is
in Sobriety, did at last by writing notably make declaration thereof.

Both these Treatises (my Reverend L.) I have thought fit to dedicate unto your
name. and to send fo^th into the world under your patronage. For to whom can a
Treatise of Sobriety be more fitly dedicated, then to such a one as has so
stoutly and constantly followed Sobriety, as by the help thereof to preserve
himself vigorous and cheerful unto near upon seventie years of his age? You
are he that can sit a hu^gry in the midst of daily feasts, enjoined to be made
unto the Gentry that pass by solitary Campinia: and whilst others fill
their bellies and satisfy their appetites, you contract both into narrow
bounds and limits. Besides this, there are sundry other causes, which deserve
this testimony of my venerable respect toward your Lordship; to wit, that
zeal wherewith you do so industriously promote the cause of your Religion,
which is so exceedingly beneficial to the whole Church, and to our Belgia: and
together herewith that singular wisdom of yours in Government, through means
whereof you have for so many years space safely conserved your noble Hospital
in that desert where it stands, in the midst of many tumults of wars, and
shocks of armies, in great licencio^snesse of military discipline, and almost
daily inrodes of both sides unto it: by means whereof you have further not
only recovered it out of those great debts, wherewith it was formerly
burdened, but have moreover adorned it with beautiful structures, and a high
Tower for the settling of a Monastery therein. And that I may pass over your
other virtues, whereof Sobriety, the mother of all virtues, is the true cause
in you, this dedication seems due to you in particular, in regard of that
ancient friendship which for above forty years space I have had with your
brother, Father George Colibrant, a learned man, and of noted holiness,
exceedingly addicted to sobriety, prayer, mortification of the flesh, and zeal
touching the soul: by whose example and wholesome admonitions, many Centuries
of excellent young men have in sundry places given themselves unto holy
Religion. The conjunction that we likewise have with your other brother, John
Colibrant, a man of great uprightness, whose every where approved integrity
far excells rich patrimonies, makes this work belong to you. I could relate
many other things appertaining to your own and your friends commendation: but I
make spare of them, that I may not offend your modesty, which does not
willingly hear such matters.

Receive therefore ( Right Reverend Lord) this small gift, a testimony of our
affec^ion toward you and yours: and be not wanting to the recommendation of
that excellency of holy Sobriety which you have made proof of in your self,
and we make declaration of in this Treatise, to all men, but especially to Gods
servants, that they may by this means come to serve God more perfectly and
sweetly in this life, and obtain greater glory in heaven.

Now I beseech the Divine Goodness to prosper all your holy designs to its
own glory, and the salvation of men; and after that you shall have been
adorned with all manner of virtue, to renew your long and happy Old age with
the blessed youth of Eternity.

From Lovain, Call. Iul. 1613. Your Reverend Fatherships servant in Christ,
LEONARD LESSIUS.

The Approbation of JOHN VIRINGUS, Doctor of Physic and Professor.
THe Hygiasticon of the Reverend Father Leonard Lessius, a Divine of the
Society of Jesus, is learned, pious, and profitable. For it is squared out
according to the Physicians rules, and is entire (...). It whets the vigor of
the mind, and leads to old age. Out of his love to the Commonwealth and
public good, he was desirous to make that common, which he had learned (...)
regno. I hold th^^ Work to be most worthy of praise and so will every sober
man, that without spite and envy reads it, think, and will he nill he, judge
of it as I do.

So I censure, Joannes Walterius Viringus, Doctor and Professor of Physic.
The Approbation of GERARD de VILEERS, Doctor of Physic and Ordinary
Professor.
I Have diligently read and weighed the most learned book of the Reverend
Father Leonard Lessius, and I judge the doctrine contained therein agreeable to
the Physicians rules; and most convenient to that end, for which it was written
by the Author: and therefore most profitable for Religious persons, and for
all those that are given to the employments of the mind.

Gerard de Vileers, Doctor of Physic and Ordinary Professor*
The Approbation of FRANCIS SASSEN Doctor of Physic.
INasmuch as all diseases, except distempers without matter, some
instrumentari^, and those which arise from emptiness (which are but few) are
caused either from abundance of humors, or from ill nourishment; and it is
Galens determination, in his 4. book and 4. chapter concerning the preservation
of health, that all they who have thick and slimie humors in the prime veins
(as most part of the Europeans, and especially those that are more Northernly
have) do exceedingly well com^^^t a spare diet: And thirdly, inasmuch as by ^e
stimonie of the self same Galen, the conditions of the soul follow the temper
of the body, and so consequently the body being clear from all superfluous
excrements, the operations of the mind are more vigorous: These precepts will
not only be available for the preservation of them that be in health, and for
the recoverie of them that be sickly, but (which is the learned Authors main
intent) exceedingly conduce to the maintenance of the Senses, Judgment, and
Memory in their soundness until extreme old age.

FRAN. SASSEN, Doctor of Physic.
HYGIASTICON, OR The right course of preserving Health.
CHAP. 1.
The occasion and scope of this work.
1MAny Authors have written largely and very learnedly touching the
preservation of Health: but they charge men with so many rules, and exact so
much observation and caution about the quality and quantity of meats and
drinks; about air, sleep, exercise, seasons of the year, purgations,
bloodletting, and the like; and over and above prescribe such a number of
Compound, Opiate, and other kinds of exquisite remedies, as they bring men
into a Labyrinth of care in the observation, and unto perfect slaverie in the
endeavoring to perform what they do in this matter enjoin.

And when all is done, the issue proves commonly much short, often times clean
contrary to that which was expected; in regard perhaps that some smaller
matter in appearance, yet wherein the chief of the business indeed lay, was
not observed and practiced as it ought. For men forsooth will have their own
minds, eat every thing that likes them, and to their fill: they will shape
their diet according to the ordinary usage of the world, and give in every
thing satisfaction to their sensuality and appetite. Whereby it comes to
pass, that all their other care and diligence touching these physical
precepts and observations comes in the end to little or nothing at all for
matter of benefit.

Hereupon most men bidding adieu to Physicians counsels and injuctions, leave
all to nature and success. They hold it, according to the the common Qui
medice vivit, misere vivit.
Proverb, A miserable life to live after the Physicians prescript; a great part
of unhappiness to be limited in a man's diet, so that he may not eat freely,
and to the full, of what he has a mind unto: To be kept continually as it
were in aw, so that he dare not content his appetite, nor give satisfaction to
his belly, they fancy to themselves to be the most wretched condition of life
that may be. Upon this ground they fall on eating twice or thrice a day,
without stint or restraint in measure or quality of food, but as their
appetites lead them on.

Having thus filled their bodies, they instantly apply themselves some good
space to their business, exercising their minds, and all the faculties
thereof in the consideration and pursuit of weighty and important matters: Nor
can they ever be persuaded to purge at fitting seasons, or before the disease
oppress them, imagining all to be well with them, as long as they feel nothing
plainly to the contrary. Hereupon it comes to pass, that their bodies in
tract of time grow replenished with crude and ill humors, which are not only
increased by continuance, but become putrified, and of a malignant temper; so
that upon every light occasion, either of heat, or cold, or weather, or winds,
or extraordinary labor, or any other inconvenience or excess, they are
inflamed, and break out into mortal sicknesses and diseases.

2. I my self have observed many excellent men on this ground only snatched
away by death in the prime of their age; who undoubtedly, had they used the
right course of preserving their health, might have many years prolonged their
lives, and by their learning and worthy deeds have notably benefited the world,
and thereby (it may be) added to their own glory in heaven. There are
questionless likewise a great many of all kinds of persons, both of those
that enter into religious Orders, and of those that live at large in the world,
who through ignorance of this matter enjoy little health, and through the want
thereof remain much hindered in their studies, and in the performance of those
offices and functions of the mind, which they most desire, and are bound to do.

3. Having therefore of a long time and in sundry places taken this matter into
diligent consideration, I thought with my self, that it would prove a work of
no small benefit, to give notice to the world of that way and means for
preservation of health, whereby I my self have for many years past been kept
not only found in body, but expedite to all operations and exercises of the
mind: although I have all this space labored under many corporal
inconveniences, and before I entered into this course, was so far gone, as by
the judgment of very skillful Physicians I was not like to have lived above
two years at the most. The same good effects that it wrought in me, have
diverse of our Society and sundry others abroad made happy proof of,
maintaining themselves in constant health and cheerfulness by this means;
being indeed the very self same, which was of old practiced by Holy men and
sage Philosophers. And it consists chiefly in a right ordering of the diet, and
in a certain Moderation of our meat and drink: such a moderation I mean, as is
no way troublesome, nor breeding weakness or distemper; but on the contrary
very easy to be undergone, and such as brings strength and vigor both in
Mind and Body.

Being very intent on these matters, there was brought unto me by a noble
person a little Treatise concerning the benefits of a Sober Life, written in
Italian by Lodowick Cornaro, a noble Gentleman of Venice, of great
understanding, Honorable, Rich in estate, and a married man* In which book
this course is marvellously commended to all men, and confirmed by much and
certain experience. I was much taken with the reading thereof, and held it very
well worth the translating into Latin, to make it common to all men; and to
annex it to this explicative Treatise of mine own.

4. I would not have any man to think strange of the matter, That this subject
is nor unbefitting a Divine.
that I being a prosessed Divine should take upon me to write of this subject.
For besides that I have long ago made some good progress in the Theorie of
Physic, this matter is no way discrepant to the profession of a Divine: in
regard that it is the divine virtue of Temperance, which is chiefly in
question; to wit, Wherein it consists; what is the right way to attain it, and
what may be the true measure of its object; how this measure may be found: and
lastly, what benefits will arise thereby. The search then and consideration of
this business is not altogether Physical, but in great part appertains to
Divinity and moral Philosophy.

And over and above, the end and scope which I aim at herein, is indeed most
befitting a Divine. For that which I principally intend, is to furnish
religious persons, and those who give themselves to piety, with such a way and
manner of living, as they may with more ease, cheerfulness, and servencie
apply themselves to the faithful service of the Great God, and our Savior the
Lord Jesus Christ. For verily it is scarce to be believed, with how great
alacrity, and with what abundance of inward consolations those men, who addict
themselves to sobriety, may (if so be they have any reasonable understanding
in divine mysteries) attend Divine Service, and the hearing of Gods Word, their
private devotions and meditations, and in sum all manner of spiritual
exercises. And this indeed was my principal aim in the writing of this
Tractate; this my chiefest wish and desire. As for the benefit and help that it
affords to Students of good learning, and to all those whose employments
consist in affairs and* businesses appertaining to the mind and understanding,
I say nothing at present; purposing hereafter to speak more at large thereof.
Whether you take the matter therefore, or the end, this Treatise can no way
misbeseem a Divine. And so, good Reader, thou have an account of my reasons in
undertaking this business.

CHAP. II.
What is meant by a Sober life: and what is the fit measure of meat and drink.
TO come then to the thing it self, I will first set down, What we mean by a
sober life: Secondly, By what way and means we may come to a determination of
the just measure that is to be observed in our life and diet: And thirdly, What
the commodities and benefits thereof be.

5. Touching the first point then, We call that a Sober life or diet, which
sets stint not only in drink, but also in meat: so that a man must neither eat
nor drink any more, then the constitution of his body allows, with reference
to the services of his mind. And this self-same we term an orderly, regulate,
and temperate life or diet; for all these phrases and names we shall make use
of, intending by them all one and the same thing.

The Matter then about which this Diet or Temperance is mainly conversant, is
Meat and Drink, in which a constant measure is to be kept. Notwithstanding it
does likewise reach unto the care and ordering of all other things; such as
are, immoderate heat and cold, overmuch labor, and the like; through the
excess whereof there grows any inconvenience in bodily health, or disturbance
in the operations of the mind.

6. Now this measure is not the same in respect of the quantity in all sorts
of people, The Measure is different, according to the diversiti^ of
constitutions and ages.
but very different according to the diversity of complexions in sundry
persons, and of youth and strength in the self same body. For one kind of
proportion belongs to Youth, when it is in its flower; another to Consistencie;
a third to Old age: The Sickly and the Whole have likewise their several
measures; as also the Phlegmatic and the Choleric: In regard that in these
several constitutions the nature and temper of the stomach is very different.
Now the Measure of the food ought to be exactly proportionable, as much as
possibly may be, to the quality and condition of the stomach. And that Measure
is exactly proportionable, What is every ones due measure.
which the stomach has such power and masterie over, as it can perfectly
concoct and digest in the midst of any employments either of mind or body,
and which withal suffices to the due nourishment of the body.

I say, In the midst of any employme^ts of mind or body, etc. In regard that
a greater measure is requisite to him that is occupied in bodily labor, and
continually exercising of the faculties of the body, then to him that is
altogether in studies, meditation, prayer, or other like works and exercises of
the mind: Ina^much as the exercises and employments of the mind do very much
hinder and disturb the concoction: and that, either because in calling up the
whole force of the soul they do as it were abate and suspend the power and
actions of the inferior faculties, as experience shows; for when we are very
intent on study or prayers, we neither hear clock, nor take notice of any
thing that comes before our eyes or other senses: or else because they do
withdraw not only the animal, but the vital and natural spirits themselves
from their proper services. And hence it comes, that for the most part twice as
little food serves their turn, who are continually employed in study and
affairs of the mind, as is necessary for them that apply themselves to bodily
exercises; although equal age and temper might otherwise perhaps require an
equality in both their diets.

7. The difficulty then lies in finding out this measure. Which S. Austine of
old well observed, in his fourth book against Julian, and in the fourteenth
chapter writing thus, Now when we come to the putting in^ure of that necessary
pleasure, with which we refresh our bodies, who is able to declare in words,
how it suffers us not to know the measure of necessity? but if there be any of
those things that yield delight before us, it by their means steals away, and
hides, and leaps over the ^ounds and limits of proc^ring health; whilst we
cannot think that to be sufficient, which is indeed sufficient, being willingly
led on by the provocation thereof, fancying our selves to be about the
business of Health, when indeed we are about the service of Pleasure: so that
Lust knows not where Necessity ends.

In these words he referres the ground of this difficulty to Pleasure, which
blindes us that we cannot discern when we are come to the due measure we ought
to hold, but hides the bound-marks thereof, to draw us past them, and persuades
us that we do but make provision for Health, when in very truth we canvasse for
Pleasure.

Concerning the discovery of this measure therefore are we to treat in the
second place, producing Rules, whereby it may be clearly and certainly found
out.

8. But here perhaps some will object, That in Monasteries and other regular
societies, such as are Colleges in the Universities, Whether Students in
Colleges, or those that live in Monasteries etc. ought to trouble themselves
about this measure.
etc. no man need trouble himself touching this measure, inasmuch as either the
statutes of the Societies, or the discreet orders of Superiors have set down
the just measure that is to be held, appointing according to the several
seasons of the year such and such portions of flesh, eggs, fish, roots, rice,
butter, cheese, fruits, and broths; and such quantities of wine and beer, as
are fit; all of them being proportioned out by weight and measure: so that we
may boldly (say they) take our allowance in these things without danger of
excess.

These men will by no means believe, that the catarrhs, coughs, headaches,
pains of the stomach, fevers, and other the like infirmities, whereinto they
often fall, should proceed from the excess of their food; but lay the fault
upon winds, ill air, watchings, too much pains-taking, and other the like
outward causes. But questionless they are deceived in this opinion; inasmuch
as it cannot possibly be, that any one certain measure should be found
proportionable to so many different sorts of complexions and stomachs, as use
to be in such kind of societies: so that what is but reasonable to a young and
strong body, is more then twice or thrice too much for an old or infirm
person: as Thomas, following Aristotle, does well prove, 2. 2. q. 141. art. 6.
and is indeed of it self without proof manifest.

These allowances then both for quantity and variety, are not set out by
Founders and Superiors, as just measures for every man, but with the largest
for all in general; to the intent that the strongest, and they who need most,
might have enough; and the rest might take of that which best liked them, (yet
always keeping within those limits which reason prescribes) and in those
things which they forbore, might have opportunity to exercise their virtue.
For it is no great glory to show temperance in the absence of temptations: but
to keep hunger on foot at a banquet, and to restrain the greediness of the
belly in the midst of provoking dainties; why, this is a masterie indeed,
especially to Novices, and such as have not gotten the victory over their
appetites. It is a great masterie, I say, and therefore undoubtedly of no small
price with God. To the intent therefore that the exercise of this virtue, and
the benefit of the reward that by Gods mercy belongs to it, might not be
wanting to them that seek and endeavor the increasing of their reward
hereafter, the Founders and Institutours of religious Societies have perhaps
allotted a larger measure, and more variety of food, then is necessary, or
they would have every one to make use of.

Touching this matter we have a very pertinent example in the life of
Pachomius, faithfully written 1200. years ago, as it is extant in Surius, 14.
Maii. Where it is mentioned, that this Pachomius, in his monasteries, and
especially in those that younger persons lived in, would have (beside bread and
salt) some sod or roast meat set before all the Monks, to the intent that,
albeit the most of them were so abstemious, that they contented themselves
only with bread and salt, or some Crudo aliquo fructu.
green fruit, yet they might have it in their free choice and liberty, either
to eat thereof, or to forbear: And so, if either for mortification sake, or the
better sitting of themselves for devotion, they should abstain, they might
exercise a greater virtue; since it is a more difficult thing to abstain, when
meat is set before us, and by its presence does provoke the appetite, then when
it is removed out of our sight. More to this purpose may be read in Jacob. de
Paz. Tom. 2. l. 2. de Mortif. ext. hom. cap. 5.

Nor will it any thing at all abate from the probability of this opinion, to
say that in this allowance of variety and abundance there was a direct
intention of giving some kind of refreshment to Nature: Inasmuch as the
refreshment, which the Institutours and Founders of these Societies meant,
consists not in this, that the true and right measure at temperance should at
any time be notably exceeded; but that there might be now and then an
opportunity of delight ministered, through the different and grateful favor
of sundry kinds of meats: yet so always, as this delight should be kept
bounded within the limits of temperance, and the appetite never fully
satisfied. For whatsoever exceeds this measure, is to be accounted vice, be it
upon what occasion it will, whether of Marriage, Dedication of Churches, or any
other solemn Feast whatsoever. Now that is always excess, which proves more
in quantity, then the stomach can perfectly digest without leaving any
^rudities at all behind.

CHAP. III.
Seven Rules for the finding out of the right Measure.
9 NOw to find out this right Measure, we shall make use of these Rules and
observations following.

The first Rule is, If thou do usually take so much food at meals, as thou
art thereby made unfit for the duties and offices belonging to the Mind, such
as are Prayer, Meditation, Studies of learning, and the like; it is then
evident, that thou do exceed the measure which thou ought to hold: For
both Nature and Reason exact, that the Vegetati^^ part in a man (that is, that
wherein the growth and conservation of the body consists) should be so
ordered and cherished, as that there should arise no offense or damage thereby
to the Animal and Reasonable parts of the soul; in as much as the Vegetative
part is ordained to the service of these other, and therefore ought to be of
furtherance and help, and no ways of hinderance unto them in their several
functions and operations.

Whenever therefore there is so much food taken in upon account of the
Vegetative part, as proves of any remarkable offense or hinderance to the
operations of the superior faculties, to wit, of the Senses, the Imagination,
the Understa^ding, or the Memory; then it is a sign, that the fitting measure
in this kind is exceeded. Now this impediment and offense proceeds from the
abundance of vapors, that are chiefly sent up into the head out of the
stomach: which, as experience demonstrates, would be but sparingly sent up, if
this measure were not exceeded.

For they who follow a sober course of life, are as apt and ready to all
services and employments of the mind after their meals, as before: as our
Author, whom we have annexed to this present Treatise, does often times
testify; and my self, and diverse others of our Society do daily make proof
of. Nay, those holy Fathers of old, who eat only once a day, did it so
sparingly, as they were no whit at all thereby hindered in their performances
of the functions belonging to the mind: How much more easily then may it be
effected by them* who divide the quantity; and twice a day use moderate
refection?

10. I said before; that those vapors and f^mes; which cloud and overshadow
the clearenesse of the Brain, are chiefly caused by the meat taken down into
the st^mack: Chiefly, I say, in regard that however this be the principal; yet
it is not the only cause. For these vapors proceed not only from the meat
immediately before taken, which begins to boil and concoct; but also from the
abundance of blood and other humors, which are in the Liver, the Spleen, and
the Veins: which together with the meat fall on seething as it were, and send
up great abundance of these kind of sooty fumes.

But a sober diet does by little and little diminish this Plet^oram.
abundance of humors, and abates this Cacochymiam.
ill moisture, and reduces them to their due proportions both in quantity and
quality: so that they do no more upon eating send up these kind of fumes. For
when Nature does perfectly govern all the humors of the body by the
ministry of the vegetative faculties, she does so order and dispense all
things, as neither any diseases arise in the body, nor any impediment follows
to the superior offices and duties of the soul.

Nor matters it at all, that many men addicted to sobriety, are accustomed to
sleep a while after dinner: inasmuch as they do it to the intent, that their
vigor and the spirits, which have been spent and wasted by any labor either
of mind or body, might be refreshed and restored by the means of sleep: For
sleep serves to both these ends. And then besides* that sleep of theirs is very
short, and such as they could easily forbear, but when by weariness and
custom they are inclined thereunto. Some of them indeed sleep a good while,
but those use to abate as much of their nights rest, as they take out thus in
the day, dividing as it were into two parts the rest and sleep that is due to
their bodies. But indeed generally it is more agreeable to health, to forbear
all sleep after meat at noon, according to the commonly received opinion of
Physicians.

II. The second Rule is; If so be thou take so much meat and drink, as thou
afterward find a certain kind of dullness, heaviness, and slothful
weariness, whereas before thou wast quick and lightsome; it is a sign, that
thou have exceeded the fitting measure: except this come to pass through
present sickness, or the relics of some former disease. For meat and drink
ought to refresh the strength and powers of the body, and to make them more
cheerful, and no ways to burden or oppress them.

They therefore who find their constitution to be such, as they feel
oppression after their meals, ought to make abatement of their daily allowance,
having first used good and diligent consideration, whether this inconvenience
arise from the abundance of their meat, or of their drink, or of both together:
and when they have found out where the error lies, it is by degrees to be
amended, till the matter be brought to that pass, that there be no more
feeling of any such inconvenience.

12. Many there be, who are much deceived in this case; who although they eat
and drink liberally, and use nourishing meats, yet nevertheless complain of
continual weakness and faintness; and that, they persuade themselves, comes
from the want of nourishment and spirits: whereupon they seek out meats of much
nourishment, and provide breakfasts betimes in the morning, lest Nature should
faint for want of its due sustenance.

But, as I said, they are miserably beguiled in this opinion, and do hereby
add a surcharge to their bodies, which are in truth already overburdened with
ill juice and moisture. For this weakness which they complain of, proceeds not
from defect of nutriment, but from the abundance of ill humors; as both the
constitution of their bodies, and the swelling of their bellies in particular
do evidently show. Now these ill humors do cloy up the muscles and the nerves,
through which the spirits have their course and passage: whereby it comes to
pass, that the animal spirits (from which, as from the most general and
immediate instrument of the soul, all the vigor of the body in sense and
motion is derived) cannot freely take their course, nor govern and order the
body as they ought. And hence comes that weakness and lumpishnesse of the
body, and that dullness of the senses, the animal spirits being as it were
intercepted in their passage by this excess of humors.

Daily experience shows this to be true in diverse bodies abounding with ill
humors, and vicious moystures, which in the morning are faint and dull,
through the superfluities of moisture remaining in them upon their former
nights supper and sleep: But when these moystures are consumed by abstinence
and Apophlegmatismos.
the purgations of the head, they become more cheerful and active; and this
vigor goes on still increasing till night come, albeit they take little or
nothing at all at noon. But in case they eat, whilst these moystures remain
unconcocted in the body, especially if it be in any great quantity or moist
food, the indisposition is renewed, and they presently return to their former
misery.

Wherefore if a man desire to be always quick, apt, and ready to motion, and
to every other use of his senses, these humors are to be lessened by abatement
of diet, so that the spirits may have their free passage through all parts of
the body, and the mind may find them always ready to every motion and
service in the body.

13. The third Rule is; We must not pass immediately from a disordered kind
of life to a strict and precise course: but it is to be done by little and
little, by small abatements subtracting from that excessive quantity,
whereunto we have been accustomed, until at last we come to that just measure,
which does not at all oppress the body, nor offend and hinder the operations
of the mind. This is a common Tenet amongst Physicians. For all sudden
changes, if they be any thing remarkable, do prejudice Nature; in regard that
Custom gets almost the force and quality of Nature it self: Wherefore it
cannot but be very dangerous to be driven off forcibly from that, which a man
has been long used unto, and to be put upon the contrary. For as that which
is against Nature, so likewise that which is against long and inveterate
Custom, is very grievous to be undergone, whilst the strength and power of
Custom remains on foot. We must therefore break off old usages by degrees, and
not all at once; going backward step by step, as we grew on toward them: and
so the alteration being not much perceived in the progress, will be less
difficult in performance.

14. The fourth Rule is, That albeit there cannot be any one determinate
quantity set for all, in respect of the great difference of ages, strength,
and other dispositions in men; as also in respect of the great diversity in
the nature and quality of several kinds of food: yet notwithstanding
generally for them who are stepped in years, and for those who are of weak
complexions, it seems twelve, thirteen, or fourteen ounces of food a day should
be enough; accounting into this proportion bread, flesh, eggs, and all other
kind of victuals: And as many, or but a few more ounces of drink would
suffice.

This is to be understood of those, who use but little exercise of body, and
are altogether addicted to study, and other offices and employments of the
mind. Verily Lodowi^k Cornaro, whose Treatise touching a Sober life we have
hereunto annexed, approves greatly this measure, having stinted himself
thereat, when he was thirty six years old, and kept it constantly as long as
he lived; and that was indeed very long, and with perfect health.

The holy Fathers likewise that lived in the deserts, albeit they fed only
upon bread, and drank nothing but water, exceeded not this proportion,
establishing it as it were by law every where in their Monasteries: For so
Cassianus writes in his second Collation of Abbat Moses, chap. 19. Where Abbat
Moses being demanded what was the best measure of temperance, answered on this
wise: We know there has often times much discourse been amongst our Ancestors
touching this matter. For examining the several manners of Abstinence used by
diverse, to wit, of those who passed their lives only with pulse, or altogether
with herbs, or fruits, they did prefer before them all the Refection by Bread
alone. The most equal measure whereof they did conclude to be in In duobus
paximaciis*
two biskets; which small cakes it is very certain were scarce a pound weight.
So that it appears they did count the just allowance for a day to be twelve
ounces of bread, which might generally suffice for all. For the pound weight
amongst the Ancients was not of sixteen ounces, as our pound weight now is, but
only of twelve ounces.

15. Some do think, that each of these cakes should be a pound weight: and so
they understand those words of Abbat Moses, Which small cakes, that is, each
of them severally, and not both jointly. But that it cannot be so understood,
will be very plain to them that well consider the matter. For first, his
intention was to express, how much the whole allowance, which was in two
several cakes, did weigh, and not what each cake weighed. Moreover, that
measure of bread was, as Abbat Moses teaches, very scant, and di^ficult to be
observed, chap. 21. Now if the two cakes had been two pounds, that would not
have been a scant allowance for a day, nor hard to be kept, especially by old
men. For who is there, that may not be contented with such a quantity of
bread, or can be said after the taking thereof to have eaten but moderately and
sparingly? Nay verily, even amongst us of these colder climates, it would be
thought very strange, if any of those whom we call Religious, should at one
meal eat up two pound weight of bread: undoubtedly such a one could not be
esteemed (in regard of the quantity) abstinent or sober, but rather a great
feeder and devourer.

Moreover, these two cakes did not so allay hunger, but that there were some,
who chose rather to fast two days together, then every day to refresh
themselves with others: Their reason, as Abbat Moses reports, chap. 24.
(though he much disallow it) was, that by this double portion they might be
able fully to content and sa^isfie their appetite. Now what man (I pray)
devoted to the exercises of the mind is there, that can at one repast eat up
four pounds, or forty eight ounces of dry bread?

Lastly, as Abbat Moses recounts in the 11. chap. Abbat Serapion being a
little boy, after he had at meals with others at the ninth hour of the day
eaten his two cakes, was still a hungry; whereupon he was wont to steal a third
biscuit, which he used to eat in secret. Now what child can eat three pounds of
bread at once? It seems therefore very certain, that these biscuit cakes were
but six ounces a piece, and two of them together weighed only a pound.

Now if these holy Fathers upon long experience found twelve ounces of dry
bread, without any other sort of Absque ullo obsonio.
food, to be enough, and with this diet conserved themselves healthful and
sound in all their members and senses, even to decrepit age: How much more then
may six, seven, or eight ounces of bread suffice, together with six, or seven
ounces of other choice victuals, which yield double the nutriment that dry
bread does? Considering withal that in stead of water (which served their
turn, and of it self nourishes not at all) we now drink beer or wine, which
yield much nutriment. Last of all, experience demonstrates, that there are
many, who live with far less quantity of meat.

Now although our speech here be chiefly touching weak persons, That this
measure may suffice (ordinarily) even those that are healthy and strong.
and those that are declining in years; yet I hold it very probable, that the
aforesaid measure is large enough for the most part, even for those that are in
health, and strong, and in the flower of their age, if they be such as give
themselves to prayer, study, and other such like operations and exercises of
the mind. And this may be made good by infinite examples of holy men, who from
fifteen, sixteen, or twenty years old, have kept themselves to this stint, or
it may be less; albeit they eat nothing but bread, herbs, or pulse, nor used
other drink then water: and yet nevertheless they lived exceeding long and
healthfully, in the height of labors and afflictions both of their minds and
bodies: as is plain to be seen in many, whose lives are extant in history;
some whereof we will set down Number. 35.

Furthermore, I incline to hold this measure sufficient, in regard it was
commonly established as it were by law in sundry Monasteries, as ordinarily
sufficient as well for the younger, as for the elder sort of people. So that
those ancient Fathers, who had the largest experience of these matters, and
best knew what was requisite in this kind for Nature, judged that this measure
might ordinarily suffice to all ages. Of the same opinion is our Author, and
confirms it by his own example: for he began to keep this stint at thirty six
years old.

Now whereas some may here object, that Pan^tel^a.
Panada, although it weigh seven, or eight, or nine ounces the mess, yet the
water or broth being deducted, there remains not in truth above three or four
ounces of bread, or other solid ingredients:

The Solution is easy. For when Escul^nta and poculenta.
meats and drinks are mingled (as in Panada, and other such like Menestris.
suppings) they are to be severally weighed and reduced to the making up of the
just measure of that kind, to which they properly belong. And so drinking
liquours are to be put on the account of drink, and bread and other ingredients
on the account of meat. But it is not our intent to prosecute these smaller
matters: it is enough to have made a general remonstrance, that this measure
which we have put, is not contrary to reason.

16. The fifth Rule is, That as touching the quality of the food, there is no
great care to be had, if so be a man be of a healthful constitution, and find
that such kind of meat as he makes choice of, does not offend nor harm him.
For almost all sorts of meats that are commonly used, do well agree with good
and healthful constitutions, if so be the right quantity and measure be kept:
So that questionless a man may live long and healthfully on bread only, with
milk ^ butter, cheese, and beer* especially if he have from his childehood
been used unto them.

But from all those sorts of food, H^rtfull meats are to be avoided.
whereby a man finds prejudice, he must abstain, albeit they relish his taste
never so we^l: at least he may not use them in any quantity. Of this sort are
for the most part fat meats, which make loose the stomach, and weaken the
astrictive and retentive faculty thereof, so as the other sorts of meat are
much hindered in their concoction, and are indeed caused to slip out of the
stomach undigested and half raw as it were. Besides, these fat meats do send up
store of fumes into the head; whereupon follow (...)
clowdinesses in the brain, coughs, Asthmata.
wheazings, and other infirmities of the lungs. Last of all, they themselves,
except they be very well concocted (to which intent both a good stomach, and
length of time is required) turn into evil humors, and to the matter of
fevers; inasmuch as they are converted partly into choleric, and partly into
phlegmatic juices and moistures. Students therefore are to use these kind of
meats but sparingly, and with a sufficient quantity of bread taken together
with them: For so the damage which they bring may be in great part avoided.

17. Of the same nature likewise (as experience shows) are all those kind of
meats, which in the head breed cataracts, clouds, dizzinesses, distillations,
and coughs; and in the stomach breed crudities, inflations, gripings, gnawings,
frettings, and the like; and in a word all those, which any way breed damage to
the constitution of the Body, or impediment to the functions of the Mind. For
how senseless a thing is it, to buy the vile and fading pleasures of Gluttony
at the rate of so many inconveniences! Undoubtedly a man cannot make plainer
proof of his thraldom to gluttony, then when he thus thrusts and poures in
that, which he knows is hurtful unto him, only to content his licorish
appetite.

Now when we say, A man must warily abstain from these kinds of food, it is
not so to be understood, as that a man may not (for example) ^at a little of
Bra^sica.
Colewort, Onyons, Cheese, Beans, Pease, and the like; although they naturally
breed melancholy, choler, Humoris visc os^.
slime, and windiness: but that he ought not to eat them in any notable
quantity. For these being but seldom used, and in small quantities, cannot
hurt, especially when they be pleasing to the appetite. Nay, it often times
happens, that those things which do hurt being taken in larger quantities, do
in lesser proportions benefit Nature.

18. Amongst all these kind of meats there is none more fit for weakly and
aged persons, Panada a very convenient food for the aged, etc.
then Panada; with which alone, and now and then an egg or two, a man may live
very long, and with great healthfulnesse; as our Author testifies. Panada is
the Italian name of that kind of pap or gruell, which is made of bread and
water, or some flesh-broth boiled together. The reasons, why this sort of food
is so excellent, are, because it is most light and easy of digestion, being
prepared by art, so as it is very like to that Chylus, which the stomach makes
by the conco^tion of meats: as also, because it is most temperate in the
qualities thereof: And further, it is little subject to putrefaction and
corruption, as many other sorts of meats be, which do easily corrupt in the
stomach. Last of all, it breeds abundance of good blood: And if occasion need,
it may easily by supply of other ingredients be made more hot and nourishing.
So that worthily was it spoken by the wise man, Ecclus. 29. The principal of
man's life are bread and water. By which words he would teach us, that man's life
is mainly supported and upheld by these two things: and therefore they being
the most fit and proper for the conservation of life, the sollicitous pursuit
of costly sorts of flesh and fish, serving only for enticement and nourishment
of gluttony, is altogether needless.

Plutarch, in his book concerning the preservation of health, does not allow of
Flesh: for thus he writes: Crudities are much to be feared upon eating of
flesh: Inasmuch as these sorts of food do at first very much oppress, and
afterward leave behind them malignant relics. It were surely therefore
best, so to accustom the body, that it should not require any flesh at all to
feed on. In regard that the Earth produces abundantly not only those things,
which serve to nourishment, but also that which may suffice to pleasure and
delight: A great number of which thou may feed upon without any manner of
preparation; and the other, by compounding and mingling them in a thousand
several ways, may be easily made sweet and pleasant. To this opinion of
Plutarch many Physicians agree; and experience, the surest proof to go upon,
confirms it. For there are many Nations which seldom eat Flesh, but live
chiefly on Rice and Fruits; and yet notwithstanding they live very long and
healthfully; as the Iapans, the Chinese, the Africans in sundry regions, and
the Turks. The self same is to be seen likewise amongst us in many husbandmen
and others of mechanic trades, who ordinarily feed on bread, butter, pottage,
pulse, herbs, cheese, and the like, eating flesh very rarely; and yet they live
long not only with health, but with strength. I say nothing of the Fathers in
the desert, and of all Monasteries of old.

19. The sixth Rule for them who are careful of preserving health, Variety of
dishes prejudicial to health.
is, That above all things they must beware of variety of meats, and such as
are curiously and daintily dressed. From this ground, that most learned Physician
Disarius, in Macrobius, lib. 7. Saturnal. cap. 4. and Socrates, give warning to
eschew those meats and drinks, Qui ultra fitim famemque (...).
which prolong the appetit^ beyond the satisfaction of Hunger and Thirst. And
indeed it is a common rule of all Physicians. And the reason is, because change
and variety tolls on Gluttony, and stirs up the Appetite, so that it never
persuades it self to have enough. By which means it comes to pass, that the
just Measure is enormously outshot, and often times three or four times as much
as Nature required, is thus thrust in by licorishnesse. Besides, diverse meats
have different natures, and several tempers, and often times contrary* whereby
it comes to pass, that some are sooner digested, and others later* and
hereupon ensue mavelous crudities in the stomach, and in truth a depravation
of the whole digestion; whereby are bred swellings, gripings, collicks,
obstructions, pains in the reins, and the stone: for by means of the excessive
quantity, and also of the diversity, there are bred many crudities, and much
corruption in that Chylus or juice, out of which the blood is to be made.
Whereupon Francis Valeriola, a notable Physician, disputing, in the second
book, and 6. chap. of his common places, of this matter, says, This seems
equally agreed upon by all Phys^cians, that there is nothing more hurtful to
men's health, then variety and plenty of meats on the same table, and long
sitting at them. You shall find much more, excellently discoursed to this
purpose, in Macrobius, in the forecited place.

Xenophon, in his 1. book of the sayings and doings of Socrates, writes, that
his diet was most spare and simple, and such, as there is no body but may
easily provide himself as good as that which Socrates used; it being of very
little cost and charge.

Athenaeus in his second book reports out of Theophrastus, that there was one
Phalinus, who all his life long used no other meat or drink, then milk alone:
And there he mentions sundry others, who used plain and simple diets.

Pliny, in his 11. book, and 42. chap. writes, that Zoroastres lived 20.
years in the desert, only feeding on cheese, which was so tempered, that it
was not empaired by age. In a word, both of old in all forepast ages, and now
amongst us, they in every Nation live longest and most healthfully, who use a
simple, spare, and common diet.

20. The seventh Rule. Forasmuch as all the difficulty in setting and keeping
of a just measure, proceeds from the sensual Appetite; and the Appetite
arises from that apprehension of the Fancy, or Imagination, whereby meats are
conceived to be delightful and pleasant: special care is to be used touching
the correction and amendment of this conceit and imagination. To the
furtherance whereof, two things amongst all other will most conduce. The first
is, That a man withdraw and apart himself from the view of Feasts and Daynties,
to the end they may not by their sight and smell stir up the Fancy, and
entice on Gluttony: Inasmuch as the presence of every object does naturally
move, and work upon the faculty whereunto it appertains. And therefore it is
much more difficult to restrain the appetite, when good cheer is present, then
not to desire that which is away. The self same happens in all the objects and
allurements of the other senses.

The second help is, To imagine these self same things, whereunto Gluttony
allureth us, not to be as she persuades, and as outwardly they appear, good,
pleasant, savoury, relishing, and bringing delight to the palate; but filthy,
sordid, evilsavoured, and detestable, as indeed after a very little while they
prove. For all things, when they are resolv^d into their principles, show what
they be in truth, and manifest what it was that lay disguised under that
amiable appearance, wherewith they presented themselves. Now what can be
imagined more unsavourie, or loathsome, then these dainties, as soon as they have
received a little alteration in the stomach? Nay verily, by how much any thing
proves more delectable to Gluttony, by so much does it instantly prove more
abominable in truth, and yields the worse and more noisome smell. Whereupon
they who give themselves to delicacies, were it not for the help of outward
perfumes, would undoubtedly be as intolerable through the evil savours that
arise from their bodies, as dead carcases are. Their excrements likewise are of
most noisome savor, and all the breathings of their bodies accompanied with a
most filthy smell. The contrary whereof is to be seen in Country people, and
mechanic artificers, who live temperately upon brown bread, cheese, and other
such like ordinary food.

And this verily was excellently contrived by Gods ordinance, to the end that
we should learn thereby, so much the more to contemn delicacies, and to
content our selves with simple and plain fare. This matter therefore is often
to be thought upon, and the Fancy by continual meditation accustomed
thereunto.

CHAP. IV.
Answer is made unto certain Doubts and Objections.
21. BUt here arise two Doubts: Whether this measure or stint ought not to be
altered.
The first, Whether both the quantity and quality of the meat and drink ought
not to be varied according to the seasons of the year. Forasmuch as it seems a
larger quantity of food is agreeable to winter, then to summer; in regard that
in winter time (as Hippocrates affirms, sect. 1. aphorism. 15.) men's bellies
are hotter, by reason that the cold without forces the heat into the inward
bowels, as it were from the circumference into the center: but in summer, upon
a clean contrary ground, men's bellies become more feeble; to wit, in regard
that the heat is drawn out by the warmness of the air from the inward parts,
as it were from the center to the circumference, and there dissipated. In like
manner, dry and hot meats seem more proper for winter, in regard of the
abundance of phleg^e, which is then bred, and is not so readily dissolved: But
in summer, moist and cooling meats are better, inasmuch as through the heat of
the outward air there is a great dissipation of humors, and much drying of
the body.

To this I answer, According to Physicians Rules we ought indeed so to do;
nevertheless not over scrupulously nor precisely, but as occasion serves: For
if opportunity be wanting, there is no great care to be had touching this
business. For if we find necessity of a drier kind of diet in winter, or
long continued moist weather, we may easily remedy the matter by increasing
our stint of bread, and diminishing the stint of our drink, or other kinds of
moist nourishment. For the abundance of drink and other moist food, which is
beneficial in dry weather, will be of prejudice, if it should be continued
many days together, when the air is raw and cold: for it may perhaps breed
distillations, hoarsnesses, and coughs. And on the other side, when a moyster
kind of diet seems requisite, the stint of the drink may be augmented, putting
a larger quantity of water into the wine; or in stead of wine we may use small
beer, which will sufficiently moysten and refresh.

The Holy Fathers of old seem not to have made any account at all of this
diversity of seasons, having appointed the self same measure of one and the
self same kind of meat and drink for the whole year throughout; and yet
notwithstanding they lived exceeding long. But now adays in Monasteries there
is good provision made this way for health, there being change of victuals
appointed according to the season; out of which they who follow Temperance, may
make choice of what they find most convenient for them.

22. The second Doubt is, Whether the daily measure or stint ought to be taken
at one, or at more ^efections.
Whether this measure and stint which we have prescribed, or any other which
men shall find meet for them, is to be taken at one meal, or more. To which I
answer, That however all the Ancients, who did so notably practice Temperance,
contented themselves with one meal a day, and that either after Sunset, or at
the ninth hour of the day, that is, three hours after noon; as Cassianus
reports in the second Collation of Abbat Moses, chap. 25. and 26.
Nevertheless many there be that think it more convenient, for old men to make
two meals a day, dividing the foresaid measure into two parts. And the reason
is, because old men being not able to take much sustenance at once, it is
better that they should eat oftener, and smaller quantities. For by this means
they will not be oppressed with meat, and make their digestion easier.
Wherefore they may take 7. or 8. ounces at dinner, and at evening 3. or 4. or
otherwise, as they shall find it most convenient for them.

But verily in these matters long custom bears great sway, and much regard is
to be had likewise to the disposition of the body. For if the stomach abound
with cold and tough phlegm, it seems to be mo^e expedient, that a man should
make but one meal a day, in regard that there is a good space of time requisite
for the concocting and dispersing of them: And this I have by experience
abundantly made proof of. Yet notwithstanding if the meal be deferred till
night, it will be good to take some small modicum at noon, and such in
particular, as may help to dry up the vicious moisture of the stomach. Or if
so be the chief meal be a dinner, it will not be a^isse at night to take some
dried Raisins, with bread or the like. For they who are thus affected, ought to
have especial care that this moistness of the stomach be corrected, as much
as may be: in regard that from this indisposition the stomach is troubled with
wind, and the head filled with cloudinesse and tough phlegm. One said of old,
That Sapientia in sicco residet; non in paludibus, and lacunis.
Wisdoms residence is in dry regions, and not in bogges and fennes. On which
ground Herac^itus left it for an Axiom, Lux sic^a, anima sapientissima*
A dry light (makes) the wisest mind.

23. Some will perhaps object against this which we have delivered, That this
stinting a man's self at a set measure for meat and drink, is a thing that has
been reproved by many excellent Physicians: in regard that by this means the
stomach is contracted or made narrow, and at last becomes so proportioned to
this set quantity, as if at any time it chance to exceed, it feels great
oppression and hurt, inasmuch as it is thereby extended or enlarged beyond that
which it uses. For the remedy of which inconvenience they advise, that a man
should not keep always one stint, but sometimes take more food, and sometimes
less. Which opinion seems to be confirmed by Hippocrates, Aphor. 5. sect. 1.
where he writes thus; A very slender, set, and exact diet is perilous even in
them that are in health; inasmuch as they become thereby less able to endure
errors when they happen. And therefore in this respect a slender and exact
diet is more perilous, then that which is a little fuller.

24. I answer, That this Rule of the Physicians takes place in them, who cannot
steadfastly hold the same course of Temperance, in regard of the often
intercourse of feasts and banquets, which they either cannot or will not avoid;
and have not so gotten the masterie of Gluttony, as they are able to restrain
their Appetites, and keep themselves in their wonted bounds, when they see
abundance of dainties before their eyes, and are on every side enticed, and
combated by persuasions and arguments of them that are in company, to take
their part of them. For verily these men upon such filling of themselves will
run upon some inconvenience, for the reason above specified. But the case is
otherwise with them, who may well avoid these occasions and excesses, and are
able to hold themselves in their own course. For to them a set measure is most
fitting, especially if they be weakly or old, as both Experience and Reason
evidently convince.

Nor does it matter much, if now and then through some occasion they be drawn
to exceed this measure: in regard that one or two excesses do not much harm, if
so be a man instantly return to his wonted sobriety, and either altogether in
such cases omit his next repast, or else make it as much sparer, as the former
was excessive, As suppose using to eat moderately both at dinner and supper,
thou be drawn on to eat more largely at dinner, then forbearthy supper
altogether: And if at supper thou exceedest, forbear thy dinner the next day
after.

This inconvenience therefore is not of that moment, that for shunning the
hazard thereof a man should refuse to bind himself ordinarily to a set measure
in his food; inasmuch as such accidental excesses, so they happen but seldom,
are of little prejudice even to old and weakly disposed persons.

25. But if these excesses come often, or be continued many days together,
they who are used to a set stint, will find much hurt by them, and especially
they who are sickly or stricken in age. Our Author relates; that having lived
from the 36. year of his age to the 75. with only 12. ounces of food, and 14.
of drink for the day, he did all that while enjoy his health very prosperously:
Afterward by the Physicians counsel, and through his friends importunity, he
was overruled to add only two ounces apiece both to his food and to his
drink. But this small addition after ten days brought upon him many great
infirmities; to wit, very sore pain in his side, much grief in his chest, and a
fever, which held him 35. days, so that the Physicians gave him over for a
dead man: nor could he have been cured, but by returning to his former custom.
I my self also knew one, who for many years together having used himself to
suppers, taking only a bit at noon, and that of some dry kind of food, was
by the persuasions of friends drawn on to eat a little more largely at noon,
and that of liquid substance: which thing after ten or twelve days space
brought upon him such cruel pains in his stomach and bowels for diverse weeks
together, that it seemed verily he would have died. From which although he was
twice recovered by the help of many remedies, and the care of excellent
Physicians, yet he did still fall again into the same passions. At last, upon
his third relapse, after many days torment, the altering of his wonted custom
came to remembrance, which when he had well bethought him of, he did conclude
it was the true ground of all this mischief: whereupon he determined to return
to his former course. Which be no sooner began to do, but the very first day
his pains assuaged, and in four days space were so quite gone, as there
remained nothing behind, save a great debilitie and weakness of body: which
yet notwithstanding by little and little wore away likewise by means of that
fober and dry diet. For it is not the abundance of meats, nor the daintiness,
that strengthens Nature; but the moderate quantity proportionable to the
strength, and the good condition of the food answerable to the constitution of
the body.

26. Nor is Hippocrates Aphorisine above alleged, contrary to this opinion of
ours: inasmuch as he there intends by a spare diet, That which is of so small
nutriment, and so little in quantity, as is not sufficient for the maintenance
of strength, and upholding of a man's constitution. But we allow all sorts of
meats that are agreeable to Nature, and that measure and quantity, which is
most convenient and proportionable to the stomach, and best conducing to health.

27. But some will say, Another help to preserve h^^lth
. It Is not in every bodies power, (or at least not with conveniencie) to
observe this exact course of diet: what then? is there no other way for a man
to preserve his health, and to prolong his life? I answer, There is only one,
which many excellent Physicians have prescribed. And that is, That every year
twice, namely in the Spring and Autumn, the body should be well purged, and
cleared of all ill humors. I speak of those, who do not ordinarily use much
exercise of the body, but are altogether intent upon the employments of the
mind; such as are Churchmen, Lawyers, Scholars, and the like.

Now this purging ought to be after a good preparation of the evil humors, and
that by the advice of a skillful Physician: Nor ought it to be done by strong
medicines one upon the neck of another; but gently, taking the medicines two or
three days together. For so they will both be easilyer borne, and with much
more benefit. For the first day the first region (as the Physicians term it)
is to be purged, that is, the Bowels: The second day, the Liver: and the third
day, the Veins, in which lies the great drayn of ill humors. For they who do
not live temperately, do every day add some crude humor, which being sucked
in by the veins as by a sponge, is afterward dispersed through the whole body.

28. So that after two or three years space there is often times such a mass of
ill humors gathered in the body, as a vessel big enough to hold two hundred
ounces would scarce serve to receive them in.

Now these humors in tract of time do corrupt and putrify, and cast a man
upon mortal infirmities; and are the very true ground why most men die so much
before their time. For almost all that die before old age, die by this means:
those only excepted, who are slain by outward violences; as by fire, sword,
wild beasts, water, or the like: as also those who die of the stone, of
poison, of the plague, or some such other infection. And questionless there be
many, who with store and plenty of all things in their own houses, die and
perish through this abundance of malignant humors in their bodies; who had
they been condemned to the Gallyes, and there kept at biscuit and water, might
have lived long, and with good health. This danger therefore may in great part
be remedied by purging seasonably, at least twice every year. For so it will
come to pass, that neither the quantity of the ill humors will be very
great, nor be much putrified, being evacuated and kept under by this purging at
every half years end. I have known many, who by this means have prolonged
their lives to extreme old age, and scarce all their lives long been oppressed
with any great sickness.

CHAP. V.
Of the Commodities which a sober diet brings to the body; and first, That it
freeth almost from all diseases.
29. Now follows the third of those things, which we propounded, to wit, The
explication of those Commodities, which a sober life brings both to soul and
body.

The first Benefit therefore is, That it does free a man, and preserve him from
almost all manner of diseases. For it rids away catarrhs, coughs, wheazings,
dizzinesses, and pains of the head and stomach: it drives away Apoplexies,
Lethargies, falling sickness, and other ill affections of the brain: it cures
the Gout in the feet, and in the hands, the Dolores ischiadicos.
Sciatica, and those diseases that grow in the joints. It likewise prevents
Crudities, the mother of all diseases. In a word, it so tempers the humors,
and maintains them in an equal proportion, that they offend not any way either
in quantity or quality. Now where there is an agreeable proportionablenesse
amongst the humors, there is no matter for sickness to work upon: inasmuch as
the ground of health lies in this, That the humors be rightly and
proportionably tempered in the body.

And this both Reason and Experience does confirm. For we see, that those who
keep them to a sober course of diet, are very seldom or rather never molested
with diseases: and if at any time they happen to be oppressed with sickness,
they do bear it much better, and sooner recover, then those others, whose
bodies are full fraught with ill humors, bred through the intemperance of
Gluttony. I know very many, who although they be weak by natural
constitution, and well grown in years, and continually busied in employments
of the mind, nevertheless by the help of this Temperance they live in health,
and have passed the greatest part of their lives, which have been many years
long, without any notable sickness. The self same is to be made good by the
examples of the Holy Fathers and Monks of old, who lived very long, healthy,
and cheerful in the height of spare diet.

30. The reason hereof is, For that almost all the diseases, with which men are
ordinarily vexed, have their beginning and birth from Repletion; that is to
say, from men's taking more of meat and drink, then Nature requires, and then
the stomach can perfectly concoct. In proof whereof we see, that almost all
diseases are cured by Evacuation. For blood is taken away either by opening a
vein, or by cuppingglasses, leaches, or otherwise, that Nature may be
lightened: The great overflowing of humors in the bowels, and throughout the
whole body, are abated and drayned by Purgings and other Medicines: Abstinence
and a very spare diet is prescribed. All which ways of cure do plainly show,
that the disease was bred by Repletion: For contraries are cured by contraries.
Whereupon Hippocrates, Sect. 2. Aphor. 22. says, What ever diseases are bred
by Repletion, are cured by Evacuation: and those that are bred through
Evacuation, by Repletion. But diseases by Evacuation happen seldom, and
scarcely otherwise then upon dearths, sieges, sea-voyages, and the like
chances. In which cases, the adust humor, which the heat through want of food
has bred and kindled, is first to be removed; and after that, the body by
little and little is to be nourished and strengthened, the measure of food
being increased by degrees. The self same course is likewise to be held for the
repair of Nature, when upon great sicknesses the Evacuations have been many,
whereby the ^trength has been much empaired.

Since therefore almost all diseases proceed from this ground, to wit, That
more food is taken into the body, then Nature requires; it will follow, That
he who follows the just measure, shall be free from almost all diseases. Which
thing is also intimated in that famous saying of Hippocrates, l. 6. Epidemi^n,
sect. 4. (...).
The Rule of health, is to eat without fullness, and to be diligent in labor.
Whereby he makes the true course of preserving health to consist in sparenesse
of food, and exercise of the body.

31. The self same is confirmed by that which Physicians affirm, Cruditie the
mother of ^^sease^.
That Crudities are the Nurserie of all those diseases, wherewith men are
ordinarily vexed. Whereupon Galen, in his 1. book concerning meats of good and
evil juice or nourishment, says, No man, shall be oppressed by sickness, who
keeps himself warily from falling into Crudities. And in respect of these
Crudities the common saying is, That more are killed by Non plures ^ladio^ ^uam
^^cid^re (...).
surfets, then by the sword. And holy Scripture says, Ecclus. 37. Many have
perished by surfets; but he that is temperate shall prolong his life. And a
little before, Be not greedy upon every dainty, and pour not thy self out
upon every meat; for in many meats there will be sickness. Now a sober course
of Diet does prevent these Crudities, and thereby cuts away the ground of
diseases. That which we call Crudities, is the imperfect concoction of food.
For when the stomach, either through the over great quantity of meats, or for
their refractorie quality, or for the variety of them taken at the same time,
or because there was not a due space of time left for the perfect concoction of
food, does imperfectly digest: then that Chylus or juice, which it makes of the
meats so taken, is said to be Crude, that is, raw, or to have Cruditie in it;
which brings many inconveniences. First, it fills the brain and bowels with
many phlegmatic and bilious excrements. Secondly, it breeds many obstructions
in the narrow passages of the bowels. Thirdly, it corrupts the temper of the
whole body. Lastly, it stuffes the veins with putrid humors, whereof proceed
very grievous diseases.

32. These things might be largely demonstrated; but the thing is manifest
enough of it self, especially the first and the second point: I will only
therefore explain the third and fourth.

When the Chylus is crude, or malignantly concocted by the stomach, and rather
corrupted then digested (for so Aristotle calls it, (...) not (...) a
corruption, not a concoction) there cannot be bred good blood in the storehouse
of the Liver, out of this kind of Chylus, but only that which is bad and
vicious. For, as physicians affirm, The second concoction cannot amend the
first. Now then from corrupt blood there cannot be made good nourishment in the
body, but of necessity the whole temper of the body is corrupted, and so
becomes subject to diseases. For the third concoction, which is made in the
small pores of the body (where the blood is assimilated to every part which it
is to nourish, and lastly disposed to the receiving of the form thereof) cannot
mend the second. By this means the temper of the body through these Crudities
is by little and little altered, and marred, and made subject to many
inconveniences.

Again, the cruditie of the Chylus is a cause, that the veins through the whole
body are replenished with impure and foul blood, and such as is mingled with
many evil humors, which in tract of time do by little and little putrify,
and at last upon occasion of Labor, Heat, Cold, Winds, and the like, are set
on fire, breaking out into great and perilous diseases, whereby an innumerable
company of men do perish even in the flower of their age.

These inconveniences a sober course of Diet prevents, by taking away the
Crudities which are the cause of all. For when there is no more taken in, then
the stomach can well concoct, and afterward sufficient space of time is
allowed thereunto, Crudities cannot arise; but the Chylus is made good and
agreeable to Nature: And from good Chylus, good blood is bred; And from good
blood there follows good nourishment and good temper in and throughout the
whole body.

By this means also the putrefaction of the humors in the veins is avoided; as
likewise obstructions in the inward parts, and those superfluous excrements
which do so often vex and molest the head and inward parts and joints of the
body: So that a good constitution of the body, and health is hereby
preserved: For they consist in these two things, to wit, in the due proportion
and symmetrie of the humors, Health consists in two things.
both in respect of their quantity and quality; and in a certain spongie
kind of disposition throughout the whole body, having no let nor impediment
by obstructions, so that the spirits and blood have their free passage and
recourse through all parts.

Nor does Sobriety only prevent the Cruditie of humors, and the evil
consequences arising thereupon* but it does also consume the superfluous
humors, and that much more safely and effectually then bodily exercise does;
as the famous Doctor Viringus does learnedly show in his 5. Book concerning
Fasting, chap. 3, 4, 5. For Labor does confusedly stir the body, and
always exercises some parts more then other, and most commonly only some few
parts alone; and that often times with a great perturbation in the humors, with
much heat and hazard of sickness, especially of Fevers, Pleurisies, and
several kinds of Distillations upon sundry parts, which breed much grief and
pain. But Abstinence peirceth far more inwardly, even unto the very entralls,
and to all the joints and knittings in the body, and does with ease and
equality make a general evacuation: For it extenuates that which is
overthickened, it opens that which is closed, it consumes those things that are
superfluous, it unlocks the passages of the spirtis, and makes the spirits
themselves the more clear; and that without disturbance of the humors,
without fluxes and pains, without heating the body, and without hazard of
diseases, without expense of time, or loss and neglect of better employments.
Notwithstanding it must needs be granted, That Exercise, if it be used in due
time, and do not exceed measure, is very profitable, and to many necessary.

Yet ordinarily to such as lead temperate and sober lives, and follow their
studies, being much given to the employments of the mind, there is no great
need of long walks, or other long-continued exercises, whereby much time is
wasted and lost: but it is sufficient, if only for the space of a quarter or
half an hour before meals, they use to swing or to toss a Ve^tis agitatio.
Bar, Stool, or some such like heavy thing; or taking in each hand a weight
of 2 or 3 pounds, they strike and swing their arms about them, the one after
the other, as if they (...)
fought with a shadow. These are Exercises, which many grave and worthy men,
even Cardinals themselves, do use (and that not undecently) in their Chambers.
And there is no other which I know, that does more stir all the muscles of
the breast, and of the back, nor more rid the joints of superfluous humors,
then these forenamed Exercises do.

CHAP. VI.
Of two other Commodities, which it brings to the Body.
33. THe second Commodity is, A sober Diet ^^meth ag^^^^st outward causes and
accidents.
That a sober Diet does not only preserve from those diseases which are bred
by crudities and inward corruptions of the humors, but it does also arm and
fortify against outward causes. For they who have their bodies free and
untainted, and the humors well tempered, are not so easily hurt by Heat, Cold,
Labor, and the like inconveniences, as other men are who are full of ill
humors: and if at any time they be prejudiced by these outward inconveniences,
they are much sooner and easilyer cured.

The self same comes to pass in wounds, bruises, puttings out of joint, and
breaking of bones; in regard that there is either no flux at all of ill
humors, or at least very little to that part that is affected. Now the flux of
humors does very much hinder the cure, and causes pain and inflammations. Our
Author does confirm this by a notable proof in himself, number. 11.

Furthermore, a sober Diet does arm and fortify against the Plague: for the
venime thereof is much better resisted, if the body be clear and free.
Whereupon Socrates by his Frugalitie and Temperance brought to pass, that he
himself was never sick of the Plague, which often times greatly wasted the city
of Athens where he lived, as Laertius writes, libro 2. de vitis Philosophorum.

34 The third Commodity of a sober Diet is, It mitigateth incurable diseases.
That although it do not cure such diseases as are incurable in their own
nature, yet it does so much mitigate and allay them, as they are easily born,
and do not much hinder the functions of the mind. This is seen by daily
experience: for many there be who have ulcers in their Lungs, Scirrho.
hardness of the Liver or Spleen, the Stone in the reins or in the bladder,
old dry Itches, and inveterate distempers in their Bowels, Enterocele,
^ydrocele, alissque ^erni^^ genoribus.
swellings in the Guts, waterish Ruptures, and diverse other kinds of
Burstnesses; who yet notwithstanding by the help of good Diet only prolong
their lives a great while, and are always cheerful and expedite to the
affairs and businesses of the mind. For as these diseases are very much
exasperated by overeating, so that they do very much afflict Nature, and in a
short space overthrow it: so by a sober course of life they are maruellously
allayed and mitigated, insomuch as very little inconvenience is felt by them,
nor do they much shorten the ordinary race of men's lives.

CHAP. VII.
That it makes men to live long; and in the end to die without pain.
35. The fourth Commodity is, That it brings not only health, but long life
to the followers thereof, and leads them on to extreme old Age; so that when
they are to pass out of this world, their departure is without any great pain
or grief, inasmuch as they die by a mere resolution.

Both these things are manifest in Reason and in Experience: For as for old
Age, it is evident, That Holy men in the Deserts and Monasteries of old lived
very long, albeit they led most strict lives, and almost utterly destitute of
all bodily conveniences: which thing ought chiefly to be attributed to their
sober Diet. So Paul the first Hermit prolonged his life to almost 115. years;
of which he lived about 100. in the desert, maintaining himself the first
forty of them with a few Dates and a draught of water, and the remainder with
half a loaf of bread, which a Raven daily brought him, as S. Hierom writes in
his Life.

S. Anthony lived 105. years; whereof 90. he spent in the desert, sustaining
his body with bread and water only, saving that at the very last he added a
few herbs, as Athanasius testifies.

Paphnutius exceeded 90. years, eating bread only, as is gathered out of
Cassian, Collat. 3. chap. 1.

S. Hilarion, although he was of a weak nature, and always intent upon divine
affairs, yet lived 84. years; whereof he passed almost 70. in the desert, with
wonderful abstinence and rigor in his diet, and other ordering of his body,
as S. Hierom writes.

James the Hermit, a Persian born, lived partly in the desert, and partly in a
Monastery, 104. years, upon a most spare diet, as Theodorets Religious
History in Julian makes mention.

And Julian himself, surnamed Saba, that is to say, Old man, refreshed himself
only once a week, contenting himself with barleybread, salt, and water, as
Theodoret in the same place recounts.

Macarius, whose Homilies are extant, passed about 90. years; whereof he spent
threescore in the desert, in continual fastings.

Arsenius, the master of the Emperor Arcadius, lived 120. years; that is, 65.
in the world, and the other 55. in the desert, with admirable abstinence.

Simeon Stylites lived 109. years; whereof he passed 81. In Columna.
in a Turret, and ten in a Monastery. But this man's abstinence and labors
seem to exceed humane nature.

Romualdus, an Italian, lived 120. years; whereof he spent a whole hundred in
Religion with exceeding abstinence and most strict courses.

Vdalricus, the Paduan Bishop, a man of wonderful abstinence, lived 105.
years; as Paul Bernriedensis witnesses in the Life of Gregory the VII. which
our Gretzer brought to light some few years ago.

Francis of Pole lived till he was above 90. years old, using mavelous
abstinence: for he made but one repast a day after sunset, and that of bread
and water, very seldom using any of those kinds of food which belong to Lent.

S. Martin lived 86. years.

S. Epiphanius almost 115.

S. Hierom about 100.

S. Augustine 76.

S. Remigius 74. in his Bishopric.

Venerable Bede lived from 7. years old till he was 92. in a Religious Order.
It would be too long to recount all the Examples, that might be brought out of
Histories and the lives of the Saints to the confirmation of this matter. I
omit very many in our times, who by means of a sober course of Life and Diet
have extended their lives with health until 80. 90. and 95. years space, or
upwards. There are also Monasteries of women, in which upon a most spare diet
they live to 80. or 90. years; so that those of 60. and 70. years old are
scarce accounted amongst the Aged.

36. Nor can it be well said, That these whom we have recounted, lived to so
great ages by the supernatural gift of God, and not by the power of Nature:
Inasmuch as this long life was not the reward of some few, but of very many,
and almost of all those who followed that precise course of Sobriety, and were
not cut off by some outward chance or violence. Wherefore S. John the
Evangelist, who alone amongst the Apostles escaped violent death, lived 68.
years after the Ascension of our Lord: so that it is very probable he arrived
to the age of a hundred years. And S. Simeon was 120. years old when he was
martyred. S. Dennis the Arcopagite lived till he was above an hundred years
old. S. James the younger saw 96. having continually attended prayer and
fasting, and always abstained from flesh and wine.

37. Besides, this Privilege belongs not only to Saints, but also to others:
For the Brachmans amongst the Indians live exceeding long by reason of their
spare di^t: And amongst the Turks, the Religious professors of their
Mahometicall superstition, who are very much given to abstinence and austeritie.

Josephus in his 2. book of the wars of the Jews, chap. 7. writes, That the
Essenes were m^n of long lives, so that many of them lived till they were a
hundred years old, through the simplicity of the diet which they used, and
their well-ordered course of living: for there was nothing but bread and some
one kind of gruell or pappe set before them at their meals. Democritus and
Hippocrates prolonged their lives to 105 years. Plato passed 80.

Last of all, when the Scripture says in Ecclus. 37. 30. He that is temperate,
adds to his life; it speaks generally of all those that follow abstinence, and
not of Saints only. Nevertheless I gran^ indeed, That wicked men, and in
particular, Homicides and Blasphemers, Homicides and blasphemous persons do not
live long.
do not for the most part live long, albeit they be temperate in their diets;
for the divine vengeance persecuteth them. And yet these commonly do not die by
sicknesses bred through corruption of inward humors, but by some outward
violence used toward them. And in like manner they who are studiously addicted
to Lust, neither luxurious persons.
cannot be longlived; seeing that there is nothing which does so much exhaust
the spirits and the best juice in the body, as Lust does;nor which more
weakens and overthrows Nature.

38. But some will say, There are many in the world who come to extreme old
age, who never keep this sober Diet that you speak of; but when occasion
serves, give the reins to Gluttony as you call it* stuffing themselves almost
every day with meat and drink to the full.

To which I make answer, That these are but rare, and must needs be of a rare
strength and temper: For the greatest number of Devourers and Gluttons do die
before their time. Now if these strong and (...).
irregular Eaters would observe a convenient moderation, they would
questionless live much longer, and in better health, and effect far greater
matters by their wit and learning. For it cannot be but that they who live not
frugally should be full of ill humors, and often times vexed with diseases. Nor
can they without great prejudice to their healths, much or long intend hard and
difficult businesses appertaining to the mind* both in regard that the whole
force of Nature and of the spirits is as it were Mancipata (...).
enthralled in them to the Concoction and Digestion of meats, from which if
they be violently withdrawn by means of Contemplation, the Concoction must
needs prove vicious, and many crudities necessarily follow: As also in regard
that the head hereby becomes full fraught with vapors which do overcloud the
mind, and if a man intend his thoughts much, cause pain and grief.

Lastly, these men are forced to use much exercise of body, or often to take
medicines for the purging thereof: so that in truth however they may seem to
live long in the body, yet as much as belongs to the mind and the
understanding, they live but a while; in regard that it is but a little and
short time, that they are fit for the functions and affairs of the mind, being
forced to spend the greatest part of their time upon the care of their bodies:
which is in very truth to make the Soul become the servant of the Flesh, that
is, a Slave to its own Vassal. Such a life suits not with Man's nature, much
less with Christianity; whose good and happiness is altogether spiritual,
and is not to be otherwise purchased then by mortification of the Senses, and
employment and exercise both of Mind and Body.

39. Add further to that which has been said, That they who are of weakly
Constitutions, if so be they live temperately, are much more secure touching
their health and the prolonging of their lives, then those who are of the
strongest Constitution that may be, in case they live intemperately. For these
of the former sort know that they have no ill juices or moistures in their
bodies, or at least not in any such quantity as to breed diseases: But those
other after some few years must of necessity have their bodies cloyed with
evil humors, which by little and little putrefying, do at last break out into
grievous and deadly sicknesses.

Aristotle in his Problemes testifies, That there was in his time a certain
Philosopher named Herodicus, who albeit in all men's judgment he was of a most
weakly Constitution, and fallen into a Consumption; nevertheless by the Art
(...), that is, That which prescribes the course of Diet, he lived till he was
100. years old. Plato mentions the same man in his third book De Republ.

Galen, in his book de Ma^asmo, and in his book of the preservation of Health,
reports that there was in his time a certain Philosopher, who had set forth a
Book, wherein he took upon him to teach the way how a man might conserve
himself free from old Age. Galen does indeed worthily deride this, as matter of
vanity: yet nevertheless the Philosopher by his own example gave proof, That
his Art was not altogether vain, but very available to the prolonging of man's
life: For when he came to his 80 year, and was so utterly consumed as there
seemed nothing but skin and bones remaining; yet nevertheless by his Art, and
the singular moderation and temper of his diet he brought to pass, that he
died not but after a great while lingering in a gentle Consumption.

And the same Galen, in his 5. Book of the preservation of Health, says, They
who come forth weakly complexioned from their mothers womb, may by help of
that Art which prescribes the course of Diet, attain to extreme old Age,
without any diminution in their Senses, or interruption of health by pains and
sicknesses. And further adds touching himself, As for my part, although I
neither had a healthful Constitution of body from my very birth, nor did
always lead a life free from disorder, yet using this self same Art, after the
28 year of my life, I never fell into the least sickness, except perchance
now and then for one day into a Fever, and that gotten through overmuch
weariness.

40. Nor do these followers of Temperance It brings qui^t dissolution.
only come to extreme old Age without feeling the pains and diseases belonging
thereunto; but in their very dying pass away without sense of grief: inasmuch
as the bond that knits together their foul and body, is unloosed, not by any
violence used to Nature, but by a simple Resolution and Consumption of their
Radical Humor.

And it fares with them as with a Lamp, that when the Oil is spent, goes out of
it self without any ado or business. For as a burning Lamp may be three ways
extinguished; Man's life compared to a Lamp.
First, by outward violence, as when it is blown out: Secondly, by pouring in
much water, whereby the good Liquour of the Oil is drowned and corrupted: and
Thirdly, by the waste and spending of the Oil it self: So likewise a man's Life
(which in truth resembles much the nature of a Lamp) is extinguished by three
ways and means; First, by external force, to wit, of the sword, fire,
strangling, and the like: Secondly, through the abundance of ill Humors, or
the malignant qua ^itie of them, whereby the Radical Humor is oppressed and
overthrowen: Thirdly, when the Radical Humor is in long space of time quite
consumed by the Natural Heat, and blown out into the air; which is done
after the same manner that boiling water or oil is wasted by the heat of the
fire.

Now in the first and second kinds of death there is a great disturbance of
Nature, and so consequently much grief must needs ensue, as long as that
continues; in regard that the Temper is overthrowen by the violence of that
which is contrary to it, and the bond of Nature is forcibly broken: But in the
third there is either none at all or very little grief, in regard that the
Temper is inwardly dissolved by little and little, and the Original Humiditie,
in which Life chiefly consists, is wasted together with the inbred heat: For
whilst the Humiditie or moisture wastes, the heat founded therein does
equally abate; and the moisture being spent, the heat is jointly extinguished,
as we see it comes to pass in Lamps. After this manner do most of them die,
who have observed an exact Rule of diet, unless perchance they die by means of
outward violence: For having prevented evil Humors by their good diet, there
is no inward cause in them whereby their Temper should be violently
overthrowen, nor their Natural Heat oppressed. And therefore it will needs
follow, that they must live till the Original Moisture together with the Heat
that is founded thereupon be so consumed, as it is not sufficient to retain the
soul any longer in the body. And in the like manner would a man's death be, if
God should withdraw his conservation of the Natural Heat, although the
Radical Humor should remain; or on the other side, if the Radical Humor
should by divine operation be in an instant consumed.

41. The fifth Commodity of a sober Diet is, It makes the body ag^l and
expedite for all employments.
That it makes the body Lightsome, Agil, Fresh and Expedite to all the motions
appertaining thereunto. For Heaviness, Oppression of Nature, and Dullness
proceed from the abundance of Humors, which do stop up the way of the
spirits, and cloy the joints, and fill them too full of moisture: so that the
excess of Humors being taken away by means of Diet, the cause of that
Heaviness, Sloth, and Dullness is taken away, and the passages of the spirits
are made free. And moreover by means of the self same Diet it comes to pass,
that the Concoction is perfect; and so good blo^d is bred, out of which
abundance of pure spirits are made, in which all the vigor and agilitie of the
body mainly consists.

CHAP. VIII.
That it maintains the Se^s^s in their integrity and vigor.
42. WE have found five Commodities which Sobriety brings to the Body: The
Commodities of the Mind by a sober Diet.
Let us now see the Benefits which it affords to the Mind; and they may
likewise be well reduced to five.

The first is, That it ministers soundness and vigor to the outward Senses.
It affords vigor to the Senses.
For the Sense of Seeing is chiefly deaded in old men, by reason that the
Optic Nerves are cloyed with super^luous humors and vapors: whereby it comes
to pass, that the Animal spirits which serve to the sight, are either
darkened, or not afforded in such abundance as is needful for quick and clear
discerning of things.

This impediment is taken away or much diminished by the Sobriety of meat and
drink, and by abstinence from those things which replenish the head with fumes;
such as are all fat things, and especially Butter, if it be taken in a good
quantity, strong wines, and thick beer, or such as are compounded with those
herbs that fly up into the Head.

43. The Sense of Hearing is likewise hindered by the ^lux of crude and
superfluous humors out of the Brain into the Organ of hearing, or into the
Nerve that serves unto it: for by this means it comes to pass that a man grows
deaf or thick of hearing in that part where this flux of humors is. Now this
flux is very easily prevented and driven away by the Sobriety of diet. And as
it may be taken away by help of Physic after it has befallen a man (in case
it be not let go on too long, so as it take root) so likewise it may be taken
away by means of Diet, especially if together therewith some Topica quaedam.
Topicall Medicines be used.

44. The Sense of Tasting is chiefly marred by ill humors that infect the
Organ thereof: As, if choleric, tart, or salt humors possess the tongue and
throat (whether it be that they come out of the Head or out of the Stomach,
whose inward tunicle is continued with these Organs) all things will relish
bitter, tart, and salt. This indisposition is taken away by good Diet; by means
whereof it is further brought about, that the most ordinary meats, yea and
dry bread it self, do better taste and relish a sober man, and yield him
greater pleasure, then the greatest dainties that can be do to those who are
given to Gluttony. For the evil juices that did infect the stomach and the
Organ of the Taste, and which bred (...).
a loathing and offense, being removed and cleared, the Appetite returns of
it self, and the pure relish and natural delight in meats is felt. In like
manner, good Diet conserveth the Senses of Smelling and Touching.

45. Nevertheless, I grant that by long age the vigor of the Senses, and
especially of the Eyes and Ears* is much abated and almost extinct, in regard
that the Temper of the Organs, as also of the other parts, is by little and
little dissolved; the Radical Humor and the Native Heat being by degrees
consumed and dried up: whereupon the Temper becomes more dry then is
proportionable to the operations of the Senses, and all the passages and pores
are stopped up with cold Phlegm, which is most of all other things contrary
to the functions of the mind. For as old men by the inward temper of their
bodies grow dry and cold in excess; so likewise they become full of moisture
by reason of excrementitiall humors: so that old Age is nothing else but a
cold dry temper, proceeding from the consumption of the Radical Humor and
the Native Heat, to which there must needs be conjoined great store of cold
Phlegm, dispersed through the whole body.

CHAP. IX.
That it mitigates the Passions and Affections.
46. THe second Commodity which a sober Diet brings to the Soul of a man is,
That it does very much abate and diminish the Affections and Passions, and
especially those of Anger and Melancholy, taking away from them their excess
and inordinate violence. The self same it works upon those Affections which are
conversant about the taste and touch of delectable things: so that in this
regard it ought to be highly prized. For it is in truth a shameful thing not
to be able to master Choler, to be subject to Melancholy and to sour cares of
the Fancy, to be enthralled to Gluttony, and Slave to the Belly, to be
hurried on with violence to eating and drinking, and poured out as it were to
the exercise of lust and concupis^ence. Nor is it only shameful and contrary
to Virtue to be thus disposed, but also very prejudicial in regard of Health,
and full of opprobrie in respect of good men. But Sobriety with much ease
remedies all these mischiefs, partly subtracting and partly correcting the
Humors of the body, which are the causes of them. For, that the Humors are
the causes of such Passions, is both a received ground amongst all Physicians
and Philosophers, and manifest by experience:

47. Inasmuch as we see those who are full of Choleric Humors to be very
Angry and Rash; and those who abound with Melancholy, to be always troubled
with griefs and fears: and if these Humors be set on fire in the Brain, they
cause Frenzies and Madness: If a tart Humor replenish the tunicles of the
Stomach, it breeds a continual Hunger and Ravening: If there be store of
boiling blood in the body, it incites continually to Lust, especially if
together with it there be any flatulent or windy matter. The reason is,
Because the Affections of the mind follow (as is well known in Philosophy)
the apprehensions of the Fancy: Now the apprehension of the Fancy is
conformable to the disposition of the Body, and to the Humors that are
predominant therein* And hence it comes to pass, that Choleric persons dream
of fires, burning, wars and slaughter: Melancholy men of darkness,
funerals, sepulchers, ^o^goblins, runnings away, pits, and such sad and
doleful matters: The Phlegmatic dream of rains, lakes, rivers, inundations,
drownings, shipwracks: The Sanguine of flyings, courses, banquets, songs, and
love-matters. Now Dreams are nothing else but the apprehensions of the Fancy,
when the Senses are asleep. Whereupon it follows, that as in sleep, so also in
waking, the Fantasy does for the most part apprehend things answerable to the
Humor and Quality then prevalent, and especially upon the first presentment
of the object, till it be corrected and otherwise directed by reason.

So then the excess of these Humors does pervert the natural condition and
apprehension of the Fancy. For Choler, inasmuch as it is extreme bitter and
contrary to Nature, causes a man to apprehend other men's words or deeds, or
any thing that displeases him, as if it were intended against him with
despite and injury: And because this humor is fiery and impetuous, it makes
the apprehension to be swift and violent, and drives a man on to a speedy
repulse and revenge of the evil which he conceives done toward him. The
Melancholic Humor is heavy, cold, and dry, lumpish, sour, swart in color,
and very hurtful to the heart. And so it causes that the Fancy apprehends
all things as having enmity, bringing sorrow, and full of darkness. Now by
reason of the cold and heaviness therein it comes to pass, that this Humor
does not incite a man to the repulse of evil, as Choler does, which is light
and active: but, on the contrary, it casts a man into fears, flight, and
delays. Phlegm is cold and moist, whereby it comes to pass, that the
apprehension is slow and dull to every thing without any vigor, acrimonie, or
alacrity. So that Choler makes a man angry, rash, hasty, bold, earnest,
quarrelsome, peevish, angry at every thing, a swearer, a curser, a clamourer,
and a brawler. And hence arise so many in^uries, fightings, wounds and
slaughters, as are rife amongst men. For even those things which are committed
upon drunkenness, do for the most part come from the fury of Choler set on
fire, and augmented by the wine. Melancholy makes men sad, fainthearted,
timorous, solitary, thoughtfull, and enclining to despair. And as Choler,
whilst it boyls, does for a short space pervert the right judgment of the
mind: so Melancholy perverts it almost always, especially if it be that
kind which possesses the brain, or sends up foul vapors from the Ex
Hypochondriis.
Hypochondriacall parts into the Head and Heart. Phlegm makes men slow,
feeble, sleepie, fearful, forgetful, and in a word altogether unfit for
mat^ers of worth. For albeit this Humor be not so hurtful to the Body as
Choler and Melancholy, it is nevertheless exceeding contrary to the
functions of the Mind, inasmuch as by the coldness thereof it dulls the
vigor of the spirits, and by the moistness thereof it cloyes the brain, and
stops up the passages of the spirits.

48. Now a Sober Diet does in great part remedy all these evils. For by the
continuance thereof, the evil Humors are by little and* little abated, Nature
either consuming or driving them out, and especially if there be adjoined some
little help by means of purging Medicines. Furthermore, the temper of the body
is corrected, inasmuch as there is a supply of pure and welltempered blood,
which is neither mixed with Crudities, nor corrupted by superfluous Humors,
nor exceeding in any hurtful quality. And hereupon we see those men that are
accustomed to Sobriety, to be calm, affable, courteous, cheerful, tractable,
and moderate in all things. For the benign juice or nourishment which Nature
works upon, causes benign affections and manners: and the malignant juice
(such as Choler and Melancholy breed, if they exceed either in Quantity or
Quality) causes fierceness and wildness in the affections and manners.
Wherein it is also very considerable, That evil Humors do not only excite and
stir up passions, and set them on work; but again by a certain sympathy that
is between them, are themselves also set on fire, and strengthened by the
passions ^ and being thus kindled and strengthened, they add new force and
strength to the passions, augmenting and confirming them.

This is evident in the Choleric Humor, which, when it is abundant, stirs
up wrath by means of the apprehension of the Fancy, which it has corrupted:
And on the other side, the commotion of Anger, by a certain kind of Sympathy,
sets on fire the spirits and the choleric humor; and then again the choleric
humor being enflamed, causes the Fancy to apprehend the matter more strongly
and vehemently, so that the injury seems much greater then it did before: And
hereupon the commotion of Anger it self is increased and fortified. And so it
often times happens that men run out from Anger into Madness, if so be the
Fancy dwell long upon imagination of the injury. It is therefore the best
counsel that can be given, to persuade a man to turn away his thoughts from the
injuries that he conceives to have received, inasmuch as the thinking upon them
is prejudicial not only to the Mind, but also to the Body. In like manner,
the Melancholic Humor, by means of the Fancy, stirs up grief, although
there be no true ground for it; and grief thus set on work, by a certain kind
of Sympathic straitens the heart, and hinders the free (...)
Dilatation thereof, whereby the mela^cholick humor becomes adust, and more
malignant, in regard that the sootie fumes cannot be dispersed: And being thus
become more malignant, it multiplies the affection of grief, and often times
thrusts on to despair and to deadly resolutions.

CHAP. X.
That it preserves the Memory.
49. The third Commodity arising to the Soul from a sober Diet, is, The
preservation of the Memory. For Memory is above all things most hurt by a
cold humor possessing the Brain, which commonly uses most to molest
intemperate persons, and those who are stricken in age. For this humor both
stops up the narrow passages of the spirits, and benummes the spirits
themselves, making them sluggish: whereby the apprehensions of the mind become
slow, languid, and inconstant; and often times they do so fail a man in the
midst of his discourse, as himself knows not what it was he said, nor about
what he was speaking, but is fain to ask the standers by concerning the matter
that they were treating of. And this is caused three ways; First, by reason
that the Animal spirit which the Fancy makes use of, as well in remembrance
as in all her other actions, is as it were hastily intercepted in her course by
the phlegmatic humor; upon the interception whereof the apprehension cease,
and consequently all remembrance. Secondly, this comes to pass, in regard that
the apprehension was feeble and without reflection, and that by reason of the
poverty and unaptnesse of the spirits. Now the apprehension of any thing, made
without re^lexion, cannot leave any such print of it self as is sufficient for
remembrance: Forasmuch as all remembrance is immediately conversant about our
own actions, and only mediately about the objects of those actions. For I do
not properly remember that Peter was dead; but that I saw, or heard, or read
that he was dead: so that where there is no reflection upon our own actions,
there cannot be a sufficient print left for memory. The third cause is, from
the unaptnesse of the spirits: For albeit the print and footstep be in some
manner sufficient for its own part; nevertheless it comes often to pass, that
by reason of the poverty, or impuritie, or sluggishnesse, or too much heat of
the spirits, we cannot conveniently make use of that print and footstep. And by
this means it sometimes happens, that a man almost quite loses his memory,
and forgets all his learning; As when abundance of cold Phlegm stops up the
narrow passages of the Brain, and makes the spirits become sluggish, and does
overmuch moisten and cool the substance of the Brain.

50. Now all this evil is wonderfully prevented or cured by a sober and
convenient course of Diet; to wit, by abstaining from hot drinks and such as
fume, except it be in small quantities. For albeit wine is hot, nevertheless
being drunk often and in abundance, it breeds cold diseases, to wit,
Distillations, Coughs, Cor^zas,
Runnings at the nose, Apoplexies, Palsies, etc. And the reason is, because it
fills the head with vapors, which being there refrigerated, are congealed into
that cold Phlegm, which is the cause of all these evils. Nor must a man in
this case abstain from hot and fuming drinks only, but also from all abundance
of moist things, and, as much as may be, hold himself to a dry kind of diet:
For so it will come to pass, that the superfluous humiditie will either not be
bred, or being bred will be consumed; and consequently that the obstructions
caused by means there of will be removed, and the passages of the spirits made
free, and the spirits themselves rarefied, and brought to their right quality,
and the brain it self reduced to its natural temper, and become together with
the spirits fit and apt to the service of the Fancy and the Memory.

CHAP. XI.
That it helps the Wit and Understanding.
51. The fourth Commodity is the vigor of the Wit in excogitating, reasoning,
finding out, and judging of things, and the aptitude and fitness that it has
for the receiving of divine Illuminations. And hence it comes to pass, that
men given to Abstinence are watchful, circumspect, provident, of good
forecast, able to give counsel, and of sound judgment: and for matters of
learning, they do easily grow to excellency in those things whereunto they
apply themselves. As for Prayer, Meditation, and Contemplation, they do perform
them with great facility, pleasure, and spiritual delight.

The Ancient Fathers and those that lived in the deserts prove this by their
example, who being most abstinent, were always fresh in their minds, and
spent whole nights in prayer, and in search and study of divine matters, with
so great solace of mind that they deemed themselves to be in Paradise as it
were, and perceived not the passage of the time: And by this means they came to
that great measure of holiness, and familiarity with God, and were adorned
with the gifts of prophecy and miracles, and became admirable to all the
world. For having their minds always lifted up and set on God, his Majesty
vouchsafed to descend down to them, illuminating them wonderfully, according as
it is in the 34 Psalm, They had an eye unto him and were lightened; making
them partakers of his secrets, and instruments of his miraculous works; that so
the world might know how acceptable their kind of life was with God, and be
provoked to the honor and imitation of them.

52. There are very many also now adays, who tend unto the highest pitches of
wisdom and virtue by the self same way of Abstinence: whereof some are very
admirable in all men's eyes, through the abundance of their writings, and their
^urpassing learning. But no man without the assistance of Sobriety can perform
any such matter: and if he obstinately attempt it, he shall kill himself long
before his time. No man is able without the help of this virtue to refrain his
passions, to keep his mind in quiet, to perform the services of the mind
about divine mysteries with ease and pleasure, or to come to any eminent degree
of holiness. For Sobriety is as it were the ground and Basis of all these
things, as Cassian teaches in his 5 Book which is de Gastrimargia, chap. 14.
and 17. So that all the Saints who have gone about the building up of the high
Tower of Evangelicall Perfection, have made their beginning from this virtue,
as from the foundation of their spiritual fabric.

52. Nor is it any thing contrary to this which we have said, that Faith ought
to be held the foundation of all virtues, and consequently the groundwork of
all this spiritual building: Inasmuch as Faith is the internal and primarie
foundation, into which all other virtues are set, and whereupon they are
reared: but Abstinence is an outward, secondarie, and ministerial foundation,
inasmuch as it removes those things which breed impediment to the exercises of
Faith, and to the functions of the Intellectual faculty, or make them full of
difficulty, unpleasant, and tedious: And together herewith it affords many
helps, whereby the functions of the Intellectual power become more clear,
easy to be performed, and delightful.

For all spiritual progress does depend upon the use of the Understanding,
and of Faith which resides in the Understanding. For we cannot love any good
thing, or profit in the love thereof, nor hate any evil thing, or grow in the
hatred thereof, except it be proposed by the Understanding, so as it may move
the Affections: Whereupon he that is so disposed by heavenly -Grace, as that
heavenly matters are always in his mind (as it was in the Apostles, and in
other Apostolical men) will easily contemn all earthly things, and so by
degrees, from a great measure of holiness attained here below, mount up to the
enjoyment of a glorious Crown of everlasting bliss in heaven. For the Will
does easily conform it self to the judgment of the Understanding, when matters
are propounded by the Understanding, not by starts as it were, but constantly
and seriously. From these grounds it is evident, That those things which hinder
the functions of the Mind, or obscure them, or make them to become difficult
and irksome, are the things which in very truth debar us from attaining to
any great measure of perfection either in Learning, or in exercises of
Religion; or in sanctity of Life: And on the contrary, those things which
make the functions of the Mind to become more easy, expedite, clear, and
delightful, are those things which fit a man to intend spiritual affairs with
ease and pleasure, and do lead on to the ready attainment of excellent
wisdom and holiness.

54. Since Sobrietre the has this virtue, that it takes away those things
which hinder the consideration of the Mind, or make it to become difficult and
unpleasant, and does make supply of those things, whereby it becomes ea^ie and
pleasant: It deserves ^ustly to be called the secondarie Foundation of wisdom
and spiritual progres^e. Now (...) this is brought to pass, is manifest by
that which has been said formerly. For the things that hinder speculation, and
make it irk^ome, are these, Too much moisture of the brain, abundance of
vapors and sootie exhalations, obstructions of the passages of the brain, too
much store of blood, heating of the spirits, arising from blood or Choler, the
flying up of choleric vapors, and those which proceed from (...) melancholy
into the head, chol^ri^k and melancholic humors possessing the brain. Now all
these impediments, if so be they be not (...) in act, are prevented by means of
a Sober Diet, so that they cannot ^t^al in upon a man: And if they be already
got into the body, they are by little and little overcome and amended,
especially if at the beginning there be use made of some such medicines as are
needful; unless the evil be inveterate and incurable: as it sometimes
happens, that there is bred a continued madness, to wit, when Melancholy and
Phlegm have possessed the brain.

Nor does a Sober Diet only take away the impediments of Speculation, but also
minister the proper helps thereof, to wit, good blood, and consequently pure
and well-tempered spirits, and such a temper in the brain as ought to be. For
the very temper of the brain it self, which by Intemperance is made either too
moist, or too cold, or too dry, or too hot, is by little and little mended
through the help of diet, and reduced to mediocritie.

55. This fruit of Temperance ought to be highly esteemed: This is a Benefit of
greatest moment.
For what can a Christian man more desire, and especially he that intends
Piety, then after long old age to enjoy his Mind healthful, cheerie,
expedite, and vigorous to all employments and functions thereof? For besides
that this is very pleasant in its own nature, it brings along with it, if so be
we desire it, a very great spiritual commodity: For then by long experience
of forepast age, the vanity of the world is better discerned, and becomes more
contemptible; heavenly matters begin to relish us better, and earthly to be
despised: Those everlasting future things which hang over our heads, are
always before our eyes, and call upon us to make fitting preparation for them:
All the knowledge and experience which we have gotten from our youth up until
that time, turns then greatly to our advantage, and we reap the sweet fruit
thereof. And then the affections and perturbations of our minds being calmed,
we can with great ease and pleasure give our selves to Prayer, Meditation of
divine matters, Reading of scripture and the works of the holy Fathers. Then we
may with delight always busy our minds with pious cogitations, and, as the
holy Fathers were wont, be always ruminating upon some one or other divine
sentence out of Gods Word, and with great reverence and devotion be constantly
partakers of the Prayers, and other public duties which the Church enjoins us
unto. It is not to be beleeyed, what an aptness (...) facility there is in a
sober old age to all these good duties and employments of the mind, and how
much pleasure and consolation they shall here find by means thereof, and
consequently increase their reward hereafter.

56. This was that which principally drew me on to the penning of this
Treatise, to wit, that I might thereby recommend to all piousminded Christians,
and especially to them which are more particularly set apart for devotion, so
incomparable a good as this is; by means whereof they may live long in Health,
and ^erve God with great ease and cheerfulness, and fit their minds for the
entertainment of divine Inspirations and Illuminations, and lay up in store for
themselves a great treasure of good works. A long life is little worth, and of
small advantage, if it be spent in the service of the world, and not of God,
being given to Covetousness, Ambition, and Pleasure: but if it be altogether
devoted to God, and wholly employed in the practice of virtue, then undoubtedly
it is a thing that ought to be highly prized, as being of singular benefit and
advantage both to a man's own self, and to the world.

Wherefore albeit Sobriety have that virtue, that it preserves all men in
general (and not only those who are given to piety) healthie in body, and
sound and vigorous in their minds: yet the pursuit thereof seems more properly
to belong to them who follow mainly after piety, and endeavor to please God
as much as they possibly can; in regard it will bring them exceeding great
comfort in this life, and hereafter yield them great abundance of fruit in life
eternal.

CHAP. XII.
That it quenches or allayeth the heat of Lust.
57. The fifth Commodity of a Sober Diet is, That it extinguisheth the ^urie
of Lust, and does wonderfully allay the Temptations of the Flesh, and procures
much tranquillity both to the Flesh and to the Spirit: For it was rightly
spoken by one, That Sin^^, Cerere and Baccho friget Venus.
Venus grows cold without the fellowship of C^res and Bacchus. And this remedy
against this kind of evil has been ever put in practice by all those who have
been eminent in holiness. And verily next the divine Grace it self, there is
nothing so potent as this is, inasmuch as Sobriety does take away not only
the matter it self, but the impulsive and the exciting causes of Lust. The
Matter of Lust I call the abundance of Seed: The Impulsive cause, the store of
Animal Spirits, whereby the Seed is expelled: And by the Exciting cause, I mean
the imagination of lustful matters. This Imagination first stirs up the
Concupiscence, and that straightwayes moves the spirits to the expulsion, and
they being thus stirred up do accomplish the thing, except the Will do restrain
them. Now in the overcoming of this violence does the Christian combat chie^ly
lie, especially in them that are in the flower of their Age, and in the
strength of Nature.

58. Now Sobriety does take from the Matter and the Impulsive cause: for it
makes an abatement by degrees both in the quantity and heat of the Seed. It
does likewise diminish the store and firinesse of the spirits, by abstaining
from hot and windy meats, and from the use of wine and strong beer, at least
so long as is needful for coming to the right Mediocritie. And when the Seed
is diminished and tempered, and withal the spirits, lustful imaginations do
cease of their own accord: or if so be they rise, they are easily quelled,
except it be so, that by Gods permission they are continued through the devils
suggestion. For lustful imaginations do spring up in the Mind through a
certain kind of sympathy which they have with the disposition of the Body,
to wit, by reason of the abundance of Seed and spirits; as also other
imaginations do, which follow the condition of the Predominant Humor, as we
formerly declared. In sign and proof whereof, we see the followers of
Sobriety for the most part free from such kind of imaginations and
temptations, or rarely molested with them. Now if ^o be there be not store of
these causes laid up before hand in the body, Sobriety does easily prevent
their growth, inasmuch as it causes that a man neither eats nor drinks more
then the sustentation of the body requires: For he does not measure the
quantity of those things which he takes, by his Appetite, which is altogether
deceitful; but by Reason, which looks what and how much is proportionable for
the conservation of the Body, and the performance of the duties and services
belonging to the Mind.

59. Now there is a double Reason, Why the Appetite is decei^^^ull.
why the Appetite becomes a deceitful Measurer in this kind. The first is,
Because the Appetite does not only desire that which is nece^sarie to the
conservation of the Body, but also that which may serve for the use of
Procreation. For the appetite of eating and drinking is both in men and beasts
ordained to both these ends, to wit, to the conservation of the Individual,
and to the propagation of the whole Kind. And therefore Reason charge them
who desire to live chastely, and not to be molested by the sting of Lust, that
they should not obey their Appetite to the full, but give it satisfaction only
to the half, that is, only as much as is needful for the sustenance of the
Body: which thing if they carefully observe, there will be little store of
Seed bred in their Bodies, and very few incitements to Lust. For Seed is bred
of that superfluity of the nourishment, which was more then requisite for the
sustentation of the body: So that where there is no more sustenance taken in,
then is sufficient for the nourishment of the body, there remains either
nothing at all, or very little to be distributed for the increase of Seed.

60. The other cause why the Appetite is deceitful, is, Because it oftentimes
longs after more then is any way proportionable to either of these
forementioned ends, that is to say, more then is fitting either for the
nourishment of the Body, or for the matter of Propagation. And that is caused
either through the ill disposition of the stomach, as it comes to pass in that
ravening kind of appetite, which is called Dogshunger, Buli^^a.
Ox-hunger, and when the Melancholic Humor is soaked into the tunicles of the
stomach: or else by reason of the condiments, and Mangonia.
Lickorish cooking of the meats themselves, which by their variety and new
relishes do go on continually provoking the Appetite, and stirring up
Gluttony. In which regard, this variety and curious dressing of meats is, as
Physicians teach, especially to be eschewed by all them that are followers of
Sobriety and Chastity, and in very truth by all those who have care of their
health, concerning which thing we have discoursed more largely before.

By all this it appears, That there is far greater virtue and power for the
quenching of Lust, in Sobriety and Abstinence, then in other corporal
mortifications, such as are hair-cloths, whippings, Chameuni^,
lying upon the ground, and bodily labors: for these do only afflict the
body outwardly, and but raze the skin as it were, but come not at all to the
ground of the evil which lies hidden within: But Abstinence plucks up the cause
of all by the roots in the inward veins, reducing the natural temper to a just
mediocritie. This remedy then is to be used by all those who are vexed with
this disease.

61. And thus much touching the benefits and singular fruits of Sobriety: all
which might well be confirmed by the testimonies of the ancient holy Fathers:
but for brevities sake I omit them, contenting my self with one passage only
out of S. Chrysostom, who in his first Homily concerning Fasting writes thus:
Fasting is, as much as lies in us, an imitation of the Angels, a contemning of
things present, a school of prayer, a nourishing of the soul, a bridle of the
mouth, an abatement of concupiscence, as they that use to fast do well know and
prove in themselves: It mollifies rage, it appeaseth anger, it calms the
tempests of Nature, it excites reason, it cleares the mind, it disburdens the
flesh, it chaseth away night-pollutions, it frees from headache, and it breeds
clear and well-colored visages. By fasting a man gets composed behavior,
free utterance of his tongue, right apprehensions of his mind, etc. See him
likewise in his first Homily on Genesis. And agreeabl^ to this we find many
things in S. Basil, in his Oration concerning Fasting; In Ambrose, in his book
of Elias and Fasting; and in Cyprian, in his Oration concerning Fasting; and in
many others.

CHAP. XIII.
That a Sober Diet is not of any grief or trouble: and that Intemperance
brings many great and grievous maladies.
62. BUt some will object, that this straitness of Diet is troublesome, in
regard it leaves a man always tormented as it were with hunger and therefore
it were better to die sooner, then to prolong a wretched life by such a
painful medicine; accordingly as it was once said by a certain diseased
person, whose Thigh was to be cut off, that N^n (...) digna dolor (...)
The preservation of life would be too deer bought at the price of so much pain.

To which I answer, At first indeed this sparenesse of Diet is somewhat
troublesome, in regard of the contrary usage formerly, and also in regard of
the enlargement of the stomach: but by little and little that trouble is
removed. For we must not suddenly pass from a great quantity to a small, but
every day by degrees subtracting a little, till we come to the just measure, as
F^ippocrates does oftentimes warn: for by this means the stomach is contracted
by little and little without any great trouble, and the greediness which was
formerly felt, is taken way. Now when the stomach comes to be contracted to the
right measure that it ought, there is no more trouble remaining by means of a
Sober Diet, inasmuch as that small quantity does justly agree and answer the
capacity and strength of the stomach. In proof whereof we see, that it is very
grievous to most men to forbear their usual Breakfast at the beginning of
Lent; but by little and little that offense is diminished: and diverse do in the
end find such benefit by Abstinence, as that they choose willingly ever after
to forbear Breakfast. The self same do many prove in forbearing of Suppers.
And in like manner, after that men have a while forced themselves, they find
no pain in abstaining from diverse kinds of meats, to which their appetites did
formerly lead them with great violence. It is therefore altogether ^ntrue
which is commonly objected, That a sober Diet does torment a man with
continual hunger.

63. Secondly, I answer, Suppose there were some trouble in such kind of diet,
and that it should d^re long, (which yet in truth is not so) yet ought we to
consider the many profits and benefits which it brings in recompense of this
small trouble; to wit, That a sober Diet expells diseases, preserves the body
agil, healthful, pure and clean from noysomnesse and filthiness, causes long
life, breeds quiet sleep, makes ordinary fare equal in sweetness to the
greatest dainties, and moreover keeps the Senses sound, and the Memory fresh,
and adds perspica^iti^ to the Wit, and clearenesse and aptness for the
receiving of divine Illuminations; And further, quiets the Passions, drives
away Wrath and Melancholy, and breaks the fury of Lust; In a word,
replenisheth both soul and body with exceeding good things; so that it may
well be termed the mother of Health, of Cheerfulness, of Wisdom, and, in
sum, of all Virtues.

64. And on the contrary, a disordered life repayes that small and fading
pleasure, The discommodities of ^ntemperance
which it affords to the throat, with an innumerable company of mischiefs: For
it oppresses the belly with the weight thereof, it destroys health, it makes
the body to become noisome, ill-sented, filthy, and full fraught with muck
and excrements; it enflames Lust, and enthralls the mind to passions; it dulls
the Senses, weakens the Memory, obscures the Wit and Understanding, and, in su
mme, makes the Mind become lumpis^ and unapt for performance of the functions
proper thereunto, such as are Learning, Prayer, Meditation, and all other
exccllent and lofty matters; whereby is brought about, that there can be
little progress made either in knowledge of good things, or in holiness of
life, or in the exercise and performance of good works.

And what a goodly Benefit is it, for the enjoyment whereof we undergo all this
loss and damage! Nothing but a short delight of the throat for a minutes
space, which is only felt whilst the meat is in chewing and going down into
the belly; which in it own nature is very base and contemptible, being no other
then that which is common with us together with the beasts, and such as does
affect only a very small portion of the body, to wit, the tongue, the palate,
and the throat: For this it is, that we pull upon our selves all these
mischiefs; and through the desire of this it is, that the following of
Temperance seems such1 a difficult business: For were there no pleasure in
taking meat and drink, there would be no grief in forbearing them. Intemperance
then has no other p^ece of goodness in it, then only a base momentanie
delight and pleasing of the throat. What a height of misery and indignity
then must it needs be for a man to enthrall himself to the slaverie thereof,
and for this cause to endanger so many inconveniences and prejudices? what a
deal of wormwood and gall does Gluttony pour in, after the small sweet and
pleasure which it has afforded!

65. These things ought to be diligently considered and weighed by wise men,
and especially by Churchmen, and such as set themselves apart to the service
of God, whose profession is to attend continually upon divine mysteries and the
functions of the mind. For if we carefully ponder these things, it will not be
possible but that we should make choice of Sobriety, and find it pleasant and
easy; and on the contrary, Intemperance will appear and prove full of
horror and detestation unto us: we shall be ashamed of our delicacie, and
blush at the feeble and base tempers of our minds, that are so captivated to
the service of Gluttony, that we slavishly obey the Tyrannical Rule of it,
not being able to resist the most base and transitory allurements thereof.
What can be more vile and undecent for a man, then to be a slave to his belly?
And what greater madness, then to renounce and quit our interest in all those
excellent benefits which Sobriety brings both to Soul and Body, for a little
tickling delight in the throat? and to expose our selves to the lash of all
those evils both of Soul and Body, wherewith Intemperance scourges her
followers? Oh the wretched condition of mankind, that is subject to so great
vanity, blinded with so much darkness, and beset with so many errors; whose
mind is deluded in his judgment and choice, by a vain appearance of
delectable good, as it uses to be in dreams!

66. And thus much shall suffice to have spoken touching Sobriety, as it is
the sovereign means and instrument for preservation of bodily health and
vigor of mind in and unto long old age, and as it is a procurer of the most
excellent good that can be, to both parts of a man, bringing abundance both of
Temporal and Spiritual Benefits to the exercisers thereof.

I heartily beseech God, that the things thus written may prove to the good of
many; and will conclude in the words of S. Peter, exhorting all men to
Sobriety, 1. Pet. 5. Be sober, be vigilant: because your adversary the devil,
as a roaring lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour: whom resist,
steadfast in the faith. For Sobriety is not only available for the overcoming
of the temptations of the Flesh, to which the greatest part of the world are
subject; but absolutely for all other likewise, and is helpful to every kind
of virtue, as is plain and evident by what we have formerly in this Treatise
proved.

A TREATISE OF TEMPERANCE AND SOBRIETY:
Written by Lud. Cornarus, Translated into English by Mr. George Herbert.
HAving observed in my time many of my friends, of excellent wit and noble
disposition, overthrown and undone by Intemperance; who, if they had lived,
would have been an ornament to the world, and a comfort to their friends: I
thought fit to discover in a short Treatise, that Intemperance was not such an
evil, but it might easily be remedied: which I undertake the more willingly,
because diverse worthy young men have obliged me unto it. For when they saw
their parents and kindred snatched away in the midst of their days, and me
contrariwise, at the age of eighty and one, strong and lusty; they had a
great desire to know the way of my life, and how I came to be so. Wherefore,
that I may satisfy their honest desire, and withal help many others, who will
take this into consileration, I will declare the causes which moved me to
forsake Intemperance, and live a sober life, expressing also the means which I
have used therein. I say therefore, that the infirmities, which did not only
begin, but had already gone far in me, first caused me to leave Intemperance,
to which I was much addicted: For by it, and my ill constitution, (having a
most cold and moist stomach) I fell into diverse diseases, to wit, into the pain
of the stomach, and often of the side, and the beginning of the Gout, with
almost a continual fever and thirst.

From this ill temper there remained little else to be expected of me, then
that after many troubles and griefs I should quickly come to an end; whereas my
life seemed as far from it by Nature, as it was near it by Intemperance.
When therefore I was thus affected from the thirty fifth year of my age to
the fortieth, having tried all remedies fruitlesly, the Physicians told me that
yet there was one help for me, if I could constantly pursue it, to wit, A sober
and orderly life: for this had every way great force for the recovering and
preserving of Health, as a disorderly life to the overthrowing of it; as I too
well by experience found. For Temperance preserves even old men and sickly men
sound: But Intemperance destroys most healthy and flourishing constitutions:
For contrary causes have contrary effects, and the faults of Nature are often
amended by Art, as barren grounds are made fruitful by good husbandry. They
added withal, that unless I speedily used that remedy, within a few months I
should be driven to that exigent, that there would be no help for me, but
Death, shortly to be expected.

Upon this, weighing their reasons with my self, and abhorring from so sudden
an end, and finding my self continually oppressed with pain and sickness, I
grew fully persuaded, that all my griefs arose out of Intemperance: and
therefore out of an hope of avoiding death and pain, I resolved to live a
temperate life.

Whereupon, being directed by them in the way I ought to hold, I understood,
that the food I was to use, was such as belonged to sickly constitutions, and
that in a final quantity. This they had told me before: But I, then not
liking that kind of Diet, followed my Appetite, and did eat meats pleasing to
my taste; and, when I felt inward heats, drank delightful wines, and that in
great quantity, telling my Physicians nothing thereof, as is the custom of
sick people. But after I had resolved to follow Temperance and Reason, and saw
that it was no hard thing to do so, but the proper duty of man; I so addicted
my self to this course of life, that I never went a foot out of the way. Upon
this, I found within a few days, that I was exceedingly helped, and by
continuance thereof, within less then one year (although it may seem to some
incredible) I was perfectly cured of all my infirmities.

Being now sound and well, I began to consider the force of Temperance, and to
think thus with my self: If Temperance had so much power as to bring me health;
how much more to preserve it? Wherefore I began to search out most diligently
what meats were agreeable unto me, and what disagreeable: And I purposed to
try, whether those that pleased my taste brought me commodity or
discommoditie; and whether that Proverb, wherewith Gluttons use to defend
themselves, to wit, That which savours, is good and nourishes, be consonant to
truth. This upon trial I found most false: for strong and very cool wines
pleased my taste best, as also melons, and other fruit; in like manner, raw
lettice, fish, pork, sausages, pulse, and cake, and py-crust, and the like: and
yet all these I found hurtful.

Therefore trusting on experience, I forsook all these kind of meats and
drinks, and chose that wine that fitted my stomach, and in such measure, as
easily might be digested: Above all, taking care never to rise with a full
stomach, but so as I might well both eat and drink more. By this means, within
less then a year I was not only freed from all those ^vils which had so long
beset me, and were almost become incurable; but also afterward I fell not into
that yearly disease, whereinto I was wont, when I pleased my Sense and
Appetite. Which benefits also still continue, because from the time that I was
made whole, I never since departed from my settled course of Sobriety, whose
admirable power causes that the meat and drink that is taken in fit measure,
gives true strength to the body, all superfluities passing away without
difficulty, and no ill humors being engendered in the body.

Yet with this diet I avoided other hurtful things also, as too much heat and
cold, weariness, watching, ill air, overmuch use of the benefit of marriage.
For although the power of health consists most in the proportion of meat and
drink, yet these forenamed things have also their force. I preserved me also,
as much as I could, from hatred and melancholy, and other perturbations of the
mind, which have a great power over our constitutions. Yet could I not so
avoid all these, but that now and then I fell into them, which gained me this
experience, that I perceived, that they had no great power to hurt those
bodies, which were kept in good order by a moderate Diet: So that I can truly
say, That they who in these two things that enter in at the mouth, keep a fit
proportion, shall receive little hurt from other excesses.

This Galen confirms, when he says, that immoderate heats and colds, and
winds and labors did little hurt him, because in his meats and drinks he kept
a due moderation; and therefore never was sick by any of these inconveniences,
except it were for one only day. But mine own experience confirms this more;
as all that know me, can testify: For having endured many heats and colds, and
other like discommodities of the body, and troubles of the mind, all these
did hurt me little, whereas they hurt them very much who live intemperately.
For when my brother and others of my kindred saw some great powerful men pick
quarrels against me, fearing lest I should be overthrown, they were possessed
with a deep Melancholy (a thing usual to disorderly lives) which increased so
much in them, that it brought them to a sudden end. But I, whom that matter
ought to have affected most, received no inconvenience thereby, because that
humor abounded not in me.

Nay, I began to persuade my self, that this suit and contention was raised by
the Divine Providence, that I might know what great power a sober and temperate
life has over our bodies and minds, and that at length I should be a
conqueror, as also a little after it came to pass: For in the end I got the
victory, to my great honor, and no less profit: whereupon also I joyed
exceedingly; which excess of joy neither could do me any hurt. By which it is
manifest, That neither melancholy, nor any other passion can hurt a temperate
life.

Moreover I say, that even bruises and squats, and falls, which often kill
others, can bring little grief or hurt to those that are temperate. This, I
found by experience, when I was seventie years old: for riding in a coach in
great haste, it happened that the coach was overturned, and then was dragged
for a good space by the fury of the ho^ses^* whereby my head and whole body
was sore hurt, and also one of my arms and legs put out of joint. Being
carriedhome, when the Physicians saw in what case I was, they concluded that I
would die within three days. Nevertheless at a venture two remedies might be
used, letting of blood, and purging, that the store of humors, and
inflammation, and fever (which was certainly expected) might be hindered.

But I, considering what an orderly life I had led for many years together,
which must needs so temper the humors of the body, that they could not be
much troubled, or make a great concurse, refused both remedies and only
commanded that my arm and leg should be set, and my whole body anointed with
oil: and so without other remedy or inconvenience I recovered; which seemed as
a miracle to the Physicians. Whence I conclude, That they that live a temperate
life, can receive little hurt from other inconveniences.

But my experience taught me another thing also, to wit, That an orderly and
regular life can hardly be altered without exceeding great danger.

About four years since, I was led by the advice of Physicians, and the daily
importunity of my friends, to add something to my usual stint and measure.
Diverse reasons they brought, as, that old age could not be sustained with so
little meat and drink; which yet needs not only to be sustained, but also to
gather strength, which could not be but by meat and drink. On the other side I
argued, that Nature was contented with a little, and that I had for many years
continued in good health, with that little measure; that Custom was turned
into Nature, and therefore it was agreeable to reason, that my years
increasing, and strength decreasing, my stint of meat and drink should be
diminished, rather then increased; that the patient might be proportionable to
the agent, and especially since the power of my stomach every day decreased. To
this agreed two Italian Proverbs, the one whereof was, Mangiera piu, chi manco
mangia. Ed e contrario, Chi piu mangia, manco mangia. If senso e, ^oco vive,
chi troppo sparechia.
He that will eat much, let him eat little; because by eating little, he
prolongs his life. The other Proverb was, Fa piu pro quel che si lascia sul'
condo, (...) quel' che si me^^e (...) ventr^.
The meat which remains, profits more then that which is eaten. By which is
intimated, that the hurt of too much meat is greater, then the commodity of
meat taken in a moderate proportion.

But all these things could not defend me against their importunities.
Therefore, to avoid obstinacy, and gratify my friends, at length I yielded,
and permitted the quantity of meat to be increased, yet but two ounces only.
For whereas before the measure of my whole days meat, viz. of my bread, and
eggs, and flesh, and broth, was twelve ounces exactly weighed; I increased it
to the quantity of two ounces more; and the measure of my drink, which before
was foureteen ounces, I made now sixteen.

This addition after ten days wrought so much upon me, that of a cheerful and
merry man I became melancholy and choleric; so that all things were
troublesome to me: neither did I know well, what I did or said. On the twelfth
day, a pain of the side took me, which held me two and twenty hours. Upon the
neck of it came terrible fever, which continued thirty five days and nights;
although after the fifteenth day it grew less and less. Besides all this, I
could not sleep, no not a quarter of an hour: whereupon all gave me for dead.

Nevertheless, I by the grace of God cured my self, only with returning to my
former course of Diet, although I was now seventie eight years old, and my
body spent with extreme leanness, and the season of the year was winter and
most cold air. And I am confident, that under God nothing holp me, but that
exact rule which I had so long continued. In all which time I felt no grief,
save now and then a little indisposition for a day or two.

For the Temperance of so many years spent all ill humors, and suff^red not
any new of that kind to arise, neither the good humors to be corrupted, or
contract any ill quality, as usually happens in old men's bodies, which live
without rule. For there is no malignitie of old age in the humors of my body,
which commonly kills men. And that new one, which I contracted by breaking my
diet, although it was a fore evil, yet had no power to kill me.

By this it may clearly be perceived, how great is the power of order and
disorder; whereof the one kept me well for many years; the other, though it
was but a little excess, in a few days had so soon overthrown me. If the
world consist of order, if our corporal life depend on the harmony of humors
and elements, it is no wonder that order should preserve, and disorder destroy.
Order makes arts easy, and armies victorious, and retains and confirms
kingdoms, cities, and families in peace. Whence I conclude, That an orderly
life is the most sure way and ground of health and long days, and the true and
only medicine of many diseases.

Neither can any man deny this, who will narrowly consider it. Hence it comes,
that a Physician, when he comes to visit his patient, prescribes this Physic
first, That he use a moderate diet: and when he has cured him, commends this
also to him, if he will live in health. Neither is it to be doubted, but that
he shall ever after live free from diseases, if he will keep such a course of
life: because this will cut off all causes of dis^ases, so that he shall need
neither Physic nor Physician: yea, if he will give his mind to those things
which he should, he will prove himself a Physician, and that a very complete
one: For indeed no man can be a perfect Physician to another, but to himself
only. The reason whereof is this, Every one by long experience may know the
qualities of his own nature, and what hidden properties it has, what meat and
drink agrees best with it: which things in others cannot be known without such
observation, as is not easily to be made upon others; especially since there is
a greater diversity of tempers, then of faces. Who would believe that old wine
should hurt my stomach, and new should help it; or that cinnamon should heat me
more then pepper? What Physician could have discovered these hidden qualities
to me, if I had not found them out by long experience? Wherefore one to another
cannot be a perfect Physician. Whereupon I conclude, since none can have a
better Physician then himself, nor better Physic then a Temperate Life,
Temperance by all means is to be embraced.

Nevertheless, I deny not but that Physicians are necessary, and greatly to
be esteemed for the knowing and curing of diseases, into which they often fall,
who live disorderly: For if a friend who visits thee in thy sickness, and
only comforts and condoles; does perform an acceptable thing to thee; how much
more dearly should a Physician be esteemed, who not only as a friend does
visit thee, but help thee!

But that a man may preserve himself in health, I advise, that in stead of a
Physician a regular life is to be embraced, which, as is manifest by
experience, is a natural Physic most agreeable to us, and also does preserve
even ill tempers in good health, and procure that they prolong their life even
to a hundred years and more, and that at length they shut up their days like
a Lamp, only by a pure consumption of the radical moisture, without grief or
perturbation of humors. Many have thought that this could be done by Aurum
potabile, or the Philosophers stone, sought of many, and found of few. But
surely there is no such matter, if Temperance be wanting.

But sensual men (as most are) desiring to satisfy their Appetite, and pamper
their belly, although thy see themselves ill handled by their intemperance, yet
shun a sober life: because they say, It is better to please the Appetite
(though they live ten years less then otherwise they should do) then always
to live under bit and bridle. But they consider not, of how great moment ten
years are in mature age, wherein wisdom and all kind of virtues is most
vigorous; which, but in that age, can hardly be perfected. And that I may say
nothing of other things, are not almost all the learned books that we have,
written by their Authors in that age, and those ten years, which they set at
naught in regard of their belly?

Besides, these Belly-gods say, that an orderly life is so hard a thing that it
cannot be kept. To this I answer, that Galene kept it, and held it for the best
Physic: so did Plato also, and Isocrates, and Tullie, and many others of the
Ancient; and in our age, Paul the third, and Cardinal Bembo, who therefore
lived so long; and among our Dukes, Laudus, and Donatus, and many others of
inferior condition, not only in the city, but also in villages and hamlets.

Wherefore since many have observed a regular life, both of old times and later
years, it is no such thing which may not be performed; especially since in
observing it, there needs not many and curious things, but only that a man
should begin and by little and little accustom himself unto it.

Neither does it hinder, that Plato says, that they who are employed in the
common wealth, cannot live regularly, because they must often endure heats, and
colds, and winds, and showers, and diverse labors, which suit not with an
orderly life: For I answer, That those inconveniences are of no great moment
(as I showed before) if a man be temperate in meat and drink; which is both
easy for common-weals-men, and very convenient, both that they may preserve
themselves from diseases, which hinder public employment; as also that their
mind, in all things wherein they deal, may be more lively and vigorous.

But some may say, He which lives a regular life, eating always light meats,
and in a little quantity, what diet shall he use in diseases, which being in
health he has anticipated? I answer first; Nature, which endeavors to
preserve a man as much as she can, teaches us how to govern our selves in
sickness: For suddenly it takes away our appetite, so that we can eat but a
very little, wherewith she is very well contented: So that a sick man, whether
he has lived heretofore orderly or disorderly, when he is sick, ought not to
eat, but such meats as are agreeable to his disease, and that in much smaller
quantity then when he was well. For if he should keep his former proportion,
Nature, which is already burdened with a disease, would be wholly oppressed.
Secondly, I answer better, That he which lives a temperate life, cannot fall
into diseases, and but very seldom into indispositions; because Tempe^ance
takes away the causes of diseases: and the cause being taken away, there is no
place for the effect.

Wherefore since an orderly life is so profitable, so virtuous, so decent, and
so holy, it is worthy by all means to be embraced; especially since it is easy
and most agreeable to the nature of Man. No man that follows it, is bound to
eat and drink so little as I: No man is forbidden to eat fruit or fish, which I
eat not: For I eat little, because a little suffices my weak stomach: and I
abstain from fruit, and fish, and the like, because they hurt me. But they who
find benefit in these meats, may, yea ought to use them: yet all must take
heed, lest they take a greater quantity of any meat or drink (though most
agreeable to them) then their stomach can easily digest: So that he which is
offended with no kind of meat and drink, has the quantity, and not the
quality for his rule, which is very easy to be observed.

Let no man here object unto me, That there are many, who, though they live
disorderly, yet continue in health to their lives end: Because since this is at
the best but uncertain, dangerous, and very rare, the presuming upon it ought
not to lead us to a disorderly life.

It is not the part of a wise man, to expose himself to so many dangers of
diseases and death, only upon a hope of an happy issue, which yet befalls
very few. An old man of an ill constitution, but living orderly, is more sure
of life, then the most strong young man who lives disorderly.

But some, too much given to Appetite, object, That a long life is no such
desirable thing, because that after one is once sixty five years old, all the
time we live after, is rather death then life. But these err greatly, as I
will show by my self, recounting the delights and pleasures in this age of
eighty three, which now I take, and which are such, as that men generally
account me happy.

I am continually in health, and I am so nimble, that I can easily get on
horseback without the advantage of the ground, and sometimes I go up high
stairs and hills on foot. Then, I am ever cheerful, merry, and
well-contented, free from all troubles and troublesome thoughts; in whose
place, joy and peace have taken up their standing in my heart. I am not weary
of life, which I pass with great delight. I confer often with worthy men,
excelling in wit, learning, behavior, and other virtues. When I cannot have
their company, I give my self to the reading of some learned book, and
afterward to writing; making it my aim in all things, how I may help others to
the furthest of my power.

All these things I do at my case, and at fit seasons, and in mine own houses;
which, besides that they are in the fairest place of this learned City of
Padua, are very beautiful and convenient above most in this age, being so
built by me according to the rules of Architecture, that they are cool in
summer, and warm in winter.

I enjoy also my gardens, and those diverse, parted with rills of running water,
which truly is very delightful. Some times of the year I enjoy the pleasure
of the Euganean hills, where also I have fountains and gardens, and a very
convenient house. At other times, I repair to a village of mine, seated in the
valley; which is therefore very pleasant, because many ways thither are so
ordered, that they all meet and end in a fair plot of ground; in the midst
whereof is a Church suitable to the condition of the place. This place is
washed with the river Brenta; on both sides whereof are great and fruitful
fields, well manured and adorned with many habitations. In former time it was
not so, because the place was moorish and unhealthy, fitter for beasts then
men. But I drained the ground, and made the air good: Whereupon men flockt
thither, and built houses with happy success. By this means the place is come
to that perfection we now see it is: So that I can truly say, That I have both
given God a Temple, and men to worship him (...) it: The memory whereof is
exceeding delightful to me.

Sometimes I ride to some of the neighbour-cities, that I may enjoy the right
and communication of my friends, as also of excellent Artificers in
Architecture, painting, stone^utting, music, and husbandry, whereof in this
age there is great plenty. I view their pieces, I compare them with those of
Antiquity: And ever I learn somewhat which is worthy of my knowledge: I survey
palaces, gardens, and antiquities, public fabrics, temples, and
fortifications: neither omit I any thing that may either teach, or delight me.
I am much pleased also in my travells, with the beauty of situation. Neither is
this my pleasure made less by the decaying dullness of my senses; which are
all in their perfect vigor, but especially my Taste; so that any simple fare
is more savourie to me now, then heretofore, when I was given to disorder and
all the delights that could be.

To change my bed, troubles me not; I sleep well and quietly any where, and my
dreams are fair and pleasant. But this chieflly delights me, that my advice
has taken effect in the reducing of many rude and untoiled places in my
country, to constivation and good husbandry. I was one of those that was
(...) for the managing of that work, and abode in those fenny places two whole
months in the heat of summer (which in Italy is very great) receiving not any
hurt or inconvenience thereby: So great is the power and efficacy of that
Temperance which ever accompanied me.

These are the delights and solaces of my old age, which is altogether to be
preferred before others youth: Because that by Temperance and the Grace of God
I feel not those perturbations of body and mind, wherewith infinite both
young and old are afflicted.

Moreover, by this also, in what estate I am, may be discovered, because at
these years ( viz 83) I have made a most pleasant comedy, full of honest wit
and merriment: which kind of Poems uses to be the child of Youth, which it
most suits withal for variety and pleasantness; as a Tragedy with old Age,
by reason of the sad events which it contains. And if a Greek Poet of old was
praised, that at the age of 73 years he writ a Tragedy; why should I be
accounted less happy, or less my self, who being ten years older have made
a Comedy?

Now lest there should be any delight wanting to my old age, I daily behold a
kind of immortality in the succession of my posterity. For when I come home,
I find eleven g^and-children of mine, all the sons of one father and mother,
all in perfect health; all, as far as I can conjecture, very apt and well
given both for learning and behavior. I am delighted with their music and
fashion, and I my self also sing often; because I have now a clearer voice,
then ever I had in my life.

By which it is evident, That the life which I live at this age, is not a dead,
dumpish, and sour life; but cheerful, lively, and pleasant. Neither, if I had
my wish, would I change age and constitution with them who follow their
youthful appetites, although they be of a most strong temper: Because such are
daily exposed to a thousand dangers and deaths, as daily experience shows,
and I also, when I was a young man, too well found. I know how inconsiderate
that age is, and, though subject to death, yet continually afraid of it: For
death to all young men is a terrible thing, as also to those that live in
sin, and follow their appetites: whereas I by the experience of so many
years have learned to give way to Reason: whence it seems to me, not only a
shameful thing to fear that which cannot be avoided; but also I hope, when I
shall come to that point, I shall find no little comfort in the favor of
Jesus Christ. Yet I am sure, that my end is far from me: for I know that
(setting casualties aside) I shall not die but by a pure resolution: because
that by the regularitie of my life I have shut out death all other ways. And
that is a fair and desirable death, which Nature brings by way of resolution.

Since therefore a temperate life is so happy and pleasant a thing; what
remains, but that I should wish all who have the care of themselves, to embrace
it with open arms?

Many things more might be said in commendation hereof: but lest in any thing I
forsake that Temperance which I have found so good, I here make an end.

A DISCOURSE TRANSLATED OUT OF ITALIAN, That a Spare Diet is better then a
Splendid and Sumptuous.
A PARADOX.
IVerily believe, however I have titled this opinion, yet it will by no means
be allowed for a Paradox by a number of those, whose judgment ought to bear
the greatest sway. And, to speak freely, it would seem to me very uncouth, that
any man that makes profession of more understanding then a beast, should open
his mouth to the contrary, or make any scruple at all of readily sub scribing
to the truth and evidence of this Position, That a frugall and simple Diet is
much better then a full and dainty.

Tell me, you that seem to demurre on the business, whether a sober and
austere diet serves not without further help to chase away that wracking humor
of the Gout, which by all other helps that can be used, scarce receives any
mitigation at all; but, do what can be done, lies ^ormenting the body, till it
have spent it self. Tell me whether this holy Medicine serve not to the driving
a way of Headache, to the cure of Dizzinesse, to the stopping of Rheums, to the
stay of Fluxes, to the getting away of loathsome Itches, to the freedom from
dishonest Belchings, to the prevention of Agues, and, in a word, to the
clearing and draining of all ill Humors whatsoever in the body.

Nor do the benefits thereof stay only in the Body, but ascend likewise to
the perfecting of the Soul it self: for how manifest is it, That through a
sober and strict diet, the Mind and all the faculties thereof become waking,
quick, and cheerful! How is the Wit sharpened, the Understanding solidated,
the Affections tempered, and, in a word, the whole soul and spirit of a man
freed from encumbrances, and made apt and expedite for the apprehension of
wisdom, and the embracement of virtue!

The Ancient Sages were (I am sure) of this opinion: and Plato in particular
made notable remonstrance of it; when upon his coming into S^cilic from Athens,
he did so bitterly condemn the Syracusian Tables, which being furnished with
precious and dainty cates, provoking sauces, and rich wines, sent away their
guests twice a day full of good cheer. But what would thou have said, Oh
Plato, if thou had perhaps light upon such as we Christians now adays are;
amongst whom, he that eats but two good meals a day (as we term them) boasts
himself, and is applauded by others for a person of great Temperance and
singular good diet?

Undoubtedly, our extravagancie in this matter (having added P^ologues of
Breakfasts, Interludes of Banquets, and Epilogues of Rere-suppers to the
Comedy) would have caused thee to turn thy divine Eloquence to the praise of
those Syracusian Gluttons, which, in respect of our usages and customs, might
seem great Masters of Temperance.

Nay, very Epicurus himself, however (he may thank Tullies slanders) his name
is become in this regard so infamous, yet placed his chief delight this way in
no greater dainties then Savourie Herbs, and Fresh Cheese.

But I would fain once understand from these Bellygods, that seem born only to
waste good meat, what the reason may be, That now adays the store of victuals
is so much abated, and the price enhaunsed of that it was in time of old; when
yet the world appears to have been then much fuller of people then it now is.
Undoubtedly, That scarcity and deernesse, under which we labor, can proceed
from nothing but our excessive Gluttony, which devoures things faster then
Nature can bring them forth. And that plenty and cheapnesse, which crowned
their happy days, was maintained and kept on foot chiefly through the good
husbandry of that frugall and simple Diet which they used.

S. Hierome, writing of the course of life held by those good Fathers that
retired themselves into the deserts of Egypt, the better to serve God, tells
us, That they were so enamoured of Spare and Simple Diet, that they censured it
in themselves for a kind of Riot, to feed on any thing that was dressed with
Fire. The same in every point does Cassian report, in his Relations of the Holy
Monks and Hermites of his time.

I find in Ancient Physicians, that the inhabitants of the old world were such
strict followers of Sobriety, that they kept themselves precisely to Bread in
the morning; and at night they made their Supper of Flesh only, without
addition of Sauces, or any first or second courses. And by this means it came
to pass, that they lived so long and in continual health, without so much as
once hearing the names of those many grievous infirmities, that now adays vex
mankind.

What think you might be the cause, that the Romans, the A^cadians, and the
Portugals passed so many hundred of years, without having any acquaintance at
all with Physic or Physicians? Surely nothing else but their sober spare Diet;
which, when all is done, we are often times constrained to undergo, and ever
indeed directed and advised unto, by those who really practice this Divine
Science of Physic, for the recoverie and conservation of their patients
health, and not covetously for their own gain.

I read in approved Histories, that Ptolomie, upon some occasion or other
outriding his followers in Egypt, was so pressed with hunger, that he was fain
to call in at a poor man's cottage, who brought him a piece of Riebread; which
when he had eaten, he took a solemn oath, That he never in all his life had
tasted better, nor more pleasing meat: And from that day forward, he set light
by all the costly sorts of bread, which he had been formerly accustomed unto.

The Thracian women, that they might bear healthful, strong, and hardy
children, ate nothing but Milk and Net^les. And the greatest dainties? that the
Lacedaemonians had amongst them, was a certain kind of black Pottage, that
looked no better then melted pitch, and could not by computation stand in above
three half pence a gallon at the most.

The Persians, that in their time were the best disciplined people on the
earth, ate a little Cre^^es, or wild Mint.
Nasturtium with their bread; and that was all the victuals that this brave
Nation used, when they made conquest of the world.

Artaxerxes, the brother of Cyrus, being overthrown in battle, was constrained
in his flight to sit down with dry Figs and Barley bread; which upon proof
he found so good, as he seriously lamented his misfortune, in having (through
the continual cloying of artificial dainties, wherewith he had been bred up)
been so long time a stranger to that great pleasure and delight, which natural
and simple food yields, when it meets with true hunger.

True it is, Our belly is a troublesome Creditour, and often times shamelesly
exacts more then its due: but undoubtedly, if we were not partial, and
corrupted by the allurements of that base content which dainties promise, we
might easily quiet the grudgings and murmurings thereof.

It Is not the Belly (I wis) which would rest well enough apayd with that which
is at hand; but the satisfaction of our capricious Fancies, that makes us wear
out our selves, and weary all the world besides with uncessant travel in the
search of Rarities, and in the compounding of new Delicacies. If we were but
half as wise as we ought to be, there need none of all this ado that we make,
about this and that kind of Manchet, Dutchbread, and French-bread: and I know
not what new inventions are brought on foot, to make more business in the
world; whereas with much less cost and trouble we might be much better served
with that which grows at home, and is to be found ready in every thatcht
cottage. That which is most our own, and that which we therefore perhaps (fools
as we be) most contemn in this kind, Barley bread I mean, is by all the old
Physicians warranted for a most sound and healthful food: He that eats daily
of it, say they, shall undoubtedly never be troubled with the Gout in the feet.

Show me such a virtue in any of these new inventions, and I Will yield there
were some reason perhaps in making use of them, if they might with ease and
quiet be procured. But to buy them at the price of so much pains, time, and
hazard as they cost us^, were undoubtedly too much, although they brought
as much benefit as they do prejudice.

Consider well (I pray) whether it be not a thing to make a wise man run
beside himself, to see such a ransacking of all the Elements by Fishers, and
Fowlers, and Hunters; such a turmoyling of the world by Cooks, and
Comfit-makers, and Tavern-keepers, and a numberless many of such needless
occupations; such a hazarding of men's lives on Sea and Land, by heat and cold,
and a thousand other dangers and difficulties: and all forsooth in procuring
dainty satisfaction for the greedy Maw, and senseless Belly, that within a
very short while after must of necessity make a banquet of it self to worms.

What an endless maze of error, what an intolerable hell of torments and
afflictions has this wicked Gluttony brought the world unto! And yet,
wretched men that we are, we have no mind to get out of it, but like silly
Animals led by the chaps, go on all day long, digging our Graves with our
Teeth, till at last we bring the Earth over our heads much before we otherwise
need to have done.

And yet there was a certain odd fellow once in the world (I would there were
not too many of the same mind now adays!) Philoxenus by name, that seriously
wished he might have a swallow as long and as large as the Cranes, the better to
enjoy the full relish of his licorish morsells. Long after him, I read of
another of the same fraternity, Apitius, I trow, that set all his happiness
in good cheer: but little credit (I am sure) he has got by the means; no more
then Maximinus, for all he was an Emperor, b^ his using every meal to stuff
into his paunch thirty pounds of flesh, beside bread and wine to boot. But Geta
deserves in my opinion the Monarchy of Gluttons, as he had of the Romans: His
feasts went always according to the letters of the Alphabet: as when P's turn
came, he would have Plovers, and Partridges, and Peacocks, and the like; and so
in all the rest, his table was always furnished with meats whose names began
with one and the same letter.

But what do I raking up this carrion? Let them rot in their corruption, and
lie more covered over with Infamy then with Earth. Only, to give the world
notice who have been the great Masters of this worthy Science of filling the
belly and following good cheer, I have been enforced to make this remembrance
of some of their goodly opinions and pranks. Which let who so will be their
partner in: for my part, I solemnly avow, that I find no greater misery then
to victual the Camp (as the Proverb is) cramming in lustily over night, and to
be bound next morning to rise early, and to go about serious business.

Oh what a piece of Purgatory is it, to feel within a man's self those Qualmes,
those Gripings, those Swim^ings, and those Flushing heats, that follow upon
over eating! And what a shame (if our foreheads were not of brass, and our
friends before whom we act them, infected with the same disease) would it be,
to stand ya^^ning, stretching, and perbreaking the crudities of the former
days surfeit!

On the contrary, what a happiness do I prove, when after a sober pittance I
find sound and quiet sleep all night long, and at peep of day get up as fresh
as the morning it self, full of vigor and activitie both in Mind and Body,
for all manner of affairs! Let who will take his pleasure in the fullness of
delicates: I desire my part may be in this happy enjoyment of my self,
although it should be with the abatement of much more content then any dainties
can afford.

When I was last at Messina, my Lord Antonie Doria told me, that he was
acquainted in Spain with an old man, who had lived above a hundred years. One
day having invited him home and entertained him sumptuously, as his Lordships
manner is, the good old man in stead of thanks told him, My Lord, had I been
accustomed to these kind of meals in my youth, I had never come to this age
which you see, nor been able to preserve that health and strength both of Mind
and Body, which you make she^ so much to admire i^ me.

See now! here is a proof even in our Age, That the length and happiness of
men's lives in the old world was chiefly caused by the means of Blessed
Temperance.

But what need more words in a matter as evident as the Sun at noonday, to
all but those whose Brains are sunk down into the Quag^ire of their Bellyes?
I Will make an end with that which cannot be denied, nor deluded, nor resisted;
so plain is the truth, and so great is the authority of the Argument; and this
it is: Peruse all Histories of what ever ^imes and people, and you shall
always find the haters of a Sober Life and Spare Diet to have been sworn
enemies against virtue and goodness: Witness Claudius, Caligula,
Heliogabalus, Clodius the Tragedian, Vitellius, Verus, Tiberius, and the like:
And on the contrary, the friends and followers of Sobriety and Frugalitie to
have been men of divine spirits, and most heroical performances for the
benefit of mankind; Such as were Augustus, Alexander Severus, Paulus Aemilius,
Epaminondas, Socrates, and all the rest who are registered for excellent in the
lists of Princes, Soldiers, and Philosophers.

A spare diet* then is better then a splendid and sumptuous, let the
Sardanapaluses of our age prattle what they list. Nature, and Reason, and
Experience, and the Example of all virtuous persons prove it to be so. He that
goes about to persuade me otherwise, shall lose his labor, though he had his
tongue and brain furnished with all the Sophistry and Eloquence, that ever
Greece and Italy could jointly have afforded.

FINIS.

