decorative border

The recantacio^ of Jack Ient late vicare general to the most cruel
Antichriste of Rome.

M.D.xlviii.

CErtain I am (right honorable audience) that I am not unknown to any one of
you, what I am and how I have continued my time amongst you. But whence I
came or whose creature I am I think few of you do as yet know. The most part
of you, I am sure, have hitherto ben persuaded and in deed I my self have
confessed and taught no less that I came from God, and had my first being of
the institution of Christ the only son of the lyuinge God, affirmeynge that
he, in that he fasted.xl. days and forty nights: gave us axexa^ple to do
the same. This is your perswacio^, and this have I heretofore taught, partlye
through ignorance in that I knew no better, and partly through pride of heart
which caused me to seek ways to be had in price and moon esteemed among you
that profess the name of Christ. But now that it has pleased the Lord to
open mine eyes and humble mine heart that I may see mine own estate and
content my self therwyth: I am at this present determined to revoke,
retracte and recante, not only this erroniouse and false doctrine: but also
all other supersticiouse doctrine that I have at any time taught, and will out
of the scriptures declare truly and sincerlye whense I came, whose creature I
am, and what abuses I have mayntened. First and principalli I acknowledge, that
I am no creature of God, nor have any being of him or his institucion, but am
the mere inuencion and ordinance of man first invented for a polityke order
even as other humayne tradicions have been. And according to this purpose of
my first creation: I am now by the maiestrates of this realm permitted to
continewe so long as they shall se me to be profitable to the publyke and comme
weal. And where I have taught that the example of Christ in fasting forty
days, and forty nyghtes ought to be followed of you: I utterly forsake it,
acknowelegynge that for as much as the fasting of Christ was a work above
nature, it was a miracle or thing to be wondered at and not an example to be
followed more the^ the rest of his miracles and wonderful works were. And in
very deed, the way that I have taught and you have followed, is nothing like
the example of Christ. For he fasted all the time of his fast from all
kinds of sustinaunce, but I have taught you to fast from flesh and white
meat only. Christ began his fast at the fourth day of January which is
called the feast of the Epiphanie, or the.xii day, and I have always
deferred the time to March or nighther abought. Christ fasted but once in his
life time not wtstandinge he lived.ii. years after. But I have taught you to
fast every year duringe your life. Thus you se yt as it was not possible for
man to aspire to ye perfection of christ's wonderful works so have you not
taken a way any thing like to his way in the foloweynge (as you thought) of
his example. wherefore it is but a fond perswation of men to think that in
this (more supersticious the^ religious fast they do any thing at all follow
the exemple of Christ, and I my self which have been a teacher and setter
forth of this doctrine do now acknoweledge and confess mine ignorance and
supersticion herein willing al you (my faithful fryndes, as well fyshmongers
as other) to do the same, lest of your stubburnes you cause me to be utterly
banished this realm, and you lose all the commodities that you have by me.
Over and besides this, I acknoweledge and confess that supersticiouseli and
blindly I have taught some to fast half the time of my raygne, some wensdaye,
fridaye, and saturdaye: and some the fridaye from fyshe. With these things I
have so entanglede the consciences of me^ yt they have thought it better to
break all the commandments of God then to omit one of these observations
of mine. These things I utterly revoke exhorteynge you all my favorers) to
do the same, frelye and frankly as I do without any co^strainte or co^pulsion
acknowlegynge and confessinge that no humayne tradicions or laws can bind the
consciences further then they be founded and buylte upon the commaundeme^te of
God. Wherefore I confess and grant, that all such as be by ye powers
licenced to eat flesh at all times may with out grudge of conscience do it.
More over, if necessity so require, either through poverty, sickness, or
otherwise: the faithful may at all times receive with thanks all such
sustinaunce as God of his bountuouse liberality gives them, with out any
license at al, so they do it not in the contempe of any common order nor with
the offense of their week brother. Yet all this not wythstanding I exhort you
all to fast and pray, according te the words of the prophet, return you
to the Lord in lamentation and fasteinge. But here you must be right well
ware yt your prayer be not supersticiouse numbrynge of lady psaltares or other
set numbres of orisons (for then they are but lipiaboure) but your prayer
must be the Lords prayer, spoken even with the heart, and with the holding
up of pure hands unto heaven, yea hands without blood, that is, that do not
oppress the pore members of Christ, but help them. Your fast also must be
such as Esaias speaks of in his.lviii. chapter. You must not think your
selves acceptable unto God, because you forbear your meat, because you
forsake flesh and eat fish: but chiefly and principally in the day of your
fast you must forbear al manner of sin, you must release your wicked
bargaynes, and usury contractes, if the pore and nedie be in your danger more
then he is well able to pay: then must you forgive him. You must also refrain
al meats and drinks that you may feel how hongre gnaweth the bowelles of
the neadie and then distribute to the pore that same meat or the price of ye
same meat that you were accustomed to feed your bodies with all. If you shall
know where is an impotent creature, which lacks necessary clothing: give
him of your superfluouse garments, other else sell them and bye him garments
mete for him with the price. If there be any harbor less: lead them into your
superfluouse fermes (whereof you have to many) and let them have dwelling
there that they may labor the earth and live. If you do this: your light shall
break forth even as the bright morninge ster and your brightness shall be as the
sun at myddaye. But if you do it not: fast, pray, pippe, sing, toll, ryng,
knock, and knele, till you were your knese to the bones and all will not be
worth a lousse. Many other supersticiouse things I have taught, as the
co^iuring and supersticious taking of ashes, and paulme, fire and the fou^te of
water wherein infantes be baptized with holy oil and chrisme. I have also
taught the blind folynge of saynctes Images, the hangeynge up, draweynge, and
cuttynge down of the veyle, the washing of the aultars, Judas cross full of
candels, the burieynge of the sacrament, and rayesynge of the same with the
creapynge to the cross. All these things I confess to be but vain and
supersticious, and therefore not to be used of Christian men. More one I have
stoutly defeded anricular confession and particular rehersall of all sins not
forgotten in pain of da^natio^, and the enioyning of penance satisfactorie
for ye sam and that upon the confidence of these penance, the sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ should be worthily received, otherwise not.
But now I confess that it is only the humble confession of the heart made
unto God that is accepted of God. Notwithstandedynge I will that al troubled
consciences resort unto a discrete and learned counsayloure, to hau^ and
receive at his hand as by an instrument, the confortable absolution of the
spirit, by the hearing of the great and ready mercies of god toward the
repentante hertes, rehearsed unto them. And where I have heretofore made
daungerouse of the receyuyng of the sacrament in both the kinds, that is in
bread and wine as Christ instituted it: now I think it most necessary that
it be mnistered and received as well in the kind of wine as bread, for
otherwise it were not the institucion of Christ, but to inuencion of man. Thus
I make an end, exhorting al manner of me^ and in especially al such vitayllers
as have and do accustomably make provision for that kind of fasteynge that
has been observed in forberinge of one kind of meat and feading of an other:
that they will now provide for all ye year that ye people may have wholesome meat
to sustein their bodies, upon a reasonable price. Also I exhort the^ that
whereas heretofore they have hertelye desiered of God that a contrary wind
might keep back foren vitayle till they had sold their ware at will: they
will now pray as hertelye that God of his mercy will prospere all such as
labor in the conueighinge of any kind of vytayle to any part of this realm
whereby the pore commons are releaued.

By me Jack lent lately ye utter enemy of Christ, but now (the Lord be
praised therefore) converted to the Christian faith.

Imprinted at London by Ihon Day, and William Seres, dwelling in Sepulchers
parysh, at the sign of the Resurrection a little above Holbourne Conduite

Cum gratia and priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


