A GEOGRAPHICAL HISTORY of AFRICA, Written in Arabicke and Italian by JOHN LEO
a More, borne in Granada, and brought up in Barbary.

Wherein he has at large described, not only the qualities, situations, and
true distances of the regions, cities, towns, mountains, rivers, and other
places throughout all the north and principal parts of Africa; but also the
descents and families of their kings, the causes and events of their wars,
with their manners, customs, religions, and civil government, and many other
memorable matters: gathered partly out of his own diligent observations, and
partly out of the ancient records and Chronicles of the Arabians and Mores.

Before which, out of the best ancient and modern writers, is prefixed a
general description of Africa, and also a particular treatise of all the maine
lands and Isles vndescribed by John Leo.

And after the same is annexed a relation of the great Princes, and the
manifold religions in that part of the world.

Translated and collected by JOHN PORY, lately of Goneuill and Caius College in
Cambridge.



LONDINI,

Impensis Georg. Bishop.

1600

TO THE RIGHT HONORAble sir ROBERT CECIL Knight, principal Secretary to her
Majesty, Master of the Court of Wards and Liueries, and one of her Highness
most Honorable privy Counsel.
LO here the first fruits, or rather the tender buddes and blossoms of my
labors. Which least in this their winterly sprouting they might perhaps by
some bitter blasts of censure be frost-nipped, I humbly recommend to your
Honorable protection.

Most due they are only to your self, being for the greatest part nothing
else, but a large illustration of certain southern voiages of the English,
already dedicated to your Honor. And at this time especially I thought they
would prove the more acceptable: in that the Marocan ambassador (whose Kings
dominions are here most amply and particularly described) has so lately
treated with your Honor concerning matters of that estate.

Vouchsafe therefore (right Honorable) according to your accustomed humanity
toward learning, to accept of this Geographicall history, in like manner as
it pleased your Honor not long since most favorably to take in good part
those commendable endeavors of my reverend friend M. Richard Hakluyt: who out
of his mature judgment in these studies, knowing the excellency of this
story above all others in the same kind, was the only man that moved me to
translate it. At London this three and fortieth most ioifull Coronation-day of
her sacred Majesty. 1600.

Your Honors always most ready to be commanded JOHN PORY.

To the Reader.
Give me leave (gentle Readers) if not to present unto your knowledge, because
some perhaps may as well be informed as my self; yet, to call to your
remembrance, some few particulars, concerning this Geographicall History, and
John Leo the auther thereof.

Who albeit by birth a More, and by religion for many years a Mahumetan: yet
if you consider his Parentage, Wit, Education, Learning, Emploiments,
Travels, and his conversion to Christianity; you shall find him not
altogether unfit to undertake such an enterprise; nor unworthy to be regarded.

First therefore his Parentage seems not to have bin ignoble: seeing (as in
his second book himself testifies) an Uncle of his was so Honorable a
person, and so excellent an Orator and Poet; that he was sent as a principal
Ambassador, from the king of Fez, to the king of Tombuto.

And whether this our Author were borne at Granada in Spain, (as it is most
likely) or in some part of Africa; certain it is, that in natural sharpenes
and (...) of Wit, he most lively resembled those great and classical authors,
Pomponius Mela, Justinius Historicus, Columella, Seneca, Quintilian, Orosius,
Prudentius, Martial, Iuuenal, Auicen, etc. reputed all for Spanish writers; as
likewise Terentius After, Tertullian, Saint Augustine, Victor, Optatus, etc.
known to be writers of Africa. But amongst great variety which are to be
found in the process of this not able discourse, I will here lay before your
view one only pattern of his surpassing wit. In his second book therefore,
if you peruse the description of Mount Tenueues, you shall there find the
learned and sweet Arabian verses of John Leo, not being then fully sixteen
years of age, so highly esteemed by the Prince of the same mountain, that in
recompense thereof, after bountiful entertainment, he dismissed him with gifts
of great value.

Neither wanted he the best Education that all Barbary could afford. For
being even from his tender years trained up at the University of Fez, in
Grammar, Poetry, Rhetoric, Philosophy, History, Cabala, Astronomy, and
other ingenuous sciences, and having so great acquaintance and conversation in
the kings court: how could he choose but prove in his kind a most
accomplished and absolute man? So as I may justly say (if the comparison be
tolerable) that as Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians; so
likewise was Leo, in that of the Arabians and Mores.

And that he was not meanly, but extraordinarily learned; let me keep
silence, that the admirable fruits of his rare Learning, and this Geographicall
History among the rest may bear record. Besides which, he wrote an Arabian
Grammar, highly commended by a great Linguist of Italy, who had the sight and
examination thereof; as likewise a book of the lives of the Arabian
Philosophers; and a discourse of the religion of Mahumet; with diverse excellent
Poems, and other monuments of his industry, which are not come to light.

Now as concerning his Emploiments, were they not such as might well beseem a
man of good worth? For (to omit how many courts and camps of princes he had
frequented) did not he, as himself in his third book witnesses, personally
serve king Mahumet of Fez in his wars against Arzilla? And was he not at
another time, as appears out of his second Book, in service and honorable
place under the same king of Fez, and sent ambassador by him to the king of
Maroco? Yea, how often in regard of his singular knowledge and judgment in the
laws of those countries, was he appointed, and sometimes constrained at diverse
strange cities and towns through which he traveled, to become a judge and
arbiter in matters of greatest moment?

Moreover as touching his exceeding great Travels, had he not at the first
been a More and a Mahumetan in religion, and most skillful in the languages
and customs of the Arabians and Africans, and for the most part traveled in
Carouans, or under the authority, safe conduct, and commendation of great
princes: I marvel much how ever he should have escaped so many thousands of
imminent dangers. And (all the former notwithstanding) I marvel much more how
ever he escaped them. For how many desolate cold mountains, and huge dry, and
barren deserts passed he? How often was he in hazard to have been captiued, or
to (...) had his throat cut by the prouling Arabians, and wild Mores? And how
hardly many times escaped he the Lions greedy mouth, and the devouring jaws
of the Crocodile? But if you will needs have a brief iournall of his travels:
you may see in the end of his eight book, what he writes for himself.
Wherefore (says he) if it shall please God to vouchsafe me longer life, I
purpose to describe all the regions of Asia which I have traveled: to wit,
Arabia Deserta, Arabia Petrea, Arabia Felix, the Asian part of Egypt, Armenia,
and some part of Tartaria; all which countries I saw and passed through in the
time of my youth. Likewise I will describe my last voiages from Constantinople
to Egypt, and from thence unto Italy, etc. Besides all which places he had also
been at Tauris in Persia: and of his own country, and other African regions
adioining and remote, he was so diligent a traveler; that there was no
kingdom, province, signorie, or city; nor scarcely any town, village
mountain, valley, river, or forest, etc. which he left unvisited. And so much
the more credit and commendation descrueth this worthy History of his; in
that it is (except the antiquities, and certain other incidents) nothing else
but a large Itinerarium or Iournal of his African voiages: neither describes
he almost any one particular place, where himself had not sometime been an
eie-witnes.

But, not to forget His conversion to Christianity, amidst all these his busy
and dangerous travels, it pleased the divine providence, for the discovery and
manifestation of Gods wonderful works, and of his dreadful and just
judgments performed in Africa (which before the time of John Leo, were either
utterly concealed, or imperfectly and fabulously reported both by ancient and
late writers) to deliver this author of ours, and this present Geographicall
History, into the hands of certain Italian Pirates, about the isle of Gerbi,
situate in the gulf of Capes, between the cities of Tunis and Tripolis in
Barbary. Being thus taken, the Pirates presented him and his Book unto Pope
Leo the tenth: who esteeming of him as of a most rich and inualuable prize,
greatly reioiced at his arrival, and gave him most kind entertainment and
liberal maintenance, till such time as he had woone him to be baptized in the
name of Christ, and to be called John Leo, after the Popes own name. And so
during his abode in Italy, learning the Italian tongue, he translated this book
thereinto, being before written in Arabic. Thus much of John Leo.

Now let us acquaint you with the History it self. First therefore from so
worthy an author, how could an history proceed but of special worth and
consequence? For proof whereof, I appeal unto the translations thereof into
Latin, Italian, Spanish, French, English, and (if I be not deceived) into some
other languages; which argue a general (...) of the same. I appeal also to
the grand and most judicial Cosmographer Read page 58. of places vndescribed
by John Leo.
Master John Baptista Ramusius, sometime Secretary to the state of Venice, who
in the Preface to his first volume of voiages, so highly commends it to
learned Fracastoro, and places it every word in the very forefront of his
discourses, as the principal and most praisewoorthy of the^ all. And were
renoumed Ortelius alive, I would under correction report me to him; whether his
map of Barbary and Biledulgerid, as also in his last Additament that of the
kingdoms of Maroco and Fez, were not particularly and from point to point
framed out of this present relation, which he also in two places at the least
prefers far before all other histories written of Africa. But to leave the
testimonies of others, and to come nearer to the matter it self; like as our
prime and peerless English Antiquarie master William Camden in his learned
Britannia, (...) exactly described England, Scotland, Ireland, and the isles
adjacent (the which by Leander for (...), by Damianus a Goez briefly for
Spain, by Belforest for France, by Munster for upper Germany, by Guiccardini
for the Netherlandes, and by others for other countries has been performed)
so likewise this our author John Leo in the history ensuing has so largely,
particularly, and methodically deciphered the countries of Barbary, Numidia,
Libya, The land of Negros, and the hither part of Egypt, as (I take it) never
any writer either before or since his time has done. For if you shall
thoroughly consider him, what kingdom, province, city, town, village,
mountain, vallie, river; yea, what temple, college, hospital, bath-stoue,
Inn; or what other memorable matter does he omit? So does he most iudicially
describe the temperature of the climate, and the nature of the soil, as also
the dispositions, manners, rites, customs, and most ancient pedigrees of the
inhabitants, together with the alterations of religion and estate, the
conquests and overthrows of the Romans, Goths, and Arabians, and other
things (by the way) right worthy the observation. So that the Africans may
justly say to him, and the English to master Camden, as the prince of Roman
orators did unto Marcus Varro the learned of his nation. Nos in patria
nostra peregrinantes errantesque tanquam hospites, tui Tull. Acad, quaest, lib.
libri quasi domum deduxerunt, vt possemus aliquando, qui and vbi essemus,
agnoscere. Tuaetatem patriae, tu descriptiones temporum, tu sacrorum iura, tu
domesticam, tu bellicam disciplinam, tu sedem regionum and locorum, etc. Which
may thus be rudely (...). Wandering up and down like Pilgrims in our own
native soil, thy books have as it were led us the right way home; that we
might at length acknowledge both who and where we are. Thou have revealed the
antiquity of our nation, the order of times, the rites of our religion, our
manner of government both in peace and war, yea thou have described the
situations of countries and places, etc.

Now as concerning the additions before and after this Geographicall History;
having had some spare-howers since it came first under the press; I thought
good (both for the Readers satisfaction, and that John Leo might not appear
too solitary upon the stage) to bestow a part of them in collecting and
digesting the same. The chief scope of this my enterprise is, to make a brief
and cursorie description of all those maine lands and isles of Africa, which
mine author in his nine books has omitted. For he in very deed leaves
untouched all those parts of the African continent which lie to the south of
the fifteen kingdoms of Negros, and to the east of Nilus. For the
manifestation whereof, I have (as truly as I could conjecture) in the map
adioined to this book, caused a list or border of small pricks to be
engraven; which running westward from the mouth of Nilus to The streights of
Gibraltar, and from thence southward to the coast of Guinie, and then eastward
to the banks of Nilus, and so northward to the place where it began; does with
advantage include all places treated of by Leo, and excludes the residue which
by way of Preface we have described before the beginning of his African
history. Likewise at the latter end I have put down certain relations of the
great Princes of Africa, and of the Christian, Jewish, Mahumetan, and Gentilish
religions there (...). The Princes of greatest account either inhabiting or at
least possessing large territories there, are first The grand Neguz or
Christian Emperor of Abassia or the higher Ethiopia, commonly called Presbyter
John or (as Zagazabo his own The variety of this emperors names read in a
marginall note Page 12. of places vndescribed by John Leo.
ambassador would have him) Precious John; but because (...) all the Ethiopick
relation of Francis Aluarez, being the best that ever was written of those
parts, he is continually named Prete Ianni, in imitation of him I also most
commonly call him by that name. And so likewise though Zagazabo (for the more
magnificent reputation of his prince) will have his dominions called Ethiopia;
yet with the consent of some approved authors, and also to distinguish the
country of this emperor from many other regions situate both in the higher
Ethiopia, and in the lower; I have set it down in my map, and in my
discourses do most usually speak thereof under the name of Abassia. The other
great Princes entreated of in the said relations, are The K. of Spain, The
Turkish Emperor, The Or Xeriso, or Serifo.
Xarifo otherwise called The Miramonin, or the king of Maroco Sus and Fez, and
the emperor of Monomotapa.

My method in the discourse before Leo is, after a general preface of Africa,
to begin at the Red sea, where Leo ends; and thence (as well in the
description of the maine lands, as of the isles by him untouched) to proceed on
southerly to the cape of Buena esperanca; from which cape we return toward the
north, describing all along the western countries and isles of Africa, till we
have brought our whole descriptions to an end upon the most southwesterly parts
(...) Barbary, where our author John Leo begins his.

Et quoniam (as one says) turpe non est, per quos profeceris, agnoscere: my
principal authors out of whom I have gathered this store, are, of the
ancienter note, Ptolemey, Strabo, Pliny, Diodorus Siculus, etc. and amongst
later writers, I have helped my self out of sundry discourses in the first
Italian volume of Baptista Ramusio, as likewise out of John Barros, Castanneda,
Ortelius, Osorius de reb. gest. Eman. Matthew Dresserus, Quadus, Isolario del
mundo, John Huighen van Linschoten, and out of the Hollanders late voiages to
the east Indies, and to San Tome: but I am much more beholding to the history
of Philippo Pigafetta, to the Ethiopick relations of Francis Aluarez, and of
Damianus a Goez, and beyond all comparison (both for matter and method) most of
all, to the learned Astronomer and Geographer Antonius Maginus of Padua, and to
the universal relations written in Italian by G. B. B.

And here, before I surcease, I must admonish the Reader of certain faults
escaped in some copies: as namely in the description of the isles in the
Barbarian bay, Acotatado, for Acotado; in a marginall note over against the
description of Tombuto in the seventh book of John Leo, Money for Gold; in the
relation of the Christianity of Egypt, Hypostasis twice together, in stead of
Hypostases; and in the discourse of the Christianity of Congo, Paulo Aquitino,
for Panso Aquitimo. Other literal faults (if there be any) will not be hard
for the Reader himself to amend.

AFRICA
map

A general description of all Africa, together with a comparison of the
ancient and new names of all the principal countries and provinces therein.
THat part of inhabited land extending southward, Africa otherwise called
Libya.
which we call Africa, and the Greeks Libya, is one of the three general parts
of the world known unto our ancestors; which in very The greater part of
Africa unknown in (...) ages.
deed was not thoroughly by them discovered, both because the Inlands could not
be travailed in regard of huge deserts full of dangerous sands, which being
driven with the wind, put trauailers in extreme hazard of their lives; and
also by reason of the long and perilous navigations upon the African coasts, for
which cause it was by very few of ancient times compassed by navigations, much
less searched or entirely known. Of which few, the principal were Hanno a
Carthaginian captain sent by the governors of that commonwelth When Africa
was sailed round about.
for discovery of the said land, and one Eudoxus that fled from Ptolemaeus
Lathyrus, the king of Alexandria. Howbeit in these latter times it has been
often And since also by the English, French, and Dutch.
by the Portugals sailed round about, and diligently searched, especially along
the shore, even from the streights of Gibraltar to the entrance of the red
sea: (...) Dias doubled the cape besore; but returned fearefuily without
proceeding any farther. The (...) or (...) of this word Africa.
but the first Portugal that ever doubled the cape of Buena esperanca, and
coasted the south and southeast parts of Africa, in former (...) unknown, was
Vasco da Gama, in the year 1497. who from hence sailed to Calicut in the east
Indies, to the unspeakable gain of the Portugals.

To omit John Leo his etymologies of this name Africa; Festus will have it to
be derived from the Greek word (...), which signifies horror or cold, and
from (...) the particle privative, as who should say, Africa is a place free
from all horror and extremity of cold, because it lies open to the heavens,
and is sandy, dry, and desert. Others say that it is called Africa quasi
Aprica, that is exposed and subject to the scorching beams of the sun, the
most part there of lying between the Tropicks. Josephus will have Why (...) was
called Libya.
it so called from (...) one of the posterity of Abraham, and others from Afer
son to Hercules of Libya. But it was by the Greeks called Libya, because it
was in old time conquered by Libs the king of Mauritania. In the holy
Scriptures it is called Chamesis, by the Arabians and Ethiopians (...), and by
the Indians Besecath.

In situation and shape this land of Africa is almost an islle, being by a very
The situation and shape of Africa.
small and narrow neckland (passing between the Mediterran sea and the gulf
of Arabia, (...) the red sea) conioined to Asia, and in extension of ground
being almost twice as big as Europe, albeit for inhabitants it is not half
so populous. Wherefore though in longitude from west to east Africa A
comparison between Africa and Europe.
be shorter then Europe in some places, yet extends it so far unto the
south, that Europe in that respect is nothing comparable unto it: for Africa
contains almost seventy degrees in latitude, whereas Europe stretches but
five and thirty degrees: moreover Africa is more uniform and spacious; but
Europe is of a more distracted and manifold shape, being in sundry The causes
why Africa is so slenderly inhabited.
places dispersed and restrained by the sea. Howbeit notwithstanding Africa
has far greater extension of ground then Europe, yet is it not so populous,
nor so commodious to inhabit: for the land of Africa is in many places
uninhabitable; the principal causes whereof are, the scarcity of water, the
barrennes of the soil, being either covered with (...) sand, dust, or ashes,
or else being subject to extreme heat of the sun: also there Sandy seas in
Africa.
are certain dangerous heaps of sand, which being raised by the wind, are
driven up and down like the waves of a tempestuous sea: In brief, there are
such abundance of venomous and hurtful creatures, that for fear of them the
land in some places can very hardly, and in others by no means be manured or
inhabited, be it never so fruitful. Wherefore in diverse parts this region
lies waste and unpeopled: howbeit where it is inhabited, it is exceeding
fertile, and that especially in the north parts thereof, lying over against
Europe, where (according to the report of many historiographers, and
cosmographers) it was in ancient times abundantly furnished with inhabitants:
so likewise all the western coast between Cabo de buena esperanca, and Cabo
Negro situate about nineteen degrees of southerly latitude, contains many
plains, hills, valleys, and other places most fruitful and pleasant, it being
there a continual spring, and elsewhere also it is very fertile, as it shall
be declared more at large in the particular descriptions of each region.

The Equinoctial circle does in a manner divide Africa in the very The
position of Africa, according to the heavens.
midst thereof; from whence it stretches not only to each tropique, but also
twelve degrees almost beyond them both: wherefore the greater part is comprised
between the said Tropiques under the Torrid or burnt Zone, for which only
cause the ancient writers supposed it to be uninhabitable and desert in so many
places: which indeed is much rather to be ascribed to the waste wilderness,
the barren and sandy soil, and the (...) of waters and fountains. It
comprehends therefore fully and perfecty the three first northerly climates,
and so many and the like climates southerly; for it is situate between the
eleventh north Parallele, and the eleventh Antiparallele, or south Parallele,
both which are equally distant from the Equinoctial on either side. But about
either of the foresaid extremes, the longest day consists of fowerteene
hours and one fourth part, and about the midst, of twelve hours exactly.
Likewise as touching the longitude, Africa stretches from the Meridian under
four degrees to the Meridian under fower-score and two degrees of longitude,
to wit, from Cabo Roxo, or the Red cape on the west, to Cape Guardafu on the
east side, between which two capes is the greatest breadth of Africa.

Africa has too narrow bounds allotted unto it by John Leo and certain The
bounds of Africa.
others, for they disioine the greater part of Egypt and all Ethiopia
therefrom. Wherefore it is more convenient in this behalf to follow Ptolemey,
and the late writers, limiting the same on the north with the Mediterran sea,
and the streights of Gibraltar; on the east with the Red sea or the Arabian
gulf, and the small neckland of Asia passing between the Mediterran sea, and
the said gulf; on the south (at the cape of Buena esperanca, where it ends
in form of a wedge) with the maine Ocean partly called the Ethiopian sea, as
being near unto the land of Ethiopia; and on the west, from the hither side of
the Equinoctial line, with the Atlantike Ocean, (called by Ptolemey Mare
Occiduum, by Dionysius Hesperium, and part thereof by the Spaniards Mar del
Norte) but beyond the Equinoctial line it is bounded westward with the
Ethiopian sea.

Africa has very many and most exceeding great mountains, the principal The
mountains of Africa.
whereof is Mount-Atlas, whose tops of incredible height rising out of Mount
Atlas.
the midst of sandy deserts, exalt themselves above the clouds. This
mountain begins westward at that place, where it distinguishes the Ocean
by the name of Atlanticus: from whence by a perpetual ridge, after many
windings and turnings, it extends east toward the confines of Egypt: moreover
it is in most places round, hard to ascend, craggie, steep, impassable, cold,
barren, shadie, and every where full of woods and fountains, with clouds
always houering about the tops thereof, being forlorn and desolate toward the
Ocean, but over against The provinces of (...), Alger, Bugia, Constantina, and
Tunis.
Africa minor, most fertile, and abounding with plenty of corn and of thick
woods which are clad with a kind of moss no whit inferior to silk.

The tops of this mountain are covered with deep snowes even in the midst of
summer: and sometimes when the North winds blow any thing sharp, the snow
falls in such abundance, that it hides the trees growing upon the sides
thereof, and is deadly both to man and beast.

Moreover the fountains which are here found, are so extreme cold in Extreme
cold fountains.
the hottest of summer, as if a man should dip his hand therein but for a short
space, it would loose both life, sense, and motion. Besides Mount Atlas
Mountains called Os Picos (...): that is to say, sharp pointed. John (...):
Dec. 1. lib. 8. cap. 4.
those mountains likewise are very famous, which being situate on the south
part of Africa, are called by the Portugales Os Picosfragosos: for by reason of
their surpassing height and craggie cliffes it is impossible to skale them, and
they are bare, forlorn, and destitute of all relief.

Likewise the cape commonly called Sierra Leonais as it were framed out of an
exceeding high mountain, which may be kenned a mighty distance off: the top
of this mountain is continually ouershadowed with clouds, which often send
forth dreadful thunder and lightening: whereupon some think it to have bin
called by Ptolemey, and by Hanno of Carthage, The chariot of the gods.

The mountains of the moon also, known of old, and situate under the Lunae
montes.
Tropique of Capricorn, being very high and craggie, are inhabited by
barbarous and savage people, nere unto which are valleis of such exceeding
depth, as if they reached to the center of the earth. Likewise there are
certain mountains in Angola called Cabambe containing most rich siluermines,
etc.

Also in Africa are certain mighty lakes, which for their extension seem The
lake of Zembre, which by some others is placed under the Equinoctial.
rather to be seas, the principal whereof called by some Zembre, being situate
by a number of huge mountains, and distant from the Equinoctial eleven or
twelve degrees to the south, contains about five hundred leagues in compass,
out of which lake do spring the famous rivers of Nilus, Zaire, and Cuama, and
some affirm very strange sea monsters to be therein.

Africa likewise has many exceeding great rivers, as namely Nilus, Niger, The
rivers of Africa.
Senaga, Gambra, Zaire, Abagni, Tagassi, Coluez, Coauo, Cuama, and Maniche, or
Rio del spirito santo, all which are in a manner of the same quality and
disposition; for with their yeerlie in undations they do most wonderfully
fatten and enrich the soil of the territories adjoining. Nilus the Nilus.
most famous river of the world, dividing Egypt in the midst, and with his
ouerflowes making it most fruitful, continues in his yearly increase forty
days, and forty days in decrease; to wit, from the seventeenth of June to the
sixth of October: and this river after a mighty long course through Ethiopia
and Egypt, discharges his streams into the Mediterran sea. The river of
Niger, running through the land of Negros, called of old (as Solinus Niger.
supposed) by the natural inhabitants Astabus, and (according to Marmolius)
Hued Nijar in the Arabian tongue, is now esteemed by Paulus Iouius to be Gambra,
and by Cadamosta the river of Senaga; but that both of them are deceived, it is
evident out of the description of Sanutus, who puts down the two foresaid
rivers severally, and thinks Niger to be that which is now called Rio
grande. This river takes his beginning, as some think, out of a certain
desert to the east, called Seu, or springs rather out of a lake, and after a
long race, falls at length into the western Ocean. It increases also, for
the space of forty days like Nilus, and is for so long space decreasing about
the very same time; by which inundation it brings such fruitfulnes unto all
the land of Negros (certain mountains only excepted) as no place in the world
can be imagined more fertile. Senaga or Canaga, a most notable river, called,
as some think, Baratis by Ptolemey, and for the length thereof, and manifold
strange creatures therein contained, comparable to Nilus, seuereth by his
winding chanel the barren and naked soil, from the green and fruitful.
Moreover it makes a separation between nations of sundry colors: for the
people on this side are of a dead ash color, lean, and of a small stature;
but on the farther side they are exceeding black, of tall and manly stature,
and very well proportioned: howbeit near unto the river on either side, they
are of a mean color, complexion, and stature between both the above
mentioned. It falls into the sea by two mouths, the principal whereof is
about a mile broad, up into the which the sea enters almost 60. miles. It
springs (according to John Barros) out of two lakes (the greater whereof is
now called the lake of Gaoga, but heretofore by Ptolemey Chelonidae paludes,
and the lesser Ptolemey calls Nubaepalus) as also out of a river named by
Ptolemey Ghir. This river of Senaga has great variety of strange fishes, and
other creatures that These two rivers of Senaga and Gambra are not certainly
known, whether they be maine rivers of themselves, or branches and mouths of
Niger.
live in the water, as namely, sea-horses, crocodiles, winged serpents, and
such like: near unto it also are great store of Elephants, wild bores, lions,
and leopards. Gambra or Gambea a very great river, lying between Senaga and
Niger, and esteemed by Sanutus to be that which Ptolemey called Stachir,
fetches his original from the lake of Libya, and from the fountains which
Ptolemey assigns to the river of Niger: this river in greatness and depth
exceeds Senaga, and has many unknown rivers falling thereinto, and brings
forth all kinds of living creatures that Senaga does. In the midst of this
river stands the Isle of Elephants, so called, in regard of The isle of
Elephants.
great numbers of those beasts. The river Zaire begins out of the same lake
from whence Nilus springs: this being one of the greatest rivers of all
Africa, and utterly unknown unto ancient writers, contains at the mouth
eight and twenty miles in breadth, having a very safe harbor for ships to ride
in: also there are many and great Islands in the channel thereof, and sundry
rivers do fall thereinto, the principal whereof are Vumba, Barbela, Coanza,
and Lelunda: in brief, this river Zaire running through These two rivers of
Cuama and Magnice (according to Philippo Pigafetta) spring both out of the
great lake and are not branches of one river.
the kingdom of Congo, disgorgeth it self into the maine Ethiopian sea. Out
of the same lake, which is the very fountain of Nilus, springs another
notable and famous river, which after a long race toward the south and east, is
divided into two branches: the northerly branch, which is exceeding great (for
it (...) fix great rivers thereinto, and is nauigable for the space of seven
hundred miles) being properly called Cuama, and the other branch more
southerly, which is very great also, being named Manich or Magnice, or Rio del
spirito santo.

The promontories, capes, or headlands of Africa be very many, the most The
promontories or capes of Africa.
famous and principal whereof are, The cape of Buena esperanca, or good hope,
Cabo verde, and Cabo de los corrientes. The cape of Buena esperanca Cabo de
buena esperanza.
or good hope is the extreme southerly point of all Africa, being a most
renowned and dangerous promontorie, which in the year one thousand four
hundred nintie seven was the second time discovered by Vasco da Gama at the
commandment of Don Emanuel king of Portugal: this cape the mariners were wont
to call the lion of the Ocean, and the tempestuous cape, by reason of the
ruffling and roaring of the winds, which they found there for the most part
very boisterons: for the sea thereabout is exceeding rough, by reason of the
continual fury of the winds; neither will any nauigatours touch upon the cape,
except they be enforced by mere necessity. Cabo verde or The green
head-land, is esteemed by some to be the same Cabo (...).
which Ptolemey calls Promontorium Arsinarium, and is compassed on either
side by the rivers of Senega and Gambra. Cabo de los corrientes, otherwise Cabo
de los corrientes.
called the cape of San Sebastian, stretches forth it self right over
against the south end of the great Isle of Madagascar: it is a cape well
known, by reason it is so dangerous to double, which the Moors durst not
pass for a very long time.

And here as concerning the strange beasts, fishes, serpents, trees, plants,
and roots of Africa, as likewise touching the diseases, whereto the African
people are most subject; and the variety of languages (excepting the
Chaldaean, Egyptian, Turkish, Italian, and Spanish toongs) which are now and
have been of ancient times spoken in Africa; I refer the Reader to the first
and last books of John Leo, and to other places, where they are at large and
purposely entreated of.

Moreover this part of the world is inhabited especially by five principal
The inhabitants of Africa.
nations, to wit, by the people called Cafri or Cafates, that is to say
outlawes, or lawless, by the Abassins, the Egyptians, the Arabians, and the
Africans or Moors, properly so called; which last are of two kinds, namely The
diversity of religions in Africa.
white or tawnie Moors, and Negros or black Moors. Of all which nations some
are Gentiles which worship Idols; others of the sect of Mahumet; some others
Christians; and some Jewish in religion; the greatest part of which people are
thought to be descended from Cham the cursed son of Noah; except some Arabians
of the lineage of Sem, which afterward passed into Africa. Now the Arabians
inhabiting Africa are divided into many several kinds, possessing diverse and
sundry habitations and regions; for some dwell near the sea shore, which
retain the name of Arabians; but others inhabiting the inland, are called
Baduini. There be likewise infinite swarms of Arabians, which with their
wives and children, lead a vagrant and roguish life in the deserts, using
tents in stead of houses: these are notable thieves, and very troublesome both
to their neighbour-inhabitants, and also to merchants: for which cause
travelers and merchants dare not pass over the African deserts alone, but
only in Carouans, which are great companies of merchants riding, and
transporting their goods upon their camels and asses: who go very strong, and
in great numbers, for fear of the said theeuish Arabians.

Ptolemey in his fourth book of Geography divides Africa into twelve The
ancient division of Africa by Ptolemey; and a comparison of the ancient with
the modern names.
regions or provinces: namely, Mauritania Tingitana, Mauritania Caesariensis,
Numidia, Africa propria, Cyrenaica, Marmarica, Libya propria, AEgyptus
superior, AEgyptus inferior, Libya interior, AEthiopia sub AEgypto, and
AEthiopia interior.

Mauritania Tingitana, the most rich and beautiful couutrey of Africa,
Mauritania Tingitana, being all one with the kingdoms of Maroco and Fez.
so named of the city Tingis, which we at this day call Tanger, was sometimes
also (as Pliny witnesses) called Borgundiana: moreover others have called it
by the names of Mauritania Sitiphensis, Hispania Transfretana, and Hispania
Tingitana: but Solinus terms the same Mauritania inferior. The inhabitants
were of old named by the Graecians Maurusij, and by the Romans Mauri, but the
Spaniards at this present term them Alarabes. In this part of Africa are now
contained two stately kingdoms, namely the kingdom of Maroco, (...) the
kingdom of Fez; both which are environed with the mountains of Atlas, the
Ocean and the Mediterran seas, and to the east with the river of Muluia.

Mauritania Caesariensis, named according to the city of Caesaria, Mauritania
Caesariensis called at this present Tremizen, and Aiger.
which was so called after the name of Claudius Caesar, at this present bearing
the name of Tiguident or Tegdemt, which word in the Arabian tongue signifies
ancient; was by Victor Vticensis, termed Mauritania mayor; by Strabo Massilia,
and Massaesilia, and the inhabitants thereof by Pliny Massaesuli. At this
present it contains the kingdom of Tremizen, as Dominias Niger, and Giraua
are of opinion.

Numidia the ancient, called in the time of Ptolomey, The new, but by Numidia
the ancient, containing Bugia, Constantina, Bona, Mezzab, etc.
the Greeks (as Pliny testifies) Metagonitis, and the inhabitants thereof
Numidae, and Nomades; is that region which lies between The great river, and
the river Megerada, over which country king Masinissa bare rule. It contains
now (as I conjecture) the provinces of Bugia, Constantina, Bona, and Mezzab.
Howbeit at this present we understand by Numidia that region which lies
between the mountains of Atlas and the Libyan deserts, called by John Leo and
Marmolius Biledulgerid, or the land of Dates, because this is the only region
for plenty of Dates, in all Africa.

Africa propria, situate upon the Mediterran sea, between the regions Africa
(...) all one with the kingdom of Tunis.
of old Numidia, and the Cyrene, is called by Pliny Zeugitania, who divides
it into the ancient and the new. At this present it is the kingdom of Tunis,
for it contains Byzacium, which by Strabo is accounted a part of Africa
propria. The head of this province in times past was Carthage, whereof at this
present there are nothing but ruins extant.

Cyrene, or Cyrenaica, by Pliny called Pentapolis, and by the Hebrews Cyrene
now called Mesrata.
Lebahim, is esteemed by Giraua to be at this present called Corene, and by
Andrew Theuet, Assadib: but John Leo and Marmolius name it Mesrata.

Marmarica is called by Pliny Mareotis, and Libya: howbeit at this present
Marmarica comprehended in the desert of Barcha.
the desert of Barcha, described by John Leo in his sixth book, contains a
great part of Cyrenaica, and all Marmarica.

But Libya propria, retains till this present the name of Libya, and is Libya
propria, called Sarra.
that part which the Arabians call Sarra, which word signifies a desert.

Both the ancient Ethiopias are now possessed by the Abassins, under AEthiopia,
now called Abassia.
the dominion of Prete Ianni.

Egypt retains even till this day, the ancient name.

The best modern division of Africa, for these our times is to add unto the
four general parts, Barbaria, Numidia, Libya, and the land of Negros, set
down by John Leo, three other general parts to wit, Egypt; the inner or the
upper Ethiopia, containing Troglodytica, Nubia, and the empire of Prete Ianni;
and the lower, or the extreme Ethiopia, stretching from the said empire along
the seacoast, and through the Inland even to the Cape of Buena Esperanca.

Thus much of Africa in general. Now it remains that we briefly describe in
particular all the principal maine lands, and islands, (vndescribed by John
Leo) which thereto belong, or adioyne; beginning first with the Red sea one of
the chief limits of Africa, and from thence shaping our course along the
eastern or farthest quarters thereof, through the dominions of Prete Ianni,
the land of Zanguebar, the empires of Mohenemuge, and Monomotapa, and the
region of Cafraria: and then, having doubled the cape of Buena esperanca, range
we along the western parts by the kingdoms of Angola, Congo, Anzichi, Benin,
Ghinea, and by the capes of Sierra Leona, Capo verde, and the castle of Arguin,
till we have brought our selves to finish our course, upon the most
southwesterne parts of Barbary, from whence our author John Leo begins his.

A particular description of all the known borders, coasts and inlands of
Africa, which John Leo has left vndescribed: collected out of sundry ancient
and late writers.
Of the red sea.
THe red sea called by others the Arabian gulf, and the straight of Mecha,
containing in length twelve hundred miles, and in breadth but one hundred, is
divided into three partitions or channels; the middlemost whereof being called
The large or deep sea, is without danger nauigable both day and night, because
it has from five and twenty to fifty fathomes water, especially from the
isle of Camaran even to Suez standing at the very bottom of the gulf: the
other two partitions, which are the eastern and western extremities, are
encumbered with so many little isles and rocks, as it is impossible to sail
over them but only by daylight, and with most expert pilots, which are to be
hired at a small island lying overthwart the This isle I take to be Babelmandel.
very mouth or entrance of the red sea; which the ancient kings of Egypt (if
the report of Strabo be true) barred with a chain, from the African, to the
Arabian side. This sea is very skarce of fish; perhaps because there fall no
rivers thereinto, which with their fresh and sweet waters do much delight and
nourish the fish; and the strand or shore thereof is destitute of all green
grass, herbs, or weeds. The ports and havens of this sea are for the most
part very dangerous and difficult to enter, by reason of the manifold windings
and turnings, which must be made, to avoid the rocks.

At the very head or North end of this gulf, stands Suez, which heretofore
Suez called of old Heroum ciuitas, and Hazion Geber.
seems to have bin called Ciuitas Heroum, and in the times of David and
Solomon Hazion-Geber, from whence the fleetes of those parts were sent to
Ophir for gold and other rich commodities. Under the Egyptian Ptolemeys and
the Romans, this town flourished exceedingly, by reason of the infinite
quantity of merchandise brought thither from the east Indies, and Arabia. But
now it is nothing so frequented; partly in regard of the mighty concurse and
traffic which Mecha draws unto it self, and partly by reason of the
Portugales conueiance of spices and other Indian commodities about the cape of
Buena esperanca. At this present the great Arsenale signifies a storehouse for
munition, and for all necessaries to build, repair, and furnish a fleet.
Turk has there an Arsenale, with certain galleys, for fear of the
Portugals aforesaid: against whom there have bin dispatched from this place
two great fleetes, one for the assailing of (...), and another for Ormuz.
Howbeit because all the countries round about are utterly destitute of wood, it
is a matter of infinite charge to furnish forth a fleet from hence; for they
are constrained to fetch their timber as far as Caramania, partly by sea, and
partly upon camels backs. At this town of Suez they have no fresh water; but
all their water is brought them from a place six miles distant upon camels
backs, being notwithstanding brackish and bitter.

The western shore of the Red sea is inhabited with people called in old
Troglodytae were a people that lived in caves under the earth to avoid the
extrem heat, being derived (...).
time Troglodytae, which at this present do all of them yield obedience to the
great Turk: who considering, that the fleets of the Portugales entered very
often into the Red sea, and were there received by the subjects of Prete
Gianni, and did him great damage; has thereupon taken occasion not only to
conquer the Troglodytae, but also to wast and subdue a great part of
Barnagasso, the most Northerlie province of the said Prete. So that the
audacious attempts of the Portugales in those parts have bred two most A great
part of Barnagasso subdued by the Turk.
dangerous and bad effects; the one is, that the Arabians have most strongly
fortified all their sea-townes, which before lay naked and without
fortification; the other, for that the Turk also has bin occasioned thereby
to make war against the Prete. Wherefore they ought not to have undertaken
any such enterprise, but with full resolution and sufficient forces to
accomplish the same: for lesser attempts serve to no other end, but only to
rouse and arm the enemy, which was before secure and quiet.

Neither is it here to be omitted, that in the foresaid sea, a man can sail
in no ships nor barks, but only those of the great Turk, or at least with his
license, paying unto him for tribute a good part of the freight. For this
purpose he has certain Magazines or storehouses of timber, which is brought
partly from the gulf of Satalia, and partly from Nicomedia, and other places
upon the Euxin sea, unto Rosetto and Alexandria; from whence it is afterward
transported to Cairo, and thence to Suez.

This sea is called the Red sea, not in regard that the waters thereofbe all
red, but (as some think) from certain red rushes which grow upon the shore:
and (as others are of opinion) from a kind of red earth which in sundry places
it has at the bottom: which earth dies not the very substance of the water
red, but by transparence causes it (especially near the shore) to appear of
that color.

Africa Troglodytica.
THat sandy, barren, and desert part of Africa which lies between Nilus and
the Red sea, especially to the south of the tropike, was in old times inhabited
by the Troglodytae, a people so called, because of their dwelling in caves
under the ground. Along this western coast of the Red sea runs a ridge of
mountains, which being an occasion that the inland rivers can not fall into
the said sea, they are forced to discharge themselves into Nilus. The
foresaid mountains and sea coast are now inhabited by Mahumetans, being
partly Arabians, and partly Turks: which not many years ago have attempted to
sail that sea, and to invade the regions adioining. The natural inhabitants
are a rude barbarous people, and very poor and beggarly. The chief places of
habitation are Corondol, a special good port; Alcosser a place well known,
because that near unto it the said mountains open themselves, and give
passage to the bringing in of the fruits and commodities of Abassia; Suachen
esteemed one of the principal ports in all the streights, and being made by an
island. Here resideth the Bassa of the great Turk, which is called the
governor of Abassia, with three thousand soldiers or thereabout.

Next follows Ercoco the only haven town of the Prete, lying over against
the little isle of Mazua: and here the mountains make an other opening or
passage, for transporting of victuals out of the land of the said Prete
Ianni. From hence almost to the very entrance of the Red sea, the coast is at
this present uninhabited, forlorn, and desert. Likewise from Suachen to Mazua
is a continual wood, the trees whereof are but of small worth. Just within
the said entrance stands the town and port of Vela, under the jurisdiction
of the king of Dancali a Moore.

Upon all this west shore of the Red sea, as likewise upon the contrary east
shore, scarcity of water is the cause, why there are so few, and so small
places of habitation: and the people run and flock together, where they may
find any pit or fountain of water.

Some curious reader might here expect, because I have now passed so near the
frontiers of Egypt, that I should make an exact description of that most famous
and fruitful province, and likewise of the great city of Alcair, and of the
inundation and decrease of Nilus: all which, because they are expressed in most
orient and lively colors by our author John Leo; I should show my self both
injurious to him, and tedious to all judicial readers, in anticipating and
forestalling that, before the beginning of his book, which he so near the end
does in such large and particular wise entreat of. Now therefore let us
proceed to the upper or inner Ethiopia, beginning with the first and most
northerly province thereof called Nubia.

Nubia.
PAssing therefore westward from the Island of Siene, you enter into the
province of Nubia, bordering on the west upon Gaoga, eastward upon the river
Nilus, toward the North, upon Egypt, and southward upon the desert of Goran.
The inhabitants thereof called by Strabo (...), live at this present (as
Francisco Aluarez reports) a most miserable and wretched kind of life: for
having lost the sincerity and light of the gospel, they do embrace infinite
corruptions of the Jewish and Mahumetan religions. At the same time when the
foresaid Aluarez was in Abassia, there came certain messengers out of Nubia,
to make suit unto the Prete, that he would send them priests, and such persons
as might preach and administer the sacraments unto them. But he returned
answer, that he could not in regard of the scarcity of great cler-giemen in
his dominions: The said messengers reported, that the Nubians had sent often to
Rome for a bishop; but being afterward by the invasions of the Moors and the
calamity of war, cut short of that assistance, they fell for want of
teachers and ministers, into extreme ignorance of Christian religion, and by
little and little were infected with the impious and abominable sects of the
Jews and Mahumetans. Some Portugals travailing to those parts, saw many
churches destroyed by the hands of the Arabians, and in some places the
pictures of saints painted upon the walls. They are governed by women, and call
their Queen Gaua. Their principal city called Dangala, and consisting
Dangala the head city of Nubia.
of about ten thousand households, is a place of great traffike, because it is
so near unto Egypt and the river Nilus. All their other habitations are
villages and base cottages. Their houses are built of claie, and covered with
straw. The chief commodities of this region are rice, stone-sugar, sanders,
iuorie, (for they take many elephants) as likewise abundance of ciuet, and
gold in great plenty. The country is for the most part sandy: howbeit there
are certain mighty lakes, by the benefit whereof a great part of Nubia is
watered and made fruitful.

The Isle of Meroe.
MEroe called at this time by the names of Guengare, Amara, and Nobe, being the
greatest and fairestisle which Nilus makes, and resembled by Herodotus to the
shape of a target, contains in breadth a thousand, and in length three
thousand stadios or furlongs. It abounds with gold, silver, copper, iron,
Eben-wood, palme-trees, and other such commodities as are in Nubia. Some write,
that there grow canes or reeds of so huge a bigness, that the people make botes
of them. Here also you have mineral salt, and lions, elephants, and leopards.
This island is inhabited by Mahumetans, who are confederate with the Moors
against Prete Ianni. Strabo affirms, that in old time the authority of the
priests of this island was so great, that by a mean and ordinary messenger
they would command the king to murder himself, and would substitute an
other in his room. But at length, one king having in a certain temple put all
the said priests to death, quite abolished that monstrous custom. And here
as Nilus unfolds himself into two branches, to embrace this Islande, he
receives from the east the river of Abagni, and from the west the river
Sarabotto, which have likewise other smaller rivers falling into them. The
Abassins are of opinion, that the Queen of Saba, which traveled so far to
hear the wisdom of Solomon, was mistress of this isle. Paulus Ionius says,
here are three kings, one a Gentile, the second a Moore, and the third a
Christian, subject unto the Prete. From Meroe to Siene it is accounted fifteen
days journey by water.

Or AEthiopia the higher.
Abassia, or the empire of Prete Ianni.
THe Abassins are a people subject to Commonly called in Latin writers,
Presbiter Johannes, by the Moors Asiclabassi, and by the Abassins his own
subjects Acegue, that is, Emperor, and Neguz which imports a king, and Belul
also, being all one with Encoe in the Chaldean tongue, both which words
signify precious or high.
Prete Ianni: whose empire (if we consider the style which he uses in his
letters) has most ample confines. For he intituleth himself emperor of the
great and higher Ethiopia, king of Goiame, which (as Botero supposes) is
situate between Nilus and Zaire; of Vangue a kingdom beyond Zaire; of Damut
which confineth with the land of the Anzichi; and toward the south he is
called king of Cafate and Bagamidri, two provinces bordering upon the first
great lake, which is the original fountain of Nilus; as likewise of the
kingdoms of Xoa, Fatigar, Angote, Baru, Baaliganze, Adea, Amara, Ambea, Vaguc,
Tigremahon, Sabaim, where the Queen of Saba governed, and lastly of Or
Barnagasso
Barnagaes, and lord as far as Nubia, which bordereth upon Egypt. But at
this present the center or midst of his Empire (as John Barros writes) is the
lake of Barcena. For it extends eastward toward the Red sea, as far as
Suaquen, the space of two hundred twenty and two leagues. Howbeit between the
sea and his dominions runs a ridge of mountains inhabited by Moors, who
are masters of all the seacoast along, except the port of Ercoco, which
belongs to the Prete. And likewise on the west, his empire is restrained by
another mountainous ridge stretching along the river of Nilus; where are found
most rich mines of gold; Most rich goldmines.
amongst which are the mines of Damut and of Sinassij, wholly in the possession
of Gentiles which pay tribute unto the Prete. Northward it is bounded by an
imaginary line supposed to be drawn from Suachen to the beginning of the isle
Meroe above mentioned; which line extends an hundred and five and twenty
leagues. From thence the Abassin borders trend south somewhat crookedly in
manner of a bow, as far as the kingdom of Adea (from the mountains whereof
springs a river called by Ptolemey And by the late writers (...).
Raptus which falls into the sea about Melinde) for the space of two hundred
and fifty nine leagues; next unto the which borders, inhabit certain
Gentiles of black color, with curled hair. And here the (...) empire is
limited by the kingdom of Adel, the head city whereof called Arar, stands
in the latitude nine degrees. So that all this great empire may contain in
compass six hundred threescore and two leagues, little more or less. It is
refreshed and watered by two mighty rivers which convey their streams into
Nilus, called by Ptolemey Astaboras and Astapus, and by the natural
inhabitants Abagni and Tagassi; the first whereof takes his original from the
lake of Barcena, and the second from the lake of Colue. Barcena lies in seven
degrees of north latitude; and Colue under the very Equinoctial. The first
(besides Abagni) ingendereth also the river of Zeila: and the second (besides
Tagassi) gives essence to the river of Quilimanci. Between Abagni and the Red
sea lies the province of Barnagasso: between Abagni and Tagassi are the
kingdoms of Angote and Fatigar; and more toward the Sinus Barbaricus, a
mighty gulf on the backeside of Africa, stretching (as some will have it)
from 4. degrees of northerly to 17. of southerly latitude.
bay of Barbarians, the provinces of Adea and of Baru; and somewhat lower, that
of Amara. In brief, beyond the river of Tagassi ly the regions of Bileguanzi,
and of Tigremahon.

The Abassins have no great knowledge of Nilus by reason of the mountains
which divide them from it; for which cause they call Abagni the father of
rivers. Howbeit they say that upon Nilus do inhabit two great and populous
nations; one of Jews toward the west, under the government of a mighty king;
the other more southerly, consisting of Amazones or warlike women; whereof we
will speak more at large in our relation of Monomotapa.

Throughout all the dominion of the Prete there is not any one city of
importance, either for multitude of inhabitants, for magnificent buildings, or
for any other respect. For the greatest towns there, contain not above two
thousand households; the houses being (cottage-like) reared up with clay and
covered with straw, or such like base matter. Also Ptolemey entreating of these
parts, makes mention but of three or four cities only, which he appoints
to the south of the Isle Meroe. Howbeit in some places upon the frontiers of
Abassia there are certain towns very fairly built, and much frequented for
traffic. The Portugales in their travails throughout the empire have often
declared unto the Abassins, how much better it were, for avoiding of the
outrageous injuries and losses daily inflicted by the Moors and Mahumetans
both upon their goods and persons, if the emperor would build cities and
castles strongly walled and fortified. Whereunto they made answer, that the
power of their Neguz, or emperor, consisted not in stone-walles, but in the
arms of his people. They use not ordinarily any lime or stone, but only for
the building of churches (saying, that so it becomes us to make a difference
between the houses of men, and churches dedicated to God) and of their
Beteneguz or houses of the emperor, wherein the governors of provinces are
placed to execute justice. These Beteneguz stand continually open, and yet in
the governors Of these Beteneguz read Francis Aluarez cap. 42.
absence no man dare enter into them, under pain of being punished as a
traitor. Moreover in the city of Axuma (esteemed by them to have been the
seat of the Queen of Saba) stand certain ruinous buildings like unto
pyramides; which by reason of their greatness, remain even til this present,
notwithstanding their many years antiquity. Likewise there are in this
country diverse churches and oratories hewn out of the hard rock, consisting
but of one only stone, some sixty, some forty, and some thirty Or yardes:
for Braccia signifies both.
fathomes long, being full of windows, and engraven with strange and unknown
characters. Three such churches there are of twelve Or yardes: for Braccia
signifies both.
fathomes broad and eighty in length.

The Abassins which are subject to the Prete, hold opinion, that their Of
Melich read more at large in Francisco Aluarez cap. 37. and cap. 138.
prince deriueth his petigree from (...) the son of Solomon, which (as they
say) he begot of the Queen of Saba; and that themselves are descended from the
officers and attendants which Solomon appointed unto this his son when he
sent him home unto his mother: which seems not altogether unlikely, if you
consider the Jewish ceremonies of circumcision, observing of the sabbath, and
such like, which they use until this present: likewise they abhor swines
flesh and certain other meats, which they call unclean. The Prete absolutely
governs in all matters, except it be in administering of the sacraments, and
ordaining of priests. He gives and takes away benefices at his pleasure; and
in punishing offenders, makes no difference between his clergy and laity.
The administration of their sacraments is wholly referred to the Abuna or
Patriarch. The Prete is lord and owner of all the lands and possessions in his
empire, except those of the church; which are in number infinite; for the
monasteries of saint Antonie (besides which there are none of any other order)
and the colleges of the Canons and of the Hermites, together with the parishes,
are innumerable. They are all provided by the king, both of revenues and of
ornaments.

They have two winters and two summers; which they discern not by cold and
heat, but by rainie and fair weather. They begin their year upon the 26. of
August, and divide it into twelve months, each month containing thirty
days, whereunto they add every common year five days, and in the leap
year six, which odd days they call Pagomen, that is, The end of the year.
Their ordinary iourneies in traveling are twelve miles a day. The common
harlots dwell without their towns, and have wages allowed them out of the
common purse: neither may they enter into any cities, nor apparel themselves,
but only in yellow.

The soil of Abassia abounds generally with grain, and in especial with
(...) and all kinds of Pulse, but not so much with wheat; they have (...)
likewise (not knowing how to refine it) and honey, and cotton-wooll, orenges,
cedars, and limons, grow naturally there. They have neither melons, citrons,
nor rape-roots: but many plants and herbs different from ours. Their drink is
made of barley and millet: neither have they any wine made of grapes, but only
in the houses of the emperor, and the Or (...).
Abuna. They are not destitute of Elephants, mules; lions, tygres, ounces, and
dear. Their own country horses are but of a small size: how beit they have
also of the Arabian and Egyptian breed, the coltes whereof within four days
after they be foled, they use to suckle with kine. They have great and
terribles apes; and infinite sorts of birds; but neither cuckowes nor Pies, so
far as ever could be learned. Here are likewise great store of mines of
gold, silver, iron, and copper; but they know not how to dig and refine the
same: for the people of this country are so rude and ignorant, that they have
no knowledge nor use of any art or occupation. Insomuch as they esteem the
carpenters or smithes craft for an unlawful and diabolical kind of science;
and such as exercise the same, live among them like infamous persons; neither
are they permitted to enter into any of their churches. In the kingdom of
Bagamidri are found most excellent mines of silver, which they know none
other way how to take from the ore, but only by melting it with fire into
thin plates. Goiame abounds with base gold. In the kingdom of Damut they
dig and refine it somewhat better. They have neither the art of making cloth
(for which cause the greater part of them go clad in beasts skins) nor yet the
manner of hauking, fowling, or hunting; so that their countries swarm with
partridges, quails, fesants, cranes, geese, hens, hares, dear, and other like
creatures: neither know they how to make any full use or benefit of the
fruitefulnes of their country, nor of the commodity of rivers. They sow mill
for the most part, sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another, according
as the rain gives them opportunity. In sum, they show no wit nor dexterity
in any thing so much as in robbery and war; unto both which they have a kind
of natural inclination. Which is occasioned (as I suppose) by the continual
voiages made by the Prete, and by their usual living in the wide fields, and
that in diverse and sundry places. For to travail continually, and remain in
the fields without any stable or firm habitation, compels men as it were,
of necessity, to lay hold on all that comes next to hand, be it their own,
or belonging to others.

They are not much subject to tempests; but to an inconvenience far more
intolerable, namely to innumerable swarms of locusts, which bring such
desolation upon them, as is most dreadful to consider: for they consume whole
provinces, leaving them quite destitute of succor both for man and beast. They
use no stamped coin in all this empire, but insteede thereof certain rude
pieces of gold, and little balls of iron, especially in Angote; as likewise
salt and pepper, which are the greatest riches that they can enjoy.

Hence it is, that the tributes which are paid to the prince, consist only of
such things as his own dominions do naturally afforde; as namely of salt,
gold, silver, corn, hides, elephants teeth, the horn of the Rhinoceros, with
slaves, and such like. Which form of tribute (being most agreeable to nature)
is used also in other parts of Africa. Their salt is taken out of a certain
great mountain in the province of Balgada, and is made into square pieces.

The most populous place in all Abassia is the court of the Prete, wheresoever
it resideth; and there are erected five or six thousand tents of cotton of
diverse colors, with so notable a distinction of streets, lanes,
marketplaces, and Tribunals; that even in a moment every man knows his own
station and the place where he is to do his business. A man may conjecture the
greatness of this court, if he do but consider, that (according to the report
of some who have there bin personally present) besides the camels which carry
the tents, the mules of carriage exceed the number of fifty thousand. Their
mules serve them to carry burdens, and to ride upon: but their horses are
only for the wars. The Mahumetans have now brought this prince to great
extremity: but heretofore while he was in his flourishing estate, he lived so
maiestically, that he never spoke but by an interpreter; nor would be seen to
his subjects, but only upon solemn days. At other times it was held as a
great favor, if he did show but the half part of his feet to ambassadors,
and to his favorites. And no marvel: for amongst the Ethiopians it has been
an ancient custom (as Strabo writes) To adore their kings like gods, who for
the most part live enclosed at home. This so strange and stately kind of
government, did exceedingly abase his subjects, whom the Prete used like
slaves; so that upon the smallest occasions that might be, he would deprive
them of all honor and dignity, were they never so great. Abassia contains
many large plains, and very high mountains, all fruitful. In some places you
shall have most extreme could and frostie weather: but not any snow
throughout the whole empire, no not in the mountains.

The Prete has many moors in his dominions, and upon his borders; but the
most populous of all others are the Moors called Dobas, who are The Moors
called Dobas.
bound by a law never to marry, till they can bring most evident testimony,
that each of them has slain twelve Christians. Wherefore the Abassin
merchantspasse not by their country, but with most strong guardes.

A particular and brief relation of all the kingdoms and provinces subject to
the Christian Emperor of Abassia, commonly called Prete Ianni.
(...).
OF all the provinces subject unto the Prete, that of Barnagaez.
Barnagasso is best known unto us, because it is so near unto the Red sea;
over against the shore whereof it stretches in length from Suachen, almost as
far as the very mouth or entrance of the straight, being (as is before said)
bounded on the south part with the mighty river of Abagni, which runs
westward out Out of this lake also the river of Zeila runs eastward into the
Red sea.
of the lake of Barcena into Nilus. Howbeit it has no other port upon the Red
sea but only Ercoco, situate near the Isle of Mazua; neither has the Prete
any port but this, in all his dominions; so that he is (as it were) on all
sides land-locked, which is one of the greatest defects in any empire, kingdom
or state, that can be imagined. This province is full of towns and villages,
as likewise of rivers and pooles which make it exceeding fruitful. The Viceroy
or governor hereof, called also by the name of (...) in the Abassin tongue
signifies the Sea, and Neguz a king: so that Barnagaez or Barnagasso, is as
much as king of the sea, or Lord high admiral.
Barnagasso, resideth in the city of Beroa, otherwise called Barua, and by
Ptolemey (as Sanutus thinks) Coloue, situate upon a pleasant river abounding
with fish. Unto him likewise are subject the governments of Danfila and of
Canfila, near unto the borders of Egypt.

Certain years past the great Turks forces have mightily afflicted this
province, destroying the towns, and leading the people captive: so that in the
end Isaac the lord Barnagasso was enforced to compound with the Turks
lieutenant (bearing title, The Bassa of Abassia, and residing in Suachen) for
the yearly tribute of a thousand ounces of gold. Over and besides he paieth
every year unto his sovereign the Prete, an hundred and fifty excellent
horses, with cloth of silk and of cotton, and other matters.

On the most westerly part of Barnagasso, begins a mighty ridge of
mountains, which for a good space waxing narrower and narrower, at length in
the kingdom of Angote dilateth (...) self into a round form, All persons of
the Abassin blood royal enclosed within a mighty roundel of mountains.
Francis Aluarez cap. 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, etc.
enuironing with the steep sides, and impassable tops thereof, many fruitful
and pleasant valleys, for the space of fifteen days journey in compass:
within which valleys (as it were in walled castles) all persons whatsoever,
both male and female, of the Abassin blood royal, are under pain of most
extreme punishment, together with their whole families, limited to remain.
Within this great roundell or enclosure of mountains, there is (among many
others) contained one lesser, which is begirt arounde with a mountainous wall
so craggie, steep, and vnscaleable, that no man can come in or out, but only
by a certain basket drawn up and down upon a rope: neither is it possible to
famish the parties within by a siege, be it never so long: for they have
fruitful ground, with houses, a church, a monastery, cesternes of water, and
all other necessaries for the continual maintenance of five hundred persons.
Within this strong citadell of mountains (for the avoiding of all tumults and
seditions) are locked up those great personages which come nearest in blood to
the Prete, and are in possibility of the crown; and here must they all live
and die, except a very few of them, who attain at length unto the government
of the empire. The Abassins have a tradition, that one Abraham an emperor of
theirs being admonished in a dream, that he should keep his dominions in
tranquillity by the means aforesaid, was the first that found this
mountain, and used it for the same purpose.

Tigremahon.
TIgremahon, a very large kingdom, lies between the river Marabo, Nilus, the
Red sea, and the kingdom of Angote. The governor here of paieth for yearly
tribute unto the Prete two hundred Arabian horses, a great quantity of silk
and cotton-cloth, and very much gold. Unto this kingdom is subject the
province of Tigray, wherein stands the city of Caxumo, sometimes the royal
seat of the Queen of Saba (which they say was called Maqueda, of whom Solomon
begat a son named Melich, before mentioned) which city was the seat
likewise of Queen Candace. Also to the said kingdom of Tigremahon belong the
provinces of Sabaim, Torrates, Balgada, and others.

Angote.
THis kingdom standing between the kingdoms of Tigremahon and Amara, is full
of mountains and valleies, and abounds mightily with all kind of corn and
cattle. The inhabitants eat but one meal in four and twenty hours, and
that always in the night: their food is most commonly raw flesh, with a
kind of sauce made of an oxegall. In stead of money they use salt, and little
balls of iron, as is before said. Unto this kingdom do belong the provinces
of Abuguna, and Guanamora, with other regions and places.

Amara.
THe kingdom of Amara bordering north upon Angote, east upon Xoa, south upon
Damut, and extending west almost as far as Nilus; is for the most part a
plain region, without mountains, very fertile, and abounding with cattle.
Upon the frontiers of this kingdom stands the foresaid large, high, and
(...) mountain, wherein the sons, brethren, and kinsfolks of the Prete are
most warily kept, and from whence after his decease the heir apparent is
brought, to be invested in the empire.

The kingdom of Xoa situate between the kingdoms of Amara, Damut, and
Fatigar, contains many deep valleys, and abounds with all kind of corn
and cattle.

In the kingdom of Goiame are two mighty lakes, from which Nilus is said to
fetch his original. Here is exceeding plenty of gold unrefined: the north
part of this region is full of deserts and mountainous places.

Bagamidri one of the largest kingdoms in all the upper Ethiopia, extends in
length by the river Nilus, the space almost of six hundred miles: and in (...)
kingdom are many mostrich siluer-mines.

The kingdom of Fatigar lying between the kingdoms of Adel, and of Xoa,
consists the greatest part of champion grounds, which yield wheat, barley,
and other grain most plentifully. In this kingdom stands an exceeding high
mountain, on the top whereof is a lake of twelve miles in compass,
abounding with great variety of fish, and from this mountain (...) many
rivers stored with fish also.

The kingdom of Damut (as Sanutus affirms) does border upon the kingdom of
Xoa, and is enclosed on either side with the lake of Barcena, and the land of
Zanguebar. Howbeit others place Damut between the kingdoms of Vangue and
Goiame toward the west, which opinion seems most probable. This country
abounds with gold, ginger, grapes, corn, and beasts of all sorts. The
slaves of this kingdom are much esteemed, and are commonly sold throughout
all Arabia, Persia, and Egypt, where they prove most valiant soldiers. The
greater part of the people of Damut are Gentiles, and the residue Christians,
who have certain monasteries. In this kingdom is that exceeding high and
dreadful The mountain of death.
mountain, (having one narrow passage only to ascend by) whither the Prete
sends his nobles which are convicted of any heinous crime, to suffer
ignominious death with hunger and cold. About the fountains of Nilus some say,
that there are Amazones or women-warriers, most valiant Of these Amazones read
more in the discourse of Monomotapa following.
and redoubted, which use bows and arrows, and live under the government of
a Queen: as likewise the people called Cafri or Cafates, being as black as
pitch, and of a mighty stature, and (as some think) descended of the Jews;
but now they are idolaters, and most deadly enemies to the Christians; for they
make continual assaults upon the Abassins, dispoiling them both of life and
goods: but all the daytime they lie lurking in mountains, woods, and deep
valleies.

The style used by Prete Ianni in his letters.
I the king, whose name the lions do reverence, and who by the grace of This
style is taken out of a letter written by David the Emperor of AEthiopia 1524.
God was at my baptism called Athani Tingil, that is, The incense of the
virgin, but now at the beginning of my reign, took upon me the name of
David; beloved of God, the pillar of faith, descended of the tribe of (...),
the son of David, the son of Solomon, the son of the pillar of Sion, the
son of the seed of Jacob, the son of the hand of Marie; the son of Nahu
according to the flesh, the son of the holy Apostles Peter and Faul according
to grace, Emperor of the higher and greater (...), and of most large
kingdoms, territories, and jurisdictions, the king of Xoa, Caffate, Fatigar,
Angote, Baru, Baaliganze, Adea, Vangue, and Goiame, where the fountains of
Nilus are; as likewise of (...), Baguamedri, Ambea, (...), Tigremahon, Sabaim
the country of the Queen of Saba, of Barnagasso, and lord as far as Nubia,
which confineth upon Egypt.

Certain answers of Don Francisco Aluarez, ( who from the year 1520. for the
space of six years next ensuing, had travailed and remained in the country
of PRETE IANNI with the Portugal ambassador Rodrigo de Lima) made unto
sundry demands or questions of the Archbishop of Braganca, concerning the
state of the foresaid country and prince, and of the disposition, manners,
and customs of the people. Io. Bap. Ramusius, vol. 1. delle voiag. fol. 254.
255.
THe Ethiopian Emperor called Prete Ianni has no settled place of abode where
he continually resideth; but is always flitting up and down, sometimes to one
place, and sometimes to another, and lives in tents set up in the fields,
environed with a kind of fortification; of which tents there may be in his
camp of all sorts to the number of 5000. or 6000; and of horsemen and mules
50000. and upwards.

It is a general custom of the Prete and of all his subjects not to pass on
horseback by any church (so great is their reverence to holy places) but so
soon as they approach thereunto, they light upon the ground, and having passed
by, they mount on horseback again.

Whenever the Prete marches with all his troops, there is carried before
him upon the shoulders of certain priests an altar and a consecrated stone,
whereon they use to administer their communion: the priests appointed to carry
it upon a frame of wood, are eight in number, serving four and four by
turns; before whom goes a clerk with a censer and a little bell sounding; at
the sight and noise whereof all persons forsake the way, and such as are on
horseback, dismount.

In all this country there is not any town consisting of above 1600.
families, and there are very few that have so many: neither are there any
castles or walled places; but (...) many villages, and infinite numbers of
people. Their houses are built round, al of earth, flat-roofed, and covered
with a kind of thatch which will last the time of a man's life, being compassed
about with courts or yards. They have no bridges of stone upon their rivers,
but all of wood. They sleep commonly upon oxe-hides, or else upon certain
couches corded and sustained with thongs made of the said hides. They have no
kind of tables to eat their meat upon, but have it served in upon plain and
very broad platters of wood, without any table-cloth at al. Also they have
certain great deep dishes like basins made of black earth shining in manner of
Iet, with other cups of the same earth, out of which they use to drink water
and wine. Many of them eat raw flesh, but others broile it upon the coals or
firebrands: and some places there are so destitute of wood, that the people are
feign to dress their meat with oxe-dung.

Their armor and weapons be Azagaie or short darts, some few swords, and
certain shirts of male very long and straight, and (as some of our men which
have seen them do report) made of naughty and unserviceable matter. They
have bows and arrows great store, but not with feathers as ours be: as
likewise helmets and head-peeces, but very few, and first brought in since they
began to have traffic with the Portugals: howbeit they have many strong
targets. Of artillery they had 1526.
at our departure fourteen small yron-peeces, which they had bought of
certain Turks that usually came to traffic upon the coast; for which pieces
the Prete willed that they should have their uttermost demand, to the end they
might be the willinger to return and bring more; and he caused some of his
servants also to learn how to discharge them.

The river of Nilus, I my self never saw, although at one time I was Philippo
(...) will have (...) to spring out of one great lake only, which is to the
south of Goiame.
within thirty miles thereof: howbeit some of our Portugales have traveled to
the very fountains of Nilus, which are two great lakes comparable to seas,
situate in the kingdom of Goiame; out of which having conveyed it self a
small distance, this river embraces certain Islets, and then holds on his
course to Egypt.

The reason why Nilus yearly ouerfloweth Egypt, is, because the general The
true cause of the increase of Nilus.
winter of Ethiopia holding on with most mighty and continual raines from the
middle of June to the midst of September, does make the said river so
exceedingly to swel, that the waters thereof cover all the plain country of
Egypt.

In all the foresaid dominions of the Prete, they use not to write one to
another, neither do the officers of Justice commit any of their affairs to
writing, but all matters are dispatched by messengers and by words of mouth:
only it was told me, that the revenues and tributes of the Prete, are put
down in writing both upon the receite, and at the disbursement.

The emperor Prete Ianni has two special princely names, to wit, Acegue,
which signifies an emperor, and Neguz, a king.

The Patriarch or arche-prelate of all Abassia is called Abuna, that is to say,
Father; neither is there any in all the whole empire which ordains ministers,
but only he.

There is no wine of the grape made publicly in any place, but only in the
houses of the Prete and of the Patriarch; for if it be made any other where,
it is done by stealth.

The wine which is used in their communions, they make of raisins steeped ten
days in water, and afterward streined in a wine press; and it is a most
cordial, delicate, and strong wine.

In this country is great abundance of gold, silver, copper, and tin, but
the people are ignorant how to work it out of the mines: neither have they any
coin of gold or silver, but all their bargains are made by bartering of one
commodity for another. Also they trucke little pieces of gold, some weighing a
dram, and some an ounce. But salt is the principal thing which runs current
for money throughout all the emperors dominions.

Some places there are which yield wheat and barley, and others millet in great
plenty; and where the said grains are not reaped, there grows Tafo daguza,
a seed utterly unknown in these parts, as likewise lentiles, beans, pease,
fitches, and all kind of pulse in abundance.

Here are infinite store of sugar canes, which they know neither how to boil
nor refine, but eat it raw.

There be great plenty of fair grapes and peaches, which are ripe in the
months of February and April. Of orenges, limons, and citrons, the quantity
is innumerable; for they grow most naturally out of the Abassin soil:
garden-herbes there are but few, because the people delight neither to set nor
sow them.

All the whole country is full of Basil, which grows very tall both in the
woods and upon the mountains: so are there likewise other odoriferous herbs
of diverse sorts, but unknown unto us. Of trees common with us I remember none
other kinds growing there, but only Cypresses, damsin-trees, sallowes by the
waters side, and trees of Iuiubas.

Honey there is exceeding great plenty all the country over: neither are
their bee-hiues placed abroad in the open air as ours are: but they set them
in chambers, where making a little hole in the wall, the bees go thick in and
out, and come home laden with honey. Wherefore there is great quantity
gathered in all the empire, but especially in the monasteries, where they make
it a great part of their sustenance. There are found also swarms of bees in
the woods and upon the mountains, near whom they place certain hollow
boxes made of bark, which being filled with honicombes, they take up, and
carry home to their houses.

They gather much wax, whereof they make their candles, because they have no
use of tallow.

They have no oil of olives, but of another kind which they call Hena: Oil
strayned out of an herb.
and the herb whereout they strain it, is like a little vine-leafe: neither
has this oil any smell at all, but in color it is as beautiful as gold.

Here likewise they have store of flax, but they know not how to make cloth
thereof.

Here is also great plenty of cotton, whereof they make cloth of diverse colors.

One country there is so extremely cold, that the people are enforced to
clad themselves in very course cloth of a dark tawnie.

Concerning physic, and the cure of diseases, they know very little or
nothing; but for aches in any parts of their bodies the only remedy which
they use is to apply cupping-glasses; and for headaches they let the great
vain of the temples blood.

Howbeit they have certain herbs, the juice whereof being drunk, serves
them in steed of a purgation.

There would in this conntrie be gathered infinite store of fruit, and far
greater quantity of corn, were not the poor commons most miserably
oppressed by their superiors, who extorte all their substance from them; so
that they never till nor plant any more, then they must of mere necessity.

In no place wheresoever I traveled, could I see any shambles of flesh, but
only at the court of the Prete: for in other places no man may kill an ox,
though it be his own, without license from the governor of the country.

As touching their ordinary proceeding in justice, they use not to put Their
manner of Justice.
any to sudden death, but beat them with bastonados according to the quality
of the offense, and likewise they pluck out their eyes, and cut off their
hands and feet: howbeit during mine abode there I saw one burnt for robbing
of a church.

The common sort speak truth very seldom, though it be upon an oathe,
unless they be forced to swear By the head of the King. They fear
exceedingly to be excommunicated; so that being enioined any thing that tends
to their prejudice, if they do it at all, it is done for fear of
excommunication.

Their depositions or oaths are performed in this manner. The party to Their
manner of swearing.
be deposed goes accompanied with two priests, carrying with them fire and
incense to the church-doore, whereon he lays his hand; and then the said
priests adjure him to tell the truth, saying: If thou swear falsely, as the
lion (...) the beasts of the forest, so let the devil devour thy soul; and
as corn is ground under the millstone, so let him grind thy bones; and
finally, as the fire burns up the wood, so may thy soul burn in the fire of
hell: and the party sworn, answers to every of the former clauses, Amen.
But if thou speak truth, let thy life be prolonged with honor, and thy soul
enter into Paradise with the blessed: and he again answers, Amen. Which
being done, he gives testimony of the matter in question.

No person may sit in their churches, nor enter into them with his The
ceremonies (...) in their Churches.
shoes on, nor spit within them, neither may any dog or any other creature
void of reason come within them. They confess themselves standing upon their
feet, and so standing likewise, receive absolution. They (...) their form of
public prayer after one and the same manner, both in the churches of their
Canons, and of their friars: which friars have no wives; but the Canons and
priests are permitted to have. Where the Canons live together, they go each man
to diet at his own house; but the friars eat their meat in common.

Their ecclefiasticall governors are called Licanati. The sons of the Canons
are, as it were by inheritance, Canons; but priests sons have no such
privilege, unless they be ordained by the Abuna. They pay no tithes to any
churches, but the clergy are maintained by great possessions belonging to
their churches and monasteries. Also when any priest is cited, he is conuented
before a secular judge.

Whereas I said, they sit not in their churches, it is to be understood,
that always without the church door stand a great number of wooden
crutches, such as lame men use to go upon; where every man takes his own,
and leans thereupon all the time of their divine service.

All their books (which they have in great numbers) are written in parchment,
for paper they have none; and the language wherein they are written named
Tigia, is all one with the Abassin language: but so it was called from the name
of the first town in all that empire, which was converted to the Christian
religion.

All their churches have two curtains, one about their great altar, with
belles, within which curtain none may enter but only priests: also they have
another curtain stretching through the midst of their church, and within that
may no man come, but such as have taken holy orders: insomuch that many
gentlemen and honorable persons take orders upon them, only that they may have
access into their churches.

The greater part of their monasteries are built upon high mountains, or in
some deep valley: they have great revenues and jurisdictions; and in many of
them they eat no flesh all the year long. Neither do they spend any store of
fish, because they know not how to take it.

Upon the walls of all their churches are painted the pictures of Christ, of the
blessed virgin Marie, of the apostles, prophets and angels, and in every one
the picture of Saint George a horseback. They have no Roodes, neither will they
suffer Christ crucified to be painted, because they say, they are not worthy
to behold him in that passion. All their priests, friars, and noblemen
continually carry crosses in their hands; but the meaner sort of people carry
them about their necks.

Their mooueable feasts, namely Easter, the feast of Ascension and Whitsontide,
they observe at the very same days and times that we do. Likewise as
concerning the feasts of Christmas, the Circumcision, the Epiphanie, and other
the feasts of the saints, they agree wholly with us, though in some other
things they vary.

They have great store of leprous persons, who are not put apart from the rest
of the people, but live in company with them: and many there are who for
charity and devotions sake do wash them, and heal their wounds.

They have a kind of trumpets, but not of the best, and likewise certain
Their musical instruments.
drums of brass which are brought from Cairo, and of wood also covered with
leather at both ends, and cimbals like unto ours, and certain great basins
whereon they make a noise. There are flutes in like sort, and a kind of square
instruments with strings, not much unlike to an harp, which they call David
Mozan, that is to say, the harp of David; and with these harpes they sound
before the Prete, but some what rudely.

Their horses of the countrey-breed are in number infinite, but such small
hackney-iades, that they do them little service: howbeit those that are
brought out of Arabia and Egypt are most excellent and beautiful horses: and
the great horse-masters also in Abassia have certain breeds or races of them,
which being new foled, they suffer not to suck the damme above three days, if
they be such as they mean to back betimes: but separating them from their
dammes, they suckle them with kine, and by that means they prove most sightly
and gallant horses. Hitherto Aluarez.

Thus much (I hope) may suffice to have bin spoken concerning the upper or
Inner Ethiopia which contains the empire of Prete Ianni: now since we are
so far proceeded, let us take also a cursory and brief surueie of the lower or
extreme Ethiopia, extending it self in form of a spears point, or a wedge,
as far as thirty five degrees of southerly latitude.

Of the lower or extreme Ethiopia.
THis part of Africa being utterly unknown to Ptolemey and all the ancient
writers, but in these later times, thoroughly discovered by the Portugales,
especially along the coast, begins to the Northwest about the great river of
Zaire, not far from the Equinoctial: from whence stretching southward to
thirty five degrees, and then Northward along the seacoast on the backside of
Africa, as far as the very mouth or entrance of the Arabian gulf, it limiteth
the south and east frontiers of the Abassin Empire last before described.

In this part also are many particulars very memorable, as namely besides
sundry great empires and kingdoms, The famous mountains of the moon, the
mighty rivers of Magnice Cuama, and Coauo, springing out of the lake Zembre,
the renowned cape of good hope, and other matters whereof we will entreat in
their due places.

This portion of Africa is divided into six principal parts, namely: The
land of Aian, the land of Zanguebar, the empire of Mohenemugi, the empire of
Monomotapa, the region of Cafraria, and the kingdom of Congo.

Aian the first general part of Ethiopia the lower.
THe land of Aian is accounted by the Arabians to be that region The river of
Quilimanci in nine degrees of northerly latitude.
which lies between the narrow entrance into the Red sea, and the river of
Quilimanci; being upon the seacoast for the most part inhabited by the said
Arabians; but the inland-partes thereof are peopled with a black nation which
are Idolaters. It comprehends two kingdoms; Adel and Adea.

Adel is a very large kingdom, and extends from the mouth of the Adel the
first general part of Aian.
Arabian gulf to the cape of Guardafu called of old by Ptolemey Aromata
promontorium. South and west it bordereth upon the dominions of Prete Ianni,
about the kingdom of Fatigar. The king of this country being a Moore, is
accounted amongst the Mahumetans a most holy man, and very much reverenced by
them, because he wageth continual war with the Christians, taking captive many
of the Abassins, and sending them to the great Turk, and the princes of
Arabia, of whom he receives great aid for the maintenance of his wars,
both of horse and foot. The people of Adel are of the color of an olive,
being very warlike, notwithstanding that the greatest part of them want
weapons. Their principal city is called Or Arar.
Anar, as some are of opinion. Unto this kingdom is subject the city of Zeila
inhabited by Mooes, situate on a sandy and low soil, which some suppose to be
built in the very same place, without the entrance of the Red sea, where
Ptolemey placed the ancient mart-towne of Aualites. This city is Ptol. geog.
lib. 4. cap. 7.
a place of great traffike; for hither they bring out of India, cloth,
elephants teeth, frankincense, pepper, gold, and other rich merchandise. The
territory adioining yields abundance of honey, wax, and great quantity of
oil, which they make not of olives, but of a kind of dainty plums: it
affourdeth likewise such plenty of (...), of cattle, and of fruits differing
from ours, that they are transported by shipping to other nations. Barbora
likewise, a city of the Moors, stands in this kingdom of Adel, and has a
commodious haven, whereunto resort many ships laden with merchandise, from Aden
in Arabia, and from Cambaya upon the river of Indus. The citizens are black
people, and their wealth consists most of all in flesh.

In the year 1541. Gradaameth the king of this place, after many mischiefs
which he had done to Claudius the emperor of Abassia, being vanquished by
Christopher de Gama, the Indian Viceroy of John the third king of Portugale;
he did by means of the soldiers and warlike provisions, which were sent him
from the Sheque or governor of Zebit, overcome the Portugals and the Abassins.
Howbeit afterward having sent the said forces back again to Zebit, himself
was slain, and his whole army overthrown by king Claudius aforesaid. But
certain years after, the successor of Gradaameth having in a warlike
encounter subdued the Prete, rode in triumph upon a little ass; signifying
thereby, that he ascribed not the victory to his own forces, but to the power
of God,

Adea, the second kingdom of the land of Aian, situate upon the eastern Adea,
the second part of Aian.
Ocean, is confined northward by the kingdom of Adel, and westward by the
Abassin empire. It is exceeding fruitful, and one part thereof mightily
abounds with woods, the residue being sufficiently stored with cattle and
corn. The inhabitants being Moors by religion, and paying tribute to the
emperor of Abassia, are (as they of Adel before-named) originally descended of
the Arabians: who many hundred years ago, partly by their rich traffike, and
especially by force of arms, became lords not only of Aian, but of all the
seacoast along as far as Cabo de los corrientes, standing in the southerly
latitude of four and twenty degrees. In all which space the cities standing
upon the seacoast; before the Portugals discovered the east Indies, lay open
and unfortified to the sea (because the Arabians themselves were absolute lords
thereof) but were strongly walled toward the land, for fear of the Cafri, or
lawless wild Negros, who were deadly enemies to the Arabians, and utterly
misliked their so near neighborhood. Howbeit since the Portugals taking of
Magadazo, and diverse other towns upon the coast, they have applied themselves
very much to fortification. But, to return The kingdom and city of Magadazo.
to the matter where we left, unto the foresaid kingdom of Adea belongs the
kingdom of Magadazo, so called of the principal city therein, which is a
most strong, beautiful, and rich place, and is subject to the kingly
government of a Moore. The territory adjacent is exceeding fruitful,
abounding with sheep, kine, horses, wheat, barley, and other kinds of grain.
It has also an excellent haven, and much frequented by the ships of Aden and
Cambaya, which come thither laden with sundry kinds of cloth, with spices and
other merchandise; and from hence they carry elephants teeth, gold, slaves,
honey, and wax. The inhabitants are of an oliue-colour, and some of them
black, like unto the nations adioining, and they go naked from the
girdle-stead upward, and speak the Arabian tongue. They are but meanly
weaponed, which causes them to shoot poisoned arrows. This city was in
times past head of all the towns and cities of the Moors standing along this
coast for a great distance.

Zanguebar or Zanzibar, the second general part of the lower Ethiopia.
ZAnzibar or Zanguebar, so called by the Arabians and Persians, is that tract
of land, which runs along some part of the dominions of Prete Ianni, and
from thence extends it self by the east of Mohenemugi, til it joins with
the frontiers of Monomotapa. Howbeit some there are who under the name of
Zanzibar will have all the south part of Africa to be understood, even as far
as Cabo Negro, which stretches into the western Ocean about 18. degrees of
southerly latitude: so that they comprehend therein the empires of Mohenemugi
and Monomotapa, and all the land of Cafraria. But in this controversy we
rather choose to follow the opinion of Sanutus, affirming with him, that the
said maritime tract of Zanguebar (as it is by us before limited) is allow,
fennie, and woodie country, with many great and small rivers running through
it: which extremity of moisture in those hot climates causes the air to be
most unwholesome and pestilent. The inhabitants are for the most part black,
with curled hair, being Idolaters, and much addicted to sorcery and
witchcraft. They go naked all the upper part of their bodies, covering their
nether parts with clothes of diverse colors, and with beasts skins. And this
tract of land stretching along the seacoast from the river Quilimanci to the
river of Magnice contains the kingdoms and territories of Melinde, Mombaza,
Quiloa, Mocambique, Sofala, and others.

Melinde, the most Northerly kingdom of Zanguebar, situate in two degrees
Melinde the first part of Zanguebar.
and an half of southerly latitude, and stretching from the coast up into the
main for the space of an hundred miles, has a strong and stately city of the
same name, being seventy miles distant from Mombaca. It abounds with Rice,
Millet, flesh, limons, citrons, and all kinds of fruits: but as for corn, it
is brought hither out of Cambaya. The inhabitants (especially on the sea coast)
are Moors and Mahumetans: who build their houses very sumptuously after the
manner of Europe. They are of a color inclining to white, and some black
people they have also among them, which are for the greatest part Idolaters:
howbeit all of them pretend a kind of civility both in their apparel, and in
the decency and furniture of their houses. The women are white, and
sumptuously attired after the Arabian fashion with cloth of silk. Likewise
they adorn their necks, arms, hands, and feet with bracelets and jewels of
gold and silver. When they go abroad out of their houses, they cover
themselves with a veil of taffata, so that they are not known but when they
themselves list. Upon this coast of Melinde you have a very safe harborough,
whereunto the ships that sail those seas do usually resort. In brief the
inhabitants are a kind, true-harted, and trusty people, and courteous to
strangers. They have always been in league with the Portugals, giving them
most friendly entertainme^t, and reposing much confidence in them; neither have
they ever done them any injury.

The kingdom of Mombaca, being the second general part of Zanguebar, Mombaza
the second portion of Zanguebar.
and situate in three degrees and an half beyond the Equinoctial line,
bordering to the north upon Melinde, and to the south upon Quiloa; is so called
after the name of a certain isle and city upon the coast, both which are
named Mombaca, and are peopled with Mahumetans: their houses are of many
stories high, and beautified with pictures both graven and painted. Their kings
are Mahumetans, and most deadly enemies to the Christians: one of the which
taking upon him to resist the Portugals, was himself quite vanquished and
overthrown, and constrained to leave his city to the sack and spoil of his
enemies, who found therein a good quantity of gold, silver, and pearl; and
likewise cloth of cotton, of silk, and of gold, with great numbers of slaves,
and such other commodities. Howbeit they remained not there any long time, but
were enforced to abandon the place in regard of the most unwholesome and
infectious air. This kingdom is tributarie to the great empire of Mohenemugi.

The kingdom of Quiloa situate in nine degrees toward the pole Antarticke,
Quiloathe third part of (...).
and (like the last before mentioned) taking the denomination thereof from a
certain isle and city both called by the name of Quiloa; may be accounted for
the third portion of the land of Zanguebar. This island has a very fresh and
cool air, and is replenished with trees always green, and with plenty of
all kind of victuals. It is situate at the mouth of the great river Coauo
which springs out of the same lake from whence Nilus flows, and is called
also by some Quiloa, and by others Tahiua, and runs from the said lake,
eastward for the space of six hundred miles, till it approaches near the sea,
where the stream thereof is so forcible, that at the very mouth or outlet,
dispersing it self into two branches, it shapeth out a great island, to the
west where of upon the coast you may behold the little isle and the city of
Quiloa, being separated from the maine by a very narrow arm of the sea. This
isle (as also the great isle before named) is inhabited by Mahumetans, who are
of color whitish. Their women are comely, and rich in their attire. Their
houses are fairly builte of lime and stone, and have within them very gallant
and costly furniture, and without they are environed with gardens and orchards
full of sundry delicate fruits and herbs. Of this island the whole kingdom
(as is aforesaid) took the name; which upon the coast extends it self to
Cabo Delgado, or the slender Cape (being the limite between Mocambique and
this kingdom of Quiloa) and from thence it stretches unto the foresaid river
of Coauo. In old time this kingdom of Quiloa was the chiefest of all the
principalities there adioining; for the Arabians which were masters thereof had
enlarged their dominions for the space of nine hundred miles, so that all the
seacoast and the islands, as far as Cabo de los Corrientes situate in four
and twenty degrees of southerly latitude, were tributarie and subject
thereunto. Whereupon when the Portugals arrived in those countries, the king of
this place trusted so much to himself, that he thought he was able with his
own forces, not only to make a defensive war against them, but also to
drive them from those places, which they had already surprised. Howbeit, quite
contrary to his expectation, he was by the Portugals utterly vanquished and
put to flight. Who seazing upon the isle and city, enriched themselves with
the great booties and spoils that they found therein. Thus the mighty king of
Quiloa (who before the Portugals arrival in those parts, enioied also the
chief commodity of the rich gold mines of Sofala) became atlength, by a
composition made with Don Pedro Cabral, tributarie to the crown of Portugal,
paying for tribute at the first five hundred, and afterward fifteen hundred
pieces of gold. Upon the foresaid isle the Portugals erected a fortress, which
their king afterward commanded them to deface, considering that there were
other forts sufficient enough for that coast.

Between the two mighty rivers of Coauo and Cuama (both which Mozambique the
fourth part of Zanguebar.
spring out of one lake with Nilus) among the kingdoms of Mombara, Mozimba,
Maeuas, and Embeoe, which are not as yet perfectly discovered, lies the
kingdom of Mocambique, so called of three small islets, situate in the mouth
of the river Or Moghincats.
Meghincate in fowerteene and a half, or fifteen degrees of southerly
latitude, which kingdom in ancient time by Ptolemey was called Promontorium
(...). In the principal of the three foresaid isles, there is a very
commodious and secure haven, capable of all kind of vessels, and there also
the Portugals have built a very strong forte: where albeit in regard of the
lownes and moisture of the soil, being full of bogges and fens, the air be
most unwholesome, and in manner pestilent: yet the opportunity of the place, and
the plenty of victuals, have made it one of the most famous and frequented
havens in all that Ocean. For which cause the fleetes which sail from
Portugal to the east Indies, when they are out of hope to perform their
voyage in summer, do usually resort to spend the whole winter at Mocambique:
and those Portugale ships also which come from the Indies toward Europe, must
of necessity touch at this place, to furnish themselves with victuals. Along
these coasts do sail certain Moors in vessels sowed or fastened together
with thongs of lether, the sails whereof they make of Palme-leaues, and in
stead of pitch and tallow, they calke them with gum which they gather in the
woods. Unto this kingdom of Mocambique belongs the province of Angoscia, so
Angoscia.
called from certain isles of that name, lying directly over against it, which
province stretches to the river of Cuama. It is inhabited by Mahumetans and
Gentiles, who are for the greatest part merchants, and do traffic along that
coast with the same wares and commodities wherewith the people of Sofala do
trade.

Sofala, or Sefala, the fifth and last general part of Zanguebar, is a small
Sofala the fifth part of Zanguebar.
kingdom lying upon the seacoast, between the rivers of Cuama and Magnice,
being so called after the name of a river running through it, in which river
lies an Island, which is the head and principal place of the whole country.
On this Island the Portugales (...) built a most strong forte, by means
whereof they are become Lords of the richest trade in all those parts. For (to
say nothing of the Iuorie, Amber, and slaves which are hither brought) all the
gold in a manner that is taken out of those manifold and endless mines of
Sofala and all the Inland-countries thereabouts, is here exchanged unto the
Portugales for cotton-cloth, silks, and other commodities of Cambaia: all
which is thought yearly to amount unto the sum of two millions of gold. This
golden trade was first in the power of the Moors of Magadazo; and afterward it
befell to them of Quiloa. The inhabitants of Sofala are Mahumetans, being
governed by a king of the same sect, who yields obedience to the crown of
Portugale, because he will not be subject to the empire of Monomotapa.

Neither is it here to be omitted, that in these parts under the name of
Iuorie, are bartered not only elephants teeth, but also the teeth of
sea-horses: which creatures are commonly found in the rivers of Nilus, Niger,
Coauo, Cuama, Magnice, and all other the great rivers of Africa.

The empire of Mohenemugi, the third general part of the lower Ethiopia.
THis mighty empire bordering south upon the kingdom of Mocambique, and the
empire of Monomotapa; to the river Coauo, and beyond; west with the river
Nilus; North upon the dominions of Prete Ianni; and east upon the kingdoms of
Melinde, Mombaca, and Quiloa, has not many years ago bin discovered or at
least heard of by the Portugales, upon occasion perhaps of the wars, which
with unfortunate success they have waged against Monomotapa. The emperor of
this country holds a continual league with the princes of Melinde, Mombaca,
and Quiloa, toward the sea, for traffiques sake: for they provide his
dominions with cloth of cotton, cloth of silk, and sundry other commodities
brought from Arabia, Persia, Cambaya, and India, which are very well esteemed
in those parts: but among the rest they bring especially certain little
balls, of a red color, and in substance like unto glass, being made in
Cambaya of a kind of Bitumen or clammie claie, which balls they use to wear
like beads about their necks. They serve also to them in stead of money, for
gold they make none account of. Likewise with the silks that are brought unto
them they apparel themselves from the girdle downward. In exchange of all the
foresaid wares and commodities they give gold, silver, copper, and iuorie.
Howbeit upon his Inland frontiers to the south and southwest, he maintains
continual and bloody wars against the emperor of Monomotapa, his
principal and greatest forces consisting of a most barbarous and fierce
nation, called by the people of Congo Giachi, but by themselves Agag, who
inhabit from the first great lake which is the fountain of Nilus, for a
certain space upon both sides of the said river, and then afterward on the
western bank as far as the second great lake from whence Zaire has his
chief original, and thence even to the confines of Prete Ianni. They are a
wild and lawles people, living (after the manner of the ancient Scythians and
Nomades, and like the Tartars and Baduin-Arabians of these times) a vagrant
kind of life, under cabbins and cottages in the open forests. They are of
stature tall, and of countenance most terrible, making lines upon their cheeks
with certain iron-instruments, and turning their eie-lids backward, whereby
they cast upon their enemies a most dreadful and astonishing aspect. They are
man-eaters, and courageous in battle. For their armor of defense they use
certain Pauises or great targets wherewith they cover their whole bodies, being
otherwise naked: and their offensive weapons are darts and daggers. It is not
many years since these cruel savages ranging westward from Nilus, invaded the
kingdom of Congo, vanquished the inhabitants in sundry battles, took the
head city, and forced the king Don Aluaro to flee for succor and safety unto
the isle of horses, in the mouth of the great river Zaire, being one of the
extreme frontiers of his dominions. Where the king himself was taken with an
incurable dropsy, and his people in great numbers died of famine; who to
relieve their extreme necessities, sold their wives, their children, and their
own selves for slaves unto the Portugals. Howbeit these warlike Giacchi,
notwithstanding their hautie courage, and great exploits, are no whit feared,
but rather most boldly encountered, and sometimes vanquished by the Amazones or
women warriers of Monomotapa. Which two nations, what by warlike stratagems,
and what by open and maine force, do often fight the most desperate and
doubtful battles, that are performed in all those southern parts.

The empire of Monomotapa, the fourth general part of the lower Ethiopia.
BEnomotapa, Benomotaxa, or Monomotapa is a large empire, so called after the
name of the prince thereof, who in religion is a Gentile, and for extension of
dominions, and military forces, a renowned and mighty emperor; in the
language of whose subjects an emperor is signified by this word Monomotapa.
This empire of his lies, as it were, in an Island which contains in compass
seven hundred and fifty, or (as some think) one thousand leagues, being
limited on the north-west by the great lake whereout Nilus springs; on the
south, by the river Magnice and the tributarie kingdom of Butua or Toroa; on
the east it has the seacoast and the kingdom of Sofala, which in very deed
is a member thereof; and the North part abutteth upon the river of Cuama, and
the empire of Mohenemugi. That part of this great Island which lies between
the mouth of Cuama, Some will have Magnice and Cuama to be two branches of one
mighty river springing out of the great lake; which being so, they must quite
separate Monomotapa from the same lake.
and the cape de los Corrientes, is a very pleasant, wholesome, and fruitful
country. And from the said cape to the river of Magnice, the whole region
abounds with beasts both great and small; but it is cold by reason of the
sharp brizes which come off the sea; and so destitute of wood, that the people
for fuel are constrained to use the dung of beasts, and they apparel
themselves in their skins. Along the bank of the river Cuama are diverse
hills and downs covered with trees, and valleys likewise watered with rivers,
being pleasantly situate, and well peopled. Here are such plenty of Elephants,
as it seems by the great quantity of their teeth, that there are yearly
slain between four and five thousand. Their elephants are nine cubits high,
and five cubits in thicknes: They have long and broad ears, little eyes,
short tails, and great bellies: and some are of opinion, that Ethiopia
yields as many elephants, as Europe does oxen. The towns and villages of
this empire are very few, and their buildings are of wood and clay, covered
with thatch. None may have doors to their houses but only great personages.
Their principal cities are This place both in regard of the name and situation
may seem to have been Agysimba mentioned by Ptolemey.
Zimbas, and Benamataza, the first whereof is one and twenty, and the second
fifteen days journey from Sofala. They serve this emperor at the table upon
their knees: to sit before him, is all one, as with us for a man to stand upon
his feet, neither may any presume to stand in his presence, but only great
lords. He is tasted unto, not before, but after he has eaten and drunk. For
his arms he has a spade and two darts. Tribute he takes none, but only
certain days service and gifts presented unto him; without which there is no
appearing in his sight. He carries, whithersoeuer he go, four hundred dogs,
as a most sure and trusty guard. He keeps all the heirs of his tributary
princes, as vassals, and as pledges of their fathers loialtie. There are no
prisons in all his empire: for sufficient testimony being brought of the
commission of any crime, justice is executed out of hand: and of all offenses
none are punished with greater severity and rigor, then witchcraft, theft,
and adultery. His people are of a mean (...), black, and well proportioned.
They are Gentiles in religion, having no idols, but worshipping one only God
whom they call Mozimo. They go apparelled in cloth of cotton, either made by
themselves, or brought from other countries: howbeit the king will in no case
wear any foreign cloth for fear of poison or such like treachery: and the
meaner sort of his subjects are clad in beasts skins. Among all the armies and
legions of soldiers, which this emperor (for the defense of his great estate)
is forced to maintain, his Amazones or women warriers before mentionied are
the most valiant, being indeed the very sinews and chief strength of all his
military forces. These women, after the manner of the ancient Scythish or
Asiatike Amazones, so much spoken of in histories of former times, sear off
their left paps, that they might not be an hinderance unto them in their
shooting. They are most expert in warlike stratagems, and swift of foot. Their
weapons are bows and arrows. At certain times for generations sake they
accompany with men; sending the male children home to their fathers, but
keeping their daughters unto themselves. They inhabit toward the west, not
far from the beginning of Nilus, in certain places which themselves make
choice of, and which are granted unto them by the favor of the Emperor.

This empire of Monomotapa comprehends not only the foresaid great island,
but stretches it self farther also toward the cape of Buena esperanca, as
far as the kingdoms of Butua or Toroa, which being governed by particular
lords, do acknowledge Monomotapa for their sovereign. Throughout all this
emperors dominions is found infinite quantity of gold, in the earth, in the
rocks, and in the rivers. The gold-mines of this country nearest unto Sofala
are those of Manica, upon a plain environed with mountains; and those also in
the province of Matuca, which is inhabited by the people called Battonghi, and
situate between the Equinoctial line and the Tropique of Capricorn. These
mines are distant from Sofala, between the space of 300. and six hundred
miles: but those of the provinces of Boro and Quiticui are fifteen hundred
miles distant toward the west. Others there are also in the kingdoms of Toroa
or Butua: so that from hence or from Sofala, or from some other part of
Monomotapa, some are of opinion, that Salomons gold for the adorning of the
temple at Jerusalem, was brought by sea. A thing in truth not very unlikely:
for here in Toroa, and in diverse places of Monomotapa are till this day
remaining many huge and ancient buildings of timber, lime and stone, being of
singular workmanship, the like whereof are not to be found in all the
provinces there abouts. Here is also a mighty wall of five and twenty
spannes thick, which the people asoribe to the workmanship of the devil,
being accounted from Sofala five hundred and ten miles the nearest way. All
other houses throughout this empire (as is aforesaid) consist of timber, claie,
and thatch. And here I may boldly affirm, that the ancient buildings of this
part of Africa, and along the coast of the east Indies, may not only be
compared, but even preferred before the buildings of Europe. The authors of
which ancient monuments are unknown: but the later African buildings have
been erected by the Arabians. In the time of Sebastian king of Portugale, the
emperor of Monomotapa and many of his nobles were baptized: howbeit afterward
being seduced by certain Moors, he put Gonsaluo Silua to death, who
converted him to the Christian religion. Whereupon Sebastian king of Portugal
sent against him an army of * Mine author here sets down too great a
number.
sixteen thousand, consisting for the most part of gentlemen and men of
quality, under the conduct of Francisco Barretto. The Monomotapa being afraid
of the Portugal forces, offered Barretto as good and acceptable conditions of
peace as might be desired: but he not contented with reason, was quite
overthrown, not by his enemies, but by the unwholesome air of Ethiopia, and by
the manifold diseases which consumed his people.

Cafraria the fifth general part of the lower Ethiopia.
CAfraria, or the land of the Cafri we esteem to be both the coasts and
inlands of the extreme southerly point of Africa, beginning from the river
Magnice, and thence extending by Cabo da pescaria, Terra do Natal, Bahia da
lagoa, Bahia fermosa, about the cape of Buena esperanca, by the bay called
Agoada Saldanha, and thence Northward along the western coast of Africa, as
far as Cabo Negro, or the black cape, which is situate very near unto
eighteen degrees of Southerly latitude. The said Cape of Buena esperanca is
divided into three smaller headlands or capes; The westermost, being called
Cabo de buena esperanca, or The cape of good hope after the name of the whole
promontorie, and being cut from the rest of the firm land: The middlemost is
named Cabo falso, because the Portugales in their voyage homewards from the
east Indies, have sometimes mistaken this for the true cape beforementioned;
between which two capes runs into the sea a mighty river called by the
Portugales Rio dolce (where their caraks often take in fresh water) and by the
natural inhabitants Camissa, which springs out of a small lake called Gale,
situate among The mountains of the moon so much celebrated by ancient
geographers: The third and eastermost cape stretching farthest into the sea, is
called Cabo das Agulhas, or the cape of Needles, because there the needles of
dialles touched with the loadstone, stand directly North, without any variation
either to the east or to the west: between this cape and the foresaid
westermost cape (which ly forth into the sea like two horns) is the breadth of
this mighty promontorie, containing about five and twenty leagues; the length
whereof from the river of Fernando Poo, where it begins to iuttie forth into
the sea, along the western coast southward, to the cape das Agulhas, amounts
to two thousand two hundred Italian miles; and from Cabo das Agulhas, along the
eastern shore northward, to Cape Guardafu, are three thousand three hundred of
the same miles. This cape at the first discovery thereof was called by
Nauigators, The Lion of the sea; and Cabo tormentoso, or The te^pestuous cape;
not so much, as I take it, for the dangerous and stormy seas more about this
cape then any other; but partly in regard of the chargeable, dangerous, and
long travels of the Portugals before they could attain unto it; and partly
because of the great compass which in their voiages outward they are
constrained to fetch for the doubling thereof; and partly also in regard of
some tempestuous and stormy weather wherewith they have been encountered at
this Cape; which notwithstanding at certain times is an ordinary matter upon
all shores and promontories over the face of the whole earth. And albeit some
will not come within sight of this cape, but keep a great distance off, for
fear of the dangerous seas beating thereupon (as namely Francis de Almeida who
sailed above an hundred leagues to the south, in forty degrees G. B. B. Rel.
un. dell. Afr. Part. 1. lib. 2.
of latitude; Pedro de Agnaia in forty five; and Vasco Carualho in forty
seven, where in the month of July eight of his men died for cold) yet we find
by the late and modern experience of sir Francis Drake, master Candish, master
Lancaster in his return from the east Indies, and of the Hollanders in their
nauigations thither, begun in the year 1595. that those seas are at sometimes
not only free from stormy tempests, but most pleasant also to sail upon,
with fair and gentle weather. And as the Spaniards for a long time (that they
might discourage all other nations from attempting navigations upon The south
sea beyond America) blinded all Christendom with a report, that the streights
of Magellan were vnrepasable: so perhaps the Portugals, to terrify all others
from sailing to the east Indies, and to keep the gain and secrets of that
rich trade entire unto themselves, have in their writings and relations made
the doubling of the cape of Buena Esperanca, and the crossing over those seas,
a matter of far greater difficulty and danger, then it is of late manifestly
found to be. The name of Buena esperanca or good hope, was given unto this
promontory by John the second king of Portugal; because that when his fleetes
had once doubled this cape, either outward or homeward, they then steadfastly
hoped in good time to perform the residue of their voyage; otherwise not. In
the midst of this cape lies a plot of ground of that beauty and delight, as
that without any humane industry it may compare with the most artificial
gardens of Europe. On the top of this place, nature minding as it were to
excel her-selfe, has framed a great plain, which for beautiful situation,
fruitfulnes of herbs, variety of flowers, and flourishing verdure of all
things, seems to resemble a terrestrial paradise. The Portugals term it
(...) unfitly, The table of the cape. And to the end they might not fail of
the means to enjoy so pleasant a place, there is close under it a very good
harbor which is called The port of Conception.

The people of this place called in the Arabian tongue Cafri, Cafres, or
Cafates, that is to say, lawless or outlawes, are for the most part exceeding
black of color, which very thing may be a sufficient argument, that the sun
is not the sole or chief cause of their blacknes; for in diverse other
countries where the heat thereof is far more scorching and intolerable,
there are tawnie, brown, yellowish, ash-colored, and white people; so that
the cause there of seems rather to be an hereditarie quality transfused from
the parents, then the intemperature of an hot climate, though it also may be
some furtherance thereunto. The Hollanders in the year 1595. entering the
harbor of Saint Bras, somewhat to the east of Cabo das Agulhas, had
conversation and truck with some of these Cafres, whom they found to be a
stout and valiant people, but very base and contemptible in their behavior
and apparel, being clad in ox and sheeps skins, wrapped about their shoulders
with the hairie sides inward, in form of a mantle. Their weapons are a kind
of small slender darts or pikes, some whereof are headed with some kind of
metal, the residue being vnheaded, and hardened only at the points with
fire. They cover their privy parts with a sheep tail, which is bound up
before and behind with a girdle. Their hornebeasts are, like those of Spain,
very well limmed and proportioned. Their sheep are great and fair, not
having any wool on their backs, but a kind of harsh hair like goats. Other
particulars by them observed, for breuities sake, I omit.

Now that we may proceed in describing the residue of Cafraria, having sailed
about the cape of Buena esperanca westward, albeit the coast in regard of the
greatness thereof may seem to ly directly north, yet for the space of seventeen
degrees, till you come to Cabo Negro, (the farthest Northwesterne bound of this
fifth part of the lower Ethiopia) it trendeth somewhat to the west: along which
coast somewhat within the land appears a mighty rank or ridge of
mountains, called by the Portugales Os picos fragosos, Os Picos fragosos.
that is, the ragged points or spires, being besides their excessive height,
craggie, rough, and steep, lying bare, desolate, and utterly void of all
succor, and serving for no other end, but for an object to the winds, and a
mark for the tempests. The residue of the coast, till you come to Cabo Negro,
sometimes lying low and sometimes high, sometimes shooting into the sea, and
sometimes again gently retiring, contains many plains, hills, valleys, and
places most fertile and delightful; some of them being always of so fresh and
pleasant view, as they seem to represent a continual spring.

The sixth and last part of the lower or extreme Ethiopia, containing the
kingdom of Congo; whereunto in times past were tributarie and subject the
kingdoms of Matama, and Angola to the south; the kingdoms of Quisama, and
Pangelungos to the east; and to the north the kingdom of Anzicana inhabited by
the Anzichi, and Loango peopled by the Bramas.
FIrst therefore (according to our proposed order) The kingdom of Matama.
that we may begin with the most southerly parts; The kingdom of Matama so
called after the name of the king thereof, (who being a Gentile rules over
diverse provinces named Quimbebe) bordereth north upon the first great lake
whereout Nilus springs, and upon the south frontiers of Angola; east it
abutteth upon the western bank of the river Bagamidri; and stretches south as
far as the river Brauagul, which springs out of the mountains of the moon.
This country stands in a good and wholesome air, and abounds with mines of
cristall and other metals, and has victuals great plenty. And although the
people thereof and their neighbour-borderers do traffike together; yet the
king of Matama and the king of Angola wage war oftentimes one against another:
also the said river Bagamidri deuideth this kingdom of Matama from the great
empire of Monomotapa before described, which lies to the east thereof.

Next follows Angola, a kingdom subject in times past to the king of Angola.
Congo, the governor whereof not very many years ago, growing exceedingly
rich and mighty, rebelled against his sovereign, and by diverse attempts
shaking off the yoke of superiority, became himself an absolute prince. This
country, by reason that the people are suffered to have as many wives as they
list, is a place most woonderfully populous. They go whole millions of them to
the wars, not leaving any men of service behind: but for want of victuals
they are often constrained to leave their enterprises half undone. Upon this
king, Paulo Diaz, who remained governor in these parts for the king of
Portugal, waged war: the reason was, because certain Portugal merchants
and others going by way of traffike to Cabaza, a town situate an hundred and
fifty miles from the sea, where the king of Angola usually resideth; they were
by order from this king, the same year that king Sebastian died in Barbary,
suddenly spoiled of their goods, and part of them slain; it being alleged,
that they were all spies, and came to undermine the present state. Whereupon
Paulo Diaz provided himself, and with two galeots did many notable exploits on
both sides of the river Coanza. Finally having built a forte in a very
commodious and hilly ground, at the confluence or meeting of the river last
mentioned, and the river Luiola, with a small number of Portugals, joined to
the aid sent him from the king of Congo and from certain princes of Angola
his confederates, he gave the foresaid king (notwithstanding his innumerable
troops of Negros) diverse and sundry overthrows. The said river Coanza
springs out of the lake of Aquelunda, situate westward of the great lake
whereour Nilus takes his original. In this kingdom are the mountains of
Cabambe, The siluermines of Cabambe.
abounding with rich and excellent silver mines; which have ministered the
chief occasion of all the foresaid wars. This region abounds also with
other minerals, and with cattle of all sorts. Most true it is, that dogsflesh
is here accounted of all others the daintiest meat; for which cause they
bring up and fatten great plenty of dogs for the shambles. Yea it has been
constantly affirmed, that a great dog accustomed to the bull was sold in
exchange of two and twenty slaves, the value of whom could not amount to much
less then two hundred and twenty ducats. The priests of Angola called Gange,
are held in such estimation and account, as the people are verily persuaded,
that they have in their power abundance and scarcity, life and death. For they
have knowledge of medicinable herbs, and of deadly poisons also, which they
keep secret unto themselves; and by means of their familiarity with the
devil, they often foretell things to come.

Toward the lake of Aquelunda before mentioned, lies a country called
Quizama.
Quizama; the inhabitants whereof being governed after the manner of a common
wealth, have showed themselves very friendly to the Portugals, and have done
them special good service in their wars against the king of Angola.

Thus having briefly pointed at the former three bordering countries, let us
now with like brevity pass through the kingdom of Congo it self. Bahia das
(...), or the baye of Cowes.
This kingdom therefore (accounting Angola, as indeed it is, a member
thereof) begins at Bahia das vacas in thirteen, and ends at Cabo da
Caterina in two degrees and an half of southerly latitude. True it is that the
coast near unto the said Bay of Cowes is subject to the king of Congo, but
the inland is governed by him of Angola. East and west it stretches from the
sea in breadth as far as the lake of Aquelunda, for the space of six hundred
miles, and is divided into six provinces: namely, the province The six
provinces of Congo.
of Pemba, situate in the very heart and center of the whole kingdom; Batta,
the most easterly province, where the ancient writers seem to have placed
Agisymba; Pango which bordereth upon the Pangelungi; Sundi the most Northerly
province; Sogno which stretches over the mouth of the great river Zaire; and
Bamba which is the principal of all the rest both for extension of ground, for
riches, and for military forces. In the province of Pemba, or rather in a
several territory by it self, stands the S. Saluador the chief city of
Congo.
city of Sant Saluador, in former times called Banza, being the metropolitan
of all Congo, and the seat of the king, situate an hundred and fifty miles
from the sea, upon a rockie and high mountain; on the very top whereof is a
goodly plain abounding with fountains of wholesome and sweet water, and with
all other good things which are requisite either for the sustenance, or solace
of mankind: and upon this plain where Sant Saluador is seated, there may
inhabit to the number of an hundred thousand persons. In this city the
Portugals have a ward by themselves, separate from the rest, containing a mile
in compass: and about that bigness also is the palace or house of the king. The
residue of the people dwell for the most part scatteringly in villages. It is a
place enriched by nature with corn, cattle, fruits, and wholesome springs of
water in great abundance. The principal river of all Congo called Zaire,
takes his chief original The great (...) of Zaire.
out of the second lake of Nilus, lying under the Equinoctial line: and albeit
this is one of the mightiest rivers of all Africa, being eight and twenty
miles broad at the mouth, yet was it utterly unknown to ancient writers.
Amongst other rivers it (...) Vumba and Barbela, which spring out of the first
great lake. In this country are sundry other rivers also, which fetch their
original out of the lake of Aquelunda: the principal whereof are Coanza,
which divides the kingdom of Congo from that of Angola, and the Crocodiles.
river Lelunda, which breeds crocodiles and water-horses which the Greeks
call Hippopotami, of which creatures the isle of horses in the mouth of the
river Zaire takes denomination. The Hippopotamus or water-horse is
Water-horses.
somewhat tawnie, of the color of a lion; in the night he comes on land to
feed upon the grass, and keeps in the water all the day time. The Africans
tame and manage some of these horses, and they prove exceeding swift; but a
man must beware how he pass over deep rivers with them, for they will
suddenly diue under water. Also in these rivers of Ethiopia are bred a kind of
oxen, which live every night upon the land. Here likewise breeds another
strange creature, called in the Congonian language Ambize Angulo, that is to
say, a hogge-fish, being so exceeding fat, and of such greatness, that some of
them weie above five hundred pound. This abundance of waters, together with the
heat of the climate, which proceeds from the neerenes of the sun, causes
the country to be most fruitful of plants, herbs, fruits, and corn; and
much more fertile would it be, if nature were helped forward by the industry
of the inhabitants. Here also, besides goats, sheep, dear, Gugelle, conies,
hares, ciuet-cats, and ostriches, are great swarms of tigres, which are very
hurtful both to man and beast. The Zebra or Zabra of this country being about
the bigness of a mule, is a The Zabra.
beast of incomparable swiftnes, straked about the body, legs, ears, and
other parts, with black, white and brown circles of three fingers broad;
which do make a pleasant show. Buffles, wild asses called by the Greeks
Onagri, and Dantes (of whose hard skins they make all their targets) range in
herds up and down the woods. Also here are infinite store of elephants The
elephant.
of such monstrous bigness, that by the report of sundry credible persons, some
of their teeth do weigh two hundred pounds, at sixteen ounces the pound: upon
the plains this beast is swifter then any horse, by reason of his long steps;
only he cannot turn with such celeritie. Trees he ouerturneth with the
strength of his back, or breaks them between his teeth; or stands upright
upon his hinder feet, to browse upon the leaves and tender sprigs. The she
elephants bear their brood in their wombes two years before they bring forth
young ones: neither are they great with young, but only from seven years to
seven years. This creature is said to live 150. years; he is of a gentle
disposition; and relying upon his great strength, he hurts none but such as
do him injury; only he will in a sporting manner gently heave up with his (...)
such persons as he meets. He loves the water beyond measure, and will stand
up to the mid-body therein, bathing the ridge of his back, and other parts
with his long promuscis or trunk. His skin is four fingers thick; and it is
reported, that an elephant of this country being stricken with a little gunne
called Petrera, was not wounded therewith, but so sore bruised inwardly, that
within three days after he died. Here are likewise reported to be mighty
adders or snakes of five and twenty spannes long, and five spans broad, which
will swallow up an whole stagge, or any other creature of that bigness. Neither
are they here destitute of Indie-cockes and hens, partridges, feasants, and
innumerable birds of pray, both of the land and of the sea; whereof some diue
under the water, which the Portugals call Pelicans.

Over against the most southerly part of the said kingdom of Congo, The isle
and haven of Loanda.
where it confineth with Angola, lies an Isle called Loanda, being twenty
miles long, and but one mile broad at the most, between which and the maine
land is the best port of all that Ocean. About this Isle do haunt infinite
store of whales, where notwithstanding no amber at all is found; which is a
manifest argument that it proceeds notfrom these creatures. Here they fish
for certain little shells, which in Congo and the countries adjoining are used
in steed of money. The well-waters of this Isle, when the sea ebbeth, are salt,
but when it flows they are most fresh and sweet. In this Isle the Portugals
have a town from whence they traffic to Congo and Angola: and amongst other
commodities, they get every year in those parts about five thousand slaves;
the custom of which trade belongs by ancient constitutions unto the crown
of Portugale.

To the north of Congo upon the sea coast begins the kingdom of Loango.
Loango tributarie in times past to the king of Congo: It abounds with
elephants; and the inhabitants called Bramas are circumcised after the Jewish
manner.

Next upon them do border the Anzichi, who are possessed of large Anzichi.
countries, namely from the river Zaire even to the deserts of Nubia. They
abound with mines of copper, and with sanders both Red, and Gray which are the
best; and some are of opinion, that here grows the right Lignum Aquilae,
which is of so excellent virtue in physic. They have one supreme king, with
many princes under him. They traffic in Congo, and carry home from thence
salt and great shells to be used for coin (which are brought thither from the
Isle of San Tome) in exchange of their cloth of the palm tree, and of Iuory:
but the chief commodities which they part from, are slaves of their own
nation and of Nubia: and the said shells they use also instead of Jewels and
ornaments. Both they and the Bramas before mentioned do carry for their defense
in the wars, certain targets made of the skin of a beast which in Germany is
called Dante: their weapons offensive be little bows and short arrows, which
they shoot with such wonderful celerity, as they will discharge twenty one
after another, before the first arrow fall to the ground. They have shambles of
mans-flesh as we have of beeues and muttons. They eat their enemies which they
take in the wars: their slaves which they cannot make away for a good round
price, they sell unto the butchers: and some will offer themselves to the
slaughter, for the love of their princes and patrons: so silly they are, that
to do their lords a pleasure, they will not refuse present death: wherefore
the Portugals repose not so much trust in any kind of slaves as in them: and
they are very valiant also in the wars.

But, to return unto the seacoast; from the mouth of the river Zaire
Northward, the land bearing out somewhat more to the west, is framed into three
headlands, namely, Cabo primero, Cabo da Caterina, and the cape of Lopo
Gonsalues, which is a cape very well known in regard of the eminency and
outstretching thereof. Itlyeth in one degree of southerly latitude, Over
against which cape within the land do inhabit the people called Bramas in the
kingdom of Loango beforementioned. From hence for the space of five or six
degrees, till you come to Punta delgada, or The slender point, the coast lies
in a manner directly North; most of which tract is inhabited by a nation of
Negros called Ambus. North of the said slender point you have Rio dos
Camarones, or the river of shrimpes, which is full of little Isles; not far
from which river are The countries of Biafar and Medra, inhabited with people
which are addicted to enchantments, witchcrafts, and all kind of abominable
sorceries.

Much more might be said concerning this sixth part of the lower Ethiopia: but
because it is in so ample and methodicall a manner described in the history of
Philippo Pigafetta, most iudiciously and aptly Englished by the learned Master
Abraham Hartwell; I refer the reader thereunto, as to the principal and the
very fountain of all other discourses which have bin written to any purpose of
Congo and the countries adjoining.

Of the countries of Benin, Meleghete, Ghinea, and Sierra Leona.
WEstward from the countries last mentioned lies the kingdom of Benin, having
a very proper town of that name, and an haven called Gurte. The (...) live in
Idolatry, and are a rude and brutish nation; notwithstanding that their prince
is served with such high reverence, and never comes in sight but with great
solemnity, and many ceremonies: at whose death his chief favorites count it
the greatest point of honor to be buried with him, to the end (as they vainly
imagine) they may do him service in another world. This country abounds
with long pepper called Of this long pepper read Ramusius, vol. 1. fol. 115.
page 2.
by the Portugals Pimienta dal rabo, which is as much to say, as ppeper with a
tail: This tailed or long pepper so far excels the pepper of the east
Indies, that an ounce thereof is of more force then half a pound of that other.
For which cause the kings of Portugale have done what lay in them, to keep it
from being brought into these parts of Europe, least it should too much abase
the estimation and price of their Indian pepper. All which notwithstanding
there has bin great quantity secretly conveyed from thence by the Portugals:
as likewise the English and French nations, and of late years the Hollanders
have had great traffic into those parts.

Next follow the kingdoms of Temian and Dauma; and lower to the The provinces
of Temian, Dauma, and (...).
south the province of Meleghete, a place very famous and well known, in
regard of a little red grain which there grows, being in shape somewhat like
to the (...) of Italy, but of a most vehement and fiery taste: and these little
grains are by the apothecaries called Grana Paradisi. Here also is made Grana
Paradisi.
of (...) and the ashes of the Palm Tree, a kind of soap, which has double
the force of ours. For which cause it is forbidden by the Portugals, who The
(...) of Mina.
have upon that coast a little to the east of Cabo das tres puntas, in the
northerly latitude of five degrees, a strong castle called San Georgio de la
Mina, whereunto by way of traffike they draw all the gold and riches of the
countries adioining.

Westward of these lies the country of Ghinea, inhabited by a people which
the ancient writers called Pliny calls them (...).
Autolatae, and Ichthyophagi: Ghinea is so named, according to the chief city
thereof called Genni, being situate upon the river of Sanega. The people of
this country toward the seacoast live upon fish; and they of the inland
sustain themselves with Lizards and such like creatures; and in some places
more temperate their food consists of herbs and milk. They converse
together in great families; and they fight oftentimes for water and for
pastures; neither have they (...) knowledge of learning or liberal arts. So
long as the sun continues in our northren signs, that is, from the xj. of
March to the xiij. of September, this people in regard of extreme (...) heat,
are constrained all the day time (being ordinarily with them of 12. hours) to
retire themselves within their houses, and to do all their business in the
night. The country in most places is destitute of trees that bear fruit:
neither have the greatest part of the inhabitants any hair on their bodies,
save only a thick tuft growing upon their heads: they sell their children
unto strangers, supposing that their estate cannot possibly be impaired. Unto
these natural miseries of the place, you may ad the insupportable mischiefs
which are here done by the locustes: for albeit these creatures do infinite
harm likewise in all the inner parts of Africa; yet seems it that this
country of Ghinea is their most proper habitation; whither they do often
resort in such innumerable swarms, that like a mighty thick cloud they come
raking along in the sky, and afterward falling down, they cover the face of
the earth, devouring all things that they light upon. Their coming toward any
place is known two or three days before by the yellownes of the sun. But in
most places (...).
where they haunt, the poor people are revenged of them by killing and driving
them in the air for their food: which custom is commonly used by the
Arabians and Ethiopians; and the Portugals also have found vessels full of them
upon the coast of Cambaia, where they do the like mischiefs. They which have
eaten of them affirm that they are of a good taste, and that their flesh (so
much as it is) is as white as that of a lobster. These may seem to be al one
with those grasshoppers which God sent to plague Egypt; and the same kind of
locustes, which the holy prophet John Baptist fed upon in the wilderness.

Moreover along the coasts of Meleghete and Ghinea are diverse small rivers and
freshets, containing little water, and running a slow pace: which
notwithstanding are the best and pleasantest things that are to be found in
these forlorn countries. For wheresoever any little water springs or
runs, thither do the people resort, partly for the watring of their scorched
grounds, and partly to quench their own thirst. Also upon these coasts are
diverse and sundry headlands which stretch into the sea; as namely The fair
cape, The three-pointed cape, The cape of Palmetrees, Cabo da Verga, and Sierra
Sierra (...).
Leona. This cape last mentioned has an exceeding high mountain thereupon,
which causes it to be seen a mighty distance off. It seems to be the same
promontorie which Hanno and Ptolemey call The chariot of the gods. It is called
by the name of a lion in regard of the dreadful thunders and lightnings which
are continually heard from the top thereof: howbeit near unto it are found
apes, munkeies, and such other beasts as live in temperate places.

Of Cabo verde, Sanega, and Gambra or Gambea.
NOrthward of Sierra Leona lies Cabo verde, or the green cape, called by
Ptolemey Arsinarium, and being one of the most famous headlands in all Africa.
It is environed with two rivers, namely the river of Gambra or Gambea on the
south, and the river of Senaga on the north; which last river is esteemed to be
an arm of Ghir or Niger. Gambea springs out of the same fountains assigned
by Ptolemey unto Niger (which by all the ancient writers is placed heereabout)
and out of the lake of Libya. It is larger and deeper then that other of
Senaga, and runs a crooked course, receiving many lesser rivers thereinto. A
factorie of the Portugals.
One hundred and eighty leagues within the mouth of this river the Portugals
have a factorie or place of traffic, called the factorie of Cantor. Hither by
exchange of sundry wares, they draw the gold of all those countries. In the
midde way (as it were) unto the said factorie, there The isle of elephants.
is a place called the isle of Elephants in regard of the huge numbers of those
creatures. The river of Senaga is thought to take his original out of the lakes
called Chelonides. It contains certain Isles, which in regard of their rough
and ragged shape are good for nothing, but to breed adders and such like
hurtful things, and these Isles in many places make the river utterly
innauigable. About one hundred and fifty leagues from the mouth thereof, A
mighty cataract or fall of Senaga.
it falls spouting-wise with such maine force from certain high cliffes or
rocks, that a man may walk dry under the stream thereof. The Negros in
their language call this place a Bow. It is reported that Nilus does the like
at his Cataracts or ouerfals. And Strabo writes of certain rivers of
Hircania, which from exceeding steep and craggie rocks gush with such
violence into the Caspian sea, that whole (...) may pass under them without
danger of drowning. Into this river of Senaga, among many rivers unknown,
falls one, which passing through a red soil, is it self also died red: and
whosoever drinks of the waters first of the Red river, and after of Senaga,
is constrained extremely to (...). Along the banks of this mighty river
inhabit the black and barbarous nations of the Gialofi, the Tucuroni, the
Caraguloni, and the Bagani. Finally it voideth into the sea at two mouths, one
of which mouths is a mile broad. And it is strange to consider, how upon the
south side of this river the people are black and well proportioned, and the
soil pleasant and fertile; whereas on the north side they are brown and of a
small stature, and do inhabit a barren and miserable country. In both the
said rivers of Gambra and Senaga do breed diverse strange kinds offishes, and
other creatures of the water, as namely crocodiles, sea-horses, and winged
serpents; and hither come to drink sundry sorts of wild beafts. The lands
comprehended between them both, by reason of their yearly inundation (for
from the xv. of June they increase forty days together, and are so long time
decreasing, after the manner of Nilus) abound with all kinds of grain and
pulse whereof the climate is capable, as namely with beans, (...), millet, etc.
but wheat, rye, barley, and grapes cannot there attain to ripenes and
perfection, by reason of overmuch moisture: save only some small quantity of
wheat near the deserts where the Caraguloni inhabit. But their chief
sustenance is Zaburro, otherwise called Ghinie-wheate or Maiz, which they sow
after the inundation of their rivers, casting some quantity of sand thereupon
to defend it from the heat, which otherwise would scorch the ground too
excessiuely. They drink the juice of the palm tree, which they cut and lance
for that purpose: and this juice not being tempered, is as strong and headie as
any wine. Neither are they here destitute of mighty adders, of lions,
leopards, and elephants: but beasts for labor they have none, save only a
small kind of oxen, and goats. The horses which are brought thither by
merchants, live but a short time. The air, by reason of abundance of lakes
bredde by the ouerflowes of their rivers, is moist and gross. And here fall
most unwholesome and palpable dewes. It raineth in these countries from October
till the end of July, every day about noone, with thunder and lightning.

All the kingdoms and countries by us before described, from the cape of Buena
esperanca, to the river last mentioned, are inhabited by black people. The
most northerly are the Gialofi, who spread themselves between the two foresaid
rivers for the space of five hundred miles eastward: so that the river Senaga
is the utmost northren bound of Negros, or nations extremely black; howbeit
upon the banks thereof are found people of sundry colors, by reason of the
variety of women.

Between this river of Senaga and Cabo blanco, or the white cape, lies a
country called by some Anterote, being all over in a manner sandy, barren,
low, and plain; neither is there in all this distance any place of account or
reckoning, save only the isles of Arguin (where of we will entreat among the
isles of Africa) and a territory or town six days journey within the maine,
called Hoden. This town is not walled, but lies open, and (...) vol. 1. fol.
99.
consists of the wandering Arabians rude and homely habitations, being
notwithstanding a place of Rendeuous or meeting for all such as travel in
Carouans from Tombuto, and other places in the land of Negros to Barbary. The
principal food of the inhabitants here, are dates and barley, both which the
soil yields indeed, but not in so plentiful a manner: and they drink the
milk of camels and of other beasts, for wine they have none at all. These
people are Mahumetans, and most deadly enemies to Christians: neither abide
they long in any place, but run rouing and wandering up and down those
deserts. They are themselves very populous, and have abundance of camels, upon
whose backs they carry copper, silver, and other commodities from Barbary to
Tombuto, and to the residue of the land of Negros.

From Cabo blanco to the regions of Sus, and Hea (which are the first provinces
described by John Leo) excepting a small portion only of Biledulgerid, you
have nothing but part of the vast, fruitles, and vninhabitable desert of Libya,
called by the Arabians Sarra, which stretches from the western Ocean as far
as the frontiers of Egypt.

Thus from the very bottom of the Red sea, having coasted along the eastern
and western shores of the most southerly parts of Africa, and briefly
described all the principal known empires, kingdoms, and regions within that
maine, which are left untouched by our author John Leo; let us now with like or
more brevity prosecute the description of the islands which are by the hand of
the omnipotent creator planted round about this ample and spacious continent.

A brief enumeration and description of all the most famous and known
Islandes situate round about the coasts of Africa, which have been omitted by
JOHN LEO: beginning first with the most northeasterly, and so by little and
little bringing our selves about the Cape of Buena Esperanca nearer unto Europe.
The Islands of the Red sea.
BOth the shores of the Red sea, as well on the African as on the Arabian side,
are every where beset with many small islets and rocks, which lie so thick
together, that they make the navigations all along the said coasts to be most
dangerous and difficult. (...).


The isles of the Red sea most worthy to be remembered, are these following.
Babelmandel a little isle situate in the very mouth of the Red sea, in twelve
degrees, contains two leagues in compass, being from either of the firm
lands three miles distant, and standing about twenty paces high out of the
water. By Ptolemey it is called The isle of Diodorus. Upon this isle, or one of
the continents adioining, are to be hired the most experime^ted pilots for all
that narrow sea, even as far as Suez. And from the eastern and western side
of this islet, Strabo reports that the twofold entrance of the Arabian Gulf
was barred with a double chain. More to the north stands Camaran, being
about eight leagues The isle of Camaran.
from the Arabian coast in fifteen degrees of latitude. Upon this isle are to
be seen great ruins of ancient buildings. It has one indifferent good haven,
and abounds with fresh water, (a thing most precious and acceptable in those
parts) with salt, and with cattle. On the other side toward Africa, in
fifteen degrees and an half, stands the isle of Dalaqua of about Dalaqua.
thirty miles in circuit, which space is almost contained in the length
thereof, being a place very famous for the abundance of pearls which are there
caught; wherewithal likewise the isle of Mua near unto it is richly Mua.
(...)
end owed. Next follows Mazua in form like to an half moon, and not above
a bow-shoot distant from the African maine: between which isle and the
continent, there is an excellent haven which is now the only port that Prete
Ianni has in all his dominions; for which (as you may read before in the
description of the said princes empire) his lieutenant Barnagasso is
constrained to pay a great yearly tribute to the Turk.

Over against Mazua, upon the firm, stands the town of Ercoco. Upon this
little isle are diverse houses of Arabians, built of lime and stone; and The
isle, haven, and city of Suaquen.
others of claie covered with thatch. North of Mazua stands Suaquen in a
certain lake made by the sea, which there insinuates it self within the land,
and frames a most secure and commodious haven. On this small islet is built
the fair and stately city of Suaquen, being almost as large as the isle it
self; wherein resideth the Turks lieutenant or Bassa of Abassia.

Of the Isle of Socotera and other isles lying without the narrow entrance of
the Arabian gulf.
WIthout the straight of Babelmandel there are no islands worthy of mention,
save only Socotera; which (as John Barros supposes) was of old called by
Ptolemey Dioscoridis and lies in sight of cape Guardafu, which the same author
names Aromata Promo^torium. Being about threescore miles long, and five and
twenty miles broad, it is divided with a rough and exceeding high ridge of
mountains, and is subject unto most terrible and boisterous winds, which do
out of measure dry and parch the same. For which cause, and in regard of the
slothful rudenes of the inhabitants, it is very scarce of victuals: for it
yields neither wheat, rice, wine, nor honey. In the valleys and places of
shelter it affoordeth some quantity of Millet, of dates, and of sundry kinds
of fruits: neither is it altogether destitute of pasture for cattle. It is
frequented by merchants for Or vermillion.
Cinabre, Sanguis Draconis, and the most excellent Aloes of the world. It has
no haven of importance. Two towns of the Portugales in Socotora.
The Portugals are here possessed of two small towns, one called Coro, and
the other Benin; and here in times past the king of Fartac [ A country of
Arabia Foelix,] had a castle and a garrison of soldiers upon this isle, which
castle being taken by the Portugals, was afterward by them abandoned, because
it quited not the cost. The inhabitants being of a brown color, and of a good
constitution; are in religion a kind of Christians. They hold an opinion that
Saint Thomas suffered shipwreck upon this isle, and that of his ship was built
a most ancient church, which as yet is to be seen walled round about, with
three allies or partitions, and three doors.

Furthermore they live for the most part in caves or in cabins made of boughs,
very far from the sea. They go apparrelled in course cloth, or in the skins
of beasts. In war their weapons are slings, and swords made of base iron: and
the women are as good soldiers as the men. They are much addicted unto Magic
and enchantments, and do bring to pass matters incredible. They have no use
at all of navigations, nor of traffic, and yet forsooth they esteem
themselves the most noble and worthy people under the heavens; as also they are
utterly void of learning: which I do note, because that such as are learned
make but small account of their wisdom.

To the North of Socotera are two small Isles which are called the two The two
sisters.
sisters: the inhabitants whereof being of an oliue-colour, live without law,
and have no conversation with any other people. The commodities of these Islets
are Iuorie, amber, Sanguis draconis, Aloes, and a kind of precious stones
called Nizzolij.

Likewise over against Socotera are two other Islets, one called the Isle of
men, and the other the Isle of women, being distant thirty miles asunder, and
five miles from Socotera. They are so termed, because that in the one dwell men
only, and in the other women. Howbeit they visit one another at certain
seasons: but they cannot stay one in the Isle of another above three months,
in regard of a secret quality of the air which is contrary to either sex. A
matter (if it be true) most strange and admirable.

Of the Isles lying in the sea called Sinus Barbaricus, over against the
Eastern and Southeasterne shore of Africa.
ALl along from the cape of Guardafu to the cape of Buena Esperanca are found
sundry Islands, partly dispersed here and there in the sea, and partly
adioining upon the firm land. Such as are far into the sea, are the greatest
part uninhabited, as namly, the Isle of Don Garcia, The * three and The * seven
brethren, As rocas partidas, the Isles of Sant Brandan, and Isles which are not
inhabited.
those of Mascarenha, of Sant Francis, of Santa Apollonia, of John de Lisboa,
of Cosinoledo: and between the great Isle of Saint Laurence and the maine, the
Isles Do Natal or of the nativity, as likewise the three Isles of Comoro, with
those of Alioa, of Spirito Santo, and of sant Christopher.

But of those which the vicinity of the firm land has made more noble
Concerning the isles of Mo^baca, Quiloa, and Mocambique read more at large in
the discourse of Zanguebar before set down, whereas (...) thought it (...) to
entreat of them, being (as it were) certain fragments of the maine, and having
large territories thereof subject unto them.
and frequented, the first that offers it self to our consideration, is the
Isle of Mombaza in four degrees of southerly latitude, cut out by a certain
chanel or arm of the sea, which deuideth the same from the maine of Africa: in
compass it contains twelve miles; and at the entrance of the said chanel,
upon a down, stands the city of Mombaca, built very handsomely after the
Arabian fashion. Somewhat farther from the continent are situate the Isles of
Pemba, Zanzibar, and Monfia inhabited by Negros; the greatest of which is
Zanzibar, the prince whereof is called by the name of a king; and it lies
under six degrees, of south latitude, being from the main ten leagues distant.
But the sovereign of all these Isles was Quiloa, inhabited like the rest, with
Mahumetans of little bodies and abject minds. It abounds with rice, millet,
cattle, woods of palme-trees, limons, orenges, and sugarcanes; where of
notwithstanding they are ignorant how to make sugar. The city stands upon the
seashore over against the firm (...): it is built of pure marble, and the
streets are very narrow: a thing common among the Arabians, whereby they use
to defend themselves, after the enemy has once entered their towns. From
this Isle to Mocambique are about an hundred leagues. Without the port lies
Misa, and three miles off Songo and Canga inhabited by Moors. Next follow As
Ilhas do Acotatado, or The isles of the scourged, because here a certain pilot
that was a Moore, who had determined to wrack the whole fleet of Vasco da
Gama, received punishment. Concerning Mocambique called by Ptolemey and other
ancient writers Prassia, we have entreated before. Four miles from thence lie
the desert isles of Saint George: and then the isles of Angoscia inhabited by
Moors. These are stored with indifferent quantity of victuals: and here
Plenty of Ambergrise.
upon an east wind they gather plenty of Ambergrise. An hundred and fifty
miles from Cabo dos corrientes, lies A Ilha das vacas, or The isle of Cowes,
with a castle thereupon, and store of good water. As Ilhas llanas, or The
plain isles are not worth the speaking of. A Ilha da cruz, otherwise called
Ilha das fontanhas, was the farthest limite of Bartholomew Diaz his navigations,
who was the first Portugale that ever doubled the cape of Buena espranca, and
having doubled it, returned back without discovering any farther.

Of the Isle of Saint Laurence, otherwise called Madagascar.
THis isle called by the Portugales The isle of Sant Laurence, by the natural
inhabitans Madagascar, by Paulus Venetus Magastar, by Ptolemey Menuthias, and
by Pliny Cerne, is accounted one of the greatest, noblest, and richest in the
whole world. About the midst thereof it approaches toward the maine of Africa,
in form of an elbowe, being distant from thence an hundred threescore and ten
miles. The extremes of this isle are very far separate from the said maine,
and especially that which stretches toward the northeast. The whole isle
contains in breadth four hundred and fowerscore, in length one thousand two
hundred, and in compass four thousand miles; so that in bigness it far
exceeds Italy, though it be not so well inhabited and manured. Situate it is
beyond the Equator in seventeen degrees, and stretches from thence to six
and twenty degrees and an half of southerly latitude. It is plentifully
endowed with all things needful for man's use: for it yields cotton, Millet,
Rice, Potatos, sweet orenges, sugarcanes, and sundry kinds of pulse: as
likewise, amber, Iette, silver, copper, red sanders, saffron, a spice somewhat
like unto cloves, and some quantity of ginger. Moreover, here are lions,
leopards, stags, roe-deere, goats, kine, sheep, and other beasts both tame
and wild. Here are likewise innumerable elephants, so that from hence is
conveyed great quantity of iuorie. They have also great store of camels, whose
flesh the inhabitants eat for the holesomenes thereof. The people (except some
few Moors upon the coast) are idolaters, of colourblack, with curled hair,
very barbarous, and in fashions resembling much the Cafres. They go naked all
save their priuities, which they cover with cloth of cotton: and they use in
the war certain crooked staves headed with bone. The Jesuits in their
letters report, that in one part of this island there are white people found;
who (as they affirm) are descended from the people of China; whereby may be
gathered the great length of the Chinians nauigations, and the largenes of
their empire. The Portugals sailing toward India in due time, do pass
between this great isle and the firm land; but if the season grows toward
winter, they hold on their course (as themselves report) on the back side
thereof. In these two courses of navigations they have found, and daily do
discover sundry isles, but of small account, part whereof we have mentioned
before. Amongst others, as it were over against Mocambique, lies on a certain
strand or should an isle called Langane of a reasonable bigness, with a great
river therein, being inhabited by Moors. And the farthest toward the west are
those isles which the Portugals call Os Romeros. On the northeast part of this
isle is the Bay of Antogill, being one of the safest and most commodious
harbors in the world.

Of the Isles of the Ethiopian sea about the cape of Buena esperanca.
THis sea I take to be most exceeding deep, because it has fewer Isles then
the former, and those few which it has are but little ones. The first that was
discovered on this side the cape of Buena Esperanca is that of Don Aluarez,
situate in thirty degrees and an half. And to the northwest of that is the
Isle of Tristan d' Acunna being distant (...). miles from the cape, and beyond
the Equinoctial eight and thirty degrees; which being of a round form,
contains in compass fifty leagues. It is full of birds, and especially of
sea-crowes or cormorants, and round about it lie four other small islets. The
mariners hold, that near unto this isle, as unto that of Bermuda, there are
continual storms and tempests. Not far from the main are certain dry and
rockie isles, and others of none account.

The Isles of Santa Helena, and of the Ascension.
NExt follows in the height of sixteen degrees of southerly latitude the
isle of Santa Helena, discovered by Iuan da Noua, being so fitly and
commodiously situate for such as return home from the east Indies into Europe,
as it seems there of purpose to have been planted by God for the furtherance
of this voyage, and for the refreshing and comfort of nauigators. In compass
it contains nine miles, and has a most perfect healthful (...), and sundry
freshets of excellent water. The soil is of a red color, and like unto ashes;
it gives way to ones footing like sand, and a man may shake every tree upon
the isle. Here the kings of Portugal have enacted, that none may remain to
inhabit, except it be sometime two or three (...) persons for the recovery of
their health; to the end that the fleets may here plentifully and of free cost
furnish themselves with fresh victuals, fruits, and water. So that when they
arrive, they usually plant or sow some one thing or other, which presently
springs and grows to ripenes; and then the seed falling into the earth, it
multiplieth of it self. Here are woods of Eban and Cedar, with infinite store
of (...), orenges, and all sorts of fruits; as likewise hogs, geese, hens,
partridges, feasants, Guinie-cocks, and other like creatures brought thither by
the Portugals out of Europe, or from other countries. In sailing from Portugal
toward India it is not so easily found: but in their return home they do here
in few days cure all their diseases, and relieve their wants: and here to
their (...) solace and recreation they hunt, foul, and fish, and provide
themselves of water, wood, and all things necessary. To the west thereof
appear in the sea the isles of Santa Maria, and of the Trinity, which serve
for signs unto the mariners. To the northwest of this isle, toward the coast
of Brasil, are the The isles of Ascension.
isles of Ascension, so called, because they were first discovered by Tristan
Acunna in his return from the Indies upon Ascension day in the year 1508.
They are all uninhabited and desert, and have upon them infinite swarms of a
kind of fowls of the bigness of duckes.

Of the Isles of Loanda, Nobon, and Saint Thomas.
HArd upon the firm land of the south part of Congo, is situate the isle of
Concerning this isle read more at large in the description of Congo.
Loanda before mentioned. And over against the cape of Lopo Gonsalues in a
manner, lies the small isle of Nobon, being a rockie and desolate place, but
of great importance for fishing; for which cause it is frequented by the
inhabitants of Saint Thomas isle. This isle of Saint Thomas being an hundred
and fower-score miles distant from the maine, is of a round form, containing
threescore Italian miles from side to side, and an hundred and fower-score
miles also in compass: of which isle (because it is situate just under the
Equinoctial, so that the horizon thereof passes by both the poles) it will
not be from our purpose to entreat somewhat at large; to the end we may the
better understand the quality and temperature of such places as are seated in
that part of the world. This isle when it was first discovered was nothing else
but a wood of unprofitable trees, with their boughs turning crookedly upward.
The air is extremely hot: in the months of March and September, when the
sun passes perpendicularly over, it raineth here out of measure, and in
other months here falls only a moist dew which waters the ground. In
the very midst it has a woodie mountain, which is continually ouershadowed
with a thick cloud, which cloud so moistneth the trees that grow in great
abundance upon this mountain, that from hence droppeth water sufficient for
the watering of al their fields of sugarcanes. By how much the sun is more
perpendicular over this isle, by so much is the air more cloudie and dark;
and contrariwise, the farther it is distant from perpendicularitie, the cleerer
and brighter is the sky. In the months of December, January, and February,
such as are borne in Europe, can very hardly walk or move themselves for
faintnes: and all the rest of the year, once in eight or ten days, they seem
to be taken with an hot and a cold fit of an ague, which continues upon them
for tow hours together. They are thrice or oftener let blood every year: and
few of them live above fifty years; but their Negros remain more then an
hundred years alive. They which newly arrive there, are commonly surprised with
a most dangerous fever, which holds them for twenty days together. And
these are let blood, without any reckoning of ounces. Heereblow no winds at
all, but only from the southeast, south, and southwest, which winds stir
not in the months of December, January, and February, and therefore these
months are most extremely hot. But in June, July, and August, they blow a
fresh gale. In this isle the French evil, and the scuruies are very rife. The
soil is of a mean color between red and yellow, being clammie like claie,
and by reason of the continual nightly dewes, as soft and pliable as wax, and
of incredible fertility. Besides diverse other good ports, it has one
principal among the rest, belonging to the chief town or city called Or
perhaps Pouacaon, which (as I conjecture) may be all one with Poblacion in
Spanish, which signifies a Colonie or town.
Pauoasan, consisting of above seven hundred families, and inhabited by
Portugals, and into the said port runs a little river of excellent water.

To every of the Ingenios or sugar-houses (which in all may amount to the
number of seventy) do belong Negro-slaues, for the planting of their Seventy
Ingenios in San Tome.
canes and the dressing of their sugars, to some, two hundred, and to others,
three hundred a piece, who live upon Maiz or Ghiny-wheat: the number of which
slaves is so great, that oftentimes they rebel, to the great damage of the
Portugals. They have good sustenance also by means of a root, called there
Igname, but in the west Indies Batata. Wheat that is here sown, grows not
to any ripenes or grain, but is resolved altogether into grass. They make
wine of the Palm Tree. Vines prosper nothing kindly in this place, except it
be here and there one, planted by an house-side, and attended with great
diligence. They bring forth clusters at the same time, some ripe, some green,
and some blossoms only; and they bear fruit twice in the year, as do the
fig trees likewise. They have sugarcanes ripe all the year long: but melons
only in June, July, and August. No tree that bears fruit with a stone or
kernel will fructify or prosper in this place. (...) are found all over the
Isle certain crabs or creuises like unto them of the sea; here be likewise
gray parots, and infinite other birds of diverse sorts; and in the sea are
mighty store of whales, especially toward the firm land. The principal
riches of this isle consist in sugars, whereof there grows great abundance.
The sugarcanes are planted and cut every month, and in five months they grow
to ripenes, but by reason of the moistnes of the air, they neither prove hard
nor white, but are of a reddish color. The tenths which belong to the king
amount to the number of 12. or 14. thousand Arrouas, every Arroua being one and
thirty Italian pound-weight. In times past there were forty ships yearly
laden therewith; but now of late certain worms which eat the roots of the
canes, or (as others think) white antes or mise, have so mightily impaired the
growth of this commodity, that now there are not above six ships laden
therewith. The sugarcanes, after they be once ground, they give unto their
hogs, wherewith they prove fat, and their flesh is very sauory. For return
of sugars, the merchants of Europe carry thither meal, wine, swords, oil,
cheese, hides, drinking-glasses, and certain shells, which there and in the
countries adioining they use instead of money. Of the conjunction between the
men of Europe and the Negro women are bred a generation of brown or tawnie
people.

This Isle of Saint Thomas together with the principal town and castle, was in
October 1599 taken by part of the same fleet of Hollanders, which not fully
four months before had sacked the isles, castles and towns of Gran Canaria
and Gomera.

Of the Isle del principe, and that of Fernando Po.
THe Isle del principe or of the prince, situate in three degrees of Northerly
latitude, and one hundred twenty miles on this side the isle of Sant Thomas,
is little in quantity, but excellent in quality: for which cause it is
thoroughly tilled and manured. The revenues thereof (which consist the greatest
part in sugars) were in times past allowed unto the prince of Portugale;
whereupon it was named The isle of the prince.

This Isle was in the year 1598 taken by certain ships of war sent forth
under the conduct of Iulianus Clerehagen at the charges of Balthazar Musheron
of Camphere in Zeland merchant, who had the conquest thereof given him by
patent from Prince Maurice, and the States general of the united provinces.

That of Fernando Po has no other matter of special note, save only a
certain lake which is the original of sundry freshets of sweet and wholesome
water, which make the island to be most pleasant. It seemed so beautiful to
the first discouerer thereof, that he termed it Ilha fermosa, or The fair isle.

To the west of these two isles are situate the isle of Sant Matthew, and that
of Santa Cruz; and afterward having passed the Equinoctial, you come to the
isle of Sant Paul, and the isle of conception, both which were discovered by
Pedro Aluarez Cabral in the year 1501.

Of the isles of Cabo verde.
NExt unto Cape verde it self stand The Barbacene which are seven small isles
replenished with green trees, and full of strange birds unknown to us; and
yet are they utterly void of inhabitants. But those that are called the isles
of Cape verde (which by ancient authors are thought to have bin named Gorgones,
or Gorgades, or Hesperides) are nine in number, and are fituate between Cabo
verde and Cabo blanco. They were first discovered by Antonio di Nolli a
Genoway, and began in like sort to be peopled, in the year of our Lord 1440.
Albeit there are none of them now inhabited, but only the isle of Sant Iago,
and Isla del fo go or The burning isle. The principal of them all is Sant Iago
being seventy miles long, This town was taken by sir Francis Drake 1585. and
by sir (...) Sherley 1596.
whereon the Portugals have a fair and strong town called Ribera grande, with
a river running through it, and a commodious and secure haven: it is very
strongly seated between two mountains, and consists of five hundred
families at the least. The river (which springs two leagues from the city) is
beautified upon the banks thereof with Cedars, Orenge-trees, and diverse other
plants, amongst which the Palm tree of India that bears nuts, prospers
exceeding well. The herbs of Europe grow here as naturally as in their
original soil; howbeit the seeds thereof must every year be brought out of
Spain. The isle is generally uneven and mountainous: but the valleis are
passing fertile, and thoroughly inhabited: and here is sowed abundance of rice
and Saburro, which grows to ripenes in forty days. Howbeit the soil will
bear no wheat. Here is store of cotton also, the cloth whereof is dispersed
along the coast of Africa. The shee-gotes here, as likewise in all the isles
adjacent, bring forth three and more kids at a birth, every four months. When
the sun is in Cancer, it raineth here in a manner without ceasing.

To the west of Sant Iago stand the isles of Fogo and Braua being but of small
importance (albeit that of Fogo is in some parts thereof inhabited) and to the
North of the same is situate the isle of Maio, where there is a lake of two
leagues long, which is full of salt; the which is a common thing in all these
islands; but in one, more then in any of the other, in that it is full of such
like salt pits, and is therefore called The island of salt, being destitute of
all other living things, save only of wild gotes. The isle of Buena vista has
a name contrary to the quality; for it is without all show of beauty. Of the
others I have nothing worthy the observation.

Of the Isles of Arguin.
A Little to the south or on the backside of Cabo blanco, within a certain
gulf or baie which enters thirty miles into the maine, lie the isles of
Arguin, which were discovered in the year 1443. so called after the name of
the principal of them, which has great store of fresh water, whereof all the
residue are destitute. Here the king of Spain has a fortress, for the
traffic of gold and other rich commodities of those countries. These isles
are six or seven in number, all little ones, being inhabited by the Azanaghi,
who live of fish, whereof there is plenty in that baie. They go to sea in
certain small botes which they call Almadies. The names of the other isles (as
far as I conjecture) are The isle of Penguins, The isles of Nar, Tider, and
Adeget.

Of the Isles in the Atlantic Ocean, and first of the Canaries.
FOr so the isles named of old Insulae fortunatae (which ever since the decay
of the Roman empire, till within these two hundred years, lay undiscovered)
are at this present called. They are in number twelve, (although the ancient
writers make mention but of six) that is to say, Canaria, Lancarotta, (...)
ventura, Hierro, Palma, Gomera, Santa Clara, Isla de lobos, La Roca, Gratiosa,
Alegranca, and Infierno. They (...) abound with barley, sugar, honey, goats,
cheese, hides, and Orchel, being herb commodious to die cloth withal, and
whereof they make great merchandise. Amongst other beasts they have also
camels. The natural inhabitants of the country are of a good disposition, and
notable agilitie; but before they were discovered, they were so gross and
rude, as they knew not the use of fire. They believed in one creator of the
world, who punished the (...), and rewarded the good; and in this point they
all consented, but in other matters they were very different. They had no iron
at all, but yet esteemed it much when any came to their hands, for the use
thereof. They made no account of gold or silver, judging it a folly to esteem
of that metal, which could not serve for mechanical instruments. Their
weapons were stones and staves. They shaued their heads with certain sharp
stones like to (...). The women would not willingly nurse their own children,
but caused them to be suckled by goats. They were and are at this day
delighted with a kind of dance which they use also in Spain and in other
places, and because it took original from thence, it is called The Canaries.
From hence also they bring certain birds which sing at all times of the year.
The greatest of all these isles is the This isle with the principal town and
castles was sacked by the Hollanders in (...) Anno 1599.
Gran Canaria, containing fower-score and ten miles in circuit, and it has to
the number of nine thousand inhabitants. Tenerif is not altogether so great.
This is esteemed one of the highest islands in the world, by reason of a
mountain therein of the form of a diamond, The Pike of Tenerif.
being (as it is reported) fifteen leagues high, and it may be seen more then
threescore leagues off. Hierro has neither spring nor well, but is
miraculously furnished with water by a cloud which ouer-spreadeth a tree, from
whence distilleth so much moisture, as suffices both for men and cattle. This
cloud arises an hour or two before the sun, and is dissolved two hours
after sun rising. The water falls into a ponde made at the foot of the
tree. The isle of Palma is little, but beautiful, and abundant in sugar, wine,
flesh, and cheese: wherefore such ships as go from Spain to Terra firma, and
Brasil, do there ordinarily provide themselves of fresh victual. It is from
Lisbon a thousand miles by sea, being much subject to tempests, and especially
those which come from the northwest.

Of these islands Lancarota, Hierro, and Gomera are in the hands of private
men: the others belong to the crown.

Of the Isles of Madera and Puerto santo.
MAdera is the greatest and most principal of all the isles in the Atlantic
Madera in Spanish signifies wood or timber.
Ocean. It stands in two and thirty degrees and an half, forty miles to
the southwest of Puerto santo. So it is called, because at the first discovery
thereof it was all ouergrowen with mighty thick woods. Wherefore, to waste the
said woods, and to make it fit to be manured, the first discouerers set them on
fire, which continued burning (as some report) for the space of certain years
together: whereupon it grew so exceeding fertile, that of corn it yields
sixty fold for one: and for a certain space the fifte part of the sugars
amounted yearly to threescore thousand Arrouas (one of which Arrouas
contains five and twenty pounds of sixteen ounces the pound) but now it
comes not to the one half of that reckoning. This isle contains in compass
an hundred and sixty miles. It is dided into four regions or quarters, that
is to say Comerico, Santa Cruz, Funcial, and Camara de los Lobos. It abounds
with water: and besides diuiuers and sundry fountains, it has eight small
rivers which make it as fruitful and pleasant as a garden. It yields every
thing in such perfection, that Cadamosta (in regard of their excellency)
affirms all commodities which are there gathered, to be gold. It produces
infinite store of fruits, excellent wines, and sugars which cannot be matched.
Here is likewise great abundance of cedars, whereof are made fine chestes and
other works of account: for which purpose there are diverse sawing milles upon
the foresaid rivers. This isle is very scarce of oil and of corn. The head or
principal city hereof is Funciall, being the seat of an archbishop who has
8000. ducates of revenue. Here are two fortresses built which command the haven.

Forty miles to the northeast of Madera lies the isle of Puerto santo, so
Puerto santo, the principal (...) whereof was taken by sir Amias Preston 1596.
called because it was discovered upon the day of all saints, in the year
1428. It contains in compass fifteen miles, and abounds with oxen, wild
swine, and honey; and yields wheat sufficient for the use of the inhabitants.
Here grows a fruit in bigness and shape like unto a cherry, but of a yellow
color. The tree that (...) this fruit being cut near the root with certain
strokes of an hatcher, puts forth the year following a kind of gum which
is called Sanguis Draconis.

The generation of one shee-cony big with young, brought hither out The (...)
increase of one she-(...).
of Portugale at the first inhabiting of this isle, did in short time so
exceedingly increase, that the inhabitants were quite out of hope ever to
repair the ruin and waste which they committed. At this present there is a
small isle near unto Puerto santo which breeds nothing but conies.

Unto all these might be added such isles as lie near the African coast within
the streights of Gibraltar: the principal whereof (as namely Pennon or The
little rock over against Velles de Gumera, with the isle of Gerbi, etc.)
because they are largely described by John Leo, I hold it a matter merely
vain and superfluous in this place to stand upon them.

An approbation of the history ensuing, by me RICHARD HAKLVYT.
BEing moved to publish mine opinion as touching this present History of John
Leo; I do hold and affirm it to be the very best, the most particular, and
methodicall, that ever was written, or at least that has come to light,
concerning the countries, peoples, and affairs of Africa. For which cause, and
knowing well the sufficiency of the translator, my self was the first and
only man that persuaded him to take it in hand. Wherein how diligently and
faithfully he has done his part, and how he has enlarged and graced this
Geographicall history out of others, the best ancient, and modern writers, by
adding a description of all those African maine lands and isles, and other
matters very notable, which John Leo himself has omitted: I refer to the
consideration of all judicial and indifferent Readers.

Richard Hakluyt.

Unto this approbation of master Richard Hakluyt, I hold it not altogether
amiss to adioine the testimonies of certain modern writers, the most
approved and famous for their skill in Geographie and history, which they
have also purposely set down in commendation of this author of ours John Leo.

First therefore master John Baptista Ramusius, Secretary to the State of
Venice, and a man of singular judgment and diligence in these matters, in his
epistle Dedicatorie before the third edition of his first volume of voiages,
speaking of the manifold difficulties which he underwent to bring the important
discourses therein, to light, writteth unto learned Fracastorius in manner
following.

Oltra che gli essemplari che mi son venute all mani, etc.
Moreover (says he) those copies which have come to my hands, have been
extremely foul and vncorrect; a matter sufficient to discourage the mind of
any man, though never so forward and resolute, were it not sustained by
considering what unspeakable delight these discourses will breed unto all those
that are studious in Geography; and most especially this of Africa written by
John Leo. Concerning which part of the world, even till these our days, we
have had no knowledge in a manner out of any other author, or at leastwise
never any information so large, and of so undoubted truth. But what do I here
speak of the delight which those that are learned and studious shall reap
hereby? As though it were not a matter which will afford also very much
satisfaction unto the greatest Lords and Princes? Whom it concerns more then
any other to know the secrets and particularities of this African part of the
world, together with the situations of all the regions, provinces, and cities
thereof, and the dependences, which the princes and people have one toward
another. For albeit they may have some aduertisements and instructions from
others that have personally travailed these countries, and may think their
writings and discourses to be very large; yet am I well assured, that having
once read this book of John Leo, and thoroughly considered the matters therein
contained and declared, they will esteem the relations of all others, in
comparison of this, to be but brief, imperfect, and of little moment: so great
will be the fruit which to their exceeding contentment, all readers shall reap
hereby, etc. Thus far Ramusius.

Abraham Ortelius before his general map of Africa has these words.
Ex recentioribus, etc.
AMong the late writers (for your more perfect knowledge of Africa) you must
read Aloisius Cadamosta, Vasco da Gama, and Francis Aluarez, who travailed
Ethiopia; Sed omnium accuratissime etc. but of all others you have it most
exactly described by John Leo.

Also the same author before his map of Barbary and Biledulgerid.
But (says he) concerning these regions and people, you shall find a most
exquisite description in the History of John Leo, etc.

The opinion of JOHN BODIN in the fourth chapter of his method of reading
Histories concerning this our author.
Ita quoque Leo Afer, genere Maurus, etc.
SO likewise Leo Afer by descent a More, borne in Spain, in religion a
Mahumetan, and afterward a Christian, having by continual iournies traveled
almost over all Africa; as also over Asia minor, and a good part of Europe, was
taken by certain pirates, and presented unto pope Leo the tenth: under whom he
translated into Italian all those things which with incredible study and
diligence he had written in the Arabic tongue, concerning Africa, the manners,
laws, and customs of the African people, and the situation and true
description of the whole country. Their military discipline he lightly
passes over: and briefly mentions the conflicts and victories of famous
warrious, without any orations or ornaments of speech, rather like a Geographer
then a Chronicler: and with a perpetual delight of new and strange things, he
does (as it were) perforce detain his Reader, etc. And a little after he
adds: Profecto vnus est ex omnibus, etc. Certes of all others this is the
only man, by whom Africa, which for a thousand years before had lien buried
in the barbarous and gross ignorance of our people, is now plainly discovered
and laid open to the view of all beholders.

Antonius Posseuinus de historicis sect. 7. cap. 2.
Sed and perdigna est lectu, etc.
ALso the History of Leo Afer the Geographer is most worthy to be read,
because it contains an exact description of all the regions and people of
Africa; and it has been published in Italian and French.

JOHN LEO HIS FIRST BOOK OF the description of Africa, and of the memorable
things contained therein.
Why this part of the world was named Africa.
AFRICA is called in the Arabian tongue (...), of the word Faraca, which
signifies in the said language, to divide: but why it should be so called,
there are two opinions; the first is this: namely, because this part of the
world is divided from Europa by the Mediterran sea, and from Asia Others
divide it from Asia by the red sea.
by the river of Nilus. Others are of opinion, that this name Africa was
derived from one Ifricus the king of Arabia Foelix, who is said to have been
the first that ever inhabited these parts. This Ifricus waging war against
the king of Aslyria, and being at length by him driven out of his kingdom,
passed with his whole army over Nilus, and so conducting his troops westward,
made no delay till he was come unto the region lying about Carthage. Hence it
is that the Arabians do imagine the country about Carthage only, and the
regions lying westward thereof, to comprehend all Africa.

The borders of Africa.
AFRICA (if we may give credit unto the writers of that nation, being men of
learning, and most skillful Cosmographers) begins southward at certain
rivers issuing forth of a lake in the desert of Gaoga. Eastward it bordereth
upon the river Nilus. It extends northward to that part of Egypt, where Nilus
at seven mouths discharges his streams into the Mediterran sea: from whence
it stretches westward as far as the streites of Gibraltar, and is bounded on
that part with the utmost sea-towne of all Libya, called Non.
Nun. Likewise the south part thereof abutteth upon the Ocean sea, which
compasses Africa almost as far as the deserts of Gaoga.

The (...) of Africa.
OUR authors affirm, that Africa is (...) into four parts, that is to say,
Barbaria, Numidia, Libya, and the land of Negros. Barbaria takes beginning
from the hill called Meies, which is the extreme part of all the mountains of
Atlas, being distant from Alexandria almost three hundred miles. It is bounded
on the North side with the Mediterran sea, stretching thence to mount-Meies
aforesaid, and from mountMeies extending itself to the streites of Gibraltar.
Westward it is limited with the said streites, from whence winding it self out
of the Mediterran sea into the maine Ocean, it is enclosed with the most
westerly point of Atlas: namely, at that Western cape which is next unto the
town called Messa. And southward it is bounded with that side of Atlas which
lies toward the Mediterran sea. This is the most noble and worthy region of
all Africa, the inhabitants whereof are of a brown or tawnie color, being a
civil people, and prescribe wholesome laws and constitutions unto themselves.

The second part of Africa is called of the Latins Numidia, but of the
Arabians Biledulgerid: this region brings forth dates in great abundance. It
begins eastward at the city of Eloacat, which is an hundred miles distant
from Egypt, and extends west as far as the town of (...).
Nun, standing upon the Ocean sea. Northward it is enclosed with the south side
of Atlas. And the south part thereof bordereth upon the sandy deserts of
Libya. All the Arabians do usually call it The land of dates: because this
only region of Africa bears dates.

The third part called of the Latins Libya, and of the Arabians Sarra (which
word signifies a desert) begins eastward at that part of Nilus which is
next unto the city of Eloacat, and from thence runs westward as far as the
Ocean sea. Northwarde it is bounded with Numidia, southward it abutteth upon
the land of Negros, eastward it takes beginning at the kingdom of Gaoga, and
stretches westwarde even to the land of Gualata, which bordereth upon the
Ocean sea.

The fourth part of Africa which is called the land of Negros, begins
eastward at the kingdom of Gaoga, from whence it extends west as far as
Gualata. The north part thereof is enclosed with the desert of Libya, and the
south part, which is unknown unto us, with the Ocean sea: howbeit the
merchants which daily come from thence to the kingdom of Tombuto, have
sufficiently described the situation of that country unto us. This land of
Negros has a mighty river, which taking his The (...) of Niger.
name of the region, is called Niger: this river takes his original from the
east out of a certain desert called by the foresaid Negros Seu. Others will
have this river to spring out of a certain lake, and so to run westward till
it exonerateth itself into the Ocean sea. Our Cosmographers affirm, that the
said river of Niger is derived out of Nilus, which they imagine for some
certain space to be swallowed up of the earth, and yet at last to burst forth
into such a lake as is before mentioned. Some others are of opinion, that this
river begins westward to spring out of a certain mountain, and so running
east, to make at length a huge lake: which verily is not like to be true; for
they usually sail westward from Tombuto to the kingdom of Ginea, yea and to
the land of Melli also; both which in respect of Tombuto are situate to the
west: neither has the said land of Negros any kingdoms comparable, for
beautiful and pleasant soil, unto those which adioine unto the banks of
Niger. And here it is to be noted, that (according to the opinion of our
Cosmographers) Aethiopia.
that land of Negros by which Nilus is said to run (namely, that part of the
world which stretches eastward even to the Indian sea, some northerly parcel
whereof abutteth upon the red sea, to wit, the country which lies without the
gulf of Arabia) is not to be called any member or portion of Africa; and that
for many reasons, which are to be found in the process of this history set
down more at large: The said country is called by the Latins Aethiopia. From
thence come certain religious Friars seared or branded on the face with an hot
iron, who are to be seen almost over all Europe, and specially at Rome. These
people have an Emperor, which they call Prete Gianni, the greater part of that
land being inhabited with Christians. Howbeit, there is also a certain
Mahumetan among them, which is said to possess a great dominion.

A division of the four forenamed parts of Africa.
Barbary is distinguished into four kingdoms: the first whereof is the
kingdom of Maroco; which is likewise divided into seven regions or provinces;
namely, Hea, Sus, Guzula, the territory of Maroco, Duccala, Hazcora, and
Tedles. The second kingdom of Barbary called Fez, comprehends in like sort
seven regions within the bounds thereof; to wit, Temesne, the territory of
Fez, Azgara, Habat.
Elabat, Errif, Garet, and Chauz.
Elcauz. The third kingdom is called Tremizen.
Telensin, and has three regions under it, namely, the mountains, Tenez, and
Algezer. The fourth kingdom of Barbary is named Tunis; under which are
comprised four regions, that is to say, Bugia, Constantina, Tripolis in
Barbary, and Ezzaba, which is a good part of Numidia. Bugia has always been
turmoiled with continual wars; because sometimes it was subject unto the
king of Tunis, and sometimes again unto the king of Tremizen. Certain it is
that even until these our days, this Bugia was a kingdom of it self, and so
continued, till the principal city of that region was at the commandment of
Ferdinando the king of Castile, taken by one Peter of Navarre.

The division of Numidia.
THis is the basest part of all Africa; neither will our Cosmographers
vouchsafe it the name of a kingdom, by reason that the inhabitants thereof are
so far distant asunder; which you may easily conjecture by that which
follows. Tesset a city of Numidia contains about four hundred families,
and is in regard of the Libyan desert, severed from all places of habitation
almost three hundred miles; wherefore this second part is thought by diverse not
to be worthy the name of a kingdom. Howbeit we will make some relation of
the habitable parts of Numidia; some whereof may not unfitly be compared with
other regions of Africa, as for example, that of Segelmess, which territory of
Numidia lies over against Barbary; likewise Zeb, which is situate against
Bugia, and the signiorie of Biledulgerid, which extends unto the kingdom of
Tunis. Reserving therefore many particulars for the second part of this
history, we will make our entry and beginning at those places, which lie upon
the west of Numidia: the names whereof be these; Tesset, Guaden, Ifren, Hacca,
Dare, Tebelbelt, Todga, Fercale, Segelmess, Benigumi, Fighig, Tegua, Tsabit,
Tegorarin, Mesab, Tegort, and Guarghela. The region of Zeb contains five
towns, to wit, Pescara, Elborgh, Nesta, Taolac, and Deusin: so many cities
likewise has the territory of Biledulgerid; namely, Teozar, Caphesa, Nefreoa,
Elchamid, and Chalbis: and from hence eastward are found the isles of Gerbe,
Garion, Mesellata, Mestrata, Teoirraga, Gademis, Fizza, Augela, Birdeoa, and
Eloacat. These are the names of the most famous places of all Numidia, being
bounded (as is said before) westward upon the Ocean sea, and eastward with the
river of Nilus.

A description of the Libyan deserts, which lie between Numidia and the (...)
of Negros.
THese deserts have not as yet any certain name amongst us, (...) they be
divided into five parts, and receive all their denomination from the
inhabitants which dwell upon them, that is to say, from the Numidians, who are
in like sort themselves divided into five parts also, to wit, the people or
tribes called Zanega, Ganziga, Terga, Leuta, and Berdeoa. There be likewise
certain places, which take some proper and particular name from the goodness
and badnes of the soil; as namely the desert of Azaohad, so called for the
drought and unfruitfulness of that place: likewise Hair, albeit a desert, yet so
called for the goodness and temperature of the air.

A division of the land of Negros into several kingdoms.
Moreover, the land of Negros is divided into many kingdoms: whereof albeit a
great part be unknown unto us, and removed far out of our trade; we will
notwithstanding make relation of those places, where we our selves have abode,
and which by long experience are grown very familiar unto us: as likewise of
some other places, from whence merchants used to travel unto the same cities
wherein my self was then resident; from whom I learned right (...) the state
of their countries. I John (...) over (...) of the (...) of Negros.
my self saw fifteen kingdoms of the Negros: howbeit there are many more,
which although I saw not with mine own eyes, yet are they by the Negros
sufficiently known and frequented. Their names therefore (beginning from the
west, and so proceeding Eastward and Southward) are these following: Gualata,
Ghinea, Melli, Tombuto, Gago, Guber, Agadez, Cano, Casena, Zegzeg, Zanfara,
Guangara, Burno, Gaoga, Nube. These fifteen kingdoms are for the most part
situate upon the river Niger, through the which merchants usually travel from
Gualata to the city of Cairo.
Alcair in Egypt. The journey indeed is very long, but yet secure and void of
danger. All the said kingdoms adioine one upon another; ten whereof are
separated either by the river Niger, or by some sandy desert: and in times
past each one of the fifteen had a several king, but now About the year 1526.
at this present, they are all in a manner subject unto three kings only:
namely, to the king of Tombuto who is Lord of the greatest part; to the king of
Borno, who governs the least part, and the residue is in subjection unto the
king of Gaoga: howbeit he that possesses the kingdom of Ducala has a very
small train attending upon him. Likewise these kingdoms have many other
kingdoms bordering upon the South frontiers of them: to wit, Bito, Temiam,
Dauma, Medra, and Gorhan; the governors and inhabitants whereof are most rich
and industrious people, great lovers of justice and equity, albeit some lead a
brutish kind of life.

Of the habitations of Africa, and of the signification of this word Barbar.
Our Cosmographers and historiographers affirm, that in times past Africa was
altogether disinhabited, except that part which is now called the land of
Negros: and most certain it is, that Barbary and Numidia were for many ages
destitute of inhabitants. The tawnie people of the said region were called by
the name of Barbar, being derived of the verb Barbara, which in their tongue
signifies to murmur: because the African tongue sounds in the ears of the
Arabians, no otherwise then the voice of beasts, which utter their sounds
without any accents. Others will have Barbar to be one word twice repeated,
for so much as Bar in the Arabian tongue signifies a desert. For (say they) when
king Iphricus being by the Assyrians or Aethiopians driven out of his own
kingdom, traveled toward Egypt, and seeing himself so oppressed with his
enemies, that he knew not what should become of him and his followers, he asked
his people how or which way it was possible to escape, who answered him
Bar-Bar, that is, to the desert, to the desert: giving him to understand by
this speech, that he could have no safer refuge, then to cross over Nilus, and
to flee unto the desert of Africa. And this reason seems to agree with them,
which affirm the Africans to be descended from the people of Arabia foelix.

The original of the people of Africa.
ABout the original of the Africans, our historiographers do much disagree.
For some will have them to be derived from the inhabitants of Palaestina;
because (as they say) being expelled out of their own country by the
Assyrians, they came at length into Africa, and seeing the fruitfulnes of the
soil, chose it to be their place of habitation. Others are of opinion, that
they took their original from the Sabeans a people of Arabia foelix, and
that, before such time as they were put to flight by the Assyrians or
Aethiopians, as has been aforesaid. Some others report, that the Africans
descended from certain people of Forte Asia minor.
Asia, who being chased thence by reason of wars which were waged against
them, fled into Greece, which at the same time had no inhabitants at all.
Howbeit the enemy still pursuing them, they were forced to cross the sea of
Morea, and being arrived in Africa, to settle themselves there: but their
enemies abode still in Greece. All which opinions and reports are to be
understood only of the original of the tawnie people, that is to say, of the
Numidians and Barbarians. For all the Negros or black Moors take their
descent from Chus, the son of Cham, who was the son of Noe. But whatsoever
difference there be between the Negros and the tawnie Moors, certain it is
that they had all one beginning. For the Negros are descended of the
Philistims, and the Philistims of Mesraim the Genesis the 10. v. the 6. Mezraim
is accounted the (...) of Chus.
son of Chus: but the tawnie Moors fetch their petigree from the Sabeans,
and it is evident that Saba was begotten of Genesis 10. 7.
Rama, which was the eldest son of Chus. Diverse other opinions there be as
touching this matter: which because they seem not so necessary, we have
purposely omitted.

A division of the tawnie Moors into sundry tribes or nations.
THE tawnie Moors are divided into five several people or tribes: to wit, the
tribes called Zanhagi, Musmudi, Zeneti, Hacari, and Gumeri. The tribe of
Musmudi inhabit the western part of mount Atlas, from the province of Hea to
the river of Guadalhabit.
Seruan. Likewise they dwell upon the south part of the said mountain, and
upon all the inward plains of that region. These Musmudae have four provinces
under them: namely, Hea, Sus, Guzula, and the territory of Marocco. The tribe
of Gumeri possess certain mountains of Barbary, dwelling on the sides of
those mountains which lie over against the Mediterran sea: as likewise they
are Lords of all the river called in their language Rif. This river Tremizen
called by the ancient Cosmographers Caesaria or Mauritania Caesariensis.
has his fountain near unto the streites of Gibraltar, and thence runs
eastwards to the kingdom of Tremizen, called by the Latins Caesaria.

These two tribes or people have several habitations by themselves: the other
three are dispersed confusiuely over all Africa: howbeit they are, like
strangers, discerned one from another by certain properties or tokens,
maintaining continual war among themselves, especially they of Numidia.
These (I say) are those very people (as some report) who had no other places
then tents and wide fields to repose themselves in: and it is reported, that in
times past they had great conflicts together, and that the vanquished were sent
to inhabit towns and cities, but the conquerors held the champions and fields
unto themselves, and there settled their abode. Neither is it altogether
unlikely; because the inhabitants of cities have all one and the same language
with the country people. For the Zeneti, whether they dwell in the city or in
the country, speak all one kind of language: which is likewise to be
understood of the rest. The tribes of Zeneti, Haoari, and Sanhagi; inhabit the
country of Temesne: sometimes they live peaceably, and sometimes again,
calling to mind their ancient quarrels, they break forth into cruel wars
and manslaughters. Some of these people bear rule over all Africa, as namely
the Zeneti, who in times past vanquished the family called Idris; from which
some affirm the true and natural Dukes of Fez, and the founders of the same
city to derive their petigree: their progeny likewise was called Mecnasa.
There came afterward out of Numidia, another family of the Zeneti called
Magraoa: this Magraoa chased the family of Mecnasa with all their Dukes and
chieftaines out of their dominions. Not long after, the said tribe of Magraoa
was expelled in like sort by certain others of the race of the Sanhagij,
called by the name of Luntuna, which came also out of the desert of Numidia.

By this family was the country of Temesna in process of time utterly
spoiled and wasted, and all the inhabitants thereof slain, except those which
were of their own tribe and kindred of Luntuna, unto whom was allotted the
region of Ducala to inhabit, and by them was built the city commonly called
Maroco. It fell out afterward by the Who were the founders of Maroco.
inconstancy of fortune, that one Elmahdi the principal (...) preacher among
them, conspiring with the Hargij (these Hargij were of the family of Musmuda)
expelled the whole race of the Luntuna, and usurped that kingdom unto
himself. After this man's decease, succeeded in his place one of his disciples
called Habdul Mumen a Banigueriaghel of the kindred of the Sanhagij. The
kingdom remained unto this family about an 120. years, whereunto all Africa
in a manner was subject: At length being deposed by the Banimarini, a
generation of the Zeneti, the said family was put to flight: which Banimarini
are said to have reigned afterward for the space of 170. years. The Banimarini
which descended of the Sanhagij and of Magroa, waged continual war against
Banizeijan the king of Telensin: likewise the progeny of Hafasa, and of
Musmuda are at variance and dissension with the king of Tunis. So that you see
what stirs and tumults have at all times been occasioned in those regions by
the foresaid five families.

Certain it is, that neither the Gumeri, nor the Haoari have at this present
any jurisdiction at all; albeit heretofore (as we read in their chronicles)
they had some certain dominion, before such time as they were infected with
the Mahumetan law. Out of all which it is evident, that in times past all the
foresaid people had their habitations and tents in the plain fields: every one
of which favored their own faction, and exercised all labors necessary for
man's life, as common among them. The governors of the country attended their
droues and flocks; and the citizens applied themselves unto some manual art,
or to husbandry. The said people are divided into five hundred several
families, as appears by the genealogies of the Africans, author whereof is
one Ibnu Rachu, whom I have oftentimes read and perused. Some writers are of
opinion, that the king of Tombuto, the king of Melli, and the king of Agadez
fetch their original from the people of Zanaga, to wit, from them which
inhabit the desert.

The agreement or variety of the African lauguage.
THe foresaid five families or people, (...) divided into hundreds of
progenies, and having innumerable habitations, do notwithstanding use all one
kind of language, called by them Aquel Amarig, that is, the noble tongue: the
Arabians Aquel Amarig
which inhabit Africa, call it a barbarous tongue; and this is the true and
natural language of the Africans. Howbeit it is altogether different from
other languages, although it has diverse words common with the Arabian tongue;
whereupon some would infer, that the Africans (as is above said) came by
lineall descent from the Sabeans, a people of Arabia foelix. Others say, that
these words were even then invented when the Arabians came first into Africa,
and began to take possession thereof: but these authors were so rude and
grosse-witted, that they left no writings behind them, which might be alleged
either for, or against. Moreover they have among them another diversity, not
only of (...), but of significant words also: as namely, they which dwell
near unto the Arabians, and exercise much traffic with them, do for the
greater part use their language. Yea, all the Gumeri in a manner, and most of
the Haoari speak Arabian, though corruptly; which (I suppose) came first
hereupon to pass, for that the said people have had long acquaintance and
conversation with the Arabians. The Negros have diverse languages among
themselves, among which they call one Sungai, and the same is current in many
regions; as namely, in Gualata, Tombuto, Ghinea, Melli, and Gago. Another
language there is among the Negros, which they call Guber; and this is rife
among the people of Guber, of Cano, of Casena, of Perzegreg, and of Guangra.
Likewise the kingdom of Borno has a peculiar kind of speech, altogether like
unto that, which is used in Gaoga. And the kingdom of Nube has a language of
great affinity with the Chaldean, Arabian, and Egyptian toongs. But all the
seatowns of Africa from the Mediterran sea to the mountains of Atlas, speak
broken Arabian. Except the kingdom and town of Maroco, and the inland
Numidians bordering upon Maroco, Fez, and Tremizen; all which, use the
Barbarian tongue. Howbeit they which dwell over against Tunis and Tripoli, speak
indeed the Arabian language; albeit most corruptly.

Of the Arabians inhabiting the city of Africa.
OF that army which was sent by Califa (...).
Otmen the third, in the four hundred year of the Hegeira, there came into
Africa fowerscore thousand gentlemen and others, who having subdued sundry
provinces, at length arrived in Africa: and there the General of the whole
army called (...).
Hucha (...) Nafich remained. This man built that great city which is called
of us Cairaoan.
Alcair. For he stood in fear of the people of Tunis, least they should betray
him, misdoubting also that they would procure aid out of Sicily, and so give
him the encounter. Wherefore with all his treasure which he had got, he
traveled to the desert and firm ground, distant from Tunis.
Carthage about one hundred and twenty miles, and there is he said to have
built the city of (...).
Alcair. The remnant of his soldiers he commanded to keep those places, which
were most secure and fit for their defense, and willed them to build where no
rock nor fortification was. Which being done, the Arabians began to inhabit
Africa, and to disperse themselves among the Africans, who, because they had
been for certain years subject unto the Romans or Italians, used to speak
their language: and hence it is, that the natural and mother-toong of the
Arabians, which has great affinity with the African tongue, grew by little
and little to be corrupted: and so they report that these two nations at length
conioined themselves in one. Howbeit the Arabians usually do blaze their
petigree in daily and triuiall songs; which custom as yet is common both to
The Moors of Granada.
us, and to the people of Barbary also. For no man there is, be he never so
base, which will not to his own name, add the name of his nation; as for
example, Arabian, Barbarian, or such like.

Of the Arabians which dwell in tents.
THE Mahumetan priests always forbad the Arabians to pass over Nilus with
their armies and tents. How beit in the four hundred year of the Hegeira we
read, that they were permitted so to do by a certain factious and
schismatic A (...) patriarch.
Califa: because one of his nobles had rebelled against him, usurping the city
of Cairaoan, and the greatest part of Barbary. After the death of which
rebel, that kingdom remained for some years unto his posterity and family;
whose jurisdiction (as the African chronicles report) grew so large and strong
in the time of Elcain (the Mahumetan Califa and patriark of Arabia) that he
sent unto them one Gehoar, whom of a slave he had made his counselor, Gehoar
a slave by condition, conquered all Barbary, Numidia, Egypt, and Syria.
with an huge army. This Gehoar conducting his army westward, recovered all
Numidia and Barbary. Insomuch that he pierced unto the region of Sus, and
there claimed most ample tribute: all which being done, he returned back unto
his Calipha, and most faithfully surrendered unto him whatsoever he had gained
from the enemy. The Calipha seeing his prosperous success, began to aspire
unto greater exploites. And Gehoar most firmly promised, that as he had
recovered that western dominion unto his Lord, so would he likewise by force
of war most certainly restore unto him the countries of the East, to wit,
Egypt, Syria, and all Arabia; and protested moreover that with the greatest
hazard of his life, he would be avenged of all the injuries offered by the
family of Labhus unto his Lords predecessors, and would reuest him in the
royal seat of his most famous grandfathers, great-grandfathers, and
progenitors. The Calipha liking well his audacious promise, caused an army of
fower-score thousand soldiers, with an infinite sum of money and other things
necessary for the wars, to be delivered unto him. And so this valiant and
stout chieftaine being provided for warfare, conducted his troops through the
deserts of Egypt and Barbary; and having first (...) to flight the
vice-Califa of Egypt (who fled unto Eluir the Califa of Bagdet) in short time
he subdued very easily all the provinces of Egypt and Syria. Howbeit he could
not as yet hold himself secure; fearing least the Califa of Bagdet would
assail him with an army out of Asia, and least the garrisons which he had
left to keep Barbary, should be constrained to forsake those conquered
provinces. Wherefore he built (...), and caused it to be walled round about.
In which city he left one of his most trusty captains, with a great part of
the army: and this Gehoar the first (...) of Cairo.
city he called by the name of Alchair, which afterward by others was named
Cairo. This Alchair is said daily so to have increased, that no city of the
world for buildings and inhabitants was any way comparable thereunto. Now when
Gehoar perceived that the Calipha of Bagdet made no preparation for war, he
forthwith wrote unto his Lord, that all the conquered cities yielded due
honor unto him, and that all things were in quiet and tranquillity: and
therefore, that himself (if he thought good) should come over into Egypt, and
thereby with his only presence should prevail more to recover the remnant of
his dominions, then with never so huge an army: for he was in good hope that
the Calipha of Bagdet hearing of his expedition, would leave his kingdom and
prelacie, and would betake himself to flight. This notable and joyful message
no sooner came to the ears of Califa Elcain; but he being by his good fortune
much more encouraged then before, and not forethinking himself, what mischief
might ensue, levied a great army, appointing for viceroy of all Barbary one
of the family of Sanagia aforesaid, finding him afterward not to be his
trusty friend. Moreover Califa Elcain arriving at Alchair, and being most
honorably entertained by his servant Gehoar, began to think upon great
affairs, and having gathered an huge army, resolved to wage battle against
the Califa of Bagdet. In the mean season he that was appointed viceroy of
Barbary compacting with the Calipha of Bagdet, yielded himself and all
Barbary into his hands. Which the Califa most kindly accepted, and ordained
him king over all Africa. But Califa Elcain hearing this news at Alchair was
woonderfully afflicted in mind; partly because he saw himself repelled from
his own kingdom, and partly for that he had spent all his money which he
brought with him: insomuch that he knew not what in the world to do,
determining some severe punishment for Gehoar, by whose counsel he left his
kingdom of Arabia. Howbeit there was one of his secret counselors a very
learned and witty man, who seeing his Lord so sad and pensive, and being
desirous by some good advise to prevent the danger imminent, comforted him in
this wise: Your highness knows (most invincible Califa) that fortune is most
variable, and that the courage of your soldiers is no whit daunted by reason of
these mishaps. For mine own part, as I have heretofore showed my self to be
your trusty servant, so will I at this time give you such profitable counsel,
whereby you may within short space recover all those dominions which have been
so treacherously taken from you, and may without al peradventure most easily
attain unto your own hearts desire. And this you may do without maintaining
any army at all; yea, I assure you, if you please to take mine advise, that I
will forthwith procure you such an army, as shall give you great store of
money, and yet notwithstanding shall do you good service also. The Califa
being somewhat (...) these speeches, asked his counselor how this might
possibly be brought to effect: My Lord (says his counselor) certain it is,
that the Arabians are now grown so populous and to so great a number, that all
Arabia cannot contain them, scarcely will the yearly increase of the ground
suffice to feed their droues, and you see with what great famine they are
afflicted, and how they are destitute not only of habitations, but even of
victuals and sustenance. Wherefore if you had heretofore given them leave,
they would long ere this have invaded Africa. And if you will now license them
so to do, doubt you not, but that you shall receive of them an huge mass of
gold. This counsel could not altogether satisfy the Califa his mind: for he
knew right well that the Arabians would so waste all Africa, as it should
neither be profitable for himself, nor for his enemies. Notwithstanding,
seeing that his kingdom was altogether endangered, he thought it better to
accept those sums of money which his counselor promised, and so to be
revenged of his enemy, then to lose both his kingdom and gold all at once.
Wherefore he permitted all Arabians, which would pay him ducats apeece, freely
to enter Africa; conditionally that they would show themselves most deadly
enemies unto the treacherous king of Barbary. Which liberty Ten tribes of
Arabians (...) Africa.
being granted unto them, it is reported that ten tribes or families of
Arabians, being half the people of Arabia deserta, came immediately into
Africa; unto whom certain inhabitants of Arabia foelix joined themselves,
insomuch that there were found amongst them about fifty thousand persons able
to bear arms: their women, children, and cattle were (...) Rachu a (...).
almost innumerable: the story whereof Ibnu Rachu, the most diligent
chronicler of African affairs (whom we have before mentioned) sets down at
large. These Arabians having trauersed the desert between Egypt and Barbary,
first laid siege unto Tripolis a city of Barbary, which being overcome, they
slew a great part of the citizens, the residue escaping by flight. Next of all
they encountered the town of Capes, which was by them taken and vanquished. At
length they besieged Cairaoan also; howbeit the citizens being sufficiently
provided of victuals, are said to have endured the siege for eight months:
which being expired, they were constrained to yield: at what time there was
nothing in Cairaoan but woeful slaughters, hideous outcries, and present death.
This land the Arabians divided among themselves, and began to people and
inhabit the same; requiring in the mean space large tributes of the towns
and provinces subject unto them. And so they possessed all Africa, until such
time as one Joseph the son of Ieffin attained to the kingdom of Marocco. This
Joseph was the first king of Marocco, who endeavored by all means to advance
the friends and kindred of the late deceased king of Africa unto the kingdom;
neither did he cease until he had expelled all the Arabians out of Cairaoan.
Howbeit the Arabians possessed the regions thereabout, giving themselves wholly
to spoils and robberies: and the friends of the said deceased king could bear
rule but in certain places only. Afterward succeeded in the kingdom of
Marocco one Mansor, who was the fourth king and prelate of that Mahumetan sect
which was called Muachedim. This man, albeit his grandfathers and great
grandfathers had always favored the posterity and friends of the foresaid
deceased African king, and had restored them to their ancient dignity; devised
altogether how to oppose himself against them, and to usurp all their
authority. Wherefore making a fained league with them, we read, that he
provoked the Arabians against them, and so very easily overcame them. Afterward
Mansor brought the greatest part of the Arabians into the western dominions of
Africa; unto the better sort of whom he gave the habitation of Duccala and
Azgara, and unto the baser remnant he bequeathed the possession of Numidia. But
in process of time he commanded the Numidian slaves to be set at liberty, and
so in despite of the Arabians, he caused them to inhabit that part of Numidia
which he had allotted unto them. But as for the Arabians of Azgara and of
certain other places in Barbary, he brought them all under his subjection.
For the Arabians out of deserts are like fishes without water: they had indeed
often attempted to get into the deserts; but the mountains of Atlas, which
were then possessed by the Barbarians, hindered their passage. Neither had they
liberty to pass over the plains, for the residue of the Barbarians were
there planted. Wherefore their pride being abated, they applied themselves unto
husbandry, having no where to repose themselves, but only in villages,
cottages, and tents. And their misery was so much the greater, in that they
were constrained yearly to disburse unto the king of Marocco most ample
tribute. Those which inhabited Duccala, because they were an huge multitude,
easily freed themselves from all tribute, and imposition. A great part of the
Arabians remained still at Tunis, for that Mansor had refused to carry them
along with him: who, after the death of the said Mansor, grew to be Lords of
Tunis, and so continued, till they resigned their government unto the people
called Abu-Haf; upon condition that they should pay them half the revenues
thereof: and this condition has remained firm even until our days. Howbeit,
because the Arabians are increased to such innumerable swarms, that the whole
revenues are not sufficient for them, the king of Tunis most justly allows
some of 1526.
them their duties, to the end they may make secure passage for merchants,
which indeed they perform without molestation or hurt of any. But the residue
which are deprived of their pay, betake themselves wholly to robberies, thefts,
slaughters, and such other monstrous outrages. For these, lurking always in
the woods, no sooner see any merchant approaching, but suddenly they break
forth, depriving him of his goods and life also: insomuch that now merchants
dare not pass that way but with a garrison of safe conduct. And so they pass
sometimes to their great inconvenience. For they are notwithstanding
constrained to give unto the foresaid Arabians, which are in pay with the king
of Tunis, great sums of money: and are likewise oftentimes so in danger of
robbers, that they lose both their goods and lives.

Adiuision of the Arabians which inhabit Africa, and are called by the name of
Barbarians, into diverse progenies or kinreds.
THE Arabians which inhabit Africa are divided into three parts: one part
whereof are called Cachin, the second Hilell, and the third Machill. The Cachin
are divided into three nations or tribes; to wit, the tribes of Etheg, Sumait,
and Sahid. Moreover Etheg is divided into three families; that is to say, the
family of Delleg, Elmuntefig, and Subair: and these are dispersed into many
regions. Hilel are derived into four generations; to wit, the people of
Benihemir, of Rieh, of Sufien, and of Chusain. The family of Benihemir is
divided into the linages of Huroam, Hucben, Habrum and Mussim. The tribe of
Rieh are distributed into the kinreds called Deuvad, Suaid, Asgeg, Elcherith,
Enedri, and Garfam; which kinreds possess many dominions. Machil have three
tribes under them: to wit, Mastar, Hutmen, and Hassan. Mastar are divided into
Ruchen, and Selim; Hutmen into Elhasi and Chinan; and Hassan into Deuihessen,
Deuimansor, and Deuihubaidulla. Deuihessen is distinguished into the kinreds
called Dulein, Berbun, Vodein, Racmen and Hamram; Deuimansor into Hemrun,
Menebbe, Husein, and Albuhusein; and lastly Deuihubaidulla, into Garag, Hedeg,
Teleb, and Geoan. All these do in a manner possess innumerable regions;
insomuch that to reckon them up at large, were a matter not only difficult,
but almost impossible.

Of the habitations and number of the foresaid Arabians.
THE most noble and famous Arabians were they of the family of Etheg, unto
whom Almansor gave the regions of Duccala and of Tedles to inhabit. These
Arabians even till our times have been put to great distress and hazard,
partly by the Portugal king, and partly by the king of Fez. They have at all
oportunities, if need should require, a hundred thousand soldiers fit to bear
arms, a great part whereof are horsemen. The Arabians called Sumait enjoy that
part of the Libyan desert which lies over against the desert of Tripoly. These
make often invasions into Barbary, for they have no places allotted them
therein, but they and their camels do perpetually remain in the deserts. They
are able to levy fowerscore thousand soldiers, the greatest part being
footmen. Likewise the tribe of Sahid do inhabit the desert of Libya: and
these have had always great league and familiarity with the king of Guargala.
They have such abundance of cattle, that they do plentifully supply all the
cities of that region with flesh, and that especially in summer time, for all
the winter they stir not out of the deserts. Their number is increased to
about a hundred and fifty thousand, having not many horsemen among them. The
tribe of Delleg possess diverse habitations, howbeit (...).
Caesaria contains the greatest part of them. Some also inhabit upon the
frontiers of the kingdom of Bugia; who are said to receive a yearly stipend
from their next neighbors. But the least part of them dwell upon the
field-countrey of Acdes, upon the borders of Mauritania, and upon some part of
mount Atlas, being subject unto the king of Fez. The people of Elmuntefig are
seated in the province of Azgar, and are called by the later writers Elcaluth.
These also pay certain yearly tribute unto the King of Fez, being able to
furnish about eight thousand horsemen to the wars. The kindred of Sobair do
inhabit not far from the kingdom of Gezeir, being many of them under the pay
of the king of Tremizen, and are said to enjoy a great part of Numidia. They
have, more or less, three thousand most warlike horsemen. They possess
likewise great abundance of camels; for which cause they abide all winter in
the deserts. The remnant of them occupies the plain which lies between Sala
and Mecnes. These have huge droues of cattle, and exercise themselves in
husbandry, being constrained to pay some yearly tribute unto the king of Fez.
They have horsemen, who, as a man may say, are naturally framed to the wars,
about four thousand in number.

Of the people of Hillel, and of their habitations.
HIllel, which are also called Benihamir, dwell upon the frontiers of the
kingdom of Tremizen and Oran. These range up and down the desert of
Tegorarin, being in pay under the king of Tremizen, and of great riches and
power; insomuch that they have at all times in a readiness for the (...) six
thousand horsemen. The tribe of Hurua possess only the borders of Mustuganim.
These are savage people, giving themselves wholly to spoils and robberies, and
alienating their minds from the wars. They never come forth of the deserts;
for the people of Barbary will neither allow them any places of habitation,
nor yet any stipend at all: horsemen they have to the number of two thousand.
The kindred of Hucban are next neighbors unto the region of Melian, who
receive certain pay from the king of Tunis. They are rude and wild people,
and in very deed estranged from al humanity: they have (as it is reported)
about fifteen hundred horsemen. The tribe of Habru inhabit the region lying
between Oran and Mustuganim: these exercise husbandry, paying yearly tribute
unto the king of Tremizen, and being scarce able to make one hundred horsemen.

The people called Mussim possess those deserts of Masila which extend unto
the kingdom of Bugia. These likewise are given only to theft and robbery;
they take tribute both of their own people, and of other regions adjoining
unto them. The tribe of Rieeh inhabit those deserts of Libya which border upon
Constantina. These have most ample dominions in Numidia, being now divided into
six parts. This right famous and warlike nation receives stipende from the
king of Tunis, having five thousand horsemen at command. The people of Suaid
enjoy that desert, which is extended unto the signiorie of Tenez. These have
very large possessions, receiving stipend from the king of Tremizen, being men
of notable dexterity, as well in the wars as in all other conversation of
life. The kindred of Azgeg dwell not all together in one place: for part of
them inhabit the region of Garet among the people called Hemram: and the
residue poslesse that part of Duccala which lies near unto Azaphi. The tribe
of Elcherit dwell upon that portion of Helin which is situate in the plain of
Sahidim, having the people of Heah tributarie unto them, and being a very
uncivil and barbarous people. The people called Enedri are seated in the
plain of Heah: but the whole region of Heah maintains almost four thousand
horsemen; which notwithstanding are unfit for the wars. The people of Garfa
have sundry mansions; neither have they any king or governor. They are
dispersed among other generations, and especially among the kindreds of Manebbi
and Hemram. These convey dates from Segelmessa to the kingdom of Fez, and
carry back again from thence such things as are necessary for Segelmess.

Of the tribe of Machil.
THE people called Ruche, who are thought to be descended from Mastar, do
possess that desert, which lies next unto Deeds and Farcala. They have very
small dominions, for which cause they are accounted no whit rich; howbeit they
are most valiant soldiers, and exceeding swift of foot; insomuch that they
esteem it a great disgrace, if one of their footmen be vanquished by two
horsemen. And you shall find scarce any one man among them, which will not
outgoe a very swift horse; be the journey never so long. They have about five
hundred horsemen; but most warlike footmen, to the number of eight thousand.
Selim inhabit upon the river of Dara; from whence they range up and down the
deserts. They are endowed with great riches, carrying every year merchandise
unto the kingdom of Tombuto, and are thought to be in high favor with the
king himself. Traffic to Tombuto.
A large jurisdiction they have in Darha and great plenty of camels: and for
all oportunities of war they have ever in a readiness three thousand
horsemen. The tribe of Elhasis dwells upon the seacoast near unto Messa.
They do arm about five hundred horsemen, and are a nation altogether rude and
unacquainted in the wars. Some part of them inhabiteth Azgara. Those which
dwell about Messa are free from the yoke of superiority, but the others which
remain in Azgar are subject to the king of Fez. The kindred of Chinan are
dispersed among them which before were called Elcaluth, and these also are
subject unto the king of Fez. Very warlike people they are; and are able to set
forth two thousand horsemen. The people of Deuihessen are divided into the
kindreds of Duleim, Burbun, Vode, Deuimansor, and Deuihubaidulla. Duleim are
conversant in the deserts of Libya with the African people called Zanhaga. They
have neither dominion nor yet any stipend; wherefore they are very poor and
given to robbery: they travel unto Dara, and exchange cattle for dates with
the inhabitants there. All bravery and comelines of apparel they utterly
neglect; and their number of fighting menis ten thousand, four thousand being
horsemen and the residue footmen. The people called Burbun possess, that part
of the Libyan desert, which adioyneth unto Sus. They are a huge multitude,
neither have they any riches beside camels. Unto them is subject the city of
Tesset, which scarce suffices them for the maintenance of their horses, being
but a few. The people of Vode enjoys that desert, which is situate between
Guaden and Gualata. They bear rule over the Guadenites, and of the Duke of
Gualata they receive yearly tribute, and their number is grown almost
infinite For by report they are of ability to bring into the field almost
threescore thousand most skilful soldiers; notwithstanding they have great want
of horses. The tribe of Racmen occupy that desert which is next unto Hacha.
They have very large possessions, and do in the springtime usually travel
unto Tesset: for then always they have somewhat to do with the inhabitants
there. Their people fit for arms are to the number of twelve thousand; albeit
they have very few horsemen. The nation of Hamrum inhabit the deserts of
Tagauost, exacting some tribute of the inhabitants there, and with daily
incursions likewise molesting the people of Nun. Their number of soldiers is
almost eight thousand.

The people descended of Deuimansor.
THE generation of Dehemrum, which are said to derive their petigree from
Deuimansor, inhabit the desert over against Segellmess, who continually wander
by the Libyan deserts as far as Ighid. They have tributarie unto them the
people of Segelmesse, of Todgatan, of Tebelbelt, and of Dara. Their soil
yields such abundance of dates, that the yearly increase thereof is
sufficient to maintain them, although they had nothing else to live on. They
are of great fame in other nations, being able to furnish for the wars about
three thousand horsemen. There dwell likewise among these certain other
Arabians of more base condition, called in their language Garfa Esgeh; which
notwithstanding have great abundance of horses and of all other cattle. A
certain part also of the people Hemrun obtains many and large possessions
among the (...), from whence they have a notable yearly revenue brought them
in: this part of Hemrun makes often excursions toward the deserts of Fighig.
In summer they disperse themselves all over the province of Garet, possessing
the east part of Mauritania. They are noble and honest persons, and endued with
all kind of humanity and civility; insomuch that all the kings of Fez in a
manner do usually choose them wives out of the same tribe; needs therefore must
there be great friendship and familiarity among them. The people of Menebbe
do almost inhabit the very same desert, having two provinces of Numidia under
them; to wit, Matgara, and Retebbe. These also are a most valiant nation, being
in pay under the province of Segelmess, and being able to make about two
thousand horsemen. The kindred of Husein, which are thought to be descended of
Deuimansor, are seated upon the mountains of Atlas. They have in the said
mountains a large jurisdiction, namely diverse castles every where, and many
most rich and flourishing cities, all which, they think, were given them in
old time by the vice-royes of the Marini: for so soon as they had won that
kingdom, the kindred of Husein affoorded them great aid and service. Their
dominion is now subject unto the kings of Fez and of Segelmess. They have a
captain, which for the most part resideth at the city commonly called
Garseluin. Likewise they are always, in a manner, traversing of that desert
which in their language is called Eddara. They are taken to be a most rich and
honest people, being of ability to furnish for the wars about six thousand
horsemen. Among these you shall oftentimes find many Arabians of another sort,
whom they use only to be their servants. The tribe of Abulhusein do inhabit
part of the foresaid desert of Eddara, howbeit a very small part: the greatest
number of whom are brought unto such extreme misery, that they have not in
those their wild tents sufficient sustenance to live upon. True it is, that
they have built them certain habitations upon the Libyan deserts; but yet they
are cruelly pinched with famine and with extreme penury of all things: and
(that there might be no end of their misery) they are constrained to pay
yearly tribute unto their kindred and parents.

The offspring of Deuihubaidulla.
ONE generation of the people of Deuihubaidulla are those which are named
Gharrag: these enjoy the deserts of Benigomi and Fighig, having very large
possessions in Numidia. They are stipendaries unto the king of Tremizen; who
diligently endeuoreth to bring them to peace and tranquillity of life; for
they are wholly given to theft and robbery. In summer time they usually repair
unto Tremizen, where they are thought for that season of the year to settle
their abode: their horsemen are to the number of four thousand, all which are
most noble warriors. The kindred of Hedeg possess a certain desert near
unto Tremizen, called in their own language Hangad. These have no stipend from
any prince, nor yet any jurisdiction at all, rapine and stealth is only
delightful unto them, they provide only for their family and themselves, and
are able to set forth about five hundred horsemen. The tribe of Theleb
inhabit the plain of Alger.
Algezer: these have often vagaries over the deserts unto the province of
Tedgear. Unto them were subject in times past the most famous cities of Algezer
and Tedelles: howbeit in these our days they were recovered again from them
by Barbarossa the Turk; which loss could not but greatly grieve and molest
their king. It is reported moreover, that at the same time, the principal of
the said people of Theleb were cut off. For strength and cunning in chivalry
they were inferior to no other nation; their norsemen were about three
thousand. The tribe of Gehoan inhabit not all in one place: for part of them
you may find among the people of Guarag, and the residue amongst the people of
Hedeg, and they are unto them no otherwise then their servants, which condition
they notwithstanding most patiently and willingly submit themselves unto. And
here one thing is to be noted by the way; to wit, that the two forenamed people
called The Arabians called (...) and (...) descended from Ismael the base son
of Abraham.
Schachin and Hilel are originally Arabians of Arabia deserta, and think
themselves to be descended from Ismael the son of Abraham. And those which
we called Machil, came first forth of Arabia foelix, and derive their petigree
from Saba. Before whom the Mahumetans prefer the former, which of Ismael are
called Ismaelites. And because The Arabians called (...) descended of Saba.
there has always been great controuerfie among them, which part should be
of greater nobility, they have written on both sides many dialogues and
epigrams, whereby each man is wont to blaze the renown, the virtuous manners,
and laudable customs of his own nation. The ancient Arabians, which were
before the times of the Ismaelites, were called by the African historiographers
Arabi-Araba, as if a man should say, Arabians of Arabia. But those which came
of Ismael, they call Arabi Mus-Araba, as if they should say, Arabians ingraffed
into the land of Arabia, or Arabians accidentally, because they were not
originally bred and borne in Arabia. And the^ which afterward came into Africa,
they name in their language Mustehgeme, that is, barbarous Arabians; and that
because they joined themselves unto strangers, insomuch that not only their
speech, but their manners also are most corrupt and barbarous. These are
(friendly reader) the particulars, which for these ten years my memory could
reserve, as touching the originals and diversities of the Africans and
Arabians; in all which time I remember not, that ever I read or saw any
history of that nation. He that will know more, let him have recourse unto
Hibnu Rachu the historiographer beforenamed.

The manners and customs of the African people, which inhabit the deserts of
Libya.
THose five kinds of people before rehearsed, to wit, the people The people of
Numidia.
of Zenega, of Gansiga, of Terga, of Leuta, and of Bardeoa, are called of the
Latins Numidae: and they live all after one manner, that is to say, without all
law and civility. Their garment is a narrow and base piece of cloth,
wherewith scarce half their body is covered. Some of them wrap their heads in
a kind of black cloth, as it were with a scarf, such as the Turks use, which
is commonly called a Turbant. Such as will be discerned from the common sort,
for geutlemen, wear a iacket made of blew cotton with wide sleeves. And
cotton-cloth is brought unto them by certain merchants from the land of
Negros. They have no beasts fit to ride upon except their camels; unto whom
nature, between the bunch standing upon the hinder part of their backs and
their necks, has allotted a place, which may fitly serve to ride upon, in
stead of a saddle. Their manner of riding is most ridiculous. For sometimes
they lay their legs acrosse upon the camels neck; and sometimes again (having
no knowledge nor regard of stirrops) they rest their feet upon a rope, which
is cast over his shoulders. In stead of spurs they use a truncheon of a
cubits length, having at the one end thereof a goad, wherewith they prick
only the shoulders of their camels. Those camels which they use to ride upon
have a hole bored through the gristles of their nose, in the which a ring of
leather is fastened, whereby as with a bit, they are more easily curbed and
mastred; after which manner I have seen buffles used in Italy. For beds; they
lie upon mats made of sedge and bulrushes. Their tents are covered for the most
part with course chamlet, or with a harsh kind of wool which commonly grows
upon the boughs of their date-trees. As for their manner Wool growing upon
the Palm tree.
of living, it would seem to any man incredible what hunger and scarcity this
nation will endure. Bread they have none at all, neither use they any seething
or rosting; their food is camels milk only, and they desire no other
dainties. For their breakefast they drink off a great cup of camels milk: for
supper they have certain dried flesh stieped in butter and milk; whereof each
man taking his share, eats it out of his fist. And that this their meat may
not stay long undigested in their stomachs, they sup off the foresaid broth
wherein their flesh was steeped: for which purpose they use the palms of their
hands as a most fit instrument framed by nature to the same end. After that,
each one drinks his cup of milk, and so their supper has an end. These
Numidians, while they have any store of milk, regard water nothing at all,
which for the most part happens in the spring of the year, all which time
you shall find some among them that will neither wash their hands nor their
faces. Which seems not altogether to be unlikely; for (as we said before)
while their milk lasts, they frequent not those places where water is
common: yea, and their camels, so long as they may feed upon grass, will
drink no water at all. They spend their whole days in hunting and theeuing:
for all their endeavor and exercise is to drive away the camels of their
enemies; neither will they remain above three days in one place, by reason
that they have not pasture any longer for the sustenance of their camels. And
albeit (as is aforesaid) they have no civility at all, nor any laws
prescribed unto them; yet have they a certain governor or prince placed over
them, unto whom they render obedience and due honor, as unto their king. They
are not only ignorant of all good learning and liberal sciences; but are
likewise altogether careless and destitute of virtue: insomuch that you shall
find scarce one amongst them all which is a man of judgment or counsel. And
if any iniuried party will go to the law with his adversary, he must ride
continually five or six days before he can come to the speech of any judge.
This nation has all learning and good disciplines in such contempt, that they
will not once vouchsafe to go out of their deserts for the study and
attaining thereof: neither, if any learned man shall chance to come among them,
can they love his company and conversation, in regard of their most rude and
detestable behavior. Howbeit, if they can find any judge, which can frame
himself to live and continue among them, to him they give most large yearly
allowance. Some allow their judge a thousand ducates yearly, some more, and
some less, according as themselves think good. They that will seem to be
accounted of the better sort, cover their heads (as I said before) with a piece
of black cloth, part whereof, like a vizard or mask, reaches down over
their faces, covering all their countenance except their eyes; and this is
their daily kind of attire. And so often as they put meat into their mouths
they remove the said mask, which being done, they forth with cover their
mouths again; alleging this fond reason: for (say they) as it is unseemly for
a man, after he has received meat into his stomach, to vomit it out of his
mouth again and to cast it upon the earth; even so it is an indecent part to
eat meat with a man's mouth uncovered. The women of this nation be gross,
corpulent, and of a swart complexion. They are fattest upon their breast and
paps, but slender about the girdle-(...). Very civil they are, after their
manner, both in speech and gestures: sometimes they will accept of a kiss; but
whosoever tempts them farther, puts his own life in hazard. For by reason of
jealousy you may see them daily one to be the death and destruction of
another, and that in such savage and brutish manner, that in this case they
will show no compassion at all. And they seem to be more wise in this behalf
then diverse of our people, for they will by no means match themselves unto an
harlot. The liberality of this people has at all times been exceeding great.
And when any travelers may pass through their dry and desert territories,
they will never repair unto their tents, neither will they themselves travel
upon the common high way. And if any carouan or multitude of merchants will
pass those deserts, they are bound to pay certain custom unto the prince of
the said people, namely, for every camels load a piece of cloth worth a
ducate. Upon a time I remember that traveling in the company of certain
merchants over the desert called by them Araoan, it was our chance there to
meet with the prince of Zanaga; who, after he had received his due custom,
invited the said company of merchants, for their recreation, to go and abide
with him in his tents four or five days. Howbeit, because his tents were too
far out of our way, and for that we should have wandered farther then we
thought good, esteeming it more convenient for us to hold on our direct course,
we refused his gentle offer, and for his courtesy gave him great thanks. But
not being satisfied therewith, he commanded that our camels should proceed on
forward, but the merchants he carried along with him, and gave them very
sumptuous entertainment at his place of abode. Where we were no sooner
arrived, but this good prince caused camels of all kinds and ostriches, (...)
and (...) used (...) victuals.
which he had hunted and taken by the way, to be killed for his household
provision. Howbeit we requested him not to make such daily slaughters of his
camels; affirming moreover, that we never used to eat the flesh of a gelt
camel, but when all other victuals failed us. Whereunto he answered, that he
should deal uncivilly, if he welcomed so worthy and so seldome-seene guests
with the killing of small cattle only. Wherefore he wished us to fall to such
provision as was set before us. Here might you have seen great plenty of
roasted and sodden flesh: their roasted ostriches were brought to the table in
wicker platters, being seasoned with sundry kinds of herbs and spices. Their
bread made of Mill and panicke was of a most sauorie and pleasant taste: and
always at the end of dinner or supper we had plenty of dates and great store
of milk served in. Yea, this bountiful and noble prince, that he might
sufficiently show how welcome we were unto him, would together with his
nobility always bear us company: howbeit we ever dined and supped apart by
our selves. Moreover he caused certain religious and most learned men to come
unto our banquet; who, all the time we remained with the said prince, used not
to eat any bread at all, but fed only upon flesh and milk. Whereat we being
somewhat amazed, the good prince gently told us, that they all were borne in
such places whereas no kind of grain would grow: howbeit that himself, for
the entertainment of strangers, had great plenty of corn laid up in store.
Wherefore he bad us to be of good cheer, saying that (...) would eat only of
such things as his own native soil affoorded: affirming moreover, that bread
was yet in use among them at their feast of passover, and at other feasts
also, whereupon they used to offer sacrifice. And thus we remained with him for
the space of two days; all which time, what wonderful and magnificent cheer
we had made us, would seem incredible to report. But the third day, being
desirous to take our leave, the prince accompanied us to that place where we
ouertooke our camels and company sent before. And this I dare most deeply
take mine oath on, that we spent the said prince ten times more, then our
custom which he received came to. We thought it not amiss here to set down
this history, to declare in some sort the courtesy and liberality of the
said nation. Neither could the prince aforesaid understand our language nor we
his; but all our speech to and fro was made by an interpreter. And this which
we have here recorded as touching this nation, is likewise to be understood of
the other four nations above mentioned, which are dispersed over the residue
of the Numidian deserts.

The manners and customs of the Arabians which inhabit Africa.
THE Arabians, as they have sundry mansions and places of abode, so do they
live after a diverse and sundry manner. Those which inhabit between Numidia and
Libya lead a most miserable and distressed life, differing much in this regard
from those Africans, whom we affirmed to dwell in Libya. Howbeit they are
far more valiant then the said Africans; and use commonly to exchange camels
in the land of Negros: Where the Barbary horses are bred.
they have likewise great store of horses, which in Europe they call horses of
Barbary. They take wonderful delight in hunting and pursuing of dear, of
wild asses, of ostriches, and such like. Neither is it here to be omitted,
that the greater part of Arabians which inhabit Numidia, are very witty and
conceited in penning of verses; wherein each man will decipher Arabian poems
and verses.
his love, his hunting, his combats, and other his worthy acts: and this is
done for the most part in ryme, after the Italians manner. And albe it they are
most liberally minded, yet dare they not by bountiful giving make any show of
wealth; for they are daily oppressed with manifold inconveniences. They are
apparelled after the Numidians fashion, saving that their women differ somewhat
from the women of Numidia. Those deserts which they do now enjoy were wont to
be possessed by Africans: but the Arabians with their army inuading that part
of Africa, drove out the natural Numidians, and reserved the deserts adioining
upon The land of dates, unto themselves: but the Numidians began to inhabit
those deserts which border upon the land of Negros. The Arabians which dwell
between mount Atlas and the Mediterran sea are far wealthier then these which
we now speak of, both for costlines of apparel, for good horse-meate, and for
the statelines and beauty of their tents. Their horses also are of better
shape and more corpulent, but not so swift as the horses of the Numidian
desert. They exercise husbandry and have great increase of corn. Their droues
and flocks of cattle be innumerable, insomuch that they cannot inhabit one
by another for want of pasture. They are somewhat more vile and barbarous then
those which inhabit the deserts, and yet they are not altogether destitute of
liberality: part of them, which dwell in the territory of Fez are subject
unto the king of Fez. Those which remain in Marocco and Duccala have continued
this long time free from all exaction and tribute: but so soon as the king of
Portugal began to bear rule over Azafi and Azamor, there began also among
them strife and civil war. Wherefore being assailed by the king of Portugal
on the one side, and by the king of Fez on the other, and being oppressed also
with the extreme famine and scarcity of that year, they were brought unto
such misery, that they freely offered themselves as The Arabians offer
themselves slaves to any that would relieve their extreme hunger.
slaves unto the Portugals, submitting themselves to any man, that was willing
to relieve their intolerable hunger: and by this means scarce one of them was
left in all Duccala. Moreover those which possess the deserts bordering upon
the kingdoms of Tremizen and Tunis may all of them, in regard of the rest, be
called noblemen and gentlemen. For their governors receiving every year great
revenues from the king of Tunis, divide the same afterward among their people,
to the end they may avoid all discord: and by this means all dissension is
eschewed, and peace is kept firm and inviolable among them. They have notable
dexterity and cunning, both in making of tents, and in bringing up and keeping
of horses. In summer time they usually come near unto Tunis, to the end that
each man may provide himself of bread, armor, and other necessaries: all
which they carry with them into the deserts, remaining there the whole winter.
In the spring of the year they apply themselves to hunting, insomuch that no
beast can escape their pursuit. My self, I remember, was once at their tents,
to my no little danger and inconvenience; where I saw greater quantity of
cloth, brass, iron, and copper, then a man shall oftentimes find in the most
rich warehouses of some cities. Howbeit no trust is to be given unto them; for
if occasion serve, they will play the thieves most slyly and cunningly;
notwithstanding they seem to carry some show of civility. They take great
delight in poetry, and will pen most excellent verses, their language being
very pure and elegant. If any worthy poet be found among them, he is accepted
by their governors with great honor and liberality; neither would any man
easily believe what wit and decency is in their verses. Their women (according
to the guise of that country) go very gorgeously attired: they wear linen
gowns died black, with exceeding wide sleeves, over which sometimes they cast
a mantle of the same color or of blew, the corners of which mantle are very
artificially fastened about their shoulders with a fine silver claspe. Likewise
they have rings hanging at their ears, which for the most part are made of
silver: they wear many rings also upon their fingers. Moreover they usually
wear about their thighs and ankles certain scarfes and rings, after the
fashion of the Africans. They cover their faces with certain maskes having
only two holes for their eyes to peep out at. If any man chance to meet with
them, they presently hide their faces, passing by him with silence, except it
be some of their allies or kinsfolks; for unto them they always discover their
faces, neither is there any use of the said mask so long as they be in
presence. These Arabians when they travel any journey (as they oftentimes do)
they set their women upon certain saddles made handsomely of wicker for the
same purpose, and fastened to their camels backs, neither be they any thing
too wide, but fit only for a woman to sit in. When they go to the wars each
man carries his wife with him, to the end that she may cheer up her good man,
and give him encouragement. Their damsels which are unmarried do usually paint
their faces, breasts, arms, hands, and fingers with a kind of counterfeit
color: which is accounted a most decent custom among them. But this fashion
was first brought in by those Arabians, which before we called Africans, what
time they began first of all to inhabit that region; for before then, they
never used any false or glozing colors. The women of Barbary use not this
fond kind of painting, but contenting themselves only with their natural hiew,
they regard not such fained ornaments: howbeit sometimes they will temper a
certain color with hens-dung and safron, wherewithal they paint a little
round spot on the bals of their cheeks, about the breadth of a French crown.
Likewise between their eie-browes they make a triangle; and paint upon their
chinnes a patch like unto an olive leaf. Some of them also do paint their
eie-browes: and this custom is very highly esteemed of by the Arabian poets
and by the gentlemen of that country. Howbeit they will not use these
fantastical ornaments above two or three days together: all which time they
will not be seen to any of their friends, except it be to their husbands and
children: for these paintings seem to be great allurements unto lust, whereby
the said women think themselves more trim and beautiful.

How the Arabians in the deserts between Barbary and Egypt do lead their
lives.
THE life of these men is full of misery and calamity: for the places where
they inhabit are barren and unpleasant. They have some store of camels and
other cattle: howbeit their fodder is so scarce, that they cannot well
sustain them. Neither shall you find over all the whole region any place fit
to bear corn. And if in that desert there be any villages at all, which use
to husband and manure their ground; yet reap they small commodity thereby,
except it be for plentiful increase of dates. Their camels and other of their
cattle they exchange for dates and corn; and so the poor husbandmen of the
foresaid villages have some small recompense for their labors:
notwithstanding, how can all this satisfy the hunger of such a multitude? For
you shall daily see in Sicilia great numbers of The Arabians of Barca lay their
sons to pawn unto the Sicilians for corn.
their sons laid to pawn. Because when they have not wherewithal to pay
for the corn which they there buy, they are constrained to leave their sons
behind them, as pledges of future payment. But the Sicilians, if their money
be not paid them at the time appointed, will challenge the Arabians sons to
be their slaves. Which day being once past, if any father will redeem his
child, he must disburse thrice or four times so much as the due debt
amounts unto: for which cause they are the most notable thieves in the whole
world. If any stranger fall into their hands, depriving him of all that he
has, they presently carry him to Sicilie, and there either sell or exchange
him for come. And I think, that no merchants (...) at any time within these
hundred years (...) for traffiques sake upon any part of their coast. For when
they are to pass by with merchandise, or about any other weighty affairs,
they eschew that region five hundred miles at the least. Once I remember, that
I my self, for my better (...), and to avoid the danger of those mischievous
people, went in company with certain merchants, who in three ships sailed
along their coast. We were no sooner espied of them; but forthwith they came
running to the shore, making signs that they would traffic with us to our
great advantage. Howbeit becaufe we durst not repose any trust in them, none of
our company would depart the ship, before they had delivered certain pledges
unto us. Which being done, we bought certain (...) or gelded men, and good
store of butter of them. And so immediately weighing our ankers we betook us
to flight, fearing least we should have been met withal by the Sicilian and
Rhodian Pirates, and been spoiled not only of our goods, but of our liberties
also. To be short, the said Arabians are very rude, forlorn, beggarly,
lean, and hunger-starued people, having God (no doubt) (...) displeased
against them, by whose vengeance they daily sustain such (...) calamities.

Of the people called Soara, namely, which possess droues and flocks of
cattle, and being Africans by birth, do notwithstanding imitate the manners of
the Arabians.
YOU shall find many among the Africans which live altogithera shepherds or
drouers life, inhabiting upon the beginning of mount Atlas, and being dispersed
here and there over the same mountain. They are constrained always to pay
tribute either to the King of the same region where they dwell, or else to the
Arabians, except those only which inhabit Temesna, who are free from all
foreign superiority, and are of great power. They speak the same kind of
language that other Africanes do, except some few of them which converse with
the inhabitants of the city called Vrbs (which is near unto Tunis) who speak
the Arabian tongue. Moreover there is a certain people inhabiting that region
which divides Numidia from Tunis. These oftentimes wage war against the King
of Tunis himself, which they put in practice not many years since, when as
the said King his son marching toward them from Constantina with an army,
for the demanding of such tribute as was due unto him, fought a very
unfortunate battle. For no sooner were they advertised of the Kings son The
(...) and death of the Ring of Tunis his son.
his approach, but forthwith they went to meet him with two thousand
horsemen, and at length vanquished and slew him at unawares, carrying home with
them all the furniture, bag, and baggage, which he had brought forth. And this
was done in the year of Mahumets Hegeira 915. From that time their fame has
been spread abroad in all places. Yea, many of the king of Tunis his subjects
revolted from their King unto them; insomuch that the Prince of this people is
grown so puissant, that scarcely is his equal to be found in all Africa.

Of the faith and religion of the ancient Africans or Moors.
THE ancient Africans were much addicted to idolatry, even as certain of the
Persians are at this day, some of whom worship the sun, and others the fire,
for their gods. For the said Africans had in times past magnificent and most
stately temples built and dedicated, as well to the honor of the sun as of
the fire. In these temples day and night they kept fire kindled, giving
diligent heed that it might not at any time be extinguished, even as we read of
the Roman Vestall virgins: All which you may read more fully and at large in
the Persian and African Chronicles. Those Africans which inhabited Libya and
Numidia, would each of them worship some certain planet, unto whom likewise
they offered sacrifices and prayers. Some others of the land of Negros worship
Guighimo, that is to say, The Lord of Heaven. And this sound point of religion
was not delivered unto them by any Prophet or teacher, but was inspired, as it
were, from God himself. After that, they embraced the Jewish law, wherein they
are said to have continued many years. Afterward they professed the Christian
religion, and continued Christians, until such time as the Mahumetan
superstition prevailed; which came to pass in the year of the Hegeira 208.
About which time certain of Mahomets disciples so bewitched them with eloquent
and deceivable speeches, that they allured their weak minds to consent unto
their opinion; insomuch that all the kingdoms of the Negros adjoining unto
Libya received the Mahumetan law. Neither is there any region in all the
Negros land, which has in it at this day any Christians at all. At the same
time such as were found to be Jews, Christians, or of the African religion,
were slain every man of them. Howbeit those which dwell near unto the Ocean
sea, are all of them very gross idolaters. Between whom and the Portugals
there has been from time to time and even at this present is, great traffic
and familiarity. The inhabitants of Barbary continued for many years
idolaters; but before the coming of Mahomet above 250, years, they are said
to have embraced the Christian faith: which some think came to pass upon this
occasion; namely, because that of part Barbary which contains the kingdom
of Tripolis and Tunis, was in times past governed by Apulian and Sicilian
Captains, and the countries of Trenizen.
Caesaria and of Maroco and Fez.
Mauritania are supposed to have been (...) unto the Goths. At what time also
many Christians fleeing from the fury and madness of the Goths left their
sweet native soil of Italy, and at length arrived in Africa near unto Tunis:
where having settled their abode for some certain space, they began at length
to have the dominion over all that region. Howbeit the Christians which
inhabited Barbaria, not respecting the rites and ceremonies of the Church of
Rome, followed the Arrians (...) and form of living: and one of the African
Christians was that most godly and learned father Saint Augustine. When the
Arabians therefore came to conquer that part of Africa they found Christians to
be Lords over the regions adjacent; of whom, after sundry hot conflicts, the
said Arabians got the victory. Whereupon the Arrians being deprived of all
their dominions and goods went part of them into Italy and part into Spain.
And so about two hundred years after the death of Mahumet, almost all Barbary
was infected with his law. Howbeit afterward, civil dissensions arising among
them, neglecting the law of Mahumet, they slew all the priests and governors
of that region. Which tumult when it came to the ears of the Mahumetan
Caliphas, they sent an huge army against the said rebels of Barbary, to wit,
those which were revolted from the Calipha of Bagdet, and severely punished
their misdemeanor. And even at the same time was laid the most (...) foundation
of the Mahumetan law; notwithstanding there have remained many heresies among
them even until this very day. As touching the patrons of the Mahumetan law,
and likewise concerning the difference in religion between the Mahumetans A
book written by John Leo concerning the Mahumetan religion.
of Africa, and them of Asia, we will (by Gods grace) write more in another
several volume; and in the mean season, let these particulars which we have
noted suffice the Reader.

Of the letters and characters of the Africans.
THose writers which record the histories of the Arabians doings are all
jointly of opinion, that the Africans were wont to use only the Latin
letters. And they do most constantly affirm, The Africans used in times past
none other kind of letters but the Roman letters.
that the Arabians, when they first (...) Africa and especially Barbary (which
was the principal seat of the Africans) found no letters nor characters
there, beside the Latin. Neither indeed do they deny that the Africans have
a peculiar kind of language, but this they firmly avouch, that they have the
very same letters which the (...) or Florentinesa people of Italy have. The
Arabians have no history Perhaps he means the histories of Salust, (...)
Liuius, and others.
of African matters, which was not first written in Latin. They have certain
ancient authors, who writ partly in the times of the Arrians and partly before
their times, the names of all which are clean forgotten. Howbeit it is very
likely that those Latin authors have written many volumes: for when their
interpreters labored to persuade something unto us, I remember they would say,
it is contained in the seuentieth book. Neither did they in translating of the
said volumes altogether follow the authors order; but taking the history of
some one prince, they would conioine his time and actions with the history of
the Persian, Assyrian, and Chaldaean kings, or of the Israelites, which
concerned the same times. But when as those which rebelled against the Calipha
of Bagdet (as is aforesaid) got the upper hand in Africa, they burnt all the
Africans books. For they were of opinion, that the Africans, so long as they
had any knowledge of natural philosophy or of other good arts and sciences,
would every day more and more arrogantly contemn the law of Mahumet.
Contrariwise, some historiographers there are which affirm, that the Africans
had a kind of letters peculiar unto themselves; which notwithstanding, from
the time wherein the Italians began first to inhabit Barbary, and wherein the
Christians (...) out of Italy from the Goths, began to subdue those provinces
of Africa, were utterly abolished and taken away. For it is likely that a
people vanquished should follow the customs and the letters also of their
conquerors. And did not the same thing happen to the Persians, while the
Arabians empire stood? For certain it is, that the Persians at the same time
lost those letters which were peculiar unto their nation; and that all their
books, by the commandment The Mahumetan Calisas caused all the books of the
Persians to be burned.
of the Mahumetan prelates, were burnt, least their knowledge in natural
philosophy, or their idolatrous religion might move them to contemn the
precepts of Mahumet. The like also (as we showed before) befell the Barbarians
when as the Italians and the Goths usurped their dominions in Barbary; which
may here (I hope) suffice the gentle reader. Howbeit this is out of doubt, that
all the (...)-cities and inland-cities of Barbary do use Latin letters
only, whenever they will commit any epitaphes or any other verses or prose
unto posterity. The consideration of all which former particulars has made me
to be of opinion, that the Africans in times past had their own proper and
peculiar letters, wherein they described their doings and exploites. For it is
likely that the Romans, when they first subdued those provinces (as conquerours
usually do) utterly spoiled and took away all their letters and memory, and
established their own letters in the stead thereof; to the end that the fame
and honor of the Roman people might there only be continued. And who knows
not that the very same attempt was practiced by the Goths upon the stately
buildings of the Romans, and by the Arabians against the monuments of the
Persians. The very same thing likewise we daily see put in practice by the
Turks, who when they have gotten any city or town from the Christians, do
presently cast forth of the temples all the images and memorials of their
saints. And to omit all the aforesaid, may we not in our time see the like
daily practiced in Rome; where sumptuous and stately buildings left imperfect
by reason of the untimely death of one Pope, are for some novelty utterly
ruined and destroyed by his next successor? Or else, does not the new Pope
cause his predecessors arms to be razed, and his own in stead thereof to be
set up? Or at the least, if he will not seem so arrogant, letting his
predecessors monuments stand still, does he not erect others for himself
far more sumptuous and stately? No marvel therefore, though so long success
of times and so many alterations have quite bereaved the Africans of their
letters. Concerning those nine hundred years wherein the Africans used the
letters of the Arabians, Ibnu Rachich, a most diligent writer of Africa, does
in his Chronicle most largely dispute; whether the Africans ever had any
peculiar kind of writing or no. And at last he concludes the affirmative
part; that they had: for (says he) whosoever denies this, may as well deny,
that they had a language peculiar unto themselves. For it cannot be that any
people should have a proper kind of speech, and yet should use letters
borrowed from other nations, and being altogether unfit for their
mother-language.

Of the situation of Africa.
AS there are four parts in Africa, so the situation thereof is not in all
places alike. That part which lies toward the Mediterran sea, that is to say,
from the streites of Gibraltar to the frontiers of Egypt, is here and there
full of mountains: Southward it is extended about a hundred miles, albeit in
some places it be larger and in some other narrower. From the said mountains
unto mount Atlas there is a very spacious plain and many little hillocks.
Fountains there are in this region great store, which meeting together at one
head do send forth most beautiful rivers and crystal streams. Between
the foresaid mountains and the plain country is situate the mountain of
Atlas; which beginning westward upon the Ocean sea, stretches it self toward
the east as far as the borders of Egypt. Over against Atlas lies that
region of Numidia which bears dates, being every where almost sandy ground.
Between Numidia and the land of Negros is the sandy desert of Libya situate,
which contains many mountains also; howbeit merchants travel not that way,
when as they may go other ways with more ease and less danger. Beyond the
Libyan desert begins the land of Negros, all places whereof are barren and
sandy except those which adioine upon the river of Niger, or through the which
any river or stream runs.

Of the unpleasant and snowie places in Africa.
ALl the region of Barbary, and the mountains contained therein, are subject
more to cold then to heat. For seldom comes any gale of wind which brings
not some snow therewith. In all the said mountains there grow abundance of
fruits, but not so great plenty of corn. The inhabitants of these mountains
live for the greatest part of the year upon barlie bread. The springs and
rivers issuing forth of the said mountains, representing the quality and
taste of their native soil, are somewhat muddie and impure, especially upon
the confines of Mauritania. These mountains likewise are replenished with
woods and lofty (...), and are greatly stored with beasts of all kinds. But
the little hills and valleys lying between the foresaid mountains and mount
Atlas are far more commodious, and abounding with corn. For' they are
moistened with rivers springing out of Atlas, and from thence holding on their
course to the Mediterran sea. And albeit woods are somewhat more scarce upon
these plains, yet are they much more fruitful, then be the plain countries
situate between Atlas and the Ocean sea, as namely the regions of Maroco, of
Duccala, of Tedles, of Temesna, of Azgara, and the country lying toward the
straites of Gibraltar. The mountains The mountains of Atlas exceeding cold.
of Atlas are exceeding cold and barren, and bring forth but small store of
corn, being woody on all sides, and engendring almost all the rivers of
Africa. The fountains of Atlas are even in the midst of summer extremely cold;
so that if a man dippeth his hand therein for any long space, he is in great
danger of loosing the same. Howbeit the said mountains are not so cold in all
places: for some parts thereof are of such mild temperature, that they may be
right commodiously inhabited: yea and sundry places thereof are well stored
with inhabitants; as in the second part of this present discourse we will
declare more at large. Those places which are destitute of inhabitants be
either extremely cold, as namely the same which lie over against Mauritania: or
very rough and unpleasant, to wit, those which are directly opposite to the
region of Temesna. Where notwithstanding in summer time they may feed their
great and small cattle, but not in winter by any means. For then the North
wind so furiously rages, bringing with it such abundance of snow; that all
the cattle which till then remain upon the said mountains, and a great part
of the people also are forced to lose their lives in regard thereof: wherefore
whosoever has any occasion to travel that way in winter time, chooses rather
to take his journey between Mauritania and Numidia. Those merchants which
bring dates out of Numidia for the use and service of other nations, set forth
usually upon their journey about the end of October; and yet they are
oftentimes so oppressed Most wonderful and terrible snowes.
and overtaken with a sudden fall of snow, that scarcely one man among them
all escapes the danger of the tempest. For when it begins to snow over
night, before the next morning not only carts and men, but even the very
trees are so drowned and overwhelmed therein, that it is not possible to find
any mention of them. Howbeit the dead carcases are then found when the sun
has melted the snow. I my self also, by the goodness of The extreme danger of
snow which John Leo himself escaped
almighty God, twice escaped the most dreadful danger of the foresaid snow;
whereof, if it may not be tedious to the reader, I will here in few words
make relation. Upon a certain day of the foresaid month of October,
traveling with a great company of Merchants toward Atlas, we were there
about the sun going down weather-beaten with a most cold and snowy kind of
hayle. Here we found eleven or twelve horsemen (Arabians to our thinking) who
persuading us to leave our carts and to go with them, promised us a good and
secure place to lodge in. For mine own part, that I might not seem altogether
uncivil, I thought it not meet to refuse their good offer; albeit I stood in
doubt least they went about to practice some mischief. Wherefore I bethought
my self to hide up a certain sum of gold which I had as then about me. But
all being ready to ride, I had no leisure to hide away my coin from them;
whereupon I fained that I would go ease my self. And so departing a while
their company, and getting me under a certain tree, whereof I took diligent
notice, I buried my money between certain stones and the root of the said
tree. And then we rode on quietly till about midnight. What time one of them
thinking that he had stayed long enough for his pray, began to utter that in
words which secretly he had conceived in his mind. For he asked whether I had
any money about me or no? To whom I answered, that I had left my money behind
with one of them which attended the carts, and that I had then none at all
about me. Howbeit they being no whit satisfied with this answer, commanded me,
for all the cold weather, to strip my self out of mine apparel. At length
when they could find no money at all, they said in jesting and scoffing wise,
that they did this for no other purpose, but only to see how strong and hardy
I was, and how I could endure the cold and tempestuous season. Well, on we
rode, seeking our way as well as we could that dark and dismal night; and
anon we heard the bleating of sheep, coniecturing thereby, that we were not
far distant from some habitation of people. Wherefore out of hand we directed
our course thitherwards: being constrained to lead our horses through thick
woods and over steep and craggie rocks, to the great hazard and peril of our
lives. And at length after many labors, we found shepherds in a certain
cave: who, having with much pains brought their cattle in there, had kindled
a lusty fire for themselves, which they were constrained, by reason of the
extreme cold, daily to sit by. Who understanding our company to be Arabians,
feared at the first that we would do them some mischief: but afterward being
persuaded that we were driven thither by extremity of cold, and being more
secure of us, they gave us most friendly entertainment. For they set bread,
flesh, and cheese before us, wherewith having ended our suppers, we laid us
along each man to sleep before the fire. All of us were as yet exceeding cold,
but especially my self, who before with great horror and trembling was
stripped stark naked. And so we continued with the said shepherds for the
space of two days: all which time we could not set forth, by reason of
continual snow. But the third day, so soon as they saw it leave snowing,
with great labor they began to remove that snow which lay before the door
of their cave. Which done, they brought us to our horses, which we found well
provided of hay in another cave. Being all mounted, the shepherds accompanied
us some part of our way, showing us where the snow was of least depth, and yet
even there it touched our horse bellies. This day was so clear, that the sun
took away all the cold of the two days going before. At length entering into a
certain village near unto Fez, we understood, that our carts which passed
by, were overwhelmed with the snow. Then the Arabians seeing no hope of
recompense for all the pains they had taken (for they had defended our carts
from thieves) carried a certain Jew of our company with them as their
captive, (who had lost a great quantity of dates, by reason of the snow
aforesaid) to the end that he might remain as their prisoner, till he had
satisfied for all the residue. From my self they took my horse, and committed
me unto the wide world and to fortune. From whence, riding upon a mule, within
three days I arrived at Fez, where I heard doleful news of our merchants and
wares, that they were cast away in the snow. Yea, they thought that I had
been destrosed with the rest; but it seemed that God would have it otherwise.
Now, having finished the history of mine own misfortunes, let us return unto
that discourse where we left. Beyond Atlas there are certain hot and dry
places moistened with very few rivers, but those which flow out of Atlas it
self: some of which rivers running into the Libyan deserts are dried up with
the sands, but others do engender lakes. Neither shall you find in these
countries any places apt to bring forth corn, notwithstanding they have dates
in abundance. There are also certain other trees bearing fruit, but in so
small quantity, that no increase nor gain is to be reaped by them. You may
see likewise in those parts of Numidia which border upon Libya certain barren
hills destitute of trees, upon the lower parts whereof grow nothing but
unprofitable thorns and shrubs. Amongst these mountains you shall find no
rivers nor springs, nor yet any waters at all, except it be in certain pits
and wels almost unknown unto the inhabitants of that region. Moreover in six
or seven days journey they have not one drop of water, but such as is brought
unto them by certain merchants upon camels backs. And that especially in
those places which lie upon the maine road from Fez to Tombuto, or from
Tremizen to Agadez.
Agad. That journey likewise is very dangerous which is of late found out by
the merchants of our days from Fez to Alcair over the deserts of Libya, were
it not for an huge lake in the way, upon the banks whereof the Sinites and the
Goranites do inhabit. But in the way which leads from Fez to Tombuto are
certain pits environed either with the hides or bones of camels. Neither do
the merchants in summer time pass that way without great danger of their
lives: for oftentimes it falls out, when the south wind blows, that all
those pits are stopped up with sand. And so the merchants, when they can find
neither those pits, nor any mention thereof, must needs perish for extreme
thirst: whose carcases are afterward found lying scattered here and there, and
scorched with the heat of the sun. One remedy they have A strange remedy
used by the African merchants to quench their thirst.
in this case, which is very strange: for when they are so grievously
oppressed with thirst, they kill forthwith some one of their camels, out of
whose bowels they wring and express some quantity of water, which water they
they drink and carry about with them, till they have either found some pit of
water, or till they pine away for thirst. In the desert which they call Azaoad
there are as yet extant two monuments built of marble, upon which marble is an
Epitaphe engraven, signifying that one of the said monuments represented a most
rich merchant, and the other a carrier or transporter of wares. Which wealthy
merchant bought of the carrier a cup of water for ten A merchant constrained
by extreme thirst, gave ten thousand ducats for a cup of water.
thousand ducates, and yet this precious water could suffice neither of them;
for both were consumed with thirst. This desert likewise contains sundry
kinds of beasts, which in the fourth part of this discourse concerning Libya,
and in our treatise of the beasts of Africa, we will discourse of more at
large. I was determined to have written more concerning those things which
happened unto my self and the rest of my company traveling through the Libyan
deserts unto Gualata. For sometime being sore a thirst, we could not find one
drop of water, partly because our guide strayed out of the direct course, and
partly because our enemies had cut off the springs and channels of the foresaid
pits and wels. Insomuch that the small quantity of water which we found, was
sparingly to be kept; for that which would scarce suffice us for five days, we
were constrained to keep for ten. But if I should commit to writing all things
worthy of memory, a whole year were not sufficient for me. The land of
Negros is extreme hot, having some store of moisture also, by reason of the
river of Niger running through the midst thereof. All places adioining upon
Niger do mightily abound both with cattle and corn. No trees I saw there but
only certain great ones, bearing a kind of bitter fruit like unto a chestnut,
which in their language is called Goron. The fruit called Goron. Cocos. (...).
Onions.
Likewise in the same regions grow Cocos, cucumbers, onions, and such kind of
herbs and fruits in great abundance. There are no mountains at all either in
Libya or in the land of Negros: howbeit diverse fennes and lakes there are;
which (as men report) the inundation of Niger has left behind it. Neither are
the woods of the said regions altogether destitute of Elephants and other
strange beasts; whereof we will make relation in their due place.

What natural impressions and motions the air of Africa is subject unto; and
what effects ensue thereupon.
THroughout the greatest part of Barbary stormy and cold weather begin
commonly about the midst of October. But in December and January the cold
grows somewhat more sharp in all places: howbeit this happens in the
morning only, but so gently and remissely, that no man cares greatly to warm
himself by the fire. February somewhat mitigateth the cold of winter, but
that so inconstantly, that the weather changes sometime five and sometime six
times in one day. In March the north and west winds usually blow, which cause
the trees to be adorned with blossoms. In April all fruits attain to their
proper form and shape, insomuch that cherries are commonly ripe about the end
of April and the beginning of MayIn the midst of May they gather their figs:
and in mid-Iune their grapes are ripe in many places. Likewise their pears,
their sweet quinces and their damascens attain unto sufficient ripenes in the
months of June and Iulie. Their figs of Autumn may be gathered in August;
howbeit they never have so great plenty of figs and peaches, as in September.
By the midst of August they usually begin to dry their grapes in the sun,
where of they make reisins. Which if they cannot finish in September, by reason
of unseasonable weather, of their grapes as then ungathered they use to make
wine and must, especially in the province of Rifa, as we will in due place
signify more at large. In the midst of October they take in their honey, and
gather their pomegranates and quinces. In The olives of Africa.
November they gather their olives, not climing up with ladders nor plucking
them with their hands, according to the custom of Europe; for the trees of
Mauritania and Caesarea are so tal, that no ladder is long ynongh to reach unto
the fruit. And therefore their olives being full ripe, they clime the trees,
beating them off the boughs with certain long poles, albeit they know this
kind of beating to be most hurtful unto the said trees. Sometimes they have
great plenty of olives in Africa, and sometimes as great scarcity. Certain
great oliue-trees there are, the olives whereof are eaten ripe by the
inhabitants, because they are not so fit for oil. No year falls out to be so
unseasonable, but that they have three months in the spring always
temperate. They begin their spring upon the fifteenth day of February,
accounting the eighteenth of May for the end thereof: all which time they have
most pleasant weather. But if from the five and twentieth of Rain signifying
plenty or (...).
April, to the fifth of May they have no rain fall, they take it as a sign
of ill luck. And the raine-water which falls all the time aforesaid they
call Naisan, that is, water blessed of God. Some store it up in vessels, most
religiously keeping it, as an holy thing. Their summer lasts till the
sixteenth of August; all which time they have most hot and clear weather.
Except perhaps some showers of rain fall in July and August, which do so
infect the air, that great plague and most pestilent fevers ensue thereupon;
with which plague whosoever is infected, most hardly escapes death. Their
Autumn they reckon from the 17. of August to the 16. of November; having
commonly in the months of August and September not such extreme heat as
before. Howbeit all the time between the 15. of August and the 15. of
September is called by them the furnace of the whole year, for that it
brings figs, quinces, and such kind of fruits to their full maturitie. From
the 15. of November they begin their winter-season, continuing the same till
the 14. day of February. So soon as winter comes, they begin to till their
ground which lies in the plains: but upon the mountains they go to plough
in October. The Africans are most certainly persuaded that every year
contains forty extreme hot days, beginning upon the 12. of June; and again
so many days extreme cold, beginning from the 12. of December. Their
Aequinoctia are upon the 16. of March, and the 16. of September. For their
Solstitia they account the 16. of June and the 16. of December. These rules
they do most strictly observe, as well in husbandry and navigations, as in
searching out the houses and true places of the planets: and these
instructions, with other such like they teach their young children first of
all. Many countrie-people and husbandmen there be in Africa, The pesants and
unlearned people of Africa cunning in Astrology.
who knowing (as they say) never a letter of the book, will notwithstanding
most learnedly dispute of Astrology, and allege most profou^d reasons and
arguments for themselves. But whatsoever skill they have in the art of
Astrology, they first learned the same of the Latins: yea they give those
very names unto their months which the Latins do. Moreover they have exta^t
among them a certain great book divided into three volumes, which they call
The treasury or storehouse of husbandry. This book was then translated out
of Latin into their tongue, when Mansor was Lord of Granada. In the said
Treasury are all things contained which may seem in any wise to concern
husbandry; as namely, the changes and variety of times, the manner of sowing,
with a number of such like particulars, which (I think) at this day the Latin
tongue it self, whereout these things were first translated, does not contain.
Whatsoever either the Africans or the Mahumetans have, which seems to
appertain in any wise to their law or religion, they make their computation
thereof altogether according to the course of the moon. Their year is divided
into 354. days: for unto six months they The year of the Arabians and
Africans.
allot 30. days, and unto the other six but 29; all which being added into
one sum do produce the number aforesaid: wherefore their year differs
eleven days from the year of the Latins. They have at diverse times festival
days, and fasts. About the end of Autumn, for all winter, and a great part
of the spring they are troubled with boisterous winds, with hail, with
terrible thunder and lightening: yea then it snoweth much in some places of
Barbary. The eastern, southern, and southeasterne winds blowing in May and
June, do very much hurt there: for they spoil the corn, and hinder the fruit
from coming to ripenes. Their corn likewise is greatly appaired by snow,
especially such as falls in the daytime, when it begins to flower. Upon
the mountains of Atlas they divide the year into The year divided into two
seasons only, upon the mounain es of Atlas.
two parts only: for their winter continues from October to April; and from
April to October they account it summer: neither is there any day throughout
the whole year, wherein the tops of those mountains are not covered with
snow. In Numidia the year runs away very swiftly: for they reap their
corn in May, and in October they gather their dates: but from the midst of
September they have winter till the beginning of (...). But if September
falls out to be rainie, they are like to lose most part of their dates. All
the fields of Numidia require watering from the rivers; but if the mountains
of Atlas have no rain fall upon them, the Numidian rivers wax dry, and so
the fields are destitute of watering. October being destitute of rain, the
husbandman has no hope to cast his seed into the ground; and he despaireth
likewise, if it rain not in April. But their dates prosper more without
rain, whereof the Numidians have greater plenty then of corn. For albeit they
have some store of corn, yet can it scarcely suffice them for half the year.
Howbeit, if they have good increase of dates, they cannot want abundance of
corn, which is sold unto them by the Arabians for dates. If in the Libyan
deserts there fall out change of weather about the midst of October; and if it
continue raining there all December, January, and some part of February, it
is wonderful what abundance of grass and milk it brings forth. Then may
you find diverse lakes in all places and many fennes throughout Libya;
wherefore this is the meetest time for the Barbarie-merchants to travel to the
land of Negros. Here all kind of fruits grow sooner ripe, if they have
moderate showers about the end of July. Moreover the land of Negros receives
by rain neither any benefit, nor yet any damage at all. For the river Niger
together with the water which falls from certain mountains does so moisten
their grounds, that no places can be devised to be more fruitful: for that
which Nilus is to Egypt, the same is Niger to the land of Negors: for it
increases like Nilus The increase of the rivers of Niger and Nilu.
from the fifteenth of June the space of forty days after, and for so many
again it decreaseth. And so at the increase of Niger, when all places are
overflowed with water, a man may in a bark pass over all the land of Negros,
albeit not without great peril of drowning; as in the fifth part of this
treatise we will declare more at large.

Of the length and shortness of the Africans lives.
ALl the people of Barbary by us before mentioned live unto 65. or 70. years
of age, and few or none exceed that number. Howbeit in the foresaid
mountains I saw some which had lived an hundred years, and others which
affirmed themselves to be older; whose age was most healthful and lusty. Yea
some you shall find here of fowerscore years of age, who are sufficiently
strong and able to exercise husbandry, to dress vines, and to serve in the
wars; insomuch that young men are oftentimes inferior unto them. In Numidia,
that is to say, in the land of dates, they live a long time: howbeit they lose
their teeth very soon, and their eyes wax woonderfully dim. Which
infirmities are likely to be incident unto them, first because they continually
feed upon dates, the sweetness and natural quality whereof does by little and
little pull out their teeth: and secondly the dust and sand, which is tossed up
and down the air with eastern winds entering into their eyes, does at last
miserably weaken and spoil their eie-sight. The inhabitants of Libya are of a
shorter life; but those which are most strong and healthful among them live
oftentimes till they come to threescore years; albeit they are slender and
lean of body. The Negros commonly live the shortest time of all the rest:
howbeit they are always strong and lusty, having their teeth sound even till
their dying day: yet is there no nation under heaven more prone to venerie;
unto which vice also the Libyans and Numidians are to too much addicted. To be
short, the Barbarians are the weakest people of them all.

What kinds of diseases the Africans are subject unto.
THE children, and sometimes the ancient women of this region are subject unto
baldnes or unnatural shedding of hair; which disease they can hardly be cured
of. They are likewise oftentimes troubled with the headache, which usually
afflicts them without any ague joined therewith. Many of them are tormented
with the toothache, which (as some think) they are the more subject unto,
because immediately after hot pottage they drink cold water. They are
oftentimes vexed with extreme pain of the stomach, which ignorantly they
call, the pain of the heart. They are likewise daily molested with inward
gripings and infirmities over their whole body, which is thought to proceed of
continual drinking of water. Yea they are (...) subject unto bone-aches and
goutes, by reason that they sit commonly upon the bare ground, and never wear
any shoes upon their feet. Their chief gentlemen and noblemen prove gowtie
oftentimes with immoderate drinking of wine and eating of dainty meats. Some
with eating of olives, nuts, and such course fare, are for the most part
infected with the scuruies. Those which are of a sanguine complexion are
greatly troubled with the cough, because that in the spring-season they sit too
much upon the ground. And upon fridaies I had no small sport and recreation to
go and see them. For upon this day the people flock to church in great
numbers to hear their (...) sermons. Now if any one in the sermon-tile falls
a neezing, all the whole multitude will neeze with him for company, and so
they make such a noise, that they never leave, till the sermon be quite done;
so that a man shall reap but little knowledge by any of their sermons. If any
of Barbary be infected with the disease commonly called the French pox; they
die thereof for the most part, and are seldom cured. This disease begins
with a kind of anguish and swelling, and at The French disease.
length breaks out into sores. Over the mountains of Atlas, and throughout
all Numidia and Libya they scarcely know this disease. Insomuch that oftentimes
the parties infected travel forthwith into Numidia or the land of Negros, in
which places the air is so temperate, that only by remaining there they
recover their perfect health, and (...) home sound into their own country:
which I saw many do with mine own eyes; who without the help of any
physician or medicine, except the foresaid wholesome air, were restored to
their former health. Not so much as the name of this malady was ever known
unto the Africans, before (...) the king of Castile expelled all Jews out of
Spain; after the return of which Jews When and by what means the French
(...) was brought into Africa.
into Africa, certain unhappy and lewd people lay with their wives; and so at
length the disease spread from one to another, over the whole region: insomuch
that scarce any one family was free from the same. Howbeit, this they were
most certainly persuaded of, that the same disease came first from Spain;
wherefore they (for want of a better name) do call it, The Spanish pox.
Notwithstanding at Tunis and over all Italy it is called the French disease.
It is so called likewise in Egypt and Syria: for there it is used as a common
proverb of cursing; The French pox take you. Amongst the Hernia or the
disease called (...) or the rupture.
Barbarians the disease called in Latin Hernia is not so common; but in Egypt
the people are much troubled therewith. For some of the Egyptians have their
cods oftentimes so swollen, as it is incredible to report. Which infirmity is
thought to be so common among them, because they eat so much gum, and salt
cheese. Some of their children are subject unto the falling sickness; but when
they grow to any stature, they are free from that disease. This falling
sickness likewise possesses the women of Barbary, and of the land of Negros;
who, to excuse it, say that they are taken with a spirit. In Barbary the
plague is rife every tenth, fifteenth, or twentieth year, whereby great numbers
of people are consumed; for they have no cure for the same, but only to rub
the plague sore with certain ointments made of Armenian earth. In Numidia they
are infected with the plague Earth of (...).
scarce once in an hundred years. And in the land of Negros they know not the
name of this disease: because they never were subject thereunto.

The commendable actions and virtues of the Africans.
THose Arabians which inhabit in Barbary or upon the coast of the Mediterran
sea, are greatly addicted unto the study of good arts and sciences: and those
things which concern their law and religion are esteemed by them in the first
place. Moreover they have been heretofore most studious of the Mathematiques,
of Philosophy, and of Astrology: but these arts (as it is aforesaid) were
four hundred years ago, utterly destroyed and taken away by the chief
professors of their law. The inhabitants of cities do most religiously
observe and (...) those things which appertain unto their religion: yea they
honor those doctors and priests, of whom they learn their law, as if they
were petie-gods. Their Churches they frequent very diligently, to the end
they may repeat certain prescript and formal prayers; most superstitiously
persuading themselves that the same day wherein they make their prayers, it is
not lawful for them to wash certain of their members, when as at other times
they will wash their whole bodies. Whereof we will (by Gods help) discourse
more at large in the second Book of this present treatise, when we shall fall
into the mentioning of Mahumet and of his religion. Moreover those which
inhabit Barbary are of great cunning and dexterity for building and for
mathematical inventions, which a man may easily conjecture by their
artificial works. Most honest people they are, and destitute of all fraud and
guile; not only embracing all simplicity and truth, but also practicing the
same throughout the whole course of their lives: albeit certain Latin
authors, which have written of the same regions, are far otherwise of
opinion. Likewise they are most strong and valiant people, especially those
which dwell upon the mountains. The Moors are a people of great fidelity.
They keep their covenant most faithfully; insomuch that they had rather die
then break promise. No nation in the world is so subject unto jealousy; for
they will rather leese their lives, then put up any disgrace in the behalf of
their women. So desirous they are of riches and honor, that therein no other
people can go beyond them. They travel in a manner over the whole world to
exercise traffic. For they are continually to be seen in Egypt, in
AEthiopia, in Arabia, Persia, India, and Turkey: and whithersoeuer they go,
they are most honorably esteemed of: for none of them will profess any art,
unless he has attained unto great exactnes and perfection therein. They have
always been much delighted with all kind of civility and modest behavior:
and it is accounted heinous among them for any man to utter in company, any
bawdie or unseemly word. They have always in mind this sentence of a grave
author; Give place to thy superior. If any youth in presence of his father,
his uncle, or any other of his kindred, does sing or talk ought of love
matters, he is deemed to be worthy of grievous punishment. Whatsoever lad or
youth there lights by chance into any company which discourses of love, no
sooner hears nor understands what their talk tends unto, but immediately
he withdraws himself from among them. These are the things which we thought
most worthy of relation as concerning the civility, humanity, and upright
dealing of the Barbarians: let us now proceed unto the residue. Those Arabians
which dwell in tents, that is to say, which bring up cattle, are of a more
liberal and civil disposition: to wit, they are in their kind as devout,
valiant, patient, courteous, hospital, and as honest in life and conversation
as any other people. They be most faithful obseruers of their word and
promise: insomuch that the people, which before we said to dwell in the
mountains, are greatly stirred up with emulation of their virtues. Howbeit the
said mountainers, both for learning, for virtue, and for religion, are thought
much inferior to the Numidians; albeit they have little or no knowledge at all
in natural philosophy. They are reported likewise to be most (...) warriors,
to be valiant, and exceeding lovers and practisers of all humanity. Also, the
Moors and Arabians inhabiting Libya are somewhat civil of behavior, being
plain dealers, void of dissimulation, favorable to strangers, and lovers of
simplicity. Those which we before named white, or tawney Moors, are most
steadfast in friendship: as likewise they indifferently and favorably esteem
of other nations: and wholly endeavor themselves in this one thing, namely, that
they may lead a most pleasant and iocund life. Moreover they maintain most
learned professors of liberal arts, and such men as are most devout in their
religion. Neither is there any people in all Africa that lead a more happy and
honorable life.

What vices the foresaid Africans are subject unto.
Never was there any people or nation so perfectly endued with virtue, but that
they had their contrary faults and blemishes: now therefore let us consider,
whether the vices of the Africa^s do surpass their virtues and good parts.
Those which we named the inhabitants of the cities of Barbary are somewhat
needy and covetous, being also very proud and high-minded, and woonderfully
addicted unto wrath; insomuch that (according to the proverb) they will deeply
engraue in marble any injury be it never so small, and will in no wise blot it
out of their remembrance. So rusticall they are and void of good manners, that
scarcely can any stranger obtain their familiarity and friendship. Their wits
are but mean; and they are so credulous, that they will believe matters
impossible, which are told them. So ignorant are they of natural philosophy,
that they imagine all the effects and operations of nature to be extraordinary
and divine. They observe no certain order of living nor of laws. Abounding
exceedingly with choler, they speak always with an angry and loud voice.
Neither shall you walk in the daytime in any of their streets, but you shall
see commonly two or three of them together by the ears. By nature they are a
vile and base people, being no better accounted of by their governors then if
they were dogs. They have neither judges nor lawyers, by whose wisdom and
counsel they ought to be directed. They are utterly unskillful in trades of
merchandise, being destitute of bankers and money changers: wherefore a
merchant can do nothing among them in his absence, but is himself constrained
to go in person, whithersoeuer his wares are carried. No people under heaven
are more addicted unto couetise then this nation: neither is there (I think)
to be found among them one of an hundred, who for courtesy, humanity, or
devotions sake, will vouchsafe any entertainment upon a stranger. Mindful they
have always been of injuries, but most forgetful of benefits. Their minds
are perpetually possessed with vexation and strife, so that they will seldom
or never show themselves tractable to any man; the cause whereof is supposed to
be; for that they are so greedily addicted unto their filthy lucre, that they
never could attain unto any kind of civility or good behavior. The
shepherds of that region live a miserable, toilsome, wretched and beggarly
life: they are a rude people, and (as a man may say) borne and bred to theft,
deceit, and brutish manners. Their young men may go a wooing to diverse maids,
till such time as they have sped of a wife. Yea, the father of the maid most
friendly welcommeth her suitor; so that I think scarce any noble or gentleman
among them can choose a virgin for his spouse: albeit, so soon as any woman is
married, she is quite forsaken of all her suitors; who then seek out other new
paramours for their liking. Concerning their religion, the greater part of
these people are neither Mahumetans, Jews, nor Christians; and hardly shall
you find so much as a spark of piety in any of them. They have no churches
at all, nor any kind of prayers, but being utterly estranged from all godly
devotion, they lead a savage and beastly life: and if any man chances to be
of a better disposition (because they have no law-giuers nor teachers among
them) he is constrained to follow the example of other men's lives and manners.
All the Numidians being most ignorant of natural, domestical, and
commonwealth-matters, are principally addicted unto treason, treachery,
murder, theft, and robbery. This nation, because it is most slavish, will
right gladly accept of any service among the Barbarians, be it never so vile or
contemptible. For some will take upon them to be dung-farmers, others to be
scullians, some others to be ostlers, and such like servile occupations.
Likewise the inhabitants of Libya live a brutish kind of life; who neglecting
all kinds of good arts and sciences, do wholly apply their minds unto theft
and violence. Never as yet had they any religion, any laws, or any good form
of living; but always had, and ever will have a most miserable and distressed
life. There cannot any treachery or villainy be invented so damnable, which for
lucres sake they dare not attempt. They spend all their days either in most
lewd practices, or in hunting, or else in warfare; neither wear they any
shoes nor garments. The Negros likewise lead a beastly kind of life, being
utterly destitute of the use of reason, of dexterity of wit, and of all arts.
Yea they so behave themselves, as if they had continually lived in a forest
among wild beasts. They have great swarms of harlots among them; whereupon a
man may easily conjecture their manner of living; except (...) conversation
perhaps be somewhat more tolerable, who dwell in the (...) and cities: for it
is like that they are somewhat more addicted to (...)

Neither am I ignorant, how much mine own credit is (...), when The author of
this work his Apology for the former relation.
I my self write so homely of Africa, unto which country (...) debted both
for my birth, and also for the best part of my education: Howbeit in this
regard I seek not to excuse my self, but only to appeal unto the duty of
an historiographer, who is to set down the plain truth in all places, and is
blame-woorthie for flattering or favoring of any person. And this is the cause
that has moved me to describe all things so plainly without glosing or
dissimulation: wherefore here I am to request the gentle Reader friendly to
accept of this my most true discourse, (albeit not adorned with fine words, and
artificial eloquence) as of certain unknown strange matters. Wherein how
indifferent and sincere I have showed my self, it may in few words appear by
that which follows. It is reported of a lewd countriman of ours, that being
convicted of some heinous crime, he was adjudged to be severely beaten for it.
Howbeit the day following, when the (...) came to do his business, the
malefactor remembered that certain years before, he had some acquaintance and
familiarity with him: which made him to presume, that he should find more
favor at his hands, then a mere stranger. But he was fowly (...); for the
executioner used him no better, then if he had never known him. Wherefore this
caitife at the first exclaiming upon his executioner, oh (says he) my
goodfriend, what makes you so stern, as not to acknowledge our old
acquaintance? Hereupon the executioner beating him more cruelly then before:
friend (quoth he) in such business as this I use to be mindful of my duty, and
to show no favor at all: and so continually laying on, he ceased not, till the
judicial sentence was fulfilled. It was (doubtless) a great argument of
impartial dealing, when as respect of former friendship could take no place.

Wherefore I thought good to record all the particulars aforesaid; least that
describing vices only I should seem to flatter them, with whom I am now
presently conversant; or extolling only the virtues of the Africans, I might
hereafter be said to sue for their favor (which I have of purpose eschewed)
to the end that I might have more free access unto them. Moreover, may it
please you for this purpose to hear another resemblance or similitude. There
was upon a time a most wily bird, so endued by nature, that she could live as
well with the fishes of the sea, as with the fowls of the air; wherefore she
was rightly called Amphibia. This bird being sommoned before the king of birds
to pay her yearly tribute, determined forthwith to change her element, and to
delude the king; and so flying out of the air, she drencht herself in the
Ocean sea. Which strange accident the fishes woondring at, came flocking about
Amphibia, saluting her, and asking her the cause of her coming. Good fishes
(quoth the bird) know you not, that all things are turned so vpside down, that
we wot not how to live securely in the air? Our tyrannical king (what fury
haunts him, I know not) commanded me to be (...) to death, whereas no silly
bird respected ever his commodity as (...) one. Which most unjust edict I no
sooner heard of, but presently ((...) fishes) I came to you for refuge.
Wherefore vouchsafe me (I beseech (...)) some odd corner or other to hide my
head in; and then I may justly say, that I have found more friendship among
strangers, then ever I did in mine own native country. With this speech the
fishes were so persuaded, that Amphibia stayed a whole year among them, not
paying one penie or halfepenie. At the years end the king of fishes began to
demand his tribute, insomuch that at last the bird was (...) to pay. Great
reason it is (says the bird) that each man should have his due, and for my
part I am contented to do the duty of a loyal subject. These words were no
sooner spoken, but she suddenly spread her wings, and up she mounted into the
air. And so this bird, to avoid yearly exactions and tributes, would
eftsoons change her element. Out of this fable I will infer no other moral,
but that all men do most affect that place, where they find least damage and
inconvenience. For mine own part, when I hear the Africans evil spoken of, I
will affirm my self to be one of Granada: and when I perceive the nation of
Granada to be discommended, then will I profess my self to be an African. But
herein the Africans shall be the more beholding unto me; for that I will only
record their principal and notorious vices, omitting their smaller and more
tolerable faults.

JOHN LEO HIS SECOND BOOK OF the History of Africa, and of the memorable
things contained therein.
Having in my first book made mention of the cities, bounds, divisions, and
some other notable and memorable things contained in Africa; we will in this
second part more fully, particularly, largely, and distinctly describe sundry
provinces, towns, mountains, situations of places, laws, rites, and customs
of people. Insomuch that we will leave nothing untouched, which may any way
serve to the illustrating and perfecting of this our present discourse.
Beginning therefore at the west part of Africa, we will in this our
geographicall history proceed eastward, till we come to the borders of
Egypt. And all this our narration following we will divide into seven books;
whereunto (God willing) we purpose to annexe the eighth, which shall entreat of
rivers, of living creatures, of trees, of plants, of fruits, of shrubs, and of
such other most delightful matters.

Of the region of Hea lying upon the west part of Africa.
HEa being one of the provinces of Maroco is bounded westward and northwarde
with the maine Ocean, southwarde with the mountains of Atlas, and eastward
with the river which they call (...). This river springs out of the foresaid
mountain, discharging it self at length into the river of Tensift, and
dividing Hea from the province next adjacent.

Of the situation and description of Hea.
THis region of Hea is an uneven and rough soil, full of rockie mountains,
shadie woods, and chrystall-streames in all places; being woonderfully rich,
and well stored with inhabitants. They have in the said region great abundance
of goats and asses, but not such plenty of sheep, oxen, and horses. All
kind of fruits are very scarce among them, not, that the ground is incapable
of fruit, but because the people are so rude and ignorant in this behalf, that
very few of them are skillful in planting, graffing, or pruning of trees.
Whereof I was easily persuaded: for I remember that I found among some
gardiners of Hea great abundance of fruits. Of grain they have not much
plenty, except it be of barlie, mill, and panick. They have great abundance of
honey, which they use in stead of ordinary food, but the wax they cast away,
little regarding it, because they know not the value thereof. Likewise there
are found in this region certain thornie trees bearing a gross kind of
fruit, not unlike unto those olives which are brought unto us from Spain: the
said fruit they call in their language Arga. Of this fruit they make a kind of
oil, being The fruit (...) Arga.
of a fulsome and strong savor, which they use notwithstanding for sauce and
for lamps.

The manner of living, and the food of the people of (...).
THis people for the most part eats barlie-bread unleavened, which is like
rather unto a cake, then to a loaf: this bread is baked in a kind of earthen
baking-pan, somewhat like unto that wherewith in Italy they use to cover
iuncats and dainty dishes: neither shall you find many in Hea which eat
ouen-bread. They use also a certain unsavory and base kind of meat, which
in their language is called Elhasid, and is made in manner (...).
following: they cast barlie-meale into boiling water, continually tempering
and stirring the same about with a stick, till they perceive it be
sufficiently sodden. Then setting this pap or hastie-pudding upon the table,
and pouring in some of their countrie-oile, all the whole family stand round
about the platter, and eat the said pap not with spoones, but with their hands
and fingers. Howbeit in the spring and summer season they temper the said meal
with milk, and cast in butter in stead of oil: and this kind of meat is not
usual among them, but only at supper. For in winter time they break their
fast with bread and honey; and in summer with milk, butter, and bread.
Moreover sometimes they use to eat sodden flesh, whereunto some add onions,
other beans, and some other, a kind of seasoning or sauce called by them
(...). With them tables and table-cloathes are quite out of use, in stead
whereof they spread a certain round mat upon the ground, which serves among
this rude people both for table, cloth, and all.

The apparel and customs of the foresaid people of Hea.
THE greatest part of them are clad in a kind of cloath-garment made of wool
after the manner of a couerlet, called in their language, Elchise, and not
unlike unto those couerlets or blankets which the Italians lay upon their beds.
In these kind of mantles they wrap themselves; and then are they girt with a
woollen girdle, not about their waste, but about their hippes. They have also a
certain piece of cloth of ten handfuls in length and two in breadth, wherewith
they use to adorn their heads: these kind of ornaments or head-tires they dye
with the juice of walnut-tree-rootes, being so put upon their heads, that their
crowns are always bare. None of them wear any cap, except it be an old man,
or a man of learning; albeit learned men are very rare among them: which caps
of theirs are double and round, not much unlike to the caps of certain
Physicians in Italy. You shall seldom find any linen shirts or smockes among
this people; and that (as I suppose) either because their soil will yield no
flax nor hemp, or else for that they have none skillful in the art of
weauing. Their seats whereon they sit, are naught else but certain mats made
of hair and rushes. For beds they use a certain kind of hairie flockbed or
mattresse; some of which beds are ten else in length, some more, and some
less, yea some you shall find of twenty else long, but none longer: one part
of these mattresses they lie upon instead of a couch, and with the residue they
cover their bodies as it were with (...) and couerlets. In the Springtime
always they lay the hairie side next unto their bodies, because it is somewhat
warmer; but in Sommer-time not regarding that side, they turn the smooth side
upward, and thereon they rest themselves. Likewise of such base and harsh
stuff they make their cushions: being much like unto the stuff which is
brought hither out of Albania and Turkey, to serve for horse-cloathes: The
women of Hea go commonly with their faces uncovered, using for their huswifery
turned vessels and cups of wood: their platters, dishes, and other their
kitchin-vessels be for the most part of earth. You may easily discern which of
them is married, and who is not: for an unmarried man must always keep his
beard shaven, which, after he be once married, he suffers to grow at
length. The said region brings forth no great plenty of horses, but those
that it does bring forth, are so nimble and full of metal, that they will
climb like cats over the steep and craggie mountains. These horses are
always unshod: and the people of this region use to till their ground with no
other cattle, but only with horses and asses. You shall here find great
store of dear, of wild goats, and of hares: Howbeit the people are no whit
delighted in hunting. Which is the cause (as I think) why the said beasts do
so multiply. And it is somewhat strange, that so many rivers running through the
country, they should have such scarsitie of water-mils: but the reason is,
because every household almost have a wooden mill of their own, whereat their
women usually grind with their hands. No good learning nor liberal arts are
here to be found; except it be a little skill in the laws, which some few
challenge unto themselves; otherwise you shall find not so much as any shadow
of virtue among them. They have neither Physician nor Surgeon of any learning
or account But if a disease or infirmity befall any of them, they presently
sear or cauterize Cauterizing.
the sick party with red hot yrons, even as the Italians use their horses.
Howbeit some chirurgians there are among them, whose duty and occupation
consists only in circumcising of their male children. They make no soap in
all the country, but instead thereof they use to wash with lee made of ashes.
They are at continual war, but it is civil and among themselves, insomuch
that they have no leisure to fight against other nations. Whosoever will
travel into a (...) country must take either a harlot, or a wife, or a
religious man of the contrary part, to bear him company. They have no regard
at all of justice, especially in those mountains which are destitute of
governors or princes: yea even the principal men of this very region of Hea,
which dwell within towns and cities, dare scarce prescribe any law or good
order unto the people, so great is their insolency in all places. The cities
of Hea are few in number, but they have great store of villages, towns, and
most strong castles: whereof (God willing) we will hereafter speak more at
large.

Of Tednest one of the cities of Hea.
THE ancient city of Tednest was built by the Africans upon a most beautiful
and large plain, which they environed with a lofty wall built of brick and
lime. Likewise a certain river running forth of the city serves to fill up
the wall ditch. In this city are certain merchants that sell cloth, wherein
the people of the same place are clad. Here is likewise uttered a kind of
cloth which is brought thither out of Portugal: howbeit they will admit no
artificers, but tailors, botchers, carpenters, and a few gold-smithes which are
Jews. In this city there are no innes, stoues, nor wine-tauerns: so that
whatsoever merchant goes thither, must seek out some of his acquaintance to
remain withal: but if he has no friends (...) acquaintance in the town, then
the principal inhabitants there cast lots who should entertain the strange
merchant: insomuch that no stranger, be he never so mean, shall Their manner
of entertaining strangers at Tednest.
want friendly entertainment, but is always sumptuously and honorably
accepted of. But whosoever is received as a guest, must at his departure bestow
some gift upon his host in token of thankfulness, to the end he may be more
welcome at his next return. Howbeit if the said stranger be no merchant, he
may choose what great man's house he will to lodge in, being bound at his
departure to no recompense nor gift. To be short, if any beggar or poor
pilgrim pass the same way, he has some (...) provided for him in a certain
hospital, which was founded only for the relief of poor people, and is
maintained at the common charge of the city. In the midst of the city
stands an ancient temple, being most sumptuously built and of an huge bigness,
which was thought to be founded at the very same time when as the King of
Maroco bare rule in those places. This temple has a great cestern standing in
the midst thereof, and it has many priests and such kind of people which give
attendance thereunto, and store it with things necessary. In this city
likewise are diverse other temples, which, (...) they are but little, yet be
they most cleanly and decently kept. There are in this city about an hundred
families of Jews, who pay no yearly tribute at all, but only bestow each of
them some gratuitie upon this or that nobleman, whom they think to favor them
most, to the end they may enjoy their favor still: and the greatest part of
the said city is inhabited with Jews. These Jews have certain mintinghouses
wherein they stamp silver coin, of which 170. Aspers (as they call them) do
weigh one ounce, being like unto the common coin of Hungary, saving that
this Asper is square, and the Hungarian coin is round. The inhabitants of
Tednest are free from al tributes and yearly taxations: howbeit if any sum
of money be wanting for the erection of a public building, or for any other
common use, the people is forthwith assembled, and each man must give
according to his ability. This city was left desolate in the year 918. of
the Hegeira. At what time all the citizens Tednest left desolate.
thereof fled unto the mountains, and from thence to Maroco. The reason they
say was, because the inhabitants were informed that their next neighbors the
Arabians joined in league with the Portugal Captains (who as then held the
town of Azaphi) and promised to deliver Tednest into the hands of the
Christians, which thing so danted the citizens, that they presently sought to
save themselves by flight. My self (I remember) saw this city utterly ruined
and defaced, the walls thereof being laid even with the ground, the houses
being destitute of inhabitants, and nothing at that time to be there seen,
but only the nests of ravens and of other birds. All this I saw in the 920.
year of the Hegeira.

Of Teculeth a town of Hea.
Upon the foot of an hill eighteen miles Eastwarde from Tednest stands a
town called by the Africans Teculeth, and containing about one thousand
housholdes. Hard by this town runs a certain river, on both sides whereof
are most pleasant gardens, and all kinds of trees. Within the walls of the
said town are many pits or wels, whereout they draw most clear and pleasant
water. Here also is to be seen a most stately and beautiful temple; as
likewise four hospitals and a monastery of religious persons. The inhabitants
of this town are far wealthier then they of Tednest; for they have a most
famous port upon the Ocean sea, commonly called by merchants, Goz. They have
likewise great abundance of corn and pulse, which grow in the fruitful fields
adjacent. These also of Teculeth send wax into Portugal to be sold: and they
are very curious in their apparel (...).
and about the furniture of their (...). When I my self was at Teculeth, I
found there a certain nobleman, who was the president or chief of their
senate: this noblemans duty was both to procure tribute which was yearly to
be paid unto the Arabians, and also to make atonement and reconciliation
between them, when they were at ods. This man had gathered great riches unto
himself, which he employed rather to purchase friends, then to fill his
coffers: most liberal he was unto the poor, most bountiful and favorable
unto all his citizens; insomuch that all men did reverence and honor unto him,
as unto their father and best protector. Of whose courtesy I my self also
made trial: and being not meanly but very sumptuously entertained by him, I
remained with him for a certain time, and read in his house diverse histories
of African matters. This good man together with his son was slain in a
skirmish against the Portugals: which was done, according to our computation,
in the year of the Hegeira 923. that is to say, in the year of our Lord 1514.
After which misfortune Teculeth destroyed by the Portugals.
we heard, that the city was razed, that the people were part of them put to
flight, part lead captive, and the residue (...) by the enemy: all which
particulars we have declared more at large in that Book, which is now lately
1514.
printed and published concerning African affairs.

Of Hadecchis a town of Hea.
THE city of Hadecchis being situate upon a plain, stands eight miles
Southward of Teculeth: it contains seven hundred families: and the walls,
churches, and houses throughout this whole city are all built of free stone.
Through the midst of the town runs a large and fair stream, having many
vines and galleries on both sides thereof. There be many Jews artificers in
this city. The citizens here go somewhat decently apparelled: their horses are
good: most of them exercise merchandise: also they stamp a kind of coin; and
they have certain yearly faires or martes, whereunto the nations adioining do
usually resort. Here is to be sold great store of cattle, of butter, oil,
iron, and cloth, and their said mart lasts fifteen days. Their women are
very beautiful, white of color, fat, comely, and trim. But the men bear a
most savage mind, being so extremely possessed with jealousy, that whomsoever
they find but talking with their wives, they presently go about to murder
them. They have no judges nor learned men among them, nor any which can assign
unto the citizens any functions and magistracies according to their worthiness:
so that he rules like a king that excels the residue in wealth. For matters
of religion, they have certain Mahumetan priests to administer them. Who
neither pay tribute nor yearly custom, even as they whom we last before
mentioned. Here I was entertained by a certain courteous and liberal minded
priest, who was exceedingly delighted with Arabian Poetry. Wherefore being so
lovingly entertained, I read unto him a certain brief treatise as touching
the same argument: which he accepted so kindly at my hands, that he would not
suffer me to depart without great and bountiful rewards. From hence I
traveled unto Maroco. And afterward I heard that this town also, in the year
of the Hegeira Hadecchis sacked by the Portugals.
922. was sacked by the Portugals, and that the inhabitants were all fled into
the next mountains, and the very same year I returned home to visit my 1513.
native country, which was in the year of our Lord 1513.

Of Ileusugaghen a town of Hea.
THis town is situate upon the top of a certain high mountain which is
distant eight miles to the South of Hadecchis: it consists of about two
hundred families: and by the foot of the hill runs a small river. Here are
no gardens at all, nor yet any trees which bear fruit: the reason whereof is
(as I suppose) because the inhabitants are such slothful and gross people,
that they regard nothing but their barley and their oil. They are at
continual war with their next neighbors, which is performed with such
monstrous bloodshed and manslaughter, that they deserve rather the name of
beasts then of men. They have neither judges, priests, nor lawyers, to
prescribe any form of living among them, or to govern their commonwealth:
wherefore justice and honesty is quite banished out of their habitations.
Those mountains are altogether destitute of fruits: howbe it they abound
greatly with honey, which serves the inhabitants both for food, and for
merchandise to sell in the neighbour-countries. And because they know not what
service to put their wax unto, they cast it forth, together with the other
excrements of honey. The said town of Ileusugaghen has a very small and
narrow chapel, which will scarce contain a hundred persons, whither
notwithstanding the people do so slowly resort, that they need not to have any
greater; so much do they neglect religion and piety. Whenever they go
abroad, they carry a dagger or a iauelin about with them: and you shall often
hear of the slaughter of some one or other of their citizens. No people under
heaven can be more wicked, treacherous, or lewdly addicted, then this people is.

I remember that I my self went once thither with a Seriffo or Mahumetan
priest, (who made challenge unto the government of Hea) to the end that we
might arbitrate certain strifes and contentions: for it were incredible to
report, what cruel wars, partly for murders, and partly for robberies, were
practiced among them. But because the Seriffo had brought no lawyers with him,
nor any judges to decide controversies, he would needs, that I should take
that office upon me. Immediately the townsmen come flocking about us: one
complains that his neighbor has slain eight of his kindred and family; his
neighbor on the contrary alleges, that the former had slain ten of his
family; wherefore, according to the ancient custom, he demands to have a
sum of money given him. For (says he) there is some recompense due unto me,
since ten of my people have been slain, and but eight of this my
neighbors. Whereunto the other replied that the said ten persons were justly
slain, because they went about by violence to dispossess him of a certain
piece of ground which his father had left him by inheritance; but, that his
eight were murdered only for unjust revenge, against all equity and law.
With these and such like frivolous allegations we spent that whole day, neither
could we decide any one controversy. About midnight we saw a great throng of
people meet in the marketplace, who made there such a bloody and horrible
conflict, that the sight thereof would have affrighted any man, were he never
so hard hearted. Wherefore the said Seriffo fearing least those lewd varlets
would make some treacherous conspiracy against him, and thinking it better to
depart thence immediately, then to expect the conclusion of that fraye, we
took our journey from that place to a town called Aghilinghighil.

Of the town of Teijeut in Hea.
Moreover, the tower of Teijeut standing upon a plain ten miles Westward of
Ileusugaghen, contains about three hundred housholdes. The houses and wall of
this town are built of brick. The townsmen exercise husbandry; for their
ground is most fertile for barley; albeit it will scarcely yield any other
grain. They have pleasant and large gardens, stored with vines, fig trees, and
peachtrees: also they have great abundance of goats. About this town are many
lions, whereby the townsmen are not a little endamaged: for they pray
continually upon their goats and upon other of their cattle. Certain of us
upon time coming into these parts for want of a lodging were constrained to
repair unto a little cottage which we escried, being so old, that it was in
danger of falling: having provided our horses of prouender, we stopped up all
the doors and passages of the said cottage with thorns and wood, as
circumspectly as possibly we could: these things happened in the month of
April, at what time they have extreme heat in the same country. Wherefore we
our selves got up to the top of the house, to the end that in our sleep we
might be near unto the open air. About midnight we espied two monstrous
lions, who were drawn thither by the sent of our horses, and endeavored to
break down that fence of thorns which we had made. Whereupon the horses
being put in fear, kept such a neighing, and such a stir, that we misdoubted
least the rotten cottage would have fallen, and least our selves should have
become a pray unto the lions. But so soon as we perceived the day begin to
break, we forthwith sadled our horses, and hyed us unto that place, where we
knew the Prince and his army lay. Not long after followed the destruction of
this town. For the greater part of the townsmen being slain, the rest were
taken by the Portugals, and were carried Teijeut destroyed by the Portugals.
as captives into Portugal. This was done in the year of the Hegeira 920 and
in the year of our Lord 1513.

Of Tesegdelt a town of Hea.
THe town of Tesegdelt being situate upon the top of a certain high
mountain, and naturally environed with an high rock in stead of a wall,
contains more then eight hundredth families. It is distant from Teijeut
southward about twelve miles, and it has a river running by it, the name
whereof I have forgotten. About this town of Tesegdelt are most pleasant
gardens and orchards, replenished with all kind of trees, and especially with
walnut-trees. The inhabitants are wealthy, having great abundance of horses,
neither are they constrained to pay any tribute unto the Arabians. There are
continual wars between the Arabians and them, and that with great bloodshed
and manslaughter on both parts. The villages lying near unto Tesegdelt do
usually carry all their grain thither, least they should be deprived thereof
by the enemy, who makes daily inrodes and invasions upon them. The
inhabitants of the foresaid town are much The courtesy of the citizens of
Tesegdelt toward strangers.
(...) unto courtesy and civility; and for liberality and bounty unto
strangers, they will suffer themselves to be inferior to none other. At every
gate of Tesegdelt stand certain watchmen or warders, which do most lovingly
receive all incommers, enquiring of them, whether they have any friends and
acquaintaine in the town, or no? If they have none, then are they conducted to
one of the best Innes of the town, and having had entertainment there,
according to their degree and place, they are friendly dismissed: and
whatsoever his expenses come to, the stranger paies naught at all, but his
charges are defraied out of the common purse. This people of Tesegdelt are
subject also unto jealousy; howbeit they are most faithful keepers of their
promise. In the very midst of the town stands a most beautiful and stately
temple, whereunto belong a certain number of Mahumetan priests. And to the
end that justice may be most duly administered among them, they have a very
learned judge, who decideth all matters in the common wealth, except criminal
causes only. Their fields where they use to sow their corn, are, for the
greater part upon the mountains. Unto this very town I traveled with the
foresaid Seriffo in the (...) of the Hegeira 919. that is to say, in the year
of our Lord 1510.

A description of the city of Tagtess.
THE most ancient city of Tagtess is built round, and stands upon the top
of an hill: on the sides whereof are certain winding steps hewn out of the
hard rock. It is about fourteen miles distant from Tesegdelt. By the foot
of the said hill runs a river, whereout the women of Tagtess draw their
water, neither have the citizens any other drink: and although this river be
almost six miles from Tagtess, yet a man would think, looking down from the
city upon it, that it were but half a mile distant. The way leading unto the
said river being cut out of the rock, in form of a pair of stayres, is very
narrow. The citizens of Tagtess are addicted unto theft and robbery, and are
at continual war with their neighbors. They have no corne-fields, nor any
cattle, but only upon the said mountain: they have great store of bores; but
such scarcity of horses, that there is not one almost to be found in the
whole city. The way through their region is so difficult, that they will
suffer none to pass by without a public testimonial. While I (...)
was in that country, there came such a swarm of Locusts, that they devoured
the greatest part of their corns which were as then ripe: insomuch that all
the upper part of the ground was covered with Locusts. Which was in the year
of the Hegeira 919. that is, in the year of our Lord 1510.

The town of Eitdeuet.
Fifteen miles Southward from Tagtess stands another town called Eitdeuet,
being built upon a plain, and yet upon the higher ground thereof. It
contains to the number of seven hundred families; and has in the midst
thereof most clear and cool fountains. This town is environed on all sides
with rocks and mighty woods. In the said town are Jews of all occupations:
and so me there are which affirm, that the first inhabitants of this town
came by natural descent from King David: but so soon as the Mahumetan
religion had. infected that place, their own law and religion ceased. Here
are great store of most cunning lawyers, which are perfectly well seen in the
laws and constitutions of that nation: for I remember that I my self saw a
very aged man, who could most readily repeat a whole volume written in their
language, called by them Elmudevuana, that is to say, the body of the whole
law. The said volume is divided into three tomes, wherein all difficult
questions are dissolved: together with certain counsels or commentaries of a
famous author, which they call (...). They have a kind of tribunal or
iudgement-hall, wherein all contentions happening between the citizens of this
place, and their neighbour-cities, are presently decided and set through.
Neither do the said lawyers deal only in commonwealth matters, but also in
cases pertaining to religion: albeit in criminal cases the people do not so
greatly credit them, for indeed their learning little serves them for that
purpose. Being amongst them, it was my hap to soiourne in the house of a
certain lawyer, who was a man of great learning. This lawyer, to the end he
might give me more solemn entertainme^t, would needs inuit diverse learned men
of his own profession to bear us company at supper. After supper, we had
many questions propounded: and amongst the residue this was one; namely,
Whether any man might justly sell that person for a bondflaue, who is nourished
by any commodity of the people. There was in company at the same time a
certain aged Sire, having a grave beard and a reverend countenance, unto whom
each one of them ascribed much honor; him they called in their own language
Hegazzare. Which name, when I had heard thrice or four times repeated, I
demanded of some that were in presence, what was the true signification
thereof. They told me that it signified a butcher: for (say they) as a butcher
knows right well the true anatomy of every part of a beast; even so can this
aged Sire most learnedly dissolve all difficult questions and doubts of law.
This people leads a most miserable and distressed life: their food is barlie
bread, oil arganicke, and goates-flesh. They know no use of any other grain
but barlie. Their women are very beautiful and of a lovely hue: their men be
strong and lusty, having hair growing upon their breasts, and being very
liberal and exceeding jealous.

Of Culeihat Elmuridin, that is to say, The rock of disciples; a castle of Hea.
THis Culeihat Elmuridin is a castle built upon the top of a certain high
mountain, having round about it diverse other mountains of a like height,
which are environed with craggie rocks and huge woods. There is no passage unto
this castle, but only a certain narrow path upon one side of the mountain.
By the one side thereof stands a rock, and upon the other side the mountain
of Tesegdelt is within half a mile; and it is distant from Eitdeuet almost
eighteen miles. This castle was built even in our time by a certain apostata
or renouncer of the Mahumetan religion, called by them Homar Seijef; who being
first a Mahumetan preacher unto A pestiferous Mahumetan preacher.
the people, propounded unto a great number of disciples and sectaries, whom he
had drawn to be of his opinion, certain new points of religion. This fellow
seeing that he prevailed so with his disciples, that they esteemed him for some
petie-god, became of a false preacher a most cruel tyrant, and his government
lasted for twelve years. He was the chief cause of the destruction and ruin
of the whole province. At length he was slain by his own wife, because he had
unlawfully lien with her daughter which she had by her former husband. And then
was his perverse and lewd dealing laid open unto all men; for he is reported
to have been utterly ignorant of the laws, and of all good knowledge.
Wherefore not long after his decease all the inhabitants of the region
gathering their forces together, slew every one of his disciples and false
sectaries. Howbeit the nephew of the said apostata was left alive; who
afterward in the same castle endured a whole years siege of his adversaries,
and repelled them, insomuch that they were constrained to depart. Yea even
until this day he molesteth the people of Hea, and those which inhabit near
unto him, with continual war, living upon robbery and spoil; for which
purpose he has certain horsemen, which are appointed to watch and to pursue
travelers, sometimes taking cattle, and sometimes men captives. He has
likewise certain gunners, who, although travelers be a good distance off (for
the common high way stands almost a mile from the castle) will put them in
great fear. Howbeit all people do so deadly hate him, that they will not
suffer him to till one foot of ground, or to bear any dominion without the
said mountain. This man has caused his grandfathers body to be honorably
buried in his castle, suffering him to be adored of his people, as if he were a
god. Passing by that way upon a A treatise written by (...) Leo concerning the
Mahumetan religion.
certain time, I escaped their very bullets narrowly. The life, religion and
manners of the foresaid Homar Seijef I perfectly learned by a disciple of his,
having at large declared the same in a certain brief treatise, which I have
written concerning the Mahumetan religion.

Of Igilingigil a town of Hea.
Moreover the Africans in old time built a certain town upon an hill, called
by the inhabitants Igilingigil; being distant from Eitdeuet about six miles
southward, and containing almost four hundred families. In this town are
sundry artificers, employing themselves only about things necessary, to the
end they may make their best gain and advantage thereby. Their ground is most
fertile for barlie; as likewise they have great abundance of honey and of oil
Arganicke. The passage or way unto this city is very narrow, lying only upon
one side of the hill. And it is so hard and difficult, that horses cannot
without great labor and peril go upon it. The inhabitants are most valiant
people and well exercised in arms, maintaining continual war against the
Arabians, and that for the most part with very prosperous success, by reason
of the natural and strong situation of the (...). A more liberal people then
this, you shall hardly find. They generally exercise themselves in making of
earthen pots and vessels, which (I think) none of their neighhours thereabout
can do.

Of Tefethne a port and most famous marttowne of Hea.
Near unto the Ocean sea stands a city, most strong both for situation and
building, commonly called Tefethne, being westward of Ingilingigil about forty
miles. They say that this town was built by certain Africans, and that it
contains more then six hundred households. Here ships of mean burden may
safely harbor themselves; and hither the Portugal merchants resort to buy
goats-skins and wax. Corne-fields they have none, but only certain hills,
which yield great increase of barlie. Near unto this town runs a certain
river, whereinto the ships put themselves in tempestuous weather. The
towne-wall is built of white hewn stone and of brick. They gather their
yearly customs and subsidies; all the whole sum whereof is equally
distributed among such citizens as are meet for the wars. In this town are
great plenty of Mahumetan priests and of judges; howbeit, for the inquiry of
murder and such like crimes these judges have no authority. For if any
kinsman of the slain or wounded party meets A punishment of murder.
with him that did the fact, he is presently without any judgment to have
Legem talionis, that is, like for like, inflicted upon him: but if he escape
that, he is banished seven years out of the city: at the end of which seven
years the malefactor having paid a certain sum of money to the friends of
the wounded or slain party, is afterward received into favor, and accounted
among the number of citizens. All the inhabitants of Tefethne are of a most
white color, being so addicted unto friendship and hospitality, that they
favor strangers more then their own citizens. They have a most stately and
rich hospital; howbeit those which are there placed may for the most part
remain in citizens houses. My self being in company with the Seriffo or
Mahumetan prelate, continued for the space of three days among this people;
which three days seemed three years unto me, both for the incredible number
of fleas, and also for the most loathsome and intolerable stench of piss, and
of goats dung. For each citizen has a flock of goats, which they drive in
the daytime to pasture, and at night they house them at home in their own
habitations, yea even before their chamber-doores.

Of the people called Ideuacal who inhabit the beginning of mount Atlas.
Having hitherto made report of all the cities of Hea, which are worthy of
memory, I thought good in this place (to the end that nothing should be
wanting in this our discourse, which might delight the reader) to describe the
inhabited mountains also. Wherefore the greatest part of the people of
Headwelleth upon mountains, some where of being called Ideuacal (for so are
they named) inhabit upon that part of Atlas, which stretches it self from
the Ocean sea eastward, as far as Igilingigil; and this ridge of mountains
divides Hea from Sus. The breadth of this mountain is three days journey. For
Tefethne, whereat this mountain begins from the north, is distant from the
town of Messa, where it ends southward, as far as I could conveniently
ride in three days. Whosoever knows this region as well as my self, can
sufficiently bear me witness, how it is replenished with inhabitants and
countrey-villages. Their ordinary food is barley, goatesflesh, and honey. Shirts
they wear none at all, nor yet any other garments which are sown together;
for there is no man among them which knows how to use the needle: but such
apparel as they have, hangs by a knot upon their shoulders. Their women
wear silver rings upon their ears, some three, and some more. They have
silver buttons of so great a scantling, that each one weighs an ounce,
wherewith they fasten their apparel upon their shoulders, to the end it may
not fall off. The nobler and richer sort of people among them wear silver
rings upon their fingers and legs, but such as are poor wear ringes only of
iron or of copper. There are likewise certain horses in this region, being so
small of stature and so swift, as it is wonderful. Here may you find great
plenty of wild goats, hares, and dear, and yet none of the people are
delighted in hunting. Many fountains are here to be found, and great
abundance of trees, but especially of walnut-trees. The greater part of this
people lives after the Arabians manner, often changing their places of
habitation. A kind of daggers they use whieh are broad and crooked like a
wood-knife; and their swords are as thick as sithes, wherewith they mow haie.
When they go to the wars they carry three or four hunting toiles with them.
In all the said mountain are neither judges, priests, nor temples to be
found. So ignorant they are of learning, that not one among them either loves
or embraces the same. They are all most lewd and wicked people, and apply
their minds unto all kind of villainy. It was told the Seriffo in my
presence, that the foresaid mountain was able to afford twenty thousand
soldiers for a need.

Of the mountain called Demensera.
THis mountain also is a part of Atlas, beginning from the mountain last
before mentioned, and extending it self eastward for the space of about fifty
miles, as far as the mountain of Nifif in the territory of Maroco. And it
divides a good part of Hea from the region of Sus before named. It abounds
with inhabitants, which are of a most barbarous and savage disposition. Horses
they have great plenty: they go to war oftentimes with the Arabians which
border upon them: neither will they permit any of the said Arabians to come
within their dominions. There are no towns nor castles upon all this
mountain: howbeit they have certain villages and cottages, wherein the better
sort do hide their heads. Great store of noble men or governors they have in
all places, unto whom the residue are very obedient. Their ground yields
barley and mill in abundance. They have every where many fountains, which being
dispersed over the whole province, do at length issue into that river, which is
called in their language Siffaia. Their apparel is somewhat decent: also they
possess (...) of iron.
great quantity of iron, which is from thence transported into other places;
and these people are well given to thrift and good husbandry. Great numbers of
Jews remain in this region, which live as stipendarie soldiers under diverse
princes, and are continually in arms; and they are reputed and called by other
Jews in Africa Carraum, that is to say, heretics. They have store of box,
of mastick, and of high walnut trees. Unto their Argans (for so they call a
kind of olives which they have) they put nuts; out of which two simples they
express very bitter oil, using it for a sauce to some of their meats, and
pouring it into their lamps. I heard diverse of their principal men avouch,
that they were able to bring into the field sieve and twenty thousand most
expert soldiers. In my return from Sus they did me exceeding honor, in regard
of certain letters, which I delivered unto them from my Lord the Seriffo: and
to manifest their good will toward the said Seriffo, they (...) me with most
ample gifts and gratuities. This was done in the 920. year of the Hegeira,
that is to say, in the year of our Lord, 1520.

Of the mountain of Iron, commonly called Gebelelhadih.
THis mountain is not to be accounted any part of Atlas: for it begins
northward from the Ocean; and southward it extends to the river of Tensift;
and divides Hea from Duccala and Maroco. The inhabitants are called Regraga.
Upon this hill are waste deserts, clear fountains, and abundance of honey, and
of oil Arganick, but of corn and pulse great scarcity, unless they make
provision thereof out of Duccala. Few rich men are here to be found, but they
are all most devout and religious after their manner. Upon the top of this
mountain are many Hermites, which live only upon the fruits of certain
trees, and drink water. They are a most faithful and peaceable nation.
Whosoever among them is apprehended for theft or any other crime, is forthwith
banished the country for certain years. So great is their simplicity, that
whatsoever they see the Hermites do, they esteem it as a miracle. They are
much oppressed with the often invasions of their neighbors the Arabians;
wherefore this quiet nation choose rather to pay yearly tribute, then to
maintain war. Against the said Arabians Mahumet the King of Fez directed
his troops: insomuch that they were constrained to leave their own country
and to flee into the mountains. But the people of the mountains being aided
with Mahumet his forces, vanquished the Arabians; so that three thousand of
them were slain, and fower-score of their horses were brought unto K. Mahumet.
After which prosperous battle, the said mountainers remained free from all
tribute. I my self, while these things were a doing, served the king. It was
in the year of the Hegeira 921. that is to say, in the year of our Lord 1512.
When this people undertake any war, they bring commonly into the field an
army of twelve thousand men.

Of the region of Sus.
NOw comes the region of Sus to be considered of, being situate beyond Atlas,
over against the territory of Hea, that is to say, in the extreme part of
Africa. Westward it begins from the Ocean sea, and southward from the sandy
deserts: on the north it is bounded with the utmost town of Hea; and on the
east with that mighty river whereof the whole region is named. Wherefore
beginning from the west, we will describe all those cities and places which
shall seem to be worthy of memory.

Of the town of Messa.
THree small towns were built by the ancient Africans upon the sea shore
(each being a mile distant from other) in that very place where Atlas takes his
beginning: all which three are called by one only name, to wit, Messa, and are
environed with a wall builte of white stones. Through these three runs a
certain great river called Sus in their language: this river in summer is so
destitute of water, that a man may easily without peril pass over it on
foot; but it is not so in the winter time. They have then certain small
barks, which are not meet to sail upon this river. The place where the
foresaid three towns are situate, abounds greatly with palm trees, neither
have they in a manner any other wealth; and yet their dates are but of small
worth, because they will not last above Dates which will last but one year.
one year. All the inhabitants exercise husbandry, especially in the months
of September and April; what time their river increases. And in May their
corn grows to ripenes. But if in the two foresaid months the river
increases not according to the woonted manner, their harvest is then nothing
worth. Cattle are very scarce among them. Not far from the sea side they
have a temple, which they greatly esteem and honor. Out of which,
Historiographers say, that the same prophet, of whom their great Mahumet
foretold, should proceed. Yea, some there are which stick not to affirm,
that the prophet Jonas was cast forth by the whale upon the shore of Messa,
when as he was sent to preach unto the Ninevites. The rafters Great store of
whales.
and beams of the said temple are of whales bone. And it is a usual thing
amongst them, to see whales of an huge and monstrous bigness cast up dead upon
their shore, which by reason of their hugenes and strange deformity, may
terrify and astonish the beholders. The common people imagine, that, by reason
of a certain secret power and virtue infused from heaven by God upon the said
temple, each whale which would swim past it can by no means escape death.
Which opinion had almost persuaded me; especially when at my being there, I my
self saw a mighty whale cast up: unless a certain Jew had told me, that
it was no such strange matter: for (quoth he) there lie certain rocks two
miles into the sea on either side; and as the sea mooues, so the whales move
also; and if they chance to light upon a rock, they are easily wounded to
death, and so are cast upon the next shore. This reason more prevailed with me
then the opinion of the people. My self (I remember) being in this region at
the same time when my Lord the Seriffo bare rule over it, was invited by a
certain gentleman, and was by him conducted into a garden: where he showed me
a whales rib of so great A whales rib of incredible greatness.
a size, that lying upon the ground with the conuexe or bowing side upward in
manner of an arche, it resembled a gate, the hollow or inward part whereof
aloft we could not touch with our heads, as we rode upon our camels backs: this
rib (he said) had lien there above an hundred years, and was kept as a
miracle. Here may you find upon the seashore great store of amber, which the
Portugal, and Fessan mercha^ts fetch from thence for a very Amber.
mean price: for they scarcely pay a duckat for a whole ounce of most choice
and excellent amber. Amber (as some think) is made of whales dung, and (as
others suppose) of their Sperma or seed, which being consolidate and hardened
by the sea, is cast upon the next shore.

Of Teijeut an ancient town of Sus.
TEijeut being (as the report goes) built by the ancient Africans in a most
pleasant place, is divided into three parts, whereof each one is almost a mile
distant from another, and they all make a triangle or three-square. This
Teijeut contains four thousand families, and stands not far from the
river of Sus. The soil adjacent is most fruitful for grain, for barlie, and
for all kind of pulse. They have here likewise a good quantity of sugar Store
of sugar.
growing; howbeit, because they know not how to press, boil, and trim it,
they cannot have it but black and unsavory: wherefore so much as they can
spare, they sell unto the merchants of Maroco, of Fez, and of the land of
Negros. Of dates likewise they have plenty; neither use they any money besides
the gold which is dug out of their own native soil. The women wear upon
their heads a piece of cloth worth a duckat. Silver they have none, but such
as their women adorn themselves with. The least iron-coine used amongst them,
weighs almost an ounce. No fruits take plentifully upon their soil, but
only figs, grapes, peaches, and dates. Neither oil nor olives are here to be
found, except such as are brought from certain mountains of Maroco. A measure
of oil is sold at Sus for fifteen ducats; which measure contains an
hundred and fifty pounds Italian weight. Their pieces of gold (because they
have no certain nor proportionable money) do weigh, seven of them and one
third part, one ounce. Their ounce is all one with the Italian ounce: but their
pound contains eighteen ounces, and is called in their language Rethl, and
an hundred Rethl make one such measure of oil as is aforesaid. For carrying of
merchandise from place to place, their custom is to pay for a camels load,
that is, for 700. pounds of Italia^ weight; 3. pieces of gold, especially in
the spring time: for in so^mer they pay sometimes 5. and sometimes 6. pieces of
gold, as the time requires. Here is that excellent leather dressed, which is
called leather of Cordouan leather of Maroco.
Maroco; twelve hides where of are here sold for six ducats, and at Fez for
eight. That part of this region which lies toward Atlas has many villages,
towns; and hamlets: but the south part thereof is utterly destitute of
inhabitants, and subject to the Arabians which border upon it. In the midst of
this city stands a fair and stately temple, which they call The greatest,
and the chiefest, through the very midst whereof they have caused a part of the
foresaid river to run. The inhabitants are stern and uncivil, being so
continually exercised in wars, that they have not one day of quiet. Each part
of the city has a several captain and governor, who all of them together
do rule the commonwealth: but their authority continues never above three
months, which being expired, three other are chosen in their room. Their
apparel is some what like unto that of the people of Hea: saving that some of
them make their shirtes, and other of their garments of a certain kind of
white stuff. A Canna (which is a measure proper to this region, containing two
else) of course cloth is sold for half a piece of Good sale for cloth.
gold: but four and twenty else of Portugal or Neatherlandish cloth, if it
be any thing fine, is usually sold there for four pieces of their gold.
Likewise in this town are many judges and priests, which are conversant only
in matters of religion: but in civil matters, he that has most friends,
obtains greatest favor. Whenever any one is slain, all the friends of the
slain party do forthwith conspire to kill the murderer. Which if they
cannot bring to pass, then is the malefactor by open proclamation banished out
of the city for seven years, unless he will in despite of all men
continually defend himself by maine force. They which return from exile
before the time prefixed, are punished in such manner as we will hereafter
declare in place convenient. But he that returns after the seven years are
once expired, makes a feast unto the Burghmasters, and so is restored again
to his former liberty. In this city dwell many Jews, and many notable
artificers, who are not compelled to pay any yearly tribute or taxation at
all: except it be some small gratuitie unto the principal citizens.

Of Tarodant a town of Sus.
THE (...) of Tarodant built by the ancient Africans, contains about three
thousand households. It is distant from Atlas Southward about four miles, and
five and thirty miles Eastward of Teijeut. For the fruitfulnes of the soil
and manners of the people, it is all one with Teijeut; saving that the town is
somewhat lesser, and the people somewhat more civil. For when the family of
Marin (...) at Fez, part of them also inhabited Sus, and in those days Sus was
the seat of the King of (...) his. Viceroy. There is to be (...) even at this
present a certain rock lying upon the (...), which was there placed by the
foresaid king. But the said family of Marin decaying, the inhabitants recovered
their former estate. Their garments are made partly of linen, and partly of
woollen; and they have many artificers of all sorts. All authority is
committed unto their noble or principal men; who govern four by four, six
months only. They are wholly given to peace: neither do I read, that ever
they endamaged any of their neighbors. Between this town and Atlas are many
villages and hamlets: but to the south of this town lie the (...) desert. The
(...) pay large yearly tribute, to the end that merchants may have safe and
secure passage to and fro. This town in our time waged war against the
Arabians: which, that they might the more prosperously bring to (...), they
yielded themselves unto (...) Lord the Seriffo; in the year of the Hegeira
920. which was in the year of our Lord 1511.

Of the castle of Gartguessem.
THE castle of Gartguessem is built upon the top of Atlas in a most Gartguessem
surprised by the Portugals.
impregnable place, oueragainst that part of the Ocean whereinto the river of
Sus discharges his streams: the soil is most profitable and fruitful. This
place about twenty years since the Portugals surprised; which caused the
inhabitants of Hea and Sus forth with to arm themselves, to the end they
might recover the castle by maine force, which was by force taken from them.
Wherefore leuying a mighty army as well of home-bornes, as of strangers; they
chose for their Captain a certain Mahumetan (...), being a man descended of
the family of Mahumet; and so besieged the castle. But they had unhappy
success in this their enterprise; for they which came to the siege, seeing
that they could not prevail; and that so many of their company were slain,
left the castle, and returned home. Except some few which remained with the
Seriffo, to the end they might maintain war against the Christians, even
till the last hour. The inhabitants of Sus not being desirous to live in
warfare, allowed the Seriffo money for the maintenance of five hundred horses.
Who having with his money hired a great number of soldiers, and growing famous
over all the region, at last usurped the government thereof. This I know for a
certainty, that the Seriffo, when I came from his court, had above three
thousand horsemen; and such numbers of footmen and sums of money, as were
almost innumerable.

Of Tedsi a town of Sus.
TEdsi being a very great town, and built many years ago in a most pleasant
and fertile place by the Africans, contains more then four thousand families:
it is distant from Tarodant Eastward thirty miles, from the Ocean sea sixty
miles, and from Atlas twenty. Here grows Store of sugar and of woad.
great abundance of corn, of sugar, and of wild woad. You shall find in this
city many merchants, which come out of the land of Negros for trafiques sake.
The citizens are great lovers of peace and of all civility: and they have a
flourishing commonwealth. The whole city is governed by six Magistrates
which are chosen by lots: howbeit their government lasts for sixteen months
only. The river of Sus is distant three miles from hence. Here dwell many
Jews, which are most cunning goldsmiths, carpenters, and such like artificers.
They have a very stately temple and many priests and doctors of the law,
which are maintained at the public charge. Every monday great numbers of
Arabians both of the plains and of the mountains come hither to market. In
the year of the Hegeira 920. this city of their own accord yielded
themselves into the hands of the Seriffo: and here the common council of the
whole region was established.

Of the city of Tagauost.
IN all Sus there is no city comparable unto that which is commonly called
Tagauost: for it contains above eight thousand housholdes: the wall thereof
is builte of rough stones. From the Ocean it is distant about threescore miles,
and about fifty miles southward of Atlas: and the report is, that the Africans
built this city. About ten miles from this place lies the river of Sus: here
are great store of artificers and of shops: and the people of Tagauost are
divided into three parts. They have continual civil wars among themselves,
and one part have the Arabians always on their side; who for better pay will
take part sometime with one side, and sometime with the contrary. Of corn
and cattle here is great abundance; but their wool is exceeding course. In
this city are made certain kinds of apparel, which are usually carried for
merchandise once a year to Tombuto, to Gualata, and to other places in the
land of Negros. Their market is twice every week: their attire is somewhat
decent and comely: their women are beautiful; but their men are of a tawnie
and swart color, by reason they are descended of black fathers and white
mothers. In this city such carry the greatest authority and credit, as are
accounted the richest and the mightiest. I my self remained here thirteen
days with the Seriffo his (...) chancellor, who went thither of purpose to
buie certain (...) for his Lord, in the year of the Hegeira 919. which was in
the year of our Lord, 1510.

Of the mountain of Hanchisa.
THis mountain begins westward from Atlas, and from thence stretches
almost forty miles eastward. At the foot of this mountain stands Messa,
with the residue of the region of Sus. The inhabitants of this mountain are
such valiant footmen, that one of them will encounter two horsemen. The soil
will yield no corn at all but barley; (...) honey there is in great abundance.
With snow they are almost at all times troubled: but how patiently and
strongly they can endure the cold, a man may easily guess, for that the whole
year throughout they wear one single garment only. This people my Lord the
Seriffo attempted often to bring under his subjection: howbeit he has not as
yet prevailed against them.

Of the mountain of Ilalem.
THis mountain begins westward from the mountain aforesaid; on the east it
abutteth upon the region of Guzula, and southward upon the plains of Sus. The
inhabitants are valiant, having great store of horses. They are at continual
war among themselves, for certain silver Mines of silver.
mines: so that those which have the better hand dig as much silver as they
can, and distribute to every man his portion, until such time as they be
restrained from digging by others.

The situation and estate of the region of Maroco.
THis region begins westward from the mountain of Nefisa, stretching
eastward to the mountain of Hadimei, and northward even to that place where
the most famous rivers of Tensift and Asfinual meet together, that is to say,
upon the east border of Hea. This region is in a manner three square, being a
most pleasant country, and abounding with many droues and flocks of cattle:
it is green every where, and most fertile of all things, which serve for
food, or which delight the senses of smelling or seeing. It is altogether a
plain country, not much unlike to Lombardie. The mountains in this region
are most cold and barren, insomuch that they will bring forth naught but
barley. Wherefore (according to our former order) beginning at the west part of
this region, we will proceed in our description eastward.

Of Elgihumuha a town of Maroco.
Upon that plain which is about seven miles distant from Atlas, and not far
from the river of Sesseua, stands a town called by the inhabitants
Elgihumuha, which was built, as they suppose, by the Africans. A while after it
was brought under the subjection of certain Arabians, about that very time
when the family of Muachidin aforesaid began to revolt from the kingdom. And
at this day the ruins and relics of this town can scarce be seen. The
Arabians which now dwell thereabout do sow so much ground only, as to supply
their own necessities; and the residue they let lie untilled and fruitles.
Howbeit when the country thereabout was in flourishing estate, the inhabitants
paid yearly unto the Prince for tribute 100000. ducates: and then this town
contained above six thousand families. Traveling that way I was most friendly
entertained by a certain Arabian, and had good experience of the peoples
liberality: saving that I heard of some, that they were most treacherous and
deceitful.

Of the castle of Imegiagen.
THe castle of Imegiagen is built upon the top of a certain hill of Atlas,
being so fortified by natural situation, that it neither has nor needs any
wall. It stands southward of Elgihumuha (as I take it) 25. miles. This castle
was in times past under the jurisdiction of the noble men of that region,
until such time as it was taken by one Homar Essuef an apostata from the
Mahumetan religion, as we will afterward declare. The said Homar The (...) of
Homar Essuef.
used such monstrous tyranny in that place, that neither children, nor women
big with child could escape his cruelty; insomuch that he caused the unborn
infants to be ripped out of their mothers wombes, and to be murdered. This
was done in the year of the Hegeira 900, and so that place remained destitute
of inhabitants In the year 920. of the Hegeira the said region began to be
inhabited anew: howbeit now there can but one side of the mountain only be
tilled, for the plain underneath is so dangerous, both by reason of the daily
incursions of the Arabians, and also of the Portugals, that no man dare travel
that way.

Of the town of Tenessa.
Upon a certain hill of Atlas named Ghedmin stands a town, which was built
(as some report) by the ancient Africans, and called by the name of Tenessa;
being a most strong and defensible place, and being distant about eight miles
eastward from the river of Asifinuall. At the foot of the said hill lies a
most excellent plain, which, were it not for the lewd (...) Arabians, would
yield an incomparable crop. And because the inhabitants of Tenessa are deprived
of this (...) commodity, they till only that ground which is upon the side of
the mountain, and which lies between the town and the river. Neither do
they enjoy that gratis; for they yearly pay unto the Arabians for tribute the
third part of their corn.

Of the new town of Delgumuha.
Upon the top of a certain high mountain was built in our time a most large
and impregnable forte, being environed on all sides with diverse other
mountains, and called by the inhabitants New Delgumuha. Beneath the said
mountain springs Asifinuall, which word signifies in the African tongue, the
river of rumor, because that breaking forth by the side of the hill with a
monstrous noise, it makes a most deep gulf, much like unto that, which the
Italians call Inferno di Tivoli. The said forte contains almost a thousand
families. It was sometime governed by a certain tyrant, which came thither out
of the king of Maroco his court. Here may you find great store of soldiers
both horsemen and fooremen. They gather yearly tribute of the people bordering
upon Atlas, to the sum of a thousand crowns. They have always had great
league and familiarity with the Arabians, each of whom have accustomed to
salute and gratify the other with mutual gifts: for which cause they have
oftentimes much provoked the kings of Maroco against them. They have always
been great lovers of civility, and have worn neat and decent apparel;
neither shall you find any corner in the whole town which is not well peopled.
In this town are plenty of artificers, for it is but fifty miles from the
city of Maroco. Upon the said mountain there are great store of gardens and
orchards; which yield the inhabitants abundance offruit yearly. They reap
likewise barlie, hemp, and cotton; and their goats are almost innumerable.
Likewise they have many priests and judges: but as touching their minds, they
are ignorant, froward, and exceedingly addicted to jealousy. In this town I
abode certain days with a kinsman of mine, who while he dwelt at Fez being
impouerished with extreme study of Alchimie, was constrained to flee unto this
town, where in process of time he became Secretary unto the governor.

Of the city of Imizmizi.
Upon a certain part of Atlas stands a city called Imizmizi. Westward it is
distant from new Delgumuha about fourteen miles: and this city the Arabians
are reported to have built. Near unto this city lies the common high way to
Guzula over the mountains of Atlas, being commonly called Burris, that is, A
way strowed with feathers: because snow falls often thereupon, which a man
would think rather to be feathers then snow. Not far from this town likewise
there is a very fair and large plain, which extends for the space of
thirty miles, even to the territory of Maroco. This most fertile plain
yields such excellent corn, as (to my remembrance) I never saw the like.
Saving that the Arabians and soldiers of Maroco do so much molest the said
plain country, that the greater part thereof is destitute of inhabitants:
yea, I have heard of many citizens that have forsaken the city it self;
thinking it better to depart, then to be daily oppressed with so many
inconveniences. They have very little money, but the scarcity thereof is
recompensed by their abundance of good ground, and their plenty of corn. In
the time of my abode with them I went unto a certain Hermit, which they
called Sidi signifies a Saint in the Arabian tongue.
Sidi Canon: which famous and worthy man gave me such friendly entertainment,
as I cannot easily express.

Of the three towns of Tumelgast.
THese three towns called by the name of Tumelgast are situate upon a plain,
about thirty miles from Maroco, and fourteen miles northward of Atlas, being
replenished with palme-trees, vines, and all other trees that bear fruit.
Their fields are very large and fertile, were they not continually wasted by
the lewd Arabians. So few are the inhabitants of these three towns, that I
think there are not in all above fifteen families, all which are joined in
affinity and kindred unto the foresaid hermit: for which cause they are
permitted to till some part of that plain, without paying of any tribute unto
the Arabians. Save only, that they entertain the Arabians when they travel
that way. Their lowly and base habitations a man would take rather to be
hogs-cotes, then dwelling places for men: hence it is, that they are so
continually vexed with fleas, gnats, and other such vermin. Their water is
exceeding salt. This province also I perused in the company of my dear friend
Sidi (...), who went thither to gather up the tribute of the country on the
behalf of the king of Portugal. This Sidi was appointed governor over all
that circuit which is called by them Azafi.

Of the town of Tesrast.
THis town is situate upon the bank of the river Asifelmel. It stands
westward of Maroco fourteen miles, and about twenty miles from Atlas. Round
about this town they have diverse gardens and enclosures abounding with dates
and corn; and the chief part of the inhabitants earne their living with
gardening. Howbeit sometimes the increase of their river is so great, that it
drowneth all their gardens and corne-fields. And they are by so much the more
miserable, in regard that the Arabians all summertime do possess the whole
region, devouring all things which the poor husbandmen by their great care and
industry had provided. With these people I made no longer tarrying but only
till I could have well baited my horse: howbeit in that short time I hardly
escaped with life and goods, from certain Arabian thieves.

A most exact description of the great and famous city of Maroco.
THis noble city of Maroco in Africa is accounted to be one of the greatest
cities in the whole world. It is built upon a most large field, being about
fourteen miles distant from Atlas. One Joseph the son of The first founder
of Maroco.
Tesfin, and king of the tribe or people called Luntuna, is reported to have
been the founder of this city, at that very time when he conducted his
troops into the region of Maroco, and settled himself not far from the
common high way, which stretches from Agmet over the mountains of Atlas, to
those deserts where the foresaid tribe or people do usually inhabit. Here may
you behold most stately and wonderful workmanship: for all their buildings
are so cunningly and artificially contrived, that a man cannot easily describe
the same. This huge and mighty city, at such time as it was governed by Hali
the son of king Joseph, contained more then 100000. families. Maroco in times
past contained above 100000. families.
It had four and twenty gates belonging thereto, and a wall of great strength
and thicknes, which was built of white stone and lime. From this city the
river of Tensift lies about six miles distant. Here may you behold great
abundance of temples, of colleges, of bath-stoues, and of innes, all framed
after the fashion and custom of that region. Some were built by the king of
the tribe of Luntuna, and others by Elmunchidin his successor: but the most
curious and magnificent temple of all, is that in the midst of the city which
was built by Hali the first king of Maroco, and the son of Joseph aforesaid,
being commonly called the temple of Hali ben Joseph. Howbeit one Abdul-Mumen
which succeeded him, to the end he might utterly abolish the name of Hali, and
might make himself only famous with posterity, caused this stately temple of
Maroco to be razed, and to be reedified somewhat more sumptuously then before.
Howbeit he lost not only his expenses, but failed of his purpose also: for the
common people even till this day do call the said Temple by the first and
auncientest name. Likewise in this city not far from a certain rock was
built a Temple by him that was the second usurper over the kingdom of Maroco:
Mansor the king of Maroco.
after whose death his nephew Mansor enlarged the said Temple fifty cubits
on all sides, and adorned the same with many pillars, which he commanded to be
brought out of Spain for that purpose. Under this temple he made a cesterne or
vault as big as the temple it self: the roof of the said temple he covered
with lead: and at every corner he made leaden pipes to conueigh rain water
into the cesterne underneath the temple. The turret or steeple is built of most
hard and well framed stone, like unto Vespasian his Amphitheatrum at Rome,
containing in compass more then an hundredth else, and in height exceeding the
steeple of Bononia. The stairs of the said turret or steeple are each of them
nine handfuls in breadth, the utmost side of the wall is ten, and Obscurum.
the thicknes of the turret is five. The said turret has seven lofts, unto
which the stairs ascending are very lightsome: for there are great store of
windows, which to the end they may give more light, are made broader within
then without. Upon the top of this turret is built a certain spire or pinnacle
rising sharp in form of a sugar-loafe, and containing five and twenty else
in compass, but in height being not much more then two spears length: the
said spire has three lofts one above another, unto every of which they
ascend with wooden ladders. Likewise on the top of this spire stands a
golden half moon, upon a bar of iron, with three spheres of gold under
it; which golden spheres are so fastened unto the said iron bar, that the
greatest is lowest, and the least highest. It would make a man giddie to look
down from the top of the turret; for men walking on the ground, be they never
so tall, seem no bigger then a child of one year old. From hence likewise
may you plainly escrie the promontorie of Azaphi, which notwithstanding is an
hundredth and thirty miles distant. But mountains (you will say) by reason of
their huge bigness may easily be seen a far off: howbeit from this turret a
man may in clear weather most easily see fifty miles into the plain
countries. The inner part of the said temple is not very beautiful. But the
roof is most cunningly and artificially vaulted, the timbers being framed and
set together with singular workmanship, so that I have not seen many fairer
temples in all Italy. And albeit you shall hardly find any temple in the whole
world greater then this, yet is it very meanly frequented; for the people do
never assemble there but only upon fridaies. Yea a great part of this city,
especially about the foresaid temple lies so desolate and void of inhabitants,
that a man cannot without great difficulty pass, by reason of the ruins of
many houses lying in the way. Under the porch Great store of books in old
time to be sold in Maroco.
of this temple it is reported that in old time there were almost an hundredth
shops of sale-bookes, and as many on the other side over against them: but at
this time I think there is not one booke-seller in all the whole city to be
found. And scarcely is the third part of this city inhabited. Within the walls
of Maroco are vines, palme-trees, great gardens, and most fruitful
corne-fields: for without their walls they can till no ground, by reason of the
Arabians often inrodes. Know ye this for a certainty, that the said city is
grown to untimely decay and old age: for scarcely five hundredth and six
years are past, since the first building thereof, forasmuch as the foundations
thereof were laid in the time of Joseph the son of Tesfin, that is to say,
in the 424. year of the Hegeira. Which decay I can impute to none other cause,
but to the injury of continual wars, and to the often alterations of
magistrates and of the common wealth. After king Joseph succeeded his son
Hali, and the son of Hali was ordained governor after his fathers decease.
In whose time sprung up a factious crew, by the means of a certain Mahumetan
preacher named Elmaheli, being a man both borne and brought up in the
mountains. The said Elmaheli having levied a great army, waged war against
Abraham his sovereign Lord. Whereupon king Abraham conducting another army
against him, had marvelous ill success: and after the battle ended, his
passage into the city of Maroco was so stopped and restrained, that he was
forced with a few soldiers, which remained yet alive, to flee eastward to the
mountains of Atlas. But Elmaheli not being satisfied with expelling his true
sovereign out of his own kingdom, commanded one of his captains called
Abdul Mumen, with the one half of his army to pursue the distressed king,
while himself with the other half laid siege to Maroco. The king with his
followers came at length unto Oran, hoping there to have renewed his forces. But
Abdul Mumen and his great army pursued the said king so narrowly, that the
citizens of Oran told him in plain terms, that they would not hazard
themselves for him. Wherefore this unhappy king being utterly driven to
despair, set his Queen on horseback behind him, and so in the night time
road forth of the city. But perceiving that he was descried and known by his
enemies, he fled forthwith unto a certain rock standing upon the seashore:
The miserable death of Abraham king of Maroco and of (...).
where, setting spurs to his horse-side, he cast himself, his most dear
spouse, and his horse down headlong, and was within a while after found slain
among the rocks and stones, by certain which dwelt near unto the place.
Wherefore Abdul Mumen having gotten the victory, returned in triumphant manner
toward Maroco, where the foresaid Elmaheli was deceased before his coming, in
whose place Abdul was chosen King and Mahumetan prelate over the forty
disciples, and took ten persons to be of his privy council, which was a
new invention in the law of Mahumet. This Abdul Mumen having besieged the city
of Maroco for the space of an whole year, at last overcame it: and killing
Isaac the only son of King Abraham with his own hand, he commanded all the
soldiers, and a good part of the citizens to be slain. This man's posterity
reigned from the five hundred sixteenth, to the six hundred sixty eight year
of the Hegeira, and at length they were dispossessed of the kingdom by a
certain king of the Tribe called Marin. Now, attend (I beseech you) and mark,
what changes and alterations of estates befell afterward. The family of Marin
after the said kings decease bare rule till the year of the Hegeira 785. At
length the kingdom of Maroco decreasing daily more and more, was governed by
kings which came out of the next mountain. Howbeit, never had Maroco any
governors which did so tyrannize over it, as they of the family called (...).
The principal court of this family was holden for the most part at Fez; but
over Maroco were appointed Vice-royes and deputies: insomuch that Fez was
continually the head and Metropolitan city of all Mauritania, and of all the
Western dominion: even as (God willing) we will declare more at large in our
brief treatise concerning the law and religion of Mahumet. But now having made
a sufficient digression, let us resume the matter subject where we left. In the
said city of Maroco is a most impregnable castle, which, if you consider the
bigness, the walls, the towers, and the gates built all of perfect marble, you
may well think to be a city rather then a castle. Within this castle there is
a stately temple, (...) a most (...) and high steeple, on the top where of
stands an half moon, (...) under the half moon are three golden spheres
one bigger then another, which all of them together weigh 130000. ducates. Some
kings there Three golden spears.
were, who being allured with the value, went about to take down the said
golden spears: but they had always some great misfortune or other, which
hindered their attempt: insomuch that the common people think it very
dangerous, if a man does but offer to touch the said spears with his hand.
Some affirm that they are there placed by so forcible an influence of the
planets, that they cannot be removed from thence by any cunning or (...). Some
others report that a certain spirit is adjured by (...)-magique; to defend
those spears from al assaults and injuries whatsoever. In our time the king of
Maroco neglecting the vulgar opinion, would have taken down the said spears,
to use them for treasure against the Portugals, who as then prepared themselves
to battle against him. Howbeit his counselors would not suffer him so to
do, for that they esteemed them as the principal monuments of all Maroco. I
remember that I read in a certain historiographer, that the wife of King
Mansor, to the end she might be famous in time to come, caused those three
spears to be made of the princely and precious jewels which her husband Mansor
bestowed upon her, and to be placed upon the temple which he built. Likewise
the said castle contains a most noble college, which has thirty hals
belonging thereunto. In the A great college.
midst whereof is one hall of a marvelous greatness, wherein public (...)
were most solemnly read, while the study of learning flourished among them.
Such as were admitted into this college had their victuals and (...) freely
given them. Of their professors some were yearly allowed an hundred, and some
two hundred ducates, according to the quality of their profession: neither
would they admit any to hear them read, but such as perfectly understood what
belonged to those Arts which they professed. The walls of this (...) hall are
most stately adorned with painting and caruing, especially of (...) hall where
lectures were wont publicly to be read. All their porches and vaulted roofes
are made of painted and glittering stones, called in their language (...), such
as are yet used in Spain. In the midst of the said building is a most pleasant
and clear fountain, the wall whereof is of white and polished (...), albeit
low-built, as in Africa for the most (...) such walls are. I have heard that in
old time here was great abundance of students, but at my being there I found
but five in all: and they have now a most (...) professor, and one that is
quite void of all humanity.

In the time of mine abode at Maroco I grew (...) acquaintance with a certain
Jew, who (...) his skill in the law was but mean, was (...) exceeding rich
and well (...) in histories. This Jew in regard of many singular duties which
he performed to his prince, found the kings bounty and liberality extended
unto him. All others which bear any public office are (in mine opinion) men
of no high reach. Moreover the foresaid castle (as I remember) has twelve
courts most curiously and artificially built by one Mansor. In the first lodged
about five hundredth Christians, which carried crosse-bowes before the king
whither soever he went. Not far from thence is the lodging of the Lord
Chancellor and of the kings privy counsel, which house is called by them,
The house of affairs. The third is called The court of victory; wherein all
the armor and munition of the city is laid up. The fourth belongs to the
great Master of the kings horse. Upon this court three stables adioine, each
one of which stables will contain two hundredth horses. Likewise there are two
other (...), whereof one is for mules, and the other for an hundredth of the
kings horses only. Next unto the stables were two barnes or garners adioining,
in two several places, in the lower of which barnes was laid straw, and barley
in the other. There is also another most large place to lay up corn in,
every room whereof will contain more then three hundredth bushels. The cover
of the said room has a certain hole whereunto they ascend by stairs made
of stone. Whither the beasts laden with corn being come, they power the said
corn into the hole. And so when they would take any corn from thence, they
do but open certain holes below, suffering so much corn to come forth as may
serve their turns, and that without any labor at all. There is likewise a
certain other hall, where the kings son, and the sons of noble men are
instructed in learning. Then may you behold a certain fower-square building,
containing diverse galleries with fair glass windows, in which galleries are
many histories most curiously painted: here likewise the glittering and gilt
armor is to be seen. Next unto this building is another, wherein certain of
the kings guard are lodged: then follows that wherein state-matters are
discussed: whereunto adioineth also another, which is appointed for
ambassadors to confer with the kings privy counsel in. Likewise the kings
concubines and other ladies of honor have a most convenient place assigned
them: next unto which stands the lodging of the kings sons. Not far from
the castle wall, on that side which is next unto the fields, may you behold a
most pleasant and large garden, containing almost all kind of trees that can
be named. Moreover, there is a sumptuous and stately porch built of most
excellent square marble: in the midst whereof stands a pillar with a lion
very artificially made of marble, out of the mouth of which lion issues most
clear and crystal water, falling into a cesterne within the porch: at each
corner of the said porch stands the image of a leopard framed of Excellent
spotted marble.
white marble, which is naturally adorned with certain black spots: this
kind of parti-colored marble is no where to be found but only in a certain
place of Atlas, which is about an hundredth and fifty miles distant from
Maroco. Not far from the garden stands a certain wood or park walled round
about: And here I think no kind of wild beasts are wanting: for here you
may behold elephants, lions, stagges, roes, and such like: howbeit the lions
are separated in a certain place from other beasts, which place even to this
day is called The lions den. Wherefore such monuments of antiquity as are yet
extant in Maroco, albeit they are but few, do not withstanding sufficiently
argue, what a noble city it was in the time of Mansor. This king called Mansor
was he unto whom Rasis that famous (...) dedicated his Book.
At this present all the courts and lodgings before described lie utterly void
and desolate: except perhaps some of the kings ostlery which tend his mules and
horses do lie in that court, which we said even now was to lodge archers and
crossebowe-men: all the residue are left for the fowls of the air to nestle
in. That garden which you might have named a paradise in old time, is now
become a place where the filth and dung of the whole city is cast forth.
Where the fair and stately library was of old, at this present there is
nothing else to be found, but hens, dooues, and other such like fowls, which
build their nests there. Certain it is, that the foresaid Mansor, whom we
have so often mentioned, was a most puissant and mighty prince: for it is well
known that his dominion stretched from the town of Messa to the kingdom of
Tripolis in Barbary, which is the most excellent region of Africa, and so
large, that a man can hardly travel the length The huge dominions of king
Mansor.
thereof in fourscore and ten days, or the breadth in fifteen. This Mansor
likewise was in times past Lord of all the kingdom of Granada in Spain. Yea,
his dominion in Spain extended from Tariffa to Aragon, and over a great part
of Castilia and of Portugal. Neither did this Jacob surnamed Mansor only
possess the foresaid dominions, but also his grandfather Abdul Mumen, his
father Joseph, and his son Mahumet Enasir, who being vanquished in the
kingdom of Valencia, lost 60000. soldiers horsemen and footmen: howbeit
himself escaped and returned to Maroco. The Christians being encouraged The
Christians happy (...) against the Moors.
with this victory, refrained not from war, till, within 30. years space,
they had won all the towns following, to wit, Valencia, Denia, Alcauro,
Murcia, Cartagena, Cordoua, Siuillia, Iaen, and Vbeda. After which unhappy
war succeeded the decay of Maroco. The said Mahumet deceasing, left behind
him ten sons of a full and perfect age, who contended much about the
kingdom. Hereupon it came to pass, while the brethren were at discord, and
assailed each other with mutual wars, that the people of Fez called Marini,
and the inhabitants of other regions adjacent, began to usurp the government.
The people called Habdulvad enjoyed Tremizen, expelling the king of Tunis, and
ordaining some other, whom they pleased, in his stead. Now have you heard the
end of Mansor his progeny and successors. The kingdom therefore was
translated unto one Jacob the son of Habdulach, who was the first king of the
family called Marin. And at length the famous city of Maroco it self, by
reason of the Arabians continual outrages, fell into most extreme calamity:
so great is the inconstancy of all earthly things. That which we have here
reported as touching Maroco, partly we saw with our own eyes, partly we read
in the history of one Ibnu Ibnu Abdul.
(...) Malich, a most exact chronicler of the affairs of Maroco, and Abdul
Malich.
partly we borrowed out of that treatise, which our selves have written
concerning the law of Mahumet.

Of the town of Agmet.
THE town of Agmet built of old by the Africans upon the top of a certain
hill which begins almost from Atlas, is distant from Maroco about four and
twenty miles. In times past, when Muachidin was prince thereof, it contained
more then six thousand families: at what time the people were very civil, and
had such plenty and magnificence of all things, that many would not stick to
compare this town with the city of Maroco. It had on all sides most (...)
gardens, and great store of vines, whereof (...) grew upon the mountain it
self, and others on the valley. By the foot of this hill runs a fair
river, which springing forth of Atlas, falls at length into Tensift. The
field which lies near unto this river is said to be so fruitful, that it
yields every year fifty fold increase. The water of this river looks
always white; albeit if a man steadfastly behold the said river, it may seem
unto him in color to resemble the soil of Narnia, or the river Niger of
Vmbria in Italy. And (...) there are which Ariuer running under the ground to
Maroco.
affirm, that the very same river runs under ground to Maroco, and not to
break forth of the earth, till it come to a certain place very near unto
the said city. (...) princes in times past, being desirous to know the hidden
and intricate passages of the said river, sent certain persons into the hollow
cave, who the better to discern the same, carried candles and torches with
them. But having proceeded a little way under ground, there met them such a
flaw of wind, that blew out their lights, and perforce drove them back to the
great hazard of their lives, so that they said they never felt the like. They
affirm likewise, that, the river being full of rocks, which the water drives
to and fro, and by reason of the manifold channels and streams, their passage
was altogether hindered. Wherefore that secret remains unknown even till this
day, neither is there any man so hardy as to attempt the same enterprise
again. I remember that I read in some histories, that king Joseph which built
Maroco, being forewarned by the conjecture of a certain astrologer, that the
whole region should perpetually be vexed with war, provided by arte-magique,
that the passage of this river should always be unknown: least, if any
enemy should afterward practice (...), he might cut off the course thereof
from the said city. Near unto this river lies the common high way, which
crosses over mount Atlas to Guzula aregion The desolation of Agmet.
of Maroco. Howbeit the city of Agmet, which I have now described unto you.
has at this day no other inhabitants but woolues, foxes, dear, and such other
wild beasts. Except only at my being there I found a certain Hermit, who
was attended upon by an hundred persons of his own sect: all of them were
well-horsed, and did their best endeavor to become governors and commanders,
but their forces were insufficient. With this Hermit I staide (as I remember)
for the space of ten days, and found one amongst his followers, with whom I
had old (...), and familiarity: John Leo student at Fez.
for we were certain years fellow-students together at Fez, where being of
one standing and seniority, we heard that book of the Mahumetan religion
expounded, which is commonly called the epistle of Nensefi.

Of the town of Hannimei.
Upon that side of Atlas which lies toward the plain country, stands a
certain town called by the inhabitants Hannimei, being about 40. miles
eastward of Maroco: by which town, on the same side of Atlas, lies the direct
way to Fez. From the said town the river of Agmet is almost fifteen miles
distant: and the field lying between the said river and town is a most
fruitful soil, like unto the field adioining upon the city of Agmet before
mentioned. All the region between Maroco and the The (...) of (...).
foresaid river is in subjection unto the governor of Maroco, but from the
river unto Hannimei the townes-men of Hannimei bear rule. This town had a
famous young captain, who maintained continual war against the governor of
Maroco, and sometimes against the Arabians also. He had likewise a most ample
dominion upon the mountains of Atlas: by natural disposition he was right
liberal and valiant, and having scarce attained to sixeteene years of age, he
slew his own uncle, and usurped his government. Whereof so soon as the
Arabians had intelligence, ioining three hundredth Christian horsemen, which
came out of Portugale, unto their great forces, they marched on the sudden
even to the very gates of the town. And the foresaid captain with his army
containing scarce an hundredth horsemen, with a very few footmen met the
Arabians, and gave them such a valiant onset, that the greater part of them was
slain, and the Christians were so discomfited, that (as I suppose) not one of
them returned home into Portugale: which (they say) came to pass, both by
reason that the Christians were ignorant of the place, and unskillful of the
Africans manner of warfare. These things were done in the 920. year of the
Hegeira, and in the year of our Lord 1511. Afterward being wearied by the
king of Fez his wars (which king demanded tribute of the towns men of
Hannimei) he was slain with a bullet: whereupon the town remained tributarie
to the king of Fez. Yea, the deceased captains wife delivered as prisoners
certain burgesses of the town unto the king himself. And the king so soon
as he had placed a lieutenant over Hannimei, departed from the same town in
the 921. year of the Hegeira, and in the year of our Lord 1512.

Of the mountain of Nififa.
Having before described all the cities and towns of Maroco, it now remains
that we briefly declare the situation and quality of the mountains there.
Wherefore we will begin with the mountain of Nififa, from whence the region of
Maroco it self begins westward, and is thereby divided from the province of
Hea. The said mountain has great store of inhabitants: and albeit the tops
thereof are continually covered with snow; yet does it yearly affoorde
marvelous increase and abundance of barley. The rude people there are so
destitute of all humanity and civil behavior, that they do admire not only
all strangers, but also do even gaze and wonder at their apparel. I my self
remained two days among them, in which space all the people of the town came
flocking about me, greatly woondring at the white garment which I wore (being
such as the learned men of our country are usually clad in) so that every one
being desirous to handle and view this garment of mine, in two days it was
turned from white to black, and became all greasy and filthy. Here one of
the townes-men being allured with the strangenes and novelty of my sword,
which I bought at Fez for half a ducate, would never leave entreating of me,
till I had exchanged it with him for an horse, which cost (as himself
affirmed) above ten ducates. The reason of which fond and childish behavior I
think to be, because they never travail unto Fez nor to any other cities. And
were they never so desirous to travail, yet dare they not adventure upon the
common high ways, in regard of the great number of robbers and thieves. Of
honey, goats, and oil Arganick they have wonderful store: for in this
mountain begins the said oil to be put in use.

Of the mountain called Semede.
AT the bounds of Nififa a certain other mountain called by the inhabitants
Semede takes his original: and these two mountains are separated by the
river of Sefsaua. Semede extends eastward almost 20. miles, the inhabitants
whereof are most base and witless people. Great store of springs and
fountains are here to be found; the snow is perpetual; all good laws,
civility, and honesty are quite banished from hence, except perhaps the
people be moved thereunto by the advice of some stranger, whom they find to
be of a modest and sober disposition. Here being entertained by a certain
religious man of the same place (who was had in great reputation by the people)
I was constrained to eat of such gross meats as the said people are
accustomed unto, to wit, of barlie meal mingled with water, and of
goats-flesh, which was extremely tough and hard by reason of the stalenes and
long continuance. After supper we had no other bed but the bare ground to lie
upon. The next morning being ready to take horse, and desirous to depart,
fifty of the people came about me, laying open each man their causes and
suites unto me, as our people use to do before a judge. Unto whom I answered,
that I had never in all my life either known or heard of the manners and
customs of that region. Forthwith comes one of the chief men amongst them,
affirming that it was their custom never to dismiss any stranger, till he had
both heard and thoroughly decided all the quarrels and controversies of the
inhabitants. Which words he had no sooner John Leo constrained to play the
judge.
uttered, but immediately my horse was taken from me. Wherefore I was
constrained for nine days, and so many nights, longer to abide the penury and
misery of that region. Moreover my trouble was the greater, for that, in such
abundance of suites and affairs, there was not one man present, which could
set down so much as a word in writing: wherefore I my self was feign to play
both the judge and the notarie. Upon the eight day they all of them promised to
bestow some great reward upon me. Wherefore the night following seemed unto
me a year long: for I was in good hope the next morrow to have received a
mass of gold from my clients. So soon as the next day began to dawne, they
placed me in a certain churchporch: whither, after an usual and short prayer
ended, each man full reverently presented his gift unto me. Here some offered
me a cock, others brought me nuts and onions, and some others bestowed a
handful of garlic upon me. The principal and head-men amongst them
presented me with a goat; and so by reason that there was no money in all the
said mountain, they proffered me not one farthing for my pains: wherefore all
the said gifts I bequeathed unto mine oste for his worthy entertaining of me.
And this was all the notable reward which I reaped in regard of so great and
intolerable pains. All things being thus dispatched, they sent fifty horsemen
to accompany and guard me from thieves in that dangerous way.

Of the mountain called Seusaua.
THis mountain of Seusaua takes his beginning where Semede ends, out of
which springs a certain river, having one name with the said mountain from
whence it proceeds. Never were the tops of this mountain seen destitute of
snow. The inhabitants lead a brutish and savage life, waging continual war
with their next neighbors: for which purpose they use neither swords,
iauelins, nor any other warlike instruments, but only certain slings, out of
which they discharge stones after a strange and wonderful manner. Their
victuals consist of barlie, honey, and goates-flesh. In the same mountain
great multitudes of Jews exercising handy-craftes, do inhabit: likewise they
make soap, yron-hookes, and horse-shooes. Diverse masons are here to be found
also. They build their walls of no other matter but only of rough stone and
lime, and the roofes of their houses they use to cover with thatch: neither
have they any other kind of lime or bricks. They have among them also abundance
of learned men and of skilful lawyers, whose counsel they use at all times.
Among whom I found some, who had heretofore been my fellow-students at Fez,
and for our old acquaintance sake, gave me most courteous entertainment: and,
to the end I might escape the danger of thieves, they conducted me a good part
of my way.

Of the mountain called Sesiua.
Upon this most lofty and cold mountain there is nothing almost to be found,
but continual snow and woods. The inhabitants wear white caps: and the
region in all places is full of springs and fountains. Out of the said
mountain springs a river, which in the discourse before-going we called
Asifinuall. All over this mountain are most deep and hollow caves, wherein
every year, for the three cold months of November, January, and February
they usually winter their cattle, laying up so much fodder, namely hay, and
the leaves of certain trees, as they think will suffice them. Most of their
victuals are brought unto them from the next mountains, because their own
soil yields no come at all: only in the spring time and in summer, they
have good plenty of new cheese and butter. Their old age they bear most
lustily and stoutly, sometime at ninety, and sometime at an hundred years.
They give attendance to their cattle all their life long, neither do they at
any time, or seldom, see any strangers. They wear no shoes at all, but
certain sandals only, to defend the soles of their feet: and their legs they
wrap in a certain piece of cloth or list instead of an hose, to keep
themselves from the injury of the snow.

Of the mountain called (...).
THis high and cold mountain has very many inhabitants: upon the top whereof
stands a town which is called by the name of the mountain it self. In this
town are great store of dwellers, and a most stately and beautiful temple. It
has likewise a most pleasant and (...) river. This town is adorned with the
monuments of Or Elmaheli.
Elmahdi (who was in times past a most learned Mahumetan priest) and of Abdul
Mumen his disciple. And albeit the inhabitants are accounted heretics by all
other Mahumetans, yet is there no kind of learning which they will not
arrogate unto themselves: because perhaps they are well read in the works of
Elmahdi, who was notwithstanding the ringleader of all the said heretics: so
that if any stranger come among them, they presently challenge him to dispute in
matters of learning. In their apparel they go very ragged and beggarly, by
reason that they have no tailors in the whole town. Their commonwealth is
governed after a wild and savage manner, albeit they have a certain priest,
which uses all the policy and means he can to bring it into good order.
Their victuals are barley-bread and oil of olives: likewise they have great
store of nuts, and of pine-trees.

Of the mountain called Gedmeua.
GEdmeua begins at the West frontier of the foresaid mountain of Semede,
and stretches Eastward almost five and twenty miles, extending unto the
border of Mizmizi. All the inhabitants are rude, miserable, and hunger-starued
people, being subject to the Arabians, for that they border upon those fields
which adioine upon the mountain of Temnella. This hill of Gedmeua abounds
with olives, barley, wood, and fountains.

Of the mountain called Hanteta.
Never did I see (to my remembrance) an higher mountain, then that which the
Africans call Hanteta. Westward it begins from Gedmeua, and stretches five
and forty miles Eastward, to the mountain of Adimmei beforenamed. The
inhabitants are valiant and rich, having great store of horses. Here likewise
stands a most strong and impregnable castle subject unto a certain nobleman,
which is reported to be of alliance unto the prince of Maroco: howbeit they are
at continual war for certain lands situate within their dominions. Many
Jews exercising diverse handie-crafts do here inhabit, and do yearly pay
unto the governor of this mountain great sums of money. As concerning
religion, they follow them especially which are called Carrain. The top of this
mountain is continually covered with snow. When I first beheld this mountain,
I thought it had bin clouds; so great is the height thereof. The sides of this
mountain being altogether destitute of herbs and trees, are in many places
stored with excellent white marble, which the people might dig, and make a good
commodity thereof, were they not so sluggish and so ignorant in hewing and
polishing of the fame. In this place are many pillars and arches which were
most artificially and sumptuously built by those mighty princes whom we have
often before made mention of: which pillars they would have used for the
building of water-conduits, had they not been hindered by the violence of
wars. To be brief, in the said mountain I saw many notable things, whereof
I will here make no discourse at all, partly because they are out of my
remembrance, and partly for avoiding tediousnes to the reader; because I have
determined to pass over these small matters, and to proceed unto greater.

Of the mountain called Adimmei.
FRom Hanteta begins another huge and high mountain called by the
inhabitants Adimmei, extending eastward to the river of Teseut. Upon this
mountain stands that city, the prince whereof (as we said before) was
slain in battle against the king of Fez. This mountain is well stored with
inhabitants and abounds with woods which bring forth acornes, olives, and
quinces. The people here inhabiting are most valiant, possessing beasts and
cattle of all sorts, their air being very temperate, and their soil
exceeding fruitful. Springs they have great plenty, and also two rivers
issuing forth of the said mountain, whereof in due place we will discourse
more at large. Wherefore having described all the cities and mountains of
Maroco bordering southward upon Atlas, let us now pass over the said mountain
of Atlas, and take a view of the region beyond it commonly called Guzzula.

Of the region of Guzzula.
THis region is exceeding populous: westward it abutteth upon Ilda a mountain
of Sus; northward it ioineth unto Atlas, and eastward it stretches unto the
region of Hea. It is inhabited with savage and fierce people, being most
needy of money, and yet abounding greatly in cattle. Great store of copper
and iron is here dug out of mines, and here are brazen (...) and copper
(...).
vessels made, which are carried into other countries to be sold: and these
vessels they exchange for linen and woollen cloth, for horses, and for other
wares necessary for the said region. In all this whole region there is neither
town nor castle environed with walls. Great villages they have, which
contain, many of them, more then a thousand families a piece. They have
neither king nor governor to prescribe any laws unto them: but every one is
his own captain and commander; whereupon they are at continual wars among
themselves, neither have they any truce at all, but three days (...) wars
(...).
only every week; during which time every man may safely and freely bargain
with his enemy, and may travel whither he lists. But these days of truce
being past, the wretched people of this region do continually commit most
horrible slaughters. The foresaid days of truce a certain Hermit appointed
unto them, whom they honored and reverenced like a god. This Hermit with one
eye I my self saw, and found him to be a trusty; sincere, courteous, and most
liberal person. The common attire of the people of Guzzula is a woollen iacket
straight to their bodies and without (...). They wear crooked, broad, and
two-edged daggers: and their swords are like unto the swords of Hea. Once every
year they have a fair of two months long: all which time (though the number
of merchants be never so great) they give Free entertainment for merchants.
free entertainment unto all such as either bring wares with them, or come
thither to fetch away their wares. When the time of their fair approaches,
they forthwith make truce, and each faction appoints a captain over an
hundred soldiers, to the end they may keep themselves in safety, and may
defend their said fair from the invasion and injury of all lewd persons. If
any offense be committed, the captains immediately give sentence upon the
guilty person: and whosoever be convicted of theft, is forthwith slain like
a brute beast, and his thieves carcass is thrown out to be devoured of dogs,
wild beasts, and ravenous fowls. The said fair is kept in a certain
plain or valley between two hills. All the wares are contained in tents and in
certain cottages made of boughs, so that each particular kind of merchandise
has a several place to lie in by it self. They which sell droues of cattle
are removed far from the tents. And every tent has a cottage made of
boughs belonging thereunto, for their principal and head men to repose
themselves in. And in the said cottages or bowers are merchant strangers (as we
noted before) freely entertained and bourded. Also they have certain Caters
and purueiers among them, which make provision of victuals, and take upon them
the friendly and well entertaining of strangers. And albeit an huge deal of
money is spent for this behalf, yet make they a good gain thereof: for
thither do resort all the merchants of that region for traffiques sake, yea
and a great number out of the land of Negros, who bring with them marvelous
plenty of all kinds of wares. And although they are men of a dull and gross
capacity, yet are they very industrious in governing and maintaining the said
fair: the beginning whereof is upon the birthday of that great deceiuer
Mahumet, that is, upon the twelfth day of their month called Rabih, which is
the third Haraba of the year, according to their account. I my self was
present at this fair in the company of my Lord the (...) for the space of
fifteen days, in the year of the Hegeira 920. which was in the year of our
Lord 1511.

Abriefe description of the region of Duccala.
THis region begins westward from the river of Tensift; northward it is
bounded with the Ocean sea; the south part thereof lies upon the river of
Habid; and the east part abutteth upon the river Ommirabih. It is three days
journey long, and about two days journey broad. Very populous it is; the
inhabitants being a rude people, and most ignorant of all civility and
humanity. Walled cities it has but a few, of all which we will in their due
places particularly discourse, neither will we (by Gods help) omit any thing
which may seem worthy of memory.

Of the town of Azaphi.
IT was built by the Africans, and stands upon the shore of the Ocean sea,
containing four thousand families: inhabitants there are great store, being
for the most part very uncivil and barbarous. In times past there dwelt many
Jews in this town, which exercised diverse handy-crafts. Their soil is
exceeding fertile; but so gross is their own unskillfulness and negligence,
that they know neither how to till their ground, to sow their corn, or to
plant vineyards: except perhaps some few of them (who would seem to be more
provident then the residue) sow a quantity of pot-herbes in their small
gardens. After the kings of Maroco gave over the government of the said region,
the city of Azafi was usurped by certain which were said to fetch their
original from Farchon. Howbeit in our days the said city was governed by a
certain prince called Hebdurrahmam: this man for a greedy and ambitious desire
of reigning murdered his own uncle: after whose death he governed the town
for certain years. He had a daughter of most excellent beauty, who falling in
love with a certain courtier (whose name was Hali, being son unto one
Goesimen) by the help of her mother and her waiting maid enjoyed oftentimes
the company of her paramour. Which when her father had intelligence of, he
rebuked his wife, threatening death unto her, if she reformed not the manners
of her daughter: howbeit afterward he dissembled his fury. But the mother
thoroughly knowing her husbands intent, told her daughters paramour that the
prince was not to be trusted, and therefore advised him to take heed unto
himself. Whereupon Hali fearing least some mischief might light upon him,
began to determine with himself the princes death, and for The occasion of the
prince of Azafilin his death.
his associate in this conspiracy he took a trusty friend of his who had been
most familiar with him from his childhoode, and was captain over a certain
band of footmen. Wherefore both of them being alike mischieuously bent against
their prince, expected nothing else but a fit place and opportunity to put
their bloody determination in practice. Contrariwise the king seeking by all
means an occasion to effect his purpose, sent word unto Hali upon a certain
festival day, that after their Mahumetan devotions were finished he should
come and walk with him; appointing a place, where he had laid a troop of men
in ambush to kill Hali at his coming: which being done, he went to church.
Hali suspecting no harm at all, told his associate, that now was the time
wherein they might bring their purpose to effect. And this intent of theirs
they forthwith declared unto ten other of their adherents: and to the end that
the whole matter might go securely and certainly forward, they presently
assembled a great multitude of footmen (which they fained that they would
send the next day unto Azamor) that, if they were constrained to fly, they
might have aid and succor in a readiness. All their accomplices being armed,
they came to church at the very same time when as the king with all his train
was entering thereinto, and had placed himself next unto the Mahumetan
preacher. The church was full of auditors, and the king had his guard attending
upon him, who because they knew the two foresaid young gentlemen to be very
familiar with the king, suspected none evil, but suffered them to draw near
unto his person. Wherefore one of the said young courtiers, as though he The
prince of Azafi slain, as he was hearing of a Mahumetan sermon.
would have done obeizance unto the king, came before him, but Hali got in at
his back and stabd him through with a dagger: and at the very same instant
the other thrust him in with his sword, and so this unhappy king, imbrued in
his own blood, gave up the ghost. The kings guarde went about to apprehend the
authors of this fact; but being ouermatched by the contrary part, and
suspecting, least the people were authors of this conspiracy, they sought to
save themselves by flight. And after them followed all the rest of the
assembly, till the authors of the said murder were left alone. They also
immediately came forth, and persuaded the people with many words, that they
had slain the king for none other cause, but only in regard that he had
attempted the utter overthrow both of themselves and of the whole people. The
citizens being to too credulous, advanced the two foresaid conspiratours to
the government of the kingdom: howbeit they agreed not long thereabout, but
the commonwealth was diversely tossed hither and thither, sometime inclining to
one, and sometime to another. Wherefore the Portugal merchants which usually
frequented that city in great numbers, wrote unto their king to send
forthwith an army of soldiers thither: for they were in good hope, that he
should most easily and with small disadvantage win the said city. Howbeit
the king being nothing moved with this message of theirs, would not send any
forces at al, til he was more certainly informed by his said merchants touching
the death of the king of Azaphi, and the dissension between the two new
governors. As also, that they had made such a compact with a certain captain
of the contrary faction, that it was the easiest matter in the world for him to
co^quer the town. For they had built them a very strong castle upon the
seashore, wherein their merchandise might safely be bestowed. For the
Portugals had persuaded the townes-men, that during the great tumult about the
kings death, they were all of them in danger to lose both their lives and
goods. Wherefore into this castle, among their vessels of oil and other
wares, they cunningly conveyed gunnes and all other kind of warlike
instruments: but the townes-men being ignorant here of, exacted nothing of the
Portugals save only custom due for their wares. Now after the Portugales had
sufficiently provided themselves of all kind of armor and warlike munitions,
they sought by all means an occasion to fight with the citizens. At length it
came to pass that a certain Portugals servant buying meat in the city, did
so provoke a butcher, that after much quarrelling they fell to blows,
whereupon the servant feeling himself hurt, thrust the butcher with his
sword, and laid him along upon the cold earth, and then fled speedily to
the castle, wherein he knew the merchants to be. The people immediately rose
up in arms, and ran all of them with one consent unto the castle, to the
end they might utterly destroy it, and cut the throats of all them which were
therein. But the guns and crosse-bowes which were there in a readiness made such
hauock among the townes-men, that it cannot be, but they were greatly daunted.
At this first encounter there were an hundredth and fifty citizens slain
outright; howbeit the residue would not therefore give over, but gave the
castle daily assaults. At length the king of Portugal sent aid unto his
subjects, to wit five thousand footmen, two hundredth horsemen, with a great
number of gunnes. Which forces when the citizens saw to approach, they
presently betook themselves to their feet, and fled unto the mountain of
Benimegher: neither durst any man stay in the town, but only he that was the
author of building the castle. And so it (...) won by the Portugals.
came to pass that the Portugal forces won the town without any peril or
labor. Soon after the general of the whole army sent the builder of the
castle unto the king of Portugal. But the king sent him with a certain number
of attendants back again to Azafi, and appointed him governor of all the
region adjacent. For the Portugal king was not acquainted with their customs,
nether did he sufficiently know how they governed their commonwealth. Soon
after ensued the miserable desolation and ruin, not only of the city but of
the whole region thereabouts. In this discourse we have been somewhat tedious,
to the end we might show of how great evil a woman may be the instrument, and
what intolerable mischiefs are bred by dissension. These things were a doing
(as I remember) John Leo ten years old at the winning of (...).
when my self was but ten years old: and being fowerteene years of age, I
had some conference with the Portugal captain aforesaid. This captain with
an army of five hundredth Portugals, and more then twelve thousand Arabian
horsemen giving battle to the king of Maroco, conquered all the foresaid
province on the behalf of his master the Portugal king, in the year of the
Hegeira 920. as in our brief treatise concerning the Mahumetan religion we
will declare more at large.

Of Conta a town in Duccala.
THis town is situate from Azafi about 20. miles, and is said to have bin
built by the Goths at the very same time when they possessed the whole region
of Duccala: but now it is utterly laid waste: howbeit the field belonging
thereto is in subjection unto certain Arabians which dwell in the said
province of Duccala.

Of Tit a city in Duccala.
THis ancient city of Tit built of old by the Africans upon the Ocean
sea-shoare, is about twenty miles distant from Azamur. It has most large and
fruitful fields belonging unto it. The inhabitants are men of a gross
conceit, who regard neither husbandry nor civility. Their apparel indeed is
somewhat decent, by reason that they continually have so great traffic with
the Portugals. At the The city of Tit tributarie unto the King of Portugal.
same time when Azamur was subdued, this city also yielded it self unto the
kings captain, and for certain years paid tribute unto the king. In our
time the king of Fez attempted to set Duccala at liberty: howbeit not speeding
of his purpose, he caused a certain Christian (which was his own treasurer)
and a Jew, to be hanged. And that company which remained with him, he brought
unto Fez, giving them a certain portion of ground to dwell upon, which was
destitute of inhabitants, being distant about twelve miles from Fez.

Of the famous city of Elmedina in Duccala.
ELmedina being in a manner the chief city of the whole region, is (according
to the manner there) environed with walls of no great force. The inhabitants are
homely as well in wit and behavior, as in apparel: wearing such cloth as is
wouen in their own country. Their women wear certain silver ornaments: the
men are valiant, and have great store of horses. They were all of them banished
by the king of Fez out of his dominions, for that he suspected them to be
friends to the Portugals. For he had heard that a certain governor of that
region had counseled his subjects to pay tribute unto the Portugal king. This
governor I saw barefoote led so miserably captive, that I could scarce
refrain from tears; because he did not ought upon treachery, but being
constrained. For, good man, he thought it much better to pay a little tribute
unto the Portugals, then suddenly to lose both his life and his goods. For the
restoring of whom unto his former liberty, diverse noblemen greatly labored:
and so at length for a great sum of money he was released. But afterward the
city remained void of Elmedina left desolate
inhabitants, about the year of the Hegeira 921.

Of the town of Duccala called Centumputei.
THis town is built upon a rock of excellent marble: in the suburbs whereof
are certain caves, wherein the inhabitants use to lay up their corn: which is
there so woonderfully preserved, that it will continue an hundredth years
without any ill savor or corruption. Of the number of Corn preserved 100.
years.
which caves resembling pits or wels, the town it self is called Centum
putei. The inhabitants are of small reckoning or account, having no artificers
dwelling among them but certain Jews. When the king of Fez had forced the
inhabitants of Elmadin to come into his dominions, he attempted also to bring
thither the inhabitants of this town: but they refusing to go into a strange
place, chose rather to inhabit near unto the town of Azafi, then to forsake
their own native soil. Which when the king understood, he presently caused
the town to be sacked; wherein nothing was found but corn, honey, and other
things of small value.

Of the town of Subeit in the same region.
SVbeit is a small town built upon the south side of the river of Ommirabih.
It is distant from Elmadin about forty miles, and is said to be subject unto
certain Arabians dwelling in Duccala. Honey and corn they have great
abundance: but such is their unskillfulness and ignorance, that they have neither
gardens nor vineyardes. At the same time when Bulahuan was won, the king of
Fez brought all the people of Subeit into his dominion, and allotted unto them
a certain piece of ground near unto Fez which was never before inhabited: so
that Subeit remains waste and void of inhabitants even until this day.

Of the town of Temeracost.
ALso in Duccala near unto the river Ommirabih stands a certain small
town, which was built by the founder of Maroco, from whom the name thereof is
thought to be derived. Inhabitants it has great store, and contains more
then four hundredth families. It was subject in times past unto the people of
Azamur; but Azamur being spoiled by the Portugales, this town also came to
naught, and the people heerof went to Elmadin.

Of the town called Terga.
THis town being distant about thirty miles from Azamur, is situate near
unto the river Ommirabih: it is well peopled, and contains about three
hundredth families. In times past it was subject unto the inhabitants of
Duccala; but after the sacking of Azafi, Hali which fought against the
Portugals, for certain days lay with his army in this town. But afterward
being repelled thence by the king of Fez, the town became so waste and
desolate, that from thencefoorth it was an habitation for owls and bats.

Of the town of Bulahuan.
THis town likewise stands upon the bank of Ommirabih, and contains about
five hundredth families: in times past it had most noble and worthy
inhabitants, especially in that street which lies next unto the river, upon
the high way to Maroco. In this town was a famous hospital built, which had
many rooms and mansions: wherein all strangers travailing that way, were
sumptuously and freely entertained at the common charge of the town. The
inhabitants are most rich both in cattle and corn. Every cititizen almost
has an 100. yoke of oxen, and some of them yearly reap two thousand, some
three thousand measures of corn: so that the Arabians do carry grain from
thence sufficient to serve them all the year following. In the 919. year of
the Hegeira, the king of Fez sent his brother to govern and defend the region
of Duccala, who coming unto this town, was informed that the captain of
Azemur approached thither with a great army, of purpose to destroy the town
and to lead the people captive. Whereupon the king of Fez his brother sent
immediately unto the said town two captains with two thousand horsemen, and
eight hundredth archers. But the very same time when they entered the town, they
met there the Portugal soldiers accompanied with two thousand Arabians: by
whom, being fewer in number, they were so miserably slain, that scarcely
twelve archers of all the eight hundredth could escape with the horsemen unto
the next mountains. Howbeit afterward the Arabians renewed the skirmish, and
150. of the Portugal horsemen being slain, they put the enemy to flight.
Whereupon the king of Fez his brother passed on to Duccala, requiring tribute
of the people, and promising that as long as he lived he would stand between
them and their enemies. Afterward being vanquished, he returned home to. Fez
unto the king his brother. But the inhabitants seeing that the kings brother
had received tribute of them and had stood them in no stead, they presently
forsook the town, and fled unto the mountain of Tedles: for they feared
least the Portugals army would come upon them, and exacting a greater sum,
would lead them presently captive which could not disburse it. At all these
accidents I my self was present, and saw the foresaid slaughter of the
archers: for I stood about a mile distant from them, and was mounted upon a
swift courser. At the same time I was traveling to Maroco, being sent by the
king of Fez, to declare unto the king of Maroco, and unto the Seriffo, that the
king of Fez his brother was presently to depart unto Duccala: for which cause
they were requested to provide soldiers for the better resistance of the
Portugals army.

Of the city of Azamur.
AZamur, a town of Duccala, was built by the Africans upon that part of the
Ocea^ sea shore where the river of Or (...).
Ommirabih disemboqueth; being distant from Elmadina southward about thirty
miles. Very large it is, and well inhabited, and contains to the number of
five thousand families. Here do the Portugal merchants continually reside.
The inhabitants are very civil, and decently apparelled. And albeit they are
divided into two parts, yet have they continual peace among themselves. Pulse
and corn they have great plenty; though their gardens and orchards bring
forth naught else but figs. They have such plenty of fishes, that they
receive yearly for them sometime six thousand, and sometime seven thousand
ducats. And their time of fishing dureth from October to the end of April.
They use to fry fishes in a certain pan with oil, whereby they gather an
incredible quantity of trane: neither use they any other oil to put into
their lamps. Once a year the Portugals make a voyage hither, and do carry
away so great abundance of fish, that they only do disburse the sum of
ducats aforesaid. Hence it is, that the king of Portugal, being allured for
gain, has often sent most warlike fleetes to surprise this town: the first
whereof, in regard of the Generals indiscretion, was the greatest part
dispersed and sunk upon the sea. Afterward the king sent another navy of two
hundred sail well furnished, at the very sight whereof the citizens were so
discomfited, that they all betook themselves to flight; and the throng was so
great at their entrance of the gates, that more then fowerscore citizens were
slain therein. Yea a certain prince which came to aid them, was, for his
safety constrained to let himself down by a rope on the farther side of the
city. The inhabitants were presently dispersed hither and thither; some
fleeing on horseback, and others on foot. Neither could you (I know) have
refrained from tears, had you seen the weak women, the silly old men, and
the tender children run away barefooted and forlorn. But before the
Christians gave any assault, the Jews (which shortly after compounded with the
Azamur won by the Portugals.
king of Portugal, to yield the city to him, on condition that they should
sustain no injury) with a general consent, opened the gates unto them: and
so the Christians obtained the city, and the people went to dwell part of them
to Sala, and part to Fez. Neither do I think that God for any other cause
brought this calamity upon them, but only for the horrible vice of Sodomie,
whereunto the greatest part of the citizens were so notoriously addicted, that
they could scarce see any young stripling, who escaped their lust.

Of the town called Meramei.
THis town was built by the Goths upon a plain, almost fourteen miles
distant from Azafi, and it contains to the number of four hundred families:
the soil thereabout abounds greatly with olives and corn. It was governed
in times past by the prince of Azafi; but afterward being surprised by the
Portugals, and the inhabitants being all put to flight, it remained well nigh
one whole year destitute of people. Howbeit soon after making a league with
the Portugals, each man retired unto his own home. And now I think it not
amiss to report as concerning the mountains of Duccala those things which may
seem worthy of memory.

Of the mountain called Benimegher.
BEnimegher is distant from Azafi about twelve miles, containing diverse
artizans of all sorts, every one of which has an house at Azafi. This
mountain is so exceeding fruitful for oil and corn, that a man would scarce
believe it. It was once in subjection unto the prince of Azafi, but the
inhabitants of Azafi being put to flight, as has been aforesaid, had no other
place for their refuge, but only this mountain of Benimegher. Afterward they
paid tribute for certain years unto the Portugals; but when the king of Fez
came thither with his army, he carried with him part of them unto Fez, and the
residue returned to Azafi: for they were determined rather to endure any
injury, then to submit themselves to the Christians government.

Of the green mountain.
THis mountain is of an exceeding height, beginning eastward from the river of
Ommirabih, and extending westward to the hills called in their language Hasara,
and it divides Duccala from some part of Tedles. Likewise this mountain is
very rough and full of woods, affoording great The fruit called by the Italians
Frutto Africano.
store of acornes and pine-apples, and a certain kind of red fruit which the
Italians commonly call Africano. Many Hermites also do inhabit upon this
mountain, living with no other kind of victuals, but such as the woods yield
unto them. For they are above five and twenty (...) distant from all towns and
cities. Here are great store of fountains and of altars built after the
Mahumetan fashion, and many ancient houses also erected by the Africans. At
the foot of this mountain there is a notable lake, very like unto the lake of
Bolsena in the Roman territory. In which lake are found infinite numbers of
fishes, as namely eeles, pickrels, and of diverse other sorts, which, to my
remembrance, I never saw in Italy: but there is no man that goes about to
take any fish in this lake, no marvel therefore though the number be so great.
Upon a certain time when Mahumet the king of Fez traveled Great plentic of
fish.
that way toward the kingdom of Maroco, he encamped his army eight days
upon the side of this lake. Some of his company he licenced to fish the same,
amongst whom I saw certain that took off their shirts and coats, sowing up
their sleeves and collars, and putting certain hoops within them to keep them
from closing together, and so used them in steed of nets, wherewith
notwithstanding they caught many thousand fishes: but others which had nets
indeed, got more then they. And all by reason that the fishes (as we will now
declare) were perforce driven into the nets. For king Mahumet being there
accompanied with fourteen thousand Arabian horsemen, which brought a great
many more camels with them; and having five thousand horsemen under the conduct
of his brother, with an huge army of fooremen, caused them all at once to
enter the lake, insomuch that there was scarce water enough to satisfy the
camels thirst: wherefore it was no marvel though the fishes came so fast into
the nets. Upon the banks of this lake are many trees bearing leaves like unto
pine-leaues, among the boughs whereof, such abundance of turtles do nestle,
that the inhabitants reap wonderful commodity by them. Mahumet having
refreshed himself eight days by the foresaid lake, was then desirous to view
The green mountain aforesaid: my self with a great number of courtiers and
learned men attending upon him. So often as he saw any altar, he would command
his army there to make a stand, and lowly kneeling on his knees, would say
these words following: Thou know (oh Lord my God) that I came hither for
none other cause, but to release the people of Duccala from the Arabians and
cruel Christians: which attempt of mine if thou think to be unjust, let me
only feel the punishment of this offense: for these my followers are
guiltless. And thus we ranged up and down the green hill one whole day: but
at night we returned unto our tents. The next day it was king Mahumets pleasure
to go on hunting and hauking, whereupon his hounds and hawks (which he had in
great abundance) were brought forth: howbeit that sport yielded naught but
wild geese, duckes, turtle-doues, and other fowls. But the day following the
king called for his hounds, faulcons, and eagles: their game were hares, dear,
porcupikes, roe-deere, woolues, quails and starlings: and by reason that none
had hunted or hawked there an hundred years before, they had very good
pastime. And after we had here stayed certain days, the king with his army
marching unto the said Elmadin a town of Duccala, willed all his learned men
and priests which he had John Leo sent ambassador from the King of Fez unto
Maroco.
brought with him, to return unto Fez. But my self (as ambassador) and a
certain number of soldiers he sent unto Maroco: this was done in the 922.
year of the Hegeira, and in the year of our Lord 1512.

A description of the region of Hascora.
THis region is bounded northward with certain mountains which adioine upon
Duccala; westward with a river running by the foot of mount Hadimmei, which we
called before Tensift; and eastward by the river Quadelhabid, that is, the
river of servants, which river divides Hascora from Tedles. And so likewise
the hills of Duccala do separate Hascora from the Ocean sea. The inhabitants of
this region are far more civil, then the people of Duccala. This province
yields great abundance of oil, of Marockin skins, and of goats, of whose
hair they make cloth and sadles. And hither do all the bordering regions
bring their goat skins, whereof the foresaid Marockin or Cordouan leather is
made. This people has great traffic with the Portugals, with whom they
exchange the foresaid leather and sadles, for cloth. Their coin is all one
with the coin of Duccala. Also the Arabians usually buy oil and other
necessaries our of this region. Now let us in order describe all the towns and
cities of the said region.

Of Elmadin a town in Hascora.
THis town of Hascora being called by the inhabitants Elmadin, is built upon
the side of mount Atlas, and contains (...) then two thousand families. It
stands almost fourscore and ten miles eastward of Maroco, and about 60.
miles from Duccala. Here may you find many leather-dressers, and all other
kind of artizans, with a great multitude of Jewish merchants. This town is
environed with a certain wood, which is full of olive, and walnut-trees. The
inhabitants are continually, in a manner, oppressed with wars among
themselves, and against a certain little town being four miles distant from
thence. Neither dare any come upon the plain lying between these two towns,
(save women only and slaves) except he be well and strongly guarded. So that
(...) man is feign to maintain an harquebusier or archer for his defense, whom
he monethlyalloweth ten or twelve pieces of gold, which are worth sixeteene
ducates Italian. Likewise in Elmadin there are certain men of great and
profound learning, which are appointed to be judges and notaries. Whatsoever
tribute or custom strangers do pay, is delivered unto certain treasurers and
customers of the town; which employ it afterward for the public benefit.
They are likewise constrained to pay certain tribute unto the Arabians, for
sundry possessions which they enjoy in the foresaid valley; but that money
gains them at the Arabians hand ten times so much, or more. In my return
from Maroco I thought good to travel by this town, where I was right
sumptuously entertained by one of Granada my countryman, who was exceeding
rich, having served as an archer in this region for fifteen years. And albeit
the town of Elmadin had a stately hospital, wherein all merchants traveling
that way, were entertained at the common charge; yet my countryman would not
suffer us there to lodge, but for three days together most courteously
welcomed my self, nine courtiers, and all the servants and retinue which we
brought with us: unto which company of ours the townsmen presented, some of
them calves, some lambs, and some other brought hens. Seeing upon a time so
many goats in the town, I merrily demanded of my countryman, why he gave us
no kids-flesh to eat: he answered that that was accounted among them of all
others the most base and homely meat. Their fair and beautiful women are so
fond of strangers that if secret occasion be offered they will not refuse
their dishonest company.

Of the city of Alemdin.
Near unto the foresaid town stands another commonly called Alemdin, being
situate four miles to the west thereof in a valley, amidst four most high
hills, whereupon the place is exceeding cold. The inhabitants are merchants,
artizans, and gentlemen, and families it contains to the number of one
thousand. This town has been at continual war with the town last before
mentioned: but in our time both of them were by the means of a certain
merchant brought in subjection unto the King of Fez, as we will now declare.
There was a merchant of Fez which had a paramour in this By what means the
towns of Elmadin and (...) became subject unto the King of Fez.
town, whom he determined forthwith to marry; but when the marriage day was
come, this merchant was beguiled of his love by the governor of the town
himself, which disappointment grieved him full sore, albeit he dissembled the
matter as well as he could. Returning home to the King of Fez, the said
merchant presented unto him most rich and costly gifts, making humble suite
unto his majesty that he would allow him an hundred principal archers, three
hundred horsemen, and four hundred footmen; saying, that himself would
maintain them all at his own costs and charges, and would win the said
town of Alemdin for the Kings behalf, and would assure the King seven
thousand ducates for yearly tribute. This offer pleased the King right well,
and that he might declare his princely liberality, he would not suffer the
merchant to give wages unto any, but only to the archers. And so with all
expedition he commanded his governor of Tedles to provide the said merchant
so many horsemen and so many footmen, and two captains over the army. At
length coming before Alemdin they besiged it six days: which being expired,
the townsmen told their governor in plain terms, that they would not for
his cause incur the king of Fez his displeasure, nor suffer any inconvenience.
Whereupon he putting himself in a beggars weed, attempted to escape away: but
being known and apprehended, he was brought before the merchant, who committed
him to prison. And so the townsmen presently opening their gates received the
merchant with all his troops, and yielded themselves to him and to the king of
Fez. The parents of the foresaid maid protested unto the merchant', that the
governor by maine force had deprived them of his paramour. Howbeit she
herself was big with child by the governor; but after the merchant knew that
she was delivered of her child, he bore her affection again, and at length
married her. And the wretched governor was the same day by the judges
pronounced guilty of fornication, and was stoned to death. Well, the merchant
remained governor and Lord of both towns, establishing most firm peace
between them, and duly paying unto the king of Fez all the yearly tribute
which he had promised. I my self afterward coming to the foresaid town grew
familiarly acquainted with this famous merchant. The same year departing from
Fez I took my journey toward Constantinople.

Of Tagodast a town in Hascora.
THis town is built upon the top of a certain high mountain, having four
other high mountains round about it. Between which four mountains and the
said town are diverse most large and beautiful gardens replenished with all
kind of fruits: quinces here are of an incredible bigness. Their vines
dispersing themselves upon the boughs of trees do make most pleasant bowers
and walks: the grapes whereof being red, are for their bigness, called in the
language of that people, hens eggs. They have here Grapes of marvelous
bigness. White honey.
great (...) of oil and most excellent honey: some of their honey being white,
and some yellow. This town has many fountains about it, which joining into
one stream, do serve for many water-mils thereabouts. Here are likewise great
store of artizans, who exercise themselves only about things necessary. The
inhabitants are somewhat civil, their women are most beautiful, being most
gorgeously decked with silver jewels. Their oil they carry unto the next
cities southward of them on this side Atlas: but they send their leather unto
Fez and Mecnasa. Their plain is almost six miles long: the soil being most
fruitful for corn: in regard whereof the townes-men pay certain yearly
tribute unto the Arabiaus. This town has judges, priests, and a great number
of gentlemen. Upon a time as I traveled this way, it was my hap to meet with
a certain ancient governor of the same place, who was grown blind with
extreme age. This aged sire (as by some I understood) was in his youth a most
valiant and stout person, insomuch that after many other noble exploits, he
slew with his own hand four captains which were most deadly enemies unto the
people of Tagodast. And afterward he handled the matter so wisely, that he
joined those in perfect league which before time had waged continual war.
Here no commonwealth-matter is concluded by the magistrates of the town
without his special advise and (...). By this worthy Senator my self with
fowerscore (...) were honorably entertained, and had dainty meats every day
set before us, of game which was newly hunted. He recounted most familiarly
unto us all his labors which he had bestowed in concluding of the forefaid
league: neither had this good man any so entire and hidden secrets, which he
revealed not unto us, as to his loving friends. At my departure I offered him
money for my self and my company: but he, like a liberal man, would by no
means accept of it; saying, that albeit he ought the king of Fez much duty
and good will, yet did he not bestow that liberality for his sake: but that
whatsoever wealth he enioied, his parents bequeathed unto him upon this
condition, that he should show himself kind and bountiful unto all his
kindred, acquaintance, and strangers traveling that way: and although he were
free from that condition, yet his love toward God, and the liberality which
God had planted in him, could require no less at his hands. Yea, he said, that
by Gods good blessing and providence he had reaped the same year seven
thousand bushels of corn: insomuch, that himself and all his neighbors were
provided for in abundance. Moreover, that he possessed of sheep and goats more
then an hundred thousand, the wool whereof only, and some small portion of
butter, he reserved to himself, but as for the cheese and milk, he gave it
all frankly unto his shepherds. In this town there is none that sells either
cheese, butter, milk, or any otber such commodity, though each one has great
abundance of cattle. Howbeit their hides, oil, and wool they utter in the
provinces thereabout. The reverend sire added this moreover: If it shall please
(says he) the king of Fez to return home from Duccala through this my region,
I will come forth to meet him, and will submit my self wholly unto him, as
unto my most liege and sovereign prince. Thus my self a mere stranger being
so honorably dismissed by this worthy Senator, could not sufficiently
commend his courtesy and bounteous dealing toward strangers.

Of the city of Elgiumuha.
Near unto the foresaid town, within five miles, stands Elgiumuha. It was
in our time built upon the top of an high mountain, and contains to the
number of five hundred families, besides so many families comprised in the
villages of that mountain. Here are innumerable springs and fountains, and
most pleasant and fruitful gardens in all places. Here are likewise
walnut-trees huge and tall. The little hills enuironing this mountain do yield
barlie and olives in great abundance. In the said town are great numbers of
artizans, as smithes, leather-dressers, and such like. And because they have
here notable yron-mines, they make plenty of horseshooes. And whatsoever
commodity proceeds of their labor, they carry it to foreign regions where
they think it is wanting: from whence they bring home slaves, woad, and the
skins of certain beasts, whereof they make most defensive and warlike
shields: these shields they transport unto Fez, exchanging them there for
weapons, cloth, and other such things as they stand in need of. This town
stands so near unto the high way, that the boys will stand gazing and
woondering at merchants as they come by, especially if they wear any strange
attire. The residue of inhabitants upon this mountain are all commanded and
governed by them of the town. They say that the people of Tagodast aforesaid
were the first founders of this town: for so upon a time it befell, that
whereas the principal men of Tagodast grew to dissension among themselves, the
common sort favoring neither faction, built Elgiumuha, and left Tagodast to be
inhabited by their governors: hence it is, that even at this day they are here
only ignoble and base people, whereas there they are all gentlemen.

Of Bzo a town in Hascora.
THE ancient town of Bzo is built upon an high hill about twenty miles
westward from the town last mentioned. Within three miles of Bzo runs the
foresaid river of Guadelhabid. The townsmen are honest people, exercising
merchandise, and going decently apparelled: To them which inhabit the deserts
they carry cloth, oil, and leather. Their mountains abound with olives,
corn, and all kind of fruits: and of their grapes they make every year most
excellent and sweet raisins. Figs they have great plenty: and their
walnut-trees are so high, that a puttocke may securely build his nest upon the
tops: for it is impossible for any man to climb up. On each side of the way
which leads from hence to the river Guadelhabid there are most pleasant and
beautiful gardens. My self (I remember) was here present when their oranges,
figs, and other fruits were grown to ripenes; and was entertained by a
certain priest, who dwelt not far from a stately Mahumetan temple, standing
by that river which runs through the marketplace of the town.

Of the mountain called Tenueues.
THis mountain is situate over against Hascora upon that part of Atlas which
trendeth southward. It has many most valiant and warlike inhabitants both
horsemen and footmen; and a great number of horses of small stature. It
yields abundance of woad and barlie: but other grain they have none at all,
so that they have no other but barlie bread to eat. At all times of the year
you shall here see plenty of snow. Here are likewise sundry nobleme^ and
gentlemen, all which are subject unto one prince. To this prince they pay great
yearly tribute for the maintenance of his soldiers, for he wageth continual
war with the inhabitants of mount Tensita. The said prince has (...) 1000.
most valiant horsemen always in a readiness: and so many likewise do the
noblemen of this mountain continually keep at their own costs and charges.
Moreover the prince has an hundredth soldiers part of them bowmen, and part
harquebusiers, to guard and attend upon his person in all places. Coming my
self to see this mountain, it was my chance to find out the said prince,
who was desirous exceedingly to be praised of all men: but for liberality,
courtesy, and civility, his like I think was not to be found. Unto the
Arabian tongue (albeit he were ignorant thereof) he bore a marvelous affection:
and was greatly delighted to hear any man expound a sentence or verse, which
was penned to his own commendation. The uncle of (...) Leo sent ambassador to
the king of Tombuto.
At the very same time when mine uncle was sent ambassador from the king of
Fez to the king of Tombuto, I my self also travailed in his company: we were
no sooner entered the region of Dara (which is an hundredth miles distant from
the said princes dominions) but he hearing of my uncles fame (who was an
excellent Orator, and a most witty Poet) sent letters unto the prince of
Dara, requesting him that he would persuade mine uncle to travail unto
Tombuto by mount Tenueues: for he had a great desire to see him, and to speak
with him. Howbeit my uncle answered, that it beseemed not a kings ambassador
to visit any princes far out of his way, and so to defer his masters
weighty affairs. But, to the end that he might in some sort satisfy the
said prince, he promised to send me his nephew unto him, which might in his
name salute him and do him due honor. Afterward he delivered me certain
costly gifts to present the prince withal: as namely a curious pair of
stirrups double gilt and finely wrought after the Morisco fashion, which cost
(as I remember) five and twenty ducates; and a rich pair of spurs of fifteen
ducates price. Moreover he sent two bands of silk artificially entwined with
gold, one whereos was tawnie, and the other blew. He sent also a most excellent
book, containing the lives of certain famous and devout men of Africa,
together with certain verses in the commendation of the prince himself. Thus
being furnished with the things aforesaid, I set forth on my journey, taking
two horsemen to accompany me unto the foresaid mountain: and so as I road, I
invented verses in the princes praise. At our first arrival there, the prince
with a great train of his nobility was ridden forth on hunting. Who being
informed of my coming, caused me forthwith to be sent for, and after
salutations had, he asked me how my uncle did: I answered that he was in good
health, and at his highness disposition. Then he commanded me to be carried unto
a stately lodging, where, after my tedious journey, I might repose my self,
till he were returned from hunting. And so within night returning from his
game, he sent for me immediately to come into his chamber of presence: where,
having first performed due obeisance unto him, I presented him with mine uncles
gifts: which (as I suppose) were most acceptable unto him. At length I gave him
the verses which mine uncle had indicted: which he presently commanded one of
his secretaries to read. And as he was expounding each sentence and word unto
the prince, it was a wonder to see, what exceeding alacrity and joy appeered
in his countenance. The verses being read, he sat down to supper, willing me
not only to be his guest, but also to sit next unto his person. His table was
furnished with mutton, veale roasted and sodden, and with bread baked like a
cake. Diverse other dishes likewise were served in, but I remember not all the
particulars. Supper being ended, I greeted the prince in this wise: Your
highness (my lord) has received all those gifts, which your humble servant mine
uncle (in token of his loiall disposition, and that he might be had of your
highness in remembrance) has sent you: Now I being both his sisters son and
his scholar, have naught else but a few words to present your princelines
withal: may it please you therefore to accept of such homely The excellent wit
and towardliness of John Leo at 16. years of age.
stuff as my wit could suddenly afford in the time of my journey. These
words ended, I began to read my verses unto him: and being as then but sixteen
years of age, the prince gave right joyful and diligent ear unto me; and
whatsoever he understood not sufficiently, he would cause it to be (...). Now
being weary with his hunting, and perceiving the night to be far spent, he
wished all of us to go to bed. Early the next morning I was sent for, to a
stately breakefast, after the conclusion whereof, he caused an hundredth ducates
to be delivered me for a present unto my uncle, together with three slaves,
which should attend upon him in his journey. But on me he bestowed fifty
ducates and a good horse; and to each of my two servants he gave ten ducates:
giving mine uncle to understand, that his mean gift which he bestowed, was
sent not in regard of his worthy presents, but for a recompense of his
excellent verses. For as touching mine uncles gifts, he said he would defer
the requital thereof till his return from Tombuto, what time he would more
fully manifest his good will toward him. Then commanding one of his
secretaries to direct us on our way, and most courteously bidding us farewell;
he told us that the same day he was going to make an assault upon his enemies.
And so departing from him, I returned to mine uncle. Thus much I thought good
to set down, for to show, that even Africa is not utterly destitute of
courteous and bountiful persons.

Of the mountain called Tensita.
TEnsita is a part of Atlas, beginning westward from the mountain last before
mentioned, eastward extending to mount Deeds, and southward bordering upon the
desert of Dara. This mountain is well stored with inhabitants, having more then
fifty castles about it, the walls whereof are built of lime and rough stone:
and by reason of the southerly situation it is ever almost destitute of rain.
All the said castles stand not far from the river of Dara, some being three,
and some four miles distant there from. The greatest prince in all this region
has under his command well nigh fifteen hundredth horsemen, and about so many
footmen as the prince of Tenueues before named. And albeit these two princes
are most nearly conioined in blood, yet can neither of them refrain from most
cruel wars against the other. It is a wonder to see, what plenty of dates
this mountain affoordeth: the inhabitants give themselves partly to husbandry,
and partly to traffike. Barley they have in great abundance: but of other grain
and of flesh their scarcity is incredible: for that region has no flocks nor
droues at all. The prince of this mountain commonly receives for yearly
tribute twenty thousand pieces of gold: every of which pieces contains not
so much by one third part, as an Italian ducate. There has always been so
great amity between the king of Fez and this prince, that either often
sends rich gifts unto other. My self (I remember) once saw A most stately
and rich present.
a most magnificent gift presented to the said king in the name of this
prince, to wit, fifty men slaves, and fifty women slaves brought out of the
land of Negros, ten eunuchs, twelve camels, one Giraffa, sixteen ciuetcats,
one pound of ciuet, a pound of amber, and almost six hundredth skins of a
certain beast called by them Elamt, whereof they make shieldes, (...) skin
being worth at Fez, eight ducates; twenty of the men slaves cost twenty
ducates a piece, and so did fifteen of the women slaves; every (...) was
valued at forty, every camel at fifty, and every ciuet-cat at two hundredth
ducates: and a pound of ciuet and amber is sold at Fez for threescore (...).
Besides these were sent diverse other particulars, which for breuities sake I
omit. I my self was in presence when these gifts were offered to the king: the
princes ambassador was a Negro borne, being gross and of a (...) stature, and
for his speech and behavior most barbarous: this fellow delivered a letter
unto the king, which was most absurdly and rudely penned: but the Oration which
he made in the behalf of his prince was well worse; so that at the
pronouncing thereof the king and all that were in presence could hardly (...)
from laughter, but were feign to hold their hands and garments before their
faces, least they should have seemed too uncivil. Howbeit his oration being
ended, the king caused him to be most honorably entertained by the priest of
the chief temple; with whom himself and all his company having remained
fourteen days, were at length by the kings liberality frankely and freely
dismissed.

Of the mountain called Gogideme.
Near unto the foresaid mountaiue stands another called Gogideme. This
mountain is inhabited only upon the north part thereof: but the south side is
utterly destitute of inahbitants: the reason whereof they affirm to be,
because that when Read of this Abraham before in the description of the city
of Maroco.
Abraham king of Maroco was vanquished and expelled out of his kingdom by his
disciple Elmaheli, he fled unto this mountain. The inhabitants moved with the
kings distress endeavored (though to small purpose) all that they could, to
succor him: whereof his disciple Elmaheli was no sooner informed; but coming
with an huge army and with great fury upon them, he destroyed all their
mansions and villages, and the inhabitants he partly put to flight, and partly
to the sword. And those which now remain there are most base, beggarly and
slavish people: Howbeit they sell some quantity of oil and barley: neither
indeed will their soil affoorde any other commodities. They have plenty of
goats and mules; but their mules and horses are but of mean stature. The
situation and quality of this mountain will not suffer the inhabitants to be
liberal.

Of the two mountains called Teseuon.
TEseuon consists of two mountains standing together, beginning westward
from Gogideme, and ending at the mountain of Tagodast. The inhabitants are
oppressed with extreme poverty: for their ground will yield nothing but barley
and mill. Forth of this mountain springs a certain river, which runs
through most pleasant fields. But because the mountainers never descend into
the same fields, hence it is that the Arabians only enjoy that river. To have
said thus much of these may suffice: now let us come unto the description of
Tedles.

A description of the region of Tedles.
THE small region of Tedles begins westward at the river of Guadelhabid, and
stretches to that part of the great river Ommirabih where Guadelhabid takes
his beginning; southward it bordereth upon Atlas, and northward it extends
unto that place where Guadelhabid falls into Ommirabih. This region is in a
manner three square: for the said two rivers springing out of Atlas run
northward, till approaching by little and little, they meet all in one.

Of Tefza the principal town in Tedles
TEfza the chief town of all Tedles, was built by the Africans upon the side
of mount Atlas, some five miles from the plain. The town walls are built of
most excellent marble, which is called in their language Tefza, and hereupon
the town was so called likewise. Here do reside most rich merchants of all
sorts: of Jews here are two hundred families, who exercise merchandise and
diverse other trades. And here you shall find many outlandish merchants which
buy from hence certain black mantles with hoods, commonly called Ilbernus: of
these there are great numbers both in Ilbernus.
Italy and Spain. Neither are there in Fez any kind of wares, which are not
here to be bought: if any merchant will exchange his wares for other, he may
the sooner be dispatched: for the townsmen are furnished with diverse kinds of
merchandise, as namely with slaves, horses, woad, leather, and such like:
whereas if the forreiners were desirous to sell their wares for ready money,
they should never attain to the value of them. They have golden coin without
any image or superscription: their apparel is decent: and their women are
beautiful and of good behavior. In this town are diverse Mahumetan temples,
and many priests and judges. Their commonwealth was wont always to be most
prosperous and well-gouerned; but degenerating from better to worse, they were
afterward so turmoyled with dissensions and wars, that certain being expelled
hence, came unto the king of Fez, humbly beseeching him that by force he would
restore them to their native country, conditionally that all matters well
succeeding on their side, they should deliver the town unto the king. This
condition was accepted, and the king having a thousand brave horsemen ready to
do the feat, joined five hundred horse, and two hundred gunners on horseback
unto them. Moreover he wrote unto certain Arabians (which are commonly called
Zuair, and have almost four thousand horesemen at command) that, if need so
required, they would come in, and aid his troops. Over the said army the
king appointed as captain one Ezzeranghi, a most valiant and redoubted
warrior. Who having pitched his tents near unto the town, began presently to
give the townsmen an assault. But when he had done his best, the warlike
citizens easily gave him the repulse. Moreover the Arabians called Benigeber
were coming with five thousand horsemen to succor the town. Which so soon
as Captain Ezzeranghi was advertised of, he raised his siege, and went
suddenly to meet with the foresaid Arabians; whom after he had discomfited in
three days, he then safely returned to lay new siege. The citizens seeing
themselves cut off from all hope of the Arabians aid, began seriously to treat
of peace with the enemy; which the easlier to obtain, they promised to defray
all the kings charges laid out in this expedition, and to pay him for yearly
tribute more then ten thousand ducates: howbeit with this prouiso, that they for
whose cause the king had sent the said army, if they entered the town, should
be secluded from all Magistracy and government. But they hearing of these
conditions, spoke unto the Captain in manner following: Sir, if it shall
please you to restore us unto our former dignity and state, we will procure
you above an hundredth thousand ducates. Neither is there cause why any man
should fear any injury or violence; for we protest unto you that no man shall
be a farthing endamaged by us: only we will exact at our adversaries hands
the revenues of our possessions which they have these three years unjustly
detained from us. The sum whereof will amount unto thirty thousand ducates,
all which we are most willing to bestow upon you, in regard of those labors
which you have undergone for our sakes. Moreover the revenues of the whole
region shall be yours, which will come to twenty thousand ducates. And the
Jews tribute shall yield you ten thousand more. Upon these speeches the
Captain returned answer unto the citizens, that his master the king of Fez
had most faithfully promised those which moved him unto this war, that he
would never forsake them till they had attained their hearts desire: for which
cause he was more willing to have them govern, then the townsmen which were
now in possession, and that for many reasons: wherefore (says he) if you be
determined to yield unto the king, assure your selves, that no inconvenience
shall light upon you: but if you will to the end remain perverse and
obstinate, be ye assured also, that the king will deal most extremely with
you. This message was no sooner known unto the people, but forthwith they
began to be distracted into diverse factions: some there were which stood for
the king, and others chose rather manfully to fight it out, then that the king
should be admitted: insomuch that the whole city resounded with brawlings,
quarrels, and contentions. This tumult came at length by spies unto the
Captains ear, who presently caused half his forces to take arms; and by
their means in three hours space he wan the city with little slaughter on
his part. For those townsmen that favored the king, did what they could on
the inside, to set open the gates, and so did the assailants on the outside,
neither did any resist their attempts, by reason of the foresaid civil
dissensions. Whereupon Captain Ezzeranghi entering the city, caused the kings
colors to be advanced in the marketplace, and upon the walls, charging his
horsemen to range about the city, that no citizens might escape by flight; and
last of all made a proclamation unto all his soldiers, that they should not
upon pain of death offer any injury unto the townsmen. Then he caused all
the chieftaines of the contrary faction to be brought prisoners unto him: to
whom he threatened captivity and thraldom, till they should disburse so much
as the king had spent in that expedition: the total sum was twelve thousand
ducates, which the wives and kinsfolks of the captives presently paid.
Neither could they yet obtain their liberty: for the exiles, for whose cause
the king had sent that army, demanded restitution of all their goods, which
the other had for certain years detained from them. The captives therefore
were committed that night, and the next morning lawyers and atturnies came to
plead on both sides before a judge and the captain. Howbeit after a great
deal of tedious fending and proouing, having concluded nothing at all, the
captain was so weary, that he left them, and went to supper. Afterward he
caused the captives to be brought forth, wishing them to pay the sums
demanded; for (says he) If you come before the king of Fez he will make you to
disburse more then twice the value. At which words being terrified, they wrote
unto their wives, if they would ever see them alive, to procure them money by
some means. Eight days after, the women brought as many gold rings,
bracelets, and other such jewels, as were valued at eight and twenty thousand
ducates: for they had rather bestow these for the ransom of their husbands,
then to reveal their great wealth; bringing forth all their costly ornaments,
as if their money had been quite exhaust. When therefore the king and the
exiles were fully satisfied, insomuch that nothing seemed now to let the said
captives from liberty, the captain spoke unto them in this wise: Sirs, I have
signified (though unwillingly) unto my master the king all matters which have
here passed between us: for I dare by no means release you, till the kings
letters authorize me so to do: Howbeit, I wish you to be of good cheer; for
since you have honestly restored to every man his own, there is no doubt but
your selves shall shortly be set at liberty. The same night the captain A
notable and effectual practice to wring more money out of the (...) purses.
called a friend of his, whose counsel he found oftentimes to take good
effect, and asked him by what means he might without suspicion of guile or
treachery, wring any more sums of money from them. Whereunto his friend replied:
make them believe (quoth he) that you are willed by the kings letters to put
them all to death: howbeit, that you will not, for pitties sake, deal so
extremely with innocent persons: but that you will send them to Fez to receive
punishment or pardon at the kings pleasure. Hereupon the kings letters were
counterfeited, which the day following the captain with a lamentable voice
published unto his two and forty prisoners. My friends (quoth he) so it is,
that the king having received some sinister and wrong information, that you
should go about to make a conspiracy: most firmly enioineth me by these his
letters, to put each one of you to death: which, though it be full sore against
my will, yet needs I must obey my prince, if I will not wittingly run upon mine
own destruction. And then shedding some fained tears: since (quoth he) we
can upon the sudden devise no better course, I think it most convenient to
send you with a troop of horsemen unto the king, whose wrath (perhaps) you may
by some means pacify. Whereupon the captives growing far more pensive then
before, recommended themselves unto God, and to the captains clemency,
requesting his good will with many tears. And forthwith there comes one in
among them, who advised them to make up some round sum of money, and
therewithal to try if they could appease the king: and seemed likewise to
entreat the captain, that he would by his letters stand their friend to the
king. Heereunto the captives agreeing with one voice, promised that they would
give the king a great sum of gold, and would most liberally reward the
captain. The captain, as though forsooth this condition much disliked him,
asked at length how much gold they meant to send the king: one said that he
would disburse a thousand ducates, another, that he would give five hundredth,
and the third, eight hundredth. But the captain making show, that this was too
little, said that he was loath to make signification of so small a sum unto
the king: howbeit, better it were for you (quoth the captain) to go your
selves unto the king, with whom perhaps you shall make a more reasonable end
then you are aware of. But they fearing hard measure, if they should be carried
unto the king, were far more importunate with the captain then before, that he
would (to his power) be good unto them. Wherefore the captain (as though at
length he had been moved with their vehement petitions) spoke unto them in
this wise: here are of you (my masters) two and forty noble and rich persons;
if you will promise two thousand ducates a man, I will signify on your behalf
so much unto the king, and so I hope to persuade him: but if this condition
will not please him, then must I needs send you to make answer for your
selves. This condition they al of them yielded unto; howbeit with this prouizo,
that every man should give proportionablie to his wealth, and that they might
have for the payment fifteen days of farther respite. The twelfth day
following the captain fained, that he had received letters from his king,
signifying that the king, for his sake, would show the captives more favor.
The fifteenth day he had paid unto him eighty four thousand ducates: neither
could he sufficiently wonder, how in so small a town, among two and forty
inhabitants only, such huge sums of money could so readily be found. Then
wrote he unto his king how all matters had passed, demanding what should be
done with the gold. And so the king forthwith sent two of his secretaries with
an hundredth horsemen to fetch home the said gold unto Fez. The captives being
restored to their liberty, presented the said captain with horses, slaves,
ciuet, and such like gifts, to the value of two thousand ducates: giving him
exceeding thanks for their liberty; and requesting him to take their presents
in good worth: for, had not their treasure been quite consumed, they said,
they would have bestowed far greater upon him. Wherefore, from thence
forward, that region was subject unto the king of Fez, and to the foresaid
captain Ezzeranghi, till he was trecherously slain by certain Arabians.
Moreover the king receives from that city, even at this present twenty
thousand ducats for yearly tribute. I have in this narration been indeed
somewhat more large then need required; howbeit perhaps I did it, because I my
self was present in all the expedition, and was an earnest mediator for the
citizens release: neither saw I ever (to my remembrance) a greater mass of
gold, then was by subtlety drawn from them. Yea the king himself never had
so much gold in his coffers at one time: for albeit he receives yearly
thirty thousand ducates, yet never could he store himself with so much at
once, nor his father before him. These things were done in the year of the
Hegeira 915. and in the year of our Lord 1506. And here I would have the
reader to consider, what man's industry and wit may do in getting of money.
The King marvelled much at this sum of gold; but afterward he had greater
cause to wonder at the wealth of a certain Jew, who paid more out of his
own purse, then all the forenamed captives. And his riches were the cause, why
the King of Fez exacted fifty thousand ducates from the Jews, for that they
were said to favor his enemies. I my self bare him company, that went in the
Kings name to receive the said sum of the Jews.

Of Efza a town of Tedles.
THis town stands two miles from Tefza, and contains almost six hundred
families, being built upon a little hill at the foot of mount Atlas. In this
town are many Moors and Jews which make Or (...), being a kind of garment.
Bernussi. The natural inhabitants are either artificers or husbandmen, being
in subjection to the governors of Tefza. Their women are excellent spinsters,
whereby they are said to gain more then the men of the town. Between this
town and Tefza runs a certain river called by the inhabitants Derne, which
springing forth of Atlas, runs through the plains of that region, till at
length it falls into Ommirabih. On both sides of this river are most
beautiful and large gardens replenished with all kinds of fruits. The
townsmen here are most liberal and courteous people, and will permit merchants
traveling that way freely to come into their gardens, and to take thence as
much fruit as they will. No people are slower then they for paying of debts:
for albeit the merchants lay down ready money to receive Bernussi within
three months, yet are they sometime feign to stay an whole year. My self was
in this town when the kings army lay in Tedles, and then they yielded
themselves to the king. The second time that the kings general of his army
came unto them, they presented him with fifteen horses, and as many slaves.
Afterward they gave him fifteen kine, in token that they were the kings loyal
subjects.

Of Cithiteb.
THis town was built by the Africans upon an high hill, almost ten miles
westward of Efza. Well peopled it is with rich and noble inhabitants: and
because Bernussi be here made, it is always frequented with * Ilbernus.
store of merchants. The top of the said high mountain is continually covered
with snow. The fields adjoining to the town are full of vineyards and gardens,
which bring forth fruits in such abundance, that they are naught worth to be
sold in the markets. Their women are beautiful, fat, and comely, being adorned
with much silver: their eyes and hair are of a brown color. The inhabitants
are so stout and sullen, that when the other cities of Tedles yielded to the
king, they alone stood out: yea they assembled under a certain captain an
army of a thousand horsemen, wherewith they so vexed the kings forces, that he
was often in danger to have lost all that which he had got. Afterward the king
sent his brother with a new supply of men to aid his lieutenant; but he also
had hard success. At length having maintained war for three whole years,
the king commanded a Jew to poison their captain. And so at last the king wan
this city also, in the year of the Hegeira 921.

Of the town of Eithiad.
THis town being built by the Africans upon a certain hillocke of Atlas,
contains to the number of three hundred families. It is walled only toward
the mountain; for that side which respects the plain, is so fortified
naturally with rocks, that it seems not to need any wall. From Cithiteb it is
about twelve miles distant. The temple of this town is little, but most
beautiful, round about which runs a mote, in manner of a river. The
inhabitants are wealthy and noble: they have great store of merchants, as well
townsmen as forreiners. The Jews here inhabiting are partly artificers and
partly merchants. About this town are abundance of springs, which breaking
through the rocks of the mountain, do fall into a certain river under the
town. On both sides of this river are diverse gardens woonderfully replenished
with grapes, figs, and walnuts. Likewise the sides of the mountain it self
abound greatly with olives. Their women are no less beautiful then civil,
being adorned with much silver, and wearing fine rings upon their fingers and
arms. Their vallie is fruitful for all kind of grain, but their hill is
meet only for barley, and for goates-pasture. In my time one Raoman
Benguihazzan usurped this town, and enioied it to his dying day. My self was
once entertained by a priest of this place, in the year of the Hegeira 921.

Of Seggheme a mountain of Tedles.
ALbeit this mountain stands much southerly, yet is it to be accounted one
of the mountains of Tedles. Westward it begins from the mountain of
Tesauon, extending it self eastward to mount Magran, from whence the famous
river of Ommirabih is said to take his beginning. The south part bordreth upon
mount Deeds. The inhabitants are said originally to be descended from the
people of Zanaga: they are personable, cheerful, valiant, and warlike people.
Their weapons are darts, Turkish swords, and daggers. They sling stones
likewise with great dexterity and force. They are at continual war with the
inhabitants of Tedles, insomuch that no merchants can pass that way without
public safe conduct, and without great expense of money. Their houses are so
homely built, that sometime three or four rooms are contained in one. Of
goats they have great abundance, as likewise of mules scarcely so big as
asses, which range so far into the forest to seek their food, that they
are often devoured of lions. They would never submit themselves to any prince;
for their mountain is so rough and steep, that it seems almost impregnable.
In my time the same captain which had won the towns of Tedles went about to
assail them in like manner. Which when the mountainers understood, assembling
a great army, they shrouded themselves in a certain part of the mountain,
near which they knew their enemies would pass. And so soon as they saw all
the enemies horsemen ascended up the hill, suddenly rushing forth, they gave
them the onset. The skirmish was not so long as bloody: for the captains
army being too weak for the mountainers, could neither march on, nor retire:
wherefore they were constrained to fight it out by hand-blowes: many of them
with their horses being thrown headlong down the rocks, were miserably
crushed in pieces: the residue were either taken or slain, so that I think
scarce one man of them escaped. But of all others the captives were most
miserable: for the mountainers themselves would not slay them, but delivered
them over to their wives to be tormented, who, as if they had been she-tigres
or lionesses, put them to a most horrible and vile death. From thencefoorth
they had no traffic nor familiarity with the people of Tedles, neither
seemed they greatly to stand in need of their friendship (for they have great
store of barlie, of cattle, and of sweet fountains) unless it be for that
they are excluded from all trade of merchandise.

Of the mountain called Magran.
Somewhat beyond the foresaid mountain of Seggheme stands mount Magran.
Southward it bordereth upon the region of Farcala, near unto the Lybian
desert: westward it begins at Seggheme, and extends eastward to the foot
of mount Deeds. It is continually covered with snow. The inhabitants have such
abundance of small and great cattle that they cannot long remain in one place
together. They build their houses of the bark of certain trees, the rooffe
whereof depends on slender sparres, fashioned like unto the hoops enuironing
the lids of such chests or trunks, as the women of Italy, when they travel,
carry upon their mules. So likewise these These people live like the Tartars.
people transport their whole houses up and down by the strength of mules,
till they have found a fit place of abode; where, so soon as they arrive, they
plant their said houses, remaining there with their whole families, so long as
they have grass sufficient to feed their cattle. Howbeit all the spring time
they settle themselves in one place, making certain low stables or cottages,
and (...) the^ with the boughs of trees, which serve for their cattle to lie in
a nights: and to the end that the cold may not pinch them overmuch, they kindle
certain huge fires near unto their said stables, whereupon sometimes the wind
so violently drives the fire; that unless the cattle escape by flight, they
are in great danger to be consumed: and as their houses are destitute of
walls, so are their (...). They are continually molested and haunted with
lions and woolues. In their apparel and customs they wholly agree with the
foresaid people of Seggheme, saving that these have houses of bark and wood,
and the other of stone. I my self, in the 917. year of the Hegeira, was in
this mountain, as I traveled from Dara to Fez.

A description of mount Deeds.
THis high and cold mountain greatly abounds with fountains and woods.
Westward it begins at mount Magran, extending thence almost as far as the
mountain of Adesan; and southward it bordereth upon the plains of Todga. The
length thereof is almost fowerscore miles. Upon the very top of this mountain
there was a city built in ancient time, whereof a few ruinous monuments are to
be seen at this present; namely certain walls of white stone, wherein are
diverse letters and words graven, which the inhabitants themselves do not
understand. Many are of opinion, that this city was built long ago by the
Romans: howbeit I my self could never find so much affirmed by any African
writer, nor yet the city it self mentioned. Saving that (...) Essacalli in a
certain story of his makes mention of Tedsi, which he says is near unto
Segelmesse and Dara: but he declares not whether it be built upon mount Deeds
or no. Howbeit for mine own part I think it to be the very same: for there is
no other city in the whole region. The inhabitants of Deeds are in very deed
most base people; of whom the greater part dwell in caves under the ground:
their food is barley and Elhasid, that is to say, barley meal sodden with
water, and salt, which we mentioned before in our description of Hea: For here
is nothing but barley to be had. Goats and asses they have in great abundance.
The caves wherein their cattle lodge are exceedingly full of Or Saltpeter.
Nitre: so that I verily think if this mountain were near unto Italy, the
said Nitre would yearly be worth five and twenty thousand ducates. But
such is their negligence and unskillfulness, that they are utterly ignorant to
what purposes Nitre serves. Their garments are so rude, that they scarce cover
half their nakedness. Their houses are very loathsome, being annoied with the
stinking smell of their goats. In all this mountain you shall find neither
castle nor walled town: when they build an house, they pile one stone upon
another without any mortar at all, the roof whereof they make of certain
rubbish, like as they do in some places of Sisa and Fabbriano: the residue (as
we have said) do inhabit in caves, neither saw I ever, to my remembrance,
greater swarms of fleas then among these people. Moreover they are treacherous
and strong thieves, so given to stealing and quarrelling, that for one unkind
word they will not only contend, but seek also the destruction one of
another. They have neither judge, priest, nor any honest governor among them.
No merchants resort unto them: for being given to continual idleness, and not
exercising any trades or handie-crafts, they have nothing meet for merchants to
buy. If any merchant bring any wares into their region, unless he be safe
conducted by their captain, he is in danger to be robbed of altogether. And if
the wares serve not for their own necessary uses, they will exact one fourth
part of them for custom. Their women are most forlorn and sluttish, going
more beggarly apparelled then the men. So continual and slavish are the toiles
of these women, that for misery, the life of asses is not comparable to
theirs. And, to be brief, never was I so weary of any place in all Africa, as
I was of this: howbeit in the year of the Hegeira 918. being commanded by one,
to whom I was in duty bound, to travel unto Segelmesse, I could not choose
but come this way.

JOHN LEO HIS THIRD BOOK OF the History of Africa, and of the memorable
things contained therein.
A most exact description of the kingdom of Fez.
THE kingdom of Fez begins westward at the famous river Ommirabih, and
extends eastward to the river Muluia; northward it is enclosed partly with
the Ocean, and partly with the Mediterran sea. The said kingdom of Fez is
divided into seven provinces; to wit, Temesna, the territory of Fez, Azgar,
Habat.
Elhabet, Errif, Garet, and Chauz or Cheuz.
Elchauz: every of which provinces had in old time a several governor:
neither indeed has the city of Fez always been the kings royal seat, but
being built by a certain Mahumetan apostata, was governed by his posterity
almost an hundred and fifty years. After which time the family of Marin got
the upper hand, who here settling their abode, were the first that ever called
Fez by the name of a kingdom: the reasons why they did so, we will declare
more at large in our small treatise concerning the Mahumetan religion. But now
let us as briefly as we may, describe the foresaid seven provinces.

Of Temesna one of the provinces of Fez.
WEstward it begins at the river Ommirabih, and stretches to the river
Buragrag eastward; the south frontire thereof bordereth upon Atlas, and the
north upon the Ocean sea. It is all over a plain country, containing in
length from west to east almost fowerscore miles, and in breadth from Atlas to
the Ocean sea about threescore. This province has ever almost been the
principal of the seven before named: for it contained to the number of forty
great towns, besides three hundred castles, all which were inhabited by
Barbarian Africans. In the 323. year of the Hegeira this province was by a
certain heretic against the Mahumetan religion called Chemim the son of
Mennal freed from paying of tribute. This bad fellow persuaded the people A
dangerous seducer.
of Fez to yield no tribute nor honor unto their prince, and himself he
professed to be a prophet: but a while after he dealt not only in matters of
religion, but in commonwealth-affaires also. At length waging war against the
king of Fez (who was himself then warring with the people of Zenete) it so
befell, that a league was concluded between them, conditionally that Chemim
should enjoy Temesne, and that the king should contain himself within his
signiorie of Fez, so that from thencefoorth neither should molest other. The
said Chemim governed the province of Temesne about five and thirty years: and
his successors enjoyed it almost an hundred years after his decease. But king
Joseph having built Maroco, went about to bring this province under his
subjection. Whereupon he sent sundry Mahumetan doctors, and priests to
reclaim the governor thereof from his heresy, and to persuade him, if it
were possible, to yield unto the king by fair means. Whereof the inhabitants
being advertised, they consulted with a certain kinsman of the foresaid
governor, in the city called Anfa, to murder the king of Maroco his
ambassadors: and so they did. Soon after leuying an army of fifty thousand
men, he marched toward Maroco, intending to expel thence the family of
Luntuna, and Joseph their king. King Joseph hearing of this news, was driven
into wonderful perplexity of mind. Wherefore preparing an huge and mighty
army, he stayed not the coming of his enemies: but on the sudden within three
days, having conducted his forces over the river of Ommirabih, he entered
Temesne, when as the foresaid fifty thousand men were so dismayed at the kings
army, that they all passed the river Buragrag, and so fled into Fez. But the
king so dispeopled and wasted Temesne, that without all remorse he put both
man, woman, and child to the sword. This army remained in the region eight
days, in which space they so razed and demolished all the towns The horrible
desolation of Temesne.
and cities thereof, that there scarce remain any fragments of them at this
time. But the king of Fez on the other side hearing that the people of Temesne
were come into his dominions, made a truce with the tribe of Zenete, and bent
his great army against the said Temesnites. And at length having found them
half famished near unto the river of Buragrag, he so stopped their passage on
all sides, that they were constrained to run up the craggie mountains and
thickets. At last being environed with the kings forces, some of them were
drowned in the river, others were thrown down headlong from the rocks, and
the residue were miserably slain by their enemies. And for the space of ten
months there was such hauock made among the Temesnites, that a silly remnant
of them was left alive. But king Joseph prince of the Luntunes returned
forthwith to Maroco for the repairing of his forces, to the end he might bid
the king of Fez a battle. Howbeit Temesne being bereft of her people, was left
to be inhabited of wild beasts. Neither had that province any new colonie, or
supply of inhabitants, till that about 150. years after, king Mansor returning
from Tunis, brought thence certain Arabians with him, unto whom he gave the
possession of Temesne. And these Arabians enjoyed the said province for fifty
years, till such time as king Mansor himself was expelled out of his
kingdom: and then were they also expolled by the (...), and were brought unto
extreme misery. Afterward the kings of the family of Marin bestowed the said
province upon the people of Zenete and Haoara. Hence it came to pass that the
said people of Zenete and Haoara were always great friends unto the Marin
family, and were thought to have defended them from the fury of the king of
Maroco. From which time they have peaceably enjoyed Maroco, and now they are
grown in less then an hundred years so mighty, that they stand not in fear
of the king of Fez. For they are able to bring threescore thousand horsemen to
the field, and have two hundred castles at their command. My self had great
familiarity and acquaintance with them, and therefore I will not stick to
record all memorable things which I saw among them.

Of Anfa a town in Temesna.
THis famous town was built by the Romans upon the Ocean sea shore, northward
of Atlas sixty, eastward of Azamursixtie, and westward of Rebat forty miles.
The citizens thereof were most civil and wealthy people: the fields thereto
adjoining are exceeding fruitful for all kind of grain: neither do I
think, that any town in all Africa is for pleasant situation comparable
thereto. The plain round about it (except it be to the sea northward) is
almost fowerscore miles over. In old time it was fraught with stately temples,
rich warehouses and shops, and beautiful palaces: which the monuments as yet
remaining do sufficiently testify. They had also most large and fair
gardens, out of which they gather great abundance of fruit, especially of
melons, and pome-citrons even at this day: all which are perfectly ripe by
mid-Aprill. So that the inhabitants usually carry their fruits unto Fez, by
reason that the fruits of Fez are not so soon ripe. Their attire is trim and
decent, and they have always had great traffic with the Portugals and the
English. Likewise they have many learned men among English traffic.
them. Howbeit two reasons are alleged of the destruction of this town:
first, because they were too desirous of liberty; and secondly, for that they
maintained certain galleys or foistes, wherewith they daily molested the
Island of Cadiz and the Portugals. Wherefore at length the king of Portugal
sent a strong navy of fifty sails against them, the consideration whereof
struck such terror into the inhabitants, that taking such goods as they could
carry, foam fled to Rebat, and others to Sela, and so their town was Anfa
destroyed by the Portugals.
left naked to the spoil of the enemy. But the General of the kings fleet
not knowing that they were fled, put all his forces into battell-array. Howbeit
after a while being advertised how the matter stood, he conducted his soldiers
into the city, which in one days space they so defaced, burning the houses,
and laying the walls even with the ground, that until this day it has
remained void of inhabitants. My self being in this place, I could scarce
refrain from tears, when I seriously beheld the miserable ruin of so many
fair buildings and temples, whereof some monuments are as yet extant. The
gardens, albeit they bring forth some fruit, yet are they more like unto woods
then gardens. And now by reason of the king of Fez his weakness and default,
this place is fallen into so great desolation, as I utterly despair, that ever
it will be inhabited again.

Of the city of Mansora.
THis town was built by Mansor the king and Mahumetan patriarch of Maroco upon
a most pleasant field, being two miles distant from the Ocean sea, five and
twenty miles from Rebat, and five and twenty from Anfa: it contained in times
past almost four hundred families. By this town runs a certain river
called by the inhabitants Guir, on both sides whereof in times past were most
beautiful gardens, but now there are no fruits at all to be found. For upon
the surprise of Anfa the inhabitants of this town fled unto Rebat, fearing
least they also should have been assailed by the Portugals. Howbeit the wall
of this town remained all whole, saving that the Arabians of Temesne brake it
down in certain places. This town also I could not but with great sorrow
behold; for easy it were to repair it, and to furnish it with new
inhabitants, if but a few houses were saved from ruin: but such is the malice
of the Arabians thereabout, that they will suffer no people to reedifie the
same.

Of the town of Nuchaila.
THis little town called by the inhabitants Nuchaila, is built almost in the
midst of Temesne. It was well peopled in times past, and then (so long as the
foresaid Chemim and his successors bare rule) there were fayres yearly
holden, whereunto all the inhabitants of Temesne usually resorted. The
townsmen were exceeding wealthy; for the plains stretched almost forty
miles right forth from each side of their town. I red (as I remember) in a
certain story, that they had in times past such abundance of corn, as they
would give a camels burden thereof for a pair of shoes. Howbeit when king
Joseph of Maroco destroyed all the region of Temesne, this town was laid
waste, together with all the towns and cities of the same province: howbeit at
this day certain fragments thereof are to be seen, namely some parts of the
towne-wall, and one high steeple Here also in the large and pleasant gardens
you may see many vines and trees planted, which are so old and sear, that they
yield no fruit at all. The husbandmen thereabout having finished their days
work, do lay up their rakes and other such country tools in the said
steeple: supposing that by virtue of a certain holy man which lies there
buried, no man dare remove them out of their place. I have often seen this
town, as I traveled between Rebat and Maroco.

Of the town of Adendum.
THis town was situate among certain hills almost fifteen miles from mount
Atlas, and five and twenty miles from the town last named. The soil near
unto it is exceeding fruitful for corn. Not far from the walls thereof
springs a certain river; about which place are great store of palme-trees,
being but low and fruitles. The said river runs through certain valleys and
rocks, where iron-mines are said to have been of old, Iron-mines.
which may seem probable, for the earth resembles iron in color, and the
water in taste. Here is nothing now to be seen but a few relics and ruins
of houses and pillars ouerturned: for this town was destroyed at the same
time, when the whole region (as is before declared) was laid waste.

Of the town of Tegeget.
THis town was built by the Africans upon the bank of Ommirabih near unto
the high way leading from Tedles to Fez. It had in times past civil and
wealthy inhabitants, for it stood not far from the way which passes over
Atlas into the deserts: hither were all the neighbor-people wont to resort
for to buy corn. And albeit this town was razed with all the residue in the
province, yet is it after long time replanted with inhabitants. Hither do all
the Arabians of Temesne bring their corn, delivering it unto the townsmen, to
be kept. Here are no shops nor artificers at all, but certain smithes only,
which make tools of husbandry and horseshooes. The townsmen are straightly
enjoined by the Arabians their governors courteously to entertain all
strangers traveling that way. Merchants pay custom there for each pack of
cloth to the value of a riall: but for their horses and camels they give no
custom at all. Often traveling the same way, the town did not greatly please
me, albeit the grounds about it do plentifully abound with cattle and corn.

Of the town called Hain Elchallu.
THis small town stands on a certain plain not far from Mansora. About
this town grow abundance of wild cherrie-trees, and of other thornie trees,
bearing a round fruit not much unlike to a cherrie, saving that it is yellow:
it is somewhat bigger then an olive, and the utter part thereof is nothing
pleasant in taste. The fennes and marshes on all sides of the town are full
of snailes and toades: which toades (as the inhabitants told me) are no whit
venomous. There is not any African historiographer which makes description or
mention of this town; because perhaps they thought it not worthy the name of
a town, or for that it was long since destroyed. Neither was it (as I
conjecture) built by the Africans, but either by the Romans or some other
foreign people.

A description of Rebat.
THis great and famous town was built not many years ago by Mansor the king
and Mahumetan patriarch of Maroco, upon the Ocean sea shore. By the east part
thereof runs the river Buragrag beforenamed, and there discharges itself
into the maine sea. The rock whereon this town is founded, stands near the
mouth of the said river, having the river on the one side thereof, and the sea
on the other. In building it much resembles Maroco, which Mansor willed to be
a pattern thereof: saving that it is a great deal less then Maroco. Some say
that the reason why it was built Why king Mansor built the town of Rebat upon
the seashore.
in this place was, for that king Mansor possessing the kingdom of Granada and
a great part of Spain besides, and considering that Maroco was so far distant,
that if any wars should happen, he could not in due time send new forces
against the Christians, determined to built some town upon the sea shore,
where he and his army might remain all summer time. Some persuaded him to lie
with his army at Ceuta a town upon the streites of Gibraltar: but Mansor
seeing that by reason of the barrennes of the soil he could not maintain an
army royal for three or four months in the town of Ceuta, he caused this
town of Rebat in short space to be erected, and to be exceedingly beautified
with temples, colleges, palaces, shops, stoues, hospitals, and other such
buildings. Moreover on the south side without the walls he caused a certain
high tower like the tower of Maroco to be built, saving that the winding
stairs were somewhat larger, insomuch that three horses abreast might well
ascend up: from the top whereof they might escrie ships an huge way into the
sea. So exceeding is the height thereof, that I think there is no where the
like building to be found. And to the end that greater store of artificers and
merchants might hither from all places make resort, he appointed, that every
man according to his trade and occupation should be allowed a yearly stipend:
whereupon it came to pass that within few months, this town was better
stored with all kind of artificers and merchants, then any town in all Africa
besides, and that because they reaped a double gain. Here used Mansor with his
troops to remain from the beginning of April, till the month of September.
And whereas there was no water about the town meet to be drunk (for the sea
runs ten miles up into the river, and the wels likewise yield salt water)
Mansor caused fresh water to be conveyed to the town by certain pipes and
channels, from a fountain twelve miles distant. And the conducts he made
arch-wise, like unto the conducts of Italy in many places and specially at
Rome. So soon as the said water-conduct was derived unto the town, he caused
it to be divided and sent into sundry places, as namely some pipes thereof to
the temples, some to the colleges, others to the kings palace, and the rest
into the common cesternes, throughout all the city. Howbeit after king Mansors
death this town grew into such decay, that scarce the tenth part thereof now
remains. The said notable water-conduct was utterly fordone in the war
between the Marin-familie and the successors of Mansor, and the famous town
it self decaieth every day more then other: so that at this present a man
shall hardly find throughout the whole town four hundred houses inhabited;
the residue are changed into fields and vineyards. About the foresaid rock are
two or three streets with a few shops in them, which notwithstanding are in
continual danger, for they daily fear least the Portugals should surprise
them; because the Portugal king often determined their overthrow, thinking if
he might but win Rebat, that the kingdom of Fez were easy to be conquered.
Howbeit the king of Fez has always endeavored to defend the same, and
strongly to fortify it against the enemy. But comparing their former
felicity with the present alteration whereinto they are fallen, I cannot but
greatly lament their miserable case.

Of the town of Sella.
THis town was built by the Romans upon the river of Buragrag, two miles from
the Ocean sea, and a mile from Rebat: from whence, if a man will go to the
sea, he must take Rebat in his way. This town also was destroyed when (as is
aforesaid) king Joseph spoiled all Temesne. Howbeit afterward king Mansor
caused it to be walled round about, and built therein a fair hospital and a
stately palace, into which his soldiers might at their pleasure retire
themselves. Here likewise he erected a most beautiful temple, Where king
Mansor was buried.
wherein he caused a goodly hall or chapel to be set up, which was curiously
carved, and had many fair windows about it: and in this hall (when he
perceived death to seize upon him) he commanded his subjects to (...) his
corpse. Which being done, they laid one marble-stone over his head and another
over his feet, whereon sundry (...) were engraven. After him likewise all the
honorable personages of his family and blood, chose to be interred in the
same hall. And so did the kings of the Marin-familie, so long as their
commonwealth prospered. My self on a time entering the same hall, beheld there
thirty monuments of noble and great personages, and diligently wrote out all
their epitaphes: this I did in the year of the Hegeira 915.

Of the town called Mader Avuam.
THis town was built in my time by a certain treasurer of the Mahumetan
prelate Abdulmumen, upon the bank of Buragrag. Some say it Iron-mines.
was built only for yron-mines. From mount Atlas it is ten miles distant, and
between it and Atlas are certain shadie woods, full of terrible lions Lions,
and leopards.
and leopards. So long as the founders posterity governed this town, it was
well stored with people, with fair buildings, temples, innes, and hospitals:
but, the Marin-familie prevailing daily more and more, it was at length by them
utterly destroyed. Part of the inhabitants were slain, and part taken
prisoners, and the residue by flight escaped to Sella. The king of Maroco sent
forces to succor the town, but the citizens being vanquished before their
coming, were constrained to forsake the same, and to yield it unto the
Marin-soldiers. Howbeit the king of Maroco his captain coming upon the
Marin-captaine with round forces, drove him and his forth of the town, and
took possession thereof himself. At length the king of the said Marin-familie
marching with an army against Maroco, took his journey by this town: whereat
the governor being dismayed left the said town, and before the kings approach
betook himself to flight. But the king putting all the inhabitants to the
sword, left the town it self so defaced and desolate, that by report it has
lien dispeopled ever since. The towne-walles and certain steeples are as yet
to be seen. My self saw this town, when the king of Fez having concluded a
league with his cozen, took his journey to Thagia, for to visit the sepulcher
of one accounted in his life time an holy man, called Or Sidi.
Seudi Buhasa: which was in the year of the Hegeira 920. Anno Dom. 1511.

Of Thagia a town in Temesne.
THis little town was in ancient time built by the Africans among certain
hills of mount Atlas. The air is extreme cold, and the soil dry and barren.
It is environed with huge woods, which are full of lions and other cruel
beasts. Their scarcity of corn is sufficiently counteruailed with abundance
of honey and goats. Civility they have none at all; and their houses are most
rudely built; for they have no use of lime. In this town is visited the
sepulcher of one accounted for a most holy man, who is reported in the time of
Habdulmumen, to have wrought many miracles against the fury of lions:
whereupon he was reputed by many as a great prophet. I remember that I read in
a certain writer of that nation commonly called Etdedle, a whole catalogue of
the said holy man's miracles: which whether he wrought by arte-magique, or by
some wonderful secret of nature, it is altogether uncertain. Howbeit his
great fame and honorable reputation is the cause why this town is so well
fraught with inhabitants. The people of Fez having solemnized their passover,
do yearly frequent this town to visit the said sepulcher, and that in such
huge numbers, that you would esteem them to be an whole army; for every
principal man carries his tent and other necessaries with him: and so you
shall see sometime an hundred tents and sometimes more in that company.
Fifteen days they are in performing of that pilgrimage; for Thagia stands
from Fez almost an hundred and twenty miles. My self being a child, went
thither on pilgrimage oftentimes with my father; as likewise being grown up to
man's estate, I repaired thither as often, making supplication to be delivered
from the danger of lions.

Of the town of Zarfa.
THis town the Africans built upon a certain large and beautiful plain,
watered with pleasant rivers, and christall-fountaines. About the ancient bounds
of this city you may behold many shrubs, together with fig trees and
cherrie-trees, which bear such cherries, as at Rome are called Marene. Here
are likewise certain thornie trees, the fruit whereof is by the Arabians
called Rabich. Somewhat lesser it is then a cherie, resembling in taste the
fruit called Ziziphum, or Iujuba. Here also may you find great store of wild
palme-trees, from which they gather a kind of fruit like unto Spanish olives,
saving that the stone or (...) is greater, and not so pleasant in taste: before
they be ripe they taste somewhat like unto Seruice-apples. This town was
destroyed when king Joseph aforesaid spoiled Temesne. Now the Arabians of
Temesne sow their (...) where the town stood, with great increase and gain.

Of the territory of Fez.
WEstward it begins at the river of Buragrag, and stretches eastward to the
river called Inauen: which two rivers are almost a hundred miles distant
asunder. Northward it bordereth upon the river Or (...).
Subu, and southward upon the foot of Atlas. The soil both for abundance of
corn, fruits, and cattle seems to be inferior to none other. Within this
province you shall see many exceeding great villages, which may for their
bigness, not unfitly be called towns. The plains of this region have been so
wasted with former wars, that very few inhabitants dwell upon them, except
certain poor silly Arabians, some of whom have ground of their own, and some
possess ground in common, either with the citizens of Fez, or with the king,
or else with some (...). But the fields of Sala and Mecnase are tilled by other
Arabians of better account, and are for the most part subject to the king of
Fez. And now those things which are worthy of memory in this region let us
here make report of.

Of the city or town of Sella.
THis most ancient city was built by the Romans, and sacked by the Goths. And
afterward when the Mahumetans army were entered into the same region, the
Goths gave it to Tarick one of their captains. But ever since the time that
Fez was built, Sela has been subject unto the governors thereof. It is most
pleasantly situate upon the Ocean seashore, within half a mile of Rebat; both
which towns the river Buragrag separateth insunder. The buildings of this
town carry a show of antiquity on them, being artificially carved and
stately supported with marble pillars. Their temples are most beautiful, and
their shops are built under large porches. And at the end of every row of shops
is an arch, which (as they say) is to divide one occupation from another. And
(to say all in a word) here is nothing wanting, which may be required either in
a most honorable city, or in a flourishing commonwealth. Moreover hither
resort all kind of merchants both Christians and others. Here the Genowaies,
Venetians, English traffic.
English, and low Dutch used to traffic. In the 670. year of the Hegeira
this town was surprised by a certain Castilian captain, the inhabitants Sela
won by a captain of Castilia, and recovered forthwith by the king of Fez.
being put to flight, and the Christians enjoying the city. And when they had
kept it ten days, being on the sudden assailed by Jacob the first king of the
Marin-familie (who could not, they thought, surcease his war against
Tremizen) they were put to the woorst, the greater part being slain, and the
residue put to flight. From thencefoorth that prince favored of all his
subjects, enjoyed the kingdom, after whom lineally succeeded those of his own
race and blood. And albeit this town was in so few days recovered from the
enemy; yet a world it was to see, what a wonderful alteration both of the
houses and of the state of government happened. Many houses of this town are
left desolate, especially near the towne-walles: which, albeit they are most
stately and curiously built, yet no man there is that will inhabit them. The
grounds adjoining upon this town are sandy: neither are they fit for corn,
but for cotton-wooll in diverse places very profitable. The inhabitants, diverse
of them, do weaue most excellent cotton. Here likewise are made very fine
combs, which are sold in all the kingdom of Fez, for the region thereabout
yields great plenty of box, and of other wood fit for the same purpose. Their
government is very orderly and discreet even until this day: for they have
most learned judges, vmpires, and deciders of doubtful cases in law. This
town is frequented by many rich merchants of Genoa, whom the king has always
had in great regard; because he gains much yearly by their traffic. The
said merchants have their abode and diet, partly here at Sella, and partly at
Fez: from both which towns they mutually help the traffic one of another.
These Genowaies I found in their affairs of merchandise to be exceeding
liberal: for they will spend frankly to get a courtiers favor, not so much
for their own private gain, as to be esteemed bountiful by strangers. In my
time there was an honorable A merchant of Genoa.
gentleman of Genoa in the king of Fez his court, called Messer Thomaso di
Marino, a man both learned and wise, and highly reputed of by the king. This
man having continued almost thirty years in the Fessan court, he there
deceased, and requesting on his deathbed to have his corpse interred at Genoa,
the king commanded the same to be transported thither. After his decease he
left many sons in the Fessan kings court, who all of them proved rich, and
were greatly favored by the king.

Of the town called Fanzara.
THis town being not very large, was built by a certain king of the family
called Muachidin, on a beautiful plain almost ten miles from Sella. The soil
there abouts yields corn in great plenty. Without the town walls are very
many clear fountaines' and wels, which Albuchesen The occasion of the bloody
wars moved by Sahid.
the king of Fez caused there to be dug. In the time of Abusaid the last
king of the Marin-familie, his cozen called Sahid was taken by Habdilla the
king of Granada; whereupon by letters he requested his cozen the king of Fez to
send him a certain sum of money required by the king of Granada for his
ransom. Which when the (...) king refused to yield unto, Habdilla restored his
prisoner to liberty, and sent him toward Fez to destroy both the city and
the king. Afterward Sahid, with the help of certain The city of Fez besieged
for seven years together.
wild Arabians besieged Fez for seven years together; in which space most of
the towns, villages, and hamlets throughout the whole kingdom were destroyed.
But at length such a pestilence invaded Sahids forces, that himself, with a
great part of his army, in the This number (as I take it) should rather be 819.
918. year of the Hegeira, died thereof. Howbeit those desolate towns never
received from thencefoorth any new inhabitants, especially Fanzara, which was
given to certain Arabian captains, that came to assist Sahid.

Of the town of Mahmora.
THis town was built upon the mouth of the great river Subu by a certain king
of the Muachidin-familie, being almost half a mile distant from the sea, and
about twelve miles from Sella. The places near unto it are sandy and barren.
It was built (they say) of purpose to keep the enemies from entering the mouth
of the said river. Not far from this town stands a mighty wood; the trees
whereof bear a kind of nuts or acornes about the bigness of Damascen-plums,
being sweeter in taste then chestnuts. Of which nuts certain Arabians,
dwelling near unto the place, convey Most cruel and (...) lions.
great plenty unto the city of Fez, and reap much gain thereby: howbeit in
going to gather this fruit, unless they take good heed unto themselves, they
are in great danger of the most cruel and devouring lions in all Africa, which
there oftentimes do seize upon them. This town a hundred and twenty years
ago was razed in the foresaid war of Sahid against the king of Fez, nothing
but a few ruins thereof remaining, whereby it appears The Portugals
attempting to build a forte within the mouth of the river Subu, defeated of
their purpose, and slain.
to have been of no great bigness. In the 921. year of the Hegeira the king of
Portugal sent an army to build a forte in the foresaid rivers mouth; which
they accordingly attempted to do. But having laid the foundations, and reared
the walls a good height, the king of Fez his brother so defeated them of their
purpose, that he slew of them in one night almost three thousand in manner
following: on a certain morning before sunrise three thousand Portugals
marching toward the king of Fez his camp, determined to bring thence all the
ordinance and field-peeces unto their new-erected fort: howbeit most rashly and
inconsiderately, themselves being but three thousand, and the kings army
containing fifty thousand footmen, and four thousand horsemen. And yet the
Portugals hoped so slyly and closely to perform this attempt, that before the
Moors were ready to pursue them, they should convey all their ordinance unto
the forte which was two miles distant. The Moors which kept the ordinance
being seven thousand men, were all asleep when the Portugals came: whereupon
the Portugals had so good success, that they had carried the ordinance almost
a mile, before the enemy was aware thereof. But at last, some rumor or alarm
being given in the Moors camp, they all betook themselves to arms, and
fiercely pursued the Portugals, who likewise arranged their whole company into
battell-array. And albeit the enemy environed them on all sides; yet they made
such stout and valiant resistance, that they had all escaped to their forte in
safety, had not certain villains in the king of Fez his army cried out
amain in the Portugal tongue: Hold your hands (fellow soldiers) and throw
down your weapons, for the kings brother will make a truce. Which the
Portugals no sooner yielded unto, but the savage and merciles Moors put them
every one to the sword, saving three or four only, who were saved at the
request of a captain in the Moors camp. The Portugals General being sore
dismayed with this slaughter (for thereby he had lost all his principal
soldiers) craved aid of a certain other captain, which by chance arrived
there with a mighty fleet, being accompanied with a great number of noblemen
and gentlemen. Howbeit, he was so hindered by the Moors (who daily did him all
the villainy they could, and sunk diverse of his ships) that he was not able to
perform that which he desired. In the mean space news was published among
the Portugals, of the king of Spaines death; whereupon diverse ships were
provided, and many Portugals were sent into Spain. Likewise the captain of
the said new forte seeing himself destitute of all succor, leaving the forte,
embarked himself in those ships, which then lay upon the river. But the
greatest part of the fleet were cast away at their setting forth, and the
residue, to escape the Moors shot, ran themselves a-ground on the flats and
shouldes of the river, and were there miserably slain by the Moors. Many of
their ships were here burnt, and their ordinance sunk in the sea. So many
Christians were then slain (some say A lamentable slaughter.
to the number of ten thousand) that the seawater in that place continued red
with their blood for three days after. Soon after the Moors took up four
hundred great pieces of brass out of the sea. This huge calamity befell the
Portugals for two causes: first because they would with such a small number
make so rash an assault upon the Moors, whom they knew to be so strong: and
secondly, whereas the Portugall-king might at his own cost have sent another
fleet for a new supply, he would by no means join his own people and
Castilians together. For by reason of the diversity of counsels and of people,
there is nothing more pernicious then for an army to consist of two nations:
yea the Moors certainly expect the upper hand, when they are to fight with
such an army. I my self was present in the foresaid John Leo his (...) to
(...).
war, and saw each particular accident, a little before my voyage to
Constantinople.

Of the town called Tefelfelt.
THis town is situate upon a sandy plain, fifteen miles eastward of
Mahmora, and almost twelve miles from the Ocean sea. Not far from this town
runs a certain river, on both sides whereof are thick woods haunted with
more fierce and cruel lions, then the last before mentioned, Fierce lions.
which greatly endanger those travelers that have occasion to lodge
thereabout. Without this town, upon the high way to Fez, stands an old
cottage with a plancherd chamber therein: here the mulettiers and carriers are
said to take up their lodging; but the door of the said cottage they stop as
sure as they can with boughs and thorns. Some affirm, that this rotten
cottage (while the town was inhabited) was a most stately inn. But it was
defaced in the foresaid war of Sahid.

A description of Mecnase.
THis town was so called after the name of the Mecnasites who were the
founders thereof. From Fez it is 36. miles, about fifty from Sella, and from
Atlas almost 15. miles distant. It is exceeding rich, and contains families
to the number of six thousand. The inhabitants hereof while they dwelt in the
fields lived a most peaceable life: howbeit at length they fell to dissension
among themselves, and the weaker part having all their cattle taken from them,
and having nothing in the fields to maintain their estaste, agreed among
themselves to build this city of Mecnase in a most beautiful plain. Near
unto this town runs a little river: and within three miles thereof are most
pleasant gardens replenished with all manner of fruits. Quinces there are of
great bigness, and of a most fragrant smell; and pomegranates likewise, which
being very great and most pleasant in taste, have no stones within them, and
yet they are sold exceeding cheap. Likewise here are plenty of damascens, of
white plums, and of the fruit called Iujuba, which being dried in the sun,
they eat in the spring, and carry a great number of them to Fez. They have
likewise great store of figs and grapes, which are not to be eaten but while
they are green and new: for their figs being dried become so brittle, that
they waste all to powder, and their grapes when they are made raisins, prove
unsavory. Peaches and oranges they have in so great quantity, that they make
no store of them: but their limons are waterish and unpleasant. Olives are sold
among them for a duckat and a half the Cantharo, which measure contains a
hundred pounds Italian. Moreover their fields yield them great plenty of hemp
and flax, which they sell at Fez and Sela. In this town are most stately and
beautiful temples, three colleges, and ten bath-stoues. Every monday they have
a great market without the towne-walles, whereunto the bordering Arabians do
usually resort. Here are oxen, sheep, and other such beasts to be sold:
butter and wool are here plentiful and at an easy rate. In my time the king
bestowed this town upon a certain noble man of his, where as much fruits are
reaped as in the third part of the whole kingdom of Fez. This town has been
so afflicted by wars, that the yearly tribute thereof has been diminished
sometime forty thousand, and fifty thousand ducats, and sometimes more: and I
have red, that it has been besieged for six or seven years together. In my
time the governor thereof the king of Fez his cozen, relying upon the favor
of the people, rebelled against his kinsman and sovereign. Whereupon the
Fessan king with a great army besieged the town two months together, and,
because it would not yield, so wasted and destroyed all the country
thereabout, that the governor lost by that means five and twenty thousand
ducats of yearly revenue. What then shall we think of the six and seven
years siege before mentioned? At length those Mecnase reduced under (...) by
the king of Fez.
citizens which favored the king of Fez opened the gates, and stoutly
resisting the contrary faction, gave the king and his soldiers entrance. Thus
by their means the king wan the city, carrying home to Fez the rebellious
governor captive, who within few days escaped from him. This most strong and
beautiful city has many fair streets, whereinto by conducts from a
fountain three miles distant, is conveyed most sweet and wholesome water, which
serves all the whole city. The mils are two miles distant from the town. The
inhabitants are most valiant, warlike, liberal, and civil people, but their
wits are not so refined as others: some of them are merchants, some artificers,
and the residue gentlemen. They count it unseemly for any man to send an
horse-lode of seed to his husbandman or farmer. They are at continual jar
with the citizens of Fez; but whereupon this dissension of theirs should arise,
I cannot well determine. Their gentlemen's wives never go forth of the doors
but only in the night season, and then also they must be so veiled and
muffeled that no man may see them: so great is the jealousy of this people.
This town is so durtie in the springtime, that it would irke a man to walk
the streets.

Of a town called Gemiha Elchmen.
THis ancient town stands on a plain near unto certain baths, being
distant southward of Mecnase fifteen miles, westard of Fez thirty, and from
Atlas about ten miles. By this town lies the common high way from Fez to
Tedle. The field of this town was possessed by certain Arabians, and the
town it self utterly destroyed in the war of Sahid. Howbeit in certain
places the walls are yet remaining, and diverse towers and temples standing
without roofes.

Of the town called Cannis Metgara.
THis town was built by certain Africans in the field of Zuaga almost
fifteen miles westward from Fez. Without this town for two miles together
were most pleasant and fruitful gardens: but by the cruel war of Sahid all
was laid waste; and the place it self remained void of inhabitauts an hundred
and twenty years. Howbeit when part of the people of Granada came over into
Africa, this region began to be inhabited anew. And whereas the Granatines are
great merchants of silk, they caused, for the breeding of silkewormes, great
store of white mulberrie trees to be brought hither. Here likewise they planted
abundance of sugarcanes, which prosper not so well in this place as in the
province of Andaluzia. In times past the inhabitants of this place were very
civil people, but in our time they have not been so, by reason that all of
them exercise husbandry.

Of the town of Banibasil.
THis town was built by the Africans upon a certain small river just in the
mid way between Mecnase and Fez, being distant from Fez about eighteen miles
westward. Out of their fields many rivers take their original, which fields
are by the Arabians sown all over with barlie and hemp: neither indeed will
the soil yield any other commodity, both by reason of the barrennes, and also
for that it is for the most part ouerflowed with water. Whatsoever commodity
arises out of this place redoundeth to the priests of the principal
Mahumetan temple in Fez, and it amounts almost yearly to twenty thousand
ducats. Here also in times past were most large, pleasant, and fruitful
gardens, as appears by the monuments and relics thereof, howbeit they were,
like other places, laid waste by the war of Sahid. The town it self remained
destitute of inhabitants an hundred and ten years; but as the king of Fez
returned home from Duccala, he commanded part of his people to inhabit the
same: albeit their inciuilitie made them loath so to do.

Of Fez the principal city of all Barbary, and of the founders thereof.
FEz was built in the time of one Aron a Mahumetan patriarch, in the year of
the Hegeira 185. and in the year of our Lord 786. by a certain heretic
against the religion of Mahumet. But why it should so be called some are of
opinion, because when the first foundations thereof were dug, there was
found some quantity of gold, which metal in the Arabian language is called
Fez. Which etymology seems to me not improbable, albeit some would have it
so called from a certain river of that name. But howsoever it be, we leave
that to be discussed by others, affirming for an undoubted truth, that the
founder of this city was one Idris, being the foresaid Aron his near kinsman.
This Idris ought rather to have been Mahumetan Idris the first founder of Fe
patriarch, because he was nephew unto Hali the cozen-german of Mahumet, who
married Falerna Mahumets own daughter, so that Idris both by father and mother
was of Mahumets lineage: but Aron being nephew unto one Habbus the uncle of
Mahumet, was of kindred only by the fathers side Howbeit both of them were
excluded from the said patriarkship for certain causes mentioned in the
African chronicles, although Aron usurped the same by deceit. For Arons uncle
being a most cunning and crafty man, and faining himself to bear greatest
favor unto the family of Hali, and to be most desirous, that the
patriarkship should light thereon, sent his ambassadors almost throughout the
whole world. Whereupon the dignity was translated from Vmeve to Habdulla
Seffec the first patriarch. Which, Vmeve being informed of, waged war against
the family of Hali, and so prevailed, that some of them he chased into Asia,
and some into India. Howbeit an ancient religious man of the same family
remained still alive at Elmadina, who being very old, no whit regarded the
dignity. But this ancient sire left behind him two sons, who when they were
come to man's estate, grew into so great favor with the people of Elmadin, that
they were chased thence by their enemies; the one being taken and hanged; and
the other (whose name was Idris) escaping into Mauritania. This Idris dwelling
upon mount Zaron about thirty miles from Fez, governed not only the
commonwealth, but matters of religion also: and all the region adjacent paid
him tribute. At length Idris deceasing without lawful issue, left one of his
maids big with child, which had been turned from the Goths religion to the
Moors. Being delivered of her son, they called him after his fathers name,
Idris. This child the inhabitants choosing for their prince, caused him to be
most carefully brought up: and as he grew in years, to the end they might
train him up in feats of chivalry, they appointed one Rasid a most valiant
and skillful captain to instruct him. Insomuch, that while he was but fifteen
Idris his (...) valor at fifteen years of age.
years of age, he grew famous for his valiant acts and stratagems, and began
woonderfully to enlarge his dominions. Wherefore his troops and family
increasing every day more and more, he set his mind upon building of a city,
and changing of his habitation. And so he sent for cunning builders into all
nations, who having diligently perused all places in the region, at last made
choice of that where the city of Fez now stands. For here they found great
store of fountains, and a fair river, which springing forth of a plain not
far of, runs pleasantly almost eight miles amidst the little hills, till at
length it casts itself upon another plain. Southward of the place they
found a wood, which they knew would be right commodious for the town. Here
therefore upon the east bank of the said river, they built a town containing
three thousand families: neither omitted they ought at al which might be
required in a flourishing commonwealth. After the decease of Idris, his son
erected another town directly over against the foresaid, on the other side of
the river. But in process of time either town so increased, that there was
but a small distance between them: for the governors of each labored might
and maine to augment their own jurisdictions. An hundred and fowerscore years
after, there fell out great dissension and civil war between these two
cities, which by report continued an hundred years together. At length Joseph
king of Maroco of the Luntune-familie, conducting an huge army against both
these princes, took them prisoners, carried them home unto his dominions, and
put them to a most cruel death. And he so vanquished the citizens, that there
were slain of them thirty thousand. Then determined king Joseph to reduce
those two towns into firm unity and concord: for which cause, making a
bridge over the river, and beating down the walls of either town right
against it, he united both into one, which afterward he divided into twelve
regions or wards. Now let us make report of all such memorable things as are
there to be seen 1526.
at this day.

A most exact description of the city of Fez.
A World it is to see, how large, how populous, how well-fortified and walled
this city is. The most part thereof stands upon great and little hills:
neither is there any plain ground but only in the midst of the city. The
river enters the town in two places, for it is divided into a double branch,
one whereof runs by new Fez, that is, by the south side of the town, and
another comes in at the west side. And so almost infinitely dispersing it
self into the city, it is derived by certain conducts and channels unto every
temple, college, inn, hospital, and almost to every private house. Unto the
temples are certain square conducts adioined, having celles and receptacles
round about them; each one of which has a cock, whereby water is conveyed
through the wall into a trough of marble. From whence flowing into the sinks
and gutters, it carries away all the filth of the city into the river. In the
midst of each square conduct stands a low cesterne, being three cubits in
depth, four in breadth, and twelve in length: and the water is conveyed by
certain pipes into the foresaid square conducts, which are almost an hundred
and fifty in number. The most part of the houses are built of fine bricks and
stones curiously painted. Likewise their bay-windowes and portals are made of
partie-coloured brick, like unto the stones of Majorica. The roofes of their
houses they adorn with gold, azure, and other excellent colors, which roofes
are made of wood, and plain on the top, to the end that in summertime carpets
may be spread upon them, for here they use to lodge by reason of the exceeding
heat of that country. Some houses are of two and some of three stories high,
whereunto they make fine stairs, by which they pass from one room to another
under the same roof: for the middle part of the house is always open or
uncovered, having some chambers built on the one side, and some on the other.
The chamber-doores are very high and wide: which in rich men's houses are framed
of excellent and carved wood. Each chamber has a press curiously painted and
varnished belonging thereunto, being as long as the chamber it self is broad:
some will have it very high, and others but six handfuls in height, that they
may set it on the tester of a bed. All the portals of their houses are
supported with bricke-pillers finely plaistered over, except some which stand
upon pillars of marble. The beams and transoms upholding their chambers are
most curiously painted and carved. To some houses likewise belong certain
square cesternes, containing in breadth six or seven cubits, in length ten or
twelve, and in height but six or seven handfuls, being all uncovered, and
built of bricks trimly plaistered over. Along the sides of these cesternes are
certain cocks, which convey the water into marbletroughes, as I have seen in
many places of Europe. When the foresaid conducts are full of water, that
which flows over, runs by certain secret pipes and conueiances into the
cesternes: and that which ouerfloweth the cesternes, is carried likewise by
other passages into the common sinks and gutters, and so into the river. The
said cesternes are always kept sweet and clean, neither are they (...) but
only in summer-(...), when men, women, and children bathe themselves therein.
Moreover on the tops of their houses they usually build a turret with many
pleasant rooms therein, whither the women, for recreations sake, when they are
weary of working, retire themselves; from whence they may see well-nigh all
the city over. Of Mahumetan temples and oratories there are almost seven
hundred in The number and (...) of the Mahumetan (...) in Fez.
this town, fifty whereof are most stately and sumptuously built, having
their conducts made of marble and other excellent stones unknown to the
Italians; and the chapiters of their pillars be artificially adorned with
painting and caruing. The tops of these temples, after the fashion of Christian
churches in Europe, are made of ioises and planks: but the pauement is covered
with mats which are so cunningly sowed together, that a man cannot see the
breadth of a finger uncovered. The walls likewise on the inner side are lined a
man's height with such mats. Moreover, each temple has a turret or steeple,
from whence certain are appointed with a loud voice to call the people at
their set-time of prayer. Every temple has one only priest to say service
therein; who has the bestowing of all revenues belonging to his own temple, as
occasion requires: for thereby are maintained lamps to burn in the night,
and porters to keep the doors are paid their wages out of it, and so likewise
are they that call the people to ordinary prayers in the night season: for
those which cry from the said towers in the daytime have no wages, but are
only released from all tributes and exactions. The chief The principal
temple of Fez (...) Caruven.
Mahumetan temple in this town is called Caruven, being of so incredible a
bigness, that the circuit thereof and of the buildings longing unto it, is a
good mile and a half about. This temple has one and thirty gates or portals
of a wonderful greatness and height. The roof of this temple is in length
150. and in breadth about fowerscore Florentine cubits. The turret or steeple,
from whence they cry amain to assemble the people together, is exceedingly
high; the breadth whereof is supported with twenty, and the length with thirty
pillars. On the east, west, and north sides, it has certain walks or
galleries, forty cubits in length, and thirty in breadth. Under which
galleries there is a cell or storehouse, wherein oil, candles, mats, and other
such necessaries for the temple are laid up. Every night in this temple are
burnt nine hundred lights; for every arch has a several lamp, especially
those which extend through the mid-quire. Some arches there are that have 120.
candles apeece: there are likewise certain brasse-candlestickes so great and
with so many sockets, as they will hold each one fifteen hundred candles: and
these candlestickes are reported to have been made of bells, which the king of
Fez in times past took from Christians. About the walls of the said temple are
diverse pulpits, out of which those that are learned in the Mahumetan law
instruct the people. Their winter-lectures begin presently after sunrise, and
continue the space of an hour. But their summer-lectures hold on from the
sun going down, till an hour and a half within night. And here they teach
as well moral philosophy as the law of Mahumet. The summer-lectures are
performed by certain private and obscure persons; but in winter such only are
admitted to read, as be reputed their greatest clerks. All which readers and
professors are yearly allowed most liberal stipends. The priest of this
great temple is inioined only to read prayers, and faithfully to distribute
alms among the poor. Every festival day he bestows all such corn and
money as he has in his custody, to all poor people, according to their
need. The treasurer or collector of the revenues of this church has every day
a duckat for his pay. Likewise he has eight notaries or clerks under him;
every one of which gains six ducats a month: and other six clerks who
receive the rent of houses, shops, and other such places as belong to the
temple, having for their wages the twentieth part of all such rents and duties
as they gather. Moreover there belong to this temple twenty factors or bailies
of husbandry, that without the citie-walles have an eye to the laborers,
plowemen, vine-planters, and gardeners, and that provide them things
necessary: their gain is three ducats a month. Not far from the city are
about twenty lime-kils, and as many bricke-kils, serving for the reparation of
their temple, and of all houses thereto belonging. The revenues The revenues of
the great temple, and how they are bestowed.
of the said temple daily received, are two hundred ducats a day; the better
half whereof is laid out upon the particulars aforesaid. Also if there be any
temples in the city destitute of living, they must all be maintained at the
charges of this great temple: and then that which remains after all expenses,
is bestowed for the behoof of the commonwealth: for the people receive no
revenues at all. In our time the king commanded the priest of the said temple
to lend him an huge sum of money, which he never repaied again. Moreover in
the city of Fez are two most stately colleges, of which diverse rooms are
adorned with curious painting; all their beams are carved, their walls
consisting both of marble and freestone. Some colleges here are which contain
an hundred studies, some more, and some fewer, all which were built by diverse
kings of the Marin-familie. One there is among the rest most beautiful and
admirable to behold, which was erected by a certain king called Habu Henon.
Here is to be seen an excellent fountain of marble, the cesterne whereof
contains two pipes. Through this college runs a little stream in a most
clear and pleasant channel, the brims and edges whereof are workmanly framed
of marble, and stones of Majorica. Likewise here are three cloisters to walk
in, most curiously and artificially made, with certain eight-square pillars of
diverse colors to support them. And between pillar and pillar the arches are
beautifully ouercast with gold, azure, and diverse other colors; and the roof
is very artificially built of wood. The sides of these cloisters are so close,
that they which are without cannot see such as walk within. The walls round
about as high as a man can reach, are adorned with plaister-worke of Majorica.
In many places you may find certain verses, which declare what year the
college was built in, together with many epigrams in the founders commendation.
The letters of which verses are very great and black, so that they may be red
a far off. This college-gates are of brass most curiously carved, and so are
the doors artificially made of wood. In the chapel of this college stands
a certain pulpit mounted nine stairs high, which stairs are of iuorie and
eben. Some affirm, that the king having built this college, was desirous to
know how much money he had spent in building it; but after he had perused a
leaf or two of his account-booke, finding the sum of forty thousand
ducats, he rent it asunder, and threw it into the foresaid little river,
adding this sentence out of a certain Arabian writer: Each precious and
amiable thing, though it costeth dear, yet if it be beautiful, it cannot
choose but be good cheap: neither is any thing of too high a price, which
pleases a man's affection. Howbeit a certain treasurer of the kings, making a
particular account of all the said expenses, found that this excellent building
stood his master in 480000. ducats. The other colleges of Fez are somewhat like
unto this, having every one readers and professors, some of which read in the
forenoone, and some in the afternoon. In times past the students of these
colleges had their apparel and victuals allowed them for seven years, but now
they have nothing gratis but their chamber. For the war of Sahid destroyed
many possessions, whereby learning was The (...) of learning and learned men, a
principal cause of disorderly and base government.
maintained; so that now the greatest college of al has yearly but two
hundred, and the second but an hundred ducats for the maintenance of their
professors. And this perhaps may be one reason, among many, why the government
not only of Fez, but of all the cities in Africa, is so base. Now these
colleges are furnished with no scholars but such as are strangers, and live of
the citie-almes: and if any citizens dwell there, they are not above two or
three at the most. The professor being ready for his lecture, some of his
auditors reads a text, whereupon the said professor dilateth, and explaneth
obscure and difficult places. Sometimes also the scholars dispute before their
professor.

A description of the hospitals and bathes in the city of Fez.
MAny hospitals there are in Fez, no whit inferior, either for building or
beauty, unto the foresaid colleges. For in them whatsoever strangers came to
the city were entertained at the common charge for three days together. There
are likewise as fair and as stately hospitals in the suburbs. In times past
their wealth was marvelous great; but in the time of Sahids war, the king
standing in need of a great sum of money, was counseled by some of his
greedy courtiers to sell the livings of the said hospitals. Which when the
people would in no case yield unto, the kings orator or speaker, persuaded
them that all those livings were given by his majesty's predecessors, and
therefore (because when the wars were ended, they should soon recover all
again) that it were far better for them by that means to pleasure their
sovereign, then to let his kingly estate fall into so great danger. Whereupon
all the said livings being sold, the king was prevented by untimely and sudden
death before he could bring his purpose to effect: and so these famous
hospitals were deprived of all their maintenance. The poor indeed and
impotent people of the city are at this day relieved; but no strangers are
(...), save only learned men or gentlemen. Howbeit there is another hospital
for the relief of sick and diseased strangers, who have their diet only
allowed them, but no physician or medicine: certain women there are which
attend upon them, till they recover their former health, or die. In this
hospital likewise there is a place for frantic or distraught persons, where
they are bound in strong iron chains; whereof the part next unto their walks
is strengthened with mighty beams of wood and iron. The governor of these
distraught persons, when he brings them any sustenance, has a whip of
purpose to chastise those that offer to bite, strike, or play any mad part.
Sometimes it falls out that these frantic people will call unto them such
as pass by; declaring how unjustly they are there detained, and how cruelly
they are handled by the officers, when as notwithstanding they affirm
themselves to be restored unto their right mind. And having thus persuaded
the commers-by, approaching nearer and nearer unto them, at length they take
hold with one hand on their garments, and (like villans) with the other hand
they shamefully defile their faces and apparel with dung. And though all of
them have their priuies and close stools, yet would they be poisoned in their
own filth, if the servants did not often wash their lodgings: so that their
abominable and continual stink is the cause why citizens never visit them.
Likewise this hospital has many rooms for the purueiors, notaries, cooks,
and other officers John Leo in his youth a notarie of an hospital for two
years together.
belonging to the sick persons; who each of them have some small yearly
stipend. Being a young man I my self was notarie here for two years, which
office is worth three ducats a month.

In this city are more then an hundred bath-stoues very artificially and
stately built: which though they be not of equal bigness, yet are they all of
one fashion. Each stoue has four halles, without which are certain galleries
in an higher place, with five or six stairs to ascend unto them: here men put
off their apparel, and hence they go naked into the bath. In the midst they
always keep a cesterne full of water. First therefore they that mean to
bathe themselves must pass through a cold hall, where they use to temper hot
water and cold together, then they go into a room somewhat hotter, where the
servants cleanse and wash them; and last of all they proceed into a third
hot-house, where they sweat as much as they think good. Of the said water
they give unto every man two vessels only: but he that will have more and will
be extraordinarily washed, must give to the servant one Liardo at the least,
and to the master of the stoue but two farthings. The fire that heateth their
water is made of naught else but beasts dung: for which purpose many boys are
set on work to run up and down to stables, and thence to carry all the dung,
and to lay it on heaps without the towne-walles; which being parched in the
sun for two or three months together, they use for fuel. Likewise the
women have their stoues apart from the men. And yet some hot-houses serve both
for men and women, but at sundry times, namely for men from the third to the
fourteenth hour of the day, and the residue for women. While women (...)
bathing themselves, they hang out a rope at the first entrance of the house,
which is a sign for men, that they may then proceed no farther. Neither may
husbands here be permitted to speak with their own wives; so great a regard
they have of their honesty. Here men and women both, after they have done
bathing, use to banquet and make merry with pleasant music and singing.
Young striplings enter the bath stark naked without any shame, but men cover
their priuities with a linen cloth. The richer sort will not enter the common
bath, but that which is adorned and finely set forth, and which serves for
noblemen and gentlemen. When any one is to be bathed, they lay him along upon
the ground, anointing him with a certain ointment, and with certain
instruments doing away his filth. The richer sort have a carpet to lie on,
their head lying on a wooden cushion covered with the same carpet. Likewise
here are many barbers and chirurgions which attend to do their office. The
most part of these baths pertain to the temples and colleges, yielding unto
them a great sum of money for yearly rent; for some give an hundred, some an
hundred and fifty ducats a year. Neither must I here omit the festival day
which the servants and officers of the bathes yearly celebrate. Who with
trumpets and pipes calling their friends together, go forth of the town,
and there gather a wild onion, putting it in a certain brazen vessel, and
covering the same with a linen cloth wet in lee: afterward with a great noise
of trumpets and pipes they solemnly bring the said onion unto the hot-house
door, and there they hang it up in the little brazen vessel or lauer, saying
that this is a most happy boading or sign of good luck unto their stoue.
Howbeit I suppose it to be some such sacrifice, as the ancient Moors were
wont in times past, when they were destitute of laws and civility, to offer,
and that the same custom has remained till this very day. The like is to be
seen even among Christians, who celebrate many feasts whereof they can yield no
reason. Likewise every African town had their peculiar feast, which, when the
Christians once enioied Africa, were utterly abolished and done away.

Of the Innes of Fez.
IN this city are almost two hundred innes, the greatest whereof are in the
principal part of the city near unto the chief temple. Every of these innes
are three stories high, and contain an hundred and twenty or more chambers
apeece. Likewise each one has a fountain together with sinks and waterpipes,
which make auoidance of all the filth. Never, to my remembrance, did I see
greater buildings, except it were the Spanish college at Bologna, or the
palace of the Cardinal di San Giorgio at Rome: of which innes all the
chamber-doores have walks or galleries before them. And albeit the innes of
this city are very fair and large, yet they afford most beggarly
entertainment to strangers: for there are neither beds nor couches for a man to
lie upon, unless it be a course blanket and a mat. And if you will have any
victuals, you must go to the shambles your self, and buie such meat for your
host to dress, as your stomach stands-to. In these innes certain poor
widows of Fez, which have neither wealth nor friends to succor them, are
relieved: sometimes one, and sometimes two of them together are allowed a
chamber; for which courtesy they play both the chamberlaines and cooks of the
inn. The inne-keepers of Fez being all of one family called Elcheua, go
apparelled like women, and shave their beards, and are so delighted to imitate
women, that they will not only counterfeite their speech, but will sometimes
also sit down and spin. Each one of these has his concubine, whom he
accompanies as if she were his own lawful wife; albeit the said concubines
are not only ill-fauoured in countenance, but notorious for their bad life and
behavior. They buie and sell wine so freely, that no man controules them for
it. None resort hither but most lewd and wicked people, to the end they may
more boldly commit villainy. The inne-keepers have a consul over them, and they
pay tribute unto the governor of the city. And when the king has occasion to
send forth an army, then they, as being most meet for the purpose, are
constrained largely to victual the camp. Had not the streit law of history
enforced me to make relation of the foresaid particulars as they stand, I would
much rather have smothered such matters in silence, as tend so extremely to the
disgrace of Fez; which being reformed, there is not any city in all Africa, for
the honesty and good demeanor of the citizens, comparable thereunto. For the
very company of these inne-keepers is so odious and detestable in the sight of
all honest men, learned men, and merchants, that they will in no wise vouchsafe
to speak unto them. And they are firmly enioined not to enter into the
temple, into the burse, nor into any bath. Neither yet are they permitted to
resort unto those innes which are next unto the great temple, and wherein
merchants are usually entertained. All men in a manner are in utter detestation
of these wretches: but because the kings army has some use of them (as is
aforesaid) they are borne withal, whether the citizens will or no.

Of the mils of Fez.
IN this city are mils in four hundred places at least. And every of these
places contains five or six mils; so that there are some thousands of mils
in the whole city. Every mill stands in a large room Like unto our
horse-mils.
upon some strong pillar or post; whereunto many countrie-people use to resort.
Certain merchants there are in Fez, which hiring mils and shops, buie corn
and sell it ready ground unto the citizens, whereby they reap exceeding gain:
for the greatest part of the citizens being poor, and not able to lay up corn
sufficient in store, are feign to buie meal of them. But the richer sort buie
their own corn, and send it to some common mill, where they pay a shilling
for the grinding of each measure. All the said mils pertain either to the
temples or colleges: for he must be very rich that has a mill of his own; for
every mill gains the owner two ducats.

A description of the occupations, the shops, and the market.
EAch trade or occupation has a peculiar place allotted thereto, the
principal whereof are next unto the great temple: for there first you may
behold to the number of fowerscore notaries or scriueners shops, whereof some
join upon the temple, and the residue stand over against them: every of which
shops has always two notaries. Then westward there are about thirty
stationers or booke-sellers. The shoo-merchants which buie shoes and buskins
of the shoomakers, and sell them again to the citizens, inhabit on the south
side of the temple: and next unto them, such as make shoes for children only,
their shops being about fifty. On the east side dwell those that sell vessels
and other commodities made of brass. Over against the great gate of the said
temple stands the fruit-market, containing fifty shops, where no kind of
fruit is wanting. Next unto them stand the waxe-merchants, very ingenious and
cunning workmen, and much to be admired. Here are merchants factors likewise,
though they be but few. Then follows the herbe-market, wherein the
pome-citrons, and diverse kinds of green boughs and herbs do represent the
sweet and flourishing spring, and in this market are about twenty tauernes:
for they which drink wine, will shroud themselves under the shadie and
pleasant boughs. Next unto them stand the milke-sellers, who have great store
of such (...) vessels by them, as the Italians call Vasidi Maiolica: but their
milk they cause to be brought thither in certain vessels of wood bound with
iron-hoops, being narrow-mouthed and broad at the bottom. From these
milke-sellers some there are which daily buie great store of milk to make
butter thereof: and the residue of their milk they sell either crudded or
sometimes sower unto the citizens: so that I think there passes scarce one
day over their heads, wherein they utter not five and twenty tons of milk.
Next unto these are such as sell cotton, and they have about thirty shops:
then follow those that sell hemp, ropes, halters, and such other hempen
commodities. Then come you to the girdlers, and such as make pantofles, and
leather-bridles embrodered with silk: next, their shops adioine that make
sword-scabberds and caparisons for horses. Immediately after dwell those that
sell salt and lime. And upon them border an hundred shops of potters, who frame
all kind of earthen vessels adorned with diverse colors. Then come you to the
sadlers-shops: and next of all to the street of porters, who (as I suppose) are
The porters of Fez.
above three hundred: these porters have a consul or governor, who every week
allotteth unto part of them some set business. The gain which redoundeth
thereof they put into a coffer, dividing it at the weeks end among them, which
have wrought the same week. Strange it is to consider how exceedingly these
porters love one another; for when any of them deceaseth, the whole company
maintains his widow and fatherless children at their common charge, till
either she die, or marries a new husband. The children they carefully bring
up, till they have attained to some good art or occupation. Whosoever of them
marries and has children by his wife, inuiteth most part of his company unto
a banquet: who being thus invited, present each of them some gift or other unto
the good man, or his wife. No man can be admitted into their company, unless
first he banqueteth the principal men thereof: otherwise he is to have but
half a share of the common gain. Free they are from all tributes and
exactions: yea their bread is baked of free cost. If any of them be taken in
any heinous offense, he is not publicly but privately punished. While they are
at work they all wear short garments of one color: and at vacant times they
are apparelled as themselves think good: but howsoever it be, they are most
honest and faire-conditioned people. Next unto the porters company dwell the
chief cooks and victuallers. Here also stands a certain square house covered
with reed, wherein pease and turnep-rootes are to be sold, which are so greatly
esteemed of in Fez, that none may buie them of the countriepeople at the first
hand, but such as are appointed, who are bound to pay tole and tribute unto the
customers: and scarcely one day passes, wherein mo then 500. sacks of pease
and turnips are not sold. And albeit (as we have said) they are so much
esteemed of, yet are they sold at a most easy price: for a man may buie 30, or
at least 20. pound weight for one (...) in his Italian (...) calls it Baioco.
Liardo. Green beans likewise in time of year are sold good cheap. Not far
from the place before mentioned are certain shops, wherein lumps or steakes of
flesh beaten in a mortar, and the^ fried with oil, and seasoned with much
spice, are to be bought, every one of the said lumps or steakes being about the
bigness of a fig, and being made only of dried beef. On the north side of the
temple is a place whither all kind of herbs are brought to make sallets
withal: for which purpose there are 40. shops appointed. Next whereunto is The
place of smoke, so called by reason of continual smoke: here are certain
fritters or cakes fried in oil, like unto such as are called at Rome Pan
Melato. Of these fritters great store are daily uttered: for every day they use
to break their fasts therewith, and especially upon festiual days: unto which
fritters they add for a conclusion either rostmeat or honey: sometimes they
steep them in an homely kind of broth made of bruised meat, which being
sodden, they bray the second time in a mortar, making pottage thereof, and
coloring it with a kind of red earth. They roste their flesh not upon a spit,
but in an oven: for making two ouens one over another for the same purpose, in
the lower they kindle a fire, putting the flesh into the upper oven when it is
well het. You would not believe how finely their meat is thus roasted, for it
cannot be spoiled either by smoke, or too much heat: for they are all night
rosting it by a gentle fire, and in the morning they set it to sale. The
foresaid steakes and fritters they sell unto the citizens in so great
abundance, that they daily take for them mo the^ 200. ducats. For there are
15. shops which sell nothing else. Likewise here are sold certain fishes and
flesh fried, and a kind of excellent sauorie bread, tasting somewhat like a
fritter: which being baked with butter, they never eat but with butter and
honey Here also are the feet of certain beasts sodden; wherewith the
husbandmen betimes in the morning break their fast, and then hie them to their
labor. Next unto these are such as sell oil, salt, butter, cheese, olives,
pome-citrons and capers: their shops are full of fine earthen vessels, which
are of much greater value then the things contained in them. Their butter and
honey they sell by certain criers, which are porters appointed for the same
office. Neither do they admit every one to fill their vessels; but that work
is reserved for certain porters appointed to do it, which also fill the
measures of oil when merchants buie the same. The said vessels are sufficient
to contain an hundred and fifty pounds of butter; for so much butter the
countrie-people put into each vessel. Then follow the shambles, consisting of
about forty shops, wherein the butchers cut their flesh a pieces, and sell it
by weight. They kill no beasts within the shambles, for there is a place
allotted for this purpose near unto the river, where having once dressed their
flesh, they send it to the shambles by certain servants appointed for that
end. But before any butcher dare sell his flesh unto the citizens, he must
carry it to the governor of the shambles, who so soon as he sees the The
governor of the shambles in Fez.
flesh, he sets down in a piece of paper the price thereof, which they show
together with their meat unto the people; neither may they in any case exceed
the said price. Next unto the shambles stands the market where course
clothes are sold, which contains at least an hundred shops: the said cloth
is delivered unto certain criers (which are about threescore in number) who
carrying the cloth from shop to shop tell the price thereof, and for the
selling of every duckats-woorth they have two In the Italian copy they are
called Baiochi.
Liardos allowed them. This traffic of cloth indureth from noone till night,
to the merchants great advantage. Then follow their shops that scowre and sell
armor, swords, iauelings, and such like warlike instruments. Next unto them
stand the fishmongers, who sell most excellent and great fish, taken both in
the river of Fez and in other waters, exceeding cheap; for you may buie a
pound of fish for two farthings only. There is great abundance of the fish
called in Rome Laccia, and that especially from the beginning of October till
the month of April, as we will declare more at large when we come to speak
of the rivers. Next unto the fishmongers dwell such as make of a certain hard
reed, coopes and cages for fowls; their shops being about forty in number.
For each of the citizens uses to bring up great store of hens and capons.
And that their houses may not be defiled with hennes-dung, they keep them
continually in coopes and cages. Then follow their shops that sell liquide
soap, but they be not many, for you shall find more of them in other parts of
the city. Neither make they soap at Fez only, but also in the mountains
thereabout, from whence it is brought unto the city upon mules backs. Next of
all are certain of their shops that sell meal, albeit they are diversely
dispersed throughout the whole city. Next unto them are such as sell
seed-graine and seed-pulse: which you cannot buie of any citizen, because that
every one had rather keep his corn in store: many there are likewise in the
same place, that will carry pulse or corn to mules or horses, whithersoeuer
you will have them. A mule uses to carry three measures of pulse upon his
back (which the muliter is enioined to measure) in three sacks lying one upon
another. Then are there ten shops of them that sell straw. Next them is the
market where thread and hemp is to be sold, and where hemp uses to be kempt:
which place is built after the fashion of great houses, with four galleries or
spare-roomes round about it: in the first whereof they sell linen cloth, and
weigh hemp: in two other sit a great many women having abundance of
sale-threed, which is there sold by the criers, who carry the same up and
down from noone till night. In the midst of this place grow diverse mulberie
trees, affoordiug pleasant shade and shelter unto the merchants: and hither
such swarms of women resort, that a man shall hardly withdraw himself from
among them: good sport it is sometime to see how they will barret and scould
one at another: yea and oftentimes you shall see them fall together by the
ears. Let us now come to the west part; which stretches from the temple to
that gate that leads unto Mecnase. Next unto the smokie place before
mentioned, their habitations directly stand, that make leather-tankards, to
draw water out of wels; of whom there are some fourteen shops. Unto these
adioine such as make wicker-vessels and other, to lay up meal and corn in:
and these enjoy about thirty shops. Next them are 150. shops of tailors. And
next the tailors are those that make leather-shieldes, such as I have often
seen brought into Europe. Then follow twenty shops of laundresses or washers,
being people of a base condition; to whom the citizens that have not maids of
their own, carry their shirtes and other foul linen, which after few days
are restored unto them so clean and white as it is wonderful. These
laundresses have diverse shops adioining together in the same place: but here
and there throughout the city are above two hundred families of such persons.
Next unto the laundresses are those that make trees for saddles; who dwell
likewise in great numbers eastwarde right in the way to the college founded by
king Abuhinan. Upon these adioine about forty shops of such as work stirrops,
spurs, and bridles, so artificially, as I think the like are not to be seen
in Europe. Next stands their street, that first rudely make the said
stirrops, bridles, and spurs. From thence you may go into the street of
sadlers, which cover the saddles before mentioned threefold with most excellent
leather: the best leather they lay uppermost, and the woorst beneath, and that
with notable workmanship; as may be seen in most places of Italy. And of them
there are more then an hundred shops. Then follow their long shops that make
pikes and lances. Next stands a rock or mount, having two walks thereupon;
the one whereof leads to the east gate, and the other to one of the kings
palaces, where the kings sisters, or some other of his kindred are usually
kept. But this is by the way to be noted, that all the foresaid shops or market
begin at the great temple: howbeit, that I might not inuert my set-order, I
have only described those places that are round about the said temple, minding
last of all to speak of the merchants station or burse.

Of the station or burse of merchants in Fez.
THis burse you may well call a city, which being walled round about has
twelve gates, and before every gate an iron chain, to keep horses and carts
from coming in. The said burse is divided into 12. several wards or parts:
two whereof are allotted unto such shoomakers as make shoes only for noblemen
and gentlemen, and two also to silke-merchants or haberdashers, that sell
ribands, garters, skarfes, and such other like ornaments; and of these there
are about fifty shops. Others there are that sell silk only for the
embrodering of shirts, cushions, and other such furniture made of cloth,
possessing almost as many shops as the former. Then follow those that make
women's girdles of course wool (which some make of silk) but very grossly,
for I think they are (...) then two fingers thick, so that they may serve
almost for cables to a ship. Next unto these girdlers are such as sell woollen
and linen cloth brought out of Europe: which have also silke-stuffes, caps,
and other like commodities to sell. Having passed these, you come to them that
sell mats, mattresses, cushions, and other things made of leather. Next
adioineth the customers office; for their cloth is sent about by certain
criers to be sold, who before they can pass, must go to the customers to
have the said cloth sealed, and to pay toll unto the customers. Criers here
are, to the number of sixty, which for the crying of every cloth have one Or
(...).
Liardo allowed them. Next of all dwell the tailors, and that in three several
streets. Then come you to the linnen-drapers, which sell smocks and other
apparel for women: and these are accounted the richest merchants in all Fez,
for their wares are the most gainful of all others. Next unto these are
certain woollen garments to be sold, made of such cloth as is brought thither
out of Europe. Every afternoon cloth is sold in this place by the criers,
which is lawful for any man to do, when necessary occasion urges him. Last
of all is that place where they use to sell wrought shirts, towels, and other
embrodered works; as also where carpets, beds, and blankets are to be sold.

The reason why this part of the city was called Caesaria.
THe foresaid burse or station of merchants was in times past called Caesaria,
according to the name of that renowned conqueror (...) Caesar: the reason
whereof some affirm to be; because all the cities of Barbary were in those
days first subject to the Romans, and then to the Goths. And each city
always had either Romans or Goths to receive and take charge of the tribute.
Howbeit because the people often made civil A (...) used in Africa how to
keep the princes tribute and merchants goods in security.
wars and assaults upon them, their determination was in every city to build
some strong walled place, where both the tribute and the principal goods of
the citizens might remain in safety: hoping by this means that the citizens
would be as careful of the princes goods as of their own. Which course had
the Italians imitated, they had never been spoiled so often of their goods.
For in civil wars it many times befalls, that the greedy soldiers not being
satisfied with the enemies goods, will prey upon the wealth of their friends.

Of the grocers, apothecaries, and other tradesmen, and (...) of Fez.
NExt unto the said burse, on the north side, in a straight lane, stand an
hundred and fifty grocers and apothecaries shops, which are fortified on both
sides with two strong gates. These shops are guarded in the night season by
certain hired and armed watchmen, which keep their station with lanternes and
mastiues. The said apothecaries can make neither (...), ointments, nor
electuaries: but such things are made at home by the physicians, and are of
them to be bought. The physicians houses adioine for the most part unto the
apothecaries: howbeitvery few of the people know either the physician or the
use of his physic. The shops here are so artificially built and adorned, that
the like (I think) are no where else to be found. John Leo was at Tauris in
Persia.
Being in Tauris a city of Persia, I remember that I saw diverse stately shops
curiously built (...) certain galleries, but very dark, so that (in my
judgment) they be far inferior unto the shops of Fez. Next the apothecaries
are certain artificers that make combs of box and other wood. Eastward of
the apothecaries dwell the needle-makers, possessing to the number of fifty
shops. Then follow those that turn iuorie, and such other matter, who (because
their craft is practiced by some other artizans) are but few in number. Unto
the turners adioine certain that sell meal, soap, and brooms: who dwelling
next unto the threed-market beforementioned, are scarce twenty shops in all:
for the residue are dispersed in other places of the city, as we will
hereafter declare. Amongst the cotton-merchants are certain that sell
ornaments for tents, and beds. Next of all stand the fowlers, who, though they
be but few, yet are they stored with all kind of choice and dainty fowls:
whereupon the place is called the fowlers market. Then come you to their shops
that sell cords and ropes of hemp: and then to such as make high cork
slippers for noblemen and gentlemen to walk the streets in, when it is foul
weather: these corke-slippers are finely trimmed with much silk, and most
excellent upper leathers, so that the cheapest will cost a duckat, (...) some
there are of ten ducats, and some of five and twenty ducats price. Such
slippers as are accounted most fine and costly are made of black and white
mulberie-tree, of black walnut-tree, and of the Iujubatree, albeit the
corke-slippers are the most durable and strong. Unto these adioine ten shops of
Spanish Moors, which make crosse-bowes: as also those that make broomes of a
certain wild palm tree, such as are daily brought out of (...) to Rome.
These broomes they cartie about the city in a great basket, either selling
them, or exchanging them for bran, ashes, or old shoes: the bran they sell
again to shepherds, the ashes to such as white thread, and the old shoes to
cobblers. Next unto them are smithes that make nails; and coopers which make
certain great vessels in form of a bucket, having corne-measures to sell
also: which measures, when the officer, appointed for the same purpose, has
made trial of, he is to receive a farthing apeece for his fee. Then follow the
wooll-chapmen, who having bought wool of the butchers, put it forth unto
others to be scowred and washed: the sheepe-skins they themselves dress: but
as for oxe-hides they belong to another occupation, and are tanned in another
place. Unto these adioine such as make certain langols or withs, which the
Africans put upon their horses feet. Next of all are the braziers; then such
as make weights and measures; and those likewise that make instruments to card
wool or flax. At length you descend into a long street, where men of diverse
occupations dwell together, some of which do polish and enamell stirrops,
spurs, and other such commodities, as they receive from the smithes roughly
and rudely hammered. Next whom dwell certain cartwrights, plow-wrights,
mill-wrights, and of other like occupations. Diers have their abode by the
rivers side, and have each of them a most clear fountain or cesterne, to wash
their silke-stuffes in. Over against the diers dwell makers of bulwarks or
trenches, in a very large place, which being planted with shadie mulberie-trees
is exceeding pleasant in the summertime. Next them are a company offarriers,
that shoe mules and horses: and then those that make the iron-worke of
crosse-bowes. Then follow smithes that make horse-shooes; and last of all
those that white linen cloth: and here the west part of the city ends,
which in times past (as is aforesaid) was a city by it self, and was built
after the city on the east side of the river.

A description of the second part of Fez.
THe second part of Fez situate eastward, is beautified with most stately
palaces, temples, houses, and colleges; albeit there are not so many trades and
occupations as in the part before described. For here are neither merchants,
tailors, shoomakers, etc. but of the meaner sort. Here are notwithstanding
thirty shops of grocers. Near unto the walls dwell certain bricke-burners
and potters: and not far from thence is a great market of white earthen
vessels, platters, cups, and dishes. Next of all stands the corne-market,
wherein are diverse granaries to lay up corn. Over against the great temple
there is a broad street paued with brick, round about which diverse handy-crafts
and occupations are exercised. There are likewise many other trades diversely
dispersed over this east part of the city. The drapers and grocers have
certain peculiar places allotted unto them. In this east part of Fez likewise
there are five hundred and twenty weauers houses, very stately and sumptuously
built: having in each of them many worke-houses and loomes, which yield great
rent unto the owners. (...) there are (by report) in this city twenty
thousand, and as many millers. Moreover in this part of Fez are an hundred
shops for the whiting of thread; the principal whereof being situate upon the
river, are exceedingly well furnished with kettles, cauldrons, and other such
vessels: here are likewise many great houses to saw wood in, which work is
performed by Christian captives, and whatsoever wages they earne, redoundeth
unto their Lords and masters. These Christian captives are not suffered to
rest from their labors, but only upon fridaies, and upon eight several days
of the year besides, whereon the Moors feasts are solemnized. Here also are
the common stews for harlots, which are favored by great men, and sometime by
the chief governors of the city. Likewise there are certain vintners, who
are freely permitted to keep harlots, and to take filthy hire for them. Here
are also more then six hundred clear fountains walled round about and most
charily kept, every one of which is severally conveyed by certain pipes unto
each house, temple, college, and hospital: and this fountaine-water is
accounted the best: for that which comes out of the river is in summer
oftentimes dried up: as likewise when the conducts are to be cleansed, the
course of the river must of necessity be turned out of the city. Wherefore
every family uses to fetch water out of the said fountains, and albeit in
summertime the chief gentlemen use riuer-water, yet they will often call for
fountaine-water, because it is more cool and pleasant in taste. But in the
springtime it is nothing so. These fountains have their original for the
most part from the west and south, for the north part is all full of mountains
and marble-rocks, containing certain caves or cells, wherein corn may be kept
for many years; of which caves some are so large, that they will hold two
hundred bushels of corn. The citizens dwelling near those caves, and such as
possess them, do sufficiently maintain themselves in taking yearly every
hundred bushel for rent. The south part of east Fez is almost half destitute
of inhabitants: howbeit the gardens abound with fruits and flowers of all
sorts. Every garden has an house belonging thereunto, and a
christall-fountaine environed with roses and other odoriferous flowers and
herbs; so that in the springtime a man may both satisfy his eyes, and solace
his mind in visiting this part of the city: and well it may be called a
Paradise, sithence the noblemen do here reside from the month of April till
the end of September. Westward, that is, toward the kings palace, stands a
castle built by a king of the Luntune-familie, resembling in bigness an whole
town: wherein the kings of Fez, before the said palace was built, kept their
royal residence. But after new Fez began to be built by the Marinkings, the
said castle was left only to the governor of the city. Within this castle
stands a stately temple built (as aforesaid) what time it was inhabited by
princes and nobles, many places being afterward defaced and turned into
gardens: howbeit certain houses were left unto the governor, partly to dwell
in, and partly for the deciding of (...). Here is likewise a certain prison
for captives supported with many pillars, and being so large, that it will hold
(as diverse are of opinion) three thousand men. Neither are there any several
rooms in this prison: for at Fez one prison serves for all. By this castle
runs a certain river very commodious for the governor.

Of the magistrates, the administration of justice; and of the apparel used in
Fez.
IN the city of Fez are certain particular judges and magistrates: and there
is a governor that defines civil controversies, and gives sentence against
malefactors. Likewise there is a judge of the canon law, who has to do with
all matters concerning the Mahumetan religion. A third judge there is also that
deals about marriages and diuorcements, whose authority is to hear all
witnesses, and to give sentence accordingly. Next unto them is the high
advocate, unto whom they appeal from the sentence of the said judges, when as
they do either mistake themselves, or do ground their sentence upon the
authority of some inferior doctor. The governor gains a great sum of
money by condemning of parties at several times. Their manner of proceeding
against a malefactor is this: The punishment of malefactors in Fez.
having given him an hundred or two hundred stripes before the governor, the
executioner puts an iron-chaine about his neck, and so leads him
starke-naked (his priuities only excepted) through all parts of the city:
after the executioner follows a sergeant, declaring unto all the people what
fact the guilty person has committed, till at length having put on his
apparel again, they carry him back to prison. Sometimes it falls out that
many offenders chained together are led about the city: and the governor for
each malefactor thus punished, receives one duckat and one fourth part; and
likewise at their first entrance into the iaile, he demands of each one a
certain duty, which is paid particularly unto him by diverse merchants and
artificers appointed of purpose. And amongst his other livings, he gathers
out of a certain mountain seven thousand ducats of yearly revenue: so that
when occasion serves, he is at his proper costs to find the king of Fez three
hundred horses, and to give them their pay. Those which follow the canon-lawe
have neither stipend nor reward allowed them: for it is forbidden by the law
of Mahumet, that the judges of his religion should reap any commodity or fees
by their office; but that they should live only by reading of lectures, and
by their priesthood. In this faculty are many advocates and proctors, which
are extreme idiotes, and utterly void of all good learning. There is a place
also in Fez whereinto the judges vseto cast the citizens, for debt, or for some
light offense. In all this city are four officers or sergeants only; who
from midnight till two a clock in the morning do walk about all parts of
the city; neither have they any stipend, but a certain fee of such
malefactors as they lead about in chains, according to the quality of every
man's crime; moreover, they are freely permitted to sell wine, and to keep
harlots. The said governor has neither scribes nor notaries, but pronounces
all sentences by word of mouth. One only there is that gathers customs and
tributes over all the city, who daily paieth to the kings use thirty ducats.
This man appoints certain substitutes to watch at every gate, where nothing,
be it of never so small value, can pass before some tribute be paid. Yea
sometime they go forth of the city to meet with the carriers and muliters
upon the high ways, to the end they may not conceal nor closely convey any
merchandise into the city. And if they be taken in any deceit, they pay
double. The set order or proportion of their custom is this, namely to pay two
ducats for the worth of an hundred: for Onix-stones, which are brought hither
in great plenty, they pay one fourth part: but for wood, corn, oxen, and
hens, they give nothing at all. Neither at the entering of the city do they
pay any tribute for rams, but at the shambles they give two Or Baiochi.
Liardos apeece, and to the governor of the shambles one. The said governor
of the shambles has always twelve men waiting upon him, and oftentimes he
rides about the city to examine the weight of bread, and finding any bread to
fail of the due weight, he causes the baker to be beaten with cudgels, and to
be led in contempt up and down the city. The said office was wont to be
allotted unto men of singular honesty; but now adays every ignorant and lewd
person enioieth it. The citizens of Fez go very ciuilly and decently attired,
in the springtime wearing garments made of outlandish cloth: over these
shirtes they wear a iacket or cassocke being narrow and halfe-sleeued,
whereupon they wear a certain wide garment, close before on the breast. Their
caps are thin and single, like unto the night-caps used in Italy, saving
that they cover not their ears: these caps are covered with a certain skarfe,
which being twice wreathed about their head and beard, hangs by a knot. They
wear neither hose nor breeches, but in the springtime when they ride a
journey they put on boots: mary the poorer sort have only their cassocke, and
a mantle over that called Or (...).
Barnussi, and a most course cap. The doctors and ancient gentlemen wear a
certain garment with wide sleeves, somewhat like to the gentlemen of Venice.
The common sort of people are for the most part clad in a kind of course white
cloth. The women are not altogether unseemly apparelled, but in sommer-time
they wear nothing save their smocks only. In winter they wear such a wide
sleeued garment, being close at the breast, as that of the men before
mentioned. When they go abroad, they put on certain long breeches, wherewith
their legs are all covered, having also, after the fashion of Syria, a veil
hanging down from their heads, which covers their whole bodies. On their
faces likewise they wear a mask with two little holes only for their eyes,
to peep out at. Their ears they adorn with golden eare-rings and with most
precious jewels: the meaner sort wear (...) of silver and gilt only. Upon
their arms the ladies and gentlewomen wear golden bracelets, and the residue
silver, as likewise gold or siluer-rings upon their legs, according to each
ones estate and ability.

Of their manner of eating and drinking.
LEt us now speak somewhat of their victuals and manner of eating. The common
sort set on the pot with fresh meat twice every week: but the gentlemen and
richer sort every day, and as often as they list. They take three meals a day:
their breakefast consists of certain fruits and bread, or else of a kind of
liquid pap made like unto frumentie: in winter they sup off the broth of sal
flesh thickened with course meal. To dinner they have flesh, sallets, cheese,
and olives: but in summer they have greater cheer. Their supper is easy of
digestion, consisting of bread, melons, grapes, or milk: but in winter they
have sodden flesh, together with a kind of meat called Cuscusu, which being
made of a lump of dowe is set first upon the A kind of (...) called Cuscusu.
fire in certain vessels full of holes, and afterward is tempered with butter
and pottage. Some also use often to have roste-meat. And thus you see after
what sort both the gentlemen and common people lead their lives: albeit the
(...) fare somewhat more daintily: but if you compare them with the noblemen
and gentlemen of Europe, they may seem to be miserable and base fellows; not
for any want or scarcity of victuals, but for want of good manners and
cleanlines. The table whereat they sit is low, uncovered, and filthy: seats
they have none but the bare ground, neither knives or (...) but only their ten
talons. The said Cuscusu is set before them all in one only platter, whereout
as well gentlemen as others take it not with spoones, but with their claws
five. The meat and pottage is putal in one dish; out of which every one raketh
with his greasy fists what he thinks good: you shall never see knife upon the
table, but they tear and greedily devour their meat like hungry dogs.
Neither does any of them desire to drink before he has well stuffed his
panch; and then will he sup off a cup of cold water as big as a milke-bowle.
The doctors indeed are somewhat more orderly at meals: but, to tell you the
very truth, in all Italy there is no gentleman so mean, which for fine diet
and stately furniture excels not the greatest potentates and lords of all
Africa.

The manner of solemnizing marriages.
AS touching their marriages, they observe these courses following. So soon as
the maids father has espoused her unto her lover, they go forthwith like
bride and bridegroom to church, accompanied with their parents and kinsfolks,
and call likewise two notaries with them to make record before all that are
present of the covenants and dowry. The meaner sort of people usually give for
their daughters dowry thirty ducats and a woman-slaue of fifteen ducats
price; as likewise a partie-coloured garment embrodered with silk, and
certain other silk skarfs or iags, to wear upon her head in stead of a hood
or veil; then a pair of fine shoes, and two excellent pair of startups; and
lastly many pretty knackes curiously made of silver and other metals, as namely
combs, perfuming-pans, bellows, and such other trinkets as women have in
estimation. Which being done, all the guests present are invited to a banquet,
whereunto for great dainties is brought a kind of bread fried and tempered
with honey, which we have before described; then they bring roste-meate to the
board, all this being at the bridegroomes cost: afterward the brides father
makes a banquet in like sort. Who if he bestow on his daughter some apparel
besides her dowry, it is accounted a point of liberality. And albeit the
father promises but thirty ducats only for a dowry, yet will he sometimes
bestow, in apparel and other ornaments belonging to women, two hundred, yea
sometimes three hundred ducats besides. But they seldom give an house, a
vineyarde, or a field for a dowry. Moreover upon the bride they bestow three
gowns made of costly cloth; and three others of silk chamlet, or of some
other excellent stuff. They give her smockes likewise curiously wrought, with
fine vailes, and other embrodered vestures; as also pillowes and cushions of
the best sort. And besides all the former gifts, they bestow eight carpets or
couerlets on the bride, four whereof are only for seemelines to spread upon
their presses and cupboords: two of the courser they use for their beds; and
the other two of leather, to lay upon the floor of their bedchambers. Also
they have certain rugs of about twenty else compass or length; as likewise
three quilts being made of linen and woollen on the one side, and stuffed with
flocks on the other side, which they use in the night in manner following.
With the one half they cover themselves, and the other half they lay under
them: which they may easily do, when as they are both ways about ten else
long. Unto the former they add as many couerlets of silk very curiously
embrodered on the vpperside, and beneath lined double with linen and cotton.
They bestow likewise white couerlets to use in summertime only: and lastly
they bestow a woollen hanging divided into many parts, and finely wrought, as
namely with certain pieces of gilt leather; whereupon they sow iags of
partie-coloured silk, and upon every iag a little ball or button of silk,
whereby the said hanging may for ornaments sake be fastened unto a wall. Here
you see what be the appurtenances of their dowries; wherein some do strive so
much to excel others, that oftentimes many gentlemen have brought themselves
unto poverty thereby. Some Italians think that the husband bestows a dowry
upon his wife; but they altogether mistake the matter. The bridegroom being
ready to carry home his bride, causes her to be placed in a wooden cage or
cabinet eight-square covered with silk, in which she is carried by porters,
her parents and kinsfolks following, with a great noise of trumpets, pipes,
and drums, and with a number of torches; the bridegroomes kinsmen go before
with torches, and the brides kinsfolks follow after: and so they go unto the
great market place, and having passed by the temple, the bridegroom takes his
leave of his father in law and the rest, hying him home with all speed, and in
his chamber expecting the presence of his spouse. The father, brother, and
uncle of the bride lead her unto the chamber-doore, and there deliver her with
one consent unto the mother of the bridegroom: who, as soon as she is entered,
touches her foot with his, and forthwith they depart into a several room
by themselves. In the mean season the banquet is coming forth: and a certain
woman stands before the (...) door, expecting till the bridegroom having
defloured his bride reaches her a napkin stained with blood, which napkin she
carries incontinent and shows to the guestes, proclaiming with a loud voice,
that the bride was ever till that time an unspotted and pure virgin. This
woman together with other women her companions, first the parents of the
bridegroom and then of the bride do honorably entertain. But if the bride
be found not to be a virgin, the marriage is made frustrate, and she with great
disgrace is turned home to her parents. At complete marriages they make for the
most part three bankets: the first the same day when the bridegroom and bride
are joined in wedlock; the second the day following for women only; and the
third seven days after; whereat all the kinsfolks and friends of the bride are
present; and this day the brides father, according to his ability, sendes
great store of dainty dishes unto his son in law: but so soon as the new
married man goes forth of the house (which is for the most part on the
seventh day after the marriage) he buieth great plenty of fishes, which he
causes his mother or some other woman to cast upon his wives feet; and this
they, from an ancient superstitious custom, take for a good boading. Likewise
at the bridegroomes fathers they use to make two other feasts; the one upon the
day before the bride is married; and so that night they spend in dancing and
disport. The morrow after a company of women go to dress the bride, to comb
her locks, and to paint her cheeks with vermillion; her hands and her feet
they die black, but all this painting presently loses the fresh hew; and
this day they have another banquet. The bride they place in the highest room
that she may be seen of all, and then those that dressed the bride are
condignely entertained. Being come to the bridegroomes house, his parents
salute the new bride with certain great cups full of new wine and cakes, with
other iuncats, (which we will here pass over in silence) all which are
bestowed upon the bridegroomes companions. The same night which we said was
spent in dancing, there are present at the bridall-house certain minstrels
and singers, which by turns sometimes use their instruments and sometimes
voice-musicke: they dance always one by one, and at the end of each galliard
they bestow a largess upon the musitions. If any one will honor the dancer, he
bids him kneel down before him, and having fastened pieces of money all over
his face, the musitions presently take it off for their fee. The women dance
alone without any men, at the noise of their own musitions. All these things
use to be performed when the bride is a maid. But the marriages of The marriage
of widows.
widows are concluded with less ado. Their cheer is boiled beef and
mutton, and stued hens, with diverse iuncating dishes among. In stead of
trenchers, the guestes being ten or twelve in number, have so many great round
platters of wood set before them. And this is the common custom of gentlemen
and merchants. The meaner sort present their guestes with certain sops or
bruesse of bread like unto a pan-cake, which being dipped in flesh-pottage,
they eat out of a great platter not with spoones but with their fingers only:
and round about each great platter stand to the number of ten or twelve
persons. Likewise they make a solemn feast at the circumcision of their male
children, which is upon the seventh day after their birth; The circumcision of
their children.
and at this feast the circumciser, together with all their friends and
kinsfolks is present: which being done, each one, according to his ability,
bestows a gift upon the circumciser in manner following. Every man lays his
money upon a lads face which the circumciser brought with him. Whereupon the
lad calling every one by his name, gives them thanks in particular: and then
the infant being circumcised, they spend that day with as great iollitie as a
day of marriage. But at the birth of a daughter they show not so much alacrity.

Of their rites observed upon festival dates, and their manner of mourning for
the dead.
AMong the people of Fez there have remained certain relics (...) Christian
ceremonies (...) among the (...).
of festival days instituted of old by the Christians; whereupon they use
certain ceremonies which themselves understand not. Upon Christmas even they
eat a sallet made of diverse herbs: they sees likewise that night all kind of
pulse, which they feed upon for great dainties. Upon New-yeeres day the
children go with maskes and vizards on their faces to the houses of gentlemen
and merchants, and have fruits given them for singing certain carols or songs.
When as the feast of Saint John Baptist is hallowed among Christians, you shall
here see all about great store of fires made with straw. And when their
childrens teeth begin to grow, they make another feast called, according to the
Latins, Dentilla. They have also many other rites and customs of divining or
soothsaying, the like whereof I have seen at Rome and in other cities of
Italy. As touching their feasts prescribed by the Mahumetan law, they are at
large set down in that brief treatise which we have written concerning the
same law. The women having by death lost Their funerals.
their husbands, fathers, or any other of their dear friends, assemble
forthwith a great multitude of their own sex together, who stripping
themselves out of their own attire, put on most vile sackcloth, and defile
their faces with much dirt: then call they certain men clad in women's attire,
bringing great fower-square drums with them, at the noise of which drums the
women-mourners sing a funeral song, tending as much as may be, to the
commendation of the party deceased: and at the end of every verse, the said
women utter most hideous shrikes and outcries, tearing their hair, and with
much lamentation beating their cheeks and breasts, till they be all-imbrued
with blood: and so these heathenish superstitions continue for seven whole
days together. At which seven days end they surcease their mourning for the
space of 40. days, and then they begin anew to torment themselves for three
days together in manner aforesaid: howbeit these kinds of obsequies are
observed only by the baser people, but the gentlemen and better sort behave
themselves more modestly. At this time all the widows friends come about her
to comfort her, and send diverse kinds of meats unto her: for in the mourning
house they may dress no meat at all, till the dead corpse be carried forth.
The woman her self that loses her husband, father, or brother, never goes
forth with the funeral. But how they wash and bury the dead corpse, and what
superstitions they use thereabout, you shall find recorded in my little
treatise above mentioned.

Of their doue-houses.
Diverse there are in this city, that take much pleasure in keeping of doves,
which are here in great plenty, of all colors. These doves they keep in
certain cages or lockers on the tops of their houses, which lockers they set
open twice a day, to wit, morning and evening, delighting greatly to see them
fly, for those that out-flie the residue are accounted the best. Oftentimes it
falls out, that neighbors doves will be mingled together, for which cause
you shall see the owners go together by the ears. Some have a certain net
bound unto two long canes, wherewith they use to take their neighbors doves,
as they come flying forth of their lovers. Amongst the colliers you shall find
seven or eight shops only of those that sell doves.

Their manner of gaming at Fez.
THe citizens use most of all to play at chesse, and that from ancient times.
Other games there are also, but very rude, and used only by the common people.
At certain times of the year the boys of one street will fight with clubs
against the boys of another street, and that sometimes with so great fury,
that they (...) themselves to other weapons and slay one another, especially
upon their festival days, what time they will challenge and provoke one
another forth of the citie-walles. And having fought hard all the whole day,
at night they fall to throwing of stones: till at length the citie-officers
come upon them, taking some, and beating them publicly throughout the city.
Sometimes it falls (...), that the young striplings arming themselves, and
going by night out of the city, range up and down the fields and gardens: and
if the contrary faction of yoonkers and they mere, it is wonderful what a
bloody skirmish ensues: howbeit they are often most severely punished for it.

Of the African poets.
IN Fez there are diverse most excellent poets, which make verses in their own
mother tongue. Most of their poems and songs entreat of love. Every year they
pen certain verses in the commendation of Mahumet, especially upon his
birthday: for then betimes in the morning they resort unto the palace of the
chief judge or governor, ascending his tribunall-seate, and from thence
reading their verses to a great audience of people: and he Rewards for poets
in Fez.
whose verses are most elegant and pithie, is that year proclaimed prince of
the poets. But when as the kings of the Marin-familie prospered, they used to
inuit all the learned men of the city unto their palace; and honorably
entertaining them, they commanded each man in their hearing to recite their
verses to the commendation of Mahumet: and he that was in all men's opinions
esteemed the best poet, was rewarded by the king with an hundred ducats, with
an excellent horse, with a woman-slaue, and with the kings own robes wherewith
he was then apparelled: all the rest had fifty ducats apeece given them, so
that none departed without the kings liberality: but an hundred and thirty
years are expired since this custom, together with the majesty of the Fessan
kingdom, decayed.

A description of the grammar-schooles in Fez.
OF schools in Fez for the instructing of children, there are almost two
hundred, every one of which is in fashion like a great hall. The schoolemasters
teach their children to write and read not out of a book, but out of a
certain great table. Every day they expound one sentence of the Alcoran: and
having red quite through they begin it again, repeating it so often, til they
have most firmly committed the same to memory: which they do right well in
the space of 7. years. Then read they unto their scholars some part of
orthographie: howbeit both this and the other parts of Grammar are far more
exactly taught in the colleges, then in these triuiall schools. The said
schoolemasters are allowed a very small stipend; but when their boys have
learned some part of the Alcoran, they present certain gifts unto their
master, according to each ones ability. Afterward so soon as any boy has
perfectly learned the whole Alcaron, his father inuiteth all his sons
schoolefellowes unto a great banquet: and his son in costly apparel rides
through the street upon a gallant horse, which horse and apparel the governor
of the royal citadell is bound to lend him. The rest of his schoole-fellowes
being mounted likewise on horseback accompany him to the banketing house,
singing diverse songs to the praise of God and of Mahumet. Then are they brought
to a most sumptuous banquet, whereat all the kinsfolks of the foresaid boys
father are usually present: every one of whom bestows on the schoolmaster
some small gift, and the boys father gives him a new suit of apparel. The
said scholars likewise use to celebrate a feast upon the birthday of Mahumet,
and then their fathers are bound to send each man a torch unto the school:
whereupon every boy carries a torch in his hand, some of which weigh thirty
pound. These torches are most curiously made, being adorned round about with
diverse fruits of wax, which being lighted betimes in the morning do burn
till sunrise, in the mean while certain singers resound the praises of
Mahumet, and so soon as the sun is up, all their solemnity cease: this
day uses to be very gainful unto the schoolemasters, for they sell the
remnant of the wax upon the torches for an hundred ducats, and sometimes for
more. None of them paies any rent for his school: for all their schools were
built many years ago, and were freely bestowed for the training up of youth.
Whatsoever ornaments or toys are upon the (...), the schoolemasters divide
them among their scholars and among the singers. Both in these common schools
and also in the colleges they have two days of recreation every week, wherein
they neither teach nor study.

Of the fortune tellers and some other artizans in Fez.
WE have said nothing as yet of the leather-dressers, who have diverse mansions
by the rivers side, paying for every skin an halfepeny custom, which amounts
yearly almost unto three hundred ducats. Here are likewise chirurgions and
barbers, whom, because they are so few, I thought not to have mentioned in this
place. Now let us speak of the fortune tellers and diuiners, of whom there is
a great number, and three kinds. For one Three sorts of diuiners in Fez.
sort uses certain Geomanticall figures. Others pouring a drop of oil into a
vial or glass of water, make the said water to be transparent and bright,
wherein, as it were in a mirror, they affirm that they see huge swarms of
devils that resemble an whole army, some whereof are traveling, some are
passing over a river, and others fighting a land-battell, whom when the diuiner
sees at quiet, he demands such questions of them as he is desirous to be
resolved of: and the devils give them answer with beckning, or with some
gesture of their hands or eyes: so inconsiderate and damnable is their
credulity in this behalf. The foresaid glasse-viall they will deliver into
childrens hands scarce of eight years old, of whom they will ask whether they
see this or that devil. Many of the city are so besotted with these vanities,
that they spend great sums upon them. The third kind of diuiners are
women-witches, which are affirmed to have familiarity with devils: some devils
they call red, some white, and some black devils: and when they will tell any
man's fortune, they perfume themselves with certain odours, saying, that then
they possess themselves with that devil which they called for: afterward
changing their voice, they feign the devil to speak within them: then they
which come to enquire, ought with great fear and trembling ask these vile and
abominable witches such questions as they mean to propound, and lastly
offering some fee unto the devil, they depart. But the wiser and honester sort
of people call these women Sahaoat, which in Latin signifies Fricatrices,
because they have a damnable custom to commit unlawful Venerie among
themselves, which I cannot express in any modester terms. If fair women come
unto them at any time, these abominable witches will burn in lust toward
them no otherwise then lusty yoonkers do toward young maids, and will in
the devils behalf demand for a reward, that they may lie with them: and so
by this means it often falls out, that thinking thereby to fulfill the
devils command they lie with the witches. Yea some there are, which being
allured with the delight of this abominable vice, will desire the company of
these witches, and faining themselves to be sick, will either call one of the
witches home to them, or will send their husbands for the same purpose: and so
the witches perceiving how the matter stands, will say that the woman is
possessed with a devil, and that she can no way be cured, unless she be
admitted into their society. With these words her silly husband being
persuaded, does not only permit her so to do, but makes also a sumptuous
banquet unto the damned crew of witches: which being done, they use to dance
very strangely at the noise of drums: and so the poor man commits his false
wife to their filthy disposition. Howbeit some there are that will soon
conjure the devil with a good cudgel out of their wives: others faining
themselves to be possessed with a devil, will deceive the said witches, as
their wives have been deceived by them.

Of the coniurers, inchanters, and iuglers in Fez.
IN Fez likewise there are a kind of iuglers or coniurers called Muhazzimin:
who of all others are reported to be most speedy casters out of devils. And
because their Necromancie sometimes takes effect, it is a wonder to see into
what reputation they grow thereby: but when they cannot cast forth a devil,
they say it is an airie spirit. Their manner of adiuring devils is this: first
they draw certain characters and circles upon an ashheape or some other
place; then describe they certain signs upon the hands and forehead of the
party possessed, and perfume him after a strange kind of manner. Afterward
they make their enchantment or coniuration; enquiring of the devil, which way
or by what means he entered the party, as likewise what he is, and by what
name he is called, and lastly charging him to come forth. Others there are
that work by a certain Cabalisticall rule called Zairagia: this rule is
contained in many writings, for it is thought to be natural magique: neither
are there any other Necromancers in all Fez, that will more certainly and truly
resolve a doubtful question; howbeit their art is exceeding difficult: for
the students thereof must have as great skill in Astrology, as in Cabala. My
self in times past having attained to some knowledge in this faculty,
continued (I remember) an whole day in describing one figure only: which kind
of figures are described in manner following. First they draw many circles
within the compass of a great circle: in the first circle they make a cross,
at the four extremities whereof they set down the four quarters of the
world, to wit, East, West, North, and South: at each end of one of the said
cross lines, they note either pole: likewise about the circumference of the
first circle, they paint the four elements: then divide they the same circle
and the circle following into four parts: and every fourth part they divide
into other seven, each one being distinguished with certain great Arabian
characters, so that every element contains eight and twenty characters. In
the third circle they set down the seven planets; in the fourth the twelve
signs of the Zodiac; in the fifth the twelve Latin names of the months; in
the sixth the eight and twenty houses of the moon; in the seventh the 365.
days of the year, and about the conuexitie thereof, the four cardinal or
principal winds. Then take they one only letter of the question propounded,
multiplying the same by all the particulars aforenamed, and the product or
sum total they divide after a certain manner, placing it in some room,
according to the quality of the character, and as the element requires
wherein the said character is found without a figure. All which being done,
they mark that figure which seems to agree with the foresaid number or sum
produced, wherewith they proceed as they did with the former, till they have
found eight and twenty characters, whereof they make one word, and of this
word the speech is made that resolves the question demanded: this speech is
always turned into a verse of the first kind, which the Arabians call
Ethauil, consisting of eight Stipites and twelve Chordi, according to the
meeter of the Arabian tongue, whereof we have entreated in the last part of An
Arabian grammar written by John Leo.
our Arabian grammar. And the verse consisting of those characters,
comprehends always a true and infallible answer unto the question
propounded, resolving first that which is demanded, and then expounding the
sense of the question it self. These practitioners are never found to err,
which causes their art of Cabala to be had in great admiration: which
although it be accounted natural, yet never saw I any thing that has more
affinity with supernatural and divine knowledge. I remember that I saw in a
certain open place of king Abulunan his college in Fez, upon a floor paued
with excellent smooth marble, the description of a figure. Each side of this
floor or court was fifty (...) long, and yet two third parts thereof were
occupied about the figure, and about the things pertaining thereto: three there
were that made the description, every one attending his appointed place, and
they were an whole day in setting it down. Another such figure I saw at Tunis,
drawn by one that was marvelous cunning in the art, whose father had written
two volumes of commentaries or expositions upon the precepts of the same art,
wherein whosoever has exact skill, is most highly esteemed of by all men. I my
self never saw but three of this profession, namely one at Tunis, and two
other at Fez: likewise I have seen two expositions upon the precepts of the
said art, together with a commentary of one Margian father unto the foresaid
Cabalist which I saw at Tunis: and another written by Ibnu Caldim the
historiographer. And if any were desirous to see the precepts and commentaries
of that art, he might do it with the expense of fifty ducats: for sailing
to Tunis a town near unto Italy, he might have a sight of all the
particulars aforesaid. I my self had fit opportunity Divination and
soothsaying forbidden by the law of (...).
of time, and a teacher that offered to instruct me gratis in the same art:
howbeit I thought good not to accept his offer, because the said art is
forbidden and accounted heretical by the law of Mahumet: for Mahumets law
affirms all kind of diuinations to be vain, and that God only knows
secrets and things to come: wherefore sometimes the said Cabalistes are
imprisoned by the Mahumetan inquisitours, who cease not to persecute the
professors of that art.

Of certain rules and super stitions observed in the Mahumet an law.
HEre also you may find certain learned men, which will have themselves
called wizards and moral philosophers. They observe certain rules which
Mahumet never prescribed. By some they are accounted catholic or true
Mahumetans, and by others they are holden for heretics, howbeit the greatest
part of the common people reverence them as if they were gods, notwithstanding
they commit many things unlawful and forbidden Diverse Mahumetan sects.
by the Mahumetan law, as namely; whereas the said law forbids any
loue-matters to be expressed in any musical ditties or songs, these moralists
affirm the contrary. In the foresaid Mahumetan religion are a great number of
rules or sects, every of which has most learned patrones and protectours. The
foresaid sect sprang up fowerscore years after Mahumet, the first author
thereof being called Elhesen Ibnu Abilhasen, and being borne in the town of
Basora: this man taught his disciples and followers certain precepts, but
writings he left none behind him. About an hundred years after there came
another notable doctor of that sect from Bagaded, called Elharit Ibnu Esed, who
left volumes of writings unto his disciples. Afterward those that were found to
be his followers, were all condemned by the Mahumetan patriarks and lawyers.
Howbeit 80. years after, that sect began to revive again under a certain
famous professor, who drew after him many disciples, unto whom he published
his doctrine. This man at length and all his followers were by the patriarch
and lawyers condemned to die. Which he understanding, wrote forthwith unto the
patriarch, requesting that he might be licenced to dispute with the lawyers as
touching his doctrine, of whom if he were convinced, he would most willingly
suffer death; otherwise that it would be against all equity, that so many
innocents should perish upon an unjust accusation. The patriarch thinking his
demand to be reasonable, condescended wholly thereunto. But when the matter came
to disputation, the party condemned soon put all the lawyers to silence.
Which when the patriarch perceived, he revoked the sentence as unjust, and
caused many colleges and monasteries to be erected for the said party and his
followers. After which time this sect continued about an hundred years, till
the emperor Malicsach of the Turkish race came thither out of Asia the
greater, and destroyed all the maintainers thereof. Whereupon some of them fled
unto Cairo, and the rest into Arabia, being dispersed here and there for the
space of twenty years, till in the reign of Caselsah nephew unto Malicsach,
Nidam Elmule one of his counselors, and a man of an high spirit, being
addicted unto the said sect, so restored, erected, and confirmed the same, that
by the help of one Elgazzuli a most learned man (who had written of the same
argument a notable work divided into seven parts) he reconciled the lawyers
with the disciples of this sect, conditionally, that the lawyers should be
called Conseruers of the prophet Mahumet his laws, and the sectaries Reformers
of the same. This concord lasted between them, til Bagaded was sacked by the
Tartars; which befell in the year of the Hegeira (...) sacked by the Tartars.
656. at what time those sectaries so increased, that they swarmed almost over
all Africa and Asia. Neither would they admit any into their society, but such
as were very learned, and trained up in all kind of liberal sciences; to the
end they might the better defend their own opinions, and confute their
adversaries: but now adays they admit all kind of rude and ignorant persons,
affirming all sorts of learning to be needless; for the holy spirit (say
they) reuealeth the knowledge of the truth unto such as are of a clean heart;
and they allege many reasons for the confirmation of this their opinion,
though not very forcible. Wherefore despising their ancesters rites, and the
strict observations of the law, they addict themselves to naught else but
delights and pleasures, feasting often and singing lascivious songs. Sometimes
they will rend their garments, either alluding thereby to the verses that they
sing, or being moved thereunto by their corrupt and vile disposition; saying
falsely that they are then ravished with a fit of divine love: but I rather
impute it to their abundance of meat, and gluttony. For each one of them will
devour as much meat, as may well suffice three. Or (which is more likely)
they utter those passionate clamours and outcries, because they are inflamed
with unlawful and filthy lust. For sometimes it happens that some one of
the principal of them, with all his scholars and disciples, is (...) to the
marriage of some gentleman, and at the beginning of the banquet they will
rehearse their devout orizons and songs, but so soon as they are risen from
the table, the elder of the company being about to dance, tear their
garments: and if any one in the midst of their dancing, that has drunk
immoderately, chances to fall down, he is taken up forthwith by one of the
scholars, and to too lasciuiously kissed. Whereupon this proverb grew among
the people of Fez: The heremites banquet. Which they use in reproach of those
masters, that make their scholars their minions.

Of diverse other rules and sects, and of the superstitious credulity of many.
AMongst these sects there are some, that have not only a diverse law, but
also a different belief from the residue, whereupon by some others they are
called heretics. Some there are also which hold, that a man by good works, by
fasting and abstinence, may attain unto the nature of an angel, which good
works, fastings, etc. do (say they) so purge and free the mind from all
contagion of evil, that by no means it can sin any more, though it would
never so feign. Howbeit they think themselves not capable of this felicity,
before they have ascended thereunto by the degrees of fifty disciplines or
sciences: and although they fall into sin before they be come to the fiftith
degree, yet they say that God will not impute that sin unto them. These
fellows indeed in the beginning lead a most strict life, and do even
macerate and consume themselves with fasting; but afterward they give
themselves to al licentiousnes and pleasure. They have also a most severe form
of living set down in four books, by a certain learned man of their
faction, called Essehrauar de Sehrauard, and borne in the city of Corasan.
Likewise there was another author called Ibnul Farid, that described all their
religion in witty verses, which being fraught with allegories seemed to
entreat of naught but love: wherefore one Elfargani expounded the said verses
with a commentary, and thereout gathered the canons and orders of the sect,
and showed the degrees to the attainment of felicity. Moreover the said verses
are so sweet and elegant, that the maintainers of this sect will sing and
repeat none other in their bankets: for these three hundred years no author
has so adorned their language as the said Ibnul. These sectaries take the
heavens, the elements, the planets, and the fixed stars to be one god, and
that no law nor religion is erroneous: for every man (say they) may lawfully
worship that which his mind is most addicted to worship. They think that all
the knowledge of God was infused into one man, whom they call in their language
Elcorb; this man, they say, was elect by god, and was made equal in knowledge
to him. Forty there are among them called all by the name of Elauted, which
signifies in our language, a block, or stock of a tree: out of this number,
when their Elcoth deceaseth, they create another in his room, namely seventy
persons that have the authority of election committed unto them. There are
likewise 765. others (whose names I do not well remember) who are chosen into
the said electors rooms, when any of them decease. These 765. being bound
thereunto by a certain canon or rule of their order, are constrained always
to go unknown, and they range almost all the world over in a most vile and
beggarly habit, so that a man would take them for mad men and estranged from
all sense of humanity: for these lewd miscreants under pretense of their
religion run like roagues naked and savage throughout all Africa, having so
little regard of honesty or shame, that they will like brute beasts ravish
women in public places; and yet forsooth the gross common people reverence
them as men of wonderful holiness. Great swarms of these filthy vagabonds
you may see in Tunis, but many more in Egypt, and especially at Alcair, whereas
in the market called Bain Elcasrain I saw one of these villains with mine own
eyes, in the presence of much people, deflowre a most beautiful woman as she
was coming forth of the bath: which being done, the fond people came flocking
about the said woman, striving to touch her garment as a most holy thing:
saying that the adulterer was a man of great sanctity, and that he did not
commit the sin, but only seemed to commit it: which when the silly cuckold
her husband understood, he showed himself thankful to his false god with a
solemn banquet, and with liberal giving of alms. The magistrates of the city
would have punished the adulterer, but they were in hazard to be slain of the
people for their labors, who (as is before said) adore these varlets for
saints and men of singular holiness. Other more villainous acts I saw committed
by them, which I am ashamed to report.

Of the Caballistes and certain other sects.
LIkewise there is another sort of men, which we may fitly call Caballists.
These fast most streitly, neither do they eat the flesh of any living
creature, but have certain meats and garments allotted unto them: they
rehearse likewise certain set-praiers appointed for every hour of the day and
for the night, according to the variety of days and months, and they use to
carry about certain square tables with characters and numbers engraven
therein. They feign themselves to have daily conference with the angels, of
whom they learn (they say) the knowledge of all things. They had once a famous
doctor of their sect called (...), who was author of their canons, prayers, and
square tables. Which when I saw, me thought their profession had more affinity
with magique then with Cabala. Their art was divided into eight parts;
whereof the first was called Elumha Enormita, that is, the demonstration of
light: the which contained prayers and fastings. The second called Semsul
Meharif, that is, the sun of sciences, contained the foresaid square tables,
together with their use and profit. The third part they call (...) Lasmei
Elchusne; this part contained a catalogue of those 99. virtues, which (they
say) are contained in the names of God, which I remember I saw at Rome in the
custody of a certain Venetian Jew. They have also a certain other rule
called Suvach, that is, the rule of heremites, the professors and followers
whereof inhabit woods and solitary places, neither have they any other food,
but such as those wild deserts will afford: the conversation of these
heremites no man is able exactly to describe, because they are estranged from
all humane society. But if I should take upon me to describe the variety of
Mahumetan sects, I should digress too far from my present purpose. He that
desires to know more of this matter, let him read over the book of Elefacni,
who discourses at large of the sects 72. principal sects in the religion of
Mahumet.
belonging to the Mahumetan religion, the principal whereof are 72. every one
of which defend their opinions to be true and good, and such as a man may
attain salvation by. At this day you shall find but two principal sects
only, the one of Leshari being dispersed over all Africa, Egypt, Syria,
Arabia, and Turkey: the other of Imamia, which is authorized throughout the
whole kingdom of Persia, and in certain towns of Corasan; and this sect the
great Sophi of Persia maintains, insomuch that all Asia had like to been
destroyed thereabout. For whereas before they followed the sect of Leshari, the
great Sophi by force of arms established his own of Imamia: and yet one only
sect stretches over all the Mahumetans dominions.

Of such as search for treasures in Fez.
Moreover in the city of Fez there are certain men called Elcanesin, who
supposing to find treasure under the foundations of old houses, do
perpetually search and delue. These gross fellows use to resort unto certain
dens and caves without the citie-walles, certainly persuading themselves,
that when the Romans were chased out of Africa, and driven into Baetica or
Granada in Spain, they hid great abundance of treasure in the bowels of the
earth, which they could not carry with them, and so enchanted the same by
art-magique, that it can by no means be attained unto but by the same art;
wherefore they seek unto inchanters to teach them the art of digging up the
said treasures. Some of them there are that will steadfastly affirm, that they
saw gold in this or that cave: others, that they saw silver, but could not
dig it out, by reason that they were destitute of perfumes and enchantments
fit for the purpose; so that being seduced with this vain opinion, and deeply
deluing into the earth, they turn vpside down the foundations of houses and
sepulchers, and sometimes they proceed in this manner ten or twelve days
journey from Fez: yea so fond they are and so besotted, that they esteem those
books that profess the art of digging gold, as divine oracles. Before my
departure from Fez these fantastical people had chosen them a consul, and
getting license of certain owners to dig their grounds, when they had dug
as much as they thought good, they paid the said owners for all damages
committed.

Of the Alchymistes of Fez.
IN this city likewise there are great store of Alchymists which are mightily
addicted to that vain practice: they are most base fellows, and contaminate
themselves with the steam of Sulphur, and other stinking smells. In the evening
they use to assemble themselves at the great temple, where they dispute of
their false opinions. They have of their art of Alchymie many books written
by learned men, amongst which one Geber is of principal account, who lived an
hundred years after Mahumet, and being a Greek borne, is said to have
renounced his own religion. This Geber his works and all his precepts are full
of allegories or dark borrowed speeches. Likewise they have another author,
that wrote an huge volume of the same art, entitled by the name of Attogrehi:
this man was secretary unto the Sultan of Bagaded, of whom we have written in
the lives of the Arabian philosophers. A book written by John (...) of the
lives of the Arabian philosophers.
Also the songs or articles of the said science were written by one Mugairibi
of Granada, whereupon a most learned Mamaluch of Damasco wrote a commentary;
yet so, that a man may much more easily understand the text then the exposition
thereof. Of Alchymistes here are two sorts; whereof the one seek for the
Elissir, that is, the matter which colors brass and other metals; and the
other are conversant about multiplication of the quantities of metals, whereby
they may conveniently temper the same. But their chiefest drift is to coin
counterfeit money: for which cause you shall see most of them in Fez with their
hands cut off.

Of charmers andinchanters of snakes.
IN this city likewise there is a great swarm of base people, such as the
Italians commonly call Ciurmatori: these sing foolish songs and rimes in all
the streets of the city, and broching mere trifles with the music of drums,
harpes, and citterns, they sell unto the rude people certain scroules or
brief charms instead of preservatives. Unto these you may add another kind
of reffuse people of one family and disposition with the former, who carry
dancing apes up and down, and have their necks and arms all entwined with
(...) snakes. These also profess Geomancie, and persuade women that they can
foretell them their (...). Likewise they carry stone-horses about with them,
which for a certain fee, they will let others have to cover their mares. I
could here reckon up more sorts of people; but let it suffice to have
admonished in this place, that the greatest part of the forenamed are people of
most base condition, and such as bear little good will to strangers, albeit
there are but a few in this city, by reason it is distant more then an
hundredth miles from the sea, the way thither also being rough and dangerous.
Their gentle men are very stately and high minded, and will have little or no
familiarity at all with the citizens: so likewise the doctors and judges of
principal account will admit but few unto their acquaintance. This city it
self is most beautiful and right commodiously situate; where albeit in winter
time the streets are so mirie, that you cannot walk in them without startups,
yet they let pass such abundance of water out of their conducts, that all the
filth is washed clean away. Where conducts are wanting, they carry all the
dirt in carts unto the next part of the river.

A description of the suburbs without the foresaid city of Fez.
WIthout the walls of this city westward stands a suburb containing almost
five hundredth families, the houses whereof are but mean, and the inhabitants
base, as namely driuers of camels, water-bearers, and cleauers of wood for the
kings palace. Yet here you may find diverse shops, and all kinds of
artificers. Here likewise dwell all the charmers and roguish minstrels before
named; as also great swarms of sluttish and filthy harlots. In the principal
street of this suburb, you shall find certain caves most artificially hewn
out of excellent marble, wherein the noble men of Fez were wont to lay up
their corn: but after that by reason of the wars it was often taken from
thence, they have since usually conveyed their corn into new Fez, and there
stored it up: and from that time to this the marble-caues have remained
desolate. It is a wonder to see how wide and large these caves are; for the
least of them will contain more then a thousand measures of corn, there being
above an hundredth and fifty of them in all, but now they lie waste and open,
insomuch that diverse fall into them at unawares, for which cause their brimmes
are environed with walls. Here every one may play the vintener and the baud; so
that this suburb may justly be called the sink of Fez. From the twentieth
hour you shall see none at all in their shops: for then every man runs to the
tavern to disport, to spend riotously, and to be drunken. Another suburb
there is allotted unto the lepers, of whom there are two hundredth families:
these leprous persons The habitation of lepers in Fez and their governor.
have a governor, which gathers certain yearly revenues from the
noblemen, and takes such care of the said lepers, that they want no
necessary thing. He is bound by his office to discharge the city of all
leprous persons, and to compel all such as he understands to be infected with
that disease, to depart into the foresaid suburbs. If any leper chances to
die without issue, part of his goods are employed to the common benefit of the
lepers, and part fall to the governors share: but if he has any children,
they enjoy his goods. Among the lepers also those are placed, which are
infected with white botches, or with any other incurable malady. Next beyond
stands another suburb inhabited only with muleters, plaisterers, and
wood-mongers: which although it be but little, yet contains it about an
hundredth and fifty families. Moreover upon the way leading westward from the
city there is another great suburb of more then four hundredth houses: howbeit
they are low and base, and the inhabitants are beggarly, which neither can nor
will dwell among any other people. By this suburb there is a certain broad
plain which leads to the river two miles off, and extends westward almost
three miles. Upon this plain every week there is an exceeding great market of
cattle. Likewise the shopkeepers of the city resort hither and sell their
wares in tents. Also a certain company of gentlemen use to come hither, and
to divide a ram among themselves, leaving the head unto the butcher for his
fee, but the feet and the skin they sell unto the wooll-chapmen. For those
wares that are here sold they pay so little tribute to the king, that it is
not worth the mentioning. But this one thing I must in no wise pass over in
silence, namely, that I never saw neither in Asia, Africa, nor Italy, a market
either more populous, or better furnished with wares. Not far from Fez stand
certain high rocks environed with a ditch of two miles compass, out of which
rocks certain matter is hewed to make lime withal. Near unto the said
ditch are many furnaces, some whereof are so large, that they will contain more
then six thousand measures of lime: and this lime is made at the costs of the
richest citizens in Fez. Westward without the walls of Fez by the rivers side
stand about an hundred cottages, which are only inhabited by them that white
linen cloth. Hither in the spring and in summer use the citizens to bring
their linen cloth, spreading it upon the meadows, and as often as they see it
dry in the sun, casting water thereupon, which water they fetch either out
of the river or out of some cesterne in certain lether tankards made for the
same purpose: but at night each one carries his cloth into the foresaid
cottages. Neither are the meadows wherein they bleach their cloth ever
destitute of grass. A most gallant prospect it is to behold a far off the
white clothes dispersed over the green meadow, and the crystal streams of
the river, which seem to be of an azure hue, running along: all which the
Poets have celebrated in their verses.

A description of the common place of burial without the city.
MAny fields there are without the city, which have been given by certain
noblemen for the burial of the dead. Upon their sepulchers for the most part
they lay a long three-square stone. When any noble man or any principal
citizen deceaseth, they lay one stone over his head and another over his feet,
whereon uses to be engraven some epitaph, with the day and year when the
party deceased. I my self bestowed much labor in gathering of epitaphes,
which I saw both about Fez and in other places of Barbary; all which being set
down in a book I gave unto the kings brother. The matter of their epitaphes
is diverse, some tending to consolation, and others to sorrow.

Of the sepulchers of the kings of Fez.
NOrthward of the city upon a certain high hill stands a palace, wherein are
the monuments of diverse Marin kings, being most artificially hewn out of
marble with epitaphes upon them, so that I cannot condignely express the
majesty and beauty thereof.

A description of their gardens.
WIthout the north, east, and south parts of the city are great store of
gardens, replenished with all kind of fruit and with stately trees. Through
the midst of these garden^s, they derive some small vain of the river, some
whereof are so full of trees, that you would take them for groves rather then
for gardens. These gardens they manure not at all, but only water them
continually in the month of May, whereupon they have great abundance of fruit.
All their fruits, save their peaches only, are of a most delicate taste,
whereof, so soon as they are ripe, above five hundredth cart-loades are daily
carried into the market, besides grapes, which here I do not mention. But the
said fruits are carried unto a certain place in Fez, where tribute being
paid for them, they are sold by criers unto the fruiterers there present. In
the same place likewise after paying of tribute, they sell certain
Negro-slaues. Toward the east of Fez lies a plain fifteen miles broad, and
thirty miles long: this plain is full of fountains and freshets, and is
reserved for the use of the great temple. It is farmed out unto gardiners, who
sow thereupon such abundance of hemp, melons, turnips or nauewes, radish, and
other such like roots and herbs, that every summer there are said to be
gathered thereof above fifteen thousand cart-loads, and as many in winter.
Howbeit the air is very unwholesome thereabout, for the inhabitants are
continually vexed with fevers, and are of a yellowish color.

Of that part of Fez which is called new Fez.
NEW Fez being environed with an high and impregnable wall, and situate on a
most beautiful plain not far from the rivers side, is almost a mile distant
from old Fez, and that upon the east and south side thereof. Between the walls
of either town, to the northward, enters a certain arm of the river, where
the foresaid milles do stand, and the other part of the river is severed into
two branches, one whereof runs between new Fez and old Fez, not far from
the edge of the rock, and the other passing through certain valleys and
gardens, trendeth at length southward. The other part of the river holds on
his course by the rock, and so by the college of king Or Aburinan.
Abutiman. This city of new Fez Jacob the son of Abdultach caused to (...)
built, who was the first king of the Marin family, and expelled the kings of
Maroco, and usurped the kingdom unto himself: but The founder of new Fez.
the king of Telensin, to the end he might make the people of Maroco beholding
unto him, and might subvert the prosperous success of the Marin family, went
about to hinder the king of Fez his attempts against Maroco: wherefore king
Jacob having finished the wars of Maroco, determined to revenge himself to the
uttermost for the injuries offered by them of Telensin. But considering with
himself, that the strong towns of his own kingdom were far distant from
Telensin, he thought it a better course to build this city, whereunto the
seat royal of all Maroco might be translated: which being erected, he called
The white city, but it was afterward named by the inhabitants new Fez. This
city king Jacob the founder divided into three parts, whereof the first
contained his royal palace, and diverse noble men's houses, unto every one of
which he allotted a most pleasant garden. Not far from his palace he built a
most stately and sumptuous temple. In another part of this city he built a
large and fair stable for the kings horses to stand in. Then also he caused
other palaces to be erected for his captains and principal courtiers. From
the west gate to the east he appointed the market place, the distance between
which gates is a mile and an half, and on both sides he placed artificers and
merchants shops. At the west gate he caused a fair portall to be set up, to
harbor the watchmen and warders of the city. Not far from thence he erected
two stables sufficient to contain three hundredth horses, which he might use
for the protection of his own palace. The third part of the city was
appointed for the kings guarde and attendants, which were most of them borne
eastwarde of Fez, neither had they any other weapons but hand-bowes (for
crosse-bowes were not then used in that kingdom) unto which attendants the
king allowed a large stipend: but now the same place is full of beautiful
temples and stoues. Near unto the kings palace stands the mint, having in the
midst a fower-square court with certain portals or cells round about it,
wherein the money-minters dwell. Likewise there is another lodging in the midst
of the same court, where the governor of the mint with his scribes and notaries
have their abode. Here, as well as in any other places, whatsoever commodity
is raised, redoundeth wholly to the king. Near unto the mint stand the
goldsmiths shops, whose Consul or governor keeps the seal and stamps of the
coin. In Fez neither ring nor any other Jewel or commodity can be made of
silver or gold, before the metal be sealed, for the offenders are most
severely punished. And, the metal being sealed, whatsoever is made thereof is
weighed as if it were money. The greatest part of goldsmiths dwelling in new
Fez are Jews, who carry their vessels of gold and silver unto a certain
place of old Fez, near unto the grocers shops, and there sell them. For in old
Fez neither gold nor silver is coined, nor any Mahumetans are suffered to be
goldsmiths, because they have usurers among them, which will sell any piece of
wrought silver or gold deerer then the weight requires; albeit the same
privilege is by the governors of the city granted unto the Jews. Some there
are also that only make plate for the citizens, who are paid hire only for
their work. That part of the city which the kings attendants or guard once
possessed, is now inhabited by Jews: for now a days the kings use no such
guard. The Jews indeed first dwelt in old Fez, but upon the death of a
certain king they were all robbed by the Moors: whereupon king Abusabid
caused them to remove into new Fez, and by that means doubled their yearly
tribute. They therefore even till this day do occupy a long street in the
said new city, wherein they have their shops and synagogues, and their number
is maruellously increased ever since they were driven out of Spain. These
Jews are had in great contempt by all men, neither are any of them permitted
to wear shoes, but they make them certain socks of sea-rushes. On their
heads they wear a black Orturbant.
dulipan, and if any will go in a cap, he must fasten a red cloth thereunto.
They pay unto the king of Fez monthly four hundred ducats. At length within
the space of an hundred and forty years this new city was environed with most
impregnable walls, and adorned with temples, colleges, palaces, and other such
buildings as serve to beautify a city, so that I Engines for the conueiance of
water.
think there was more bestowed in garnishing of the city, then in building of
the walls. Without the citie-walles are built many huge wheels or engines, for
the conueying of riuer-water over the said walls into cesternes, from whence
it is conveyed in certain channels and pipes unto the temples, gardens, and
palaces. The said wheels were built not fully an hundred years past, before
which time water was brought unto the city by a certain conduct, from a
fountain ten miles distant. Of which artificial conduct a certain Genouese,
being then in great favor with the king, is reported to have been the author:
but the wheels (they say) were invented by a Spaniard: and in them there is
marvelous cunning workmanship: for to the conueiance of so huge a quantity of
water, each wheel is turned about but four and twenty times only in a day
and a night. To conclude, here are but few gentlemen in this city, except such
as attend upon the court, for the residue are base and mechanical people: but
such as carry any show of honesty, do so hate and disdain the kings
courtiers and gentlemen, that they will by no means vouchsafe to marie their
daughters unto them.

Of the fashions and customs used in the kings court.
AMongst all the princes of Africa, I never red of any that was created by the
common suffrages and consent of the people unto his kingdom or princedome, or
that was called from any strange province or city to bear rule. Also by the
law of Mahumet no man may bear any secular authority, which may be called
lawful, save only the Mahumetan patriarchs and prelates: howbeit the said
patriarchs authority decreasing daily more and more, the ringleaders of such
people as ranged up and down the deserts began to invade places inhabited and
ciuilized, and by force of arms, against Mahumets law, and maugre his
prelates, to ordain sundry princes: As for example in the East, whereas the
Turks, Cordians, and Tartars, have usurped dominion over such as were not able
to repel them. So likewise in the west parts first the families of Zeneta and
Luntuna, then the seditious Mahumetan preachers, and afterward the family of
Marin got the upper hand. Howbeit the family of Luntuna is reported to have
aided the western regions, and to have released them from the fury of the
seditious heretics, wherein they showed themselves friends and not enemies:
but afterward their tyranny began to show it self. And this is the reason why
they do not now a days attain unto government by hereditarie succession or by
election of the people, or of the nobility. But the prince himself when he
feels death seazing upon him, calls about him all his peers and nobles, and
binds them by oath, to establish his son, brother, or any other whom he
most favors, in his kingdom. But they after the princes decease neglecting
their oath, will choose any other whom they list. And this is ordinarily the
election of the king of Fez, who, so soon as he is proclaimed king, chooses
forthwith some one of his nobles to be his chief counselor, and on him he
bestows the third part of all his kingly revenues. The manner of choosing
officers in the court of Fez.
Then chooses another to be his secretary, treasurer, and high steward of his
household. Then is created the captain of the horsemen appointed for the kings
guard, and these horsemen with their horses live most commonly in the fields.
Lastly he appoints a new governor over every city, unto whom all the
tributes and revenues of the same place redound, with condition, that as often
as any wars betide, he shall maintain a certain company of horses to the
kings service. After a while also he places certain deputies and
commissioners over his people inhabiting the mountains, and over the Arabians
subject unto him. The governors of cities diversely administer justice,
according to the custom of the place. Some there are also appointed by the
king to collect all the tributes and revenues of his kingdom, and duly to pay
the same unto him. Likewise there are others chosen, whom they call in their
language keepers or guardians, and unto every one of these the king gives some
castle or village, whereby he may procure his own maintenance, and be able to
serve the king in time of war. Moreover the king of Fez maintains a troop
of light horsemen, who so long as they serve the king in his camp, have their
diet allowed them out of the kings provision: but in time of peace, he finds
them corn, butter, and pouldered flesh for the whole year, but money they
have very seldom. Once a year they are apparelled at the kings cost; neither
do they provide for their horses either within the city or without, for the
king furnishes them with all necessaries. Those that give attendance to their
horses are Christian captives, which go shackled in great chains and fetters.
But when the army remooueth any whither, the said Christians are carried upon
camels backs. Another officer there is that gives attendance only to the
camels, assigning certain pastures unto the heards-men, and dividing fields
among them, and making such provision for the kings camels, as himself shall
think expedient. Each camel-driuer has two camels, which are laden with the
kings furniture, according to the appointment of the governor. Likewise the
king has a certain purueiour or steward, whose office is to provide, keep,
and distribute corn both to the kings household and to his army. This man in
time of war has ten or twelve tents to lay up corn in, and every day with
change of camels he sends for new corn, least the army should be
unprovided of victuals: he has also cooks at his command. Moreover there is a
governor or mastergroome of the stables, who provides for the kings horses,
mules, and camels, and is furnished with all necessaries by the steward. There
is another also appointed ouerseer of the corn, whose duty it is to provide
barley and other prouender for the beasts: and this man has his scribes and
notaries about him, who diligently set down all particular expenses, for they
must give up a perfect account unto the chief steward. They have also a
certain captain over fifty horsemen, which horsemen may well be called
purseuants, for they are sent by the secretary in the kings name to do his
business. Likewise the Fezzan king has another captain of great name, being as
it were governor of his guard, who in the kings name, may compel the judges
to do justice, and to put their sentences in execution. This man's authority is
so great, that sometimes he may commit principal noblemen to ward, and may
severely punish them, according to the kings commandment. Moreover the said
king has a most trusty chancellor, who keeps the great seal, and writes and
signeth the kings letters. He has also a great number of footmen, the
governor of whom accepts and dismisseth whom he thinks good, and gives to
every one wages according to his agilitie and desert. And whenever the king
comes in place of judgment, the said governor always attends upon him,
and is in a manner his high chamberlain. Also there is another that takes
charge of the carriages and baggage of the army, and causes the tents of the
light horsemen to be carried up and down on mules, and the tents of the other
soldiers on camels. There are likewise a company of ensigne-bearers, who in
marching on a journey carry their colors wrapped up: but he that goes before
the army has his banner displaied, and of a great height. And every one of
the said standardbearers knows most exactly always, fords of rivers, and
passages through woods, wherefore they are for the most part appointed to guide
the army. The drummers (of whom there are great store in the kings host) play
upon certain drums of brass as big as a great kettle, the lower part
whereof is narrow, and the upper broad, being covered with a skin. These
drummers ride on horseback, having always on the one side of their horses a
great weight hanging down, to counterpoize the heaviness of their drums on the
other side. They are allowed most swift horses, because the Moors account it a
great disgrace to loose a drum. The said drums make such a loud and horrible
noise, that they are not only heard a far off, but also strike exceeding
terror both upon men and horses, and they are beaten only with a bulls pizzle.
The musitions are not maintained at the kings charge, for the cities are bound
at their costs to send a certain number of them to the wars, who, according
to their demeanor in the wars, are admitted or not admitted unto the kings
table. This king has also a certain master of ceremonies, who sits at his
feet in the senate house, and commands each man to sit down, and to speak
according to his dignity. All the maideseruants in the kings family are
Negro-slaues, which are partly chamberlains, and partly waiting-maids. And yet
his Queen is always of a white skin. Likewise in the king of Fez his court
are certain Christian captives, being partly Spanish, and partly Portugale
women, who are most circumspectly kept by certain Eunuchs, that are
Negro-slaues. The king of Fez has very large dominions, but his revenues are
small, to wit, scare three hundredth thousand ducats, the fifth part whereof
redoundeth not to the king: for the remainder is divided into sundry portions,
as we have before signified. Yea, the greater part of the said revenues is
paid in corn, cattle, oil, and butter, all which yield but small store of
money. In some place they pay a ducate and one fourth part, tribute for every
acre, but in other places a whole family paieth but so much. In some other
regions each man above fifteen years of age paieth as much tribute also.
Neither are the people of this great city more vexed with any thing then with
paying of their tributes and impositions. Here also is to be noted, that the
Mahumetan governors (the priests only excepted) may not exact greater
revenues then those that Mahumet has allotted unto them, namely of every of
their subjects which possesses 100. ducates in ready money, they are to have
two ducates and an half for yearly tribute. Every husbandman likewise is
bound to pay for tribute the tenth part of all his corn. And all the said
tributes he appointed to be paid unto the patriarch, who should bestow that
which was superfluous for the Prince to have, upon common uses; namely for the
releeuing of poor impotent people and widows, and for maintaining of wars
against the enemy. But since the Patriarchs began to decay, the Princes (as
we have beforesaide) exercised tyranny. For it was not sufficient for them to
exact all the forenamed tributes, and riotously to consume the same, but also
to urge people unto greater contributions; so that all the inhabitants of
Africa are so oppressed with daily exactions, that they have scarcely
wherewithal to feed and apparel themselves: for which cause there is almost
no man of learning or honesty, that will seek any acquaintance with courtiers,
or will inuit them to his table, or accept any gifts (be they never so
precious) at their hands: thinking that whatsoever goods they have, are gotten
by theft and briberie. The King of Fez continually maintains The king of Fez
his guard.
six thousand horsemen, five hundredth crossebowes, and as many Harquebusiers,
being at all assayes prepared for the wars, who in time of peace, when the
king goes on progress, lie within a mile of his person: for being at home in
Fez, he needs not so strong a guard. When he wageth How the king of Fez
rides on progress.
war against the Arabians that be his enemies, because the forenamed garrison
is not sufficient, he requires aid of the Arabians his subjects, who at their
own costs find him a great army of men better trained to the wars, then
his own soldiers beforementioned. The pomp and ceremonies of this king are
but mean, neither does he willingly use them, but only upon festival days,
and when mere necessity requires. When the king is to ride forth, the
master of ceremonies signifies so much unto certain herbengers or posts,
whereupon the herbengers give notice thereof unto the kings Or kines folks.
parents, unto his nobility, his senators, captains, guardians, and
gentlemen, who presently arrange themselves before the palace gate. At the
kings coming forth of the palace, the herbengers appoint unto each man his
place and order of riding. First and foremost go the standard-bearers, next the
drummers, then follows the chief groom of the stable with his servants and
family; after him comes the kings pensioners, his guard, his master of
ceremonies, his secretaries, his treasurer, and last of all his chief Judge
and his captain general, at length comes the king accompanied with his
principal counselor, or with some other great peer. Before the king also
ride certain officers belonging to his person, whereof one carries his
sword-royall, another his shield, and the third his crosse-bowe. On each side
of him march his footmen, one carrying a payer of stirrups, another the kings
partizan, the third a covering for his saddle, and the fourth a halter for his
horse. And so soon as the king is dismounted, they forthwith cover his
saddle, and put the foresaid halter upon his horse-head. Likewise there is
another footeman that carries the kings pantofles most artificially wrought.
After the king follows the captain of the footmen, then the eunuchs, the
kings family, the light horsemen, and last of all the crosse-bowes and
Harquebusiers. The apparel of the king is then very moderate and plain:
insomuch that if a man knew him not, he would think him to be absent: for the
attendants be far more sumptuously attired. Moreover no Mahumetan king or
prince may wear a crown, diadem, The king of Fez his (...) of warfare.
or any such like ornament upon his head, for that is forbidden by the law of
Mahumet. When the king lies with his army in the fields, first his own great
tent is pitched in a four square form like unto a castle, each side of the
said square being fifty else in length. At every of the four corners
stands a little sharp turret made of cloth, with a gallant sphere on the
top which glistereth like gold. This royal pauilion has four gates, every
one of which is kept by eunuchs. Within the said pauilion are contained diverse
other tents, among which is the kings lodging, being framed in such wise, that
it may easily be removed from place to place. Next unto it stand the tents of
the noblemen, and of such as are most in the kings favor; then the lodgings of
the principal guard being made of goatesskinnes, after the Arabian fashion;
and in the midst of all stands the kings kitchen and his pantrie. Not far
from hence the light horsemen have their aboade, who all of them are victualled
out of the kings storehouse, notwithstanding their attire be very base. Next
of all are the stables, wherein their horses are marvelous well tended.
Without this circuit keep such as carry the tents and the kings furniture
from place to place. Here are also butchers, victuallers, and such like. All
merchants and artificers that resort hither, take up their abode next unto the
tent-carriers: so that the kings pauilion is pitched like a strong city, for
it is so environed with the lodgings of the guarde, and with other tents
adioining, that there is very difficult passage to the king. Round about the
said royal pauilion, there are certain appointed to watch and ward all night
long, howbeit they are base and unarmed people. In like sort there is a watch
kept about the stables, but sometimes so negligently, that not only some
horses have been stolen, but there have been found enemies in the kings own
pauilion, that came to murder him. The king lives the greatest part of the
year in the fields, both for the safeguard of his kingdom, and also that he
may keep his Arabian subjects in obedience, and sometimes he recreateth
himself with hunting, and sometime with playing at chesse. I know right well
how tedious I have been in the description of this city: but because it is
the metropolitan not only of Barbary, but of all Africa, I thought good most
particularly to decypher every parcel and member thereof.

Of the town of Macarmeda.
THis town stands almost twenty miles eastward of Fez, and was built by the
family of Zeneta, upon the bank of a most beautiful river. It had in times
past a large territory, and great store of inhabitants. On both sides of the
said river are many gardens and vineyards. The kings of Fez were wont to
assign this town unto the governor of their camels; but in the war of
Sahid it was so destroyed and wasted, that at this day scarce is there any
mention of walls to be found. But the fields thereof are now in the possession
of certain gentlemen of Fez, and of the pesants.

Of the castle of Hubbed.
THis castle stands upon the side of an hill, about six miles from Fez, and
from hence you may behold the city of Fez, and all the territory adjacent.
It was founded by a certain hermit of Fez, being reputed for a man of
singular holiness. The fields thereto belonging are not very large, because the
houses being demolished, it is utterly destitute of inhabitants, the walls only
and the temple as yet remaining. In this castle I lived four summers, because
it stands in a most pleasant air, being separate from concurse of people,
and a solitary place fit for a man to study in: for my father had got a
lease of the ground adioining to this castle from the governor of the temple,
for many years.

Of the town of Zauia.
THe town of Zauia was founded by Joseph the second king of the Marin-family,
and is distant from Fez about fowerteene miles. Here king Joseph built a
stately hospital, and commanded that his corpse should be interred in this
town. But it was not his fortune here to be buried, for he was slain in the
wars against Tremizen. From thencefoorth Zauia fell to decay and grew
destitute of inhabitants, wherein at this present the hospital only
remains. The revenues of this place were given unto the great temple of Fez,
but the field thereof was tilled by certain Arabians dwelling in the region
of Fez.

Of the castle of Chaulan.
THe ancient castle of Chaulan is built upon the river Sebu, eight miles A (...)
southward of Fez. Not far from this castle there is a certain hot bath,
whereunto Abulhezen the fourth king of the Marin-family added a fair building,
unto this bath once a year in the month of April the gentlemen of Fez
usually resort, remaining there four or five days together. There is no
civility to be found in this castle: for the inhabitants are base people, and
exceeding covetous.

Of the mountain of Zelag.
THis mountain begins eastward from the river of Sebu, extending thence
almost fowerteene miles westward, and the highest part thereof to the north, is
seven miles distant from Fez. The south part of this mountain is utterly
destitute of inhabitants; but the north side is exceeding fertile, and planted
with great store of castles and towns. Most of their fields are employed about
vineyards, the grapes whereof are the sweetest that ever I tasted, and so
likewise are their olives, and other fruits. The inhabitants being very rich,
have most of them houses in the city of Fez. And so likewise most part of the
gentlemen of Fez have vineyards upon the said mountain. At the north foot of
this mountain the fields are replenished with all kind of grain and fruits.
For all that plain is watered southward with the river Sebu: and here the
gardiners with certain artificial wheels and engines draw water out of the
river to moisten their gardens. In this plain are wel-nigh two hundredth acres
of ground, the revenues whereof are given unto the kings master of ceremonies,
howbeit he makes thereof not above five hundredth ducates a year: the tenth
part of all which revenues, amounting to three thousand bushels of corn,
belongs to the kings provision.

Of mount Zarhon.
THis mountain begins from the plain of Esais lying ten miles distant from
the city of Fez; westward it extends thirty miles, and is almost ten miles
broad. This mountain is all covered with waste and desert woods, being
otherwise well stored with olives. In this mountain there are of sheepe-foldes
and castles to the number of fifty, and the inhabitants are very wealthy, for
it stands between two flourishing cities, that is to say, Fez on the east,
and Mecnase on the west. The women weaue woollen cloth, according to the
custom of that place, and are adorned with many silver rings and bracelets.
The men of this mountain are most valiant, and are much given to pursue and
take lions, whereof they send great Hunting of lions used by the king of Fez.
store unto the king of Fez. And the king hunteth the said lions in manner
following: in a large field there are certain little cells made, being so high,
that a man may stand upright in them: each one of these cells is shut fast with
a little door; and contain within every of them an armed man, who opening the
door presents himself to the view of the lion: then the lion (...) the doors
open, comes running toward them with great fury, but the doors being shut
again, he waxes more furious then before: then bring they forth a bull to
combat with the lion, who enter a fierce and bloody conflict, wherein if the
bull kill the lion, that days sport is at an end; but if the lion get the
victory, then all the armed men, being ordinarily twelve, leap forth of
their cells, and invade the lion: each one of them having a iauelin with a pike
of a cubite and an half long. And if these armed men seem to be too hard for
the lion, the king causes their number to be diminished: but perceiving them
too weak, the king with his company from a certain high place, where he
stands to behold the sport, kill the lion with their crossebowes. And
oftentimes it falls out, that before the lion be slain, some one of the men
dies for it, the residue being sore wounded. The reward of those that encounter
the lion is ten ducats apeece, and a new garment: neither are any admitted
unto this combat but men of redoubted valor, and such as come from mount
Zelagi: but those that take the lions first are inhabitants of mount Zarhon.

Of Gualili a town of mount Zarhon.
THis town was built by the Romans upon the top of the foresaid mountain,
what time they were lords of Granada in south Spain. It is environed around
with mighty thick walls made of smoothe and hewn stones. The gates are large
and high, and the fields are manured for the space of six miles about: howbeit
this town was long sithence destroyed by the Africans. But afterward when the
schismatike Idris came into this region, he began to repair this desolate
town, and to replant it so with inhabitants, that within short time it grew
very populous: howbeit after his decease it was neglected by his son, being
wholly addicted (as is beforesaid) unto the building of Fez. And yet Idris lies
buried in this town, whose sepulcher is visited with great reverence almost by
all the people of Barbary, for he is as highly esteemed as if he had been some
patriarch, because he was of the lineage of Mahumet. At this present there are
but two or three houses in all the town, which were there built for the honor
and maintenance of the sepulcher. The fields adjacent are exceedingly well
husbanded: and their gardens are most pleasant by reason of two sweet freshets
running through them, the which diversely winding themselves about the little
hills and valleys, do water all that plain.

Of a certain town called the palace of Pharao.
THis town was founded by the Romans upon the top of an hill, about eight
miles distant from Gualili. The people of this said mountain, together with
some historiographers are most certainly persuaded, that this town was built
by Pharao king of Egypt in the time of Moses, and took the name from the first
founder, which notwithstanding I think to be otherwise: for I can read in no
approved author that either Pharao or any other Egyptians ever inhabited these
regions. But I suppose that this fond opinion was taken out of that book which
one Elcabi wrote concerning the words of Mahumet. For the said book affirms
from the authority of Mahumet, that there were four kings only that governed
the whole world, two whereof were faithful, and the other two ethnikes: the
faithful he (...) were Alexander the great, and Solomon the son of David:
and the ethnikes were Nimrod and Pharao. But I am rather of opinion, by the
Latin letters which are there engraven in the walls, that the Romans built
this town. About this town run two small rivers on either side thereof. The
little hills and valleys adjacent do greatly abound with olives. Not far from
hence are certain wild deserts frequented with lions and leopards.

Of the town called Pietra Rossa or The red rock.
PIetra Rossa is a small town built by the Romans upon the side of the
foresaid mountain, being so near the forest, that the lions will come Tame
(...).
daily into the town and gather up bones in the streets, yea, they are so tame
and familiar, that neither women nor children are afeard of them. The walls of
this town are built very high and of great stones, but now they are ruined in
many places, and the whole town is diminished into one street. Their fields
being joined unto the plains of Azgara, abound with olives and all kind of
pulse.

Of the town of Maghilla.
MAghilla is a little town founded of old by the Romans upon that side of the
foresaid hill which looks toward Fez. About this town are most fertile
fields, and greatly enriched with olives: there is a plain likewise containing
many fresh fountains, and well stored with hemp and flax.

Of the castle of Shame.
THis ancient castle is built at the foot of the said mountain near unto the
high way from Fez to Mecnase: and it was called by this name, because the
inhabitants are most shamefully addicted to couetise, like unto all the people
thereabouts. In old time it is reported that a certain king passed by, whom
the inhabitants of the castle invited to dinner, requesting him to change the
ignominious name of the place: which when the king had condescended unto, they
caused, according to their custom, a company of rams to be slain, and
certain bladders and vessels to be filled with milk, to serve for the kings
breakfast the morrow after. But because the said vessels were very large, (...)
consulted together to put in half milk and half water, hoping that (...)
king should never perceive it. The day following albeit the king was not very
hasty of his breakfast, yet, his servants urging him thereunto, he perceived
the milk to be half water; whereat smiling he said: Friends, that which
nature has given, no man can (...) away. And with that saying he departed. Now
this castle is razed to the ground and utterly destroyed, but the territory
thereof is occupied by certain miserable Arabians.

Of the region of Beni Guariten.
THe region of Beni Guariten lies eastward of (...) about eighteen miles. It
is altogether hilly and mountainous, abounding with all kind of pulse, and
with store of good pasture and medow-ground, and containing almost two hundred
villages. Their houses are in all places rudely built, and the inhabitants are
base people, neither have they any vineyards or gardens, nor any tree that
bears fruit. This region the king of Fez usually divides among his youngest
brothers and sisters. The inhabitants have great store of corn and wool: and
albeit they are passing rich, yet go they very meanly attired: they ride only
upon asses, for which cause they are had in great derision by their neighbors.

Of the region called Aseis.
THis region is distant to the west of Fez almost twenty miles, and is by the
inhabitants called Aseis; it consists of a perpetual plain, whereupon some
conjecture, that it has had in old time many villages and castles, whereof
now there is no mention at all, nor so much as a sign of any building, only
the names of places yet remain. This region extends westward eighteen, and
southward almost twenty miles. The soil is most fertile, and brings forth
black and small grains. Wels and fountains are here very rare. It was wont
to be subject unto certain Arabian husbandmen, but now it is assigned by the
king unto the governor of that city.

Of mount Togat.
THis mountain stands almost seven miles westward of Fez, being very high,
and but of small breadth. Eastward it extends to the river Bunafe being about
five miles distant. All that side which looks toward Fez, and the top
thereof, and that part which lies over against Essich are woonderfully
replenished with vines, and with all kind of grain. Upon the top of this
mountain are diverse caves and hollow places, where the searchers of treasure
suppose that the Romans hid up their wealth, as we have before signified. The
said treasure-searchers, so soon as the vintage is past, use to take great
pains in digging of the rock, and albeit they find nothing, yet will they
not give over. All the fruits of this mountain are most unpleasant both to the
(...) and to the taste, and yet they are sooner ripe, then the fruits of other
places thereabout.

Of mount Guraigura.
THis mountain being near unto Atlas is almost forty miles distant from Fez.
From hence springs a certain river, which running westward falls into the
river Bath. This mountain stands between two most large and spacious
plains, whereof the one to Fez ward is (as we have before said) called Aseis:
and the other lying southward is named Adecsen. Which Adecsen is most fertile
both for corn and pasture. And they are possessed by certain Arabians called
Zuhair being vassals unto the king of Fez: but the king assigns for the most
part this plain unto his brother or some other of his kinsfolks, out of which
they yearly gather ten thousand ducats. The foresaid Arabians are continually
molested by certain other Arabians called Elhusein, which live in the deserts:
for in summertime they usually invade the plains: wherefore the king of Fez
for the defense of this region maintains a certain number of horsemen and of
crossebowes. This plain is watered with christall-fountaines and pleasant
rivers. Near unto the said plain are diverse woods and forests, where lions
keep Tame lions.
which are so gentle and tame, that any man may drive them away with a staff,
neither do they any harm at all. Now let us proceed unto the description of
Azgara.

A description of Azgara, one of the seven principal regions belonging to the
kingdom of Fez.
THis region bordereth northward upon the Ocean-sea; westward upon the river of
Buragrag; eastward upon the mountains partly of Gumera, partly of Zarhon, and
partly of Zalag; and southward it is enclosed with the river of Bunasar. This
region consists altogether of plain ground being a most fertile soil, and
in old time very populous, and adorned with many towns and castles, which are
now so defaced and ruined by reason of wars, that small villages only are left
for the inhabitants to hide their heads in. The length of this region is about
fowerscore, and the breadth almost three score miles. Through the midst thereof
runs the river of Subu. The Arabian inhabitants are called Elculoth, being
descended from the family of Muntafic; they are subject to the king of Fez,
and pay unto him large tributes: howbeit they are rich, and curious in their
apparel, and are such valiant soldiers, that the king of Fez leuieth his whole
army of them only, when he has any wars of great moment to atchieue. This
region abundantly furnishes not only Fez, but all the mountains of Gumera
with victuals, horses, and other cattle; and here the king of Fez usually
remains all winter and the spring, by reason of the temperature and
holesomnes of the air. Here is great plenty of roes and hares, and yet very
few woods.

Of Giumha a town in Azgara.
THis town the Africans built in our time by a rivers side upon that plain
over which the way lies from Fez to the city of Harais, and it is distant
from Fez about thirty miles. It was in times past very populous, but now it
lies so desolate by reason of the war of Sahid, that it serves only for
caves and receptacles for the Arabians to lay up their corn in, for the
sauegard whereof they pitch certain tents near unto the place.

Of the town of Harais.
THis town was founded by the ancient Africans upon the Ocean sea shore, near
unto the mouth of the river Luccus, one side thereof adioining upon the said
river, and the other side upon the maine Ocean. When the Moors were lords of
Arzilla and Tangia, this town was well inhabited: but those two towns being
won by the Christians, Harais remained destitute of inhabitants, almost
twenty years together: howbeit afterward the king of Fez his son, fearing
the Portugals invasion, caused it strongly to be fortified and kept with a
perpetual garrison. The passage unto this town by the rivers mouth is very
dangerous and difficult. Likewise the kings son caused a castle to be built,
wherein is maintained a garrison of two hundred crosse-bowes, an hundred
Harquebusiers, and three hundred light horsemen. Near unto the town are
diverse meadows and fennes where the townsmen take great store of eeles and of
water-fowles. Upon this rivers side are huge and solitary woods haunted with
lions and other wild beasts. The inhabitants of this town use to transport
coals by sea to Arzilla and Tangia, whereupon the Moors use for a common
proverb, A ship of Harais, which they allege when a man after great brags and
promises performs trifles; for these ships having sails of cotton, which
make a gallant show, are laden with naught but base coals: for the territory
of this city abounds greatly with cotton.

Of the town called Casar Elcabir, that is, The great palace.
THis large town was built in the time of Mansor the king and patriarch of
Maroco; of whom this notable history is reported, namely, that the said king,
as he rode on hunting, being separated from his company by tempestuous
weather, came unto a certain unknown place, where if he continued all night,
fearing least he should die in the fens, he looked round about him, and at
length espied a fisher getting of eeles: can you, A pleasant discourse how king
Mansor was entertained by a fisher.
(...) friend (quoth the king) conduct me to the court? The court (says the
fisher) is ten miles distant. Howbeit, the king entreating hard to be
conducted; if king Mansor himself were present (quoth the fisher) I could not
at this present conduct him, for fear least he should be drowned in the
fennes. Then answered Mansor: what have thou to do with the kings life or
safety? Marie (quoth the fisher) I am bound to love the king as well as mine
own life. Then have you obtained some singular benefit at his hands, said the
king. What greater benefit (quoth the fisher) can be expected at the kings
hand, then justice, love, and clemency, which he vouchsafes unto his
subjects; by whose favor and wisdom I silly fisher with my poor wife and
children live a most quiet and contented life, so that I can even at midnight
have free egresse and regresse unto this my cottage amidst these valleys and
desert fennes, no man lying in wait to do me injury? But (gentle Sir)
whatsoever you be, if you please to be my guest for this night, you shall be
right welcome, and to morrow morning betimes I will attend upon you at your
pleasure. Then the king went unto the fishers cottage, where after his horse
was provided for, the fisher caused some eeles to be roasted for his supper,
while he sat drying of his garments by the fire: but the king not being
contented with this fare, demanded if his host had any flesh in the house: Sir
(quoth he) I have a shee-goate and a kid, and they are all my substance of
cattle: but because by your countenance you seem to be some honorable
personage, I will adventure my kid for your sake; and so without any more words
he caused his wife to kill it and roste it. Thus the king remained the fishers
guest all night: and the next morning about sunrise, being scarcely gone out
of the doors with his liberal host, he espied a great company of his
gentlemen and hunters whooping and hallowing for their king amidst the fennes,
but when they saw him, they all greatly reioiced. Then Mansor turning him to
the fisher, told him what he was, promising that his liberality should not be
unrewarded. Near unto the place were certain fair castles and palaces, which
the king at his departure gave unto the fisher in token of thankfulness; and
being by the fisher requested, for declaration of his farther love, to enuiron
the said buildings with walls, he condescended thereunto. From thencefoorth the
fisher (...) lord and governor of that new city, which in process of time
grew so large, that within these few years it contained four hundred
families. And because the soil (...) unto it is so fertile, the king used to
make his abode thereabout all summer time, which was a great benefit to the
town. By the walls of this town runs Read Osorius lib. 2. de rebus gestis
Eman. (...) this town.
the river Luccus, which sometimes increases so, that it flows to the
citiegates. In this town are practiced diverse manuarie arts and trades of
merchandise: also it has many temples, one college of students, and a stately
hospital. They have neither springs nor wels, but only cesternes in stead
thereof. The inhabitants are liberal honest people, though not so (...) as
some others. Their apparel is but mean, being made of cotton-cloth, and
wrapped often about their bodies. In the suburbs are great store of gardens
replenished with all kind of fruits. Their grapes are unsavory, because the
soil is fitter for medow-ground. Every monday they have a market upon the next
plain, whither their neighbors the Arabians usually resort. In the month of
May they go forth of their town a fowling, and take great store of turtles.
Their ground is exceeding fruitful, and yields thirty fold increase: but it
cannot be tilled for six miles about, because the Portugals garrison at
Arzilla which is but eighteen miles distant, does so molest and endomage them:
whom likewise the governor of this town with three hundred horsemen
continually encountereth, and sometime proceeds even to the gates of Arzilla.

Of the region of Habat.
THis region begins southward from the river of Guarga, and bordereth
northward upon the Ocean, westward it adioineth unto the fennes of Argar, and
eastward it abutteth upon those mountains which are next unto the streites of
Gibraltar. In breadth it stretches four score, and in length almost an
hundredth miles. The fruitefulnes of the soil, and the abundance of corn
cannot easily be described: it is almost a perpetual plain, watered with many
rivers: howbeit heretofore it has been more noble and famous, by reason of
the ancient cities built partly by the Romans and partly by the Goths: and I
think it to be the same region which Ptolemey calls Mauritania; but since
Fez was first built, it has fallen into wonderful decay. Moreover Idris the
founder of Fez leaving ten sons behind him, bestowed this region upon the
eldest: afterward ensued a rebellion of diverse Mahumetan heretics and lords,
one faction of whom suing for aid at the governor of Granada, and others
seeking aid from certain governors of Cairaoan, they were all vanquished and
put to flight by the Mahumetan patriark of Cairaoan: who having thus subdued
the region, left it under garrison and returned home. Afterward the great
chancelour of Cordoua leuying an huge army, conquered all this country even
to the borders of the region of Zab. Fifty years after king Joseph of the
Luntune family, chasing out the people of Granada, obtained the said province
by force: and last of all the king of Fez enioied it.

Of Ezaggen a town of Habat.
THis town was built by the ancient Africans upon the side of a mountain,
almost ten miles distant from Guarga: all which distance being plain ground,
serves for cornfieldsd and gardens: howbeit the hills are far more
fruitful. This town is distant from Fez almost threescore and ten miles, and
contains to the number of five hundred families, out of the territory
whereof there is the sum of ten thousand ducates yearly gathered for
tribute, with which tribute the governor of the same town is bound to
maintain on the kings behalf four hundred horsemen, for the defense of the
whole region. For they are often molested with invasions of the Portugals, who
proceed wasting and spoiling the country, sometimes forty, and sometimes
fifty miles. Here is but little ciuility to be found, neither are the people
but homely apparelled, though they be very rich. They have a privilege granted
them by the ancient kings of Fez to drink wine, which is otherwise forbidden
by the law of Mahumet, and yet none of them all will abstain from drinking it.

Of the town called Bani Teude.
THis ancient town was built also by the Africans on a large plain by the
river of Guarga, five and forty miles from the city of Fez. In the
prosperity thereof it contained to the number of eight thousand families, but
afterward it was so destroyed by the wars of the (...) of Cairaoan, that now
the town wall is only remaining. At my being there I saw diverse monuments and
sepulchers of noblemen, and certain conducts curiously built of excellent
marble. From this town mount Gumera is almost fowerteene miles distant: the
fields adjacent being good arable, and very fruitful.

Of the town of Mergo.
MErgo standing upon the top of a mountain is from Bani Teude about ten
miles distant. Some think that the Romans were founders of this town, because
there are found upon the ancient ruins certain Latin letters engraven. But
now it is quite destitute of inhabitants, howbeit upon the side of the same
mountain stands another small town inhabited with weauers of course cloth;
from whence you may behold the river Subu to the south, and the river Guarga to
the north, from which rivers the said town is five miles distant. The
inhabitants love to be accounted gentlemen, albeit they are covetous,
ignorant, and destitute of all goodness.

Of the town of Tansor.
TAnsor stands upon a little hill, almost ten miles from Mergo, and
contains three hundredth families, but very few artificers. The inhabitants
are rude and barbarous people, having neither vineyardes nor gardens, but only
exercising husbandry, and possessing abundance of cattle. This town stands
in the midde way between Fez and mount Gumera, which (I think) is the
occasion, that the inhabitants are so covetous and void of humanity.

Of the town of Agla.
THis ancient town was built by the Africans upon the bank of the river
Guarga. The fruitful fields thereof are manured by the Arabians: but the town
it self has been so wasted with war, that now there is nothing to be
seen but in a few places the ruins of houses and walls, and certain pits. In
the suburbs there is every week a great market, whereunto the next Arabians
usually resort; and so do some merchants of Fez likewise, to buie oxe-hides,
wool, and wax, which are the principal commodities of that place. Hereabouts
keep great store of lions, but they are by nature so fearful, that they will
flee at the voice of a child: hence com meth the proverb so rife in Fez; A
lion of Agla; which they apply unto The (...) of a proverb.
such a one as makes great brags, and is but a mere dastard.

Of the castle of Narangia.
THe castle of Narangia built by the Africans upon a little hill not far from
the river Luccus, is almost ten miles distant from Ezaggen. It has most
fruitful cornfieldsd, but no plains belonging unto it. Along the rivers side
are huge deserts, wherein grow great store of wild fruits, especially
cherries, such as the Italians call Ciriegie marine. This castle was surprised
and sacked by the Portugals in the year of the Hegeira 895. which was in the
year of our Lord, 1486.

Of the Isle of Gesira.
THe Isle of Gesira lying not far from the mouth of the river Luccus, is
distant from the sea about ten, and from Fez about an hundredth miles. There was
in times past a little ancient town upon this Island, which was abandoned when
the Portugals first made wars upon Barbary. About the said river are many
deserts, but An attempt and defeat of the Portugals.
very few cornfieldsd. In the year of the Hegeira 894. the king of Portugal
sent hither a great army, which being landed on the Isle, the general of the
field built a strong fort thereupon, by means whereof he hoped to be free from
the enemies invasion, and to enjoy the fields adjacent. But the king of Fez,
namely his father that 1562.
now reigns, foreseeing the damage that he should sustain, if he permitted
the said fort to be finished, levied a mighty army to withstand the
Portugals proceedings. Howbeit, so great was the force of their ordinance, that
the Moors durst not approach within two miles of the Portugal camp. Wherefore
the Fessan king being almost out of hope, was persuaded by some that were about
him to stop up the river with posts and raftes two miles from the Island: by
which means the Moors being defended, and having cut down all the woods
adioining, the Portugals perceived the passage of the river in short time to be
choked and stopped up with great trees, and that there was no possibility for
them to depart. Then the king hoping easily to overcome the Portugales,
determined to assail their fort: but considering he could not do it without
great slaughter of his people, he couenanted with the Portugal general, that
besides a great sum of money paid unto him, the said general should
obtain of the Portugal king to have certain daughters of the king of Fez his
governor (which were at that time prisoners in Portugal) to be restored, and
that then he would freely dismiss him and his company: which being done, the
Portugal army returned home.

Of the town of Basra.
THis town containing almost two thousand families, was built by Mahumet the
son of Idris, which was the founder of Fez, upon a certain plain between
two mountains, being distant from Fez about fowerscore, and from Casar
southward almost twenty miles. And it was named Basra for the memory of a
city in Arabia Foelix called by that name, where Hali the fourth Mahumetan
patriarch after Mahumet, and great grandfather unto Idris was slain. It was in
times past environed with most high and impregnable walls: and so long as it was
governed by the posterity of Idris, the people were very civil; for Idris
his successors used always to remain there in summer time, by reason of the
pleasant situation of the place, the hills and valleies being beautified with
sweet gardens, and yielding corn in abundance: and that both by reason of the
vicinitie of the town, and of the neighborhood of the river Luccus.
Moreover, in old time this town was very populous, being adorned with many
fair temples, and inhabited with most civil people: but the family of Idris
decaying, it became a pray unto the enemy. At this present the ruins of the
walls are only to be seen, and certain forlorn gardens, which, because the
ground is not manured, bring forth naught, but wild fruits.

Of the town called Homar.
THis town was built by one Hali a disciple of the foresaid Mahumet upon a
little hill, and by a rivers side, being situate about fourteen miles to the
north of Casar, and sixteen miles to the south of Arzilla: which although it be
but a small town, yet is it well fortified and fairly built, and environed
with fruitful fields, vineyardes, and gardens replenished with wonderful
variety of fruits. The inhabitants being most of them linnen-weauers, gather
and provide great store of flax. But ever since the Portugals won Arzilla,
this town has remained desolate.

A description of the (...) of (...).
THe great city of Arzilla called by the Africans Azella, was built by the
Romans upon the Ocean sea shore, about seventy miles from the streits of
Gibraltar, and an hundred and forty miles from Fez. It was in times past
subject unto the prince of Septa or Ceuta, who was tributarie to the Romans,
and was afterward taken by the Goths, who established the said prince in his
former government: but the Mahumetans wan it in the year of the Hegeira 94.
and held the same for two hundred and twenty years, till such time as the
English at the persuasion of the Goths besieged it with an huge army; and
albeit the Goths were enemies to the English, because themselves were
Christians, and the English worshippers of idols, yet the Goths (...) them to
this attempt, hoping by that means to The taking of Arzilla by the English.
draw the Mahumetans out of Europe. The English having good success took the
city, and so wasted it with fire and sword, that scarce one citizen escaped,
so that it remained almost thirty years void of inhabitants. But afterward
when the Mahumetan patriarks of Cordoua were lords of Mauritania, it was again
reedified, and by all means augmented, enriched and fortified. The inhabitants
were rich, learned, and valiant. The fields adjacent yield grain and pulse of
all sorts in great abundance, but because the town stands almost ten miles
from the mountains, it sustaineth great want of wood; howbeit they have coals
brought them from Harais, as is aforesaid. In the year of the Hegeira 882.
this city was suddenly surprised and taken by the Portugalles, and all the
inhabitants carried prisoners into Arzilla taken by the Portugals.
Portugal, amongst whom was Mahumet the king of Fez that now is, who together
with his sister being both children of seven years old, were taken and led
captive. For the father of this Mahumet seeing the province of Habatreuolt from
him, went and dwelt at Arzilla, the very same time, Habdulac the last king of
the Marin family.
when Esserif a great citizen of Fez, having slain Habdulac the last king of
the Marin-familie, was by the favor of the people advanced unto the Fessan
kingdom. Afterward one Saic Abra being pricked forward with ambition, went
about to conquer the city of Fez, and to make himself king; howbeit Esserif
by the advice of a certain counselor of his, being couzin unto Saic,
vanquished and put to flight the said Saic to his great disgrace. Moreover
while Esserif had sent his said counselor to Temesna, to pacify the people
of that province being about to rebel, Saic returned, and having for one whole
year besieged new Fez with eight thousand men, at length by treason of the
townsmen he easily wan it, and compelled Esserif with all his family, to flee
unto the kingdom of Tunis. The same time therefore that Saic besieged Fez, the
king of Portugal (as is aforesaid) sending a fleet into Africa, took
Arzilla, and then was the king of Fez that now is with his young sister carried
captive into Portugal, where he remained seven years, in which space he
learned the Portugall-language most exactly. At length with a great sum of
money his father ransomed him out of Portugal, who afterward being advanced to
the kingdom, was by reason of his long continuance in Portugal called king
Mahumet the Portugal. This king afterward attempted very often to be avenged
of the Portugals, and to recover Arzilla. Wherefore suddenly encountering the
said city he beat down a Read Osorius lib. 5. de rebus gestis Eman.
great part of the wall, and entering the breach, set all the captiue-Moores at
liberty. The Christians retired into the castle, promising within two days to
yield unto the king. But Pedro Nauarro coming in the mean season with a great
fleet, they compelled the king with continual discharging of their ordinance,
not only to relinquish the city, but also to depart quite away with his whole
army: afterward it was so fortified on all sides by the Portugals, John Leo
served the king of Fez in his wars against Arzilla.
that the said king attempting often the recovery thereof, had always the
repulse. I my self serving the king in the foresaid expedition could find but
five hundred of our company slain. But the war against Arzilla continued
from the year of the Hegeira 914. to the year 921.

Of the city of Tangia.
THe great and ancient city of Tangia called by the Portugals Tangiara,
according to the fond opinion of some historiographers, was founded by one
Sedded the son of Had, who (as they say) was emperor over the whole world.
This man (say they) determined to build a city, which for beauty might match
the earthly paradise. Wherefore he compassed the same with walls of brass,
and the roofes of the houses he covered with gold and silver, for the building
whereof he exacted great tributes of all the cities in the world. But the
classical and approved authors affirm that it was built by the Romans upon
the Ocean sea shore, at the same time when they subdued the kingdom of Or
Boetica.
Granada. From the streites of Gibraltar it is distant almost thirty, and from
Fez an hundred and fifty miles. And from the time that the Goths were first
lords of Granada, this city was subject unto Septa or Ceuta, until it and
Arzilla were won by the Mahumetans. It has always been a civil, famous,
and well-peopled town, and very stately and sumptuously built. The field
thereto belonging is not very fertile, nor apt for tilth: howbeit not far off
are certain valleys continually watered with fountains, which furnish the said
city with all kind of fruits in abundance. Without the city also grow
certain vines, albeit upon a sandy soil. It was well stored with
inhabitants, till such time as Arzilla was surprised by the Portugals: for then
the inhabitants being dismayed with rumors of wars, took up their bag and
baggage and fled unto Fez. Whereupon the king of Portugal his deputy at
Arzilla sent one of his captains thither, who kept it so long under the
obedience of the king, till the king of Fez sent one of his kinsmen also to
defend a region of great importance near unto the mountains of Gumera, being
enemy to the Christians. Twenty five years before the Portugal king wan
this city, he sent forth an armada against it, hoping that the city being
destitute of aid, (...) king of Fez was in wars against the rebels of
Mecnase, would soon yield it self. But contrary to the Portugals expectation
the Fessan king concluding a sudden truce with them of Mecnase, sent his
counselor with an army, who encountering the Portugals, made a great
slaughter of them, and amongst the rest slew their general, whom he caused to
be carried in a case or sack unto new Fez, and there to be set upon an high
place where all men might behold him. Afterward the king of Portugal sent a
new supply, who suddenly assailing the city in the night, were most of them
slain, and the residue enforced to flee. But that which the Portugall-king
could not bring to pass with those two Armadas, he achieved at length (as is
aforesaid) with small forces and little disadvantage. In my time (...) king of
Fez left no means unattempted for the recovery of this city, but so great
always was the valor of the Portugals, that he had ever ill success. These
things were done in the year of the Hegeira 917, which was in the year of our
Lord 1508.

Of the town called Casar Ezzaghir, that is, the little palace.
THis town was built by Mansor the king and Patriarch of Maroco upon the Ocean
sea shore, about twelve miles from Tangia, and from Septa eighteen miles. It
was built (they say) by Mansor, because every year when he passed into the
Province of Granada, he was constrained with his whole army to march over the
rough and ragged mountains of Septa, before he could come unto the sea shore.
It stands in an open and pleasant place over against the coast of Granada. It
was well peopled in times past, part of the inhabitants being weauers and
merchants, and the rest mariners, that used to transport the Casar Ezzaghir
taken by the king of Portugal.
wares of (...) into Europe. This town the king of Portugal took by a sudden
surprise. And the Fessan king has labored by all means to recover it, but
ever with ill success. These things were done in the year of the Hegeira 863.

Of the great city of Septa.
SEpta, called by the Latins, Ciuitas, and by the Portugals, Seupta, was
(according to our most approved Authors) built by the Romans upon the streits
of Gibraltar, being in old time the head city of all Mauritania; wherefore
the Romans made great account thereof, insomuch that it became very civil,
and was thoroughly inhabited. Afterward it was woone by the Goths, who
appointed a governor there; and it continued in their possession, (...) the
Mahumetans inuading Mauritania surprised it also. The occasion whereof was one
Julian Earl of Septa; who being greatly iniuried by Roderigo king of the
Goths and of Spain, joined with the infidels, conducted The entrance of the
Moors into Granada.
them into Granada, and caused Roderigo to loose both his life and his
kingdom. The Mahumetans therefore having taken Septa, kept possession thereof
on the behalf of one Elgualid, son of Habdulmalic their Patriarch, who then
was resident at Damasco, in the year of the Hegeira 92. From thencefoorth till
within these few years, this city grew so civil and so well stored with
inhabitants, that it proved the most worthy and famous city of all
Mauritania. It contained many temples and colleges of students, with great
numbers of artizans, and men of learning and of high spirit. Their artizans
excelled especially in works of brass, as namely in making of candlesticks,
basins, standishes, and such like commodities, which were as pleasant to the
eye, as if they had been made of silver or gold. The Italians have great
cunning in making of the like, but their workmanship is nothing comparable to
theirs of Or ceuta.
Septa. Without the city are diverse fair villages and granges, especially in
that place which for the abundance of vines is called The vineyards: howbeit
the fields are very barren and fruitles, for which cause their corn is
exceeding dear. Both without and within the city there is a pleasant and
beautiful prospect to the shore of Granada upon the streits of Gibraltar, from
whence you may discern living creatures, The streits of Gibraltar from Septa
but 12. miles broad.
the distance being but 12. miles. Howbeit this famous city not many years
since was greatly afflicted by Habdulmumen the king and patriarch: who having
surprised it, razed the buildings, and banished the principal inhabitants
thereof. And not long after it sustained as great damage by the king of
Granada, who (besides the foresaid harms) carried the nobles and chief
citizens captives into Granada. And lastly in the year of Mahumet his Hegeira
Septa taken by the Portugals.
818. being taken by a Portugall-armada, all the citizens did abandon it. Abu
Sahid being then king of Fez., and a man of no valor, neglected the Abu Sahid
king of Fez and his six sons slain all in one night.
recovery thereof: but in the midst of his dancing and disport being
advertised that it was lost, he would not so much as interrupt his vain
pastime: wherefore by gods just judgment, both himself and his six sons
were all slain in one night by his Secretary, in whom he reposed singular
trust, because he would have defloured the said Secretaries wife. These things
came to pass in the year of the Hegeira 824. Afterward, the kingdom of Fez
being eight years destitute of a king, a son of the murdered king whom he
begot of a Christian woman, and who the same night that his father was slain
fled unto Tunis, succeeded in the government: this was Habdulac the last king
of the Marin family, who likewise (as is aforesaid) was slain by the people.

Of the town of Tetteguin, now called Tetuan.
THis town being built by the ancient Africans eighteen miles from the
streits of Gibraltar, and six miles from the maine Ocean, was taken by the
Mahumetans at the same time when they won Septa from the Goths. It is
reported that the Goths bestowed the government of this town upon a woman
with one eye, who weekly repairing thither to receive tribute, the inhabitants
named the town (...), which signifies in their language an eye. Afterward
being often assailed and encountered by the Portugals, the inhabitants forsook
it, and it remained fowerscore and fifteen years desolate: which time being
expired, it was reedified and replanted a new with inhabitants by a certain
captain of Granada, who together with his king being expelled thence by
Ferdinando king of Castile, departed unto Fez. This famous captain that showed
himself so valiant in the wars of Granada was called by the Portugals
Almandali. Who having obtained the government of this town, and gotten license
to repair it, environed the same with new walls, and built an impregnable
castle therein compassed with a deep ditch. Afterward making continual war
against the Portugals, he extremely molested and endamaged their towns of
Septa, Casar, and Tangia: for with three hundred valiant horsemen of Granada he
made daily incursions and inroades upon the Christians, and those that he
took, he put to continual labor and toil about the building of his forts.
Upon a time I my self traveling this way saw three thousand Christian
captives, who being clad in course sacke-cloth, were constrained in the night
to lie fettered in deep dungeons. This captain was exceeding liberal unto
all African and Mahumetan strangers that passed by: howbeit within these few
years one of his eyes being thrust out with a dagger, and the other waxing dim
with age, he deceased; leaving the town after his death unto his nephew, who
was a most valiant man.

Of the mountains of Habat.
A Among the mountains of Habat there be eight more famous then the rest, all
which are inhabited by the people of Gumera, who use one general form and
custom of living: for all of them maintain Mahumets religion, albeit they
drink wine contrary to his precept. They are proper men of personage and much
addicted to industry and labor, but for the wars they are very unfit.
Subject they are unto the king of Fez, who imposes such heavy tribute upon
them, so that besides a few (of whom we will speak hereafter) the residue are
scarce able to find themselves apparel.

Of mount Rahona.
THis mountain being near unto Ezaggen, contains in length thirty miles,
and in breadth twelve miles. It abounds with oil, honey, and vines. The
inhabitants are principally employed about making of soap and trying of wax.
Wines they have great store both brown and white. They pay unto the king of
Fez for yearly tribute three thousand ducates, which being allowed unto the
governor of Ezaggen, he maintains four hundred horsemen in the kings
service.

Of the mountain called Beni-Fenescare.
THis mountain of Fenescare adjoining unto mount Rahon, is about five and
twenty miles long, and eight miles broad. It is better peopled then Rahon,
having many leather-dressers, and weauers of course cloth, and yielding great
abundance of wax. Every saturday they have a great market, where you may find
all kind of chapmen and of wares; insomuch that the Genoueses come hither to
buy oxe-hides and wax, which they convey into Portugal and Italy. Out of this
mountain is yearly collected for tribute the sum of six thousand ducates,
three thousand whereof are allowed unto the governor of Ezaggen, the residue
being paid into the kings exchequer.

Of the mountain called Beni-Haros.
THis mountain standing near unto Casar extends northward eight, and
westward 20 miles. It contains but six miles only in breadth. It was wont to
be well peopled and inhabited with gentlemen, who, when the Portugals won
Arzilla, cruelly usurping over the people, compelled them to flee and leave the
mountain desolate. There are at this present certain cottages upon the
mountain; but all the residue lies wast. While this mountain continued in
good estate, it allowed yearly unto the governor of Casar three thousand
ducates.

Of mount Chebib.
Upon this mountain are six or seven castles inhabited with civil and honest
people: for when the Portugals wan Tangia, the citizens fled unto this
mountain being but twenty miles distant. The inhabitants are perpetually
molested with the Portugals invasions: the tributes of this mountain being
half diminished since the loss of Tangia, wax every day worse and worse,
because the garrison is thirty miles distant, and cannot come to succor them
so often as the Portugals come to waste and spoil their territories.

Of the mountain called Beni Chessen.
THis mountain is of an exceeding height, and very hard to be encountered: for
besides the natural fortification thereof, it is inhabited with most valiant
people. These inhabitants being oppressed with the tyranny of their
governors, rose up at length in arms against them, and brought them to great
misery and distress. Whereupon a young gentleman, one of their said
governors, disdaining to submit himself unto the yoke of his inferiors, went
to serve in the king of Granada his wars, where being trained up a long time
in martial discipline against the Christians, he proved an expert warrior:
and so at length returning unto one of his native mountains, he gathered a
certain troop of horsemen, and valiantly defended the said mountain from the
Portugals invasions: whereof the king of Fez being advertised, sent him an
hundred and fifty crossebowes: which he employed to the subduing of that
mountain, and to the conquest of the mountains of his enemies. But after he
began to usurp the kings tribute in the same mountain, the king waxing wroth
sent forth an huge army against him. Howbeit upon his repentant submission,
the king pardoned him, and ordained him governor of Seusauon, and of all the
region adjacent. After him succeeded in the same government one of the lineage
of Mahumet, and of Idris the founder of Fez. This man became very famous among
the Portugals, and by reason of his nobility (for he was of the family called
Helibenres) he grew unto great renown.

Of mount Angera.
IT stands southward of Casar the less almost eight miles, being ten miles
long and three miles broad. The soil thereof is exceeding fruitful, and in
times past greatly abounded with woods, which being cut down by the
inhabitants, were sent to Casar for the building of ships: which at that time
had a great fleet belonging thereunto. This mountain likewise yielded
abundance of flax; and the inhabitants were partly weauers and partly
mariners. Howbeit when the foresaid town of Casar was won by the Portugals,
this mountain also was forsaken by the inhabitants: and yet at this day all
the houses stand still, as if the inhabitants had not forsaken it at all.

Of mount Quadres.
THis high mountain standing in the midst between Septa and Tetteguin, is
inhabited with most valiant and warlike people, whose valor sufficiently
appeered in the wars between the king of Granada, and the Spaniards; where
the inhabitants only of this mountain prevailed more then all the armed
Moors beside. Upon the said mountain was borne one called by them Hellul:
this Hellul achieved many worthy exploits against the Spaniards; the
history whereof is set down partly in verse and partly in prose, and is as
rife in Africa and Granada, as is the story of Orlando in Italy. But at
length in the Spanish war (wherein Joseph Enesir king and patriarch of Maroco
was vanquished) this Hellul was slain in a castle of Catalonia, called by the
Moors, The castle of the eagle. In the same battle were slain threescore
thousand Moors, so that none of them escaped save the Threescore thousand
Moors slain.
king and a few of his nobles. This was done in the year of the Hegeira 609,
which was in the year of our Lord 1160. From thenceforth the Spaniards had
always good success in their wars, so that they recovered all those cities
which the Moors had before taken from them. And from that time till the year
wherein king Ferdinando conquered Granada, there passed (according to the
Arabians account) 285. years.

Of the mountain called Beni Guedarfeth.
THis mountain standing not far from Tetteguin (although it be not very
large) is well fraught with inhabitants. The people are very warlike, being in
pay under the governor of Tetteguin, whom they greatly honor and attend upon
him in all his attempts against the Christians: for which cause they pay no
tribute unto the king of Fez, unless it be for their fields, which is very
little. They reap much commodity out of those mountains, for there grows
great abundance of box, whereof the Fessan combs are made.

A description of Errif one of the seven regions of Fez.
WEstward this region begins near unto the streites of (...), and extends
eastward to the river of Nocor, which distance contains about an hundred and
forty miles. Northward it bordereth upon the Mediterran sea, and stretches
forty miles southward unto those mountains which lie over against the river
Guarga and the territory of Fez. This region is very uneven, being full of
exceeding cold mountains and waste deserts, which are replenished with most
beautiful and straight trees: Here is no corn growing, they have great store
of vines, figs, olives, and almonds. The inhabitants of this region are valiant
people, but so excessiuely given to drinking, that they scarcely reserve
wherewithal to apparel themselves. Head-cattell they have but few: howbeit
upon their mountains they have great plenty of goats, asses, and apes. Their
towns are but few: and their castles and villages are very homely built
without any plancher or stories, much like to the stables of Europe, and are
covered with thatch or with the bark of trees. All the inhabitants of this
region have the balls of their throat-pipes very great, and are uncivil and
rude people.

Of the town of Terga.
THis small town (as some think) built by the Goths upon the shore of the
Mediterran sea, is distant from the streites of Gibraltar about fowerscore
miles, and contains to the number of five hundred families. The town wall is
of no force. The inhabitants are most part of them fishers; who getting great
abundance of fish, salt them, and carry them to sell almost an hundred miles
southward. This town was in times past well stored with people, but since the
Portugals entered the same region, it has fallen greatly to decay. Not far
from this town grows abundance of (...) upon the ragged and cold mountains.
And albeit the inhabitants are valiant, yet are they rusticall and void of all
humanity.

Of Bedis, otherwise called Velles de (...).
THis ancient town built upon the Mediterran sea shore, and (...) by the
Spaniards Velles de Gumera, contains about six hundred families. Some
writers there are that affirm it to be built by the Africans, and others by
the Goths; so that it remains as yet uncertain who were the true founders
thereof. It stands between two high mountains: and not far from it there
is a fair and large valley, from whence comes a little river or stream to
the town, always when it raineth. In the midst of the town stands the
market place, which contains great store of shops. Here is also a very
stately temple to be seen. Water for drink is exceeding scarce among them,
for they are all constrained to resort unto one pit or well, being in the
suburbs, near unto the sepulcher of a certain man, that was in times past
very famous among them. Howbeit in the night it is dangerous to fetch water
from thence, because it is so full of blood-suckers or horse-leeches. The
townsmen are of two sorts: for some be fishers, and the residue are pirates,
which daily do great harm unto the Christians. Upon the mountains grow great
store of wood, very commodious for the building of ships and of galleies. The
inhabitants of which mountains are almost wholly employed about carrying of
the said wood from place to place. They have very little corn growing, for
which cause most of them eat barley bread. Their principal food are certain
fishes (which the Italians call Sardelli) together with other like fishes. They
have such abundance of fish, that one man alone is not able to draw up a net;
wherefore whosoever will assist the fishermen in that business, are rewarded
with good store of fishes for their labor: yea sometimes they will freely
bestow fishes upon such as pass by. They salt the foresaid Sardelli, and send
them to the mountains to be sold. In this town there is a long street
inhabited with Jews, wherein dwell sundry vintners that sell excellent wines.
So that in calm euenings the citizens use to carry wine aboard their barks
in the sea, and to spend their time in drinking and singing. In this town
stands a fair castle, but not strong, wherein the governor has his abode.
And near unto this castle the said governor has a palace, whereunto
belongs a most pleasant garden. Upon the shore the governor builds
galleies and other ships wherewith they greatly molest the Christians.
Whereupon Ferdinando king of Spain taking a certain Island within a mile of
the town, built a fort thereon, and so planted it with ordinance and
soldiers, that neither their temples nor themselves walking in the streets
were free therefrom, but were daily slain. Wherefore the governor of the
town was constrained to crave aid from the king of Fez, who sent out a great
(...) against the Christians; but they were partly taken, and partly slain, so
that very few escaped back unto Fez. The Christians kept this isle almost two
years: and then it was betrayed by a false treacherous Spaniard (who slew the
governor of the isle, because he had taken his wife from him) into the Moors
possession, and all the Christians were slain: not a man of them escaped, save
only the Spanish traitor, who in regard of his treason was greatly rewarded,
both by the governor of Bedis, and also by the king of Fez. Being at Naples I
heard the whole relation of this matter from a certain man that was present at
all the former exploits, who said that they were done about the year of our
Lord 1520. But now the said island is most diligently kept by a garrison of
soldiers sent from Fez: for Bedis is the nearest hauen-towne unto Fez upon the
Mediterran sea shore, although it be an hundred and twenty miles distant.
Every year or every second year the Venetian galleies use to resort unto
this isle, and to exchange wares for wares with the inhabitants, or sometimes
to buy for ready money: which wares the Venetians transport unto Tunis,
Venice, Alexandria, and sometime to Barutto.

Of the town of Ielles.
THis town being built upon the Mediterran sea shore is almost six miles
distant from Bedis: the haven thereof is very commodious and much frequented by
ships in foul and tempestuous weather. Not far from this town are diverse
mountains and waste deserts growing full of pine trees. In my time it remained
void of inhabitants, by reason of certain Spanish pirates which haunted the
same; and now there are but a few poor cottages of fishers, who standing in
daily dread of the Spaniards, keep continual and circumspect watch to see if
they can escrie any ships making toward them, which if they do, they flee
forthwith unto the next mountains, bringing from (...) a sufficient number of
armed men to withstand the attempts of the Spaniards or Portugals.

Of the (...) of Tegassa.
THis town though it be but little is well stored with inhabitants, and
stands upon a rivers side, about two miles from the Mediterran sea. Families
it contains to the number of five hundredth, the buildings thereof being very
rude and homely: all the inhabitants are fishers and seafaring men, who from
thence carry victuals unto other cities; for their own town being (...) with
mountains and woods, they have no corn at all. Howbeit certain vines there
are, and very fruitful trees, without which the whole region were in a
miserable case. Besides barly-bread the inhabitants have naught to live on,
saving a few little fishes and onions. I my self could hardly for one day
endure the extreme stinking smell of their fishes, which stinch miserably
infecteth the whole province.

Of the town of Gebha.
GEbha is a little town walled round about, and built by the Africans upon the
Mediterran sea shore. From Bedis it is above four and twenty miles distant.
Sometimes it has inhabitants and sometimes none, according to the custom of
that region. All the fields adjacent are unfit for corn, being full of
fountains and woods. Here also are certain vines and other fruits, but no
buildings of any account.

Of the town of Mezemme.
IT is a very large sea-towne standing upon a certain hill which bordereth
upon the province of Garet. Near unto this town lies a very large plain,
the length whereof stretching southward is eight and twenty, and the breadth
almost ten miles, and through the midst of it runs the river called Nocore,
which divides the region of Errif from that of Garet. This plain is occupied
by certain Arabian husbandmen, who reap such plenty of corn there, that
they are constrained to pay about five thousand bushels a year unto the
governor of Bedis. This city was wont in times past to be well peopled, and
was the metropolitan of the whole region, although it were continually molested
with inconveniences. For first it was almost utterly destroyed by the patriarch
of Cairaoan: who, because the townsmen refused to pay him his woonted tribute,
burnt it down, and beheaded the governor thereof: whose head was carried to
Cairaoan upon the pike of a iaueline. This was done in the year of the Hegeira
318. From thencefoorth for fifteen years after it remained destitute of
inhabitants: and then under the same patriarch the foresaid town was by
certain noblemen inhabited a new. Lastly it was taken by a certain great man
of Cordoua. He seeing this city stand within fower-score miles of his
confines (for so broad is the sea between Malaga in Granada, and this part of
Barbary) began to demand tribute of the citizens: which when they refused to
pay, he took their town with a small number of men: for the patriark could
not in so short space succor it, by reason that Cairaoan is distant from
thence above Here seems to be an error in the original.
three and twenty hundredth miles. Wherefore this town being taken and utterly
razed, the governor thereof was sent captive unto Cordoua, where he spent the
residue of his days in prison. And now the walls of this town are only to be
seen. This was done in the year of the Hegeira 892. Now let us speak
somewhat of the mountains of Errif.

Of mount Benigarir.
THis mountain is inhabited by certain people which came first from the
mountains of Gumera. It stands near unto Terga, and is ten miles long, and
almost four miles broad. Upon this mountain are great store of woods, as
likewise abundance of vines and olives. The inhabitants are miserable and poor
people. Cattle are very scarce among them: they use to make much wine and
sodden must. Neither have they any store of barley growing upon this mountain.

Of mount Beni Mansor.
THis mountain contains in length fifteen, and in breadth almost five miles.
Upon this mountain are great store of woods and fountains: All the
inhabitants are most valiant, and yet poor and miserable people, for the whole
mountain yields nothing but vines: they have indeed some small number of
goats. Every week they have a market, whereunto is brought nothing but
garlike, onions, raisins, salt fishes called before Sardelli, together with
some (...) and panicke, whereof they make bread. This hill is subject to the
governor of Bedis.

Of mount Bucchuia.
THis mountain is fowerteene miles long, and almost eight miles broad. The
inhabitants are richer and somewhat better apparelled then they of other
mountains, and possess great store of horses. Corn it yields in abundance:
neither are the people constrained to pay any great tribute, by reason of a
certain holy man buried at Bedis, and borne upon this mountain.

Of mount Beni Chelid.
BY this mountain lies the high way from Bedis to Fez. It is a very cold
place, and contains great store of wood and fountains. It yields no corn,
but vines only. The inhabitants being subject to the governor of Bedis, are
by reason of continual exactions so impouerished, that they are feign to rob
and steal for their living.

Of mount Beni Mansor.
THis mountain extends eight miles, standing an equal distance from the sea
with the mountains (...). The inhabitants are valiant and stout people, but
too much addicted to drunkenness. Wine they have great store, and but little
corn. Their women keep goats and spinne upon the distaffe both at one time:
the greater part of whom will not refuse the dishonest company of any man.

Of mount Beni Joseph.
THE length of this mountain is twelve miles, and the breadth about eight
miles. The inhabitants are poor, and basely apparelled: neither have they any
corn but panicke, whereof they make black and most unsavory bread. They live
also upon onions, and garlike. Their fountains are very muddie. They have
great store of goats, the milk whereof they keep as a most precious thing.

Of mount Beni Zaruol.
Upon this mountain (...) great store of vines, olives, and other fruits. The
inhabitants are poor miserable people, being subject to the governor of
Seusaoen, who exacteth so great tribute at their hands, that all which they
can scrape and get out of the mountain will hardly maintain them. Every week
they have a market, wherein nothing is to be sold, but only dried figs,
raisins, and oil. Likewise they use to kill their he and she goats, whose
flesh is so unsavory, that it cannot be eaten, unless it be fried.

Of mount Beni Razin.
THis mountain bordereth upon the Mediterran sea, not far from Terga. The
inhabitants live a secure and pleasant life; for the mountain is impregnable,
and abounds with all kind of grain, neither are they constrained to pay any
tribute at all. They have likewise good plenty of olives and wine; and their
ground is exceeding fruitful, especially upon the side of the mountain. Their
women partly keep goats, and partly till the ground.

Of mount Seusaoen.
THere is no mountain in all Africa for pleasant situation comparable to this:
hereon stands a town inhabited with all kind of artificers and merchants.
Upon this mountain dwells one called Sidi Heli Berrased, being lord over
many mountains. This Sidi Heli brought some civility into this mountain,
rebelled against the king of Fez, and maintained continual war against the
Portugals. The inhabitants of the villages of this and the foresaid mountains,
are free from all taxation and tribute, because (...) serve under their
captain as well for horsemen as for (...). Come here grows small store, but
great plenty of flax. There are (...) woods, and many fountains upon this
hill: and the inhabitants go all (...).

Of mount Beni Gebara.
THis mountain is very steep, and of a wonderful height, out of the foot
whereof spring certain rivers. Vines and figs here are great store, but no
corn at all: and the inhabitants wear most base attire. They have abundance
of goats, and oxen of so little a stature, that a man would take them to be
calves of half a year old. Every week they have a market, being furnished
with very few commodities. Hither do the merchants of Fez resort, and the
muletters or carriers, which conueie fruits out of this mountain unto Fez. In
times past it was subject unto a certain prince of the king of Fez his kindred:
and there were collected out of this mountain almost two thousand ducates of
yearly tribute.

Of mount Beni Ierso.
THis mountain in times past was exceedingly well peopled. Here was likewise
a fair college built, wherein the Mahumetan law was publicly taught, for
which cause the inhabitants were freed from all tributes and exactions.
Afterward a certain tirant being assisted by the king of Fez, made this
mountain to become tributarie unto him; but first he put the inhabitants to
flight, and then destroyed the college, wherein were found books worth more
then four thousand ducates, and the learned and famous men he cruelly put to
the sword. This was done in the 918. year of the Hegeira, which was in the
year of our Lord 1509.

Of mount Tezarin.
THis mountain called by the inhabitants Tezarin, stands near unto the
foresaid Beni Ierso, and abounds greatly with fountains, deserts, and
vineyards. Upon the top thereof stand diverse ancient buildings, which (so far
forth as I can conjecture) were erected by the Romans. And here (as is before
signified) certain fond people continually search in caves and holes of the
earth for the Romans treasure. All the inhabitants of this mountain are most
ignorant people, and greatly oppressed with exactions.

Of mount Beni Busibet.
THis is a most cold mountain, and therefore it yields neither corn nor
cattle, both by reason of the extreme coldness, and the barrennes thereof.
Moreover the leaves of the trees are not fit for goats to feed upon. They
have so great plenty of nuts, that they abundantly furnish the city of Fez,
and all other neighbor cities and towns therewith. All their grapes are
black, whereof they make a certain pleasant meat called Zibibbo. They make
likewise great store of must and wine. They are clad Zibibbo.
in certain woollen clokes or mantles, such as are used in Italy: these
mantles have certain hoods, which cover their heads and visages so, that you
can scarce discern them to be men: and they are parti-colored with black and
white spots. In winter the merchants that resort unto this mountain to carry
away nuts and raisins unto Fez, can scarce find any meat to eat, for there
is neither corn nor flesh, but only onions and certain salt fishes, which
are extreme dear. They use likewise to eat sodden must and beans dressed
after their manner, and this is the daintiest fare that this mountain can
afford; and their sodden must they eat with much bread.

Of mount Beni Gualid.
IT is an exceeding high and steep hill, and the inhabitants are very rich,
for of their black grapes they make the foresaid meat called Zibibbo.
Almonds, figs, and olives they have in great abundance: neither pay they any
tribute unto the king of Fez, but only each family one fourth part of a
ducate, to the end they may have free liberty to buie and sell in Fez market.
And if any citizen of Fez does them any wrong, when they take him or any of
his kindred in their mountain, they will not suffer him to return home to Fez,
till sufficient recompense be made. These people go decently apparelled, and
they have a privilege granted, that whatsoever persons are banished out of Fez,
may freely remain in their mountain; yea, they will bestow their living
gratis upon such banished persons, so long as they continue amongst them. And
doubtless if this mountain were subject unto the king of Fez, it would afford
him yearly for tribute six thousand ducates: for it contains mo then six
hundredth rich families.

Of mount Merniza.
THis mountain stands just by the former, the inhabitants being endued with
the same nobility, liberty, and wealth, that the people of the former are
endued with. The women of this mountain for any light injury offered by their
husbands, leaving forthwith their said husbands and children, will depart
unto some other mountain, and seek them new paramours fit for their humor.
For which cause they are at continual war one with another: neither will
they be reconciled till he that is last possessed of the woman pay her former
husband all such money as he spent in the solemnizing of her marriage: and for
this purpose they have certain judges, that make their poor clients spend
almost all their whole substance.

Of mount Haugustian.
IT is an exceeding high and a cold mountain, containing great store of
springs, and abundance of vines bearing black grapes, together with plenty of
figs, of honey, and of quinces: howbeit the sweetest and fairest quinces grow
upon a plain at the foot of the hill. Likewise they are well stored with
oil, and are free from all tribute, and yet there is not one of them, but in
token of a thankful mind will send great gifts unto the king of Fez: hence
it is that they may freely and securely traffic with the people of Fez, of
whom they buie great store of corn, wool, and cloth. They are most ciuilly
and decently apparelled, especially such as dwell upon the principal part of
this mountain, who are most of them either merchants or artificers, and a
great many of them gentlemen.

Of Mount Beni Iedir.
THis is a great and well peopled mountain, but it yields naught but grapes,
whereof they use to make the foresaid Zibibbo and wines. The inhabitants were
in times past free from all tribute; howbeit in regard of their daily robberies
and outrages committed against other people, the governor of Bedis being aided
with some soldiers of Fez, subdued them all, and deprived them of their
liberty: in this mountain there are about fifty farms or granges, which
scarcely pay four hundred ducates for tribute.

Of Mount Lucai.
THis mountain is of a wonderful height, and very difficult to ascend. The
inhabitants are exceeding rich, having great abundance of raisins, figs,
almonds, oil, quinces, and pome-citrons: and dwelling but five and thirty
miles distant from Fez, they carry all their fruits and commodities thither.
They are almost all gentlemen, and very proud and high minded, so that they
would never pay any tribute at all: for they know that their mountain is so
fortified by nature, that it cannot easily be subdued: here likewise all such
as are banished out of Fez, except only adulterers, are friendly entertained:
for the inhabitants are so jealous, that they will admit no adulterers into
their society. The king of Fez grants them many privileges and favors, in
regard of the great commodities which he reapeth out of their mountain.

Of mount Beni Guazeuall.
THis mountain is almost thirty miles long, and about fifteen miles broad: it
is divided into three parts, and between this and the mountains aforesaid run
certain little rivers. The inhabitants are most valiant and warlike people,
but extremely oppressed and burdened with exactions by the governor of Fez,
who every year demands of this mountain for tribute eighteen thousand
ducates: the mountain indeed abounds with grapes, olives, figs, and flax,
whereby great sums of money are raised; howbeit whatsoever they can gather
goes presently to the governor of Fez, who has his officers and receivers in
the mountain, which do miserably oppress and bribe the inhabitants: in this
mountain are a great number of villages and hamlets, that contain some an
hundred, and some two hundred families and above: of most expert and trained
soldiers they have above five and twenty thousand, and are at continual war
with those that border upon them. But the king of Fez for those that are slain
on both parts requires great sums of money, so that he gains much by their
dissensions. In this mountain there is a certain town indifferently well
peopled, and furnished with all kind of artificers; whereunto the fields
belonging maruellously abound with grapes, quinces, and pome-citrons, all
which are sold at Fez: here are likewise great store of linen weauers, and
many judges and lawyers. They have also a good market, whereunto the
inhabitants of the neighbor mountains resort. Upon the top of this mountain
there is a certain cave A cave or hole that perpetually casts up fire.
or hole that perpetually casts up fire. Some woondering greatly at the
matter, have cast in wood, which was suddenly consumed to ashes: I my self
never saw the like miracle in any other place, so that a great many think it
to be hell-mouth.

Of mount Benigueriaghell.
IT stands near unto the mountain last mentioned, and yet the inhabitants of
these mountains are at continnall war and discord. At the foot of this
mountain there is a large plain which extends to the territory of Fez, and
through the same runs that river which the inhabitants call Guarga. This
mountain greatly abounds with oil, corn, and flax, for which cause here
are great store of linnen-weauers. The greatest part of al their commodities is
gathered for the kings use, so that they which otherwise would prove exceeding
rich, become by this means stark beggars, and that especially by reason of the
courtiers continual extortions. They are people of an ingenuous and valiant
disposition. Soldiers they have almost twelve thousand, and to the number of
threescore villages.

Of mount Beni Achmed.
THis mountain is eighteen miles long and seven miles broad. It is very
steep and contains many waste deserts, and yields likewise great store of
grapes, olives, and figs: howbeit the soil is not so apt for corn. All the
inhabitants are continually oppressed with the exactions of the Fessan king. At
the foot of this mountain are diverse springs and small streams, the water
whereof is muddie and unpleasant in taste, for in regard of the nature of the
sand or earth it tastes of chalk. There are many in this place, the balls
of whose throte-pipes are very great and stick far out, like unto those
abouementioned. All of them drink pure wine, which Wine that will last
fifteen years.
being boiled will last fifteen years, howbeit they boil not all their wine,
but some they keep vnboyled, and they yearly make great quantity of boiled
wine, which they use to put in vessels, that are narrow at the bottom, and
broad at the top. They have every week a great market, where wine, oil, and
raisins are to be sold. The people of this mountain likewise are extreme
poor and beggarly, as a man may conjecture by their apparel. They have had
continual and ancient quarrels among themselves, which make them oftentimes
fall together by the ears.

Of mount Beni Ieginesen.
THis mountain bordereth upon Beni Achmed, and stretches in length almost ten
miles. And between it and mount Beni Achmed runs a certain small river.
The inhabitants are too much addicted to drunkenness, by reason that their wines
are so excellent. No fruits grow upon this mountain but only great abundance
of grapes. Goats they have which live continually in the woods, neither have
they any other flesh to eat but goates-flesh. I my self had great
acquaintance with the inhabitants, by reason that my father had some
possessions upon the mountain: but he hardly got any rents or money at their
hands: for they are the woorst paymasters that ever I knew.

Of mount Beni Mesgalda.
THis mountain bordereth upon the mountain last mentioned, and upon the river
of Guarga. The inhabitants make great store of liquid soap, for they know not
how to make hard soap. At the foot of this mountain there is a large plain
possessed by certain Arabians, who have often combats with them of the
mountain. They pay yearly to the K. of Fez an huge sum of money, and it is a
wonder to see with what new exactions they are daily burdened. In this
mountain are many Doctors of the Mahumetan law, and diverse inferior students:
who put the inhabitants to great damage. Themselves forsooth will drink wine,
and yet they persuade the people that it is (...) for them to drink it, albeit
some do give them little credit. The inhabitants of this mountain pay in
respect of others no great tribute, and that perhaps, because they maintain
the foresaid Doctors and students.

Of mount Beni Guamud.
THis mountain stands so near unto the territory of Fez, that they are
divided only by a river. All the inhabitants make soap, out of which
commodity the king of Fez reapeth six thousand ducates of yearly tribute.
The villages of this mountain are about five and twenty in number. All the
sides thereof bring forth corn and cattle in great abundance, saving that
they are sometimes destitute of water. The inhabitants are very rich and
carry all kind of wares to Fez, where they gain exceedingly by them. This
mountain yields nothing, but is commodious for man's use. From Fez it is
almost ten miles distant.

Of Garet, one of the seven Provinces of the Fessan kingdom.
Having described all the chief towns and mountains of the province of
Errife, it now remains that we say somewhat of Garet, which is the sixth
Province of Fez. This Province begins westward from the river Melulo, and
bordereth eastward upon the river Muluia; southward it is enclosed with the
mountains next unto the Numidian desert, and northward it extends to the
Mediterran sea. The breadth of this region along the sea shore stretches from
the river Nocor to the foresaid river of Muluia: the southern breadth is
bounded with the river Melulo, and westward with the mountains of Chauz. The
length of this Province is fifty, and the breadth forty miles. The soil is
rough, untilled, and barren, not much unlike to the deserts of Numidia. The
greater part has been destitute of inhabitants, especially ever since the
Spaniards took two of the principal towns in all the Province, as we will in
due place record.

Of the town of Melela in Garet.
THis great and ancient town built by the Africans upon a certain bay or
haven of the Mediterran sea, contains almost two thousand families. It was in
times past well stored with inhabitants, as being the head-citie of the whole
province. It had a great jurisdiction or territory belonging thereto, and
collected great abundance of iron and honey, whereupon the town it self was
called Mellela, which word in their language signifies honey. In the haven of
this town they fish for pearls, and get great store of oisters wherein
pearls do breed. This town was once subject unto the Goths, but fell
afterward into the Mahumetans possession. The Goths being chased thence, fled
over to Granada, which city is almost an hundred miles distant, to wit, so
far as the breadth of the sea is over. In my time the king of Spain sent a
great army against this town: before the arrival whereof, the townsmen sent
unto the king of Fez for aid, who making war as then against the people of
Temesna, could send but small forces to succor them. Which the townsmen being
advertised of, and fearing least their small forces would prove too weak for
the Spaniards great armada, they took all the bag and baggage that they could
carry, and fled unto the mountains of Buthoia. Howbeit the captain of the
Fessan soldiers, both to be revenged upon the townesmens cowardice, and also to
leave nothing for the Spaniards to enjoy, burnt down all the houses, temples,
and (...). This was done in the year of the Hegeira 896, which was in the
year of our Lord 1487. But the Spaniards, for all (...) enjoyed and reedified
by the Spaniards.
they found the city so wasted, would not depart thereupon, but first built a
strong castle, and afterward by little and little repaired the towne-walles,
and by that means have kept possession thereof even till this day.

Of the town of Chasasa.
THis town is from Mellela above twenty miles distant. It has been a famous
town and strongly walled, with a royal haven belonging thereunto, which was
yearly frequented by Venetian ships. The townsmen have always had great
traffic with the people of Fez, to the exceeding commodity of them both. At
length, while the king of Fez was seriously employed in the wars, Don
Ferdinando king of Spain came with great Chasasa taken by the Spaniards.
forces against it, and wan it very easily; for the inhabitants being
advertised of the Spaniards approach, betook themselves wholly to flight.

Of the town of (...).
IT stands upon an high grauelly hill almost fifteen miles from Chasasa, and
has but a narrow passage to ascend up unto it. Within the town they have no
water but only out of one cesterne. The founders hereof are reported to have
been some of the family of Beni Marin, before they attained unto great
dominions, and in this town they laid up their corn and other of their
commodities. At that time were all the deserts of the region adjacent void of
danger, for the Arabians were not as yet possessed of Garet: (...) after the
family of Beni-Marin began to flourish, they left this town and all the
region of Garet unto their neighbors, and went to inhabit better provinces.
Howbeit in the mean season Joseph the son of king Jacob of the Marin-familie
(I know not upon what occasion) in a manner utterly destroyed Tezzota: but
after the Christians were (...) of Chasasa, one of the king of Fez his
captains being a valiant man and borne in Granada, got license of his prince
to reedifie it again. The inhabitants of this reedified town are Moors, and
are at continual war with the Christians of Chasasan.

Of the town of Meggeo.
THis little town stands upon the top of an exceeding high mountain, being
westward from Tezzota ten miles, and almost 6. miles southward of the
Mediterran sea. Founded it was by the Africans, and is inhabited with people of
a noble and liberal disposition. At the foot of this mountain there are most
fruitful corne-fields. Likewise great store of iron is dug Yron-mines.
out of the mountains adioining. The government of this town was committed
unto one of the blood-royall, namely of the family of (...), whose father was
not very rich, but being a weauer, he taught his son the same occupation.
Afterward the valiant young man being advertised of the estate and nobility of
his ancestors, left his loome, and went to serve the king at Bedis, where he
continued an horseman for a certain time: but because he was an excellent
musician, the king loved him most entirely for his skill in music. A while
after, the governor of Tezzota requiring the kings aid against the
Christians, this worthy young gentleman with three hundred horsemen was sent
to succor him, who as he had valiantly behaved himself oftentimes before, so
now also he appeered to be a most resolute commander. Howbeit the king regarded
not his valor so much as his excellent skill in music: which the young
gallant disdaining, went at length to Garet unto certain gentlemen of his
acquaintance there, who ioining fifty horsemen unto him, appointed him
governor of the castle of Meggeo: and afterward he was so well beloved by all
the inhabitants of the next mountains, that each man according to his ability
pleasured and gratified him. At length the governor of Bedis having assembled
an army of three hundred horsemen and a thousand footmen, went about to expel
the foresaid young governor out of Meggeo; who presently with that small
troop which he had, so valiantly encountered his enemies, that he put them to
flight, and so growing famous in regard of his manifold victories, the king
of Fez bestowed very large revenues upon him (which he had given before-time
unto the governors of Bedis) to the end he might wholly endeavor himself to
expel the Spaniards out of that region. And of this noble governor the Moors
learned great skill in warlike affairs. The king of Fez has now doubled his
yearly allowance, so that at this present he has two hundred horsemen at
command, who are of greater force, then two thousand soldiers of any other
captains there about.

Of mount Echebdeuon.
THis mountain extends from Chasasa eastward as far as the river Muluia;
and from the Mediterran sea southward it stretches unto the desert of Garet.
The inhabitants are exceeding rich and valiant; and the mountain it self
abounds with honey, barlie, and all kind of cattle. Here are likewise great
store of pleasant and green pastures. But since that Chasasa was taken by the
Spaniards, the people of this mountain seeing that for want of soldiers they
were not able to withstand the violence of their enemies, abandoned their own
mountain, burnt their houses, and fled unto the mountains next adioining.

Of mount Beni Sahid.
WEstward this mountain extends almost to the river Nocor, for the space of
four and twenty miles. The inhabitants are rich, valiant, and liberal, and
entertain all strangers with great courtesy and bounty. They have abundance
of iron and of barlie; and their pastures are very commodious, abounding with
store of cattle; and yet in those pastures are their iron-mines, where they
sometime lack water; neither pay they any tribute at all. Their houses that
dig the iron are not far distant from the iron-mines. This iron the merchants
sell at Fez in rude lumpes, because they use not to frame it into bars,
neither indeed have they the cunning so to frame it. Also they make culters,
spades, and such like tools of husbandry, and yet their iron has no steel
at all in it.

Of mount Azgangan.
THis mountain beginning southward from Chasasa is inhabited with most rich
and valiant people: for besides the great plenty of all things in the
mountain it self, it has the desert of Garet adioining upon it. The
inhabitants of which desert have great familiarity and traffic with the
people of the said mountain: howbeit this mountain also has remained void of
inhabitants, ever since the taking of Chasasa.

Of mount Beni Teuzin.
THe south part of this mountain bordereth upon the mountain last mentioned,
the length whereof from the desert of Garet to the river Nocor is almost ten
miles; and on the one side thereof lie most beautiful and pleasant plains.
The inhabitants are all free, paying no tribute at all, and that perhaps,
because they have more soldiers, then Tezzota, Meggeo, and Bedis can afford.
Moreover they are thought in times past so to have assisted the governor of
Meggeo, that by their aid he attained unto that government. They have always
been great friends with the people of Fez, by reason of that ancient
familiarity which they had, before Fez was governed by a king. Afterward a
certain lawyer dwelling at Fez, who was borne in this mountain, so
represented unto the king the said ancient familiarity, that he obtained
freedom for his countrie-men. At length also they were greatly beloved by the
Marin-familie, perhaps because the mother of (...) sahid the third king of the
said family was borne of noble parentage in the foresaid mountain.

Of mount Guardan.
THe north part of this mountain ioineth unto the former; and it stretches in
length toward the Mediterran sea twelve miles, and in breadth to the river of
Nocor, almost eight miles. The inhabitants are valiant and rich. Every saturday
they have a great market upon the bank of a certain river: and hither resort
many people from the mountains of Garet, and diverse merchants of Fez, who
exchange iron and bridles for oil, for in these mountains grow great plenty
of olives. They have little or no wine at all, notwithstanding they are so
near unto mount Arif, where the people carouse wine in abundance. They were
for a certain time tributarie to the governor of Bedis, but afterward by the
means of a learned Mahumetan preacher, the king granted them favor, to pay
each man so much tribute as themselves pleased. So that sending yearly to the
king some certain sum of money, with certain horses and slaves, they are put
to no further charge.

Of the extreme part of the desert of Garet.
THe province of Garet is divided into three parts: the first whereof
contains the cities and towns, the second the foresaid mountains, (the
inhabitants whereof are called Bottoia) and the third comprehends the
deserts, which beginning northwarde at the Mediterran sea, and extending south
to the desert of Chauz, are bounded westward with the foresaid mountains, and
eastward with the river of Muluia. The length of these deserts is 60. miles,
and the breadth thirty. They are unpleasant and dry, having no water but that of
the river Muluia. There are many kinds of beasts in this desert, such as are in
the Lybian desert next unto Numidia. In summer time many Arabians take up their
abode near unto the river Muluia; and so do another kind of fierce people
called Batalisa, who possess great abundance of horses, camels, and other
cattle, and maintain continual war against the Arabians that border upon
them.

A description of Chauz, the seventh province of the kingdom of Fez.
THis province is thought to comprehend the third part of the kingdom of Fez.
It begins at the river Zha from the east, and extends westward to the
river Guruigara: so that the length thereof is an hundred fowerscore and ten,
and the breadth an hundred threescore and ten miles: for all that part of mount
Atlas which lies over against Mauritania, ioineth upon the breadth of this
region. Likewise it contains a good part of the plains and mountains
bordering upon Lybia. At the same time when Habdulach the first king of the
Marin-family began to bear rule over Mauritania and those other regions, his
kindred began also to inhabit this region. This king left four sons behind
him, whereof the first was called Abubdar, the second Abuichia, the third
Abusahid, and the fourth Jacob: this Jacob was afterward chosen king, because
he had vanquished Muachidin the king of Maroco, and had conquered the city of
Maroco it self: the other three brethren died in their nonage: howbeit before
Jacob had won Maroco, the old king assigned unto each of them three, one
region a piece. The other three parts were divided into seven, which were
distributed among the four kinreds of the Marin-family, and two other tribes
or families that were grown in great league with the same family: insomuch
that this region was accounted for three regions. They which possessed the
kingdom were ten in number, and the regions only seven. The foresaid king
Habdulach was author of the said partition, who left the region of Chauz after
his decease in such estate, as we will forthwith orderly describe.

Of the town of Teurerto.
THis ancient town was built upon a mountain by the Africans not far from
the river Zha. The fields hereof not being very large, but exceeding fruitful,
adioine upon a certain dry and barren desert. The north part of the same
bordereth upon the desert of Garet, and the south upon the desert of Adurha:
eastward thereof lies the desert of Anghad, which is near unto the kingdom
of Or Tremisen.
Telensin, and westward it is enclosed with the desert of Tafrata, which
bordereth likewise upon the town of Tezza. This Teurerto was in times past a
most populous and rich town, and contained about three thousand families:
here also are stately palaces, temples, and other such buildings to be seen.
The town wall is built of most excellent marble. Ever since the Marin-familie
enioied the western kingdom of Fez, this town was an occasion of great
wars: for the Marinfamily would have it belong to the crown of Fez: but the
king of Telensin challenged it as his own.

Of the town of Haddagia.
THis town was built by the Africans in manner of an Isle, for it is environed
with the river Mululo, which not far from hence falls into the river Muluia.
It was in times past a most populous and flourishing town: but after the
Arabians became lords of the west, it fell by little and little to decay: for
it bordereth upon the desert of Dahra, which is inhabited with most lewd and
mischievous Arabians. At the same time when Teurerto was sacked, this town was
utterly destroyed also, whereof nothing remains at this day but the town
walls only.

Of the castle of Garsis.
IT stands upon a rock by the river Muluia, fifteen miles distant from
Teurerto. Here, as in a most impregnable place, the family of Beni Marin laid
their provision of corn; when as they inhabited the deserts. Afterward it
became subject unto Abuhenan the fifth king of the Marin-familie. It has no
great quantity of arable or pasture ground belonging thereto: but it has a
most pleasant garden replenished with grapes, peaches, and figs, and
environed on all sides with most thick and shadie woods, so that it is a
paradise in respect of other places thereabout. The inhabitants are rude and
uncivil people, neither do they ought, but keep such corn as the Arabians
commit unto their custody. If a man behold the castle a far off, he would
think it rather to be a cottage then a castle: for the wall being in many
places ruined, makes show of great antiquity, and the roof is covered with
certain black stones or slates.

Of the town of Dubdu.
THis ancient town was built by the Africans upon an exceeding high and
impregnable mountain, and is inhabited by certain people of the family of
Zeneta. From the top of this mountain diverse springs come running into the
town. From this town the next plains are distant almost five miles, and yet
they seem to be but a mile and an half off; for the way is very crooked and
winding. All the jurisdiction longing to this town is only upon the top of
the mountain, for the plain underneath is unpleasant and barren; except
certain gardens on either side of a little river running by the foot of the
hill: neither have the townsmen corn growing upon the same hill sufficient
for their provision, unless they were supplied with great store of corn from
Tezza: so that this town was built for a fortress only by the family of
Marin, what time they were dispossessed of the western kingdom. Afterward it
was inhabited by a certain family called Beni Guertaggen, who are lords of the
said town even till this day. But when the Marin-family were expelled out of
the kingdom of Fez, the next Arabians endeavored to win the town: howbeit
by the aid of one Mose Ibnu Chamu, who was one of the said family, the
Arabians were so valiantly resisted, that they concluded a truce with the
people of Marin: and so Mose Ibnu remained governor of the town; after whose
death his son Acmed succeeded him, who treading just in his fathers virtuous
steps, kept the said town in great tranquillity even till his dying day.
After him succeeded one Mahumet, a man highly (...) for his noble valor and
great skill in martial affairs. This Mahumet had before time conquered many
cities and castles upon the foot of the mount Atlas, southward whereof
bordereth the land of Numidia. But having gotten this town in possession, he
beautified it exceedingly with store of fair houses and buildings: likewise he
greatly altered and reformed the government of The great courtesy of Mahumet
toward strangers.
this town; and showed such extraordinary courtesy unto al strangers, that he
grew very famous. Moreover the said Mahumet consulted how to get Tezza from
the king of Fez, and offered great matters to the performance of his intent:
and that he might the easlier attain his purpose, he determined to go to the
market of Tezza in a simple habit, and so to make an assault upon the captain
of the town: for he hoped that a great part of the townsmen, whom he knew to
be his friends, would assist him in that enterprise. Howbeit this practice was
at length discovered unto the king of Fez (which king was called Saich, and was
the first of the family of Quattas, and father unto the king that 1526.
now reigns) who presently assembled an huge army, and marched of purpose
against Dubdu, utterly to destroy it: and so coming unto the foot of the
mountain he there encamped. The people of the mountain having gathered an
army of six thousand men, hid themselves craftily behind the rocks,
suffering their enemies to ascend by certain difficult and streite passages,
from whence they were sure they could hardly escape, and so at length they
brake forth on the sudden and encountered their said enemies being weary of
ascending; and because the way was very troublesome and narrow, the king of Fez
his soldiers could not endure their assaults, but being constrained to give
back, were more then a thousand of them thrown down headlong and slain. In
this skirmish were slain in all to the number of three thousand Fessan
soldiers: and yet the king not being dismayed with so great an overthrow,
prepared forthwith a band of five hundred crossebowes, and three hundred
Harquebuziers, and determined to make a new assault upon the town. But
Mahumet seeing that he could no longer withstand the king, resolved to go
himself unto him, that he might, if it were possible, obtain peace, and to
release his country from the fury of the enemy. Wherefore putting on the
habit of an ambassador, he went and delivered a letter with his own hand unto
the king. Which the king having perused, asked him what he thought concerning
the governor of Dubdu? Mary I think (quoth Mahumet) he is not well in his
wits, in that he goes about to resist your Majesty. Then said the king, if I
had conquered him (as I hope to do within these few days) I would cause him
to be dismembered and torn in pieces. But what if he should come hither (says
Mahumet) to submit himself, and to acknowledge his offense; might it then
please the king to admit him into favor? Then the king answered: I swear unto
thee by this my head, that if he will come and acknowledge his fault in manner
as thou have said, I will not only receive him into favor, but will espouse
my daughters unto his sons, and will bestow most ample and princely dowries
upon them. But I am sure, being distraught of his wits (as thou have said) that
he will by no means come and submit himself. Then said Mahumet: he would
soon come (I assure you) if it pleased the king to protest this for a
certainty unto his nobles. I think (said the king) it has been sufficiently
protested and affirmed, sithence I have bound it with a solemn oath in the
presence of these four; for here stand my chief secretary, the general of
my forces, my father in law, and the chief judge and patriarch of Fez; the
testimony of which four may well satisfy you. Whereupon Mahumet humbly
falling at the kings feet: (...) here the man (quoth he) that submissely
acknowledges his fault, and craves the kings gracious pardon. With that the
king himself lifted him from the ground, embraced him, and saluted him with
friendly speeches. Then caused he both his daughters to be called, which he
bestowed upon Mahumets sons: all which being done, he removed his army from
that mountain, and returned conqueror unto Fez. This was done in the year of
the Hegeira 904. which was in the year of our Lord 1495. And in the year of
the Hegeira 921. I my self was at the city of Dubdu, where I was most
courteously entertained by the foresaid Mahumet, in regard of certain letters
of commendation which I brought from the king of Fez and his brother. Neither
would he cease enquiring how all things passed at the king of Fez his court.

Of the city of Teza or Tezza.
THis great, noble, and rich city of Tezza was built by the Africans, five
miles from mount Atlas, being distant from Fez fifty, from the Ocean an
hundred and thirty, and from the Mediterran sea seven miles, and standing in
the way from Garet to Chasasan. It contained in times past about five thousand
families: the buildings of this town are not very stately, except noblemens
palaces, colleges, and temples, which are somewhat beautiful. Out of Atlas
springs a little river which runs through the chief temple of this city:
and sometimes it falls out, that certain people bordering upon the city,
upon some quarrel with the citizens will cut off this river from the city,
and turn the course thereof some other way, which breeds great
inconveniences unto the citizens: for then they can neither build houses, nor
get any water to drink, but only corrupt water which they take out of
certain cesterns, for which cause they are often constrained to make a league
with those borderers. This city both for wealth, civility, and abundance of
people is the third city of all the kingdom, and has a greater temple then
that at Fez: here are likewise three colleges, with diverse bath-stoues, and a
great number of hospitals. Each trade and occupation has a several place in
this city, like as they have in Fez: the inhabitants are of a more valiant and
liberal disposition, then they of Fez: here are also great store of learned
and rich men: and the fields adjacent are exceeding fruitful. Without the
city walls are very large plains, and many pleasant streams, that serve to
water their gardens which are replenished with all kind of fruits: here are
abundance of vines also yielding very sweet grapes, whereof the Jews (being
five hundredth families) make excellent wine, such as I think all Africa scarce
affoordeth better. In this town stands a fair castle, where the governor
has his abode. The king of Fez assigned the government of this town unto his
second son, being rather a meet place for the kings own residence, in
regard of the wholefome air both in summer and winter: here were the nobles
of the Marinfamily wont to remain all summer, both in respect of the
holesomenes of the place, and also that they might defend those regions from
the Arabians dwelling in the deserts: which Arabians resorted yearly to Tezza,
to the end they might there furnish themselves with victuals and other
necessaries, and brought dates thither from Segelmese to exchange for come: the
citizens also received of the Arabians for corn great sums of money,
whereupon all of them in a manner grow exceeding rich, neither are they annoied
so much with any inconvenience, as with durtie streets in winter. I my self
was acquainted in this city with a certain aged sire, whom the townsmen
adored as if he had been a god: he was marvelous rich both in fruits, grounds,
and other commodities, which the people bestowed upon him in great abundance.
The citizens of Fez used to come fifty miles (for so far is Fez distant)
only to visit the said old man. My self conceived some great opinion of
this aged sire: but after I had seen him, I could find no such
superexcellencie in him, save only that he deluded the fond people with
strange devises. The jurisdiction of this city is very large, containing
diverse mountains under it, as we will forthwith declare in order.

Of mount Matgara.
THis mountain is very high and difficult to ascend, both by reason of the
vast deserts and the narrow passages, and it is distant from Teza almost five
miles: the top of this hill is most fruitful ground, and full of clear
fountains: the inhabitants being burdened with no exactions, gather yearly
great store of corn, flax, and oil: they have likewise abundance of cattle,
and especially of goats: neither do they any whit regard princes. Having upon
a day vanquished the king of Fez in battle, they carried a certain captain
of Fez taken prisoner unto the top of the hill, where in the kings own
presence they put him to a most cruel, and miserable death: whereupon the
said inhabitants have been at continual discord with the people of Fez: they
have almost a thousand soldiers, and their mountain contains about fifty
villages and hamlets.

Of mount Gauata.
THis mountain being as difficult to ascend as the former, stands westward
of Fez, almost fifteen miles: both the sides and top of this mountain are
very fruitful for barley and flax: it is extended in length from east to west
eight miles, and in breadth about five miles: many deserts here are, haunted
with apes and leopards. The greater part of the inhabitants are linnen-weauers;
people they are of a frank disposition, neither can they till the fields
adioining to their mountain, by reason of their continual dissension with the
king of Fez, unto whom they will pay no tribute nor custom at all, perhaps
because of the strong situation of their mountain, and for that it abounds
with all things necessary for man's sustenance: so that albeit this mountain
were besieged ten years together, yet could it by no means be won; neither
is it ever destitute of water, for thereupon are two huge fountains, which
running down into the plain, become the heads of two rivers.

Of mount Megesa.
THis mountain also is somewhat difficult to ascend: it is rough and full of
woods, and yields little corn, but great plenty of olives. The inhabitants
being most part weauers (for their soil yields good store of flax) are in
the wars right valiant both on foot and horseback. Their faces are white,
and that perhaps for the coldness of the mountain: neither do these pay any
tribute at all. Here also the exiles of Fez and Teza have safe abode, and
albeit they have great store of gardens and vineyards, yet are they no
wine-drinkers. Soldiers they have to the number of seven thousand, and almost
forty villages.

Of mount Baronis.
THis mountain stands fifteen miles northward of Teza. The inhabitants are
rich and mighty, and possess great store of horses: neither do they pay any
tribute at all. This hill abounds with plenty of corn, fruits, and grapes,
and yet they make no wine at all. Their women are white and fat, and adorn
themselves with much silver. In this place also they entertain exiles, but if
any of them offer to have familiarity with their wives, they punish him most
severely; for of all injuries they cannot endure this.

Of the mountain called Beni Guertenage.
THis is an exceeding high and impregnable mountain, both in regard of the
ragged rocks, and of the vast deserts, being distant from Teza about thirty
miles. This mountain affoordeth great store of corn, flax, olives,
pome-citrons, and excellent quinces. They have likewise all sorts of cattle in
great abundance, except horses and oxen. The inhabitants are valiant and
liberal, and as decently apparelled as any citizens. The villages and hamlets
of this mountain are about thirty five, and the soldiers almost three
thousand.

Of mount Gueblen.
THis high, cold, and large mountain contains in length about thirty, and in
breadth about fifteen miles. Eastward it bordereth upon the (...) of Dubdu, and
westward upon mount Beni-Iazga, and it is distant from Teza almost fifty miles
southward. At all times of the year the top of this mountain is covered with
snow. The inhabitants in times past were most rich and valiant people, and
lived in great liberty: but afterward when they began to play the tyrants, the
people of all the mountains adjoining having gathered great forces, invaded
this mountain, slew them every one, and so burned and wasted their towns and
villages, that unto this day it has remained void of inhabitants: except
only a few, which detesting the cruel tyranny of their parents, conveyed
themselves and all their goods unto the top of the mountain, where they lived
an abstinent and virtuous life; wherefore these were spared, and their
posterity remains in the mountain till this present: they are all learned
and of honest conversation, and well esteemed of by the king of Fez: one of
them in my time being a very learned and famous old man was used by the king of
Fez, both about treaties of peace, and in other serious affairs: and in this
man the king reposed all his confidence, as if he had been some petie-god: for
which cause all the courtiers had him in great detestation.

Of mount Beni Iesseten.
THis mountain is subject unto the governor of Dubdu, being inhabited with
most base and beggarly people. Their houses are made of sea-rushes, and so
likewise are their shoes made of such rushes when they travel any journey,
whereby a man may conjecture the miserable estate of this people. The mountain
yields naught but panicke, whereof they make bread and other victuals: but at
the foot thereof are certain gardens replenished with grapes, dates, and
peaches. Their peaches they cut into four quarters, and casting away the nuts
or stones, they dry them in the sun, and keep them an whole year, which
they esteem for great dainties. Upon this mountain are many iron-mines: and
they frame their iron Iron-mines.
in manner of horse-shooes, which serves themsometimes in stead of money,
whereof they have great want in this mountain, unless the smithes by their
art keep this money in store: who, besides horse-shooes, make certain
daggers with blunt points. Their women wear iron-rings upon their fingers and
ears for a great bravery, but they are more basely apparelled then the men,
and remain continually in the woods, both to keep goats, and to gather
fuel. They have neither civility nor learning, but live after a brutish
manner without all discretion and humanity.

Of mount Selelgo.
THis woodie mountain is full of pine-trees and fountains. Their houses are
not made of stone, but of sea-rushes, so that they may easily be removed from
place to place, which is very commodious to the inhabitants, for every spring
they leave the mountain and descend into the valleys, from whence about the
end of May they are expelled by the Arabians which inhabit the deserts: who by
reason of their abundance of goats and other cattle, forsaking the said
deserts, seek unto the fountains and moist places: but in winter, because
their camels are so impatient of cold, they resort unto the woods, and warm
regions. In this mountain are great store of lions, leopards, and apes. And
from the said mountain runs Lions, leopards, and apes.
a certain stream of water with such violence, that I have seen a stone of
an hundred pound weight carried with the force thereof: and here Subu takes
his beginning, which is the greatest river of all Mauritania.

Of mount Beni Iasga.
THe inhabitants of this mountain are rich, and civil people: it stands so
near the mountain last mentioned, that they are only separated with the
foresaid river: and to the end they may the easilier pass from one mountain
to another, they have made a certain strange bridge in the midst, A woonderful
bridge.
and that in manner following: on either side stand certain posts, through
the which runs a rope upon a truckle or pulley, unto which rope is fastened
a great basket, that will contain ten persons, and that in such sort, that so
often as they will pass over to the opposite mountain, they enter into the
basket, and drawing the rope whereon it hangs, they are easily carried aloft
in the air over the river by the help of the foresaid pulleyes, but sometimes
with great hazard of their lives, especially if the basket or the rope be worn
in any place: yea and the distance of place is often an occasion of great
terror. In this mountain there is great store of cattle, but little wood. It
abounds likewise with most excellent fine wool, whereof their women make
cloth comparable unto silk, which is sold at Fez for a great price. Here also
is great plenty of oil. The king of Fez is lord of this mountain, the
yearly tribute whereof amounting well nigh to eight thousand ducats, is paid
to the governor of old Fez.

Of mount Azgan.
THis mountain bordring eastward upon Selelgo, westward upon mount Sofroi,
southward upon the mountains by the river Maluia, and northward upon the
territory of Fez, contains in length forty, and in breadth about fifteen
miles. It is of an exceeding height, and so intolerably cold, that only that
side thereof is habitable which looks toward Fez. It abounds greatly with
olives and other fruits: and from thence also run great store of fountains
into the plains and fields adjacent, which are most fruitful for barlie,
flax, and hemp. In my time there were abundance of mulberie-trees planted
upon this plain, which bear white berries, and bring forth silke-wormes. The
inhabitants in winter dwell in most base cottages. Their water is most
extremely cold: insomuch that I my self knew one, who with drinking only a
cup thereof, suffered most intolerable gripings and tortures in his bowels for
three months after.

Of the town of Sofroi.
THis town being situate at the foot of mount Atlas, and standing about
fifteen miles southward of Fez, almost in the way to Numidia, was built by the
Africans between two rivers, on either sides whereof grow great abundance of
grapes and all kind of fruits. The town for five miles compass is environed
with oliue-trees: but the fields are apt only for hemp and barlie. The
inhabitants are very rich, notwithstanding they go in mean apparel, and
greazie with oil, the occasion whereof is in that they carry oil unto Fez to
sell. There is no memorable thing in all their town, save only a certain
temple, through the midst whereof runs a large river; and at the doors
stands a fountain of most pure water. Howbeit the greatest part of this
town is fallen to decay by the negligence of one of the kings brothers that
now reigns, and is ruined in many places.

Of the town of Mezdaga.
THis town being situate likewise at the foot of Atlas; and standing about
eight miles westward of Sofroi, is compassed with a fair wall, and albeit the
houses thereof are but mean, yet every one has a fountain of clear water
belonging unto it. Most of the inhabitants are potters, because Porcellan.
they have such abundance of porcellan earth, whereof they make great store of
earthen vessels, and send them to be sold at Fez, from whence they are but
twelve miles distant southward. Their fields are most fruitful for barlie,
flax, and hemp: and they gather yearly great abundance of figs, and of other
fruits. In the forests about this town, as also about the former, are
marvelous store of lions, being not very hurtful, for any man may drive them
away with a little stick.

Of the town of Beni Bahlul.
THis (...) town standing upon the side of Atlas toward Fez, is distant from
Fez about twelve miles, not far from the high way leading to Numidia. Through
the midst of this town run certain little rivers from the next mountain,
neither does it differ much in situation from Mezdaga, saving that the south
frontier thereof is full of woods, whereout the inhabitants get timber and
fuel, and carry it unto Fez to be sold. They are oppressed with continual
exactions of courtiers and others, neither have they any civility at all among
them.

Of the town called Ham Lisnan.
THis town built by the Africans upon a certain plain environed with
mountains, in the way from Sofroi to Numidia, borrowed the name thereof from
the fountain of an idol, upon the occasion following. At the same time while
the Africans were as yet idolaters, they had a temple standing near unto this
town, whither at certain times of the year resorted in the night great
multitudes of people both men and women: where having ended their sacrifices,
they used to put out their lights, and every man to commit adultery with that
woman which he first touched. But the women which were present at this
abominable sport, were forbidden to lie with any man for a year after: and the
children begotten in the said adultery, were kept and brought up by the
priest of the temple, as being dedicated to sacred uses. In the same temple
there was a fountain which is to be seen at this day: but neither the temple
it self, nor any monument or mention of the town is remaining, because they
were utterly demolished by the Mahumetans.

Of the town of Mahdia.
THis town being situate upon a plain, between mount Atlas, and certain
woods and rivers, is about ten miles distant from the former. The founder
thereof was a certain Mahumetan preacher of that nation, which was borne in
the next mountain: and it began to be built at the same time when the family
of Zeneta were lords of the Fessan kingdom. But when king Joseph of the
Luntune family got possession of the said kingdom, this town was so wasted and
destroyed, that the beautiful temple with some part of the town wall only
was left standing, and the inhabitants became tributarie to the king of Fez:
this was done in the year of the Hegeira 515.

Of Sahblel Marga, that is, The plain of the valiant man.
THis plain contains in longth forty, and in breadth almost thirty miles,
near unto it are certain mountains which border upon mount Atlas: and in
these mountains are waste deserts full of goodly timber: here are likewise a
great number of cottages inhabited with colliers for the most part, who carry
abundance of coals from the said mountains to (...). The lions that are here
do so haunt the poor colliers, that sometimes they devour them. From hence
likewise are carried to Fez store of excellent and great beams of timber. All
the plain is so barren and dry, that it will scarce bring forth any good
thing at all.

Of the plain called Azgari Camaren.
THis plain also is environed around with woodie mountains, being a kind of
medowe-ground, for it is covered all over with most pleasant herbs and grass:
wherefore in the summer time they use to keep their cattle here, and to
defend them with high and strong hedges from the fury of the lions.

Of mount Centopozzi.
Upon this high mountain are great store of most ancient buildings, near unto
the which there is a hole or dry pit of so great a depth, that the bottom
thereof can in no wise be seen. Into this pit some mad fellows will have
themselves let down by ropes, carrying a candle or torch in their hands: and
beneath they say it is divided into many roumes, and as it were, chambers; and
last of all they come to a most large place hewn out of the rock with
instruments, and compassed about as it were with a wall, in which wall are
four doors which lead to other more narrow places, where they say that
fountains of springing water are. And sometimes it falls out that some
miserably end their lives here: for if their lights chance to be blown out
with any sudden blast of wind, they can by no means find the place where the
rope hangs, but are there constrained to die for extreme famine. It was told
me by a certain nobleman of Fez, that there were ten persons, who being
desirous to see the woonders of this pit, and being prepared for the same
purpose, went first three of them down, who when they were come to the
foresaid four doors, two of them went one way, and the third went alone
another way. And being thus divided, after they had proceeded almost a quarter
of a mile, there came great swarms, of bats flying about their lights,
insomuch that one light was put out; at length being come to the springing
fountains, they found there certain white bones of men, and five or six
candles, whereof some were new, and others were old and worn with long lying
there: but having found nothing but water in the said fountains, they returned
back again the same way that they came: and they had scarce gone half way,
but their other light also was blown out with a sudden blast. Afterward
seeking earnestly up and down, and being weary of many falls that they
caught among the rocks, they found that there was no hope of return:
wherefore in this desperate case committing themselves with tears into the
hands of God, they vowed, if they (...) this danger, never to adventure any
more. They that stood at the (...) mouth being ignorant of their companions
mishappe expected their (...), and having staide over long, at length they let
down themselves by the rope, and began with lights to seek their fellows,
making a great noise, and at length found them heavy and sad. But the third
who was wandering up and down those dark places, they could by no means
find, wherefore leaving him, they returned forth of the cave. And he that was
left behind heard at length a noise like the barking of little dogs, and
shaping his course toward them, he found immediately four strange, and (as it
should seem) newborn beasts, after which followed the The beast called Dabah.
damme being not much unlike to a shee-woolfe, saving that she was bigger:
wherefore he began exceedingly to fear; howbeit there was no danger, for being
about to flee, the beast came toward him, fawning gently upon him with her
tail. And so at length, after long seeking, he found the holes mouth with
great joy, and escaped the danger. For within a while he said that he began to
see some glimmering of light, as they do which have long bin in the dark. But
after a certain time this cave was filled with water up to the top.

Of the mountain of ravens, called Cunaigel Gherben.
THis mountain stands very near the former, and is full of woods and
lions. Here is no city, nor any other place of habitation, perhaps by reason
of the extreme coldness of the place. From this mountain runs a certain
little river: and here is a rock of an exceeding height, whereupon keep
infinite swarms of crows and ravens, which some think to have been the
occasion of the name of this mountain. Sometime the terrible northerly winds
bring such abundance of snow upon this mountain, that such as travel from
Numidia toward Fez loose their lives thereby, as has been signified in the
first book. Every summer the Arabians next inhabiting, being called Beni
Essen, usually resort unto this mountain, in regard of the cool water and
pleasant shadows, notwithstanding they know it to be haunted with great store
of lions and leopards.

Of the town of Tezerghe.
THis little town was by the Africans built in manner of a fort upon the side
of a small river which runs by the foot of the foresaid mountain: both the
inhabitants and their houses are most base and destitute of all civility.
Their fields being environed with the mountains adjoining, bring forth some
small quantity of barley and peaches. The inhabitants are all subject unto
certain Arabians called Devil Chusein.

Of the town called Vmen Giunaibe.
THis ancient town being destroyed by the Arabians was situate about twelve
miles from Tezerghe upon the south side of Atlas. It is so dangerous a place by
reason of the often invasions of certain Arabians, that none almost dare
travel that way. There lies a way near this town, which a man may not pass
without dancing and leaping, unless he will fall into an ague: the certainty
where of I have heard many avouch.

Of mount Beni Merasen.
THe inhabitants of this exceeding high and cold mountain have great plenty
of horses and asses: here are store of mules likewise, which carry wares up and
down without either bridle or saddle. Their houses are built not with walls
of stone, but of rushes. The people are very rich, and pay no tribute to the
king, perhaps in regard of the strong situation of their mountain.

Of mount Mesettaza.
THis mountain extends in length from east to west almost thirty miles, and
twelve miles in breadth. The west part thereof adioineth upon the plain of
Edecsen, which bordereth upon Temesna. It is like unto the foresaid mountain,
both in regard of the inhabitants, and also for plenty of horses and mules. At
Fez there are great store of learned men which were borne in this mountain:
they pay no tribute at all, but only send the king such gifts as themselves
please.

Of the mountains of Ziz.
THese mountains are thought to have borrowed their name from a certain river
springing out of them. Eastward they begin at Mesettaza, and extend westward to
the mountains of Tedla and Dedis, southward they border upon that part of
Numidia which is called Segelmesse, and northward upon the plains of (...) and
Guregra: in length they contain an hundred, and in breadth almost forty miles:
in number they are fifteen, being extremely cold and difficult to ascend, and
sending forth many streams of water. The inhabitants are called Sanaga, and
are men most patient of all boisterous and cold weather. They wear but one
coat at all seasons of the year, over which they cast a kind of cloak or
mantle: their legs and (...) they wrap in certain clothes as it were in
swathing bands, and they go at all times bare-headed. In this mountain are
great store of mules, asses, and other cattle, but very few deserts. The
inhabitants are a most lewd and villainous generation, being wholly addicted to
theft and robbery. They are at continual dissension with the Arabians, and
practice daily mischiefs and inconveniences against them, and to the end they
may provoke them to greater fury, they will sometimes throw their camels
down headlong from the top of some high mountain. In these mountains there
happens a certain strange and incredible matter, for there are serpents so
familiar with men, that at dinnertime they will come like dogs and (...) and
tame serpents.
cats, and gather up the crumbs under the table, neither will they hurt any body,
unless they be offered some injury. The walls of their houses are made of
chalk, and the roofes are covered with thatch. There are also another kind of
inhabitants in these mountains, who possess more droues of cattle then the
former, and dwell for the most part in cottages made of rushes. And these
carry unto Segelmese butter and wool to be sold, but at that time only when
the Arabians inhabit the deserts, for it often falls out that they are
encou^tred by them, and spoiled of their goods. These people are most valiant
warriors, for they will fight even to the last gasp, rather then be taken of
their enemies: they carry four or five iauelins about with them, wherewith
they know right well how to defend themselves from the enemy. They fight
always on foot, neither can they be vanquished but with a great number of
horsemen, and they use to carry swords and daggers with them also. In my time
they obtained safe conduct of the Arabians, and the Arabians of them likewise,
which was a cause, that the merchants of both parts traveled more securely.

Of the town of Gerseluin.
THis ancient town was built by the Africans at the foot of one of the
foresaid mountains, not far from the river of Ziz. It is environed with an
impregnable and stately wall, the founder whereof was a certain king of the
Marin-familie. In regard of the walls and bulwarks it is a most beautiful
town. But being once entered thereinto, you shall see most base and beggarly
houses, and scarce any inhabitants dwelling in them, and that by the injury of
certain Arabians, who when they revolted from the Marin-familie, took this
town and grievously oppressed the citizens. Their dry and barren fields lie
open to the north. Upon the river are diverse mils, and by the side thereof are
many gardens replenished with grapes and peaches, which they use to dry in the
sun, and to keep an whole year. They have great scarcity of cattle, which
causes them to live a most (...) life. This town was built by the family of
Zeneta in stead of a fort, to the end it might be a place of refuge only in
their journey to Numidia, but afterward it was surprised and utterly destroyed
by the family of Luntuna. Here also are great store of such domestical
serpents, as we reported to be in the mountains of Ziz.

Here ends the third book.
JOHN LEO HIS FOVRTH BOOK OF the History of Africa, and of the memorable
things contained therein.
A description of the kingdom of Or Tremizen.
Telensin.
THis kingdom begins westward from the rivers of Zha and Muluia, eastward
it bordereth upon The great river, southward upon the desert of Numidia, and
northward upon the Mediterran sea. This region was called by the Romans
Caesaria, and was by them inhabited: howbeit after the Romans were expelled,
it was fully possessed by the ancient governors thereof called Beni
Habdulguad, and being a generation of the family of Magraua. And it remained
unto them and their successors three hundred years, until such time as a
certain mighty man called Ghamrazen the son of Zeijen took possession
thereof. His posterity changing at length their ancient name were called Beni
Zeijen, that is, the sons of Zeijen: and they enioied this kingdom for the
space almost of 380. years. At length the kings of Fez of the Marin-familie
greatly molested them, so that those ten kings which succeeded Zeijen were some
of them unfortunate in battle, some slain, some taken captive, and others
expelled their kingdom, and chased to the next mountains. Neither were they
free from vexation of the kings of Tunis: howbeit the kingdom of Telensin
remained still to this family, and they continued in peace for almost an
hundred and twenty years, being endammaged by no foreign power; saving that
one Abu Feris king of Tunis, and his son Hutmen made them to pay tribute for
certain years unto Tunis, till the decease of the said Hutmen. This kingdom
stretches in length from east to west 380. miles, but in breadth from north to
south, that is, from the Mediterran sea to the deserts of Numidia not above
five and twenty miles: which is the occasion that it is so often oppressed by
the Arabians inhabiting the Numidian deserts. The kings of Telensin have
always endeavored by great gifts to gain the good will and friendship of the
Numidians, but they could never satisfy their insatiable couetice. A man shall
seldom travel safely through this kingdom: howbeit here are great store of
merchants, perhaps either because it adioineth to Numidia, or else for that the
way to the land of Negros lies through it. It has two most famous and
frequented hauen-townes, the one called Or Oran.
Horam, and the other Or Mersalcabir.
Marsa Elcabir, whither use to resort great store of Genoueses, and Venetians.
But afterward both these towns were taken by Don Ferdinando the Catholic
king, to the great inconvenience of all this kingdom: for which cause the king
then reigning called Abuchemmeu, was expelled his kingdom and put to flight by
his own subjects: afterward Abuzeijen was restored to the kingdom, who had
for certain years been imprisoned by his nephew Abuchemmeu: howbeit he
enioied the kingdom but a very short space. For he was at length miserably
slain by Barbarossa the Turk, who conquered the kingdom of Tremizen (...)
king of Tremizen restored to his kingdom by the emperor Charles the fifth.
by force of war. Whereof Abuchemmeu, that was expelled by his own subjects,
having intelligence, sent to crave aid of the emperor Charles the fifth,
whereby he hoped to recover his kingdom. Which request being granted, he
levied a puissant army, and made war against Barbarossa, and having driven
him out, he recovered his kingdom, and severely punished them that had
conspired his banishment. And then he gave the Spanish soldiers their pay, sent
the captains home with great rewards, and allowed Charles the emperor a
large yearly revenue so long as he lived. After his decease succeeded his
brother Habdulla, who neglecting the league made before between the emperor
and his brother, and relying upon Soliman the great Turk, refused to pay any
more tribute unto the emperor Charles, and has kept possession of the
kingdom, till 1526
this present. The greater part of this region is untilled, dry, and barren,
especially toward the south. Howbeit the sea coast is somewhat more fertile.
The territory adjacent to the city of Telensin is full of woods, saving that
the western part toward the sea is mountainous. Likewise the regions of
Tenez and Alger contain mountains abounding with all kind of commodities. In
this part ate but few cities and castles, howbeit it is a most fruitful and
blessed place, as we will hereafter declare in particular.

Of the desert of Angad.
THis barren, dry, and untilled desert being utterly destitute of water and
wood, is situate upon the western frontire of the kingdom of Telensin; and
extends in length fowerscore, and in breadth almost fifty Great store of
ostriches.
miles. Here are great store of roes, dear, and ostriches. Such merchants as
travel from Fez to Telensin pass over this desert not without great danger,
by reason of certain Arabians which live only upon theft and robbery,
especially in winter, when as the soldiers appointed to defend the said desert
from those lewd vagabonds, do usually retire themselves into Numidia. Many
shepherds there are in this desert, who are daily vexed with multitudes of
fierce lions, which sometime seize not only upon cartell, but also upon men.

Of the castle of Temzegzet.
THis castle standing in the same place, where the foresaid desert adioineth
unto the territory of Telensin, and built by the Africans upon a rock, was in
times past very strong, and often annoied by the people ofFez; for it stands
in the high way from Fez to Telensin. Through the fields adjacent runs a
certain river called in their language Tefme. The said fields adjacent
sufficiently abound with all things necessary for the sustenance of the
inhabitants. Heretofore being subject unto the kings of Telensin it well
deserved the name of a city, but since the Arabians got possession thereof, it
has proved more like to a stable: for here they keep their corn only, and
the natural inhabitants are quite expelled by reason of their bad demeanor.

Of the castle of Izli.
THis ancient castle of Izli built by the Africans upon a certain plain
bordering upon the foresaid desert, has some fields adioining unto it, apt
only for barlie and punicke. It was in times past well stored with inhabitants,
and environed with stately walls: but afterward by the injury of war it was
razed to the ground, and the inhabitants expelled. Howbeit a few years after
it began to be inhabited anew by certain religious persons had in great
reverence both by the kings of Telensin and by all the Arabians. These
religious persons with great courtesy and liberality give entertainment for
three days unto all strangers that pass by, and then dismiss them without
paying of ought. All their houses are very base and low built, their walls
being of claye, and the roofes of straw. Not far from this castle runs a
river; out of which they water all their fields: for this region is so hot and
dry, that unless the fields were continually watered, they would yield no
fruit at all.

Of the town of Guagida.
THis ancient town built by the Africans upon a large plain, stands
southward of the Mediterran sea forty miles, and about the same distance from
the city of Telensin. The southwest part of the said plain bordereth upon the
desert of Angad, and it contains most fruitful fields and pleasant gardens,
exceedingly replenished with figs and grapes. Through the midst of this town
runs a certain river, which affoordeth good water to drink and to sees
meat withal. In times past the towne-walles and all the buildings were most
sumptuous and stately, and the inhabitants exceeding rich, civil, and valiant:
but afterward by reason of certain wars waged by the king of Fez against the
king of Telensin, this town was left desolate, and the inhabitants all put to
flight: but the said wars being ended, new inhabitants reedified it and dwelt
therein: howbeit they could not reduce it to the former state, neither does it
now contain above fifteen hundred families. The townsmen lead now a
miserable life, being constrained to pay tribute both to the king of Telensin
and also to the Arabians of Angad, and wearing most base apparel: asses and
mules they have great store, whereof they make round sums of money. They
speak after the ancient manner of the Arabians, neither is their language so
corrupt as the language of the people round about them.

Of the city called Ned Roma.
THis ancient town built by the Romans, while they were lords of Africa,
stands upon a large plain, almost two miles from a certain mountain, and
about twelve miles from the Mediterran sea, and near unto it runs a little
river. The historiographers of those times report, that this town was in all
respects built after the fashion of Rome, whereupon they say it borrowed the
name. For Ned in the Arabian tongue signifies like. The wall of this town is
as yet to be seen: but all the ancient buildings of the Romans are so
destroyed, that now there scarcely remain any ruins thereof. It began in some
places to be repaired and reedified anew, but nothing comparable to the former
buildings. The fields adjacent are exceeding fruitful, and contain many
gardens replenished with such trees as bear Carobs (being a fruit like unto
Cassia fistula) which in the suburbs they use for food. This town is
indifferently well inhabited, especially with weauers, who make great store of
cotton-cloth, and are free from all tribute. The governors of the town are
chosen only at their assignement: and that they may have more free traffic
with the people of Telensin, they send many gifts unto the king.

Of the town of Tebecrit.
THis little town built by the Africans upon a certain rock near unto the
Mediterran sea, is almost twelve miles distant from the former. All the next
mountains are exceeding high and barren, and yet well stored with inhabitants.
In this town dwell great store of weauers; and here they have abundance of
Carobs and honey. Being in continual fear of the Christians, they keep every
night most diligent watch and ward: for they are not of sufficient ability to
maintain a garrison of soldiers. Their fields are no less barren then
untilled; and yield only very small quantity of barlie and panicke. The
townsmen are most basely apparelled, and utterly destitute of humanity.

Of the town of Hunain.
THis town being founded by the Africans, and being famous both for stately
building and civil inhabitants, has a little haven belonging thereunto well
fortified with two turrets standing one on the one side, and another on the
other side. The towne-wall also is very high and beautiful, especially on that
side which stands next unto the sea. Hither do the Venetians yearly bring
great store of merchandise, and do traffic with the merchants of Telensin;
for the city of Telensin is but fourteen miles from hence. Since the time
that Oran was surprised by the Christians, the Venetians would no longer
frequent Oran, searing least the Spaniards having it in possession should work
them some mischief: wherefore then they began to repair unto this port. The
townsmen in times past were most civil people, the greatest part being
weauers of cotton and of linen. Their houses are most stately built, and have
every one fountains belonging unto them: likewise here are many vines running
pleasantly upon bowers or arbours. Their houses are paued with mats of diverse
colors, and their chambers and vaults are curiously painted and carved.
Howbeit, so soon as the inhabitants were advertised of the loss of Oran, they
fled from Hunain and left it void of inhabitants: saving that the king of
Telensin maintains here a garrison of footmen, who give notice when any
merchants ships approach. Their fields abound with cherries, peaches, figs,
olives, and other fruits: howbeit they reap but little commodity thereby. I
my self passing this way could not but bewail the extreme calamity whereinto
the inhabitants of this town were fallen: at the same time there arrived a
certain ship of A ship of great (...).
Genoa, which one ship brought commodities sufficient to serve Telensin for
five years: the tenth part whereof amounting to fifteen thousand ducats, was
paid for tribute to the king.

Of the town of Haresgol.
THe great and ancient town of Haresgol was built upon a rock environed on
all sides with the Mediterran sea, saving on the south, where lies a way from
the firm land to the town. It stands northward of Telensin fourteen miles;
and was in times past well stored with inhabitants. The governor thereof was
one Idris, uncle unto that Idris that was the founder of Fez; the posterity of
whom enioied the same government for the space of an hundred years. At length
there came a certain king and patriarch of Cairaoan who utterly destroyed this
town, so that it remained void of inhabitants almost an hundred years: after
which time it was reinhabited by certain people of Granada, which came thither
with Mansor; which Mansor repaired the town, to the end it might always be a
place of refuge for his soldiers. After whose decease, and the death of his
son Mudaffir, all the soldiers were expelled by the tribes or people of
Zanhagia and Magraoa: and this second desolation of that town happened in the
year of the Hegeira 410.

Of the great city of Telensin, other wise called Tremizen.
TElensin is a great city and the royal seat of the king; but who were the
first founders thereof it is uncertain: howbeit most certain it is, that this
city was very small at the beginning, and began greatly to be augmented at the
same time when Haresgol was laid waste. For then, a certain family called
Abdulguad bearing rule, it increased so exceedingly, that in the reign of king
Abu Tesfin it contained sixteen thousand families. And then it was an
honorable and well-gouerned city: howbeit Joseph king of Fez continually
molested it, and with an huge army besieged it for seven years together. This
Joseph having built a fort upon the east side of the town, put the besieged
citizens to such distress, that they could no longer endure the extreme
famine: wherefore with one accord they all went unto their king, beseeching him
to have compassion upon their want. The king, to make them acquainted with his
dainty fare, which he had to supper, showed them a dish of sodden horseflesh
and barlie. And then they well perceived how little the kings estate was better
then the estate of the meanest citizen of them all. Soon after the king having
procured an assembly, persuaded his people that it was much more honorable to
die in battle for the defense of their country, then to live so miserable a
life. Which words of the king so inflamed all their minds to the battle, that
the day following they resolved to encounter the enemy, and valiantly to fight
it out. But it fell out far better for them then they expected; for the same
night king Joseph was slain by one of his own people: which news being
brought unto the citizens, with (...) courage they marched all out of the
town, easily vanquishing and killing the confused multitude of their enemies;
after which unexpected victory they found victuals sufficient in the enemies
camp to relieve their long and tedious famine. About forty years after, the
fourth king of Fez of the Marin-familie called Abulhesen, built a town within
two miles westward of the city of Telensin. Then he besieged Telensin for
thirty months together, making daily and fierce assaults against it, and every
night erecting some new fort, so that at length the Fessan forces next unto
Telensin easily entered the city, and having conquered it, carried home the king
thereof The king of Telensin taken prisoner and beheaded.
captive unto Fez, where he was by the king of Fez beheaded, and his carcass
was cast forth among the filth of the city: and this was the second and the
greater damage that Telensin sustained. After the decay of the Marinfamilie
(...) began in many places to be repaired, and replenished with new
inhabitants, insomuch that it increased to twelve thousand families. Here each
trade and occupation has a peculiar place, after the manner of Fez, saving
that the buildings of Fez are somewhat more stately. Here are also many and
beautiful temples, having their Mahumetan priests and preachers. Likewise
here are five colleges most sumptuously built, some by the king of Telensin,
and some by the king of Fez. Here also are store of goodly bathes and
hot-houses, albeit they have not such plenty of water as is at Fez. Also here
are very many innes built after the manner of Africa: unto two of which innes
the merchants of Genoa and Venice do usually resort. A great part of this
city is inhabited with Jews, who were in times past all of them exceeding
rich: upon their heads they wear a Or Turbant.
Dulipan to distinguish them from other citizens: but in the year of the
Hegeira 923, upon the death of king Abuhabdilla, they were all so robbed and
spoiled, that they are now brought almost unto beggerie. Moreover in this city
there are many conducts, the fountains whereof are not far from the
citie-walles, so that they may easily be stopped by any foreign enemy. The
citie-wall is very high and impregnable, having five great gates upon it, at
every one of which there is placed a guard of soldiers, and certain receivers
of the kings custom. On the south side of the city stands the kings palace,
environed with most high walls, and containing many other palaces within it,
which are none of them destitute of their fountains and pleasant gardens: this
royal palace has two gates, one leading into the fields, and the other into
the city, and at this gate stands the captain of the guard. The territory
of Telensin contains most pleasant habitations, whither the citizens in
summertime use to retire themselves: for besides the beautiful pastures and
clear fountains, there is such abundance of all kind of fruits to delight
both the eyes and the taste, that to my remembrance I never saw a more
pleasant place: their figs they use to dry in the sun and to keep until
winter: and as for almonds, peaches, melons, and pome-citrons, they grow here
in great plenty. Three miles eastward of this city are diverse mils upon the
river of Sefsif; and some other there are also not far from the city upon the
mountain of Elcalha. The south part of the city is inhabited by Jews,
lawyers, and notaries: here are also very many students, and professors of
diverse arts, which have maintenance allowed them out of the five forenamed
colleges. The citizens are of four sorts, to wit, some artificers, some
merchants, others scholars and doctors, and all the residue soldiers. The
merchants are men most just, trusty, liberal, and most zealous of the common
good; who for the most part exercise traffic with the Negros. The artificers
live a secure, quiet, and merry life. The kings soldiers being all of a comely
personage and of great valor, receive very large and liberal pay, for they
are monthly allowed three pieces of the gold-coine of Telensin, which are
worth three Italian ducats and one second part. All students before they
attain to the degree of a doctor live a bare and miserable life, but having
attained thereunto, they are made either professors or notaries, or priests.
The citizens and merchants of this city are so neat and curious in their
apparel, that sometimes they excel the citizens of Fez in bravery. The
artificers wear short garments carrying seldom a Dulipan upon their heads,
and contenting themselves with plain caps: their shoes reach up to their
mid-leg. Of all others the soldiers go woorst apparelled, for wearing a shirt
or iacket with wide sleeves, they cast over it a large mantle made of cotton,
and thus they are clad both summer and winter: saving that in winter they have
certain iackets of leather with hoods upon them, such as travelers use in
Italy, and by this means their heads are defended from rain and from snow.
The scholars and students are diversely apparelled, according to their
ability, and according to the fashion of their native country: the doctors,
judges, and priests go in more sumptuous and costly attire.

The customs and rites observed in the King of Telensin his court.
A Wonder it is to see how stately and magnificently the King of Telensin
behaueth himself, for no man may see him nor be admitted to parle with him,
but only the principal nobles of his court, each one of whom are assigned to
bear offices according to their place and dignity. In this court are sundry
offices and dignities, and the Kings lieutenant being principal officer,
allotteth unto each one such places of dignity, as may be correspondent to
their honor: and this lieutenant leuieth the kings armies, and sometime
conducteth them against the enemy. The second officer is the Kings chief
Secretary, who writes and records all things pertaining to the King. The
third is the high treasurer, who is bound by (...) office to receive tributes
and customs. The fourth is the kings dispensator or almoner, who bestows
such liberality as the king vouchsafes. The fifth is the captain of the kings
guard, who so often as any nobles are admitted to the kings presence,
conducteth the guard unto the palace-gate. Then are there other meaner
officers, as namely, the master of the kings stable, the ouerseer of his
saddles and stirrops, and his chief chamberlain, who gives attendance only
at such times as any courtiers are admitted unto the kings audience. For at
other times the kings wives, with certain Christian captives, and eunuchs do
perform that duty. The king sometimes in sumptuous and costly apparellrideth
upon a stately stead richly trapped and furnished. In riding he observes not
much pomp nor many ceremonies; neither indeed does he carry so great a
train; for you shall scarcely see a thousand horsemen in his company, except
perhaps in time of war, when as the Arabians and other people give
attendance. When the king goes forth with an army, there are not many
carriages transported therein, neither can you then discern the king by his
apparel from any mean captain: and though he conducteth never so great a
guard of soldiers, yet a man would not think how sparing he is of his coin.
Gold-money he coineth of baser gold, then that whereof the Italian money
called Bislacchi is coined, but it is of a greater size, for one piece thereof
waigheth an Italian A passage from Europe to Acthiopia through the kingdom of
Tremizen.
duckat and one fourth part. He stampeth likewise coin of silver and of
brass. His dominions are but slenderly inhabited: howbeit because the way from
Europe to Aethiopia lies through his kingdom, he reapeth much benefit by the
wares that pass by, especially since the time that Oran was surprised by the
Christians. At the same time Telensin it self was made tributarie, which was
ever before a free city: whereupon the king that was the author thereof, was
extremely hated of his subjects till his dying day. Afterward his son that
succeeded him, demanded customs and tributes likewise: for which cause being
expelled out of his kingdom by the people, he was enforced to crave aid of
the emperor Charles the fifth, by whose means (as is beforesaid) he was
restored unto his said kingdom. When Oran was subject unto the king of
Telensin, the region therabout paid unto the king for yearly tribute sometime
three thousand, and sometime four thousand ducats, the greatest part whereof
was allowed unto the kings guard, and to the Arabian soldiers. I my self
continuing certain months in this kings court, had good experience of his
liberality. I have indeed omitted many particulars in the description of this
court of Telensin: but because they agreed for the most part with those things
which we reported of Fez, I have here passed them over, least I should seem
too tedious unto the reader.

Of the town of Hubbed.
THis town being built in manner of a castle stands about a mile and an
half southward of Telensin. It contains store of inhabitants, who are for
the most part dyers of cloth. In this town was buried one Sadi Bu Median being
reputed a man of singular holiness, whom they adore like a god, ascending up to
his monument by certain steps. Here is likewise a stately college, and a fair
hospital to entertain strangers in; both which were built by a king of Fez of
the Marin-familie, as I find recorded upon a certain marble stone.

Of the town of Tefesra.
TThis town standing upon a plain fifteen miles from Telensin has great
store of smiths therein, by reason of the iron-mines which are Mines of (...).
there. The fields adjacent are exceeding fruitful for corn: and the
inhabitants being for the most part blacke-smithes are destitute of all
civility.

Of the town of Tessela.
THis ancient town was built by the Africans upon a certain plain, extending
almost twenty miles in length. Here grows such abundance of excellent corn,
as is almost sufficient for the whole kingdom of Telensin. The inhabitants
live in tents, for all the buildings of this town are destroyed, though the
name remains still. These also in times past paid a great yearly tribute
unto the king of Telensin.

Of the province called Beni Rasid.
THis region extends in length from east to west fifty, and in breadth almost
five and twenty miles. The southern part thereof is plain ground, but toward
the north it is full of fruitful mountains. The inhabitants are of two sorts:
for some of them dwell upon the mountains in houses of indifferent good
building: and these employ themselves in husbandry and other necessary
affairs. Others being of a more noble condition live only upon the plains in
tents, and there keep their camels, horses, and other cattle. They are
molested with daily inconveniences, and pay yearly tribute unto the king of
Telensin. Upon the foresaid mountains are sundry villages, among which there
are two principal, whereof the one called Chalath Haoara, and built in manner
of a castle upon the side of a certain hill, contains to the number of
forty merchants and artificers houses: the other called Elmo Hascar is the
seat of the kings lieutenant over those regions; and in this village every
thursday there is a great market, where abundance of cattle, corn, raisins,
figs, and honey is to be sold: here are likewise cloth-merchants and diverse
other chapmen, which for breuities sake I pass over in silence. I my self
continuing for some time among them, found to my hinderance what cunning
thieves they were. The king of Telensin collecteth yearly out of this province
the sum of five and twenty thousand ducats; and it contains so many most
expert soldiers.

Of the town of Batha.
THis great, rich, and populous town was built in my time upon a most
beautiful and large plain, which yields great abundance of corn. The
tribute which the king of Telensin has here, amounts to the sum of twenty
thousand ducats. Howbeit this town was afterward destroyed in that war
which happened between the king and certain of his kinsmen. For they growing
mighty by the king of Fez his aid, won many towns in the kingdom of
Telensin: and whatsoever town they thought themselves not able to keep by
force of arms, they burnt it quite down: and thus they served Batha, whereof
now there remain but very few ruins. Not far from this town runs a little
river, on both sides whereof there are many gardens and fields replenished with
all kind of fruits. Moreover the foresaid plain was utterly destitute of
inhabitants, till a certain heremite A (...).
with his followers; whom they reverenced as a man of singular holiness,
repaired thither. This heremite in short time grew so rich in oxen, horses, and
other cattle, that no man almost throughout the whole region was comparable
unto him. Neither he nor his followers pay any tribute at all, when as
notwithstanding (as I heard of his disciples) he reapeth yearly eight thousand
bushels of corn, and at this time possesses five hundred horses, ten thousand
small cattle, and two thousand oxen; and besides all the former has yearly
sent unto him from diverse parts of the world four or five thousand ducats:
so greatly has the fame of his false holiness spread over all Africa and Asia.
Disciples he has to the number of five hundred, whom he maintains at his
own cost: neither emploieth he them to ought else, but daily to read a few
prayers: for which cause many resort unto him, desiring to be of the number of
his disciples, whom after he has instructed in certain ceremonies, he sends
them thither from whence they first came. He has about an hundred tents
pitched, whereof some are for strangers, others for shepherds, and the residue
for his own family. This holy heremite has four wives, and a great many
women-slaues wearing most sumptuous apparel. His sons likewise have their
wives and families: insomuch that the whole family of this heremite and of his
sons contains five hundred persons. He is greatly honored by all the
Arabians, and by the king of Telensin himself. My self was once desirous to
try what manner of man this heremite was: and for three days I was
entertained by him in the most secret places of his habitation, where amongst
other things he showed me certain books entreating of art-Magique and of
(...): and he endeavored by all means to persuade me, that Magique was a most
true and undoubted art, whereby I perceived that himself was a magician,
albeit he never used nor regarded the art, except it were in inuocating of God
by certain names.

Of the town of Oran.
THis great and populous town containing about six thousand families, and
built many years ago by the Africans upon the Mediterran sea shore, is
distant from Telensin an hundredth and forty miles. Here may you see great
store of stately buildings, as namely of temples, colleges, hospitals,
bath-stoues, and innes. The town is compassed with most high and impregnable
walls, having on the one side a fair plain, and on the other side diverse
mountains. The greatest part of the inhabitants were weauers, and the residue
lived of their yearly revenues. The territory of this town yields but
small store of corn, so that the townsmen make all their bread of barley:
howbeit they are most courteous and friendly to all strangers. This town was
greatly frequented with merchants of Catalonia, and of Genoa: and one street
thereof is at this present called the street of the Genoueses. They were at
perpetual enmity with the king of Telensin, neither would they ever accept of
any governor, but one which received the kings tribute. But the townsmen chose
one of their chief Burgo-masters to judge of cases civil and criminal. The
merchants of this town maintained at their own costs certain foists and
brigandines of war, which committed many piracies upon the coast of
Catalonia, Geuisa, Maiorica, and Minorica, insomuch that Oran was full of
Christian captives. Afterward Don Ferdinando king of Spain encountering Oran
with a great Armada, determined to release the said Christians out of
captivity: but he had very hard success. Howbeit within a few months after
being Oran taken by the Spaniards.
aided by the Biscaines and the Cardinal of Spain, he took Oran. For the
Moors issuing forth with great fury upon the Christians army, left the
town utterly destitute of soldiers, which the Spaniards perceiving, began to
assail the town on the other side; where being resisted by none but by women,
they had easy entrance. Whereupon the Moors seeing the christians banners
advanced upon their walls, they returned back into the town, and were there put
to so great a slaughter, that few of them escaped. Thus was Oran taken by the
Spaniards in the year of Mahomet his Hegeira 916.

Of the town Mersalcabir.
THis town was built in my time by the king of Telensin upon the Mediterran
sea, not far from Oran. And Mersalcabir in the Moors language signifies a
great or large haven: for I think there is not the like haven to be found in
the whole world besides: so that here infinite numbers of ships and galleies
may find most safe harbor in any tempestuous Mersalcabir surprised by the
Spaniards.
weather. Hither the Venetians ships made often resort, when they perceived any
tempest to approach: and from hence they would cause all their wares to be
transported to Oran in other vessels. This town also was at length taken by
the Spaniards as well as Oran.

Of the town of Mezzagran.
THis town also was built by the Africans upon the Mediterran sea, near unto
the place where the river Selef disemboqueth. It is well peopled and much
molested by the Arabians. The governor thereof has little authority within
the town, and less without.

Of the town of Mustuganin.
MVstuganin being founded by the Africans upon the Mediterran sea, stands
almost three miles from Mezzagran, on the other side of the river Selef. It was
in times past very populous; but since the kingdom of Telensin began to
decay, this town has been so vexed by the Arabians, that at this present the
third part thereof scarce remains. Families it contains to the number of
fifteen hundred; and it has a most beautiful and stately temple. In this
town are great store of weauers: and the houses are most sumptuously built,
having clear fountains belonging unto them. Through the midst of the town
runs a river, on each side whereof stand diverse milles. Not far from the
town there are most pleasant gardens; but they lie now untilled and desolate.
Their fields are exceeding fruitful. There belongs au haven unto this town,
whereunto many merchants of Europe use to resort, albeit they find not much
traffic here, because the (...) are so destitute of money.

Of the town of Bresch.
THis ancient town built by the Romans upon the Mediterran sea, stands many
miles distant from Mustuganin. It contains great store of inhabitants, which
are many of them weauers. The people of this town use to paint a black cross
upon their cheek, and two other black crosses upon the palms of their hands:
and the like custom is observed by all the inhabitants of the mountains of
Alger, and Bugia: the occasion whereof is thought to be this, namely that the
Goths when they first began to invade these regions, released all those from
paying of tribute (as our African historiographers affirm) that would embrace
the Christian religion. But so often as any tribute was demanded, every man to
eschew the payment thereof, would not stick to profess himself a Christian:
wherefore it was then determined, that such as were Christians indeed should be
distinguished from others by the foresaid crosses. At length the Goths being
expelled, they all revolted unto the Mahumetan religion; howbeit this custom
of painting crosses remained still amongthem, neither do they know the reason
thereof. Likewise the meaner sort of people in Mauritania use to make such
crosses upon their faces, as we see used by some people of Europe. This town
abounds greatly with figs, and the fields thereof are exceeding fruitful for
flax and barley. The townsmen have continued in firm league and friendship
with the people of the mountains adjoining; by whose favor they lived an
hundred years together without paying of any tribute at all: but Barbarossa
the Turk having won the kingdom of Telensin put them to great distress.
From hence they use to transport by sea great store of figs and flax unto
Alger, Tunis, and Bugia, whereby they gain great store of money. Here also you
may as yet behold diverse monuments of the Romans ancient buildings.

Of the town of Sersell.
THis great and ancient town built by the Romans upon the Mediterran sea, was
afterward taken by the Goths and lastly by the Mahumetans. The wall of this
town is exceeding high, strong, and stately built, and contains about eight
miles in circuit. In that part of the town next unto the Mediterran sea
stands a most beautiful and magnificent temple built by the Romans, the
inward part whereof consists of marble. They had also in times past an
impregnable fort standing upon a rock by the Mediterran sea. Their fields are
most fruitful: and albe it this town was much oppressed by the Goths, yet
the Mahumetans enjoyed a great part thereof for the space almost of five
hundred years. And then after the war of Telensin it remained void of
inhabitants almost three hundred years. At length when Granada was won by the
Christians, diverse Moors of Granada fled hither, which repaired the houses and
a good part of the castle: afterward they began to build ships, wherewith they
transported their merchantable commodities into other regions: and they
increased so by little and little, that now they are grown to twelve hundred
families. They were subject not long since unto Barbarossa the Turk, unto whom
they paid but three hundred ducates for yearly tribute.

Of the city of Meliana.
THis great and ancient city, commonly called now by the corrupt name of
Magnana, and built by the Romans upon the top of a certain hill, is distant
from the Mediterran sea almost forty miles. Upon this mountain are many
springs, and woods abounding with walnuts. The city it self is environed with
most ancient and high walls. One side thereof is fortified with impregnable
rocks, and the other side depends so upon the mountain as Narma does, which
is a city near Rome: it contains very stately houses, every one of which
houses has a fountain. The inhabitants are almost all weauers: and there are
diverse turners also which make fine cups, dishes, and such like vessels. Many
of them likewise are husbandmen. They continued many years free from all
tribute and exaction, till they were at length made tributarie by Barbarossa.

Of the town of Tenez.
THis ancient town built by the Africans upon the side of an hill not far from
the Mediterran sea, is environed with fair walls, and inhabited with many
people. The inhabitants are exceeding rusticall and uncivil; and have always
been subject to the king of Telensin. King Mahumet that was grandfather unto
the king which now reigns, left three sons behind him; the eldest being
called Abuabdilla, the second Abuzeuen, and the third Iahia. Abuabdilla
succeeded his father, whom his brethren being aided by the citizens went about
to murder. But afterward, the treason being discovered, Abuzeuen was
apprehended and put in prison. Howbeit, king Perhaps (...).
Abuchemmeu being after that expelled out of his kingdom by the people,
Abuzeuen was not only restored to his former liberty, but was also chosen
king, and enjoyed the kingdom so long, till (as is beforementioned) he was
slain by Barbarossa. Iahia fled unto the king of Fez, who being at length
proclaimed king by the people of Tenez, reigned for certain years. And his
young son that he left behind him being vanquished by Barbarossa, fled unto
Charles who was then only king of Spain. But when as the aid promised by
Charles the Emperor stayed long, and the Prince of Tenez was too long absent,
a rumor was spread abroad, that he and his brother were turned Christians:
whereupon the government of Tenez fell immedially to the brother of Barbarossa.
Their fields indeed yield abundance of corn; but of other commodities they
have great want.

Of the town of Mazuna.
THis town (as some report) was built by the Romans, and stands about
forty miles from the Mediterran sea. It has fruitful fields, strong walls,
but most base and deformed houses. Their temple indeed is somewhat beautiful:
for it was in times past a most stately town, but being often sacked, sometime
by the king of Telensin, and sometime by his rebels; and at length falling into
the hands of the Arabians, it was brought unto extreme misery, so that at this
present there are but few inhabitants remaining, all being either weauers or
husbandmen, and most grievously oppressed by the Arabians. Their fields abound
plentifully with all kind of corn. Near unto this town there have been in
times past many houses, streets, and villages, which may probably be
coniectured by the letters engraven upon marble stones. The names of which
villages are not to be found in any of our histories or Chronicles.

Of Gezeir, otherwise called Alger.
GEzeir in the Moors language signifies an island, which name is thought to
have been given unto this city, because it lies near unto the isles of
Maiorica, Minorica, and Ieuiza: howbeit the Spaniards call it Alger. It was
founded by the Africans of the family of Mesgana, wherefore in old time it was
called by the name of Mesgana. It is a large town, containing families to the
number of four thousand, and is environed with most stately and impregnable
walls. The buildings thereof are very artificial and sumptuous: and every
trade and occupation has here a several place. Innes, bath-stoues, and
temples here are very beautiful; but the stateliest temple of all stands
upon the seashore. Next unto the sea there is a most pleasant walk upon that
part of the (...) wall, which the waves of the sea beat upon. In the suburbs
are many garde^s replenished with all kind of fruits. On the east side of the
town runs a certain river having many mils thereupon: and out of this
river they draw water fit for drink, and for the services of the kitchen. It
has most beautiful plains adioining upon it, and especially one called
Metteggia, which extends forty five miles in length, and almost thirty
miles in breadth, and abounds mightily with all kinds of grain. This town
for many years was subject unto the kingdom of Telensin: but hearing that
Bugia was also governed by a king, and being nearer thereunto, they submitted
themselves unto the king of Bugia. For they saw that the king of Telensin could
not sufficiently defend them against their enemies, and also that the king of
Bugia might do them great damage, wherefore they offered unto him a yearly
tribute of their own accord, and yet remained almost free from all exaction.
But certain years after, the inhabitants of this city building for
themselves galleys, began to play the pirates, and greatly to molest the
foresaid islands. Whereupon king Ferdinando provided a mighty armada, hoping
thereby to become lord of the city. Likewise upon a certain high rock
standing opposite against the town, he caused a strong forte to be built, and
that within gunshot of the Alger become tributarie to the king of Spain.
city, albeit the city walls could not be endammaged thereby. Wherefore the
citizens immediately sent ambassadors into Spain, to crave a league for ten
years, upon condition that they should pay certain yearly tribute; which
request was granted by king Ferdinando. And so they remained for certain
months free from the danger of war: but at length Barbarossa hastening to
the siege of Bugia, and having won one fort built by the Spaniards, determined
to encounter another, hoping if he could obtain that also, that he should
soon conquer the whole kingdom of Bugia. Howbeit all matters fell not out
according to his expectation: for a great part of his soldiers being
husbandmen, when they perceived the time of sowing corn to approach, without
any leave or license they forsook their general, and returned home to the
plough-taile. And many Turks also did the like, so that Barbarossa failing of
his purpose, was constrained to break up the (...). Howbeit before his
departure, he set on fire with his own hands twelve galleys, which lay in a
river but three miles from Bugia. And then with forty of his soldiers he
retired himself to the castle of Gegel being from Bugia about sixty miles
distant, where he remained for certain days. In the mean while, king
Ferdinando deceasing, the people of Alger released themselves from paying any
more tribute: for seeing Barbarossa to be a most valiant warrior, and a deadly
enemy unto Christians, they sent for him, and chose him captain over all
their forces; who presently encountered the fort, but to little effect.
Afterward this Barbarossa secretly murdered the governor of the city in a
certain bath. The said governor was prince of the Arabians dwelling on the
plains of Mettegia, his name was Selim Etteumi, descended of the family of
Telaliba, and created governor of Alger at the same time when Bugia was taken
by the Spaniards: this man was slain by Barbarossa, after he had governed many
years. And then Barbarossa usurped the whole government of the city unto
himself, and coined money, and this was the first entrance into his great and
princely estate. At all the foresaid accidents I my self was present, as I
traveled from Fez to Tunis, and was entertained by one that was sent
ambassador from the people of Alger into Spain, from whence he brought three
thousand books written in the Arabian tongue. Then I passed on to Bugia, where
I found Barbarossa besieging A voyage performed by John (...).
the foresaid fort: afterward I proceeded to Constantina, and next to Tunis. In
the mean while I heard that Barbarossa was slain at Tremizen, and that his
brother called Cairadin succeeded in the government of Alger. Then we heard
also that the emperor Charles the fifth had sent two armies to surprise Alger;
the first whereof was destroyed upon the plain of Alger, and the second having
assailed the town three days together, was partly slain and partly taken by
Barbarossa, insomuch that very few escaped back into Spain. This was done in
the year of the Hegeira nine hundred twenty two.

Of the town of Tegdemt.
THis ancient town was built (as some think) by the Romans; and Tegdemt
signifies in the Arabian language Ancient. The wall of this town (as a man
may conjecture by the foundations thereof) was ten miles in circuit. There are
yet remaining two temples of an exceeding height, but they are very ruinous,
and in many places fallen to the ground. This town when it was possessed by
the Mahumetans, was marvelous rich, and abounded with men of learning and
poets. It is reported that Idris uncle to the same Idris that founded Fez, was
once governor of this town, and that the government thereof remained to his
posterity almost an hundred and fifty years. Afterward it was destroyed in
the wars between the schismatic patriarks of Cairaoan, in the year of
the Hegeira 365: but now there are a few ruins only of this town to be seen.

Of the town of Medua.
THis town standing not far from the borders of Numidia, is distant from the
Mediterran sea almost an hundred and fowerscore miles; and it is situate on a
most pleasant and fruitful plain, and is environed with sweet rivers and
beautiful gardens. The inhabitants are exceeding rich, exercising traffic
most of all with the Numidians; and they are very curious both in their
apparel and in the furniture of their houses. They are continually molested
with the invasions of the Arabians; but because they are almost two hundred
miles distant from Telensin, they can have no aid sent them by the king. This
town was once subject unto the governor of Tenez, afterward unto Barbarossa,
and lastly unto his brother. Never was I so sumptuously entertained as in this
place: for the inhabitants being themselves (...), so often as any learned man
comes amongst them, they entertain him with great honor, and cause him to
decide all their controversies. For the space of two months while I remained
with them, I gained above two hundred ducats, and was so allured with the
pleasantnes of the place, that had not my duty enforced me to depart, I had
remained there all the residue of my life.

Of the town of Temendfust.
THis town also was built by the Romans upon the Mediterran sea, and is about
twelve miles distant from Alger. Unto this town belongs a fair haven, where
the ships of Alger are safely harbored, for they have no other haven so
commodious. This town was at length destroyed by the Goths, and the greatest
part of the wall of Alger was built with the stones which came from the wall of
this town.

Of the town of Teddeles.
THis town built by the Africans upon the Mediterran sea, and being thirty
miles distant from Alger, is environed with most ancient and strong walls. The
greatest part of the inhabitants are dyers of cloth, and that by reason of the
many rivers and streams running through the midst of the same. They are of a
liberal and ingenuous disposition, and can play most of them upon the citterne
and lute. Their fields are fertile, and abounding with corn. Their apparel is
very decent: the greatest part of them are delighted in fishing, and they take
such abundance of fishes, that they freely give them to every body, which is
the cause that there is no fishmarket in this town.

Of the mountains contained in the kingdom of Telensin.
Of the mountain of Beni Iezneten.
THis mountain stands westward of Telensin almost fifty miles, one side
thereof bordering upon the desert of Garet, and the other side upon the desert
of Angad. In length it extends five and twenty, and in breadth almost
fifteen miles, and it is exceeding high and difficult to ascend. It has
diverse woods growing upon it, wherein grow great store of Carobs, which the
inhabitants use for an ordinary kind of food: for they have great want of
barley. Here are diverse cottages inhabited with valiant and stout men. Upon the
top of this mountain stands a strong castle, wherein all the principal men
of the mountain dwell, amongst whom there are often dissentions, for there is
none of them all but would be sole governor of the mountain. I my self had
conversation with some of them, whom I knew in the king of Fez his court, for
which cause I was honorably entertained by them. The soldiers of this mountain
are almost ten thousand.

Of mount Matgara.
THis exceeding high and cold mountain has great store of inhabitants, and
is almost six miles distant from Ned Roma. The inhabitants are valiant, but
not very rich: for this mountain yields naught but barley and Carobs. They
speak all one language with the people of Ned Roma, and are joined in such
league with them, that they will often aid one another against the king of
Telensin.

Of mount Gualhasa.
THis high mountain stands nigh unto the town of Hunain. The inhabitants
are savage, rude, and uncivil people, and are at continual war with the
people of Hunain, so that oftentimes they have almost utterly destroyed the
town. This mountain yields great store of Carobs, and but little corn.

Of mount Agbal.
THis mountain is inhabited with people of base condition, and subject to the
town of Oran. They all exercise husbandry, and carry wood unto Oran. While
the Moors enioied Oran, their state was somewhat better: but since the
Christians got possession thereof they have been driven to extreme misery.

Of mount Beni Guerened.
THis mountain being three miles distant from Tremisen, is well peopled, and
abounds with all kind of fruits, especially with figs and cherries. The
inhabitants are some of them colliers, some wood-mongers, and the residue
husbandmen. And out of this only mountain (as I was informed by the king of
Telensin his Secretary) there is yearly collected for tribute, the sum of
twelve thousand ducats.

Of mount Magraua.
THis mountain extending it self forty miles in length toward the
Mediterran sea is near unto the town of Mustuganin before described. The soil
is fertile, and the inhabitants are valiant and warrelike people, and of a
liberal and human disposition.

Of mount Beni Abusaid.
THis mountain standing not far from Tenez, is inhabited with great
multitudes of people, which lead a savage life, and are notwithstanding most
valiant warriors. They have abundance of honey, barley, and goats. Their wax
and hides they carry unto Tenez, and there sell the same to the merchants of
Europe. When as the king of Tremizen his kinsemen were lords of this mountain,
the people paid for tribute certain thousands of ducats.

Of mount Guanseris.
THis exceeding high mountain is inhabited with valiant people, who being aided
by the king of Fez, maintained war against the kingdom of Telensin, for
above threescore years. Fruitful fields they have, and great store of
fountains. Their soldiers are almost twenty thousand in number, whereof 2500.
are horsemen. By their aid Iahia attained to the government of Tenez: but
after Tenez began to decay, they gave themselves wholly to robbery and theft.

Of the mountains belonging to the state of Alger.
NEre unto Alger on the east side and on the west are diverse mountains well
stored with inhabitants. Free they are from all tribute, and rich, and
exceeding valiant. Their corn fields are very fruitful, and they have great
abundance of cattle. They are oftentimes at deadly war together, so that it
is dangerous travailing that way, unless it be in a religious man's company.
Markets they have and faires upon these mountains, where naught is to be sold
but cattle, corn, and wool, unless some of the neighbor cities supply them
with merchandise now and then.

Here ends the fourth book.
JOHN LEO HIS FIFTH BOOK OF the History of Africa, and of the memorable
things contained therein.
A description of the kingdoms of Bugia and Tunis.
WHen as in the former part of this my history I divided Barbaria into
certain parts, I determined to write of Bugia as of a kingdom by it self:
and I found indeed that not many years ago it was a kingdom. For Bugia was
subject to the king of Tunis, and albeit for certain years the king of
Telensin was Lord thereof, yet was it at length recovered again by the king of
Tunis, who committed the government of the city unto one of his sons, both for
the tranquillity of Bugia, and also that no discord might happen among his
sons after his decease. He left behind him three sons, the eldest whereof
was called Habdulhaziz, and unto him he bequeathed the kingdom of Bugia, as is
aforesaid: unto the second, whose name was Hutmen, he left the kingdom of
Tunis: and the third called Hammare, he made governor of the region of dates.
This Hammare began forthwith to wage war against his brother Hutmen, by whom
being at length taken in the town of Asfacos, and deprived of both his eyes,
he was carried captive unto Tunis, where he lived many years blind: but his
brother Hutmen governed the kingdom of Tunis full forty years. The prince of
Bugia being most loving and dutiful to his brother, reigned for many years
with great tianquilitie, till at length he was by king Ferdinand of Spain, and
by the means of one Pedro de Nauarra, cast out of his kingdom.

A description of the great city of Bugia.
THis ancient city of Bugia built (as some think) by the Romans, upon the
side of an high mountain, near unto the Mediterran sea, is environed with
walls of great height, and most stately in regard of their antiquity. The
part thereof now peopled contains above eight thousand families: but if it
were all replenished with buildings, it were capeable of more then four and
twenty thousand households, for it is of a great length. The houses, temples,
and colleges of this city are most sumptuously built. Professors of liberal
sciences here are great store, whereof some teach matters pertaining to the
law, and others profess natural Philosophy. Neither Monasteries, Innes, nor
Hospitals erected after their manner are here wanting: and their market place
is very large and fair: their streets either descend or ascend, which is
very troublesome to them that have any business in the town. In that part of
the city next unto the top of the mountain stands a strong castle, most
sumptuously and beautifully walled: and there are such notable letters and
pictures most artificially carved upon the plaister-worke and timber, that they
are thought to have cost much more then the building of the wall it self. The
citizens were exceeding rich, and used with their warlike galleys continually
to molest the coasts of Spain; which was the occasion of the utter overthrow
of their city. For Pedro de Nauarra was sent against them with a fleet of
fowerteene sails only. The citizens being addicted wholly The city of Bugia
taken by Pedro de Nauarra.
to pleasure and ease, and being terrified with the rumor of war, because
they were never exercised therein, were no sooner advertised of Pedro de
Nauarra his approach, but al of them together with their king betook themselves
to flight, and left their city abounding with all kind of riches and wealth,
to be spoiled by the Spaniards, so that it was easily taken, in the year of
Mahomet his Hegeira nine hundred and seventeen. Soon after Pedro de Nauarra
having sacked the city, built a strong forte upon the sea shore, and repaired
an other which had lien a long time waste, furnishing them both with soldiers
and munition. And six years after, Barbarossa the Turk being desirous to
win this city from the Christians, and having levied only a thousand
soldiers, took the old forte, because he was favored by the inhabitants of
all the mountains adjacent: wherein having placed a garrison, he attempted to
win the other fort also: but at his first encounter he lost an hundred of his
principal Turks, and four hundred of the mountainers that came to aid him;
insomuch that Barbarossa was enforced to fly unto the castle of Gegel, as is
aforesaid.

Of the castle of Gegel.
THis ancient castle built by the Africans, upon an high rock by the
Mediterran sea, is distant about threescore miles from Bugia. Families it
contains to the number of five hundred; and the buildings thereof are very
base. The inhabitants are of a trusty and ingenuous disposition, and do most
of them exercise husbandry: howbeit their fields are but barren, and apt
only for barley, flax, and hemp. They have great store of figs and nuts,
which they use to carry in certain barks unto Tunis. They have in despite
of the kings of Bugia and Tunis continued always free from tribute: for that
impregnable mountain can be surprised by no siege nor encounter of the enemy.
At length they yielded themselves unto Barbarossa, who demanded none other
tribute of them, but only the (...) of certain fruits and corn.

Of the town of Mesila.
MEsila founded by the Romans not far from the Numidian desert, and being
distant from Bugia almost an hundred miles, has stately walls about it, but
base houses within. The inhabitants being partly artificers and partly
husbandmen, go very homely apparelled, and are most grievously oppressed with
the continual exactions of the Arabians, and with the daily molestations of
the king of Bugia. My self upon a time traveling this way, could not find so
much fodder as was sufficient for twelve horses only.

Of the town of Stefe.
THis town also built by the Romans, sixty miles southward of Bugia, upon a
certain beautiful plain, is environed with strong and stately walls. It was
in times past exceedingly well stored with inhabitants: but since the
Mahumetans were Lords thereof, it has so decayed by the injuries of the
Arabians, who razed to the ground a great part of the wall, that within the
whole circuit of this great and ancient town, there are but an hundred houses
at this present remaining.

Of the town of Necaus.
THis town built by the Romans near unto Numidia, and being distant from the
Mediterran sea an hundred and eighty, and from the town last mentioned
eighty miles, is compassed with a strong and ancient wall. By this town
runs a certain river, on both sides whereof grow the best wal-nuts and figs
that are to be found in the whole kingdom of Tunis, being usually carried to
Constantina to be sold, which city is thence distant an hundred and eighty
miles. The fields of this town are exceeding fruitful, and the inhabitants
are very rich, liberal, and curious in their apparel. Here is an hospital
maintained at the common charges of the town, to entertain strangers that
pass by. Here is a college also, the students whereof are allowed their diet
and apparel. Neither is this town destitute of a most stately and
well-furnished temple. Their women are white, having black hairs and a most
delicate skin, because they frequent the bath-stoues so often. Most of their
houses are but of one story high, yet are they very decent, and have each one
a garden thereto belonging, replenished with damaske-roses, myrtles, cammomill,
and other herbs and flowers, and being watered with most pleasant fountains.
In these gardens likewise there are most stately arbours and bowres, the cool
shadow whereof in summertime is most acceptable. And (to be brief) all things
here are so delightful to the senses, and so alluring, that any man would be
loath to depart from hence.

Of the town of Chollo.
THe great town of Chollo founded by the Romans, upon the Mediterran sea, at
the foot of a certain high mountain, is environed with no walls at all: for
the walls were razed to the ground by the Goths: neither did the Mahumetans,
when they had got possession, build them up again. Howbeit this town is
notably well governed, and well stored with inhabitants, which are all men of a
liberal and tractable disposition. They have continually great traffic with
the merchants of Genoa, and do gather abundance of wax and hides. Their
fields upon the mountain are exceeding fruitful, and they have always so
defended themselves against the princes of Tunis and Constantina, that until
this present they remain free from tribute. From the injury of Constantina
they are easily defended, both in regard of the difficult mountains lying in
the midway, and also in respect of the great distance; for Constantina
stands almost an hundred and twenty miles off. Neither is there any city
throughout the whole kingdom of Tunis, either for wealth, or strong situation,
any way comparable unto this.

Of the town of Sucaicada.
THis ancient city built by the Romans also upon the Mediterran sea, and
standing about thirty five miles from Constantina, was wasted and almost
utterly destroyed by the Goths: howbeit by reason of the haven, being so famous
and so frequented by the merchants of Genoa, the prince of Constantina caused
certain fair houses to be built thereabouts, for the said merchants of Genoa,
to repose themselves and their goods therein: and upon a mountain not far
off he built a strong (...), for the security and defense of the said
merchants from all enemies whatsoever. From the said haven to Constantina the
high way is paued with certain black stones, such as are to be seen in some
places of Italy, being there called Le strade Roman, which is a manifest
argument, that Sucaicada was built by the Romans.

Of the city of Constantina.
NO man can deny the Romans to have been founders of this city, that shall
consider the great strength, height, and antiquity of the walls, and how
curiously they are beset and adorned with black stones. This city stands
upon the south side of an exceeding high mountain, and is environed with
steep rocks, under which rocks and within the compass whereof runs the
river called Sufegmare, so that the said deep river with the rocks on either
side, serves in stead of a towne-ditch to Constantina. The north part is
compassed with a wall of great thicknes: and there are two extreme narrow
passages only, to enter into the city, one on the east part, and another on
the west. The citie-gates are very large and stately. The city it self
contains above eight thousand families. Buildings it has very sumptuous, as
namely, the chief temple, two colleges, three or four monasteries, and other
such like. Here every trade and occupation has a several place assigned: and
the inhabitants are right honest and valiant people. Here is likewise a great
company of merchants, whereof some sell cloth and wool, others send oil and
silk into Numidia, and the residue exchange linen cloth and other wares for
slaves and dates. Neither are dates so cheap in any region of all Barbary
besides. The kings of Tunis usually commit the government of Constantina unto
their eldest sons: The hard success of the king of Tunis his three sons.
and so he that is now king of Tunis bestowed Constantina upon his eldest son
in like sort: who waging war against the Arabians was slain in the first
battle. Then fell the government of Constantina unto his second son, whose
intemperate life was the cause of his sudden and untimely death. After him
succeeded the third and yoongest son, who in regard of his insolent and
shameless behavior, was so hated of all the citizens, that some had
determined to kill him: whereof his father having intelligence, sent for him,
and kept him for certain years prisoner at Tunis. Afterward he committed the
government of Constantina to a certain Renegado that of a Christian became a
Mahumetan: this Renegado he trusted as his own brother, for he had made former
trial of him: who for many years governed the place with great tranquillity.
Upon the north part of the city stands a certain strong castle built at the
same time when the city it self was built: which castle was more strongly
fortified then before, by one Elcaied Nabil the kings lieutenant: and this
castle greatly bridled both the citizens, and all the bordering Arabians, whose
great captain it held as prisoner, and released him not, till he had left his
three sons for hostages. At length the said Elcaied grew so hautie, that he
coined money, to the great contempt of his king and sovereign, whom
notwithstanding he endeavored by many gifts and presents to appease. But when
men perceived Elcaied to degenerate from his first form of government, they
that before loved him, and had him in high regard, were presently of another
mind, and utterly forsook him. So that laying siege unto a certain city of
Numidia called Pescara, he perceived some treason to be attempted against him:
and thereupon returning forthwith to Constantina, he found the citie-gates
shut against him: from whence he presently took his journey to the king of
Tunis, and was by him cast into prison, and not restored to liberty, till he
had paid an hundred thousand ducats. Afterward by the kings aid he was
restored to his former government: but when he began to tyrannize over some of
the chief citizens, he again provoked the whole city unto arms, who
besieged forthwith the castle whereunto he fled, which was such a corrasiue
unto Elcaied his mind, that within few days he died for sorrow. And so the
people after they were reconciled to their king, would fromthencefoorth never
admit any foreign governor: wherefore the king of Tunis was (as is aforesaid)
again constrained to send his own sons thither. The fields belonging to
this city are exceeding fertile. And on either side the river which runs
through the plains, there are most commodious gardens, if they were well
husbanded. Also without the city stand many fair and ancient buildings. About
a mile and a half from the city stands a certain triumphall arch, like
unto the triumphall arches at Rome, which the gross common people think to
have been a castle where innumerable devils remained, which (they say) were
expelled by the Mahumetans, when they came first to inhabit Constantina. From
the city to the river they descend by certain stairs hewn out of the rock:
and near unto the river stands a little house so artificially cut out of the
maine rock, that the roof, pillars, and walls are all of one continued
substance, and here the women of Constantina wash their linen. Near unto the
city likewise there is a certain Hot baths.
bath of hot water dispersing it self among the rocks: in this bath are great
store of snailes, which the fond women of the city call Devils: and when any
one falls into a fever or any other disease, they suppose the snailes to be
the authors thereof. And the only remedy that they can apply upon A fond and
senseles (...).
such an occasion is this: first they kill a white hen, putting her into a
platter with her feathers on, and then very solemnly with waxe-candles they
carry her to the bathe, and there leave her: and many good fellows there are,
which so soon as the silly women have set down their hens at the bath, will
come secretly thither, and convey away the hens to their own kitchins.
Somewhat farther from the city eastward there is a fountain of extreme cold
water, and near unto it stands a certain building of marble adorned with
sundry Hieroglyphicall pictures or emblemes, such as I have seen at Rome, and
at many other places of Europe. But the common people imagine that it was in
times past a Gra^mar-schoole, and because both the masters and scholars
thereof were most vicious, they were transformed (say they) into marble. The
inhabitants twice every year send great store of wares into Numidia: and
because as they travel, they are in danger of the Arabian thieves, they hire
certain Turkish Harquebusiers for great wages to guard them. The merchants of
Constantina traveling to Tunis pay no tribute at all, but only at their
departure forth of Constantina for the worth of every 100. ducates in
merchandise, they allow two ducates and a half.

Of the town of Mela.
THis town built by the Romans within twelve miles of Constantina, and
environed with most strong walls, contains almost three thousand families:
but at this present there are but few buildings by reason of the wars that
have happened. Here are greatstore of artizans: the most whereof are such
weauers as make couerlets. In the market place there is a most clear
fountain. The citizens are valiant, though they be of rude behavior. Here is
abundance, not only offruits (whereupon some think the name of the town to
be derived) but also of cattle and corn. Unto this town the gouernonr of
Constantina sends every year a certain Judge, to decide the townesmens
controversies, and to receive the yearly tribute: howbeit oftentimes the said
Judge is slain by the people.

Of the ancient town of Bona.
THis town built by the Romans upon the Mediterran sea, almost 120. miles more
to the west was in ancient times called Hippo, where S. Augustine in times
past bishop of Hippo.
the reverend father Saint Augustine was once Bishop. It was in process of
time subdued by the Goths, and was afterward surprised and burnt to ashes by
Hutmen the third patriarch after Mahumet. And many years after they built a
new town within two miles of the stones that were brought from the ruins of
Bona: which new town they called Beld Elhuneb, that is, the city of the fruit
called Ziziphus or Iuiuba, by reason of the great abundance of that fruit: the
which they use to dry in the sun, and to keep till winter. It contains
almost three hundred families, and all the houses and buildings thereof are
very base, save one only temple which stands next the sea. The inhabitants
are all of an ingenuous disposition, some of them being merchants, and the
residue artizans. Here is great store of linnen-cloath wouen, the greatest part
whereof is carried to Numidia. The inhabitants of this town having upon a time
slain their governors, were so bold as to threaten the king of Tunis: and
they had without all doubt betrayed the town unto the Christians, had not the
king of Tunis taken special heed thereunto. In this town are certain lewd
people and most beggarly apparelled, which notwithstanding are highly
reverenced by the citizens. Here are no fountains, nor yet any water at all,
but rainewater only which is kept in cesterns. On the east side of the town
stands a strong castle built by the king of Tunis, where the governor of the
town appointed by the king has his abode. Unto this town adioyneth a most
large plain, containing in length forty, and in breadth five and twenty
miles: very commodious it is for corn, and is inhabited by certain Arabians
called Merdez: these Arabians have great store of cattle and but little money;
and they bring good store of butter daily unto Bona. Unto this town the people
of Tunis, of the isle of Gerbi, and of Genoa use yearly to resort, and to buy
great abundance of corn and butter. Every friday they have near unto the
town walls a market, which is well frequented even till night. Not Great store
of coral.
far from hence there is a certain place in the sea, abounding with great
store of coral: and because the townsmen know not how to fish for the same,
the king of Tunis licenced certain merchants of Genoa to fish for it: who in
regard of the continual assaults of pirates, because they could not speed of
their purpose, they obtained leave also of the king to build a castle near
unto the place: but that the townsmen would in no case permit, saying that the
Genoueses in times past took their town by such a wile, and that it was
afterward recovered again by the king of Tunis.

Of the town of Tefas.
THE town of Tefas founded by the Africans upon the side of a mountain, and
standing almost an hundred and fifty miles southward of Bona, was in times
past (...) populous, and full of brave buildings, but it has been since
destroyed by the Arabians. Afterward being replanted with new inhabitants, and
remaining free from war for certain months, it was the second time destroyed
by the Arabians. Last of all (because it was a place commodious for corn) it
was inhabited the third time by certain Africans called Haoara, and that by
the aid of a certain prince brother unto him, which had slain Enasir the
king of Tunis his son: but now all that remained of this town was utterly
razed by the king of Tunis.

Of the city of Tebessa.
THis great and strong city built by the Romans near unto Numidia, and being
distant two hundred miles southward from the Mediterran sea, is compassed with
an high wall made of such stones, as are to be seen upon the Colosso at Rome:
neither saw I, to my remembrance, any such walls in all Africa or Europe; and
yet the houses and other buildings are very base. Through part of this city
runs a great river: and in the market, and diverse other places stand
certain marble pillars, having Epigrams and sentences with Latin letters
engraven upon them: there are also other square pillars of marble covered with
roofs. The plains adjacent albeit very dry, yet are they most fruitful for
corn. Five miles from hence grow such abundance of wall-nut-trees, as you
would take them to be some thick forest. Near unto this town stands a
certain hill full of mighty caves, wherein the common people say, that giants
inhabited of old: but it is most evident, that those caves were dug by the
Romans at the same time, when they built the city: for certain it is that the
stones whereof the citie-walles consist, were taken out of those rocks. The
inhabitants are people of a covetous, inhumane, and beastly disposition;
neither will they vouchsafe to look upon a stranger: insomuch that Eldabag a
famous Poet of the city of Malaga in Granada, having in his travel this way
received some discourtesie, wrote in disgrace of Tebessa certain satyricall
verses, which my self likewise have thought good here to set down in the
dispraise thereof.

Within this place here is naught of any worth,
Save worthles nuts, which Tebessa affourds.
Soft, I mistake, the marble walls are worth
Your earnest view, so are the Christall-fourds:
But hence are banished virtues all divine,
The place is hell, the people worse then swine.
This Eldabag was a most learned and elegant Poet in the Arabian tongue, and out
of measure satyricall, and bitter in his inuectiues. But to return to our
former purpose, these Tebessians have always rebelled against the king of
Tunis, and have slain all the governors that he has sent. Wherefore the king
that now is, traveling upon a time toward Numidia, sent certain ambassadors
into the city, to know how the citizens stood affected toward him: unto whom
they (instead of God save the King) made answer: God save our Citie-walles.
Whereat the king waxing wroth, sacked the city forthwith, beheaded and hanged
diverse of the inhabitants, and made such hauock, that ever since it has
remained desolate. This was done in the year of the Hegeira 915.

Of the town called Vrbs.
BY the name of this town it sufficiently appears, that the Romans were the
first founders thereof. Situate it is upon the most beautiful plain of al
Africa, which by reason of the abundance of fountains is so well stored with
corn, that from thence to Tunis (which stands 190. miles northward of this
place) and to other regions adjoining, great plenty of corn is transported.
In this town are to be seen sundry monuments of the Romans, as namely
images of marble, and every where upon the walls are sentences in Latin
letters engraven: the towne-walles are most artificially and sumptuously built.
This town the Goths, being assisted by the Moors, surprised, when as it
contained the chief treasure and wealth that the Romans enjoyed in all
Africa. Afterward it remained for certain years desolate, being at length
notwithstanding inhabited a new, yet so, that it deserves rather the name of a
village then of a town. Not far from this town runs a certain river, upon
the which are diverse water-milles; and this river takes his beginning from a
little hill but half a mile distant from the town. All the inhabitants are
either weauers or husbandmen, and are continually molested by the king of
Tunis. Howbeit if the fertility of the soil, the pleasantnes of the place,
and the wholesome disposition of the air, were as well known to the king, as
they are to my self, I think verily that he would leave Tunis, and go and
dwell in this region. The Arabians are well acquainted with the place, for from
hence they yearly transport great store of corn unto their deserts.

Of the town of Beggia.
THis town built by the Romans upon a mountain almost twenty miles distant
from the Mediterran sea, and about eighty miles westward of Tunis, stands
right in the way from Tunis to Constantina. But because the name of this town
is no Arabian name, it seems, that the first name has been oftentimes
corrupted and changed. The ancient walls of this town are as yet standing,
and it is a most defensible place, and well furnished with all kind of
necessaries. It is inhabited with great store of weauers and husbandmen, and
the fields thereof are so large and fruitful for all kinds of grain, that
the people of the same region could not sufficiently manure them, unless they
were assisted by certain bordering Arabians: and yet a great part of their
fields lies untilled: howbeit they send continually great store of corn unto
Tunis. The king of Tunis surchargeth them with continual and grievous
exactions, which is the cause why their estate so mightily decaieth.

Of the town called Hain Sammit.
THis town was in my time founded by the king of Tunis, being distant almost
thirty miles from Beggia. It was built (they say) of purpose, that none of the
fields thereabout might lie untilled. But it has since been destroyed by the
Arabians, at the commandment of the king of Tunis: and now there remains a
tower and certain other buildings only, whereof some have roofes upon them
and others none.

Of the town of Casba.
THis town built by the Romans upon a large plain of twelve miles compass,
is four and twenty miles distant from Tunis. The townewall remains strong
as yet; but the town it self is destroyed by the Arabians, and the fields lie
untilled, and all by the negligence of the king of Tunis, and of the
inhabitants of the same region.

Of the castle of Choros.
THis castle founded not many years past by the Africans upon the river of
Magrida, and being about ten miles distant from Tunis, is environed with most
fruitful fields. Near unto this town grows a certain wood greatly
abounding with olives. At length it was destroyed by certain Arabians called
Beni Heli, which make perpetual war against the king of Tunis, and live
only upon theft and robbery.

Of the town of Biserta.
THe ancient town of Biserta otherwise called Bensart, founded by the Africans
upon the Mediterran sea, thirty five miles from Tunis, is but of a small
bigness, and is inhabited with most miserable people. Near unto this town
enters a certain creek or arm of the sea, which at the first being very
narrow, increases by little and little into a marvelous breadth. On either
side there of dwell great store of fishers, and husbandmen: and westward of the
said creek lies a most large and fruitful plain called Matter, which is
grievously molested by the king of Tunis, and by the Arabians. In The fish
called (...) or (...).
this creek are taken abundance of fishes: and after the month of October
they catch a certain fish called by the Africans Giarrafa, which I take to be
the same that is at Rome called Laccia: for then by reason of the abundance of
rain that falls, the salt water of the baye becomes somewhat fresh,
wherewith those fishes (they say) are much delighted. Very deep it is, and
affoordeth good fishing till the end of May: but then the fishes begin to
decrease, and to be much drier in taste then before, like unto the fishes taken
in the river of Fez.

Of the great city of Carthage.
THis famous and ancient city was built at the first by a certain people that
came out of Syria. But others say that it was founded by a queen. The African
chronicler Ibnu Rachich is of opinion, that it was built by a certain people
that came from Barca, being expelled thence by the king of Egypt: wherefore I
cannot in this place affirm any certainty as touching the founders thereof:
for besides that the African historiographers disagree about this matter, there
is none that has left any writing thereof ancienter then the decay of the
Roman empire: when as all the Romans that were found in Africa were expelled by
the Goths. But afterward Tripolis of Barbaria and Capis being taken by the
Mahumetans, the inhabitants of them both went unto Carthage, whither the
principal Romans and Goths had retired themselves, who endeavored by all
means to withstand the Mahumetans: and after many skirmishes the Romans fled
to Bona, and the Goths left Carthage for a pray unto the Mahumetans; so that it
remained desolate many years after, till a certain Mahumetan patriarch called
Elmahdi brought in new colonies: howbeit he could scarce furnish the twentieth
part with inhabitants. There are to be seen at this day certain ruins of the
citie-walles, till you come to a deep and large cesterne. And there remains
as yet also a certain conduct which conueieth water to the city from a
mountain thirty miles distant, being like unto the conduct of the great
palace at Rome. Near unto Carthage likewise are certain great and ancient
buildings, the description whereof is out of my remembrance. On the west and
south part of this city are diverse gardens replenished with all kind of
fruits, which are carried from thence to Tunis in great abundance. The plains
adioining to this city are exceeding fruitful, though not very large: for
upon the north part thereof lies a mountain, the sea, and the gulf of Tunis:
on the (...) and south parts it joins to the plains of Bensart. But 1526
now this city is fallen into extreme decay and misery: merchants shops there
are not above twenty or five and twenty at the most: and all the houses of the
town being scarce five hundred, are most base and beggarly. In my time here
was a stately (...) and a fair college also, but no students were therein. The
townsmen, though very miserable, yet are they exceeding proud withal, and
seem to pretend a great show of religion. And the greater part of them are
either gardiners or husbandmen, and are grievously oppressed with the kings
daily exactions.

A description of the mighty city of Tunis.
THis city is called by the Latins Tunetum, and by the Arabians Tunus, which
name they think to be corrupt, because it signifies naught in their language:
but in old time it was called Tarsis, after the name of a city in Asia. At
the first it was a small town built by the Africans upon a certain lake,
about twelve miles distant from the Mediterran sea. And upon the decay of
Carthage Tunis began to increase both in buildings and inhabitants. For the
inhabitants of Carthage were loath to remain any longer in their own town,
fearing least some army would have been sent out of Europe: wherefore they
repaired unto Tunis, and greatly enlarged the buildings thereof. Afterward came
thither one Hucba Vtmen the fourth Mahumetan patriarch, who persuaded the
citizens, that no army or garrison ought to The building of Cairaoan.
remain in any sea-townes; wherefore he built another city called Cairaoan,
being distant from the Mediterran sea thirty, and from Tunis almost an hundred
miles: unto which city the army marched from Tunis, and in the room thereof
other people were sent to inhabit. About an hundred and fifty years after,
Cairaoan being sacked by the Arabians, the prince thereof was expelled, and
became governor of the kingdom of Bugia: howbeit he left certain kinsmen of
his at Tunis, who governed that city. And ten years after, Bugia was taken by
Joseph the son of Tesfin, who seeing the humanity of the foresaid prince,
would not expel him out of his kingdom: but so long as it remained to the said
prince and his posterity, Joseph caused it to be free from all molestation.
Afterward Abdul Mumen king of Maroco having recovered Mahdia from the
Christians, marched toward Tunis, and got possession thereof also. And so Tunis
remained peaceably under the Tunis subject unto AbdulMumen and other kings of
Maroco.
dominion of the kings of Maroco, so long as the kingdom was governed by the
said Abdul, and his son Joseph, and their successors Jacob and Mansor. But
after the decease of Mansor, his son Mahumet Ennasir made war against the
king of Spain, by whom being vanquished, he fled to Maroco, and there within
few years ended his life. After him succeeded his brother Joseph, who was
slain by certain soldiers of the king of Telensin. And so upon the death of
Mahumet, and of his brother Joseph, the Arabians began to inhabit the
territory of Tunis, and to make often sieges and assaults against the city it
self: whereupon the governor of Tunis advertised the king of Maroco, that
unless present aid were sent, he must be coustrained to yield Tunis unto the
Arabians. The king therefore sent a certain valiant captain, called
Habduluahidi, and borne in Civil a city of Or perhaps Andaluzia.
Granada, with a fleet of twenty sails unto Tunis, which he found half
destroyed by the Arabians: but so great was his eloquence and wisdom, that he
restored all things to their former estate, and received the yearly tribute.
After Habduluahidi succeeded his son Abu (...), who in learning and
dexterity of wit, excelled his father. This Abu built a castle upon a certain
high place of the west part of Tunis, which he adorned with fair buildings and
with a most beautiful temple. Afterward taking his journey unto the kingdom
of Tripolis, and returning home by the southern regions, he gathered tribute
in all those places: so that after his decease he left great treasure unto his
son. And after Abu succeeded his son, who grew so insolent, that he would
not be subject to the king of Maroco, because he perceived his kingdom to
decay: at the same time also had the Marin-familie gotten possession of the
kingdom of Fez, and so was the family of Beni Zeijen possessed of the
kingdoms of Telensin and Granada. And so while all those regions were at
mutual dissension, the dominions of Tunis began mightily to increase. Insomuch
that the king of Tunis marched unto Telensin, and demanded tribute of the
inhabitants. Wherefore the king of Fez, who as then laid siege against Maroco,
craved by his ambassadors the king of Tunis his friendship, and with great
gifts obtained the same. Then the king of Tunis returning home conqueror from
Telensin, was received with great triumph, and was saluted king of all Africa,
because indeed there was no prince of Africa at the same time comparable unto
him. Wherefore he began to ordain a royal court, and to choose Secretaries,
counselors, captains, and other officers appertaining to a king; after the
very same manner that was used in the court of Maroco. And from the time of
this king even till our times, the kingdom of Tunis has so prospered, that
now it is accounted the richest kingdom in all Africa. The said kings son
reigning after his fathers death, enlarged the suburbs of Tunis with most
stately buildings. Without the gate called Bed Suvaica he built a street
containing to the number of three hundred families: and he built another
street at the gate called Bed el Manera consisting of more then a thousand
families. In both of these streets dwell great store of artificers, and in the
street last mentioned all the Christians of Tunis, which are of the kings
guard, have their abode. Likewise there is a third street built at the gate
next unto the sea, called Beb el Bahar, and being but half a mile distant from
the gulf of Tunis. Hither do the Genoueses, Venetians, and all other
Christian merchants resort, and here they repose themselves out of the tumult
and concourse of the Moors: and this street is of so great bigness, that it
contains three hundred families of Christians and Moors, but the houses are
very low, and of small receipt. The families of the city, together with them
of the suburbs, amount almost to the number of ten thousand. 'This stately and
populous city has a peculiar place assigned for each trade and occupation.
Here dwell great store of linnen-weauers, and the linen that they weaue is
exceeding fine, and sold at a great price over al Africa. The women of this
town use A strange kind of spinning.
a strange kind of spinning: for (...) upon an high place or on the upper part
of the house, they let down their spindles at a window, or through a hole of
the plancher into a lower room, so that the weight of the spindle makes the
thread very equal and even. And here the linnen-drapers have many shops, and
are accounted the wealthiest citizens in all Tunis: here are also great store
of grocers, apothecaries, tailors, and of all other trades and occupations:
butchers here are very many which sell mutton for the most part, especially in
the spring, and in summer: also here are abundance of all kind of artificers,
every of which to describe would prove tedious: the apparel of their
merchants, priests, and doctors is very decent. Upon their heads they wear a
Dulipan, which is covered with a great linen cloth: the courtiers likewise and
the soldiers wear all of them Dulipans, but not covered with linen. Rich men
here are but few, by reason of the exceeding scarcity of all kind of grain:
for a man cannot till a piece of ground, be it never so near the city, in
regard of the manifold invasions of the Arabians. Corn is brought unto them
from other regions and cities, as namely from Vrbs, from Beggia, and from Bona.
Some of the citizens of Tunis have certain fields in the suburbs walled round
about, where they sow some quantity of barley and of other corn: howbeit the
soil is marueluellous dry, and stands in need of much watring: for which
purpose every man has a pit, whereout with a certain wheel turned about by a
mule or a camel, and through certain conueyances and passages made for the
nonce, they water all the upper part of their ground: now consider (I pray you)
what great crop of corn can be reaped out of so little a field, walled round
about and watered by such cunning and industry. Bread they make very
excellent, albeit they leave the bran still among the flower, and they bake
their loaves in certain mortars, such as the Egyptians use to beat flax in.
The merchants and most part of the citizens use for food a kind of homely
pulse or pappe called by them Besis, being made of barley meal in form of a
dumpling, whereupon they power oil or the broth of Pome-citrons. And there is
a certain place in the city where nothing but barley prepared in a readiness
to make the said pulse, is to be sold. They use also another kind of food
almost as homely as the former: for seething a quantity of meal thoroughly in
water, and afterward braying it in another vessel with a pestill, they power
oil or flesh-pottage thereunto, and so eat it: and this meat they call Bezin:
but the richer sort feed themselves with more dainty meats. All their milles
(except such as stand upon a river not far from the city) are turned about
either by the strength of mules, or asses. In this city they have no
fountains, rivers, nor wells of fresh water: but they all use raine-water
taken out of cesterns, saving that there is a fountain in the suburbs, from
whence certain porters bring salt water into the city to sell, which they
think to be more wholesome and fit for drink then raine-water. Other wels
there are that affoorde most excellent water, which is reserved only for the
king and his courtiers. In this city there is one most stately temple,
furnished with sufficient number of priests, and with rich revenues. Other
temples there be also, but not endowed with so ample revenues: here are
colleges likewise and monasteries built after their manner, al which are
maintained upon the common benevolence of the city. There are certain people
in this city whom a man would take to be distraught, which go bare-headed and
barefooted, carrying stones about with them, and these are reverenced by the
common people, for men of singular holiness. Moreover on the behalf of one of
these mad fellows, called Sidi el Dahi; and for the residue of his fond
society, the king of Tunis built one of the foresaid monasteries, and endowed
the same with most ample revenues. All the houses of this city are
indifferently beautiful, being built of excellent stones, and adorned with
much painting and caruing. They have very artificial pargettings or
plaister-works, which they beautify with orient colors: for wood to carue
upon is very scarce at Tunis. The floores of their chambers are paued with
certain shining and fair stones: and most of their houses are but of one
story high: and almost every house has two gates or entrances; one toward
the street, and another toward the kitchen and other backe-roumes: between
which gates they have a fair court, where they may walk and confer with
their friends. The bath-stoues here are far more commodious then those at Fez,
though not so large and sumptuous. In the suburbs are many pleasant gardens
which yield fruit, albeit not in great abundance, yet very excellent:
pome-citrons, roses, and other flowers here are great store, especially in that
place which they call Bardo, where the king has built a palace amidst those
beautiful and sweet gardens. On all sides of the city within four or five
miles, there grow such plenty of olives, that the oil thereof suffices not
only the city, but is carried also in great quantity into Egypt. The wood of
the oliue-trees which they cut down they use to burn and to make char-coales
thereof: neither do I think any place to be more destitute of wood then this.
Poverty constrains some of their women to lead an unchaste life: they are
decently apparelled, and going forth of the house, they wear vailes or maskes
before their faces, like unto the women of Fez: for with one linnen-cloath they
cover their foreheads, and join thereto another which they call Setfari: but
about their heads they lap such fardels of linen, as they seem comparable to
the heads of Giants. Most part of their substance and labor they bestow upon
perfumes and other such vanities. They have here a compound called Lhasis,
whereof whosoever eats but one ounce falls a laughing, disporting, and
dallying, as if he were half drunken; and is by the said confection
maruellously provoked unto lust.

Of the king of Tunis his court, and of the rites and ceremonies there used.
SO soon as the king of Tunis has by inheritance attained to his kingdom,
all his nobles, doctors, priests, and judges, bind themselves by solemn oath
unto him. Immediately after any kings death, his son and heir apparent
succeeds in the kingdom: then the chief officer of the court (called the
Munafid, because he is the kings viceroy or high deputy) presents himself
forthwith unto the new king, and gives up an account of all things which he
did while the old king lived: and then at the kings appointment every of the
nobles receive offices from the Munafid according to their several places of
dignity. Another principal officer there is, called the Mesuare, that is, the
great commander and governor of the warlike forces: who has authority to
increase or diminish the number of soldiers, to give them their pay, to levy
armies, and to conduct the same whither he thinks good. The third officer in
dignity is the Castellan, who with his soldiers takes charge of the castle,
and looks to the sauegarde of the kings own person: and he allotteth
punishments unto such prisoners as are brought into the said castle, as if he
were the king himself. The fourth officer is the governor of the city, whose
duty is to administer justice in the common wealth, and to punish malefactors.
The fifth officer is the kings secretary, who has authority to write, and to
give answer in the kings name: he may open also and read any letters
whatsoever, except such as are sent unto the Castellan and governor of the
city. The sixth is the kings chief chamberlain, who is to furnish the walls
with hangings, to appoint unto every man his place, and by a messenger to
assemble the kings counselors, and this man has great familiarity with the
king, and has access to speak with him, as often as he pleases. The seventh
in dignity is the kings treasurer, who receives all customs, tributes, and
yearly revenues, and paieth them, with the kings consent, unto the Munafid.
The eight officer is he that receives tribute for merchandise that are brought
by land, who takes custom also of foreign merchants, which are constrained for
the value of every hundred ducats to pay two ducats and a half: this
customer has many spies and officers, who having intelligence of any merchants
arrival, they bring him forthwith before their master, in whose absence they
keep him so long in their custody, till their said master be present, and
till the merchant has delivered all such custom as is due, and then being
bound with many oaths, he is dismissed. The ninth officer receives tribute
only of such wares as are brought by sea, and dwells in a house by the
havens side. The tenth is the steward of the kings household, who is to provide
bread, meat, and other necessary victuals, and to apparel all the kings
wives, eunuchs, and the Negro-slaues that attend upon him. He also takes
charge of the kings sons and of their nurses, and allotteth business unto the
Christian captives. These are the chief officers under the king of Tunis: the
residue (least I should seem tedious to the reader) I have of purpose omitted
to entreat of. The king of Tunis has fifteen hundred most choice soldiers,
the greatest part of whom are Renegadoes or backsliders from the Christian
faith: and these have liberal pay allowed them. They have a captain over them
also, who may increase or diminish their number as he pleases. Also there are
an hundred and fifty soldiers being Moors, who have authority to remove the
tents of the kings army from place to place. There are likewise a certain
number of crossebowes, which attend upon the king whithersoeuer he rides: but
next of all to the kings person is his guard of Christians, which (as we
signified before) dwell in the suburbs. Before the king marches a guard of
footmen, being all of them Turkish archers, and gunners. Immediately before
the king go his lackies or footmen. One there is that rides on the one side
of the king, carrying his partizan, another on the other side bears his
target, and the third coming (...) him carries his crossebowe. Others there
are also that attend upon the king, whom (for breuities sake) we omit here to
speak of. These are the principal rites and ceremonies of the ancient kings
of Tunis, being much different from them which are used by the king that now
is. I could here make a large discourse of the kings vices that now reigns
(at whose hands I confess my self to have received great benefits) but that
is not my purpose at this present: this one thing I can affirm, that he is
marvelous cunning to procure money out of his subjects purses. But he himself
lives sometimes in his palace, and sometimes in gardens, in the company of
his concubines, musicians, stage-plaiers, and such like. When he calls for
any musician, he is brought in blindfold or hoodwinked in manner of a hawke.
The golden coin of Tunis contains four and twenty charats apeece, that is
to say, a duckat and one third part of the coin of Europe: there is a kind of
siluermoney coined also being four square in form, which waieth six charats
apeece: and thirty or two and thirty of these pieces are equal in value to
one piece of their gold coin, and they are called Nasari: the Italians call
the gold-coine of Tunis Doble. And thus much concerning the king of Doble.
Tunis, and the customs of his court.

Of the town of Neapolis.
THis ancient town built by the Romans upon the Mediterran sea almost twelve
miles eastward of Tunis is inhabited by certain Moors called Nabell. It was
in times past very populous, but now there dwell but a few pesants therein,
which exercise themselves only about sowing and reaping of (...).

Of the town of Cammar.
THis town is very ancient also and near unto Carthage, standing eight miles
northward of Tunis. The inhabitants being many in number are all of them
gardiners, and use to bring their herbs and fruits to Tunis to be sold. Here
also grow great store of sugarcanes, which are brought likewise unto Tunis:
but because they have not the art of getting Sugarcanes.
out the sugar, they use only after meals to suck the sweet juice out of
the said canes.

Of the town of Marsa.
THis ancient town standing upon the Mediterran sea near the same place where
the haven of Carthage was of old, remained certain years desolate, but now
it is inhabited by certain fishers and husbandmen: and here they use to white
linen cloth. Not far from hence are certain castles and palaces, where the
king of Tunis ordinarily remains in summertime.

Of the town of Ariana.
Moreover this ancient town was built by the Goths almost eight miles
northward of Tunis. It is environed with most pleasant and fruitful gardens,
and it has a strong wall, and contains many husbandmen. Certain other
little towns there are not far distant from Carthage, some inhabited, and the
residue desolate, the names whereof I have quite forgotten.

Of the town of Hammamet.
THis town built by the Mahumetans of late years, and environed with a wall
of great strength, is distant from Tunis almost fifty miles. The inhabitants
are miserable people, and oppressed with continual exactions, being the
greatest part of them either fishers or colliers.

Of the town of Heraclia.
THis little and ancient town was founded by the Romans upon a certain
mountain, and was afterward destroyed by the Arabians.

Of the town of Susa.
THis exceeding great and ancient town was built by the Romans upon the
Mediterran sea, being distant from Tunis about an hundred miles. The plains
adjoining abound with olives and figs: their fields are most fruitful for
barlie, if they could be tilled, but the Arabians often incursions are the
cause why they lie waste. The inhabitants being most liberal and courteous
people, and great friends unto strangers, make voiages most of them unto the
eastern regions and unto Turkey; and some also frequent the next towns of
Sicilia and Italy. The residue of the inhabitants are either weauers, or
graziers of cattle, or such as turn wooden vessels, wherewith they furnish
the whole kingdom of Tunis. When the Mahumetans first won that province, this
town was the seat of the viceroy, whose palace is as yet remaining. A most
stately town it is, environed with strong walls, and situate upon a most
beautiful plain. It was in times past well stored with inhabitants, and with
fair buildings, whereof some, together with a goodly temple, are as yet
extant. But now it contains very few people, and but five shops in all, by
reason of the kings continual exactions. I my self was constrained to stay in
this town for four days, in regard of the danger of the time.

Of the town of Monaster.
THe ancient town of Monaster built by the Romans upon the Mediterran sea, and
distant almost twelve miles from Susa, is environed with most impregnable and
stately walls, and contains very fair buildings: but the inhabitants are
most miserable and beggarly people, and wear shoes made of sea-rushes: most
of them are either weauers or fishers: their fare is barlie bread, and a kind
of food mingled with oil, which we called before Bezzin, which is used in all
the towns thereabout: the soil will yield no other corn but barlie. The
territory adjacent abounds with oranges, pears, figs, pomegranates, and
olives, saving that it is continually wasted by the invasion of the enemy.

Of the town of Tobulba.
THis town built also by the Romans upon the Mediterran sea, stands about
twelve miles eastward of Monaster. For certain years it was very populous,
and greatly abounded with olives: but afterward it was so wasted by the
Arabians, that now there are but few houses remaining, which are inhabited by
certain religious men: these religious men maintain a fair hospital for
strangers traveling that way, where they courteously entertain even the
Arabians themselves.

Of the town of El Mahdia, otherwise called Africa.
EL Mahdia founded in our time by Mahdi the first patriarch of Cairaoan upon
the Mediterran sea, and fortified with strong walls, towers, and gates, has a
most noble haven belonging thereto. Mahdi when he first entered into this
region, fained himself in an unknown habit to be (...) of the lineage of
(...), whereby growing into great favor of the people, he was by their
assistance made prince of Cairaoan, and was called El Mahdi Califa: afterward
traveling forty days journey westwarde into Numidia to receive tribute due
unto him, he was taken by the prince of Segelmesse, and put in prison, howbeit
the said prince of Segelmese being presently moved with compassion toward
him, restored him to his former liberty, and was for his good will not long
after slain by him: Afterward tyrannizing over the people, and perceiving
some to conspire against him, he erected this town of Mahdia, to the end he
might there find safe refuge when need required. At length one Beiezid a
Mahumetan prelate (whom they called the cauallier or knight of the ass,
because that riding continually upon an ass he conducted an army of forty
thousand men) came unto Cairaoan: but Mahdi fled unto his new town, where
with thirty sail of ships sent him by a Mahumetan prince of Cordoua, he so
valiantly encountered the enemy, that Beiezid and his son were both slain
in that battle: afterward returning to Cairaoan, he grew in league and amity
with the citizens, and so the government remained unto his posterity for many
years. But an hundred and thirty years past this El Mahdia.
town was taken by the Christians, and was after recovered by a certain
Mahumetan patriarch of Maroco called Abdul Mumen, but now it is subject unto
the king of Tunis, by whom it is continually oppressed with most grievous
exactions. The inhabitants exercise traffike with foreign nations: and they
are at so great dissension with the Arabians, that they are scarce permitted to
till their grounds. Not many years ago Pedro de Nauarra assailing this town
only with nine ships, was defeated of his purpose, and constrained to return
with great loss of his men. This happened in the year of our Lord 1519.

Of the town of Asfachus.
THis town was built by the Africans upon the Mediterran sea, at such time as
they waged war against the Romans. It is compassed with most high and
strong walls, and was in times past very populous, but now it contains but
three or four hundredth families at the most, and but a few shops. Oppressed
it is both by the Arabians, and by the king of Tunis. All the inhabitants are
either weauers, mariners, or fishermen. They take great store of fishes called
by them Spares, which word signifies naught in the Arabian and Barbarian,
much less in the Latin tongue. This people live also upon barley bread and
Bezin: their apparel is base, and some of them traffike in Egypt and Turkey.

Of the great city of Cairaoan.
THE famous city of Cairaoan otherwise called Caroen, was founded by Hucba,
who was sent general of an army out of Arabia deserta, by Hutmen the third
Mahumetan Califa. From the Mediterran sea this city is distant six and
thirty, and from Tunis almost an hundred miles; neither was it built (they
say) for any other purpose, but only that the Arabian army might securely
rest therein with all such spoils as they woone from the Barbarians, and the
Numidians. He environed it with most impregnable walls, and built therein a
sumptuous temple, supported with stately pillars. The said Hucba after the
death of Hutmen was ordained prince of Muchauia, and governed the same till the
time of Qualid Califa the son of Habdul Malic, who as then reigned in
Damasco: this Qualid sent a certain captain called Muse the son of Nosair,
with an huge army unto Cairaoan: who having stayed a few days with his army
not far from Cairaoan, marched westward, sacking and spoiling towns and
cities, till he came to the Ocean sea shore, and then he returned toward
Cairaoan again. From whence he sent as his deputy a certain captain into
Mauritania, who there also conquered many regions and cities. Insomuch that
Muse being moved with a jealous emulation, commanded him to stay till
himself came. His said Deputy therefore called Tarich encamped himself not
far from Andaluzia, whither Muse within 4. months came unto him with an huge
army. From whence both of them with their armies crossing the seas, arrived in
Granada, and so marched by land against the Goths. Against whom Theodoricus
the king of Goths opposing himself in battle, was miserably vanquished.
Then the foresaid two captains with all good success proceeded even to
Castilia, and sacked the city of Toledo, where amongst much other treasure,
they found many relics of the saints, and the very same table whereat Christ
sat with his blessed Apostles, which being covered with pure gold and adorned
with great store of precious stones, was esteemed to be worth half a million
of ducates, and this table Muse carrying with him as if it had been all the
treasure in Spain, returned with his army over the sea, and bent his course
toward Cairaoan. And being in the mean space sent for by the letters of
Qualid Califa, he sailed into Egypt: but arriving at Alexandria, it was told
him by one Hescian, brother unto the said Califa, that the Califa his brother
was fallen into a most dangerous disease: wherefore he wished him not to go
presently unto Damasco, for fear least if the Califa died in the mean season,
those rich and sumptuous spoils should be wasted and dispersed to no end. But
Muse little regarding this counsel, proceeded on to Damasco, and presented all
his spoils to the Califa, who within five days after deceased. After whom his
brother succeeding Califa, deprived Muse of his dignity, and substituted one
Iezul into his room, whose son, brother, and nephews succeeding, governed
the city of Cairaoan, till such time as the family of Qualid was deprived of
that dignity, and one Elagleb was appointed lieutenant, who governed not the
town as a Califa: from that time the Mahumetan Califas leaving Damasco,
removed unto Bagaded, as we find recorded in a certain Chronicle. After the
decease of Elagleb, succeeded his son, and the government remained unto his
posterity for an hundred threescore and ten years, till such time as they
were deprived thereof by one Mahdi Califa. But at the same time when Elagleb
was governor, the city of Cairaoan was so increased both with inhabitants,
and buildings, that a town called Recheda was built next unto it, where the
prince with his nobles used to remain. In his time also the Isle of Sicilia
was woone: for Elagleb The isle of Sicilie subdued by the governor (...).
sent thither a certain captain called Halcama, who built upon the said
Island a town in stead of a forte, calling it according to his own name
Halcama, which name is used by the Sicilians even till this present. Afterward
this new town was besieged by certain people that came to aid the Sicilians.
Whereupon one Ased was sent with an army, and so the Moors forces being
augmented, they conquered the residue of Sicilia, by which means the dominions
of Cairaoan began woonderfully to increase. The city of Cairaoan stands upon
a sandy and desert plain, which bears no trees, nor yet any corn at all.
Corn is brought thither from Susa, from Monaster, and from Mahdia, all which
towns are within the space of forty miles. About twelve miles from Cairaoan
stands a certain mountain called Gueslet, where some of the Romans
buildings are as yet extant: this mountain abounds with springs of water and
carobs, which springs run down to Cairaoan, where otherwise they should
have no water but such as is kept in cesternes. Without the walls of this city
rain water is to be found in certain cesternes only till the beginning of
June. In summer time the Arabians use to resort unto the plains adioining upon
this town, who bring great dearth of corn and water, but exceeding plenty of
dates and flesh with them, and that out of Numidia, which region is almost an
hundred threescore and ten miles distant. In this city for certain years the
study of the Mahumetan law mightily flourished, so that here were the most
famous lawyers in all Africa. It was at length destroyed, and replanted again
with new inhabitants, but it could never attain unto the former estate. At
this present it is inhabited by none but leather-dressers, who send their
leather unto the cities of Numidia, and exchange it also for cloth of Europe.
Howbeit they are so continually oppressed by the king of Tunis, that now they
are brought unto extreme misery.

Of the city of Capes.
THis ancient city built by the Romans upon the Mediterran sea, was
fortified with most high and stately walls, and with a strong castle. Just by
it runs a certain river of hot and salt water. It has continually been so
molested by the Arabians, that the inhabitants abandoning their city, resorted
unto certain plains replenished with great abundance of dates, which by a
certain art are preserved all the year long. Here is also dug out of the
ground a kind of fruit about the bigness of a bean, and in taste resembling
an almond. This fruit being ordinary The fruit called Habhaziz.
over all the kingdom of Tunis, is called by the Arabians Habhaziz. The
inhabitants of the foresaid plain are black people, being all of them either
fishers, or husbandmen.

Of the town called El Hamma.
THis most ancient town founded also by the Romans, and being distant from
Capes almost fifteen miles, is environed with most stately and strong walls:
and upon certain marble stones therein are engraven diverse monuments of
antiquity. The streets and buildings of this town are very base, and the
inhabitants miserable, and addicted to robbery. Their fields are barren and
unprofitable, and will bring forth naught but certain unsavory dates. A mile
and a half to the south of this town A river (...) hot water.
begins a certain river of hot water to spring, which being brought
thorough the midst of the city by certain channels is so deep, that it will
reach up to a man's navel: howbeit by reason of the extreme heat of the water,
there are but few that will enter thereinto. And yet the inhabitants use it for
drink, having set it a cooling almost an whole day. At length this river not
far from the town makes a certain lake, which is called the lake of leapers:
The lake of lepers.
for it is of wonderful force to heal the disease of leprosy, and to cure
leprous sores: wherefore near unto it are diverse cottages of lepers, some of
whom are restored to their health. The said water tastes in a manner like
brimstone, so that it will nothing at all quench a man's thirst, whereof I my
self have had often trial.

Of the castle of Machres.
THe castle of Machres was built by the Africans in my time upon the entrance
of the gulf of Capes, to defend the same region from the invasion of the
enemy. It is almost five hundred miles distant from the isle of Gerbi. All the
inhabitants are either weauers, shipwrights, or fishermen, and have traffic
and recourse over all the foresaid isle. They have all the same language that
the people of the isle of Gerbi use: but because they want grounds and
possessions, al of them, save the weauers, live only upon theft and robbery.

Of the isle of Gerbior Zerbi, where John Leo the Author of this History was
taken by Italian pirates, and carried thence to Rome.
THis isle being near unto the firm land of Africa, and consisting of a
plain and sandy ground, abounds exceedingly with dates, vines, olives, and
other fruits, and contains about eighteen miles in compass. It has also
certain farms and granges, which are so far distant asunder, that you shall
scarce find two or three in one village. Their ground is dry and barren,
which though it be never so well tilled, will yield but a little barlie. And
here corn and flesh is always at an (...) rate. At the sea shore stands a
strong castle, wherein the governor of the whole Island and his retinue have
their abode. Not far from hence there is a certain village, where the
Christian, Mauritanian, and Turkish merchants have their place of residence; in
which place there is a great market or fair weekly kept, whither all the
merchants of the Island and many Arabians from the maine land with great store
of cattle and wool do resort. The inhabitants of the Isle bring cloth thither
to sell, which they themselves make, and this cloth together with great store
of raisins they usually transport unto Tunis, and Alexandria to be sold.
Scarce fifty years sithence this Isle was invaded and conquered by
Christians: but it was immediately recovered by the king of Tunis. And
presently after (new colonies being here planted) the foresaid castle was
reedified; which the kings of Tunis afterward enioied. But after the death of
king Hutmen the Islanders returned to their former liberty, and presently
broke the bridge from the Island to the maine land, fearing least they should
be invaded by some land-armie. Not long after the said Islanders slaying the
king of Tunis his governors of the Isle, have themselves continued governors
thereof till this present. Out of this Island is gathered the sum of
fowerscore thousand Dobles (every Doble containing an Italian ducate, and one
third part) for yearly tribute, by reason of the great concourse and resort of
the merchants of Alexandria, Turkey, and Tunis. But now because they are at
continual dissension and controversy, their estate is much impaired. In my
time Don Ferdinando king The army of don Ferdinando defeated.
of Spain, sent a great armada against this Island, under the conduct of the
duke of Alua, who not knowing the nature of the same, commanded his soldiers to
land a good distance from thence: but the Moors so valiantly defended their
Island, that the Spaniards were constrained to give back: and so much the
greater was their distress, in that they could not find water sufficient to
quench their extreme thirst. Moreover at the Spaniards arrival it was a full
tide, but when they would have returned on bourd, it was so great an ebb,
that their ships were constrained to put to sea, least they should have been
cast upon the sholdes. The shore was dry for almost four miles together, so
that the Spanish soldiers were put unto great toil, before they could come to
the waters side. And the Moors pursued them so eagerly, that they slew and
took prisoners the greatest part of them, and the residue escaped by shipping
into Sicilia. Afterward the Emperor Gerbi made tributarie unto Charles the
fifth by means of a knight of the Rhodes.
Charles the fifth sent a mighty fleet thither under the conduct of a Rhodian
knight of the order of Saint John de Messina, who so discreetly behaved
himself in that action, that the Moors compounded to pay five thousand Dobles
for yearly tribute, upon condition of the Emperors league and good will, which
yearly tribute is paid until this present.

Of the town of Zoara.
THis town built by the Africans upon the Mediterran sea, stands eastward
from the Isle of Gerbi almost fifty miles. The town wall is weak, and the
inhabitants are poor people, being occupied about nothing but making of lime
and plaistring, which they sell in the kingdom of Tripolis. Their fields are
most barren: and the inhabitants have continually been molested by the
invasions of the Christians, especially since the time that they won Tripolis.

Of the town of Lepide.
THis ancient town founded by the Romans, and environed with most high and
strong walls, has twice been sacked by the Mahumetans, and of the stones and
ruins thereof was Tripolis afterward built.

Of the old city of Tripolis.
Old Tripolis built also by the Romans, was after won by the Goths, and
lastly by the Mahumetans, in the time of Califa Homar the second. Which
Mahumetans having besieged the governor of Tripoli six months together,
compelled him at length to flee unto Carthage. The citizens were partly slain,
and partly carried captive into Egypt and Arabia, as the most famous African
Historiographer Ibnu (...) reports.

Of the new city of Tripolis in Barbary.
AFfter the destruction of old Tripolis, there was built another city of that
name: which city being environed with most high and beautiful walls, but not
very strong, is situate upon a sandy plain, which yields great store of
Dates. The houses Plenty of dates.
of this city are most stately in respect of the houses of Tunis; and here
also every trade and occupation has a several place. Weauers here are many.
They have no wels nor fountains; but all their water is taken out of cesterns.
Corn in this city is at an exceeding rate; for all the fields of Tripoli are
as sandy and barren as the fields of Numidia. The reason whereof is, for that
the principal and fattest grounds of this region are ouerflowed with the sea.
The inhabitants of this region affirm, that the greatest part of their fields
northward are swallowed up by the Mediterran sea, the like whereof is to be
seen in the territories of Monaster, Mahdia, Asfacos, Capes, the Isle of
Gerbi, and other places more eastward, where the sea for the space of a mile is
so shallow, that it will scarce reach unto a man's navel. Yea, some are of
opinion, that the city of Tripolis it self was situate in times past more to
the north, but by reason of the continual inundations of the sea, it was built
and removed by little and little southward; for proof whereof there stand as
yet ruins of houses drowned in certain places of the sea. In this city were
many fair temples and colleges built, and an hospital also for the
maintenance of their own poor people, and for the entertainment of strangers.
Their fare is very base and homely, being only the forenamed Besis made of
barley meal: for that region affoordeth so small quantity even of barley,
that he is accounted a wealthy man that has a bushel or two of corn in
store. The citizens are most of them merchants; for Tripolis stands near
unto Numidia and Tunis, neither is there any city or town of account between
it and Alexandria: neither is it far distant from the Isles of Sicilia and
Malta: and unto the port of Tripolis Venetian ships yearly resort, and bring
thither great store of merchandise. This city has always been subject unto
the king of Tunis: but when Abulhasen the king of Fez besieged Tunis, the king
of Tunis was constrained with his Arabians to flee into the deserts. Howbeit
when Abulhasen was conquered, the king of Tunis returned to his kingdom: but
his subjects began to oppose themselves against him: and so that commonwealth
was afterward grievously turmoyled with civil dissensions and wars. Whereof
the king of Fez having intelligence, marched the fifth year of the said civil
war with an army against the city of Tunis, and having vanquished the king
thereof, and constrained him to flee unto Constantina, he so straightly besieged
him, that the citizens of Constantina seeing themselves not able to withstand
the king of Fez, opened their city gates to him and to all his army.
Whereupon the king of Tunis was carried captive unto Fez, and was afterward
kept a while prisoner in the castle of Septa. In the mean season Tripolis was
by a Genouese fleet (...) taken by a fleet of (...).
of twenty sails surprised and sacked, and the inhabitants carried away
captive. Whereof the king of Fez being advertised, gave the Genoueses fifty
thousand ducates, upon condition, that he mightenioy the town in peace. But
the Genoueses having surrendered the town, perceived after their departure,
that most part of their ducates were counterfeit. Afterward the king of Tunis
being restored unto his former liberty by Abuselim king of Fez, returned home
unto his kingdom, and so the government thereof remained unto him and his
posterity, till Abubar the son of Hutmen together with his young son was
slain in the castle of Tripolis by a nephew of his, who afterward usurped the
kingdom: but he was slain in a battle which he fought against Habdul Mumen,
who presently thereupon became Lord of Tripolis. After him succeeded his son
Zacharias, who within a few months dyed of the pestilence. After Zacharias,
Mucamen the son of Hesen and cousin to Zacharias was chosen king; who
beginning to tyrannize over the citizens was by them expelled out of his
kingdom: and afterward a certain citizen was advanced unto the royal
throne, who governed very modestly. But the king which was before expelled
sent an army of soldiers against Tripolis, who loosing the field, were all of
them put to flight. Afterward the king that began to reign so modestly,
proved a very tyrant, and being murdered by his kinsman, the people made
choice of a certain nobleman, leading as then an Hermites life, and in a
manner against his will appointed him their governor: and so the government of
the city of Tripolis remained unto him and his posterity, till such time as
king Ferdinando sent Don Pedro de Nauarra against it: who Tripolis surprised by
Pedro de Nauarra.
on the sudden encountering this city, carried away many captives with him. The
governor of Tripolis and his son in law were sent prisoners unto Messina.
Where, after certain years imprisonment, they were restored by the Emperor
Charles the fifth unto their former liberty, and returned unto Tripolis, which
town was afterward destroyed by the Christians. The castle of Tripolis being
environed with most strong walls, begin (as I understand) to be replanted with
new inhabitants. And thus much as concerning the cities of the kingdom of
Tunis.

Of the mountains belonging to the state of Bugia.
THe territory of Bugia is full of ragged, high, and woodie mountains: the
inhabitants being a noble, rich, and liberal people, and possessing great
store of goats, oxen and horses, have always continued in liberty, since the
time that Bugia was surprised by the Christians. The people of these mountains
use to have a black cross upon one of their cheeks, according to the ancient
custom before mentioned. Their bread is made of barley, and they have abundance
of nuts and figs upon those mountains, especially which are near unto Zoaoa:
in some places of these mountains are certain mines of iron, whereof they
make a kind of coin of half a Iron-mines.
pound weight. They have also another sort of silver coin weighing four
grains a piece: these mountains yield abundance of wine and hemp; but their
linnen-cloath that they weaue is exceeding course. And these mountains of
Bugia extend in length upon the coast of the Mediterran sea almost a hundred
and fifty, and in breadth forty miles: each mountain contains inhabitants
of a diverse kindred and generation from others, whom because they live all after
one manner, we will pass over in silence.

Of mount Auraz.
THis exceeding high and populous mountain is inhabited with most barbarous
people, that are wholly addicted unto robbery and spoil. From Bugia it is
distant fowerscore, and from Constantina almost threescore miles. Also being
separated from other mountains it extends about threescore miles in length.
Southward it bordereth upon the Numidian deserts, and northward upon the
regions of Mesila, Stefe, Nicaus, and Constantina. From the very top of this
mountain issue diverse streams of water, which running down into the next
plains, increase at length into a lake, the water whereof in summer time is
salt. The passage unto this mountain is very difficult, in regard of certain
cruel Arabians.

Of the mountain of Constantina.
ALl the north and west part of the territory belonging to the city of
Constantina is full of high mountains, which beginning at the borders of
Bugia, extend themselves to the Mediterran sea, even as far as Bona, that is
to say, almost an hundred and thirty miles. Their fields upon the plains are
replenished with olives, figs, and all other kinds of fruits, which are
carried in great quantity unto the next towns and cities: all the inhabitants
for civil demeanor excel the citizens of Bugia, and do exercise diverse
manuarie arts, and weaue great store of linen cloth. They are at continual
dissension among themselves, by reason that their women will so often change
husbands. They are exceeding rich, and free from all tribute: and yet dare they
not till their plains, both for fear of the Arabians, and also of the
governors of the next cities. Every week upon sundry days here is a market,
greatly frequented with merchants of Constantina, and of other places: and
whatsoever merchant has no friend nor acquaintance dwelling upon the
mountains, is in great hazard to be notably cozened. Upon these mountains
they have nether judges, priests, nor yet any learned men: so that when any of
the inhabitants would write a letter unto his friend, he must trudge up and
down sometime twelve, and sometime fifteen miles to seek a scribe. Footmen
for the wars they have almost forty thousand, and about four thousand
horsemen. The inhabitants are men of such valor, that if they agreed among
themselves, they would soon be able to conquer all Africa.

Of the mountains of Bona.
THe city of Bona has on the north part the Mediterran sea, on the south and
west parts certain mountains adioining almost unto the mountains of
Constantina, and on the east side it has most fruitful fields and large
plains, whereupon in times past were diverse towns and castles, built by the
Romans; the ruins whereof are now only remaining, and the names quite
forgotten. All these regions by reason of the Arabians cruelty are so
desolate, that they are inhabited but in very few places; and there they are
constrained to keep out the Arabians by force of arms. The mountains of Bona
extend in length from east to west almost forescore miles, and in breadth about
thirty miles. Here are great store of fountains, from whence certain rivers
issue, running through the plains into the Mediterran sea.

Of the mountains standing near unto (...).
THe city of Tunis standing upon a plain has no mountains nigh unto it, but
only on the west side toward the Meditterran sea, where it has a mountain
like unto that which enuironeth Carthage. Near unto Tunis stands another
high and cold mountain called Zagoan: inhabitants here are none at all but a
few that tend the Bee-hiues, and gather some quantity of barley. Upon the
top of this mountain the Romans built certain forts, the ruins whereof
are yet to be seen, having (...) engraven upon them in Latin letters. From
this mountain unto Carthage, water is conueighed by certain passages under
the ground.

Of the mountains of Beni Tefren and Nufusa.
THese high and cold mountains are distant from the desert, from Gerbi, and
from Asfacus almost thirty miles, and yield very small store of barley. The
inhabitants being valiant, and renouncing the law of Mahumet, do follow the
doctrine of the patriarch of Cairaoan in most points, neither is there any
other nation among the Arabians that observe the same doctrine. In Tunis and
other cities these people earne their living by most base occupations, neither
dare they openly profess their religion.

Of mount Garian.
THis high and cold mountain containing in length forty and in breadth
fifteen miles, and being separated from other mountains by a sandy desert,
is distant from Tripolis almost fifty miles. It yields great plenty of
barley and of dates, which unless they be spent while they are new, will soon
prove rotten. Here are likewise abundance of olives: Wherefore from this
mountain unto Alexandria and other cities there is much oil conueighed. There
is not better saffron to be found in any part of the Most (...) saffron.
world besides, which in regard of the goodness is sold very dear. For
yearly tribute there is gathered out of this mountain threescore thousand
ducates, and as much saffron as fifteen mules can carry. They are continually
oppressed with the exactions of the Arabians, and of the king of Tunis. They
have certain base villages upon this mountain.

Of mount Beni Guarid.
THis mountain being almost an hundred miles distant from Tripolis, is
inhabited with most valiant and stout people, which live at their own
liberty, and are at continual war with the people of the next mountains, and
of the Numidian desert.

Of the castle called Casr Acmed.
THis castle builte upon the Mediterran sea by a captain which came with an
army into Africa, stands not far from Tripolis, and was at the last laid
waste by the Arabians.

Of the castle of (...).
THe castle of Subeica erected about the same time when the Mahumetans came
into Africa, was in times past well furnished with inhabitants, being afterward
destroyed by the Arabians, and now it (...) a few fishers only.

Of the Castle called Casr Hessin.
THis castle was founded by the Mahumetans upon the Mediterran sea, and was
afterward destroyed by the Arabians.

Here ends the fifth book.
JOHN LEO HIS SIXTH BOOK OF the History of Africa, and of the memorable
things contained therein.
Of the village called Gar.
Having hitherto entreated of the mountains, it now remains that we say
somewhat as touching (...) villages, hamlets, and territories: and afterward we
will describe in order the cities of Numidia. And first the village of Gar,
situate upon the Mediterran sea, and abounding with dates, offers it self:
the fields thereto belonging are dry and barren, and yet bring they forth
some quantity of barley for the sustenance of the inhabitants.

Of Garell Gare.
IT is a certain little territory or Grange, containing caves of a marvelous
depth, whence (they say) the stones were taken wherewith old Tripolis was
built, because it is not far distant from that city.

Of the village of Sarman.
THis large village standing not far from old Tripolis, abounds with dates,
but no corn will grow there.

Of the village called Zauiat Ben Iarbuh.
THis village being situate near unto the Mediterran sea, yields great
plenty of dates, but no corn at all, and is inhabited by certain religious
persons.

Of the village of Zanzor.
THis village also standing near unto the Mediterran sea, within twelve miles
of Tripolis, is inhabited by sundry artificers, and abounds with great store
of dates, pomegranats, and peaches. The inhabitants have been very miserable
ever since Tripolis was taken by the Christians; and yet they traffic with
the citizens of Tripolis, and carry dates thither to sell.

Of the village of Hamrozo.
IT stands six miles from Tripolis, and the gardens there of bring forth
great plenty of dates, and of all other kind of fruits.

Of the plain of Taiora.
THis plain standing two miles eastward of Tripolis, contains many granges
exceedingly replenished with dates and other fruits. The surprise of Tripolis
was very profitable for this place, for then many principal citizens fled
hither for refuge. The inhabitants being ignorant and rude people, and
altogether addicted to theft and robbery, build their cottages with the
boughs of palme-trees. Their food is barley bread, and Bezin before described:
all round about are subject unto the king of Tunis and the Arabians, save those
only that inhabit upon this plain.

Of the Province of Mesellata.
THis Province standing upon the Mediterran sea about five and thirty miles
from Tripolis, and being fraught with rich villages, castles, and inhabitants,
abounds also with great plenty of olives and dates. The inhabitants being
free from all foreign authority, have a Captain among themselves, which
governs their commonwealth, and fights their battles against the Arabians:
and the soldiers of this Province are about 5000.

Of the Province of Mesrata.
THis Province being situate also upon the Mediterran sea, about an hundredth
miles from Tripolis, has many villages both upon the plains and mountains.
The inhabitants are rich and pay no tribute at all, and exercise traffic with
the Venetians resorting to this Province with their galleies, carrying the
Venetian wares to Numidia, and there exchanging the same for slaves, musk, and
ciuet, which is brought thither out of Ethiopia.

Of the desert of Barca.
THis desert beginning at the utmost frontire of Mesrata, and extending
eastward as far as the confines of Alexandria, contains in length a
thousand and three hundredth, and in breadth about 200. miles. It is a rough and
unpleasant place, being almost utterly destitute of water and corn. Before the
Arabians invaded Africa, this region was void of inhabitants: but now certain
Arabians lead here a miserable and hungry life, being a great way distant from
all places of habitation: neither have they any corn growing at all. But corn
and other necessaries are brought unto them by sea from Sicilia, which that
every of them may purchase, they are constrained to lay their sons to gage,
and then go rob and rifle travelers to redeem them again. Never did you
hear of more cruel and bloody The Arabians of Barca most cruel and bloody
thieves.
thieves; for after they have robbed merchants of all their goods and apparel,
they power warm milk down their throats, hanging them up by the heels upon
some tree, and forcing them to cast their gorge, wherein the lewd varlets
search diligently for gold, suspecting that the merchants swallowed up all
their crowns before they entered that dangerous desert.

Of the city of Tesset in Numidia.
IN the first Book of this present discourse we said that Numidia was
accounted by the African Cosmographers the basest part of all Africa, and there
we alleged certain reasons for the same purpose: we signified also in the
second Book, writing of the Province of Hea, that certain cities of Numidia
stood near unto mount Atlas. Howbeit Error.
Sus, Guzula, Helchemma, and Capes, are within the kingdom of Tunis, albeit
some would have them situate in Numidia. But my self following the opinion of
Ptolemey, suppose Tunis to be a part of Barbary. Being therefore about to
describe all the cities and towns of Numidia, I will first begin with Tesset:
which ancient town built by the Numidians near unto the Libyan deserts, and
environed with walls of sunne-dried brick, deserves scarcely the name of a
town; and yet contains four hundred families. It is compassed round about
with sandy plains, saving that near unto the town grow some store of dates,
of mill-seed, and of barley, which the miserable townsmen use for food. They
are constrained also to pay large tribute unto the (...) inhabiting the next
deserts. They exercise traffic in the land of Negroes and in Guzula, insomuch
that they spend most of their time in foreign regions. They are of a black
color, and destitute of all learning. The women indeed teach their young
children the first rudiments of learning, but before they can attain to any
perfection, they are put to labor, and to the plough-tayle. The said women are
somewhat whiter then other women: some of them get their living by spinning and
carding of wool, and the residue spend their time in idleness. Such as are
accounted richest in this region, possess but very few cattle. They till
their ground with an horse and a camel, which kind of plowing is observed
throughout all Numidia.

Of the village of (...).
THis village situate upon the Numidian desert near unto Libya, is inhabited
by most miserable and gross people. Here grows nothing but dates: and the
inhabitants are at such enmity with their neighbors, that it is dangerous for
them to go abroad. Howbeit they give themselves The beast called (...).
to hunting, and take certain wild beasts called Elamth, and ostriches,
neither do they eat any other flesh. All their goats they reserve for milk.
And these people also are black of color.

Of the castles of Ifran.
Four castles there are called by this name, built by the Numidians three
miles each from other upon a certain river, which in the heat of summer is
destitute of water. Near unto these castles are certain fields greatly
abounding with dates. The inhabitants are very rich, for they have traffic
with the Portugals at the port of Gart Guessem, whose wares The port of Gart
(...).
they (...) to Gualata and Tombuto. These castles contain great store of
inhabitants, which make certain brazen vessels to be sold in the land of
Negros: for they have copper-mines in sundry places thereabout. Every
Copper-mines.
castle has a weekly market; but corn and flesh are at an extreme rate there.
They go decently apparelled, and have a fair temple to resort unto, and a
Judge also that decideth none but civil controversies: for criminal matters
they use to punish with banishment only.

Of the castles of Accha.
THree castles of this name built upon the Numidian deserts not far from Lybia
were in times past well stored with inhabitants, but at length by civil wars
they were utterly dispeopled. Afterward (all matters being pacified) there
were, by the means of a certain religious man, who governed the same people,
certain new colonies planted. Neither have the poor inhabitants any thing to
do, but only to gather dates.

Of the Province of Dara.
THis Province beginning at mount Atlas extends it self southward by the
deserts of Lybia almost two hundred and fifty miles, and the breadth thereof is
very narrow. All the inhabitants dwell upon a certain river which is called
by the name of the Province. This river sometime so ouerfloweth, that a man
would think it to be a sea, but in summer it so diminishes, that any one may
pass over it on foot. If so be it ouerfloweth about the beginning of April,
it brings great plenty unto the whole region: if not, there follows great
scarcity of corn. Upon the bank of this river there are sundry villages and
hamlets, and diverse castles also, which are environed with walls made of
sunne-dried brick and mortar. All their beams and planchers consist of
date-trees, being notwithstanding unfit for the purpose; for the wood of
date-trees is not solid, but flexible and spungie. On either side of the said
river for the space of five or six miles, the fields abound exceedingly with
dates, which with good keeping will last many years: and as here are diverse
kinds of dates, so they are sold at sundry prices: for a bushel of some is
worth a duckat, but others wherewith they feed their horses and camels, are
scarce of a quarter so much value. Of The strange property of the palm or
datetree.
date-trees some are male and some are female: the male bring forth flowers
only, and the female fruit: but the flowers of the female will not open,
unless the boughs and flowers of the male be joined unto them: And if they be
not joined, the dates will prove stark naught and contain great stones. The
inhabitants of Dara live upon barlie and other gross meat: neither may they
eat any bread but only upon festival days. Their castles are inhabited by
goldsmithes and other artificers, and so are all the regions lying in the way
from Tombuto to Fez: in this province also there are three or four proper
towns, frequented by merchants and strangers, and containing many shops and
temples. But the principal town called Beni Sabih, and inhabited with most
valiant and liberal people, is divided into two parts, either part having a
several captain or governor: which governors are oftentimes at great
dissension, and especially when they moisten their arable grounds, by reason
that they are so skanted of water. A merchant they will most courteously
entertain a whole year together, and then friendly dismissing him, they will
require naught at his hands, but will accept such liberality as he thinks good
to bestow upon them. The said governors so often as they fall a skirmishing,
hire the next Arabians to aid them, allowing them daily half a duckat for
their pay and sometimes more, and giving them their allowance every day. In time
of peace they trim their harquebuzes, handguns, and other weapons: neither saw
I ever (to my remembrance) more cunning harquebuziers then at this place. In
this province grows great store of Indico being an herb like unto wild
woad, and this Indico.
herb they exchange with the merchants of Fez and Tremisen for other wares.
Corn is very scarce among them, and is brought thither from Fez and other
regions, neither have they any great store of goats or horses, unto whom in
stead of prouender they give dates, and a kind of herb also which grows in
the kingdom of Naples, and is called by the Neapolitans Farfa. They feed
their goats with the nuts or stones of their dates beaten to powder, whereby
they grow exceeding fat, and yield great quantity of milk. Their own food
is the flesh of camels and goats, being vnsanorie and displeasant in taste.
Likewise they kill and eat ostriches, the flesh whereof The flesh of the
Ostrich.
tastes not much unlike to the flesh of a dunghill-cocke, saving that it is
more tough and of a stronger smell, especially the ostriches leg, which
consists of slimie flesh. Their women are fair, fat, and courteous: and they
keep diverse slaves which are brought out of the land of Negros.

Of the province of Segelmesse.
THis province called Segelmesse, according to the name of the principal city
therein contained, begins not far from the town of Gherseluin, and
stretches southward by the river of Ziz an hundred and twenty miles, even to
the confines of the Libyan deserts. The said province is inhabited by certain
barbarous people of the families of Zeneta, Zanhagia, and Haoara, and was in
times past subject unto a certain prince, which bare rule over the same
province only. Afterward it fell into the possession of king Joseph of the
Luntune-family, and then into the hands of one Muahidin, and not long after it
was enioied by the king of Fez his son. But since that time, the prince of
this region was slain in a rebellion, and the city of Segelmesse was
destroyed, and till this day remains desolate. Afterward the inhabitants
built certain castles, whereof some are at liberty, and others are subject to
the Arabians.

Of the province of Cheneg.
THis region extending it self by the river of Ziz unto mount Atlas,
contains many castles, and brings forth great abundance of dates, which
dates are but of small value. Their fields are barren and of little circuit,
save only between the river Ziz and the foot of mount Atlas, where some
store of barlie uses to grow. The inhabitants are some of them subject to the
Arabians, others to the city of Gherseluin, and the residue live at their own
liberty. And unto these the high way leading from Segelmesse to Fez is
subject, and they exact great tribute of the merchants traveling the same way.
Near unto the said high way stand three castles, the first whereof being
situate upon an exceeding high rock, seems to touch the clouds. Under this
castle there is a certain house where a guard of soldiers continually stand,
who for the load of every camel that passes by, demand one fourth part of a
duckat. The second castle being fifteen miles distant from the first, stands
not upon an hill but on a plain, and is far more stately and rich then the
former. The third castle called Tammaracrost is situate upon the common high
way about twenty miles southward of the second. There are certain villages
also, and other castles of meaner account. Corn is marvelous scarce among
them: but they have goats great plenty, which in winter they keep in
certain large caves, as in places of greatest safety, whereinto they enter by
a most narrow passage. Likewise the entrance into this region for the space of
forty miles is so narrow, that two or three armed men only may withstand
mighty forces.

Of the region of Matgara.
THis region beginning southward from the region last described, contains
many castles built upon the river of Ziz, the principal whereof is called
Helel, wherein remains the governor of the whole region being an Arabian by
birth. The soldiers of this Arabian governor dwell in tents upon the plains:
and he has other soldiers attending upon his own person also, who will suffer
no man to pass but under safe conduct, without depriving him of all his goods.
Here are likewise diverse other villages and castles, which not being worthy
the naming I have of purpose omitted.

Of the territory of Retel.
REtel bordering upon the region last described, extends also fifty miles
southward along the river of Ziz, even to the confines of Segelmesse. It
contains many castles, and yields plenty of dates. The inhabitants are
subject unto the Arabians, being extremely covetous, and so faint hearted, that
an hundred of them dare scarce oppose themselves against ten Arabians: they
till the Arabians ground also as if they were their slaves. The east part of
Retel bordereth upon a certain desolate mountain, and the west part upon a
desert and sandy plain, whereunto the Arabians returning home from the
wilderness, do resort.

Of the territory of Segelmesse.
THis territory extending it self along the river of Ziz from north to south
almost twenty miles, contains about three hundred and fifty castles, besides
villages and hamlets: three of which castles are more principal then the rest.
The first called Tenegent, and consisting of a thousand and more families,
stands near unto the city of Segelmesse, and is inhabited with great store
of artificers. The second called Tebuhasan, stands about eight miles to the
south of Tenegent, being furnished also with greater numbers of inhabitants,
and so frequented with merchants, that there is not in that respect the like
place to be found in all the whole region besides. The third called (...) is
resorted unto by sundry merchants, both Jews and Moors. These three castles
have three several governors, who are at great dissension among themselves.
They will oftentimes destroy one another channels, whereby their fields are
watered, which cannot without great cost be repaired again. They will stow the
palme-trees also to the very stocks: and unto them a company of lewd Arabians
associate themselves. They coin both silver and gold-money: but their gold is
not very special. Their silver coin weighs four grains (...), eighty of
which pieces are esteemed to be worth one piece of their gold-coine. The Jews
and Arabians pay excessive tribute here. Some of their principal men are
exceeding rich, and use great traffic unto the land of Negros: whither they
transport wares of Barbary, exchanging the same for gold and slaves. The
greatest part of them live upon dates, except it be in certain places where
Infinite numbers of Scorpions.
some corn grow. Here are infinite numbers of scorpions, but no flies at all.
In summertime this region is extremely hot, and then are the rivers so
destitute of water, that the people are constrained to draw salt water out of
certain pits. The said territory contains in circuit about eighty miles,
all which, after the destruction of Segelmesse, the inhabitants with small cost
walled round about, to the end they might not be molested by continual
inrodes of horsemen. While they lived all at unity and concord, they retained
their liberty: but since they fell to mutual debate, their wall was razed,
and each faction invited the Arabians to help them, under whom by little and
little they were brought in subjection.

Of the town or city of Segelmesse.
SOme are of opinion that this town was built by a certain Roman captain,
who having conducted his troops forth of Mauritania, conquered all Numidia,
and marching westward, built a town, and called it (...), because it stood
upon the borders of Messa, and was as it were the seal of all his victories,
and afterward by a corrupt word it began to be called Segelmesse. The common
people together with one of our African Cosmographers, called Bicri, suppose
that this town was built by Alexander the great, for the relief of his sick
and wounded soldiers. Which opinion seems not probable to me: for I could
never read that Alexander the great came into any part of these regions. This
town was situate upon a plain near unto the river of Ziz, and was environed
with most stately and high walls, even as in many places it is to be seen at
this present. When the Mahumetans came first into Africa, the inhabitants of
this town were subject unto the family of Zeneta; which family was at length
dispossessed of that (...) by king Joseph the son of Tesfin, of the family of
Luntuna. The town it self was very gallantly builte, and the inhabitants were
rich, and had great traffike unto the land of Negros. Here stood stately
temples and colleges also, and great store of conducts, the water whereof was
drawn out of the river by wheels. The air in this place is most temperate
and wholesome, saving that in winter it abounds with overmuch moisture, which
breeds some diseases. But now since the town was destroyed, the inhabitants
began to plant themselves in the next castles and villages, as we have before
signified. I my self aboade in this region almost seven months at the
foresaid castle of Meniun.

Of the castle of (...).
THis castle was built by the Arabians in a certain desert place, twelve miles
southward of the town last described; and here they keep their wares free
from the danger of their enemies. Near unto this castle there is neither
garden nor field, nor any other commodity, but only certain black stones
and sand.

Of the castle of Humeledegi.
THis castle was built also by the Arabians upon a desert eighteen miles from
Segelmesse, like as was the former. Near unto it lies a certain dry plain,
so replenished with sundry fruits, that in beholding it a far off a man
would think the ground were strewed with pome-citrons.

Of the castle of Vmmelhefen.
IT is a forlorn and base castle, founded by the Arabians also five and
twenty miles from Segelmesse upon a desert, directly in the way from
Segelmesse to Dara. It is environed with black walls, and continually guarded by
the Arabians. All merchants that passeby, pay one fourth part of a ducate for
every camels lode. My self traveling this way upon a time in the company of
fourteen Jews, and being demanded how many there were of us, we said
thirteen, but after I began particularly to reckon, I found the fowerteenth
and the fifteenth man amongst us, whom the Arabians would have kept prisoners,
had we not affirmed them to be Mahumetans: howbeit not crediting our words,
they examined them in the law of Mahumet, which when they perceived them
indeed to understand, they permitted them to depart.

Of the village of Tebelbelt.
THis village standing in the Numidian desert, two hundred miles from Atlas,
and an hundred southward of Segelmesse, is situate near unto three castles,
well stored with inhabitants, and abounding with dates. Water and flesh is very
scarce amongst them. They use to hunt and take Ostriches, and to eat the flesh
of them: and albeit they have a trade unto the land of Negros, yet are they
most miserable and beggarly people, and subject to the Arabians.

Of the province of Todga.
THis little province standing upon a river of the same name, has great
plenty of dates, peaches, grapes, and figs. It contains four castles and
ten villages, the inhabitants being either husbandmen or lether-dressers. And
it stands westward of Segelmesse about forty miles.

Of the region of Farcala.
IT stands also upon a river, and abounds with dates and other fruits, but
corn is greatly wanting here. Here are in this region three castles, and
five villages. It stands southward of mount Atlas an hundred, and of
Segelmesse almost threescore miles. The poor inhabitants are subject to the
Arabians.

Of the region of Teserin.
THis beautiful region situate upon a river, is distant from Farcala thirty,
and from mount Atlas about threescore miles. Dates it yields in abundance,
and contains villages to the number of fifteen, and six castles, together
with the ruins of two towns, the names whereof I could by no means enquire.
And the word Teserin in the African language signifies a town.

Of the region called Beni Gumi.
THis region adioining upon the river of Ghir, abounds greatly with dates.
The inhabitants are poor and miserable, and buie horses at Fez, which they
sell afterward unto merchants that travel to the land of Negros. It
contains eight castles, and fifteen villages, and stands southeast of
Segelmesse about an hundred and fifty miles.

Of the castles of Mazalig and Abuhinan.
THey are situate in the Numidian desert upon the river of Ghir, almost fifty
miles from Segelmesse. Inhabited they are by certain beggarly Arabians:
neither does the soil adjacent yield any corn at all, and but very few dates.

Of the town of Chasair.
THis town standing upon the desert of Numidia twenty miles from Atlas, has
mines of lead and antimonie near unto it, whereby the inhabitants Mines of
lead and antimonie.
get their living; for this place yields none other commodity.

Of the region of Beni Besseri.
THis little region situate at the foot of mount Atlas, and abounding with all
kind of fruits save dates, will bear no corn at all. It contains three
castles and a certain iron-mine, which serves all the province An iron-mine.
of Segelmesse with iron. Villages here are but few, which are subject partly
to the prince of Dubdu, and partly to the Arabians; and all the inhabitants
employ themselves about working in the foresaid iron-mine.

Of the region of (...).
THis region standing seventy miles southward of Segelmesse has three castles
and sundry villages situate upon the river of Ghir. Dates it yields great
plenty, and but very little corn. The inhabitants exercise traffic in the
land of Negros; and are all subject, and pay tribute to the Arabians.

Of the castles of Fighig.
THe three castles of Fighig stand upon a certain desert maruellously
abounding with dates. The women of this place weaue a kind of cloth in form
of a carpet, which is so fine, that a man would take it to be silk, and this
cloth they sell at an excessive rate at Fez, Telensin, and other places of
Barbary. The inhabitants being men of an excellent wit, do part of them use
traffic to the land of Negros, and the residue become students at Fez: and so
soon as they have attained to the degree of a doctor, they return to Numidia,
where they are made either priests or senators, and prove most of them men
of great wealth and reputation. From Segelmesse the said castles are distant
almost an hundred and fifty miles eastward.

Of the region of Tesebit.
THe region of Tesebit being situate upon the Numidian desert, two hundred and
fifty miles eastward of Segelmesse, and an hundred miles from mount Atlas,
has four castles within the precincts thereof, and many villages also, which
stand upon the confines of Lybia, near unto the high way that leads from Fez
and Telensin to the kingdom of Agadez and to the land of Negros. The
inhabitants are not very rich, for all their wealth consists in dates, and
some small quantity of corn. The men of this place are black, but the women
are somewhat fairer, and yet they are of a swart and brown hue.

Of the region of Tegorarin.
THis great and large region of the Numidian desert standing about an hundred
and twenty miles eastward of Tesebit, contains fifty castles, and above an
hundred villages, and yields great plenty of dates. The inhabitants are
rich, and have ordinary traffic to the land of Negros. Their fields are very
apt for corn, and yet by reason of their extreme drouth, they stand in need
of continual watering and dunging. They allow unto strangers houses to dwell
in, requiring no money for rent but only their dung, which they keep most
charily: yea they take it in ill part if any stranger eases himself without
the doors. Flesh is very scarce among them: for their soil is so dry, that
it will scarce nourish any cattle at all: they keep a few goats indeed for
their milks sake: but the flesh that they eat is of camels, which the Arabians
bring unto their markets to sell: they mingle their meat with salt tallow,
which is brought into this region from Fez and Tremizen. There were in times
past many rich Jews in this region, who by the means of a certain Mahumetan
preacher, were at length expelled, and a great part of them slain by the
seditious people; and that in the very same year when the Jews were expelled
out of Spain and Sicily. The inhabitants of this region having one only
governor of their own nation, are notwithstanding often subject to civil
contentions, and yet they do not molest other nations: howbeit they pay
certain tribute unto the next Arabians.

Of the region of Meszab.
THis region being situate upon the Numidian desert, 300. miles eastward from
Tegorarin, and 300. miles also from the Mediterran sea, contains six
castles, and many villages, the inhabitants being rich, and using traffike to
the land of Negros. Likewise the Negro-merchants, together with them of Bugia
and Ghir make resort unto this region. Subject they are and pay tribute unto
the Arabians.

Of the town of Techort.
THe ancient town of Techort was built by the Numidians upon a certain hill,
by the foot whereof runs a river, upon which river stands a drawbridge.
The wall of this town was made of free stone and lime, but that part which is
next unto the mountain (...) instead of a wall an impregnable rock opposite
against it: this town is distant (...) hundred miles southward from the
Mediterran sea, and (...) 300. miles from (...). Families it contains to the
number of five and twenty hundred: all the houses are built of sunne-dried
brickes, except their temple which is somewhat more stately. Here dwell great
store both of gentlemen and artificers: and because they have great abundance
of dates, and are destitute of corn, the merchants of Constantina exchange
corn with them for their dates. All strangers they favor exceedingly, and
friendly dismiss them without paying of ought. They had rather match their
daughters unto strangers, then to their own citizens: and for a dowry they
give some certain portion of land, as it is accustomed in some places of
Europe. So great and surpassing is their liberality, that they will heap many
gifts upon strangers, albeit they are sure never to see them again. At the
first they were subject to the king of Maroco, afterward to the king of
Telensin, and now to the king of Tunis, unto whom they pay fifty thousand
ducats for yearly tribute, upon condition that the king himself come
personally to receive it. The king of Tunis that now is, demanded a second
tribute of them. Many castles, and villages, and some territories there be
also, which are all subject unto the prince of this town: who collecteth an
hundred and thirty thousand ducates of yearly revenues, and has always a
mighty garrison of soldiers attending upon him, unto whom he allows very
large pay. The governor at this present called Habdulla, is a valiant and
liberal young prince, and most courteous unto strangers, whereof I my self
conuersing with him for certain days, had good experience.

Of the city of Guargala.
THis ancient city founded by the Numidians, and environed with strong walls
upon the Numidian desert, is built very sumptuously, and abounds exceedingly
with dates. It has some castles and a great number of villages belonging
thereunto. The inhabitants are rich, because they are near unto the kingdom
of Agadez. Here are diverse merchants of Tunis and Constantina, which transport
wares of Barbary unto the land of Negros. And because flesh and corn is very
scarce among them, they live upon the flesh of Ostriches and camels. They are
all of a black color, and have black slaves, and are people of a courteous
and liberal disposition, and most friendly and bountiful unto strangers. A
governor they have whom they reverence as if he were a king: which governor
has about two thousand horsemen always attending upon him, and collecteth
almost fifteen thousand ducates for yearly revenue.

Of the province of Zeb.
ZEb a province situate also upon the Numidian desert, begins westward from
Mesila, northward from the mountains of Bugia, eastward from the region of
dates over against Tunis, and southward it bordereth upon a certain desert,
over which they travail from Guargala to Techort. This region is extremely
hot, sandy, and destitute both of water and corn: which wants are partly
supplied by their abundance of dates. It contains to the number of five
towns and many villages, all which we purpose in order to describe.

Of the town of Pescara.
THis ancient town built by the Romans while they were lords of Mauritania,
and afterward destroyed by the Mahumetans at their first entrance into Africa;
is now reedified, stored with new inhabitants, and environed with fair and
stately walls. And albeit the townsmen are not rich, yet are they lovers of
civility. Their soil yields naught but dates. They have been governed by
diverse princes; for they were a while subject unto the kings of Tunis, and that
to the death of king Hutmen, after whom succeeded a Mahumetan priest: neither
could the kings of Tunis ever since that time recover the dominion of Pescara.
Here are great abundance of Deadly scorpions.
scorpions, and it is present death to be stung by them: wherefore all the
townsmen in a manner depart into the country in summer time, where they
remain till the month of November.

Of the city of Borgi.
ANother town there is also called Borgi, which stands about fowerteene
miles eastward of Pescara. Here are a great many of artificers, but more
husbandmen. And because water is very scarce in this region, and yet their
fields stand in need of continual watering, every man may conueigh water
into his field by a certain sluice, for the space of an hour or two, according
to the breadth or length of his ground; and after one has done watering his
ground, his next neighbor begins, which oftentimes breeds great
contention and bloodshed.

Of the town of Nefta.
NEfta is the name of the town it self, and also of the territory adjacent;
which territory contains three castles, the greatest whereof seems by the
manner of building to have been founded by the Romans. Inhabitants here are
great store, being very rusticall and uncivil people. In times past they were
exceeding rich, for they dwell near unto Lybia, in the very way to the land of
Negros: howbeit by reason of their perpetual hostility with the kings of
Tunis, the king of Tunis that now is destroyed their town; and themselves he
partly slew, and partly put to flight. Likewise he so defaced the walls and
other buildings, that now a man would esteem it to be but a base village. Not
far from hence runs a certain river of hot water, which serves them both
to drink, and to water their fields withal.

Of the town of Teolacha.
IT was built by the Numidians, and compassed with slender walls, and has a
river of hot water also running thereby. The fields adjacent yield plenty of
dates, but great scarcity of corn. The miserable inhabitants are oppressed
with continual exactions, both by the Arabians, and also by the king of Tunis.
Yet are they extremely covetous and proud, and disdainful unto strangers.

Of the town of Deusen.
DEusen a very ancient town, founded by the Romans in the same place where
the kingdom of Bugia ioineth to Numidia, was destroyed by the Mahumetans at
their first entrance into Africa, because of a certain Roman captain, which
endured the Saracens siege for a whole year together: the town being at
length taken, this captain and all the men of the town were put to the sword,
but the women and children were carried away captive. Howbeit after the town
was sacked, the wall thereof remained entire, by reason it was built of most
hard stone, and that a wonderful thicknes, though in some places it seems
to be ruined, which (I think) might be caused by an earthquake. Not far from
this town are diverse monuments of antiquity like unto sepulchers, wherein are
found sundry pieces of silver coin, adorned with certain letters and
hieroglyphicall figures, the interpretation whereof I could never find out.

Of the province of Biledulgerio.
FRom the territory of Pescara this province extends it self unto the Isle
of Gerbi, and one part thereof, in which Cafsa and Teusar are situate, is
almost three hundred miles distant from the Mediterran sea. It is an extreme
hot and dry place, bringing forth no corn at all, but great plenty of dates,
which because they are special good, are transported unto the kingdom of
Tunis. Here are diverse towns and cities, which we will describe in their due
place.

Of the town of Teusar.
THis ancient town built by the Romans upon the Numidian desert, near unto a
certain river springing forth of the southren mountains, was environed with
most stately and impregnable walls, and had an ample territory thereunto
belonging; but it was since so destroyed by the Mahumetans, that now instead of
the woonted sumptuous palaces thereof it contains naught but base cottages.
The inhabitants are exceeding rich both in wares and money, for they have many
faires every year; whereunto resort great numbers of merchants from Numidia
and Barbary. The foresaid river divides the town into two parts, one whereof
being inhabited by the principal gentlemen and burgo-masters, is called
Fatnasa: and in the other called Merdes dwell certain Arabians, which have
remained there ever since the town was destroyed by the Mahumetans. They are
at continual civil wars among themselves, and will perform but little
obedience to the king of Tunis: for which cause he deals always most
rigorously with him.

Of the town of Caphsa.
THE ancient town of Caphsa built also by the Romans, had for certain years
a governor of their own: but afterward being sacked by one Hucba a Captain
of Hutmen Califa, the walls thereof were razed to the ground; but the castle
as yet remains, and is of great force; for the wall thereof being five and
twenty cubits high, and five cubits thick, is made of excellent stones, like
unto the stones of Vespasians Amphitheatre at Rome. Afterward the towne-walles
were reedified, and were destroyed again by Mansor, who having slain the
Governor of the town and all the inhabitants, appointed a new Governor over
the same place. Now this town is very populous, all the houses thereof,
except the temple and a few other buildings, being very deformed and base, and
the streets are paued with black stones, like unto the streets of Naples and
Florence. The poor inhabitants are continually oppressed with the exactions of
the king of Tunis. In the midst of the town are certain square, large, and
deep fountains walled round about, the water whereof is hot and unfit to be
drunk, unless it be set an hour or two a cooling. The air of this place is
very unwholesome, insomuch that the greatest part of the inhabitants are
continually sick of fevers. People they are of a rude and illiberall
disposition, and unkind unto strangers: wherefore they are had in great
contempt by all other Africans. Not far from this town are fields abounding
with dates, olives, and pome-citrons: and the dates and olives there are the
best in all the whole province: here is likewise most excellent oil. The
inhabitants make themselves shoes of buckes leather.

Of the castles of Nefzaoa.
THree castles there are of this name being well stored with inhabitants, but
very homely built, and oppressed with the king of Tunis his continual
exactions. And they are distant from the Mediterran sea, about fifty miles.

Of the region of Teorregu.
THis little territory belonging to the kingdom of Tripolis, and bordering
upon the desert of Barca, contains three castles of the same name, which
abound greatly with dates, but have no corn at all. The inhabitants being
far distant from other towns and cities, lead a most miserable life.

Of the territory of Iasliten.
IT lies upon the Mediterran sea, and contains many villages abounding with
dates. The inhabitants because they dwell so near the sea, have great
traffic with the people of Sicilie and Egypt.

Of the region of Gademes.
THis large region having many castles and villages therein, stands southward
of the Mediterran sea almost three hundred miles. The inhabitants being rich in
dates and all other kind of merchandise, and trafficking into the land of
Negros, pay tribute unto the Arabians; albeit for a certain time they were
subject unto the king of Tunis, and the Prince of Tripolis. Corn and flesh are
marvelous scarce here.

Of the region of Fezzen.
THis ample region containing great store of castles and villages, and being
inhabited with rich people, and bordering upon the kingdom of Agadez, the
Libyan desert, and the land of Egypt, is distant from Cairo almost threescore
days journey: neither is there any village in all that desert besides Augela,
which stands in the bounds of Libya. This region of Fezzen has a peculiar
governor within it self, who bestows the revenues of the whole region
according to his own discretion, and pays some tribute unto the next
Arabians. Of corn and flesh here is great scarcity, so that they are
constrained to eat camels flesh only.

A description of the deserts of Libya, and first of Zanhaga.
Having hitherto described all the regions of Numidia, letvs now proceed unto
the descriprion of Libya; which is divided into five parts, as we signified in
the beginning of this our discourse. We will therefore begin at the dry and
forlorn desert of Zanhaga, which bordereth westward upon the Ocean sea, and
extends eastward to the salt pits of Tegaza, northward it abutteth upon Sus,
Haccha, and Dara, regions of Numidia; and southward it stretches to the land
of Negros, adjoining it self unto the kingdoms of Gualata and Tombuto. Water
is here to be found scarce in an hundred miles travel, being salt and
unsavory, and drawn out of deep wels, especially in the way from Segelmesse
to Tombuto. Here are great store of wild beasts and creeping things, whereof
we will make mention in place convenient. In this region there is a barren
desert called Azaoad, wherein neither water nor any habitations are to be found
in the space of an hundred miles; beginning from the well of Azaoad to the well
of Araoan, which is distant from Tombuto about 150. miles. Here both for lack
of water and extremity of heat, great numbers of men and beasts daily perish.

Of the desert inhabited by the people called Zuenziga.
THis desert begins westward from Tegaza, extending eastward to the desert
of Hair which is inhabited by the people called Targa: northward it bordereth
upon the deserts of Segelmesse, Tebelbelt, and Benigorai; and southward upon
the desert of Ghir, which ioineth unto the kingdom of Guber. It is a most
barren and comfortless place: and yet merchants travel that way from Telensin
to Tombuto: howbeit many are found lying dead upon the same way in regard of
extreme thirst. Within this desert there is included another desert called
Gogdem, where for the space of nine days journey not one drop of water is to
be found, unless perhaps some rain falls: wherefore the merchants use to
carry their water upon camels backs.

Of the desert inhabited by the people called Targa.
THis desert begins westward upon the confines of Hair, and extends
eastward to the desert of Ighidi; northward it bordereth upon the deserts of
Tuath, Tegorarin, and Mezab, and is enclosed southward with a certain
wilderness near unto the kingdom of Agadez. It is a place much more
comfortable and pleasant then the two deserts last described; and has great
plenty of water also near unto Hair. The air is marvelous wholesome, and the
soil abounds with all kind of herbs. Not far from Agadez there is Great
store of Manna.
found great store of Manna, which the inhabitants gather in certain little
vessels, carrying it while it is new unto the market of Agadez: and this Manna
being mingled with water they esteem very dainty and precious drink. They
put it also into their pottage, and being so taken, it has a marvelous force
of refrigerating or cooling, which is the cause that here are so few diseases,
albeit the air of Tombuto and Agadez be most unwholesome and corrupt. This
desert stretches from north to south almost 300. miles.

Of the desert inhabited by the people of Lemta.
THE fourth desert beginning at the territory of Ighidi and extending to
another which is inhabited by the people called Berdoa, bordereth northward
upon the deserts of Techort, Guarghala, and Gademis, and southward upon the
kingdom of Cano in the land of Negros. It is exceeding dry, and very
dangerous for merchants traveling to Constantina. For the inhabitants challenge
unto themselves the signiorie of Guargala: wherefore making continual war
against the prince of Guargala, they oftentimes spoil the merchants of all
their goods; and as many of the people of Guargala as they can catch, they kill
without all pity and compassion.

Of the desert inhabited by the people called Berdoa.
THE fifth desert beginning westward from the desert last mentioned, and
stretching eastward to the desert of Augela, adioyneth northward upon the
deserts of Fezzen and Barca, and trendeth southward to the desert (...) Borno.
This place is extremely dry also, neither have any but the Gademites, which
are in league with the people of Berdoa, safe passage through it: for the
merchants of Fezzen, so often as they fall into their enemies hands, are
deprived of all their goods. The residue of the Libyan desert, that is to say,
from Augela to the river of Nilus is inhabited by certain Arabians and
Africans commonly called Leuata: and this is the extreme easterly part of the
deserts of Libya.

Of the region of Nun.
THis region bordering upon the Ocean sea, contains many villages and
hamlets, and is inhabited with most beggarly people. It stands between
Numidia and Libya, but somewhat nearer unto Libya. Here grows neither barley
nor any other corn. Some dates here are, but very unsavory. The inhabitants
are continually molested by the Arabians invasions: and some of them traffic
in the kingdom of Gualata.

Of the region of Tegaza.
IN this region is great store of salt dug, being whiter then any marble.
(...)-mines.
This salt is taken out of certain caves or pits, at the entrance whereof stand
their cottages that work in the salt-mines. And these workmen are all
strangers, who sell the salt which they dig, unto certain merchants that
carry the same upon camels to the kingdom of Tombuto, where there would
otherwise be extreme scarcity of salt. Neither have the said diggers of salt
any victuals but such as the merchants bring unto them: for they are distant
from all inhabited places, almost twenty days journey, insomuch that
oftentimes they perish for lack of food, when as the merchants come not in
due time unto them: Moreover the southeast wind does so often blind them, that
they cannot live here without great peril. I my self continued three days
amongst them, all which time I was constrained to drink salt water drawn out
of certain wells not far from the salt pits.

Of the region of (...).
AVgela being a region of the Libyan desert, and distant four hundred and
fifty miles from Nilus, contains three castles, and certain villages. Dates
here are great plenty, but extreme scarcity of corn, unless it be brought
hither by merchants out of Egypt. Through this region lies the way by the
Libyan desert from Mauritania to Egypt.

Of the town of Serte.
SErte an ancient town built (according to the opinion of some) by the
Egyptians; of others, by the Romans; and (as some others suppose) by the
Africans, was at length destroyed by the Mahumetans, albeit Ibnu Rachich
affirms the Romans to have sacked it. But now there is naught remaining but
only a few ruins of the wall.

Of the region of Berdeoa.
BErdeoa a region situate in the midst of the Libyan desert, and standing
almost five hundred miles from Nilus, contains three castles and five or six
villages, abounding with most excellent dates. And the said three castles were
discovered eighteen years ago by one Hamar in manner following: the carouan
of merchants wandering out of the direct way, had a certain blind man in
their company which was acquainted with all those regions: this blind guide
riding foremost upon his camel, commanded A whole carouan conducted by a
blind guide who lead them by sent only; as at (...) present the Carouans of
Maroco are conducted over the Libyan deserts to Tombuto.
some sand to be given him at every miles end, by the smell whereof he declared
the situation of the place: but when they were come within forty miles of this
region, the blind man smelling of the sand, affirmed that they (...) not far
from some places inhabited; which some believed not, for they knew that they
were distant from Egypt four hundred and eighty miles, so that they took
themselves to be nearer unto Augela. Howbeit within three days they found the
said three castles, the inhabitants whereof woondering at the approach of
strangers, and being greatly astonished, presently shut all their gates, and
would give the merchants no water to quench their extreme thirst. But the
merchants by maine force entered, and having gotten water sufficient, betook
themselves again to their journey.

Of the region of (...).
ALguechet also being a region of the Lybian desert, is from Egypt an hundred
and twenty miles distant. Here are three castles and many villages abounding
with dates. The inhabitants are black, vile, and covetous people, and yet
exceeding rich: for they dwell in the mid way between Egypt and Gaoga. They
have a governor of their own, notwithstanding they pay tribute unto the next
Arabians.

Here ends the sixth book.
JOHN LEO HIS SEVENTH BOOK OF the History of Africa, and of the memorable
things contained therein.
Wherein he entreats of the land of Negros, and of the confines of Egypt.
Our ancient Chroniclers of Africa, to wit, Bichri and Meshudi knew nothing in
the land of Negros but only the regions of Guechet and Cano: for in their time
all other places of the land of Negros were undiscovered. But in the year of
the Hegeira 380, by the means of a certain Mahumetan which came into
Barbary, the residue of the said land was found out, being as then inhabited
by great numbers of people, which lived a brutish and savage life, without any
king, governor, common wealth, or knowledge of husbandry. Clad they were in
skins of beasts, neither had they any peculiar wives: in the day time they kept
their cattle; and when night came they resorted ten or twelve both men and
women into one cottage together, using hairie skins in stead of beds, and each
man choosing his leman which he had most fancy unto. War they wage against no
other nation, ne yet are desirous to travel out of their own country. Some
of them perform great adoration unto the sun rising: others, namely the
people of Gualata, worship the fire: and some others, to wit, the inhabitants
of Gaoga, approach (after the Egyptians manner) nearer unto the Christian faith.
These Negros were The Negros subject unto Joseph king of Maroco.
first subject unto king Joseph the founder of Maroco, and afterward unto the
five nations of Libya; of whom they learned the Mahumetan law, and diverse
needful handycrafts: a while after when the merchants of Barbary began to
resort unto them with merchandise, they learned the Barbarian language also.
But the foresaid five people or nations of Libya divided this land so among
themselves, that every third part of each nation possessed one region. Howbeit
the king of Tombuto that now reigns, called Abuacre Abuacre Izchia.
Izchia, is a Negro by birth: this Abuacre after the decease of the former
king, who was a Libyan borne, slew all his sons, and so usurped the kingdom.
And having by wars for the space of fifteen years conquered many large
dominions, he then concluded a league with all nations, and went on pilgrimage
to Mecca, in which journey he so consumed his treasure, that he was constrained
to borrow great sums of money of other princes. Moreover the fifteen
kingdoms of the land of Negros known to us, are all situate upon the river of
Niger, and upon other rivers which fall thereinto. And all the land of Negros
stands between two vast deserts, for on the one side lies the maine desert
between Numidia and it, which extends it self unto this very land: and the
south side thereof adioineth upon another desert, which stretches from thence
to the maine Ocean: in which desert are infinite nations unknown to us, both
by reason of the huge distance of place, and also in regard of the diversity
of languages and religions. They have no traffic at all with our people, but
we have heard oftentimes of their traffic with the inhabitants of the Ocean
sea shore.

A description of the kingdom of Gualata.
THis region in regard of others is very small: for it contains only three
great villages, with certain granges and fields of dates. From Nun it is
distant southward about three hundred, from Tombuto northward five hundred, and
from the Ocean sea about two hundred miles. In this region the people of Libya,
while they were lords of the land of Negros, ordained their chief princely
seat: and then great store of Barbarie-merchants frequented Gualata: but
afterward in the reign of the mighty and rich prince Heli, the said merchants
leaving Gualata, began to resort unto Tombuto and Gago, which was the occasion
that the region of Gualata grew extreme beggarly. The language of this region
is called Sungai, and the inhabitants are black people, and most friendly unto
strangers. In my time this region was conquered by the king of Tombuto, and the
prince thereof fled into the deserts, whereof the king of Tombuto having
intelligence, and fearing least the prince would return with all the people of
the deserts, granted him peace, conditionally that he should pay a great
yearly tribute unto him, and so the said prince has remained tributarie to
the king of Tombuto until this present. The people agree in manners and
fashions with the inhabitants of the next desert. Here grows some quantity
of Mil-seed, and great store This round and white pulse is called Maiz in the
west Indies.
of a round and white kind of pulse, the like whereof I never saw in Europe;
but flesh is extreme scarce among them. Both the men and the women do so cover
their heads, that al their conntenance is almost hidden. Here is no form of a
common wealth, nor yet any governors or judges, but the people lead a most
miserable life.

A description of the kingdom of Ghinea.
THis kingdom called by the merchants of our nation Gheneoa, by the natural
inhabitants thereof Genni, and by the Portugals and other people of Europe
Ghinea, stands in the midst between Gualata on the north, Tombuto on the
east, and the kingdom of Melli on the south. In length it contains almost
five hundred miles, and extends two hundred The natural commodities of
Ghinea.
and fifty miles along the river of Niger, and bordereth upon the Ocean sea in
the same place, where Niger falls into the said sea. This place exceedingly
abounds with barlie, rice, cattle, fishes, and cotton: and their cotton they
sell unto the merchants of Barbary, for cloth of Europe, for brazen vessels,
for armor, and other such commodities. Their coin is of gold without any
stamp or inscription at all: they have certain iron-money also, which they
use about matters of small value, some pieces whereof weigh a pound, some half
a pound, and some one quarter of a pound. In all this kingdome-there is no
fruit to be found but only dates, which are brought hither either out of
Gualata or Numidia. Here is neither town nor castle, but a certain great
village only, wherein the prince of Ghinea, together with his priests,
doctors, merchants, and all the principal men of the region inhabit. The
walls of their houses are built of chalk, and the roofes are covered with
straw: the inhabitants are clad in black or blew cotton, wherewith they cover
their heads also: but the priests and doctors of their law go apparelled in
white cotton. This region during the three months of Iulie, August, and
September, is yearly environed with the ouerflowings of Niger in manner of an
Island; all which time the merchants of Tombuto conueigh their merchandise
hither in certain Canoas or narrow boats made of one tree, which they row all
the day long, but at night they bind them to the shore, and lodge themselves
upon the land. This kingdom was subject in times past unto a certain people
of Libya, and became afterward tributarie unto king Soni Heli, after The Prince
of Ghinea kept prisoner by Izchia.
whom succeeded Soni Heli Izchia, who kept the prince of this region prisoner
at Gago, where together with a certain nobleman, he miserably died.

Of the kingdom of Melli.
THis region extending it self almost three hundred miles along the side of a
river which f^lleth into Niger, bordereth northward upon the region last
described, southward upon certain deserts and dry mountains, westward upon
huge woods and forests stretching to the Ocean sea shore, and eastward upon
the territory of Gago. In this kingdom there is a large and ample village
containing to the number of six thousand or mo families, and called Melli,
whereof the whole kingdom is so named. And here the king has his place of
residence. The region it self yields great abundance of corn, flesh, and
cotton. Here are many artificers and merchants in all places: and yet the king
honorably entertaineth all strangers. The inhabitants are rich, and have
plenty of wares. Here are great store of temples, priests, and professors,
which professors read their lectures only in the temples, because they have
no colleges at all. The people of this region excel all other Negros in wit,
civility, and industry; and were the first that embraced the law of Mahumet,
at the same time when the uncle of Joseph the king of Maroco was their prince,
and the government The prince of M^lli subdued by Izchia.
remained for a while unto his posterity: at length Izchia subdued the prince
of this region, and made him his tributarie, and so oppressed him with grievous
exactions, that he was scarce able to maintain his family.

Of the kingdom of Tombuto.
THis name was in our times (as some think) imposed upon this kingdom Tombuto
was conquered by the king of Maroco 1589. from whenc^ he has for yearly
tribute mighty sums of gold.
from the name of a certain town so called, which (they say) king Mense
Suleiman founded in the year of the Hegeira 610. and it is situate within
twelve miles of a certain branch of Niger, all the houses whereof are now
changed into cottages built of chalk, and covered with thatch. Howbeit there
is a most stately temple to be seen, the walls whereof are made of stone and
lime; and a princely palace also built by a most excellent workman of Granada.
Here are many shops of artificers, and merchants, and especially of such as
weaue linen and cotton cloth. And hither do the Barbarie-merchants bring cloth
of Europe. All the women of this region except maid-seruants go with their
faces covered, and sell all necessary victuals. The inhabitants, and
especially strangers there residing, are exceeding The king of Tombuto his
daughters married unto two rich merchants.
rich, insomuch, that the king that 1526.
now is, married both his daughters unto two rich merchants. Here are many
wels, containing most sweet water; and so often as the river Niger
ouerfloweth, they conueigh the water thereof by certain sluices into the town.
Corn, cattle, milk, and butter Great scarcity of salt in Tombuto, which
commodity might be supplied by our English merchants to their unspeakable
gain.
this region yields in great abundance: but salt is very scarce here; for
it is brought hither by land from Tegaza, which is five hundred miles distant.
When I my self was here, I saw one camels load of salt sold for 80. ducates.
The rich king of Tombuto has many plates and scepters of gold, some whereof
weigh 1300. pounds: and he keeps a magnificent and well furnished court. When
he trauelleth any whither he rides upon a camel, which is lead by some of his
noblemen; and so he does likewise when he Reverence used before the king of
Tombuto.
goes to warfar, and all his soldiers ride upon horses. Whosoever will speak
unto this king must first fall down before his feet, and then taking up earth
must sprinkle it upon his own head and shoulders: which custom is ordinarily
observed by them that never saluted the king before, or come as ambassadors
from other princes. He has always three thousand horsemen, Poisoned arrows.
and a great number of footmen that shoot poisoned arrows, attending upon him.
They have often skirmishes with those that refuse to pay tribute, and so many
as they take, they sell unto the merchants of Tombuto. Here are very few
horses bred, and the merchants and courtiers keep certain little nags which
they use to travel upon: but their best horses are brought out of Barbary.
And the king so soon as he hears that any merchants are come to town with
horses, he commands a certain number to be brought before him, and choosing
the best horse for himself, he pays a most liberal price for him. He so
deadly hates all Jews, that he will not admit any into his city: and
whatsoever Barbary merchants he understands to have any dealings with the
Jews, he presently causes their goods to be confiscate. Here are great store
of doctors, judges, priests, and other learned men, that are bountifully
maintained at the kings cost and charges. And hither are brought diverse
manuscripts or written books out of Barbary, which are sold for more money
then any other merchandise. The coin of Tombuto is of gold without any stamp
or superscription: but in Shells used for coin like as in the kingdom of Congo.
matters of small value they use certain shells brought hither out of the
kingdom of Persia, four hundred of which shells are worth a ducate: and six
pieces of their golden coin with two third parts weigh an ounce. The
inhabitants are people of a gentle and cherefull disposition, and spend a great
part of the night in singing and dancing through all the streets of the city:
they keep great store of men and women slaves, and their town is much in
danger of fire: at my second being there half the town almost was burnt in
five hours space. Without the suburbs there are no gardens nor orchards at all.

Of the town of Cabra.
THis large town built without walls in manner of a village, stands about
twelve miles from Tombuto upon the river Niger: and here such merchants as
travel unto the kingdoms of Ghinea and Melli (...) themselves. Neither are the
people or buildings of this town any (...) inferior to the people and
buildings of Tombuto: and hither the Negros resort in great numbers by water.
In this town the king of Tombuto appoints a judge to decide all
controuerfies: for it were tedious to go (...) so often as need should require.
I my self am acquainted with Abu Bacr, surnamed Pargama, the kings brother,
who is black in color, but most beautiful in mind and conditions. Here
breed many diseases which exceedingly diminish the people; and that by reason
of the fond and loathsome mixture of their meats; for they mingle fish, milk,
butter, and flesh altogether. And this is the ordinary food also in Tombuto.

Of the town and kingdom of Gago.
THE great town of Gago being unwalled also, is distant southward of Tombuto
almost four hundred miles, and enclineth somewhat to the southeast. The houses
thereof are but mean, except those wherein the king and his courtiers remain.
Here are exceeding rich merchants: and hither continually resort great store of
Negros which buy cloth here brought out of Barbary and Europe. This town
abounds with corn and flesh, but is much destitute of wine, trees, and
fruits. Howbeit here is plenty of melons, citrons, and rice: here are many
wells also containing most sweet and wholesome water. Here is likewise a
certain place where slaves are to be sold, especially upon such days as the
merchants use to assemble; and a young slave of fifteen years age is sold for
six ducates, and so are children sold also. The king of this region has a
certain private palace wherein he maintains a great number of concubines and
slaves, which are kept by eunuchs: and for the guard of his own person he
keeps a sufficient troop of horsemen and footmen. Between the first gate of
the palace and the inner part thereof, there is a place walled round about,
wherein the king himself decideth all his subjects controversies: and albeit
the king be in this function most diligent, and performs all things thereto
appertayning, yet has he about him his counselors and other officers, as
namely his secretaries, treasurers, factors, and auditors. It is a wonder to
see what plenty of Merchandise is daily brought hither, and how costly and
sumptuous all things be. Horses bought in Europe for ten ducates, are here sold
again for forty and sometimes for fifty ducates a piece. There is not any
cloth of Europe so course, which will not here be sold for Rich sale for cloth.
four ducates an elle, and if it be any thing fine they will give fifteen
ducates for an ell: and an ell of the scarlet of Venice or of Turkie-cloath is
here worth thirty ducates. A sword is here valued at three or four crowns,
and so likewise are spurs, bridles, with other like commodities, and spices
also are sold at an high rate: but of al other commodities salt is most
extremely dear. The residue of this kingdom contains naught but villages
and hamlets inhabited by husbandmen and shepherds, who in winter cover their
bodies with beasts skins; but in summer they go all naked save their privy
members: and sometimes they wear upon their feet certain shoes made of
camels leather. They are ignorant and rude people, and you shall scarce find
one learned man in the space of an hundred miles. They are continually
burdened with grievous exactions, so that they have scarce any thing remaining
to live upon.

Of the kingdom of Guber.
IT stands eastward of the kingdom of Gago almost three hundred miles;
between which two kingdoms lies a vast desert being much destitute of water,
for it is about forty miles distant from Niger. The kingdom of Guber is
environed withhigh mountains, and contains many villages inhabited by
shepherds, and other herdsmen. Abundance of cattle here are both great and
small: but of a lower stature then the cattle in other places. Here are also
great store of artificers and linen weauers: and here are such shoes made as
the ancient Romans were wont to wear, the greatest part whereof be carried to
Tombuto and Gago. Likewise here is abundance of rice, and of certain other
grain and pulse, the like whereof I never saw in Italy. But I think it
grows in some places of Spain. At the inundation Their manner of sowing (...)
at the (...) of Niger.
of Niger all the fields of this region are ouerflowed, and then the
inhabitants cast their seed into the water only. In this region there is a
certain great village containing almost six thousand families, being
inhabited with all kind of merchants, and here was in times past the court of
a certain king, who in my time was slain by Izchia the king of Tombuto, The
(...) of Guber slain by Izchia.
and his sons were gelt, and accounted among the number of the kings
eunuchs. Afterward he sent governors hither who mightily oppressed and
impouerished the people that were before rich: and most part of the inhabitants
were carried captive and kept for slaves by the said Izchia.

Of the city and kingdom of Agadez.
THe city of Agadez standing near unto Lybia was not long since walled round
about by a certain king. The inhabitants are all whiter then other Negros: and
their houses are stately built after the fashion of Barbary. The greatest part
of the citizens are foreign merchants, and the residue be either artificers, or
stipendaries to the king. Every merchant has a great many of servants and
slaves, who attend upon them as they travel from Cano to Borno: for in that
journey they are exceedingly molested by certain thieves called Zingani,
insomuch that they dare not travel the Zingani.
same way unless they be well appointed: in my time they used crossebowes for
their defense: when the said merchants be arrived at any town, they presently
employ all their slaves about some business, to the end they may not live in
idleness: ten or twelve they keep to attend upon themselves and their wares.
The king of this city has always a notable guard about him, and continues
for the most part at a certain palace in the midst of the city. He has
greatest regard unto his subjects that inhabit in the deserts and fields: for
they will sometime expel their king and choose another: fo that he which
pleases the inhabitants of the desert best is sure to be king of Agadez. The
residue of this kingdom lying southward is inhabited by shepherds and
herdsmen, who dwell in certain cottages made of boughs, which cottages they
carry about upon oxen from place to place. They erect their cottages always
in the same field where they determine to feed their cattle; like as the
Arabians also do. Such as bring merchandise out of Agadez tributarie to the
king of Tombuto.
other places pay large custom to the king: and the king of Tombuto receives
for yearly tribute out of this kingdom almost an hundred and fifty thousand
ducats.

Of the province of Cano.
THe great province of Cano stands eastward of the river Niger almost five
hundred miles. The greatest part of the inhabitants dwelling in villages are
some of them herdsmen and others husbandmen. Here grows abundance of corn,
of rice, and of cotton. Also here are many deserts and wild woodie mountains
containing many springs of water. In these woods grow plenty of wild citrons
and limons, which differ not much in taste from the best of all. In the midst
of this province stands a town called by the same name, the walls and
houses whereof are built for the most part of a kind of chalk. The
inhabitants are rich merchants and most civil people. Their king was in times
past of great puissance, and had mighty troops of horsemen at his command; but
he has since been constrained The kings of Zegzeg, of Casena, and of Cano
subdued by Izchia the king of Tombuto.
to pay tribute unto the kings of Zegzeg and Casena. Afterward Ischia the king
of Tombuto faining friendship unto the two foresaid kings trecherously slew
them both. And then he waged war against the king of Cano, whom after a long
siege he took, and compelled him to marie one of his daughters, restoring him
again to his kingdom, (...) that he should pay unto him the third part of all
his tribute: and the said king of Tombuto has some of his courtiers
perpetually residing at Cano for the receipt thereof.

Of the kingdom of Casena.
CAsena bordering eastward upon the kingdom last described, is full of
mountains, and dry fields, which yield notwithstanding great store of barlie
and mill-seed. The inhabitants are all extremely black, having great noses and
blabber lips. They dwell in most forlorn and base cottages: neither shall you
find any of their villages containing above three hundred families. And
besides their base estate they are mightily oppressed with famine: a king they
had in times past whom the foresaid Ischia Izchia.
slew, since whose death they have all been tributarie unto Ischia.

Of the kingdom of Zegzeg.
THe southeast part thereof bordereth upon Cano, and it is distant from Casena
almost an hundred and fifty miles. The inhabitants are rich and have great
traffic unto other nations. Some part of this kingdom is plain, and the
residue mountainous, but the mountains are extremely cold, and the plains
intolerably hot. And because they can hardly endure the sharpnes of winter,
they kindle great fires in the midst of their houses, laying the coals thereof
under their high bedsteads, and (...) betaking themselves to sleep. Their
fields abounding with water, are exceeding fruitful, and their houses are
built like the houses of the kingdom of Casena. They had a king of their own
in times past, who being slain by Ischia (as is aforesaid) Izchia.
they have ever since been subject unto the said Ischia.

Of the region of Zanfara.
THe region of Zanfara bordering eastward upon Zegzeg is inhabited by most base
and rusticall people. Their fields abound with rice, mill, The king of Zanfara
slain by Izchia, and the people made tributarie.
and cotton. The inhabitants are tall in stature and extremely black, their
visages are broad, and their dispositions most savage and brutish. Their king
also was slain by Ischia, and themselves made tributarie.

Of the town and kingdom of Guangara.
THis kingdom adioineth southeasterly upon Zanfara, being very populous, and
having a king reigning over it, which maintains a garrison of seven thousand
archers, and five hundred horsemen, and receives yearly great tributes. In
all this kingdom there are none but base villages, one only excepted, which
exceeds the rest both in largenes and fair building. The inhabitants are
very rich, and have continual traffic with the nations adioining. Southward
thereof lies a region greatly abounding with gold. But now they can have no
traffic with foreign nations, for they Gold.
are molested on both sides with most cruel enemies. For westward they are
oppressed by Ischia, and eastward by the king of Borno. When I my self Izchia.
was in Borno, king Abraham having levied an huge army, determined to expel
the prince of Guangara out of his kingdom, had he not been hindered by Homar
the prince of Gaoga, which began to assail the kingdom of Borno. Wherefore
the king of Borno being drawn home into his own country, was enforced to
give over the conquest of Guangara. So often as the merchants of Guangara
travel unto the foresaid region abounding with gold, because the ways are so
rough and difficult that their camels cannot go upon them, they carry their
wares upon slaves backs; who being laden with great burdens do usually
travel ten or twelve miles a day. Yea some I saw that made two of those
iourneies in one day: a wonder it is to see what heavy burdens these poor
slaves are charged withal; for besides the merchandise they carry victuals
also for their masters, and for the soldiers that go to guard them.

Of the kingdom of Borno.
THe large province of Borno bordering westward upon the province of Guangara,
and from thence extending eastward five hundred miles, is distant from the
fountain of Niger almost an hundred and fifty miles, the south part thereof
adioining unto the desert of Set, and the north part unto that desert which
lies toward Barca. The situation of this kingdom is very uneven, some part
thereof being mountainous, and the residue plain. Upon the plains are sundry
villages inhabited by rich merchants, and abounding with corn. The king of
this region and all his followers dwell in a certain large village. The
mountains being inhabited by herdesmen and shepherds do bring forth mill and
other grain altogether unknown to us. The inhabitants in summer go all naked
save their privy members which they cover with a piece of leather: but al
winter they are clad in skins, and have beds of skins also. They embrace no
religion at all, being neither Christians, Mahumetans, nor Jews, nor of any
other profession, but living after a brutish manner, and having wives and
children in common: and (as I understood of a certain merchant that abode a
long time among them) they have no proper names at all, but every one is
nicknamed according to his length, his fatnes, or some other quality. They
have a most puissant prince, being lineally descended from the Libyan people
called Bardoa. Horsemen he has in a continual readiness to the number of three
thousand, and an huge number of footmen; for all his subjects are so serviceable
and obedient unto him, that whenever he commands them, they will arm
themselves and follow him whither he pleases to conduct them. They pay unto
him none other tribute but the tithes of all their corn: neither has this
king any revenues to maintain his estate, but only such spoils as he gets
from his next enimes by often invasions and assaults. He is at perpetual
enmity with a certain people inhabiting The desert of Seu.
beyond the desert of Seu; who in times past marching with an huge army of
footmen over the said desert, wasted a great part of the kingdom of Borno.
Whereupon the king of Borno sent for the merchants of Barbary, and willed them
to bring him great store of horses: for in this country they use to exchange
horses for slaves, and to give fifteen, and sometime twenty Fifteen or
twenty (...) exchanged for one horse.
slaves for one horse. And by this means there were abundance of horses
brought: howbeit the merchants were constrained to stay for their slaves till
the king returned home conqueror with a great number of captives, and
satisfied his creditors for their horses. And oftentimes it falls out that
the merchants must stay three months together, before the king returns from
the wars, but they are all that while maintained at the kings charges.
Sometimes he brings not home slaves enough to satisfy the merchants: and
otherwhiles they are constrained to awaite there a whole year together; for
the king makes invasions but every year once, and that at one set and
appointed time of the year. Yea I my self met with sundry merchants here,
who despairing of the kings payment, because they had trusted him an whole
year, determined never to come thither with horses again. And yet the king
seems to be marvelous rich; for his spurs, his bridles, platters, dishes,
pots, and other vessels wherein his meat and drink are brought to the table,
are all of pure gold: yea, and the chains of his dogs and hounds are of gold
also. Howbeit this king is extremely covetous, for he had much rather pay his
debts in slaves then in gold. In this kingdom are great multitudes of Negros
and of other people, the names of whom (because I tarried here but one month)
I could not well note.

Of the kingdom of Gaoga.
GAoga bordering westward upon the kingdom of Borno, and extending eastward to
the confines of Nubia, adioineth southward unto a certain desert situate upon
a crooked and winding part of Nilus, and is enclosed northward with the
frontiers of Egypt. It stretches from east to west in length five hundred
miles, and as much in breadth. They have neither humanity nor learning among
them, but are most rusticall and savage people, and especially those that
inhabit the mountains, who go all naked save their priuities: their houses
are made of boughs and rafts, and are much subject to burning, and they have
great abundance of cattle, whereunto they give diligent attendance. For many
years they remained in liberty, of which A Negro-slaue who having slain his
Lord grew to great might and authority.
liberty they were deprived by a certain Negro slave of the same region. This
slave lying upon a certain night with his master that was a wealthy merchant,
and considering that he was not far from his native country, slew his said
master, possessed his goods, and returned home: where having bought a certain
number of horses, he began to invade the people next adioining, and obtained
for the most part the victory: for he conducted a troop of most valiant and
warlike horsemen against his enemies that were but sle^derly appointed. And by
this means he took great numbers of captives, whom he exchanged for horses
that were brought out of Egypt: insomuch that at length (the number of his
soldiers increasing) he was accounted of by all men as souerainge K. of Gaoga.
After him succeeded his son, being no whit inferior in valor and high courage
unto his father; who reigned for the space of forty years. Next him succeeded
his brother Moses, and after Moses his nephew Homara, who bears rule at this
present. This Homara has greatly enlarged his dominions, and has entered
league with the Sultan of Cairo, by whom he is often presented with magnificent
gifts, which he most bountifully requiteth: also diverse merchants of Egypt, and
diverse inhabitants of Cairo present most precious and rare things unto him, and
highly commend his surpassing liberality. This prince greatly honors all
learned men, and especially such as are of the lineage of Mahumet. I my self
being in his court, a certain noble man of Damiata brought him very rich and
royal gifts, as namely, a gallant horse, a Turkish sword, and a kingly robe,
with certain other particulars that cost about an hundred and fifty ducates
at Cairo: in recompense whereof the king gave him five slaves, five camels,
five hundred ducates of that region, and an hundred elephants teeth of
wonderful bigness.

Of the kingdom of (...).
NVbia bordering westward upon the kingdom last described, and stretching from
thence unto Nilus, is enclosed on the southside with the desert of Goran, and
on the north side with the confines of Egypt. Howbeit they cannot pass by
water from this kingdom into The river of Nilus not naeuigable between Nubia
and Egypt.
Egypt: for the river of Nilus is in some places no deeper then a man may wade
over on foot. The principal town of this kingdom called Dangala is
exceeding populous, and contains to the number of ten thousand families. The
walls of their houses consist of a kind of chalk, and the roofes are covered
with straw. The townsmen are exceeding rich and civil people, and have great
traffike with the merchants of Cairo and of Egypt: in other parts of this
kingdom you shall find none but villages and hamlets situate upon the river
of Nilus, all the inhabitants whereof are husbandmen. The kingdom of Nubia is
most rich in corn and sugar, which notwithstanding The rich commodities of
Nubia.
they know not how to use. Also in the city of Dangala there is great plenty
of ciuet and Sandall-wood. This region abounds with Iuory likewise, because
here are so many elephants taken. Here is also a most Most strong poison.
strong and deadly poison, one grain whereof being divided amongst ten
persons, will kill them all within less then a quarter of an hour: but if one
man takes a grain, he dies there of out of hand. An ounce of this poison is
sold for an hundred ducates; neither may it be sold to any but to foreign
merchants, and whosoever buieth it is bound by an oath not to use it in the
kingdom of Nubia. All such as buy of this poison are constrained to pay as
much unto the king, as to the merchant: but if any man sells poison without
the princes knowledge, he is presently put to death. The king of Nubia
maintains continual war, partly against the people of Goran (who being
descended of the people called Zingani, inhabit the deserts, Zingani.
and speak a kind of language that no other nation understands) and partly
against certain other people also dwelling upon the desert which lies
eastward of Nilus, and (...) toward the red sea, being not far from the
borders of Suachen. Their language (as I take it) is mixed, for it has great
affinity with the Chaldean tongue, with the language of Suachen, and with the
language of Ethiopia the higher, where Prete Gianni is said to Prete (...).
bear rule: the people themselves are called Bugiha, and are most base and
Bugiha.
miserable, and live only upon milk, camels-flesh, and the flesh of such
beasts as are taken in those deserts. Sometimes they receive tribute of the
governor of Suachen, and sometimes of the governors of Dangala. They had once
a rich town situate upon the red sea called Zibid, whereunto belonged a
commodious haven, being opposite unto the haven of Zidem, which is forty miles
distant from Mecca. But an hundred years since it was destroyed by the Sultan,
because the inhabitants received certain wares which should have been carried
to Mecca, and at the same time the famous port of Zibid was destroyed, from
whence notwithstanding was gathered a great yearly tribute. The inhabitants
being chased from thence fled unto Dangala and Suachin, and at length being
overcome in battle by the governor of Suachin, there were in one day slain
of them above four thousand, and a thousand were carried captive unto Suachin,
who were massacred by the women and children of the city. And thus much
(friendly reader) as concerning the land of Negros: the fifteen kingdoms
whereof agreeing much in rites and customs, are subject unto four princes
only. Let us now proceed unto the description of Egypt.

Here ends the seventh book.
JOHN LEO HIS EIGHT BOOK OF the History of Africa, and of the memorable
things contained therein.
Of Egypt.
THe most noble and famous province of Egypt bordering westward upon the
deserts of Barca, Numidia, and Libya; eastward upon the deserts lying between
Egypt it self and the red sea; and northward upon the Mediterran sea; is
enclosed southward with the land of the foresaid people called Bugiha, and with
the river of Nilus. It stretches in length from the (...) sea to the land of
the people called Bugiha about four hundred and (...) 450. miles long.
fifty miles: but in breadth it is very narrow; so that it contains naught
but a small distance between both the banks of Nilus and the barren mountains
bordering upon the foresaid deserts, being inhabited only in that place where
Nilus is separate from the said mountains: albeit toward the Mediterran sea
it extends it self somewhat broader. For Nilus about fower-score miles from
the great city of Cairo is divided into two branches, one whereof (...) in his
channel westward, returns at length into the maine stream from whence he
took his original, and having passed about threescore miles beyond Cairo, it
divides it self into two other branches, whereof the one runs to Damiata,
and the other to Rosetto. And (...) of that which trendeth to Damiata issues
another branch, which discharging it self into a lake passes through a
certain gullet or streit into the Mediterran sea, upon the bank whereof
stands the most ancient city of Tenesse: and this division of Nilus into so
many streams and branches causes Egypt (as I have beforesaid) to be so
narrow. All this province is plain, and is most fruitful for all kind of
grain and pulse. There are most pleasant and green meadows, and great store
of geese and other fowls. The country people are of a swart and brown
color: but the citizens are white. Garments they wear which are streite down
to their wastes, and broad beneath, and the sleeves likewise are straight. They
cover their heads with a round and high habit called by the Italians a
Dulipan. Their shoes are made according to the ancient fashion. In summer they
wear garments of parti-colored cotton: but in winter they use a certain
garment lined with cotton, which they call Chebre: but the chief citizens and
merchants are apparelled in cloth of Europe. The inhabitants are of an honest,
cheereful, and liberal disposition. For their victuals they use a kind of
new and extreme salt cheeses, and sour milk also artificially congealed:
which fare albeit they account very dainty, yet cannot strangers digest it,
and into every dish almost they put sower milk.

A division of Egypt.
SInce the Mahumetans were Lords of Egypt, it has been divided into three
parts. For the region from Cairo to Rosetto is called the shore of Errif: and
from Cairo to the land of Bugiha it is called Sahid, that is to say, The firm
land: but the region adioining upon that branch of Nilus which runs toward
Damiata and Tenesse, they call by the name of Bechria or Maremma. All Egypt is
exceeding fertile: but the province of Sahid excels the two other parts for
abundance of corn, cattle, fowls, and flax: and Maremma abounds with
cotton and sugar. Howbeit the inhabitants of Marremma and Errif are far more
civil then the people of Sahid: because those two provinces lie nearer unto
the sea, and are more frequented by European, Barbarian, and Assirian
merchants: but the people of Sahid have no conversation with strangers, except
it be with a few Ethiopians.

Of the ancient pedigree and original of the Egyptians.
THe Egyptians (as Moses writes) fetch their original from Genesis 10. 6.
Mesraim is recorded to be the brother of Chus, and the son of Cham. Chibith.
Mesraim the son of Chus, the son of Cham, the son of Noe; and the
Hebrews call both the country and the inhabitants of Egypt by the name of
Mesraim. The Arabians call Egypt it self Mesre, but the inhabitants Chibith.
And Chibith (they say) was the man, that first took upon him the government of
this region, and began first to build houses thereon. Also the inhabitants
call themselves by the same name: neither are there left any true Egyptians,
besides a few Christians, which are at this present remaining. The residue
embracing the Mahumetan religion have mingled themselves amongst the Arabians
and the Moors. This kingdom was governed many years by the Egyptians
themselves, as namely by the kings that were called Pharao, (who by their
monuments and admirable buildings, seem to have been mighty princes) and
also by the kings called Ptolomaei. Afterward being subdued unto the Roman
Empire, this kingdom since the coming of Christ was converted unto the
Christian religion, under the said Roman government: since the decay of
which Empire, it fell into the possession of the Emperors of Constantinople;
who being very careful to maintain this kingdom, were at length deprived
thereof by the Mahumetans, under the conduct of Hamrus the son of Hasi, being
appointed captain general over the Arabian army of Homar the second Califa
or Mahumetan patriarch of that name: who permitting all men to have their own
religion required naught but tribute at their hands. The said captain built
upon the bank of Nilus a certain town called by the Arabians Fustato, which
word signifies in their language a tabernacle: for when he first undertook
this expedition, he marched through wild and desert places void of
inhabitants, so that his army was constrained to lie in tents. The common
people call this town Mesre Hatichi, that is to say, the ancient city; which
notwithstanding in comparison of Cairo may not unfitly be called the New city.
And as concerning the situation of this town many excellent men both
Christians, Jews, and Mahumetans have in these our times been deceived. For
they think Mesre to be situate in the same place where king Pharao in the time
of Moses, and king Pharao in the time of Joseph had their aboade: because they
suppose the town of Pharao to have stood in that part of Africa where Nilus
stretches out one of his arms westward toward Africa, and where the
Pyramides are as yet to be seen: which the holy Scripture also seems to
avouch in the book of Genesis, where it is said, that the Jews in Moses time
were employed about the building The town of Pharao.
of the town of Aphthun, which was founded by Pharao: namely in that place
where Nilus trendeth toward Africa, being about fifty miles southward of
Cairo, and near unto the most westerly arm or branch of Nilus. They allege
also another probability, that the town of Pharao was built in the same
place, because that at the very head or confluence of the branches of Nilus
there stands a building of marvelous antiquity, called the sepulcher of
Joseph, wherein the dead body of Joseph lay, till it was The (...) of Joseph.
by the Jews transported unto the sepulcher of their fathers. To be brief,
neither Cairo nor any place near unto it, can by any likelihood challenge that
they were at any time inhabited by the ancient Pharaos. But here it is to be
noted, that the nobility of the ancient Egyptians dwelt in times past in the
region of Sahid beyond Cairo, in the cities of Fium, of Manfichmin, and in
other such famous cities. Howbeit after Egypt was conquered by the Romans, the
Egyptian nobility planted themselves in the region of Errif, upon the sea
shore thereof, namely about the cities of Alexandria, Rosetto, and other famous
towns retayning as yet the Latin names. Also when the Roman Empire was
translated into Greece, the said nobility still inhabited upon the seashore,
the Emperors lieutenant residing at Alexandria: but after the Mahumetans got
the dominion of Egypt, the foresaid nobility retired themselves into the
inland, hoping thereby to reap a double commodity: namely first in that they
might be a means to pacify the kingdom on both sides of them, and secondly
that they might be free from the invasions of the Christians, whereof they
should have been in danger, had they remained any longer upon the sea coast.

Of the quality and temperature of the air in Egypt.
THE air of this country is hot and unwholesome: and it raineth here very
seldom or never. And rain is the cause of many diseases in Egypt: for in
rainie weather some of the Egyptians are subject unto dangerous rheumes and
fevers; and others unto a strange kind of swelling in their privy members:
which swelling the Phisicians impute unto salt-cheese and beef, which are the
common diet of the Egyptians. In summer time this country is most extremely
hot, for a remedy of which heat they build in every town certain high
towers, having one door aloft, and another beneath, right over against the
houses, through the tops whereof the wind passing downard, does somewhat cool
and refresh the air: otherwise in regard of the intolerable heat of the sun
it were impossible for any man to live there. Sometime the pestilence is so
Extreme pestilence.
hot among them, especially at Cairo, that almost every day there die twelve
thousand persons thereof. But with the French pox I think that no The French
malady most rife in Egypt.
other country under heaven is so molested, nor that contains so many people
infected therewith. About the beginning of April they reap their corn, and
having reaped it, they presently thrash the same; neither shall you see one
ear of their corn standing till the twentieth of May. The inundation The
increase of Nilus.
or ouerflow of Nilus begins about the midst of June, increasing afterward
for the space of forty days, and for the space of other forty days also
decreasing: during which time all the cities and towns of Egypt are like unto
Islands, which none can come unto but by boats and barges. At this time also
Nilus is very fit to be sailed upon with vessels of burden; some whereof are
so big that they will contain six thousand bushels of corn, and an hundredth
head-cattell: and in these vessels they sail only down the stream: for
against the stream it were impossible for them to pass empty. The Egyptians
according to the increase of Nilus do foresee the plenty or dearth of the
year following: as we will more at large declare, when we come to speak of
the island of Nilus over against the old city, where the inundation of Nilus
is measured. Neither is it our purpose in this place particularly to describe
all the cities of Egypt, because our African writers are of diverse opinions
thereabout; for some would have Egypt to be a part of Africa, but others are of
a contrary mind. Diverse there are that affirm that part of Egypt adjoining
upon the deserts of Barbary, Numidia, and Libya, to belong unto Africa. Some
others ascribe unto Africa all those places that border upon the principal and
maine chanel of Nilus: but as for other places, as namely Manf, Fium, Semenud,
Damanhore, Berelles, Tenesse, and Damiata, they think them not to be situate
in Africa: which opinion I my self also upon many and great reasons take to be
true. Wherefore my purpose is to describe none other cities but such as stand
near the maine and principal channel of Nilus.

Of the city of Bosiri.
THe ancient city of Bosiri built by the Egyptians upon the Mediterran sea,
and standing twenty miles westward from Alexandria, was in times past environed
with most strong walls, and adorned with most beautiful and stately
buildings. At this present it is compassed with many possessions or grounds
bearing dates, whereof no man takes charge nor reapeth any commodity: for
when Alexandria was won by the Christians, the inhabitants abandoned this
city, and fled toward the lake called Buchaira.

Of the great city of Alexandria in Egypt.
THe great city of Alexandria in Egypt founded by Alexander the great, not
without the advice of most famous and skillful architects, upon a beautiful
point of land stretching into the Mediterran sea, and being distant 40. miles
westward of Nilus, was in times past, till it grew subject unto the Mahumetans,
most sumptuously and strongly built, as diverse and sundry authors bear record.
Afterward this city decaying many years together, was deprived of the ancient
renown and honor, and remained in manner desolate, because no merchants of
Greece, nor of any other part of Europe exercised any longer traffic therein.
Howbeit a certain crafty Mahumetan patriarch made the rude people (...), that
by the prophecy of Mahumet most ample indulgences were granted unto all such
as would inhabit the city or guard it for certain days, and would bestow
some alms for a public benefit: by which wily stratagem the city was in
short time (...) with foreign people, which from all places resorted thereunto:
by whom were built many houses near unto the citie-walles, and many colleges
of students, and diverse monasteries for the relief of pilgrims. The city it
self is four square, and has four gates to enter in at: one standing on the
east side toward Nilus, another on the south side toward the lake of
Buchaira, the third westward toward the desert of Barca, and the fourth
toward the Mediterran sea, and the haven; whereat stand the searchers and
customers, which ransacke strangers even to their very shirts: for they
demand custom not only for wares and merchandise, but also some allowance in
the hundred for all kind of money. Near unto the citie-walles there are two
other gates also, being divided asunder by a fair walk, and a most
impregnable castle, which stands upon the strand or wharfe of the port
commonly called Marsa el Bargi, that is to say, the port of the castle: in
which port ride the principal and best ships, namely such as come from Venice,
Genoa, Ragusa, with other ships of Europe. For hither resort the English, the
low Dutch, the Biscaines, the Ancient traffic of the (...) unto Alexandria.
Portugals, and men of all other nations in Europe for traffiques sake. Howbeit
this port is most usually frequented by the (...) of Appulia, Sicilia, and of
Greece, which are Turkish ships; all which resort into this harbor to save
themselves from pirates, and from tempestuous weather. Another port there is
also called Marsa Essil Sela, that is to say, the port of the chain, wherein
the ships of Barbary, namely those of Tunis and of the isle of Gerbi harbor
themselves. The Christians are constrained to pay about the 10. part for all
wares that they bring in and carry out, but the Mahumetans pay but the 20.
part: and whatsoever wares are carried by land to Cairo pay no custom at all.
And at this present that part of the city which is next unto Cairo is the most
famous and best furnished with merchandise brought by merchants from al places
of the world. The other parts of this city are destitute both of civility and
inhabitants: for except one long street, and that part of the city next the
haven which is full of merchants shops, and inhabited by christians, the
residue is void and desolate. Which desolation happened at that time,
Alexandria surprised and sacked by the king of Cyprus.
when Lewis the fourth king of France being restored to liberty by the Sultan,
the king of Cyprus with a fleet partly of Venetians and partly of Frenchmen
suddenly assailed Alexandria, and with great slaughter surprised and (...) the
same. But the Sultan coming with an huge army to rescue Alexandria, so
discouraged the Cyprians, that they burnt down the houses (...) and (...)
themselves to flight. Whereupon the Sultan repairing the (...), and building a
castle near unto the haven, the city grew by (...) and little into that
estate, wherein it stands at this present. In the city of Alexandria there
is a certain high mount fashioned like unto the place called Testaccio at
Rome, whereon, although it has no natural situation, are found diverse earthen
vessels of great antiquity. Upon the top of the said mount stands a turret,
where a certain officer is appointed to watch for such ships as direct their
course toward the city, who for every ship that he gives notice of unto the
customers, receives a certain fee: but if he chances to fall asleep, or to
be out of the way at the arrival of any ship, whereof he certifieth not the
customers, he paieth double for his negligence into the Soldans exchequer.
Under each house of this city there is a great vaulted The water of Nilus
brought by a sluice into Alexandria.
cesterne built upon mighty pillars and arches: whereinto the water of Nilus at
every inundation is conveyed under the walls of the city, by a certain
wonderful and most artificial sluice standing without the city itself. But
these cesternes growing sometime corrupt and foul, are often in summer the
occasion of many diseases and infirmities. This city stands in the midst of
a sandy desert, and is destitute of gardens and vines, neither is the soil
round about it apt to bear corn; so that their corn is brought them from
places forty miles distant. Howbeit near the foresaid sluice, whereby the
water of Nilus is conveyed into the city, are certain little gardens, the
fruits whereof being grown to ripenes are so unwholesome, that they breed
fevers and other noisome diseases among the citizens. Six miles westward of
Alexandria, among certain ancient buildings, stands a pillar of a
wonderful height and thicknes, which the Arabians call Hemadussaoar, that is
to say, the pillar of trees. Of this pillar there is a fable reported, that
Ptolemey one of the kings of Alexandria built it upon an extreme point of land
stretching from the haven, whereby to the end he might defend the city from
the invasion of foreign enemies, and make it invincible, he placed a certain
steele-glasse upon the top thereof, by the hidden virtue of which glass as
many ships as passed by while the glass was uncovered should immediately be
set on fire: but the said glass being broken by the Mahumetans, the secret
virtue thereof vanished, and the great pillar whereon it stood was removed out
of the place. But this is a most ridiculous narration, and fit for babes to
give credit unto. At this present there are amongst the ancient inhabitants of
Alexandria many Christians called Iacobites, being all Certain Christians
called Iacobites.
of them artizans and merchants: these Iacobites have a church of their own to
resort unto, wherein the body of S. Mark the Evangelist lay in times past
interred, which has since been privily stolen by the Venetians, and carried
unto Venice. And the said Iacobites pay tribute unto the governor of Cairo.
Neither is it to be passed over in silence, that in the midst of the ruinous
monuments of Alexandria there remains as yet a certain little house built in
form of a chapel, and containing a sepulcher much honored by the
Mahumetans, wherein they affirm out of the authority of their Alcaron, that
the body of the high prophet and king (as they term him) Alexander the great
lies buried. And thither resort yearly great multitudes of pilgrims from
foreign nations, to adore and reverence the said sepulcher, and oftentimes to
bestow large alms thereupon. Other things worthy the noting I purposely
pass over, least I should seem too tedious unto the reader.

Of the city of Bochin.
THis ancient and small city situate in times past upon the Mediterran sea
shore eight miles eastward of Alexandria, lies at this time utterly desolate,
naught remaining thereof, but certain ruins of the walls. It is now planted
with date-trees, wherewith the poor inhabitants dwelling in base and solitary
cottages sustain themselves. Near unto this city stands a tower upon a
certain dangerous rock, against which many ships of Syria being driven in the
night, do suffer shipwreck, because they cannot in the dark find the right
course to the port of Alexandria. Round about this city there are no fields
but sandy deserts even to the river of Nilus.

Of the city of Rasid called by the Italians Rosetto.
THe city of Rosetto was built by a slave of a certain Mahumetan patriarch
and governor of Egypt, upon the eastern bank of Nilus three miles from the
Mediterran sea, not far from the place where Nilus discharges his streams
into the said sea. It contains most beautiful houses and palaces built upon
the shore of Nilus, and a fair marketplace, environed on all sides with shops
of merchants and artizans, with a stately and sumptuous temple also, having
some gates toward the marketplace, and others toward Nilus, and certain
commodious stairs to descend into the same river. Near unto the temple there
is a certain harbor for the safety of ships and barks of burden that carry
wares unto Cairo: for the city being unwalled resembles a village rather then
a city. About this city stand diverse cottages, wherein they use to thrash
rice with certain wooden instruments, and to make ready each month three
thousand bushels thereof. A little farther from this city there is a place
like unto a village, wherein great store of hackney-mules, and asses are kept
for travelers to ride upon unto Alexandria: neither need the travelers to
guide the said hackneyes, but to let them run their ordinary course, for they
will go directly to the same house or inn where they ought to be left: and
their pace is so good, that they will from sunne-rising to sunne-set carry a
man forty miles: they travel always so near the seashore, that sometimes
the waves thereof beat upon the hackneyes feet. Near unto this city are many
fields of dates, and grounds which yield abundance of rice. The inhabitants
are of a cheerful disposition and courteous to strangers, especially to such
as love to spend their time in iollitie and disport. Here is a stately
bath-stoue also, having fountains both of cold and hot water belonging
thereunto, the John Leo was at Rasid the same time (...) Selim the great Turk
passed that way.
like whereof for stately and commodious building is not to be found in all
Egypt besides. I my self was in this city when Selim the great Turk returned
this way from Alexandria, who with his private and familiar friends beholding
the said bath-stoue, seemed to take great delight and contentment therein.

Of the city called Anthius.
THis city was built upon the eastern bank of Nilus by the Romans, as many
Latin inscriptions engraven in marble, and remaining til this present do bear
sufficient record. It is a beautiful and well-gouerned city, and is furnished
with men of all kind of trades and occupations. The fields adjacent abound
with great plenty of rice, corn, and dates. The inhabitants are of a
cheerful and gentle disposition, and gain much by rice which they transport
unto Cairo.

Of the city of Barnabal.
THis city was founded at the same time when the Christian religion began to
take place in Egypt, upon the eastern bank of Nilus, in a most pleasant and
fruitful place. Here is such abundance of rice, that in the city there are
more then four hundred houses for the thrashing and trimming thereof. But they
that impose this task upon the inhabitants, are men of foreign countries, and
especially of Barbary, which are so lasciuiously and riotously given, that
almost all the harlots of Egypt resort hither unto them, who shave off their
hairs to the very bones without any cizzers or rasors.

Of the city of Thebe.
BY whom this ancient city of Thebe standing upon the western bank of Nilus
should be built, our African chroniclers are of sundry opinions. Some affirm
it to be built by the Egyptians, some by the Romans, and others by the
Grecians, because there are as yet to be seen most ancient monuments, partly
in Latin, partly in Greek, and partly in Egyptian characters. Howbeit at this
present it contains but three hundred families in all, being most of them
very stately and sumptuously built. It abounds with corn, rice, and sugar,
and with certain fruits of a most excellent The fruits called Mose.
taste called Muse. It is also furnished with great store of merchants and
artificers: but the most part of the inhabitants are husbandmen: and if a man
walk the streets in the daytime he shall see none but trim and beautiful
women. The territory adjacent abounds with date-trees which grow so thick,
that a man cannot see the city, till he approaches nigh unto the walls. Here
grow likewise store of grapes, figs, and peaches, which are carried in great
plenty unto Cairo. Without the city there are many ancient monuments, as
namely pillars, inscriptions, and walls of a great thicknes built of excellent
stone, and such a number of ruinous places, that this city seems in times
past to have been very large.

Of the city of Fuoa.
THis city being distant about 45. miles southward from Rosetto, was built by
the Egyptians on the side of Nilus next unto Asia. The streets there of are
narrow, being otherwise a well governed and populous city, and abounding with
all necessary commodities. Here are likewise very fair shops of merchants
and artificers, albeit the inhabitants are much addicted unto their ease and
pleasure. The women of this town live in so great liberty, that they may go
whither they will all the daytime, returning home at night without any
controlement of their husbands. The fields adjacent abound greatly with
dates, and near unto them there is a certain plain which is very, apt for
sugar and corn: howbeit the sugar Sugar.
canes there bring not forth perfect sugar, but in steed thereof a certain
kind of honey like soap, which they use throughout all Egypt, because there is
but little other honey in the whole country.

Of Gezirat Eddeheb, that is to say, the golden Isle.
OVer against the foresaid city the river of Nilus makes an Isle, which being
situate on an high place, brings forth all kind of fruitful trees except
Olives. Upon this Island are many palaces and beautiful buildings, which
cannot be seen through the thick and shadie woods. The soil of this Island
being apt for sugar and rice, is manured by most of the inhabitants, but the
residue are employed about carrying of their merchandise unto Cairo.

Of the city of Mechella.
THis city builte by the Mahumetans in my time upon the eastern shore of
Nilus, and environed with a low wall, contains great store of inhabitants,
the most part of whom being either weauers or husbandmen, are void of all
courtesy and civility. They bring up great store of geese which they sell at
Cairo; and their fields bring forth plenty of corn and flax.

Of the city of Derotte.
WHen Egypt was subject to the Roman empire, this town was built also upon
the eastern bank of Nilus: which as it is very populous, so is it adorned
with stately buildings and large streets, having merchants shops on either side
of them. They have a most beautiful temple, and the citizens are exceeding
rich: for their ground yields such abundance Great abundance of Sugar.
of sugar, that they pay yearly unto the Sultan an hundred thousand pieces of
gold, called in their language Saraffi, for their liberty of making and
refining thereof. In this city stands a certain great house like (...) a
castle, wherein are their presses and caldrons, for the boiling and preparing
of their sugar. Neither did I ever in all my life see so many workmen employed
about that business, whose daily wages (as I understood by a certain public
officer) amounted to two hundred Saraffi.

Of the city called Mechellat Chais.
THe Mahumetans having conquered Egypt, built this city upon an high hill
standing by the western bank of Nilus. The fields of this city being high
ground, are apt for to plant vines upon, because the waters of Nilus cannot
ouerflow them. This town affoordeth new grapes unto Cairo, almost for half
the year long: but the inhabitants are (...) people, being most of them
watermen and bargemen.

A description of the huge and admirable city of Cairo.
CAiro is commonly reputed to be one of the greatest and most famous cities in all the whole world. But leaving the common reports and opinions thereof, I will
exactly describe the form and estate wherein it 1526.
now stands. And that I may begin with the Etymology or deriuation of the
name, Cairo is an Arabian word, corruptly pronounced by the people of Europe:
for the true Arabian word is El Chahira, which signifies an enforcing or
imperious mistress. This city built in ancient times by one Gehoar Chetib a
Dalmatian slave (as I have before signified in the beginning of my discourse)
contains within the walls not above eight thousand families, being inhabited
by noblemen, gentlemen, and merchants that sell wares brought from all other
places. The famous temple of Cairo commonly called Gemih Hashare, that is to
say, the glorious temple, was built also by the foresaid slave, whom we
affirmed to be the founder of the city, and whose surname was Hashare, that is
to say, famous, being given him by the Mahumetan patriarch that was his prince.
This city stands upon a most beautiful plain, near unto a certain
mountain called Mucatun, about two miles distant from Nilus, and is environed
with stately walls, and fortified with iron gates: the principal of which gates
is called Babe Nansre, that is, the gate of victory, which stands eastward
toward the desert of the red sea; and the gate called Beb Zuaila being next
unto the old city and to Nilus; and also Bebel Futuh, that is to say, the gate
of triumph, standing toward the lake and the fields. And albeit Cairo
abounds every where with all kind of merchants and artificers, yet that is
the principal street of the whole city which stretches from the gate of
Nansre to the gate of Zuaila; for in it are builte most stately and admirable
palaces and colleges, and most sumptuous temples, among which is the temple of
Gemith Elhechim the third schismatic Califa of Cairo. Other temples there
are of a marvelous bigness, which to describe in particular, I think it
superfluous. Here are many bath-stoues also very artificially built. Next of
all is the street called Beinel Casrain, containing to the number of
threescore cooks or victualers shops, furnished with vessels of tin: there
are (...) other shops also, wherein are to be sold delicate waters or drinks
made of Delicate drinks made of all kind of fruits.
all kinds of fruits, being for noblemen to drink of, and these waters they
keep most charily in fine vessels, partly of glass, and partly of tin: next
unto these are shops where diverse confections of honey and sugar, unlike unto
the confections of Europe, are to be sold: then follow the fruiterers shops,
who bring outlandish fruits out of Syria, to wit, quinces, pomegranates, and
other fruits which grow not in Egypt: next unto them are the shops of such as
sell eggs, cheese, and pancakes fried with oil. And next of all there is a
street of the principal artificers shops. Beyond which street stands a
college built by the Sultan called Ghauri, who was slain in a battle against
(...) Ghauri.
Selim the great Turk. And next unto the college are diverse ranks of drapers
shops. In the first rank there is most excellent outlandish linen cloth to be
sold, as namely fine cloth of cotton brought from Balabach, and cloth called
Mosall brought from Ninou of a marvelous breadth and finenesse, whereof
noblemen and others of account have shirts made them, and scarffes to wear
upon their Dulipans. Besides these there are certain mercers shops where the
rich stuffes of Italy, namely silk, damask, velvet, cloth of gold, and such
like are to be bought, unto which stuffes I never saw any comparable (to my
remembrance) in Italy, where they use to be made. Next unto the mercers are the
woollen drapers which bring cloth out of Europe, as namely from Florence,
Venice, Flanders, and other places. Next of all there are chamblets to be sold:
and from thence the way lies to the gate of Zuaila, at which gate dwell great
store of artificers. Near unto the said way stands the famous Burse called
Canel Halili, wherein the Persian merchants dwell. It is built very stately in
manner of a kings palace, and is of three stories high: beneath it are certain
convenient rooms whither merchants for the exchange of rich and costly wares
do resort: for here do the principal and most wealthy merchants abide; whose
wares are spices, precious stones, cloth of India, and such like. Next unto the
Burse stands a street of shops where all kind of perfumes, namely ciuet,
musk, amber, and such like are to be sold: which commodities are here in so
great plenty, that if you ask for twenty pounds of musk they will presently
show you an hundred. Next follows the street of the paper-merchants where
you may buie most excellent and smooth paper: here also are to be sold jewels
and precious stones of great value, which the brokers carry from one shop to
another. Then come you to the goldsmiths street being inhabited for the most
part by Jews, who deal for riches of great importance. And next unto the
goldsmiths are certain streets of vpholsters or brokers, who sell the
apparel and rich furniture of noblemen and other citizens at the second hand;
which are not cloakes, coats, napery, or such like, but things of exceeding
price and value: amongst which I my self once saw a beautiful pauilion
embrodered with needle-worke, and beset with pearls that weighed forty
pounds, which pearls being taken out of it were sold for ten thousand
Saraffi. In this city also there is a most stately hospital builte A stately
(...).
by Piperis the first Sultan of the Mamalucks race: the yearly revenues
whereof amount unto two hundred thousand Saraffi. Hither may any impotent or
diseased persons resort, and be well provided of physicians, and of all things
necessary for those that are sick, who if they chance to die here, all their
goods are due unto the hospital.

Of the suburb called Beb Zuaila.
THis great suburb belonging unto Cairo, and containing about twelve thousand
families, begins at the gate of Zuaila, and extends westward almost a mile
and a half; southward it bordereth upon the palace of the Sultan, and
stretches northward for the space of a mile unto the suburb called Beb
Elloch. Here dwell as many noble men and gentlemen almost, as within the city
it self: and the citizens have shops both here and in the city, as likewise
many inhabitants of this suburb maintain families in the city also. Amongst
all the buildings of this suburb the principal is that stately college built
by Sultan Hesen, being of such a wonderful height and great strength, that
oftentimes the colleges have presumed to rebel against the Sultan, and therein
to fortify themselves against the whole city, and to discharge ordinance
against the Soldans castle, which is but half a crosse-bowe shot distant.

Of the suburb called Gemeh Tailon.
THis huge suburb confining eastwarde upon the foresaid suburb of Beb Zuaila
extends westward to certain ruinous places near unto the old city. Before
the foundation of Cairo this suburb was erected by one Tailon, who was subject
unto the Califa of Bagdet, and governor of Egypt, and was a most famous and
prudent man. This Tailon leaving the old city, inhabited this suburb, and
adorned the same with a most admirable palace, and sumptuous temple. Here
dwell also great store of merchants, and artificers, especially such as are
Moors of Barbary.

Of the suburb called Beb Elloch.
THis large suburb being distant from the walls of Cairo about the space of a
mile, and containing almost three thousand families, is inhabited by merchants,
and artizans of diverse sorts as well as the former. Upon a certain large place
of this suburb stands a great palace and a stately college built by a
certain Mammaluck called (...), being counselor unto the Sultan of those
times; and the place it self is called after his name Iazbachia. Hither after
Mahumetan sermons and devotions, the common people of Cairo, together with the
baudes and harlots, do usually resort; and many stage plaiers also, and such as
teach camels, asses, and dogs, to dance: which dancing is a thing very
delightful to behold, and especially that of the ass: who having frisked and
daunced a while, his master comes unto him and tells him with a loud voice,
that the Sultan being about to build some great palace, must use all the asses
of Cairo to carry mortar, stones, and other necessary provision. Then the
ass falling presently These asses are somewhat like to Banks his curtall, that
played his prizes all England over.
to the ground, and lying with his heels upward, makes his belly to swell,
and closes his eyes as if he were stark dead. In the mean while his master
lamenting the misfortune of the ass unto the standers by, earnestly craves
their friendly assistance and liberality to buie him a new ass. And having
gathered of each one as much money as he can get; you are much deceived my
masters (quoth he) that think mine ass to be dead: for the hungry jade
knowing his masters necessity has wrought this slight, to the end he might
get some money to buie him prouender. Then turning about to the ass, he
commands him with all speed to arise: but the ass lies stark still,
though he command and beat him never so much: whereupon turning again to the
people, Be it known (quoth he) unto you all, that the Sultan has published an
edict or proclamation, that to morrow next all the people shall go forth of
the city to behold a triumph; and that all the honorable and beautiful
ladies and gentlewomen shall ride upon the most comely asses, and shall give
them otes to eat, and the crystal water of Nilus to drink. Which words
being scarce ended, the ass suddenly starteth from the ground, prancing and
leaping for joy: then his master prosecuting still his narration; but (says
he) the warden of our street has borrowed this goodly ass of mine for his
deformed and old wife to ride upon. At these words the ass, as though he
were endued with human reason, coucheth his ears, and limpeth with one of
his legs, as if it were quite out of joint. Then says his master; What, sir
Jade, are you so in love with fair women? The ass nodding his head seems to
say, yea. Come on therefore sir (quoth his master) and let us see among all
these pretty damsels, which pleases your fancy best. Whereupon the ass
going about the company, and espying some woman more comely and beautiful then
the rest, walks directly unto her and touches her with his head: and then
the beholders laugh and cry out amain: Lo, the asses paramour, the paramour
of the ass. Whereupon the fellow that showed all this sport leaping upon the
back of his ass rides to some other place. There is also another kind of
charmers or iuglers, which keep certain little birds in Soothsaying birds.
cages made after the fashion of cupboords, which birds will reach unto any man
with their beaks certain skroules containing either his good or evil success
in time to come. And whosoever desires to know his fortune must give the bird
an halfepenie: which she taking in her bill carries into a little box, and
then coming forth again brings the said skroule in her beak. I my self
had once a skroule of ill fortune given me, which although I little regarded,
yet had I more unfortunate success then was contained therein. Also there are
masters of defense playing at all kind of weapons, and others that sing songs
of the battles fought between the Arabians and Egyptians, when as the Arabians
conquered Egypt, with diverse others that sing such toys and ballads unto the
people.

Of the suburb called Eulach
THis large and ancient suburb of Cairo standing two miles distant from the
walls of the city upon the bank of Nilus, contains four thousand
families. Upon the way lying between the suburb and this city, stand diverse
houses, and mils turned about by the strength of beasts. In this suburb dwell
many artificers and merchants, especially such as sell corn, oil, and sugar.
Moreover it is full of stately temples, palaces, and colleges: but the fairest
buildings thereof stand along the river of Nilus, for from thence there is a
most beautiful prospect upon the river, and thither do the vessels and barks
of Nilus resort unto the common stathe of Cairo being situate in this suburb:
at which place you shall see at some times, and especially in the time of
harvest, above 1000. barks. And here the officers appointed to receive custom
for wares brought from Alexandria and Damiata have their abode: albeit but
little tribute be demanded for the said wares, because it was paid before at
the port of their arrival: but those wares that come out of the firm land of
Egypt allow entire custom.

Of the suburb called Charafa.
THE suburb of Carafa built in manner of a town, and standing from mount
Muccatim a stones cast, and from the walls of the city about two miles,
contains almost two thousand households. But at this day the greatest part
thereof lies waste and destroyed. Here are many sepulchers built with high and
stately vaults and arches, and adorned on the inner side with diverse emblemes
and colors, which the fond people adore as the sacred shrines and monuments of
saints, spreading the pauement with sumptuous and rich carpets. Hither every
friday morning resort out of the city it self and the suburbs, great
multitudes of people for devotions sake, who bestow liberal and large alms.

Of the old city called (...).
THis city being the first that was built in Egypt in the time of the
Mahumetans, was founded by Hamre captain general over the forces of Homar the
second Mahumetan patriarch upon the bank of Nilus, (...) a suburb because it
is unwalled, and containing to the number of (...). It is adorned, especially
by the river Nilus, with (...) palaces and houses of noblemen, and also with
the famous temple of (...) being of an huge bigness, and most stately built. It
is also (...) of trades men and (...). And here stands the famous sepulcher
of a woman reputed most holy by the (...), and called by them Saint Nafissa,
which was the daughter of one called (...) being Saint (...).
the son of Husein; the son of (...), who was consin german unto (...). The
said (...) seeing all of her family to be deprived of the (...), left Cufa a
city of Arabia Felix, and came and dwelt in this city; unto whom, partly
because she was of the lineage of (...), and partly for that she lived an
innocent and blameless life, the people after her death ascribed divine
honors, canonizing her for a Saint. Wherefore the schismatic (...) of her
kindred having got the upper hand in Egypt, began to build for Nafissa a most
beautiful shrine or (...), which they adorned also with siluer-lamps, with
carpets of (...), and such like precious ornaments. So great is the renown of
this (...), that there comes no Mahumetan either by sea or land unto Cairo,
but he adoreth this sepulcher, and brings his offering thereunto, as
likewise do all the (...) inhabiting there about: (...) that the yearly
oblations and alms offered at this sepulcher, partly for the (...) of the
poor kinsfolks of Mahumet, and partly for the maintenance of the priests
which keep the said sepulcher, amount unto 100000. (...) which priests by
fained and (...) miracles do daily delude the minds of the simple, to the end
they may the more (...) their blind devotion, and may stir them to greater
liberality. When (...) the great Turk won the city of Cairo, his Ianizaries
rifling this sepulcher, found there the sum of 500000. (...) in ready money,
besides the silver lamps, the chains, and carpets: but (...) took away a
great part of that treasure from them. Such as write the lives of the Mahumetan
saints, making very honorable mention of this Nafissa, say that she was (...)
of the noble family of Heli, and that she was most famous for her virtuous and
chaste life: but the fond people and the (...) of that execrable sepulcher have
devised many fained and superstitious (...). In this suburb also here unto
the river of Nilus is the customers office for such wares as are brought out of
the Province of Sahid. Without the walled city stand the (...) and (...)
sepulchers of the Soldans, built with admirable and huge arches. But in my time
a certain Sultan caused a walk to be built between two high walls from the
gate of the city to the place of the aforesaid sepulchers, and at the ends of
both walls caused two turrets of an exceeding height to be erected, for (...)
and directions (...) such merchants as came thither from the port of mount
(...). About a (...) and an half from the said sepulchers in a certain (...)
called (...) there is a garden containing the only balm-(...), The place
where balm grows.
(for in the whole world besides there is not any other tree that bears true
balm) which balme-tree growing in the midst of a large fountain, and having a
short stock or body, bears leaves like unto vine-leaues, but that they are
not so long: and this tree (they say) would utterly wither and decay, if the
water of the fountain should chance to be deminished. The garden is environed
with a strong wall, where into no man may enter without the special favor and
license of the governor. In the midst of Nilus, over against the old city,
stands the isle called Michias, that is to say, The isle of measure, in which
isle (according to the inundation of Nilus) they have a kind of devise
invented by the ancient Egyptians, whereby they most certainly foresee the
plenty or scarcity of the year following thoroughout all the land of Egypt.
This island is well inhabited and contains about 1500. families; upon the
extreme point or end where of stands a most beautiful palace built in my
remembrance by a Sultan, and a large temple also, which is very pleasant in
regard of the cool streams of Nilus. The manner of measuring the increase of
Nilus.
Upon another side of the Island stands an house alone by it self, in the
midst whereof there is a fouresquare cestern or channel of eighteen cubits
deep, whereinto the water of Nilus is conveyed by a certain sluice under This
pillar is called by Pliny Niloscopium.
the ground. And in the midst of the cestern there is erected a certain
pillar, which is marked and divided into so many cubits as the cesterne it
self contains in depth. And upon the seventeenth of June when Nilus
begins to ouerflow, the water thereof conveyed by the said sluice into the
channel, increases daily, sometimes two, and sometimes three fingers, and
sometimes half a cubite in height. Unto this place there daily resort certain
officers appointed by the Senate, who viewing and observing the increase of
Nilus, declare unto certain children how much it has increased, which
children wearing yellow skarffes upon their heads, do publish the said
increase of Nilus in every street of the city and the suburbs, and receive
gifts every day of the merchants, artificers, and women so long as Nilus
increases. The foresaid devise or experiment of the increase of Nilus is this
that follows. If the water reaches only to the fifteenth cubit of the
foresaid pillar, they hope for a fruitful year following: but if it stays
between the twelfth cubit and the fifteenth, then the increase of the year
will prove but mean: if it rests between the tenth and twelfth cubits,
then is it a sign that corn will be sold ten ducates the bushel. But if
it arises to the eighteenth cubite, there is like to follow great scarcity in
regard of too much moisture: and if the eighteenth cubite be surmounted, all
Egypt is in danger to be swallowed up by the inundation of Nilus. The officers
therefore declare unto the children the height of the river, and the children
publish the same in all streets of the city, charging the people to fear
God, and telling them how high Nilus is increased. And the people being
astonished at the wonderful increase of Nilus, wholly exercise themselves in
prayers, and giving of alms. And thus Nilus continues forty days increasing
and forty days decreasing; all which time corn is sold very dear, because
while the innundation lasts, every man may sell at his own pleasure: but
when the eightith day is once past, the clerk of the market appoints the
price of all victuals, and especially of corn, according as he knows by the
foresaid experiment, that the high and low grounds of Egypt have received
either too little, or too much, or convenient moisture: all which customs and
ceremonies being duly performed, there follows so great a solemnity, and
such a thundering noise of drums and trumpets throughout all Cairo, that a man
would suppose the whole city to be turned vpside down. And then every family
has a barge adorned with rich couerings and carpets, and with torch-light, and
furnished with most dainty meats and confections, wherewith they solace
themselves. The Sultan also with all his nobles and courtiers resorteth unto
that sluice or conduct, which is called the great conduct, and is compassed
round about with a wall, who taking an axe in his hand breaks the said wall,
and so do his nobles and courtiers likewise: insomuch that the same part of
the wall being cast down, which stopped the passage of the water, the river of
Nilus is so swiftly and forcibly carried through that conduct and through all
other conducts and sluices in the city and the suburbs, that Cairo at that time
seems to be another Venice; and then may you row over all places of the land
of Egypt. Seven days and seven nights together the foresaid festival
solemnity continues in Cairo; during which space the merchants and artificers
of the city may (according to the custom of the ancient Egyptians) consume
and spend in torches, perfumes, confections, music, and such like iollities,
al their gains that they have gotten the whole year past. Without the city
of Cairo, near unto the suburb of Beb Zuaila, stands the castle of the
Sultan upon the side of the mountain called Mochattan. This castle is
environed with high and impregnable walls, and contains such stately and
beautiful palaces, that they can hardly be described. Paued they are with
excellent marble, and on the roofes they are gilt and curiously painted, their
windows are adorned with diverse colors, like to the windows in some places
of Europe; and their gates be artificially carved and beautified with gold and
azure. Some of these palaces are for the Sultan and his family; others for the
family of his wife, and the residue for his concubines, his eunuchs, and his
guard. Likewise the Sultan had one palace to keep public feasts in; and
another wherein to give audience unto foreign ambassadors, and to exalt
himself with great pomp and ceremonies: and another also for the governors
and officials of his court. But all these are at this present abolished by
Selim the great Turk.

Of the customs, rites, and fashions of the citizens of Cairo.
THe inhabitants of Cairo are people of a merry, iocund, and cheerful
disposition, such as will promise much, but perform little. They exercise
merchandise and mechanical arts, and yet travel they not out of their own
native soil. Many students there are of the laws, but very few of other
liberal arts and sciences. And albeit their colleges are continually full of
students, yet few of them attain unto perfection. The citizens in winter are
clad in garments of cloth lined with cotton: in summer they wear fine shirts;
over which shirts some put on linen garments curiously wrought with silk, and
others wear garments of chamblet, and upon their heads they carry great
turbants covered with cloth of India. The women go The attire of the women of
Cairo.
costly attired, adorning their foreheads and necks with frontlets and chains
of pearl, and on their heads they wear a sharp and slender bonet of a span
high, being very precious and rich. Gowns they wear of woollen cloth with
streite sleeves, being curiously embrodered with needle-worke, over which they
cast certain veiles of most excellent fine cloth of India. They cover their
heads and faces with a kind of black scarf, through which beholding others,
they cannot be seen themselves. Upon their feet they wear fine shoes and
pantofles, somewhat after the Turkish fashion. These women are so ambitious and
proud, that all of them disdain either to spin or to play the cooks:
wherefore their husbands are constrained to buie victuals ready dressed at the
cooks shops: for very few, except such as have a great family, use to prepare
and dress their victuals in their own houses. Also The liberty of the women
of Cairo.
they vouchsafe great liberty unto their wives: for the good man being gone to
the tavern or victualling-house, his wife tricking up her self in costly
apparel, and being perfumed with sweet and precious odours, walks about the
city to solace her self, and parley with her kinsfolks and friends. They use
to ride upon asses more then horses, which are broken to such a gentle pace,
that they go easier then any ambling horse. These asses they cover with most
costly furniture, and let them out unto women to ride upon, together with a boy
to lead the ass, and certain footmen to run by. In this city, like as in
diverse others, great store of people carry about sundry kinds of victuals to
be sold. Many there are also that sell water, which they carry up and down in
certain leather bags upon the backs of camels: for the city (as I said
before) is two miles distant from Nilus. Others carry about a more fine and
handsome vessel with a cock or spout of brass upon it, having a cup of
Myrrh or crystal in their hands, and these sell water for men to drink, and
for every draught they take a farthing. Others sell young chickens Birds
hatched after a strange manner in Egypt.
and other fowls by measure, which they hatch after a wonderful and strange
manner. They put great numbers of eggs into certain ouens built upon sundry
loftes, which ouens being moderately het, will within seven days convert all
the said eggs into chickens. Their measures are bottomless, which being put
into the basket of the buier, and filled full of chickens, they lift it up, and
so let the chickens fall into the basket. Likewise such as buie those chickens
having kept them a few days, carry them about to sell again. The cooks
shops stand open very late: but the shops of other artificers are shut up
before ten of the clock, who then walk abroad for their solace and recreation
from one suburb to another. The citizens in their common talk use ribald and
filthy speeches: and (that I may pass over the rest in silence) it falls
out often times that the wife will complain of her husband unto the judge,
that he does not his duty nor contenteth her sufficiently in the night season,
whereupon (as it is permitted by the Mahumetan law) the women are divorced and
married unto other husbands. Among the artizans whosoever is the first
inuentour of any new and ingenious devise is The reward of new and ingenious
devises.
clad in a garment of cloth of gold, and carried with a noise of musicians
after him, as it were in triumph from shop to shop, having some money given him
at every place. I my self once saw one carried about with solemn music and
with great pomp and triumph, because he had bound a flea in a chain, which
lay before him on a piece of paper for all men to behold. And if any of them
chance to fall out in the streets, they presently go to buffets, and then a
great number of people come flocking about them to see the conflict, who will
not depart thence, till they have reconciled them. Their most usual food is
buffles flesh and great store of pulse: when they go to dinner or supper, if
their family be little, they lay a short and round table-cloth: but if their
household be great, they spread a large cloth, such as is used in the halles of
princes. Amongst the sundry sects of religion in this city, there is one
sect of the Moors called Chenesia: and this sect lives upon horseflesh, so
that their butchers when they can hear of any halting or lame jade, buy him
forthwith, and set him up a fatting, and having killed him, the said sect of
Chenefia come and buy up his flesh handsmoothe. This sect is rife also among
the Turks, the Mamaluks, and the people of Asia; and albeit the Turks might
freely use the food beforementioned, yet do they not inure themselves
thereunto. In Egypt and Four sever all sects of the Mahumetan religion
permitted in the city of Cairo.
in the city of Cairo there are permitted four several sects, differing
each from other both in canon and civil laws: all which sects have their
original from the religion of Mahumet. For there were in times past four men
of singular learning, who by subtlety and sharpness of wit, found out a way
to make particular deductions out of Mahumets general precepts. So that each
of them would interpret the opinions of Mahumet according to their own fancy,
and would every man apply them to his own proper sense; and therefore they
must needs disagree much between themselves: howbeit growing famous among the
common people in regard of their diverse canons and precepts, they were the
first authors and founders of the said four sects: any one of which
whatsoever Mahumetan professes, cannot renounce the same at his pleasure and
embrace another sect, unless he be a man of deep learning, and knows the
reasons and allegations of both parts. Also there are in the city of Cairo
four principal judges, who give sentence only upon matters of great
importance: under which four are substituted other inferior judges, in
euestreete of the city, which decide petie contentions and brabbles. And if
the parties which are at controversy chance to be of diverse sects, the
plaintiff may summon and convent the defendant before the judge of his street:
howbeit the defendant may, if he will, appeal from him unto the highest judge
of all, being placed over the four principal judges aforesaid, and being
governor of the sect called Essafichia; and this high judge has authority to
dispense withal or to disanul the decrees of the four principal, and of all
the other inferior judges, according as he shall see cause. Whosoever
attempteth ought against the canons and precepts of his own religion, is
severely punished by the judge of the same religion. Moreover, albeit the
priests of the foresaid sects differ very much, both in their forms of
Liturgy or prayer, and also in many other respects, yet do they not for that
diversity of ceremonies hate one another, neither yet do the common people of
sundry sects fall to mutiny and debate: but men indeed of singular learning
and much reading confer oftentimes together, and as in private each man
affirms his own sect to be the best, so likewise do they confirm their
opinions by subtle arguments, neither may any man under pain of grievous
punishment reproach any of the said four ancient doctors. And in very deed
they all of them follow one and the same religion, to wit, that which is
prescribed in the canons of Hashari the principal doctor of the Mahumetans,
which canons go for current over all Africa, and most part of Asia, except in
the dominions of the great Sophi of Persia; who because he rejects the said
canons, is accounted by other Mahumetans an heretic, and a schismatike. But
how such variety of opinions proceeded from the four doctors aforesaid, it
were tedious and troublesome to rehearse: he that is desirous to know more of
this matter, let him read my Commentaries which I have written concerning the
law and religion of Mahumet, according to the doctrine of Malich, who was a
man of profound learning, and was borne at Medina Talnabi, where the body of
Mahumet lies buried: which doctrine of Malich is embraced throughout all
Syria, Egypt, and Arabia: wherewith if any man be delighted, let him peruse my
foresaid Commentaries, and they will satisfy him to the full. Upon
malefactors they inflict most grievous and horrible punishment, especially upon
such as have committed any heinous crime in the court. Thieves they condemn to
the halter. A murder committed trecherously they punish in manner following:
the executioners assistants take the malefactor one by the head, and another by
the feet, and then comes the chief executioner with a two-hand sword, and
cutteth his body in twain, the one part whereof adioining to the head is put
into a fire full of unslaked lime: and it is a An horrible kind of execution.
most strange and dreadful thing to consider, how the same dismembered and
half body will remain alive in the fire for the space of a quarter of an
hour, speaking and making answer unto the standers by. But rebels or seditious
persons they flea alive, stuffing their skins with bran till they resemble man's
shape, which being done, they carry the said stuffed skins upon camels backs
through every street of the city, and there publish the crime of the party
(...): then which punishment I never saw a more dreadful, by reason that the
condemned party lives so long in torment: but if the tormenter once touches
his nauel with the knife, he presently yields The nauel being cut is present
death.
up the ghost: which he may not do until he be commanded by the magistrate
standing by. If any be (...) for debt, not having wherewithal to satisfy the
same, the governor of the prison paieth their creditors, and sends them,
poor (...), bound in chains, and accompanied with certain keepers, daily to
beg alms from street to street, all which alms redoundeth to the
governor, and he allows the said prisoners very bare maintenance to live
upon. Moreover there go crying up and down this Women (...).
city certain aged women, who (though that which they say in the streets
cannot be understood) are notwithstanding inioined by their office to
circumcise women according to the prescript of Mahumet: which ceremony is
observed in Egypt and Syria.

Of the manner of creating the Sultan, and of the orders, degrees, and offices
in his court.
THe dignity and power of the Sultan was in times past exceeding great; but
Selim the great Turk in the year of Christ (if I be not deceived) 1517.
utterly abolished the said dignity, and changed all the customs and laws of
the Sultan. And because it has been my hap John Leo was thrice in Egypt
thrice to travel into Egypt since the said wonderful alteration befell, I
suppose it will not be much beside my purpose, if I set down in this place
such particulars as I know to be most certain true concerning the court of the
Sultan. Unto this high dignity was wont to be chosen some one of The (...).
the most noble Mamaluks. These Mamaluks being all Christians at the first, and
stolen in their childhoode by the Tartars out of the province of Circassia
which bordereth upon the Euxin sea, and being sold at Caffa a town of Taurica
Chersonesus, were brought from thence by certain merchants unto the city of
Cairo, and were there bought by the Sultan; who constraining them forthwith to
abjure and renounce their baptism, caused them to be instructed in the Arabian
and Turkish languages, and to be trained up in military discipline, to the end
they might ascend from one degree of honor to another, till at last they were
advanced unto the high dignity of the Sultan. But this custom whereby it was
enacted, that the Sultan should be chosen out of the number of such as were
Mamaluks and slaves by their condition, began about 250. years since, whenas
the family of the valiant Saladin (whose name was so terrible unto Christians)
being supported but by a few of the kindred, fell to utter decay and ruin. At
the same time when the last king of Jerusalem was determined to sack the city
of Cairo, which also in regard of the sloth and cowardice of the Mahumetan
Califa then reigning over it, intended to make it self tributary unto the same
king, the judges and lawyers of the city with the consent of the Califa, sent
for a certain prince of Asia called Azedudin, of the nation of Curdu, (the
people whereof live in tents like the Arabians) which Azedudin together with
his son Saladin, came with an army of fifty thousand horsemen. And albeit
Saladin was inferior in age unto his father, yet in regard of his redoubted
valor, and singular knowledge in military affairs, they created him general
of the field, and gave him free liberty to bestow all the tributes and
revenues of Egypt, as himself should think expedient. And so marching at
length against the Christians, he got the victory of them without any
bloodshed, and drove them out of Jerusalem and out of all Syria. Then Saladin
returning back with triumph unto Cairo, had an intent to usurp the government
thereof: where upon having slain the Califa his guard (who bare principal
swaie over the Egyptians) he procured the death also of the Califa himself,
being thus bereft of his guard, with a poisoned cup, and then forthwith
submitted himself unto the patronage of the Califa of Bagdet, who was the true
and lawful Mahumetan prelate of Cairo. Thus the jurisdiction of the Califas of
Cairo (who had continued lords of that city by perpetual succession for the
space of two hundred and thirty years) surceased, and returned again unto the
Califa of Bagdet, who was the true and lawful governor thereof. And so the
schismatic Califas and patriarks being suppressed, there grew a contention
between Saladin and the Sultan of Bagdet, and Saladin made himself a
sovereign of Cairo, because the said Sultan of Bagdet being in times past
prince of the provinces of Mazandran and Euarizin situate upon the river of
Ganges, and being borne in a certain country of Asia, laid claim
notwithstanding unto the dominion of Cairo, and intending to wage war against
Saladine, he was restrained by the Tartars of Corasan, who made invasions and
inrodes upon him. Saladin on the other side fearing least the Christians in
revenge of the foresaid injury would make an expedition into Syria, and
considering that his forces were partly slain in the former wars, and partly
consumed by pestilence, except a few which remained for the defense and
sauegard of his kingdom, began to employ himself (...) buying of slaves that
came The original of the Mamaluks.
from Circassia, whom the king of Armenia by those days took and sent unto
Cairo to be sold: which slaves he caused to abjure the Christian faith and to
be trained up in feats of war and in the Turkish language, as being the
proper language of Saladin himself: and so the said slaves within a while
increased so exceedingly both in valor and number, that they became not only
valiant soldiers and skillful commanders, but also governors of the whole
kingdom. After the decease of Saladin, the dominion remained unto his family
150. years, and all his successors observed the custom of buying slaves of
Circassia: but the family of Saladin growing at length to decay, the slaves by
a general consent elected one Piperis a valiant Mamaluk of their own company
to be their sovereign Lord and Sultan: which custom they afterward so
inuiolably kept, that not the Soldans own son nor any other Mamaluk could
attain unto that high dignity, unless first he had been a Christian, and
had abiured his faith, and had learned also exactly to speak the Circassian
and Turkish languages. Insomuch that many Soldans sent their sons in their
childhood into Circassia, that by learning the language and fashions of the
country they might prove in process of time fit to bear sovereign
authority; but by the dissension of the Mamalukes they were always defeated
of their purpose. And thus much briefly concerning the government of the
Mamalukes, and of their Princes, called even till this present by a word of
their own mother-(...) by the names of Soldans: let us now speak of the
honorable degrees and dignities inferior to the Soldanship.

Of the principal Peer next under the Sultan called Eddaguadare.
THis man being in dignity second unto the Sultan, and being, as it were, his
viceroy or lieutenant, had authority to place or displace any magistrates or
officers; and maintained a family almost as great as the family of the Sultan
himself.

Of the Soldans officer called Amir Cabir.
THis man having the third place of honor was Lord general over the Soldans
military forces; who was by office bound to leauie armies against the foreign
enemy, especially against the next Arabians, and to furnish the castles and
cities with (...) garrisons: and also had authority to dispend the Soldans
treasure upon such necessary affairs as he thought good.

Of Nai Bessan.
THE fourth in dignity after the Sultan called Nai Bessan, being the Sultan
his lieutenant in Syria, and gathering up all the tributes of Assiria, bestowed
them at his own discretion, and yet the Sultan himself was to place garrisons
in the castles and forts of those provinces. This Nai Bessan was bound yearly
to pay certain thousands of Saraffi unto the Sultan.

Of the Ostadar.
THE fifth magistrate called the Ostadar, was the great master or steward of the
palace; whose duty was to provide apparel for the Sultan, with victuals and
other necessaries for his whole family. And unto this dignity the Sultan used
to advance some one of his most ancient, honorable, and virtuous nobles, under
whose tuition himself had in times past been trained up.

Of the Amiri Achor.
THE sixth called the Amiri Achor, was master of the horse and camels; and
distributed them unto each man in court, according to his degree.

Of the Amiralf.
THE seventh office was performed by certain principal Mamalukes, being like
unto the Colonels of Europe: every of whom was captain of a thousand
inferior Mamaluks; and their office was to conduct the Soldans forces against
the enemy, and to take charge of his armor.

Of the Amirmia.
THE eight degree of honor was allotted unto certain centurions over the
Mamalukes; who were continually to attend upon the Sultan, either when he road
any whither, or when he exercised himself in arms.

Of the Chazendare.
THE ninth person was the treasurer, who made an account unto the Sultan of all
the tributes and customs of his kingdom, disbursing money for the daily and
necessary expenses of the Soldans household, and laying up the rest in the
Soldans castle.

Of the Amirsileh.
THE tenth called the Amirsileh had the armor of the Sultan committed to his
charge, which being contained in a great armorie was to be scoured, furbushed,
and renewed at his direction, for which purpose he had sundry Mamaluks placed
under him.

Of the Testecana.
THe eleventh called the Testecana was master of the Soldans wardrobe, and
took charge of all such robes and apparel as were delivered unto him by the
Ostadar or high steward of the household; which robes he distributed according
to the appointment of the Sultan; for whomsoever the Sultan promoted unto any
dignity, him he apparelled also. All the said garments were of cloth of gold,
of velvet, or of silk: and whither soever the Testecana went, he was attended
upon by a great number of Mamalukes. Certain other officers there were also:
as namely the Serbedare, whose duty was to provide delicate drink for the
Sultan, and to have always in a readiness most excellent compound waters
tempered both with sugar and with spices. Moreover there were other officers
called There is such an officer in the court of England called, The Master of
the Reuells.
Farrasin, that is, diverse chamberlaines, who furnished the place of the Sultan
with rich hangings and carpets, and made provision also of torches and tapers
of wax mixed with amber, which served both to show light, and to yield most
fragrant and odoriferous smells. Others there were also called Sebabathia, to
wit, the footmen of the Sultan: and certain others called Taburchania, which
were the Soldans Halbardiers, who attended upon his person when he road forth,
or fate in public audience. Adauia were those that took charge of the
Soldans carriages whithersoeuer he traveled: out of which number there was a
master-hangman or executioner chosen; and so often as any malefactors were to
be punished, all his companions stood by him to learn his bloody occupation,
namely of flaying and skinning men alive, and of putting them to the torture,
to make them confess their crimes. And Esuha were the Soldans foote-postes
that carried letters from Cairo into Syria, and traveled on foot threescore
miles a day, because that between Egypt and Syria there is neither mountainous
nor mirie way, but a continual sandy plain: howbeit such as carried letters
of serious and weighty matters road upon camels.

Of the Soldans military forces.
OF soldiers or martial men the Sultan had four degrees. The first called
Caschia were certain horsemen, and were most valiant and expert warriors: out
of which number the Sultan chose governors over his cities and castles. Some
of these were allowed their stipend in ready money out of the Soldans
treasury, and others out of the tributes of towns and castles. The second
called Eseifia were a company of footmen, bearing no arms but swords only,
who likewise had their pay allowed them out of the Soldans treasury. The third
called Charanisa being voluntaries or such as served gratis, had no other pay
but only their victuals allowed them: but when any Mamaluke deceased that was
well provided for, some one of them supplied his room. The fourth and last of
al called Galeb, were the young and new-come Mamaluks, being as yet ignorant of
the Turkish and Egyptian languages, and such as had showed no experiment of
their valor.

Of certain other great officers and magistrates in the Soldans commonwealth.
Of the magistrate called the Nadheasse.
HE was as it were the Soldans chief receiver; for all the tributes and
customs of the whole kingdom came through his hands, and were paid from him
unto the treasurer. Also he was customer of Cairo, by which office he gained
infinite sums of money: neither could any man attain unto this office,
unless he first paid unto the Sultan an hundred thousand Saraffi, which he
recovered again within six months following.

Of the Chetebeessere.
THis man being the Soldans secretary, and writing letters, and making answer
on the Soldans behalf, did (besides his secretariship) take notice and account
of all the land-tributes in Egypt, and received the particular sums from the
collectors thereof.

Of the Muachih.
THis was a secretary also, but inferior to the former, and yet more trusty
unto the Sultan. His office was to reuiew the letters and briefes penned by the
former, and to examine whether they were agreeable unto the Soldans mind, and
also in the name of the Sultan to subscribe unto them. But the other has so
many cunning and expert scribes about him, that the Muachih seldom cancelleth
any of his writings.

Of the Mutesib.
THis man's office was to set a price upon corn and all other victuals; which
price partly according to the increase of Nilus, and partly also according to
the resort of ships and other vessels out of the provinces of Errif and Sahid
he either diminished or inhaunsed, and upon the offenders imposed such
penalties as the Sultan thought good to appoint. Being at Cairo, I understood
that the said Mutesib got daily by his office about a thousand Saraffi; having
his ministers and substitutes not only in Cairo, but in all other cities and
places of Egypt.

Of the Amir el Cheggi.
THe office of the Amir el Cheggi being of no less charge, then dignity, was
imposed by the Sultan upon one of his most sufficient and wealthy Mamaluks:
unto whom was committed the conduct of the carouan, which went every year from
Cairo to (...). Which duty he could not perform without great expenses of his
own purse, for being guarded with a company of Mamalukes, he must travel with
maiesticall pomp and costly diet, expecting no recompense for his exceeding
charges either at the hands of the Sultan, or of the passengers which he
conducted. Other offices and dignities there are, which I think needless to
rehearse.

Of the city of Geza.
THe city of Geza being situate upon the bank of Nilus, over against the old
city before mentioned, and being separated therefrom by the foresaid Island
of Nilus, is a very populus and civil place, and is adorned with many
sumptuous palaces built by the Mamaluks, whither they use to retire themselves
out of the throng and multitude of Cairo. Here are likewise great store of
artificers and merchants, especially such as buie cattle brought from the
mountains of Barca, the drouers of which cattle being Arabians, do sell their
ware in this city unto the merchants and butchers of Cairo, to the end they
may avoid the trouble of passing over the river. The temple and other
principal buildings of this city stand upon the shore of Nilus. On all sides
of the city there are gardens and grounds of dates. Such as come hither in the
morning (...) Cairo to buy (...) sell, use not to return home again till the
evening. This way they travel The (...) The city of (...).
over a sandy desert unto the Pyramides, and sepulchers of the ancient
Egyptian kings, in which place they affirm the stately city of Memphis to
have stood in times past. And albeit the way thither be very troublesome in
regard of the manifold lakes and pits made by the inundation of Nilus, yet by
the direction of a trusty and expert guide it may easily be travailed.

Of the town of Muhallaca.
THis little town built upon the bank of Nilus, by the ancient Egyptians, and
standing three miles from the old city, has a most beautiful temple situate
upon the shore of Nilus, and diverse other stately buildings therein. It
abounds with dates and with certain fruits called Egyptian (...).
Egyptian figs; and the inhabitants use the very same rites and customs that
are observed by the citizens of Cairo.

Of the city of Chanca.
THe great city of Chanca situate about six miles from Cairo, at the very
entrance of the desert lying in the way to mount Sinai, is replenished with
most stately houses, temples, and colleges. All the fields between Cairo and
this city abound with great plenty of dates: but from Chanca to mount Sinai,
which is an hundred and forty miles, there are no places of habitation at all.
The inhabitants are but of mean wealth: for when any carouan is to pass into
Syria, hither resort a company of people from Cairo, to provide things
necessary for their journey, because the villages adioining yield (...) but
dates. Through this city lie two maine road-(...), the one leading to (...),
and the other to Arabia. This city has (...) other water but such as
remains in certain channels after the inundation of Nilus; which channels
being broken, the water runs forth into the plains, and there makes a
number of small lakes, from whence it is conueighed back by certain sluices
into the cesterns of the city.

Of the city of Muhaisira.
THis little city built upon the river of Nilus, miles eastward of Cairo,
abounds greatly with the grain or seed called Sesama, and contains Store
of the grain called Sesama.
sundry milles to grind oil out of the same seed. The inhabitants are most
of them husbandmen, except a few that exercise trade of merchandise.

Of the town of Benisuaif.
THis town being situate on the west side of Nilus, is distant from Cairo 120.
miles. The plains adjacent abound exceedingly with flax and hemp, which is
so excellent, that it is carried from Most excellent hemp.
thence as far as Tunis in Barbary. And this town furnishes all Egypt with
flax, whereof they make very fine and strong cloth. The fields of the same are
continually worn and diminished, and especially at this present, by the
inundation of Nilus, for now their date-groundes are half consumed. The
inhabitants for the most part are employed about their flax. And beyond
Crocodiles.
this town there are found Crocodiles that will eat man's flesh, as we will
declare in our history of living creatures.

Of the city of Munia.
Upon the same side of Nilus stands the fair city of Munia, which was built
in the time of the Mahumetans by one Chasib a lieutenant and courtier of the
Califa of Bagdet, upon an high place. Here are most excellent grapes, and
abundance of all kind of fruit, which albeit they are carried to Cairo, yet
can they not come thither fresh and new, by reason that this city is distant
from Cairo an hundred and fower-score miles. It is adorned with most stately
temples and other buildings: and here are to be seen at this present sundry
ruins of the ancient Egyptian buildings. The inhabitants are rich, for they
travail for their gain as far as Gaoga, a kingdom of the land of Negros.

Of the city of El Fium.
THis ancient city was founded by one of the Pharaos upon a little branch of
Nilus, and on a high ground, at the same time when the Israelites departed out
of Egypt, whom the said Pharao greatly oppressed with making of brick, and
with other servile occupations. In this city The place where Joseph was buried.
they say that Joseph the son of Jacob was buried, and that his bones were
dug up by Moses and the Israelites when they departed. Fruits here grow
great plenty, and especially olives, which are good to eat, but unprofitable
to make oil of. It is a well governed and populous city, and contains many
artificers especially weauers.

Of the city of Manf Loath.
THis great and ancient city was built by the Egyptians, destroyed by the
Romans, and reedified by the Mahumetans, but not in so stately manner as it
was first built. At this present there are found certain huge and high pillars
and porches, whereon are verses engraven in the Egyptian tongue. Near unto
Nilus stand the ruins of a stately building, which seems to have been a
temple in times past, among which ruins the citizens find sometimes coin of
silver, sometimes of gold, and sometimes of lead, having on the one side hiely
graphick notes, and on the other side the pictures of ancient kings. The fields
adjacent being very fruitful, are extremely scorched by the heat of the
sun, and much haunted with Crocodiles, which was the occasion (as some
think) why the Romans abandoned this city. The inhabitants are men of
indifferent wealth, for they exercise traffike in the land of Negros.

Of the city of Azioth.
THis ancient city founded by the Egyptians upon the bank of Nilus two hundred
and fifty miles from Cairo, is most admirable in regard of the hugenes, and of
the variety of old buildings and of epitaphes engraven in Egyptian letters;
although at this present the greatest part thereof lies desolate. When the
Mahumetans were first Lords of this city it was inhabited by honorable
personages, and continues as yet famous in regard of the nobility and great
wealth of the citizens. There are in this city almost an hundred families of
christians, and three or four churches still remaining: and without the city
stands a monastery containing mo then an hundred monks, who eat neither
flesh nor fish, but only herbs, bread, and olives. And yet have they dainty
cates without any fat among them. This monastery is very rich, and gives
three days entertainment to all strangers that resort thither, for the
welcomming of whom they bring up great store of doves, of chickens, and of such
like commodities.

Of the city of Ichmin.
IChmin being the most ancient city in all Egypt, was built by Ichmin the son
of It is otherwise read in the x. chap. of Genesis, verse 6.
Misraim, the son of Chus, which was the son of Dubium.
Hen, upon the bank of Nilus next unto Asia, and three hundred miles eastwarde
from Cairo. This city the Mahumetans, when they first began to usurp over
Egypt, so wasted and destroyed, for certain causes mentioned in histories,
that besides the foundations and rubbish they left naught remaining: for,
transporting the pillars and principal stones unto the other side of Nilus,
they built thereof the city called Munsia, even as we will now declare.

Of the city of Munsia.
MVnsia therefore, founded on the otherside of Nilus by the lieutenant of a
certain Califa, has no show of comelines or beauty, by reason that all the
streets are so narrow. And in sommer-time there rises so much dust from the
ground, that a man can hardly walk the streets. It abounds notwithstanding
with corn and cattle. It was once subject unto a certain African prince of
Barbary, whose name was Haoara, and whose predecessors were princes and
governors of Haoara. Which city (they say) was given him in regard of a
singular benefit which he did unto the foresaid Dalmatian slave that founded
Cairo: howbeit I cannot be persuaded that the government remained so long a
time unto that family. But in our time Soliman the ninth Turkish emperor
deprived them of the same government.

Of the monastery called Georgia.
THis was in times past a famous monastery of Christians, called after the
name of Saint George, and being six miles distant from Munsia. It was
inhabited by more then two hundred monks, who enjoying large territories,
possessions and revenues, showed themselves courteous and beneficial unto
strangers; and the overplus of their yearly revenues was sent unto the
patriarch of Cairo, who caused the same to be distributed amongst poor
Christians: but about an hundred years ago, all the monks of this monastery
died of a pestilence, which spread it self over all the land of Egypt.
Whereupon the prince of Munsia compassed the said monastery with a wall, and
erected diverse houses for artificers and merchants to dwell in. And being
allured by the pleasant gardens situate amidst the beautiful hills, he himself
went thither to inhabit: but the patriarch of the Iacobites making his moan
unto the Sultan, the Sultan caused another monastery to be built in the same
place, where in times past the old city stood; and assigned so much allowance
thereunto, as might maintain thirty monks.

Of the city of Chian.
THis little city of Chian was built in times past near unto Nilus by the
Mahumetans, which notwithstanding is not now inhabited by them but by the
christians called Iacobites, who employ themselves either in husbandry, or in
bringing up of chickens, geese, and doves. There remain as yet certain
monasteries of Christians, that give entertainment to strangers. But Mahumetans
(besides the governor and his family) there are none at all.

Of the city of Barbanda.
BArbanda founded by the Egyptians upon Nilus, about fowerhundred miles from
Cairo, was laid so waste by the Romans, that nothing but the ruins thereof
remained, most of which ruins were carried unto Asna, whereof we will
forthwith entreat. Amongst the said ruins are to be found many pieces of
gold and silver coin, and sundry fragments of Smaragds or emralds. Emralds.


Of the city of Cana.
THe ancient city of Cana built by the Egyptians upon the bank of Antonio
Galuano makes large mention of this city.
Nilus over against Barbanda, and environed with walls of sunne-dried brick, is
inhabited with people of base condition, applying themselves unto husbandry,
by which means the city abounds with corn. Hither are the merchandise
brought against the stream of Nilus, which are sent from Cairo to Mecca: for
the distance from hence over the wilderness unto the Red sea, is at least 120.
miles, all which way there is no water at all to befounde. And at the haven of
Chossir upon the shore of the red sea are The haven of Chossir.
diverse cottages whereinto the said merchandises are unladen. And over against
Chossir on the side of Asia lies Iambuh another haven of the red sea, whereat
trauailers going on pilgrimage to see the tomb of Mahumet at Medina, must make
their rendezuous or general meeting. Morecuer Chana furnishes Medina and
Mecca with corn, in which places they suffer great and continual scarcity.

Of the city of Asna.
ASna in times past was called Siene: which name was afterward changed by the
Arabians, in whose language the word Siene signifies a filthy or unclean
thing. Wherefore they called it Asna, that is to say, fair and beautiful,
because it stands in a pleasant situation upon the western bank of Nilus:
which city though it was brought almost to desolation by the Romans, yet was
it so repaired again in the Mahumetans time, that the inhabitants grew
exceeding rich, both in corn, cattle, and money: for they transport their
commodities partly up the stream of Nilus, and partly over the deserts, into
the kingdom of Nubia. Round about this city there are to be seen diverse huge
buildings, and admirable sepulchers, together with sundry epitaphes engraven
both in Egyptian and Latin Letters.

Of the city of Assuan.
THe great, ancient, and populous city of Assuan was built by the Egyptians
upon the river of Nilus, about fower-score miles eastward from Asna. The soil
adjacent is most apt and fruitful for corn. And the citizens are exceedingly
addicted unto the trade of merchandise, because they dwell so near unto the
kingdom of Nubia, upon the confines whereof stands their city: beyond which
city Nilus dispersing himself over the plains through many small lakes
becomes innauigable. Also the said city stands near unto that desert
over which they travel unto the port of Suachen upon the red sea, and it
adioineth likewise upon the frontiers of Suachen.
Ethiopia. And here in summer time the inhabitants are extremely scorched with
the heat of the sun, being of a swart or brown color, and being mingled
with the people of Nubia and Ethiopia. Here are to be seen also many
buildings of the ancient Egyptians, and most high towers, which they call in
the language of that country Barba. Beyond this place there is neither city
nor habitation of any account, besides a few villages of black people, whose
speech is compounded of the Arabian, Egyptian, and Ethiopian languages. These
being subject unto the people called Bugiha are those which in (...) time were
called Troglodytae.
Bugiha, live in the fields after the Arabian manner, being free from the
Soldans jurisdiction, for there his dominions are limited.

And thus much concerning the principal cities standing along the maine chanel
of Nilus: Some whereof I saw, others I entered into, and passed by the residue:
but I had most certain intelligence of them all, either by the inhabitants
themselves, or by the mariners which carried me by water from Cairo to Assuan,
with whom returning back unto Chana, I traveled thence over the desert unto
the red sea, over which sea I crossed unto Iambuth, and Ziddem two hauen-townes
of Arabia deserta, of which two towns, because they belong unto Asia, I will
not here discourse, least I should seem to transgress the limits of Africa.
But if it shall please god to The great travels of John Leo.
vouchsafe me longer life, I purpose to describe all the regions of Asia which
I have traveled; to wit Arabia deserta, Arabia felix, Arabia Petrea, the Asian
part of Egypt, Armenia, and some part of Tartaria; all which countries I saw
and passed through in the time of my youth. Likewise I will set down my last
voiages from Fez to Constantinople, from Constantinople to Egypt, and from
thence into Italy, in which Journey I saw diverse and sundry Islands. All which
my travels I mean (by gods assistance) being returned forth of Europe into
mine own country, particularly to describe; decyphering first the regions of
Europe and Asia which I have seen, and thereunto annexing this my discourse of
Africa; to the end that I may promote the endeavors of such as are desirous to
know the state of foreign countries.

JOHN LEO HIS NINTH BOOK OF the History of Africa, and of the memorable
things therein contained.
Wherein he entreats of the principal rivers, and of the strange living
creatures, plants, and minerals of the same country.
Of the river of Tensist.
THe river of Or (...).
Tensist (that we may begin in Barbary from the western part of Africa)
springing forth of the mountains of Atlas which are next unto the city of
Hanimmei, to wit, about the east part of the territory of Maroco, and
continuing his course northwarde over the plains, receives many other rivers
thereinto, and at Azafi a town of Duccala discharges his streams into the
maine Ocean. Into this mighty river of Tensist fall two other great rivers,
called Siffelmel and Niffis; the one whereof springs out of Hanteta a
mountain of Maroco; and the other issuing forth of mount Atlas near unto
Maroco, and winding it self along the plains of that region, disemboqueth at
last into the said mighty river. And albeit the river Tensist be for the most
part of an exceeding depth, yet may it in diverse places be waded over, where
the water reaches unto the stirrups of an horseman: but a footeman must
strippe himself naked to pass over the same. Near unto Maroco there is a
bridge of fifteen arches builte by king Mansor upon this river: which bridge
is accounted one of the most curious buildings in all Africa. Three of the
said arches were demolished by Abu Dubus the last king and patriarch of
Maroco, to the end he might hinder the passage of Jacob the first Fezsan king
of the Marin family: but this attempt of his was to none effect, as it
sufficiently appeered by the success thereof.

Of the two rivers called Teseuhin.
THe two rivers called by this one name, springing each of them, three miles
asunder, out of mount Gugideme, and running through the plains of Hascora,
exonerate themselves into the river called Lebich. These two rivers (as I have
said) have one only name, being either of them (according to the African
language) called Teseut in the singular number, and in the plural Teseuhin,
which signifies listes or borders.

Of Quadelhabid, that is to say, the river of servants.
QVadelhabid taking his original among the high and chill mountains of Atlas,
and runniug through certain narrow and uneven valleis, holds on his course
by the confines of Hascora and Tedle, and then stretching northward over a
certain plain, falls at length into the river of Ommirabih. In May when
the snow melts, this river increases to some bigness.

Of the river of Ommirabih.
THe mighty river of Ommirabih issuing also forth of the lofty mountains of
Atlas where the province of Tedle bordereth upon the kingdom of Fez, passes
through certain plains called Adachsun, and being afterward streitned among
the narrow valleis, it runs under a stately bridge built by Ibulhasen the
fourth king of the Marin family: from thence trending southward it waters the
plains situate between the regions of Duccala and Temesne, and lastly
disburdeneth it self under the walls of Azamor into the maine Ocean. About the
end of May they take great store of fishes in this river called by the
Italians Lasche, wherewith all Azamur being sufficiently stored, they salt the
said fishes and send many ships full of them into Portugal.

Of the river of Buregrag.
BVregrag arising out of one of the mountains of Atlas, and continuing his
course by sundry valleys, woods, and hills, proceeds on over a certain
plain, and near unto the towns of Sala and Rabat, being the utmost frontiers
of the Fezsan kingdom, it falls into the Ocean sea. Neither have the two
foresaid towns any other port or harbor, but within the mouth of the said
river only, which is so difficult to enter, that unless the pilote be
thoroughly acquainted with the place, he is in great hazard of running his ship
upon the shoulds: which shoulds serve instead of bulwarks to defend either
town from the fleets of the Christians.

Of the river of Baht.
THis river issuing forth of mount Atlas, stretches northward by the woods
and mountains, and running among certain little hills, disperseth it self upon
the plains of the province of Azgar, and from thence it falls into certain
fens, lakes, and moist valleies, where they take great store of eeles, and of
the foresaid fishes called Lasche. The inhabitants live upon cattle, and
fishing, and by reason of the plenty of milk, fish, and butter which they
eat, they are much subject unto the disease called in Italian Morphia. This
river may continually be waded over, except it be much increased by abundance
of rain and melted snow.

Of the river of Subu.
THe river of (...) begins upon mount Selilgo, standing in Cheuz, a province
of the Fezsan kingdom. And it springs out of a great fountain in the midst
of a vaste and solitary wood, and runs by diverse mountains and hills: from
whence extending upon the plains, it approaches within six miles of Fez,
divides in sunder the regions of Habat and Azgar, and at length about Mahmora,
a place not far from Sala, exonerateth it self into the Ocean sea. Into this
river fall diverse others, two of which, namely Guarga and Aodor, spring out of
the mountanes of Gumera, and the residue from the mountains of the territory
of Teza. And although Subu be a large river, yet may it in sundry places be
waded over, except in winter and the spring, when as it cannot be crossed but
in certain dangerous and small boats. The same river also which runs
through the city of Fez called in the language of that country, The river of
perles, enters into the foresaid river of Subu. This river of Subu abounds
exceedingly with fish, and especially with the foresaid fishes called Lasche,
which are there of no reckoning. The mouth thereof near unto the Ocean sea,
being very deep and broad, is nauigable for ships of great burden, as the
Portugals and Spaniards have found by often experience: and were not the
inhabitants so slothful, it might usually and commodiously be sailed upon:
yea, if the corn which is carried by the merchants of Fez over land through
the region of Azgar, were conueighed by water up this river, it might be sold
at Fez for half the price.

Of the river of Luccus.
LVccus issuing forth of the mountains of Gumera, and stretching westward over
the plains of Habat and Azgar, passes by the city of Casar Elcabir, and near
unto Harais a city of Azgar upon the borders of Habat, discharges it self
into the main-Ocean: in the mouth of this river lies the haven of the foresaid
city, being very difficult to enter.

Of the river of Mulullo.
MVlullo arising out of mount Atlas between the cities of Teza, and Dubdu,
runs through the desert and barren plains of Terrest and Tafrata, and at
length exonerateth it self into the river Muluia.

Of the river of Muluua.
THe famous river of Or Muluia.
Muluua taking his original from that part of Atlas which is situate in the
region of Cheuz, about five and twenty miles from the city of Gherseluin, and
passing over dishabited and drieplaines, as also amidst the deserts of Angad
and of Garet, and by the foot of mount Beni Ieznaten, falls not far from
the town of Chasasa into the Mediterran sea. This river a man may wade over
always in summer, in the mouth whereof are caught most excellent fishes.

Of the river of Za.
THis river springing out of mount Atlas runs through a certain plain of
the desert of Angad, whereas the kingdoms of Fez and of Telensin confine one
upon an other: which though it be exceeding deep, yet never did I see the
water thereof thick or muddie. It abounds with fishes, but the inhabitants
being destitute of fit instruments, can not take them, neither indeed be the
waters convenient to fish upon, because they are so clear.

Of the river of Tefne.
THe small river of Tefne issuing forth of the mountains bordering upon
Numidia, and continuing a northerly course over the desert of Angad, falls
into the Mediterran sea, about fifteen miles from Telensin, and it affourdeth
naught but a few small fishes.

Of the river Mina.
THis river flowing out of certain mountains near unto Tegdent, passes
through the fields of the city of Batha, and thence runs northerly into
the Mediterran sea.

Of the river Selef.
THis great river falling from the mountains of Guanseris, and descending
through barren plains to the confines of the kingdoms of Telensin and Tenez,
separateth Mezagran from Mustuganin, and then enters into the Mediterran sea:
in the mouth of which river are caught very excellent fishes of diverse kinds.

Of the river Sefsaia.
THis small river beginning from mount Atlas, passes over the plain of
Mettegia near unto Alger, and not far from the ancient town of Temendefust
discharges it self into the Mediterran sea.

Of that which is called The great river.
THis river arises out of the mountains adioining upon the region of Zeb,
from whence running along, it disemboqueth into the Mediterran sea about three
miles from Bugia. It ouerfloweth not but in rainie and snowie weather: neither
use the people of Bugia to fish therein, having the sea so near them.

Of the river called Sufgmare.
IT springs out of the mountains bordering upon mount Auras, and passes on
through the barren fields unto the territory of the city Constantina, and
gliding along by the borders thereof, it receives a small river; and so
holding a Northerly course it falls into the Mediterran sea about the same
place where it separateth the fields of Chollo from the fields of the castle
called Iegel.

Of the river Iadog.
THis small river issuing forth of the mountains near Constantina, and
stretching by the same mountains toward the east, disburdeneth it self into
the sea not far from the city of Bona.

Of the river called Guadilbarbar.
IT proceeds out of certain mountains adioining upon the fields of the
city called Vrbs, and gliding by the hills and mountains, it runs in such a
crooked channel, that such as travel from Bona to Tunis, must cross over it
without either boats or bridges above twenty times. And so at length it
falls into the sea not far from the forsaken port of Tabraca, and about
fifteen miles from the city of Bege.

Of the river of Megerada.
THe mighty river of Megerada springing forth of the mountains near unto
the city Tebessa, upon the borders of the province of Zeb, continues a
northerly course, until at a place called Gharel Meleh, forty miles distant
from Tunis it exonerateth itself into the Mediterran sea. In rainie weather it
so increases, that travelers, because there are neither boats nor bridges,
are constrained to stay two or three days by the rivers side till it be
decreased, especially within six miles of Tunis. And hereby you may see how
the Africans of these times degenerate both in wit and courage from the ancient
Africans, who made the people of Rome to tremble so often at their valor.

Of the river of Capis.
IT proceeds from a certain southern desert, and passing through sandy
plains, falls into the sea by a town of that very name. The water thereof
is salt, and so hot, that whosoever lists to drink of it, must set A river
of hot and salt water.
it a cooling for the space of an hour. Thus much concerning the principal
rivers of Barbary: let us now proceed on to describe the Numidian rivers.

Of the rivers of Numidia; and first of the river called Sus.
THe great river of Sus flowing out of the mountains of Atlas, that separate
the two provinces of Hea and Sus in sunder, runs southward among the said
mountains, stretching into the fields of the foresaid region, and from thence
trending westward unto a place called Or Guartguessen
Gurtuessen, where it discharges itself into the maine Ocean. In winter time
it mightily ouerfloweth, but in summer it is very shallow.

Of the river of Darha.
THis river taking his original from mount Atlas about the confines of
Hascora, passes southward to the province called Darha: from whence proceeding
through the deserts, it is dispersed among certain fields and pastures, where
because of the abundance of grass, the Arabians feed their camels. In summer
it is so dried up, that a man shall not wet his shoes in going over it: but it
so increases in winter, that it cannot be passed over in boats. And by extreme
heat of the sun the waters thereof prove bitter.

Of the river of Ziz.
THis river springing out of the mountains of Atlas inhabited by the people
called Zanaga, and running along by many other mountains and by the city of
Gherseluin, holds on his course through the fields of Cheneg, Metgara, and
Reteb, and enters the territory of the city Segelmesse: from whence it
proceeds by the desert castle of Sugaihila, and beyond the said castle
falls into a lake amidst the sandy deserts, where no inhabitants are to be
found, whither notwithstanding the Arabian hunters usually resort, for that
they find great store of game there.

Of the river of Ghir.
THe river of Ghir issuing also forth of mount Atlas, stretches southward by
certain deserts, and then passing through the region of Benigumi, transformeth
it self likewise into a lake in the very midst of the deserts.

Whereas in the beginning of this my discourse, entreating of the division of
Africa, I described the river called by Ptolemey Niger, it would here be
superfluous to make any repetition thereof: wherefore let us now proceed unto
the description of Nilus.

Of the mighty river of Nilus.
THE course of this river is in very deed most admirable, and the creatures
therein contained are exceeding strange, as namely sea-horses, sea-oxen,
crocodiles, and other such monstrous and cruel beasts, (as we will afterward
declare) which were not so hurtful either in the ancient times of the
Egyptians or of the Romans, as they are at this present: but they became more
dangerous ever since the Mahumetans were lords of Egypt. Meshudi in his
treatise of the memorable things of his time, reports that when Humeth the
son of Thaulon was lieutenant of Egypt under Gihsare Mutauichil the Califa of
Bagdet, namely in the year of the Hegeira 270. there was a certain leaden
image about the bigness of a crocodile found among the ruins of an old Egyptia^
temple, which in regard of the Hieroglyphick characters and constellations
engraven thereon, served instead of an inchantme^t against all crocodiles; but
so soon as the said lieutenant caused it to be broken in pieces, the
crocodiles began then to invade men, and to do much mischief. Howbeit what
the reason should be, why the crocodiles between Cairo and the Mediterran sea
are harmless, and those above Cairo toward the maine land, should devour
and kill so many persons, it goes beyond my skill to determine. But, to
return unto the description of Nilus, it increases (as we have said) for the
space of forty days, beginning from the seventeenth of June; and it
continues just so long time in decreasing. For whereas in the higher Ethiopia
it raineth most abundantly about the beginning of May, the course and
inundation of the water is hindered all the month of May, and some part of
June, before it can attain unto the plain country of Egypt. Concerning the
original fountain of this river, there Sundry opinions concerning (...).
are manifold opinions, and all of them uncertain. Some there are which
affirm the same to spring out of the mountains, called by themselves, The
mountains of the moon; and others say that it begins upon certain plains
situate beneath the foot of the said mountains, and issues out of sundry
fountains, being a great way distant one from another. Howbeit the former of
these two avouch, that Nilus with great violence falls down from the said
mountains into certain deep caves under the ground, and comes forth
again at the foresaid fountains. Both of which opinions are false: for never
did any man as yet see where Nilus takes his original. The Ethiopian
merchants which resort for traffike unto the city of Dancala, affirm that
Nilus toward the south is enlarged into such a mighty lake, that no man can
perceive which way the course thereof trendeth: and that afterward being
divided into manifold branches running in several channels, and stretching
themselves east and west, it hinders the passage of traueilers, so that they
cannot compass those intricate windings and turnings. Likewise diverse
Ethiopians inhabiting upon the plains in manner of the Arabians, say that many
of them traueiling five hundred miles southward to seek their camels which
were straied away in the heat of their lust, found Nilus to be in all places
alike, that is to say, dispersed into manifold arms and lakes, and that they
discovered sundry desert and barren mountains, where the foresaid Meshudi
affirms emraulds to be found: which seems more probable then that which the
same author affirms concerning savage men, which wander up and down like
wild goats, and feed upon the grass of the deserts in manner of beasts. But
if I recorded all the fables which our writers report concerning Nilus, I
should seem over tedious unto the Reader.

Of the strange beasts and other living creatures of Africa.
MY purpose is not in this discourse to make a co^plete history of all the
living creatures in Africa, but only of such as are either not to be found in
Europe, or such as differ in any respect from those that are found: And here
I intend to describe in order certain beasts, fishes, and fowls, omitting
many things reported by Pliny, who was doubtless a man of rare and singular
learning, notwithstanding by the default and negligence of certain authors
which wrote before him, he erred a little in some small matters concerning
Africa: howbeit a little blemish ought not quite to disgrace all the beauty of
a fair and amiable body.

Of the Elephant.
THis witty beast keeps in the woods, and is found in great numbers in the
forests of the land of Negros. They use to go many in one company; and if they
chance to meet with any man, they either shun him, or give place unto him. But
if the Elephant intends to hurt any man, he casts him on the ground with
his long snout or trunk, and never cease trampling upon him till he be dead.
And although it be a mighty and fierce beast, yet are there great store of
them caught by the Ethiopian hunters in manner following. These hunters being
acquainted with the woods and The manner of taking elephants in (...).
thickets where they keep, use to make among the trees a round hedge of
strong boughs and raftes, leaving a space open on the one side thereof, and
likewise a door standing upon the plain ground which may be lift up with
ropes, wherewith they can easily stop the said open place or passage. The
elephant therefore coming to take his rest under the shady boughs, enters
the hedge or enclosure, where the hunters by drawing the said rope and
fastening the door having imprisoned him, descend down from the trees, and
kill him with their arrows, to the end they may get his teeth and make sale of
them. But if the elephant chances to break through the hedge, he murthereth
as many men as he can find. In Ethiopia the higher, and India, they have other
devises to take the elephant, which least I should seem ouer-tedious, I pass
over in silence.

Of the beast called Giraffa.
THis beast is so savage and wild, that it is a very rare matter to see any of
them: for they hide themselves among the deserts and woods, where no other
beasts use to come; and so soon as one of them espieth a man, it flies
forthwith, though not very swiftly. It is headed like a camel, eared like an
ox, and footed like a Here is a word wanting in the original.
: neither are any taken by hunters, but while they are very young.

Of the Camel.
CAmels are gentle and domestical beasts, and are found in Africa in great
numbers, especially in the deserts of Libya, Numidia, and Barbaria. And these
the Arabians esteem to be their principal possessions and riches: so that
speaking of the wealth of any of their princes or governors, he has (say they)
so many thousand camels, and not so many thousand ducates. Moreover the
Arabians that possess camels, live like lords and potentates in great
liberty, because they can remain with their camels in barren deserts, whither
no kings nor princes can bring armies to subdue them. These kinds of beasts
are to be seen in In all parts of the world which the author at that (...)
knew.
all parts of the world, to wit, in Asia, Africa, and Europe. And they are
used in Asia by the Tartars, the Curdians, the Dalemians, and the Turcomans. In
Europe the Turks use them to carry burdens upon, as likewise do all the
Arabians in Africa, and the inhabitants of the Lybian deserts; yea kings in
their armies use camels also, to conueigh their victuals and carriages: howbeit
the African camels far excel them of Asia; for travailing forty or fifty
days together, without any prouender at all, they are unladen in the evening,
and The African (...) are the best.
turned loose into the next fields, where they feed upon grass, brambles,
and the boughs of trees; which hardness the camels of Asia cannot endure but
when they set forth any journey, they must be well pampered and full of flesh.
Experience has taught, that our camels having travailed laden fifty days
together without any prouender; have so wasted, first the flesh of their
bunches, secondly of their bellies, and lastly of their hips, that they have
scarce been able to carry the weight of 100. pounds. But the merchants of
Asia give their camels prouender, half of them being laden with wares, and the
other half with prouender, and so their whole carouan of camels goes forth
and returns home laden: by which means they keep them in good plight, and
reap double gains by their labor. Contrariwise the African merchants
travailing with merchandise into Ethiopia, because they return empty, and
bring back with them things of no great weight, so soon as they arrive with
their lean and galled camels in Ethiopia, they sell them half for naught unto
the inhabitants of the deserts. And they that return into Barbary or Numidia,
need very few camels; namely for themselves to ride upon, for to carry their
victuals, their money, and other light commodities. Of camels there are three
kinds; whereof the first being called Hugiun are gross, and of a tall stature,
and most fit to carry Three kinds of camels.
burdens, but ere four years end they grow unprofitable: after which time
every camel but of mean stature will carry a thousand pounds of Italian
weight. When any of the said camels is to be laden, being beaten upon his
knees and neck with a wande, he kneeleth down, and when he feels his load
sufficient, he rises up again. And the Africans use to gelde their camels
which they keep for the burden, putting but one male camel among ten femals.
The second kind of camels called Becheti, and having a double bunch, are fit
both to carry burdens, and to ride upon: and these are bred only in Asia.
The third kind called Raguahill, are camels of a slender and low stature,
which albeit they are unfit to carry burdens, yet Camels of a wonderful
swiftnes, otherwise called Dromedaries.
do they so excel the two other kinds in swiftnes, that in the space of one
day they will travel an hundred miles, and will so continue over the deserts
for eight or ten days together with very little prouender: and these do the
principal Arabians of Numidia and the Moors of Libya usually ride upon. When
the king of Tombuto is desirous to send any message of importance unto the
Numidian merchants with great celeritie, his post or messenger riding upon one
of these camels, will run from Tombuto to Darha or Segelmesse, being nine
hundred miles distant, in the space of eight days at the farthest: but such as
travel must be expert in the way through the deserts, neither will they
demand less then five hundred ducates for every journey. The said camels
about the beginning of the spring inclining to their lust and venerie, do not
only hurt one another, but also will deadly wound such persons as have done
them any injury in times past, not forgetting light and easy stripes: and
whomsoever they lay hold on with their teeth, they lift him up on high, and
cast him down again, trampling upon him with their feet, and in this mad
mood they continue forty days together. Neither are they so patient of
hunger as of thirst; for they will abstain from drink, without any
inconvenience, for fifteen days together: The camels great abstinence from
drink.
and if their guides water them once in three days, they do them great hurt,
for they are not usually watered but once in five or nine days, or at an urgent
necessity, once in fifteen days. Moreover the said camels are of a gentle
disposition, and are endued as it were with a kind of human reason: for when
as between Ethiopia and Barbary they have a days journey to travel more
then their wont, their masters cannot drive them on, being so tired, with
whips, but are feign to sing certain songs unto them; wherewith being
exceedingly delighted, they perform their journey with such swiftnes, that
their said masters are scarce able to follow them. At my being in Cairo I saw
a camel dance; which art of dancing how he How the Camels of (...) learn to
dance.
learned of his master I will here in few words report. They take a young
camel, and put him for half an hour together into a place like a bathstoue
prepared for the same purpose, the floor whereof is het with fire: then play
they without upon a drum, whereat the camel not so much in regard of the
noise, as of the hot pauement which offends his feet, lifts up one leg
after another in manner of a dance, and having been accustomed unto this
exercise for the space of a year or ten months, they then present him unto
the public view of the people, when as hearing the noise of a drum, and
remembering the time when he trod upon the hot floor, he presently falls a
dancing and leaping: and so, use being turned into a kind of nature, he
perpetually observes the same custom. I could here report other matters
concerning the same beast, which for breuities sake I omit.

Of the horse of Barbary.
THis name is given unto the Barbary horses throughout Italy and all Europe,
because they come forth of Barbary, and are a kind of horses that are bred
in those regions; but they which so think are deceived: for the horses of
Barbary differ not in any respect from other horses: but horses of the same
swiftnes and agilitie are in the Arabian tongue called throughout all Egypt,
Syria, Asia, Arabia Felix, and Deserta, by the name of Arabian horses: and the
Historiographers affirm, that this kind of wild horses ranging up and down
the Arabian deserts, and being broken and managed by the Arabians ever since
the time of Ismael, have so exceedingly multiplied and increased, that they
have replenished the most part of Africa: which opinion sauoureth of truth; for
even at this present there are great store of wild horses found both in the
African and Arabian deserts. And I my self saw in the Numidian desert a wild
colte of a white color, and (...) a curled maine. The most certain trial of
these horses is when they can overtake the beast called Lant or the Ostrich in
a race: which if they be able to perform, they are esteemed worth a thousand
ducats or an hundred camels. Howbeit very few of these horses are brought up
in Barbary, but the Arabians that inhabit the deserts, and the people of
Libya bring up great numbers of them, using them not for travel or warfare,
but only for hunting, neither do they give them any other meat but the milk
of Morses fed with camels milk.
camels, and that twice every day and night, to the end they may keep them
nimble, lively, and of spare flesh; and in the time of grass they suffer them
to feed in pastures, but then they ride not upon them. But those that the
princes of Barbary bring up, are not of such swiftnes, but being fed with
prouender, are more beautiful and comely to the eye; and these they use upon
an urgent necessity, when they would escape the danger of their enemies.

Of the wild horse.
THe wild horse is one of those beasts that come seldom in sight. The
Arabians of the deserts take the wild horse and eat him, saying that the
yoonger the horse be, the sweeter is his flesh: but he will hardly be taken
either with horses or dogs. In the waters where this beast keeps they lay
certain snares, covering them over with sand, wherein his foot being caught
he is entangled and slain.

Of the beast called Lant or Dant.
THis beast in shape resembles an ox, saving that he has smaller legs and
comelier horns. His hair is white, and his hoofs are as black as (...), and
he is so exceeding swift, that no beast can overtake him, but only the Barbary
horse, as is beforesaid. He is easlier caught in summer then in winter, because
that in regard of the extreme fretting heat of the sand his hoofs are then
strained and set awry, by which means his swiftnes is abated, like as the
(...) of stagges and roe-deer. Of the hide of this beast Targets made of a skin.
are made shields and targets of great defense, which will not be pierced but
only with the forcible shot of a bullet; but they are sold at an extreme
price.

Of the wild ox.
IT resembles the tame ox, save that it is less in stature, being of a gray
or ashe-colour, and of great swiftnes. It haunteth either the deserts, or the
confines of the deserts. And the flesh thereof (they say) is very sauory.

Of the wild ass.
THis beast also being found either in the deserts or upon the borders thereof,
is of an ash color. In swiftnes they are surpassed only by the Barbary
horses, and when they see a man, they bray out a loud kicking and wincing with
their heels, and standing stone-still, till one approaches so near them, that
he may touch them with his hand, and then they betake themselves to flight. By
the Arabians of the deserts they are caught with snares, and other engines.
They go in companies either when they feed or water themselves. Their flesh
is hot and unsavory, and has a wild taste: but being set a cooling two days
after it is sodden, it becomes very sauory and pleasant.

Of the oxen upon the mountains of Africa.
ALl the oxen upon the mountains of Africa being tame cattle are of so mean
a stature, that in comparison of other oxen they seem to be but heifers of two
years old: but the mountainers, using them to the plough, say that they are
strong and will endure much labor.

Of the beast called Adimmain.
IT is a tame beast, being shaped like a ram, and of the stature of an ass,
and having long and dangle ears. The Libyans use these beasts instead of kine,
and make of their milk great store of cheese and butter. They have some wool,
though it be but short. I my self upon a time being merrily disposed, road a
quarter of a mile upon the back of one of these beasts. Very many of them
there are in the deserts of Libya, and but few in other places: and it is a
rare matter to see one of them in the Numidian fields.

Of the African Ram.
THere is no difference between these rams of Africa and others, save only
in their tails, which are of a great thicknes, being by so much the grosser,
by how much they are more fat, so that some of their tails weigh ten, and
other twenty pounds a piece, and they become fat of their own natural
inclination: but in Egypt there are diverse that feed them fat with bran and
barley, until their tails grow so big that they cannot remove themselves
from place to place: insomuch that those which take charge of them are feign to
bind little carts under their tails, to the end they may have strength to
walk. I my self saw at a city in Egypt called Asiot, and standing upon
Nilus, about an hundred and fifty miles from Cairo, one of the said rams
tails that weighed fower-score pounds, and others affirmed that they had seen
one of those tails of an hundred and fifty pounds weight. All the fat
therefore of this beast consists in his tail; neither is there any of them
to be found but only in Tunis and in Egypt.

Of the Lion.
THe (...) is a most fierce and cruel beast, being hurtful unto all other
beasts, and excelling them both in strength, courage, and cruelty, neither is
he only a deuourer of beasts, but of men also. In some places one Lion will
boldly encounter two hundred horsemen. They range without all fear among the
flocks and droues of cattle, and whatsoever beast they can lay hold on, they
carry it into the next wood unto their whelps: yea some Lions there are (as I
have before said) that will vanquish and kill five or six horsemen in one
company. Howbeit such Lions as live upon the cold mountains are not so
outrageous and cruel: but the hotter the places be where they keep, the more
ravenous and bold are they, as namely upon the frontiers of Temesna, and of
the kingdom of Fez, in the desert of Angad near Telensin, and between the
city of Bona and Tunis, all which are accounted the most famous and fierce
Lions in all Africa. In the spring, while they are given to lust and venerie,
they have most fierce and bloody conflicts one with an other, eight or twelve
Lions following after one Lioness. I have heard many both men and women
report, that if a woman chances to meet with a Lion, and shows him her
privy parts, he will with crying and roaringe, cast his eyes upon the ground
and so depart. Believe it they that list. But this I am well assured of, that
whatsoever a Lion gets in his paws, though it be a camel, he will carry
it away. I my self was twice in great hazard to have been devoured of Lions,
but by the goodness of God I escaped them.

Of the Leopard.
THese beasts living in the woods of Barbary, will not for all their great
strength and cruelty hurt any man, unless it be very seldom, when as they
meet with a man in a narrow passage, and cannot shun him, or when they are
checked and provoked unto fury: for then they will fly upon a man, laying
hold upon his visage with their talents, and plucking off so much flesh as
they can catch, insomuch that sometimes they will crush his brains in pieces.
They invade not any flocks or droues of tame cattle, but are at deadly feude
with dogs, whom they will kill and devour. The mountainers of the region of
Constatina hunt them on horseback, stopping all passages, where they might
escape. The Leopard ranging up and down, and finding every place so besette
with horsemen that he cannot get away, windeth and turns himself on all
sides, and so becomes a fit mark for the hunters to discharge their darts
and arrows upon. But if the Leopard chances to escape, that man that lets him
pass, is bound by an usual custom to inuit the residue of the hunters unto
a banquet.

Of the beast called Dabuh.
THis beast called by the Arabians Dabuh, and by the Africans Iesef, in bigness
and shape resembles a woolfe, saving that his legs and feet are like to the
legs and feet of a man. It is not hurtful unto any other beast, but will rake
the carkeises of men out of their graves, and will devour them, being otherwise
an abject and silly creature. The hunters being acquainted with his den, come
before it singing and playing upon a drum, by which melody being allured
forth, his legs are intrapped in a strong rope, and so he is drawn out and
slain.

Of the (...)-Cat.
THese Cattes are naturally wild, and are found in the woods of Ethiopia. The
merchants taking their young whelps or kittes, feed them The manner of
gathering ciuet.
with milk, branne, and flesh, and keep them in cages or grates. But their
odoriferous excrement (which is naught else but their sweat) they gather twice
or thrice every day in manner following: first they drive them up and down the
grate with a wande, till they sweat, and then they take the said sweat from
under their flanks, their shoulders, their necks, and their tails: which
excrement of sweat is commonly called ciuet.

Of the Ape.
OF Apes there are diverse and sundry kinds, those which have tails, being
called in the African tongue Monne, and those which have none, Babuini. They are
found in the woods of Mauritania, and upon the mountains of Bugia and
Constantina. They represent the shape of man, not only in their feet and
hands, but also in their visages, and are naturally endued with wonderful
wit and subtlety. They live upon grass and corn, and go in great companies
to feed in the corn fields, and one of their company which stands
centinell or keeps watch and ward upon the borders, when he espieth the
husbandman coming, he cries out and gives as it were an alarm to his
fellows, who every one of them flee immediately into the next woods, and
betake themselves to the trees. The she apes carry their whelps upon their
shoulders, and will leap with them in that sort from one tree to another. Such
of them as are taught, will do wonderful feats, but they are angry and
cursed, notwithstanding they will soon be appeased.

Of the Conies of Africa.
THere are great store of wild Conies in Mauritania, and upon the mountains
of Gumera; which albeit they are accounted wild, yet in my opinion they seem
tame, for their flesh differs neither in taste nor color from the flesh of
tame conies.

Of the strange fishes of Africa and first of the fish called (...).
THe fish called Ambara, being of a monstrous shape and bigness, is never seen
but when it is cast up dead upon the seashore: and some of these fishes there
are which contain twenty five cubits in length. The head of this fish is as
hard as a stone. The inhabitants of the Ocean sea coast affirm that this fish
casts forth Amber; but whether the said Amber Amber.
be the sperma or the excrement thereof, they cannot well determine. Howsoever
it be, the fish may in regard of the hugenes be called a whale.

Of the seahorse.
THis creature is commonly found in the rivers of Niger and Nilus. In shape it
resembles an horse, and in stature an ass, but it is altogether destitute of
hair. It lives both in the water and upon the land, and swimmeth to the
shore in the night season. Barks and botes laden with wares and sailing down
the river of Niger are greatly endangered by this seahorse, for oftentimes he
ouerwhelmeth and sinketh them.

Of the sea-oxe.
THe sea-oxe being covered with an exceeding hard skin is shaped in all
respects like unto the land-oxe; save that in bigness it exceeds not a calfe
of six months old. It is found in both the rivers of Niger and of Nilus, and
being taken by fishers, is kept a long time alive out of the water. I my self
saw one at Cairo led up and down by the neck in a chain, which (they say)
was taken at the city of Asna standing upon the bank of Nilus, about four
hundred miles from Cairo.

Of the Tortoise.
THis might benumbred among the land-creatures, because it lives for the most
part in the deserts. In the Libyan deserts are found (...) many as big as a
tun. And Bicri the Cosmographer in his book of the regions and Iourneis of
Africa reports, that a certain man being weary of traveling, ascended to his
thinking, upon an high stone lying in the desert, to the end he might free
himself from the danger of serpents and venomous beasts; who having slept
soundly thereupon all night found himself in the morning removed three miles
from the place where he first lay down, and thereby understood that it was not
a stone but a tortoise whereon he reposed himself, which lying still all the
day long creeps for food in the night-season, but so slowly, that her pace
can hardly be perceived. I my self have seen some of these tortoises, as big
as a barrel, but never any so huge as the last before mentioned. The flesh of
a tortoise not above seven A medicine for the leprosy.
years old being eaten seven days together is said to be a perfect medicine
against the leprosy.

Of the Crocodile.
THis cruel and noisome beast commonly frequenteth the rivers of Niger and
Nilus, and contains in length twelve cubits and above, the tail thereof
being as long as the whole body besides, albeit there are The craft of the
Crocodile in taking both men and beasts.
but few of so huge a bigness. It goes upon four feet like a Lizard, neither
is it above a cubite and an half high. The tail of this beast is full of
knots, and the skin thereof is so exceeding hard, that no crossebowe will enter
it. Some pray upon fishes only, but others upon beasts and men. Which
lurking about the banks of the river, do craftily lay wait for men and
beasts that come the same way, about whom suddenly winding their tails, they
draw them into the water, and there devour them. Howbeit some of them are not
so cruel by nature: for if they were, no inhabitants could live near unto
the rivers of Nilus and Niger. In eating they move the upper iawe only, their
nether iawe being joined unto their breast bone. Not many years since,
passing up the river of Nilus toward the city of Cana, standing in the upper
part of Egypt, four hundred miles from Cairo, on a certain night whilst we
were in the midst of our journey, the moon being ouershadowed with clouds, the
mariners and passengers all fast a sleep, and the bark under sails, I my
self studying by candlelight in my cabben, was called upon by a devout old
man in the bark, who bestowed the same night in watching and prayer, and said
unto me, call (I pray you) some of your company, who may help me to draw
up this piece of wood floting upon the water, which will serve to morrow for
the dressing of our dinner. My self sir (quoth I) will come and help you,
rather then wake any of our company in the dead of the night. Nay (quoth the
old man) I will try whether I be able to draw it up alone or no. And so when
the bark was near unto the wood, as he supposed, holding a rope in his hand
to cast into the water; he was suddenly entangled with a crocodiles long tail,
and was in a moment drawn under the water. Whereupon I making a shoute, all
the people in the bark arose, and striking sails we staide for the space of
an hour, diverse in the mean time leaping into the water to seek the man, but
altogether in vain: and therefore all of them affirmed that he was caught by a
crocodile. As we sailed farther we saw great numbers of crocodiles upon the
banks of Islands in the midst of Nilus lie beaking them in the sun with
their jaws wide open, whereinto certain little birds about the bigness of a
thrush entering, came flying forth again presently after. The occasion whereof
was told me to be this: The crocodiles Little birds flying into the crocodiles
mouth to pick worms from between their teeth.
by reason of their continual devouring of beasts and fishes, have certain
pieces of flesh sticking fast between their (...) teeth, which flesh being
(...), breeds a kind of (...) wherewith they are cruelly tormented. Wherefore
the said birds flying about, and seeing the worms, enter into the crocodiles
jaws, to satisfy their hunger therewith. But the crocodile perceiving
himself freed from the worms of his teeth, offers to shut his mouth, and to
devour the little bird that did him so good a turn, but being hindered from
his ungrateful attempt by a prick which grows upon the birds head, he is
constrained to open his jaws and to let her depart. The she crocodile laying
eggs upon the shore, covers them with sand; and so soon as the young
crocodiles are hatched, they crawle into the river. Those crocodiles that
forsake the river and haunt the deserts become venomous; but such as continue
in Nilus, are destitute of poison. In Egypt there are many that eat the flesh
of the crocodile, and affirm it to be of an excellent taste. His larde or
grease is sold very dear at Cairo, The manner of taking the crocodile.
and is said to be very medicinable for old and cankered wounds. They take
the crocodile in manner following; The fishers binding a strong and large rope
unto some tree or post standing for the nonce upon the bank of Nilus, fasten
unto the end thereof an iron hook of a cubite long, and about the thicknes of
a man's finger, and upon the hook they hang a ram or a goat, by the bleating
noise whereof the crocodile being allured, comes forth of the water, and
swalloweth up both the bait and the hook, wherewithal feeling himself
inwardly wounded, he strugleth mightily, and beats the ground, the fishers in
the mean time pulling and slacking the rope, till the crocodile falls down
vanquished and dead: then they thrusthim in with certain darts and iauelins
under the shoulders and flanks where his skin is most tender, and so make a
quick dispatch of him. His back is so hard and thick, that an harquebuse or
caliuer will scarce pierce it. Of these beasts I saw above three hundred heads
placed upon the walls of Cana, with their jaws wide open, being of so monstrous
and incredible a bigness, that they were sufficient to have swallowed up a whole
cow at once, and their teeth were great and sharp. The Egyptian fishers use
to cut off the heads, of crocodiles, and to set them upon the walls of their
cities, and so do hunters use the heads of wild beasts.

Of the dragon.
IN the caves of Atlas are found many huge and monstrous dragons, which are
heavy, and of a slow motion, because the midst of their body is gross, but
their necks and tails are slender. They are most venomous creatures, insomuch
that whosoever is bitten or touched by them, his flesh presently waxes soft
and weak, neither can he by any means escape death.

Of the Hydra.
THis serpent being short in proportion of body, and having a slender tail and
neck, lives in the Libyan deserts. The poison thereof is most deadly, so that
if a man be bitten by this beast, he has none other remedy, but to cut off
the wounded part, before the poison disperseth it self into the other members.

Of the creature called Dub.
THis creature living also in the deserts, resembles in shape a Lizzard,
saving that it is somewhat bigger, and contains in length a cubite, and in
breadth four fingers. It drinks no water at all, and if a man pour any water
into the mouth thereof, it presently dies. It lays eggs in manner of a
tortoise, and is destitute of poison. The Arabians take it in the deserts: and
I my self cut the throat of one which I took, but it bled a very little.
Being flaied and roasted, it tastes somewhat like a frogge. In swiftnes it is
comparable to a Lizzard, and being hunted, if it chances to thrust the head
into an hole, it can by no force be drawn out, except the hole be dug wider
by the hunters. Having been slain three days together, and then being put to
the fire, it stirs it self as if it were newly dead.

Of the Guaral.
THis beast is like unto the former, saving that it is somewhat bigger, and
has poison both in the head and tail, which two parts being cut off, the
Arabians will eat it, notwithstanding it be of a deformed shape and ugly
color, in which respects I loathed always to eat the flesh thereof.

Of the Camelion.
THe camelion being of the shape and bigness of a lizzard, is a deformed,
crooked, and lean creature, having a long and slender tail like a mouse, and
being of a slow pace. It is nourished by the element of air, and the
sunbeams, at the rising whereof it gapeth, and turns it self up and down.
It changes the color according to the variety of places where it comes,
being sometimes black and sometimes green, as I my self have seen it. It is
at great enmity with venomous serpents, for when it How the camelion kills
the serpent.
sees any lie sleeping under a tree, it presently climeth up the same tree,
and looking down upon the serpents head, it voideth out of the mouth as it
were, a long threede of spittle, with a round drop like a perle hanging at the
end, which drop falling wrong, the camelion changes his place, till it may
light directly upon the serpents head, by the virtue wherofhe presently dies.
Our African writers have reported many things concerning the properties and
secret qualities of this beast, which at this present I do not well remember.

Of the Ostrich.
SOmewhat we will here say concerning the strange birds and fowls of Africa,
and first of the ostriche, which in shape resembles a goose, but that the neck
and legs are somewhat longer, so that some of them exceed the length of two
cubits. The body of this bird is large, and the wings thereof are full of
great feathers both white and black, which wings and feathers being unfit to
fly withal, do help the ostriche, with the motion of her train, to run a
swifte pace. This foul lives in dry deserts, and lays to the number of ten
or twelve eggs in the sands, which being about the bigness of great bullets,
weigh fifteen pounds a piece; but the ostrich is of so weak a memory, that
she presently forgets the place where her eggs were laid. And afterward
the same, or some other ostrichehenne finding the said eggs by chance,
hatcheth and fosterech them as if they were certainly her own: the chickens
are no sooner crept out of the shell, but they prowle up and down the deserts
for their food: and before their feathers be grown, they are so swift, that a
man shall hardly overtake them. The ostriche is a silly and deaf creature,
feeding upon any thing which it finds, be it as hard and vndigestable as
iron. The flesh especially of their legs, is of a slymie and strong taste: and
yet the Numidians use it for food, for they take young ostriches and set them
up a fatting. The ostriches wander up and down the deserts in orderly troops,
so that a far off a man would take them to be so many horsemen, which illusion
has often dismayed whole carouans. Being in Numidia I my self (...) of the
ostriches flesh, which seemed to have not (...) an unsavory taste.

Of the Eagle.
OF eagles there are diverse kinds, according to their natural properties, the
proportion of their bodies, or the diversity of their colors: and the
greatest kind of eagles are called in the Arabian tongue Nesir. The Africans
teach their eagles to pray upon foxes and woolues; which in their encounter
(...) upon the heads of the said beasts with their bills, and upon the backs
with their talents, to avoid the danger of biting. But if the beast turn his
belly upward; the eagle will not forsake him, till she has either A strange
narration.
peckt out his eyes, or slain him. Many of our African writers affirm, that
the male eagle oftentimes ingendring with a (...) woofe, begets a dragon,
having the beak and wings of a bird, a serpents tail, the feet of a woolfe,
and a skin speckled and party colored like the skin of a serpent. Neither can
it open the eie-lids, and it lives in caves. This monster albeit my self have
not seen, yet the common report over all Africa affirms that there is such
an one.

Of the foul called Nesir.
THis is the greatest foul in all Africa, and exceeds a crane in bigness,
though the bill, neck, and legs are somewhat shorter. In flying this bird
mounteth up so high into the air, that it cannot be (...); but at the sight of
a dead carkase it will immediately descend. This bird lives a long time, and
I my self have seen many of them unfeathered by reason of extreme old age:
wherefore having cast all their feathers, they return unto their nest, as if
they were newly hatched, and are there nourished by the yoonger birds of the
same kind. The Italians call it by the name of a Vulture, but I think it to
be of another kind. They nestle upon high rocks, and upon the tops of wild
and desert mountains, especially upon mount Atlas: and they are taken by such
as are acquainted with those places.

Of the bird called Bezi, or the hawk.
THis bird called in Latin Accipiter, is very common in Africa. But the best
African hawks are white, being taken upon certain mountains of the Numidian
deserts, and with these hawks they pursue the crane. Of these hawks there are
diverse kinds; some being used to fly at partriges and quails, and others at
the hare.

Of the Bat.
THese ugly night-birdes are rife all the world over: but in certain caves of
Atlas there are many of them found as big and bigger then doves, especially
in their wings: which albeit my self never saw, yet have I heard of them by
diverse persons.

Of the parrat or poppiniay.
THese parrats are commonly found in the woods of Ethiopia: but the better
sort of them, and such as will imitate man's voice more perfectly, are the
green ones. Parrats there are as big as a dove, of diverse colors, some red,
some black, and some ash-colored, which albeit they cannot so fitly express
man's speech, yet have they most sweet and shrill voices.

Of the locustes.
OF locustes there are sometimes seen such monstrous swarms in Africa, that
in flying they intercept the sunne-beames like a thick cloud. They devour
trees, leaves, fruits, and all green things growing out of the earth. At
their departure they leave eggs behind them, whereof other young locusts
breed, which in the places where they are left, will eat and consume al
things even to the very bark of trees, procuring thereby extreme dearth of
corn, especially in Mauritania. Howbeit the inhabitants of Arabia deserta, and
of Libya, esteem the coming of these locusts as a fortunate boading: for,
seething or drying them in the sun, they bruise them to powder, and so eat
them.

And now let thus much suffice to have spoken of the African beasts, fowls,
fishes, serpents, etc. which are either not to be found in Europe, or such as
differ from creatures of the same kind there. Wherefore having once briefly
entreated in the chapters following of certain minerals, trees, and fruits of
Africa, I purpose then to conclude this my present discourse.

Whereas mine author John Leo entreats but briefly of these locustes, which
God vfeth as a most sharp scourge between times to discple all the nations of
Africa; I thought it not unmeet to add two other relations or testimonies of
the same argument: the one being reverend in regard of the authors antiquity;
and the other credible and to be accepted, for that the reporter himself was a
most diligent and faithful eie-witnes of the same.

The first testimony, taken out of the 11. chap. ofthe fifth book of Paulus
Orosius contra Paganos.
Of an huge and pernicious company of Locusts in Africa, which after they had
wasted the country, being drowned in the sea, and cast up dead on the shore,
bred a most wonderful pestilence both of man and beast.
IN the consulship of Marcus Plautius Hypsaeus, and Marcus Fuluius Flaccus,
Africa scarce breathing from bloody wars, an horrible and extraordinary
destruction ensued. For whereas now throughout all Africa, infinite multitudes
of locustes were gathered together, and had not only quite devoured the corn
on the ground, and consumed the herbs with part of their roots, and the
leaves and tender boughs of the trees, but had gnawne also the bitter bark,
and dry wood; being with a violent and sudden wind hoised aloft in mighty
swarms, and carried a long time in the air, they were at length drowned in
the African sea. Whose loathsome and putrified carcases being by the waves of
the sea cast up in huge heaps far and wide along the shore, bred an
incredible stinking and infectious smell: whereupon followed so general a
pestilence of al living creatures, that the corrupt dead bodies of fowls,
cattle, and wild beasts dissolved by the contagion of the air, augmented the
fury of the plague. But how great and extraordinary a death of men there was,
I cannot but tremble to report: for in Numidia, where Micipsa was then king,
died fowerscore thousand persons; and upon the seacoast next adioiningto
Carthage and Vtica, above two hundred thousand are said to have perished. Yea
in the city of Vtica it self were by this means swept from the face of the
earth thirty thousand brave soldiers, which were appointed to be the garrison
for all Africa. And the destruction was so sudaine and violent, as they report,
that out of one gate of Vtica, in one and the same day, were carried above
fifteen hundred dead corpse of those lusty young gallants. So that by the
grace and favor of almighty God (through whose mercy, and in confidence of
whom, I do speak these things) I may boldly affirm; that albeit sometime in
our days the locusts in diverse parts, and usually, do some damage which is
tolerable: yet never befell there in the time of the Christians so
insupportable a mischief, as that this scourge of locusts, which being alive
are by no means (...), should after their death prove far more pernicious:
and which also living, the fruits of the earth would have been quite devoured;
it had been much better they had never died, to the plague and destruction of
all earthly creatures. Hitherto Paulus Orosius.

The second testimony taken out of the 32. and 33. chapters of the Ethiopian
history of Francis Aluarez, which for the satisfaction of every Reader, I
have put down with all particularities and circumstances.
Of the great multitude of Locusts, and the infinite damage that they procure
in the dominions of Prete Ianni, Chap. 32.
IN this quarter and throughout all the dominion of Prete Ianni, there is an
horrible and great plague, to wit an innumerable company of Locustes, which
eat and consume the corn, and trees of fruit; and so great is the number of
these creatures, as it is not credible, for with the multitude of them the
earth is covered, and the air so ouerspred, as one may hardly discern the
sun: and further I affirm, that it is a thing most strange to him who (...)
not seen it; and if the damage they perform were general through all the
provinces and kingdoms of Prete Ianni, his people would die with famine,
neither could men possibly there inhabit: But one year they destroy one
province, and the next year another (...): as if for example, they waste the
kingdom of Portugal or Castile this (...), an other year they are in the
quarters of Lenteio, an other in Estremadura, an other in Beira, or between
the river Dorus and Minius, an other on the mountains, an other in old
Castilia, Aragon or Andaluzia, and otherwhiles in two or three of these
provinces at once; and wheresoever they come, the earth is more wasted and
destroyed by them, then if it had been all over consumed with a fire. These
locusts are as big as the greatest grasshoppers having yellow wings. Their
coming into the country is known a day before: not for that we can see them,
but we know it by the sun, who is yellow of color, this being a sign that
they draw near to the country, as also the earth looks yellowe, by reason
of the light which reflecteth from their wings: whereupon the people in a
manner become presently half dead, saying, we are undone, for the Ambati,
that is to say, the locustes are come. And I can not forbear to set down that
which I saw three sundry times, and first in Barua, where we had now been
for the space of three years, and here we often heard it said, that such a
country and such a realm was destroyed by the Locusts: and being in this
province we saw the sun and the upper part of the earth look all yellow,
the people being in a manner half dead for sorrow: But the day following it
was an incredible thing to see the number of these creatures that came, which
to our judgment covered four and twenty miles of land, as afterward we were
informed. When this scourge and plague was come, the priests of that place
came and sought me out, requesting me to give them some remedy for the driving
of them away, and I answered, that I could tell them nothing, but only that they
should devoutly pray unto God, that he would drive them out of the country.
And so I went to the Ambassador, and told him, that it would be very good to
go on procession, beseeching God that he would deliver the country, who
peradventure in his great mercy might hear us. This liked the Ambassador
very well: and the day following we gathered together the people of the land,
with all the priests, and taking the consecrated stone, and the cross,
according to their custom, all we Portugals sung the Letanie, and appointed
those of the land, that they should lift up their voices aloud as we did,
saying in their language Zio marina Christos, which is as much to say, as Lord
God have mercy upon us: and with this manner of invocation we went over a piece
of ground, where there were fields of wheat, for the space of a mile, even
to a little hill: and here I A strange (...).
caused many of these locustes to be taken, pronouncing over them a certain
coniuration, which I had about me in writing, having made it that night,
requesting, admonishing, and excommunicating them, enioining them within the
space of three hours to depart toward the sea, or the land of the Moors, or
the desert mountains, and to let the Christians alone: and they not performing
this, I summoned and charged the birds of heaven, the beasts of the earth, and
all sorts of tempests, to scatter, destroy, and eat up their bodies: and to
this effect I took a quantity of locusts, making this admonition to them
present, in the behalf likewise of them absent, and so giving them liberty, I
suffered them to depart. It pleased God to hear us sinners, for in our return
home, they came so thick upon our backs, as it seemed that they would have
broken our heads, or shoulders, so hard they struck against us, as if we had
been beaten with stones and cudgels, and in this sort they went toward the
sea: The men, women, and children remaining at home, were gotten upon the tops,
or tarrasses of their houses, giving God thanks that the locusts were going
away, some before, and others followed. In the mean while toward the sea,
there arose a great cloud with thunder, which met them full in the teeth, and
continued for the space of three hours with much rain, and tempest, that
filled all the rivers, and when the rain ceased, it was a fearful thing to
behold the dead Locustes, which were more then two Or fathomes.
yardes in height upon the banks of the rivers, and in some rivers there were
mighty heaps of them, so that the morning following there was not one of them
found alive upon the earth. The people of the places adioining hearing this,
came in great numbers to enquire how this matter was effected; many of the
inhabitants said, these Portugals be holy men, and by the power of their God,
they have killed and driven away the locusts: others said, especially the
priests and friars of those places near about, that we were witches, and by
power of enchantments had driven away the said creatures, and that for this
cause we feared neither lions, nor any other wild beast: Three days after
this effect, there came unto us a Xuum, that is, a captain of a place called
Coiberia, with men, priests, and friars, to request us, that we would for the
love of God help them, saying that they were in a manner destroyed by the
locustes; and that place was a days journey off toward the sea. They came to
us about evening, and at the same instant, I and four other Portugals departed
away with them, we went all night, and came thither an hour within day,
where we found, that all those of the country, with many of the other places
adioining were assembled together, for they were also molested by the locusts.
And as soon as we were come, we went our procession round about the land,
which was seated upon an high hill, from whence we might discern many
countries and places all yellow by reason of the multitude of locusts. Such
inuocatious and ceremonies being ended, as we performed in the other place, we
went to dinner, and the men that were borderers, requested us to go with them,
promising us great rewards: It pleased god, that as soon as we had dined, we
saw all the earth so cleared that there was not so much as one locust to be
seen: The people seeing this and not being satisfied with the favor and grace
received, they requested us to go and bless their possessions, for they were
yet afraid least the locusts would return; and so we departed.

Of the dommage we saw done in another province by the Locustes, in two
sundry places. Chap. 33.
AN other time also we saw the Locustes, being in a town called Abuguna:
Prete Ianni sent us to this town which is in the kingdom of Angote, and
distant from Barua, where we continued, thirty days journey, to the end that
there we might be furnished with victuals: Being come (...), I went with the
ambassador Zagazabo, who came into Portugal, and five Genoueses, toward a
certain town and a mountain called Aguoan, and we travailed five days
through places all desert and destroyed, which places were sown with Maiz,
having stalks as great as those props which we use about our vines, and we
might see them all broken and trodden underfoot, as if there had been a
tempest, and this had the locusts done. Their wheat, barley, and Taffo da guza
were so eaten, as it seemed they never had been either tilled or sown. The
trees were without leaves, and their barks all gnawne and eaten, and there was
not so much as a spire of grass, for they had devoured every thing; and if we
had not been advised, and foreseen the same (for when we departed, we laded
our mules with victuals) we and our beasts had died together for hunger. The
country was covered all over with winglesse locustes; and they said, that
those were the seed of them, which had devoured all, and that when they had
gotten wings, they would go seek out the rest, the number of these was so
great, as I am loath to report, because I should not perhaps be credited: but
this I may well affirm, that I saw men, women, and children, sit as it were
amazed amongst these locusts, and I said unto them, why sit you thus half
dead, and do not kill these creatures, and so revenge your selves of the
wrong, that their fathers and mothers have done you, or at least that those
which you kill may be able to do you no more harm? They answered, taht they
had not the heart, to withstand the scourge of God which he had sent upon them
for their sins: And all the people of this place departed hence, so that we
found the ways full of men and women on foot, with their children in their
arms, and upon their heads, going into other countries, where they might find
victual, and it was great pity to behold them. We being in the said
province of Abuguna, in a place called Aquate, there came such swarms of
locustes as were innumerable: which one day began to fall upon the ground
about nine of the clock in the morning, and ceased not while night; where they
lighted, there they staide, and then the next day in the morning went away: so
that at three of the clock in the afternoon there was not one of them to be
seen, and in this short time they left the trees utterly destitute of leaves.
On the same day and hour there came an other squadron, and these left neither
tree nor bough vngnawen and eaten, and thus did they for five days one after
an other: they said that those were young ones which went to seek their
fathers, and they did the like, as those we saw without wings: the space that
these locustes took up, was nine miles, for which circuit there remained
neither bark nor leaves upon the trees, and the country looked not as though
it had bin burnt, but as though it had snowed thereupon, and this was by reason
of the whitenes of the trees which were pilled bare by the Locustes, and the
earth was all swept clean: It was Gods will that the harvest was already in:
we could not understand which way they afterward went, because they came
from the sea ward, out of the kingdom of (...), which belongs to the
Moors, who are continually in war, as also we could by no means know the
end of their journey or course. Thus much out of Francis (...).

Of the minerals: And first of miner all salt.
THe greater part of Africa has none other salt but such as is dug out of
quarries and mines, after the manner of marble or free stone, being of a white,
red, and graie color. Barbary abounds with salt, and Numidia is
indifferently furnished therewith: but the land of Negros, and especially the
inner part of Ethiopia, is so destitute thereof, that a pound of salt is there
sold for half a ducate. And the people of the said regions use not to (...)
salt upon their tables; but holding a crum of salt in hands, they lick the
same at every morsel of meat which they put in their mouths. In certain
lakes of Barbary all the summer time there is fair and white salt congealed
or kerned, as namely in diverse places near unto the city of Fez.

Of the mineral called Antimonie.
THis mineral growing in many places of Africa in the lead-mines is separated
from the lead by the help of brimstone. Great plenty of this mineral is
dug out of the bottom of mount Atlas, especially where Numidia bordereth
upon the kingdom of Fez. Brimstone likewise is dug in great abundance out
of other places of Africa.

Of (...).
EVphorbium is the juice or gum of a certain herb growing like the head of
a wild thistle, between the branches whereof grow certain fruits as big in
compass as a green cucumber; after which shape or likeness it bears certain
(...) grains or (...); and some of the said fruits are an elle long, and some
are longer. They grow not out of the branches of the herb but spring out of
the firm ground, and out of one flag you shall see sometimes 20. and sometimes
30. of them issue forth. The people of the same region, when the said fruits
are once ripe, do prick them with their knives, and out of the holes proceeds
a liquor or juice much like unto milk, which by little and little, grows
thick and slimy. And so being grown thick, they take it off with their knives,
putting it in bladders and drying it. And the plant or herb it self is full of
sharp prickles.

Of pitch.
OF pitch there are two kinds, the one being natural, and taken out of
certain stones, which are in fountains; the water whereof retains the (...)
smell and (...) of the same; and the other being artificial, and proceeding out
of the juniper or pine tree: and this artificial pitch I saw made upon mount
Atlas in manner following. They make a deep and round furnace with an hole in
the bottom, through which hole the pitch may fall down into an hollow place
within the ground being made in form of a little vessel: and putting into the
said furnace the boughs of the foresaid trees broken into small pieces, they
close up the mouth of the furnace, and make a fire under it; by the heat
whereof the pitch distilleth forth of the wood through the bottom of the
furnace into the foresaid hollow place: and so it is taken up and put in
bladders or bags.

Of the fruit called Maus or Musa.
THis fruit growing upon a small tree which bears large and broad leaves of
a cubite long, has a most excellent and delicate taste, and springs forth
about the bigness of a small cucumber. The Mahumetan doctors affirm, that this
was the fruit which God forbad our first parents to eat in Paradise, which
when they had eaten they covered their nakedness with leaves of the same fruit,
as being of all other leaves most meet for that purpose. They grow in great
abundance at Sela a town of the kingdom of Fez; but in far greater plenty
in the land of Egypt, and especially at Damiara.

Of Cassia.
THe trees bearing Cassia are of great thicknes, having leaves like unto the
mulberie-tree. They bear a broad and white blossom, and are so laden with
fruits, that they are constrained to gather great store before they be ripe,
least the tree should break with overmuch weight. And this kind of tree
grows only in Egypt.

Of the fruit called Terfez.
TErfez is to be called rather by the name of a root then of a fruit, and is
like unto a mushrom or toad-stoole, but that it is somewhat bigger. It is
enclosed with a white rind and grows in hot and sandy places. Where it
lies, it may (...) be perceived by the swelling and opening of the ground.
Some of them are as big as a walnut, and others as a (...). The phisicians,
which call it Camha, affirm it to be a refrigeratiue or cooling fruit. It
grows in great plenty upon the Numidian deserts, and the Arabians take as
great delight in eating of the same as in eating of sugar. This fruit being
stued upon the coals, and afterward made clean, and sodden in fat broth they
esteem for great dainties. Also the Arabians sees it in water and milk, and
so eat it. It grows likewise plentifully in the sands near unto the town
of Sela. Of the date or palm tree, because we have (...) spoken in our
description of Segelmesse in Numidia, we will here in this place say nothing at
all.

Of the Egyptian figg called by the Egyptians themselves Giumeiz.
THe tree of this figg resembles other fig trees both in outward form and in
leaves, but it is of an exceeding height: neither does the fruit grow among the
leaves, or upon the ends of the twigs, but out of the very body of the tree,
where no leaves at all grow. These figs taste like unto other figes, but they
have a thicker skin and are of a tawnie color.

Of the tree called Ettalche.
IT is an high and a thornie tree, having such leaves as the juniper has, and
bearing a gum like unto mastick, wherewith the African apothecaries use to
mingle and adulterate their mastick, because it has the same color and
yealdeth some smell also. There are found likewise such trees in (...) Numidian
and Lybian deserts and in the land of Negros: but the trees of Numidia being
cut in the midst, consist of white wood like unto the trees beforenamed, and
the Lybian trees of a brown or tawnie wood, but the trees of the land of
Negros are extreme black within. And that black pith or heart of this tree,
whereof musical instruments are made, is called by the Italians Sangu. That wood
which is of the brown or tawnie color is used by the African phisicians for
the curing of the French pox, whereupon it is commonly called by the name of
pock-wood.

Of the root called Tauzarghente.
THis root growing in the western part of Africa upon the Ocean sea shore,
yields a fragrant and odoriferous smell. And the merchants of Mauritania carry
the same into the land of Negros, where the people use it for a most excellent
perfume, and yet they neither burn it nor put any-fire at all thereto: for
being kept only in an house, it yields a natural sent of it self. In
Mauritania they sell a bunche of these roots for half a ducate, which being
carried to the land of Negros is sold again for eighty or one hundred ducates
and sometimes for more.

Of the root called Addad.
THe herb thereof is bitter, and the root it self is so venomous, that one
drop of the water distilled therout, will kill a man within the space of an
hour, which is commonly known even to the women of Africa.

Of the root called Surnag.
THis root growing also upon the western part of mount Atlas, is said to be
very comfortable and preservative unto the privy parts of man, and being
drunk in an electuarie, to stir up venereal lust, etc. Neither must I here omit
that which the inhabitants of mount Atlas do commonly report, that many of
those damsels which keep cattle upon the said mountains have lost their
virginity by none other occasion, but by making water upon the said root: unto
whom I would in merriment answer, that I belceued all which experience had
taught concerning the secret virtue of the same root. Yea they affirmed
moreover, that some of their maidens were so infected with this root, that
they were not only deflowred of their virginity, but had also their whole
bodies puffed up and swollen.

THese are the things memorable and worthy of knowledge, seen and observed
by me John Leo, throughout al Africa, which country I have in That is, in
Barbary, Numidia, Libya, the land of Negros, and Egypt.
all places traueiled quite over: wherein whatsoever I saw worthy the
observation, I presently committed to writing: and those things which I saw
not, I procured to be at large declared unto me by most credible and
substantial persons, which were themselves eie-witnesses of the same: and so
having gotten a fit opportunity, I thought good to reduce these my travels
and studies into this one volume.

Written at Rome in the year of Christ 1526. and upon the tenth of March.
Here ends the description of Africa written by John Leo, borne in Granada,
and brought up in Barbary.
A brief relation concerning the dominions, revenues, forces, and manner of
government of sundry the greatest princes either inhabiting within the bounds
of Africa, or at least possessing some parts thereof, translated, for the most
part, out of Italian.
Afric has ever been the least known and haunted part in the world,
chiefly by reason of the situation thereof under the torride Zone; which the
ancients thought to be uninhabitable. Whose opinion, although in very deed it is
not true, because we know that between the two Tropickes there are most
fruitful countries, as namely Abassia, and the kingdoms of Angola, and
Congo, with all India, new Spain, and Brasile; yet neither is it altogether
false: For no part of the world has greater deserts, nor vaster wilderness,
then this of Africa. These deserts, which extend themselves from the Atlanticke
Ocean even unto the borders of Egypt, for more then a thousand miles, and run
out sometimes two hundred, and otherwhiles 300. miles in breadth, divide Afric
into two parts: whereof the southerly part was never thoroughly known to the
people of Europe, as also Atlas, which divides Numidia from Africa the less,
is some impediment to the same: And toward the east it seems that nature
also meant to conceal the same, by those deserts that lie bewixt the Red sea
and the land of Egypt. In the first times after the flood we find mention
very often made of the kingdoms of Egypt, and Ethopia: and as for Ethiopia the
notice we had thereof, was but obscure and confused: But Egypt, by reason of
the commodious situation thereof between the Mediterran, and the Red seas,
has always been renowned and famous: yea king Sesostris that Egyptian
monarch enlarged his empire from the Atlantic Ocean, even to the Euxine sea:
Afterward the kings of Numidia, and Mauritania, and the Carthaginians
flourished in those provinces which are bounded by the Meditterran sea. In our
times, wherein all Afric has been and is daily environed, there is
sufficient knowledge had of the Marine parts thereof, but for the inland
provinces there is not so much known as might be, rather through want of
writers then for default of discovery and trade. Now therefore leaving those
parts of Africa which are possessed by the Turk and the king of Spain, to a
brief narration in the last place, we have reduced all the residue of our
relations to three princes: that is, to Prete Ianni, the Monomotapa, and the
Xeriffo, who is king of Maroco and Fez; for the rest referring you to John Leo,
and the discourse prefixed before him: the Xeriffo reigns between Atlas and
the Atlanticke Ocean; Prete Ianni about the center of Afric: and the
Monomotapa has his Empire toward the Sinus Barbaricus, or the Barbarian
gulphe.

The Empire of Prete Ianni.
THe Empire of Prete Ianni answers not certainly in effect, (although it be
very large) unto the fame and opinion which the common sort, and most writers
have of it: For lateliest of any other Hor atio Malugucci in a certain
discourse of his, touching the greatness of states at this day, would needs
have his dominion to be greater then any other princes, but the king of Spain.
I confess indeed, that in times past his state had most ample and large
confines, as may be judged by the multitude of kingdoms, with which he
adorneth and sets forth his style; for he entitleth himself king of
Goiame, a kingdom seated beyond Nilus, and of Vangue, and Damut situate beyond
Zaire; and yet it is at this day evidently known, that his Empire scarcely
reaches unto Nilus: yea and John Barros writes, that the Abassins have little
notice of that river, by reason of the mountains lying between them and it.
The heart or center of his state, is the lake Barcena: for on the east it
extends from Suaquen, as far as the entrance of the Red sea, for the space
of an hundred and two and twenty leagues: howbeit betwixt the Red sea and it,
there thwarteth a long rank of mountains, inhabited by the Moors, who also
command the seacoast. On the west it has another ridge of mountains along
the channel of Nilus, enhabited by the Gentiles, who pay tribute unto the
Prete. On the north it consineth with an imaginary line drawn from Suaquen to
the furthest part of the isle of Meroe, which is an hundred and five and
twenty leagues long: From hence it makes as it were a bow, but not very
crooked, toward the south, even to the kingdom of Adel (from the mountains
whereof springs that river which Ptolemey calls Raptus, and places to the
south of Melinde) for the space of two hundred and thirty leagues; all which
distance is bordered upon by the Gentiles: from whence it turns and ends
eastward at the kingdom of Adel, whose head city is Arar, in the northerly
latitude of nine degrees: So that this whole empire, little more or less,
amounts to six hundred threescore and twelve leagues in circuit: The
country (which is distinguished with ample plains, pleasant hills, and high
mountains, most of them manurable, and well inhabited) brings forth barley
and myll (for it abounds not greatly with other sorts of grain) and
likewise Taffo da guza, another good and durable seed: But there is mill, and
Zaburro (which we call the grain of India, or Ginnie wheat) great plenty,
with all sorts of our pulse, and some also unknown to us. Some of them wear
clothes of cotton: but the greater part are clad in sheeps skins, and those
which are more honorable, in the skins of Lions, Tigres, and Ounces. They have
all kinds of our domestical creatures, as hens, geese, and such like, as
also abundance of kine, and wild swine, hearts, goats, hares, but no conies,
besides panthers, lions, Ounces, and elephants. To conclude, there cannot be a
country more apt then this, for the generation and increase of all plants and
creatures. True it is, that it has little help or furtherance by the
industry of the inhabitants, because they are of a sloathfull dull nature, and
capacity. They have flax, and yet can make no cloth, sugar canes, and know
not the art of getting the sugar thereout; iron, and have no use thereof, but
take all smithes to be negromancers: They have rivers, and waters, and know not
how to better their possessions by them. They conceive not greatly of hunting
or fishing: whereupon the fields are full of birds and wild beasts, and the
rivers and lakes, of fish. An other reason of their slacknes and negligence, is
the evil entreaty of the communaltie by those of the mightier sort: for the
poor seeing every thing taken from them that they have, sow no more, then
very necessity urges them unto. Their speech also is without any rule or
prescription, and to write a letter, requires a great assembly of men, and
many days to deliberate thereon. The nobles, citizens, and peasants live
distinctly and apart, and any of these may purchase nobility by some famous, or
worthy act. The first borne inherit all things.

There is not in all the country a castle, or fortified place, for they
think, as the Spartanes did, that a country should be mayntained and defended
by force of arms, and not with rampires of earth or stone. They dwell for the
most part dispersed in towns and villages. Their trade of merchandise is
performed by exchanging one thing for an other, supplying the overplus of their
prises with wheat or salt: pepper, incense, myrrh, and salt, they sell for the
weight in gold. In their bargains they use gold also, but by weight, silver is
not ordinary among them. Their greatest city is the Princes court, which is
never firm and resident in one place, but remoueth here and there, and
remains in the open fields under tents. This court comprehends ten, or
more miles in compass.

His Government.
PRete Ianni his government is very absolute, for he holds his subjects in
most base servitude, and no less the noble and great, then those of meaner
quality and condition, entreating them rather like slaves, then subjects: and
the better to do this, he maintains him self amongst them in the reputation
of a sacred and divine person. Al men bow at the name of the Prince, and touch
the earth with their hand: they reverence the tent wherein he lies, and that
when he is absent also. The Pretes in times past were wont to be seen of the
people but only once in three years space, and afterward they showed
themselves thrice in a year, that is on Christmas, and Easter day, as also on
holy Rood day in September. Panufius who now reigns, albeit he is grown more
familiar then his predecessors, yet when any commission comes from him, the
party to whom it is directed hears the words thereof naked, from the girdle
upward, neither puts he on his apparel, but when the king permits him.
The people thought they bind it with an oath, yet do they seldom speak truth,
but when they swear by the kings life, who gives and takes away, what great
signiorie soever it pleases him, neither may he, from whom it is taken, so
much as show him self agreeued therewith. Except the giving of holy orders and
the administration of the sacraments, he disposes as well of the religious as
of the lay sort, and of their goods.

On the way he rides, environed with high and long red curtaynes, which
compass him on every side. He wears usually upon his head, a crown half
gold, half silver, and a cross of silver in his hand: his face is covered
with a piece of blew taffata, which he lifts up, or lets down, more or
less, according as he favors them that he treats withal: and sometimes he
only shows the end of his foot, which he puts forth from under the said
curtains. They that carry and return ambassages, come not to his curtain,
but with long time, diverse ceremonies, and sundry observations. None has
slaves but himself, to whom every year his subjects come to do homage. This
prince (as the Abassins report) descends from a son of Solomon, and the
Queen of Saba, called Meilech: they received the faith under Queen Candaces,
in whose time the family of Gaspar began to reign and flourish in Ethiopia,
and from him after thirteen generations came John called the holy. This man
about the time of Constantinus the Emperor, because he had no children, leaving
the kingdom to his brother Caius eldest son, invested Baltasar, and
Melchior, younger brothers, one in the kingdom of Fatigar, and the other in
Giomedi: whereupon the royal blood grew to be divided into three families,
namely that of Baltafar, that of Gaspar, and the third of Melchior, ordayning
that the Empire above all others should be given by election to some one of the
foresaid families, so it were not to the eldest borne. For these first borne
there were particular kingdoms appointed. And to avoid scandale and tumult,
he decreed that the Emperors brothers with his nearest kindred should be
enclosed as in a strong castle, within Of this mountain read in the discourse
before the beginning of Leo.
mount Amara; where he would also have the Emperors sons to be put, who
cannot succeed in the Empire, nor have any State at all, for which cause the
Emperor ordinarily marries not.

His forces both in revenues and people.
HE has two kinds of revenues, for one consists in the fruits of his
possessions, which he causes to be manured by his slaves, and oxen. These
slaves multiply continually, for they marry among themselves and their
sons remain in the condition of their progenitors. An other great revenue
comes of his tributes, which are brought unto him, from all those that hold
dominion under him. And of these, some give horses, some oxen, some gold, some
cotton, and others other things. It is thought he has great treasure as well
of clothes and jewels, as of gold, and also that he has treasuries and large
magazins of the same riches, so that writing once to the king of Portugal, he
offered to give for the maintenance of war against the Infidels, an hundred
thousand drams of gold, with infinite store of men and victual. They say, that
he puts ordinarily every year into the castle of Amara, the value of
three millions of ducates. It is true, that before the days of King Alexander
they laid not up so much gold, because they knew not how to purify it: but
rather jewels and wedges of gold. Also his commings-in may be said to be of
three sorts: for some he raises as it were, out of his crowne-landes: another
part he leuieth of the people, that pay him so much for an house, and the tenth
of all those mines that are dug by others then by himself: and a third
revenue he draws from his tributarie princes and governors: and these give
him the entire revenues of one of their cities, so as he choose not that city
wherein they make their residence. But though his wealth and revenues be great,
yet are his people of little worth, as well because he holds them in the
estimation of slaves, by means whereof they want that generositie of mind,
which makes men ready to take up arms, and to be courageous in dangers: as
also it seems they have ever their hands bound with that awefull reverence
which they bear toward their Prince, and the fear they have of him: and
further, in that they have no arms of defense but bad headpeeces, half
sculles, and coats of maile, carried thither by the Portugals. Hereunto may be
added his want of fortresses: for neither having strong places whither to
retire, nor arms to defend themselves; they and their towns remain as a pray
to the enemy; their offensive arms being unfeathered arrows, and some darts.
They have a lent of fifty days continuance, which through the great
abstinence, wherein they pass all that time, does so weaken and afflict them,
that neither for those days, nor many other following, they have the strength
to stir abroad: whereupon the Moors attend this opportunity, and assail
them with great advantage. Francis Aluares writes, that Prete Ianni can bring
into the field, an hundred thousand men: nevertheless in time of need it has
been seen, that he could make nothing so many. He has a military religion,
or order of knighthood, under the protection of Saint (...), whereunto every
noble man must ordain one of every three male children, but not the eldest.
And out of these are constituted twelve thousand knights or gentlemen for the
kings guarde. The end of this order is, to defend the confines of the empire,
and to make head against the enemies of the faith.

Princes confining upon the Prete Ianni.
THis Prince, as far as we can certainly understand, confineth especially
with three other mighty princes: one is the king of Borno; another the great
Turk; and the third the king of Adel. The king of Buruo rules over that
country which extends from Guangara toward the east, about five hundred
miles, between the deserts of Seu, and Barca, being of an uneven situation,
because it is partly mountainous, and partly plain. In the plains there
dwells a very civil people in populous and much frequented villages, by
reason of the abundance of grain, as also there is some concourse of merchants
thither. On the mountains, shepheardes of great and small beasts do inhabit,
and their chief sustenance is mill: They lead a brutish life, without
religion, with their wives and children in common: They use no other proper
names, but those which are taken from the quality or form of men's persons:
the lame, the squint eied, the long, the stuttering. This king of Borno is most
mighty in men, upon whom he lays no other imposition but the tenth of their
fruits; their profession is to rob and steal from their neighbors, and to
make them slaves: in exchange of whom, they have of the merchants of Barbary,
horses. He has under him many kingdoms, and people, partly white, and partly
black. He molesteth the Abassines exceedingly with theftes, leads away their
cattle, robs their mines, and makes their men slaves. They fight on
(...)-back after the Gynnet fashion, they use lances with two heads, and darts
and arrows: they assail a country sometimes in one part, and otherwhiles in
another, suddenly: but these may rather be termed thieves and robbers then
right enemies.

The Turk confineth with Abassia on the east; as likewise the king of Adel,
who hemmeth it in between the east and the south. They disturb the Prete
exceedingly, restraining the limits of his Empire, and bringing his country
into great misery: For the Turks besides the putting of a great part of
Barnagasso, to sack and spoil; (upon which they entered the year of our Lord,
1558.) although they were driven out again, have further taken all that from
the Prete which he possessed on the sea coast: especially the ports and
towns of Suaquen and Ercoco: In which two places, the mountains lying betwixt
Abassia and the red sea, do open, and make a passage, for conueiance of
victual, and traffic, between the Abassins, and the Arabians: And it is not
long, since the Lord Barnagasso was constrained to accord with the Turk, and
to buie the peace of his country with the tribute of a thousand ounces of gold
by the year. Also the King of Adel procures him no less molestation: This
man confineth with the kingdom of Fatigar, and extends his dominion even to
the Red sea, where he has Assum, Salir, Meth, Barbora, Pidar, and Zeila. At
Barbora many ships of Aden, and Cambaia arrive with their merchandise for
exchange; from whence they receive much flesh, honey, wax, and victuals for
Aden; and gold, Iuorie, and other things for Cambaia. A greater quantity of
victual is carried from Zeila, because there is abundance of wax, and honey,
with corn and diverse fruits, which are laden for Aden, and for Arabia, and
beasts also, as namely sheep, with tails wayghing more then five and twenty
pounds, with their heads and necks all black, but the rest of them is white:
as also certain other all white with tails a fathom long, and writhen like a
vine branche, having thropples under their throtes like bulls. There be also
certain kine with branched horns like to wild hearts, being black in color
and sorne others red, with one only horn upon their foreheads of an handful
and an half long, turning backward. The chief city of this kingdom is Arar
eight and thirty leagues from Zeila toward the South east. This king being a
Mahumetan by a perpetual profession of making war against the christians of
Abassia, who are the subjects of the Prete, has obtained of those Barbarians
the surname of Holy: He stays his opportunity while the Abassins be weakened,
and brought down with that long and hard fast of fifty days, when they can
scarcely go about their domestical affairs; and then he enters into the
country, sacketh the towns, leads the people away into servitude, and does
a thousand injuries unto them. The Abassin slaves are of great value out of
their own country: whereupon the bordering, and other Princes both far and
near esteem them much, and many of them by means of their industry in
service, of slaves have become captains and great Commanders, in Arabia,
Cambaia, Bengala, and Sumatra: Because the Mahumetan princes of the east, being
all tirants over kingdoms usurped from the Gentiles, for security of their
state, put no trust in their own subjects: but arm themselves with a
multitude of strange slaves, to whom they commit their persons, and the
government of their kingdom. And among all other slaves the Abassines bear
away the bell, as well for fidelity, as for sound and good complexion. And
because the king of Adel, with the multitude of these Abassin slaves, which he
takes in the towns and territories of Prete Ianni, fills all Egypt, and
Arabia (in exchange of whom he has armor, munition, and soldiers, both from
the Turk, and the Arabian Princes) in the year of our Lord 1550. Claudius
king of Abassia, being after this sort sorely oppressed by Gradaamed king of
Adel, who now for the space of fowerteene years had with continual incursions
grievously molested, and disturbed him, enforcing him to leave his confines,
and to retire into the heart of his empire, demanded aid of Stephano Gama, the
Indian Viceroy of John the third king of Portugale, who was then with a good
fleet upon The red sea. Whereupon he sent him four hundred Portugals, with a
good quantity of arms, and small shot, under the government of Christopher da
Gama his brother. With these men by the benefit of shot, he overthrew the
enemy in two battles; but in the third, the king of Adel having received a
thousand Turkish harquebuziers from the governor of Zebit, with ten pieces of
artillery, the Abassins were put to (...), and discomfited, and their captain
taken prisoner, and put (...) death. But the king of Adel afterward sending
back the said Turks, he and his people were suddenly, assailed, near the
river of Zeila, and mount Saual, by king Claudius with threescore thousand
foot, and five hundred Abassin horse, together with those Portugales, who
remained of the former overthrow, one of whom wounded Gradamed dangerously. But
in the month of March, the year of our Lord 1559. king Claudius being set
upon again by the Malacai Mores, he was slain in the battle: and the
enimie-king acknowledging so great a victory from the hands of God, triumphed
upon an ass.

Adamas brother unto king Claudius succeeded him, against whom (for he was
half a Mahumetan) the best part of the Abassine nobility rebelled, and he was
defeated by the Barnagasso in the year 1562. who having thus for a while
disturbed the affairs of Ethiopia, it seemed that they were at length
assuaged, and reestablished under Alexander, by the aid of the Portugals, who
have carried thither arms as well of offense, as defense, and stirred up the
minds and courages of the Abassines, by their example, to war; For all those
that remained of the discomfiture given to Christopher Gama, and diverse others
which came thither afterward, and do daily there arrive and stay, do marry
wives, and have children; and Alexander permitted them to elect a judge, who
might execute justice among them: So that they have, and do daily bring into
Abassia, the manner of warfare in Europe, with our use of arms, and the manner
of fortifying passages and places of importance. Afterward certain
Florentines went into those countries, partly upon pleasure, and partly for
affairs of merchandise. For Francesco di Medici great Duke of Florence, had
some commerce with the Abassines. The Prete therefore gives entertainment, and
makes much of the Frankes, (for so do they call the people of Europe) and
hardly gives them license to depart out of his kingdom. Besides these the
Prete Ianni has diverse other enemies, amongst whom is the king of Dancali, to
whom the town and port of Vela upon the red sea pertains; he confineth with
Balgada. The Moors also vex him greatly, which inhabit the province, called
Dobas, divided into fowerteene Signiories; for though they be within the
confines of Prete Ianni his empire, yet notwithstanding for the most part they
rebel from him: they have a law, that none of them may marry, before he
first give testimonial that he has slain twelve Christians.

Of the Emperor of Monomotapa.
COncerning the state of this mighty Emperor, and of his neighbor of
Mohenemugi, and of the limits of both their dominions, as likewise of the
Amazones and Giacchi the chief strength of their military forces, and other
memorable matters; to avoid tedious repetitions, I refer the reader to the
discourse going before the book: save only that I will here annexe a brief
testimony out of Osorius lib 4 de reb gest. Eman. which may add some small
light unto the treatise before mentioned.

But (says he) in this part of Ethiopia lying beyond the cape of good hope
which is bounded by the south Ocean, there is a most ample kingdom called
Benomotapa, whereunto before such time as the Portugals discovered those parts,
all the kings upon that coast were most obedientlie subject. It abounds with
gold beyond all credit: which is taken even out (...) most (...) in gold.
of their rivers and lakes. Yea many kings there are which pay yearly tribute
of gold unto this king of Benomotapa. The people worship no Idols, but
acknowledge one God the creator of heaven and earth. In habit and apparel
they are not much unlike to other Ethiopians. They worship their king with
wonderful superstition. This king in his scutcheon or coat of The kings
arms.
arms has two signs of majesty. One is a certain little spade with a
handle of iuorie. The other are two small darts. By the spade he (...) his
subjects to husbandry, that they may not through sloth and negligence let the
earth lie untilled, and so for want be constrained to play the thieves. The one
of his darts betokens, that he will be a severe punisher of malefactors; and
the other, that he will by valor and force of arms resist all foreign
invasions. The sons of his tributarie kings are trained up in his court; A
(...) course.
both to the end that by this education they may learn loialtie and love
toward him their sovereign, and also that they may remain as pledges to
keep their fathers in awe and due obedience. He is continually guarded with a
mighty army; notwithstanding he be conioined in most firm league with all
his neighbour-princes. For by this means he supposes that war cannot
procure him any danger at all, knowing right well that oftentimes in the midst
of peace it is ready to disturb the security of Princes. Every year this
king sends certain of his courtiers and servants to bestow A recrely (...)
of (...) fire from the (...) to his (...) princes.
in his name new fire upon all the princes and kings within his dominions,
that from them it may be distributed unto others also. Which is done in manner
following. The messenger being come to the house of any prince, his fire is
immediately quenched. Then is there a new fire kindled by the messenger: and
forthwith all the neighbors resort thither to fetch of the said new fire for
their houses. Which whosoever refuses to perform, is held as a traitorous
rebel, and receives such punishment as is liable to high treason; yea if need
be, an army is levied to apprehend (...), to the end that being taken, he may
be put to such torments as are correspondent to his disloialtie. Hitherto
Osorius.

The Xeriffo, commonly called The king of Maroco (...), and Fez.
AMong all the princes of Africa, I suppose that there is not any one, who in
richnes of state, or greatness of power, may be preferred before the Xeriffo: In
that his dominion, which comprehends all that part of Mauritania, called by
the Romans Tingitana, extends it self north and south from Capo Boiador,
even to Tanger, and east and west from the Atlanticke Ocean, as far as the
river Muluia, and somewhat further also, in which space is comprehended the
fairest, fruitfullest, best inhabited, and most civil part of all Africa, and
among other the states, the most famous kingdoms of Maroco and Fez. With the
particular description whereof, and of all the provinces, cities, towns,
rivers, mountains, etc. therein contained, the Reader may satisfy himself to
the full in the second and third books of the history of John Leo before set
down.

These kingdoms besides their natural fertility, are very traffickable; for
though the king of Fez has no haven of importance upon the Mediterranean sea,
nevertheless the English, French, and other nations traffic much to his ports
upon the Ocean, especially to Described by Leo in his fifth book under the
name of Lharais.
Larache, Santa Cruz, Cabo de Guer, and in other places perteining partly to
the kingdom of Fez, and partly to Maroco; and they bring thither copper, and
brass, with arms and diverse commodities of Europe, for which among other
things they return sugar.

But because these kingdoms of Maroco and Fez, and diverse other Signiories,
and Principalities, at first separate and divided, were united not long
sithence under one Prince, who is called Or Miramonin.
the Xeriffo, it will not be much from our purpose (because among the accidents
of our times, I think there is not any one, more notable or wonderful then
this) to set down here how the matter passed.

About the year of our Lord 1508 a certain Alchaide borne in Tigumedet The
manner how the Xeriffos aspired to the kingdoms of Maroco, Sus, and Fez.
a town of Dara, whose name was Mahumet Benametto, and who caused himself to
be called Xeriffo, being a subtle man, and of a mind no less ambitious, then
learned in those sciences, whereunto the Mahumetans are most addicted, began to
grow famous in the towns of Numidia. This man vaunting himself to be
descended of Mahumets progeny, was possessed with an imagination (trusting in
the division of the States of Affricke, wherein then the Portugals bore great
sway) of taking into his own hands all Or the kingdoms of Maroco, and Fez.
Mauritania Tingitana. For performance of this, he first sent his three (...),
Abdel, Abnet, and Mahumet, in pilgrimage to Mecca and Medina, there to visit
and do reverence to the sepulcher of their Seductor Mahumet. The young men
performed this voyage with so great fame and reputation of sanctity and
religion (if these words may be used, in declaring of such an impiety) that in
their return, the people came out to meet them, kissed their garments, and
reverenced them as saints. They fayning themselves to be ravished into deep
contemplation, went up and down the streets sighing, and crying out in words
interrupted with lamentation and yerning: Ala, Ala; and they lived of nothing
but alms. Their father having taken them home with great mirth and joy: but
yet not minding to suffer this sudden applause and credit, which they had
obtained by such a pilgrimage, to freeze and wax cold; he sent two of them
which were Or Abnet.
Amet and Mahumet to Fez; where being courteously received by the king, one of
them became a Reader in the Amodoraccia, a most famous college of that city,
and the the yoongest was made tutor to the same kings young sons. These two
seeing themselves so entirely beloved of the king, and in so great favor with
the people, being advised by their father, and taking occasion upon the damage
which the Arabians and Moors did to those of their own law and sect, under
the ensigns of the Portugals, in whose pay they served. They demanded leave
of the king to display a (...) against the Christians, putting him in hope, (as
indeed it fell out) that they would easily draw those Moors unto him, who were
followers of the crown of Portugal, and by this means secure the provinces
of Sus, Hea, Ducala, Maroco, with others molested, and euilly entreated by the
Portugals. This request was contradicted by Mullei Nazer, brother to the king:
for (said he) if these men, under pretense of holiness, and defense of their
law, shall have some prosperous proceedings with arms in hand, it will not
afterward be in thy power (O king) to bridle or bring them down: for arms
make men courageous, and by victories they prove insolent, and the rout of
ambitious people are always desirous of innovation. But the king who had a
great opinion of their sanctity, making small account of the reasons his
brother alleged unto him, gave them a banner, and drumslade, and twenty horse
to accompany them, with letters of recommendation to the Arabians, the
princes, and the cities of Barbary. With these beginnings many people running
headlong after their fame, they overcame Ducala, and the country of Or Azaphi.
Saphia, and went forward even as far as Cabo de Guer, (which places then
were subject to the Portugals) and finding themselves strong, both in retinue
and credit, they demanded of the people (who at that time lived for the most
part freely, and came in to none, but such as they liked of themselves) that
seeing they now took up arms, for the Mahumetane law against the Christians,
they should aid them with their tenthes due unto God: the which were presently
yielded unto them by the people of Dara, and so they seized by little and
little upon Tarodant (where their father was made governor) and likewise of
Sus, Hea, Ducala, and other places adioining. They first planted themselves in
Tednest, and then in Tesarote, and in a conflict (...) Lopes Barriga, a famous
captain amongst the Portugals: but so they lost their own elder brother
therein. And afterward by fair words entering into the (...) of Maroco, they
poisoned the king, and in his stead made Amet Xeriffo to be proclaimed king of
Maroco. In the mean while the Arabians of Ducala, and Xarquia came to hand
blows with those of Garbia, each party holding themselves in the Xeriffoes
favor; but the Xeriffos perceiving the skirmish to grow hot, and that many
both of the one and of the other party went to wrack, turned their arms
against them both, and enriched themselves with their spoils. In former times
they used to send unto the king of Fez the fifth of all those booties which they
got; but after this victory, making no reckoning of their said custom, they
presented him only with six horses, and six camels, and those but silly ones:
whereat being moved, he sent to demand of them the fifth part of their spoils,
and the tribute that the king of Maroco paid him, threatening otherwise war
upon them. But in the mean while, this man dying, Amet his son, who was
scholar to the yoonger Xeriffo, was not only content, but further confirmed
Amet in the Signiorie of Maroco, so that in some small matter he would
acknowledge the kings of Fez for sovereign Princes over that city. But on the
other side the Xeriffi, whose reputation and power daily increased, when the
time of paying tribute came, sent to certify this young king, that being
lawful successors to Mahumet, they were not bound to pay tribute to any, and
that they had more right to Africa then he: so that if he would have them his
friends, so it were; otherwise if he meant to divert them from this their war
against the Christians, they should not want courage nor power to defend
themselves. Wherewith the Fessan king being offended, proclaimed war against
them, and went himself in person to the siege of Maroco: but at the very first
he was driven to dislodge: and afterward returning with eighteen thousand
horse, amongst whom were two thousand harquebuziers, or bowmen, he was
vanquished by the Xeriffi, who had no more but seven thousand horse, and twelve
hundred harquebuziers which were placed on the way at the passage of a river.
By means of this victory the Xeriffi shook off the tribute of that country,
and passing over Atlas, they took Tafilete, an important city: and partly by
fair means, partly by force, they brought diverse people of Numidia to their
obedience, as also those of the mountains. In the year of our Lord 1536. the
yoonger Xeriffo who was now called king of Sus, having gathered together a
mighty army, and much artillery, taken in part from the king of Fez, and
partly Artillery cast by French Renegados.
cast by the French Renegados, he went to the enterprise of Cabo de Guer, a
very important fortification, held then by the Portugals, which was built and
fortified sirst at the charge of Lopes Sequeira: and afterward, knowing their
opportunity from the king Don Emanuel, there was fought on both sides a most
terrible battle. In the end, fire taking hold on the munition, and upon this
the soldiers being daunted that defended the fortress, the Xeriffo entered
thereinto, took the town, and made the greatest part of the garrison his
prisoners. By this victory the Xeriffi brought in a manner all Atlas and the
kingdom of Maroco to their obedience, and those Arabians who served the crown
of Portugal. Whereupon king John the third, seeing that his expenses far
exceeded the revenues which came in, of his own accord gave over Safia,
Azamor, Arzilla, and Alcazar, holds which he had on the coast of Mauritania.

This (...) was an occasion of grievous discord betwixt the Brothers: the issue
whereof was, that the younger having in two battles subdued the elder (whereof
the second was in the year of our Lord 1554) and taken him prisoner, he
banished him to Tafilet: and afterward turning his arms against the king of
Fez, after having taken him once prisoner, and then releasing him, he yet the
second time (because he brake promise) got him into his hands again, deprived
him of his estate, and in the end caused both him and his sons to be slain;
and by means of his own sons he also took Tremizen.

In the mean while Sal Araes viceroy of Algier fearing the Xeriffos prosperous
success, gathered together a great army, with which he first recovered
Tremizen, and afterward defeating the Xeriffo, conquered Fez, and gave the
government thereof to Buasson Prince of Veles: but this man joining battle
with the Xeriffo, lost at one instant both his city and kingdom. In the end.
Mahumet going to Tarodant was upon the way slain in his pauilion, by the
treason of some Turks, suborned thereunto by the viceroy of Algier, of whom
one Assen was the chief: who together with his companions went into Tarodant,
and there made hauock of the kings treasures: But in their return home, they
were all, but five, slain by the people, in the year 1559: and Mullei Abdala
the Xeriffos son, was proclaimed and saluted king.

Let thus much suffice to have bin spoken of the Xeriffo: whose proceedinges
appear much like to those of Ismael the sophie of Persia. Both of them
procured followers by blood and the cloak of religion: both of them subdued in
short time many countries: both of them grew great by the ruin of their
neighbors both of them received grievous checkes by the Turks, and lost a
part of their states: for Selym took from Ismael, Cacamit and diverse other
cities of Diarbena: And the viceroy of Algier did drive the Xeriffo out of
Tremizen, and his other quarters: And even as Selim won Tauris, the head city
of Persia, and afterward gave it over: so Sal Araes took Fez the head city
of Mauritania, and then after abandoned the same.

The Xeriffo his revenues, or commings in.
THe Xeriffo is absolute Lord of all his subjects goods, yea and of their
persons also. For though he charge them with never so burdensome tributes, and
impositions; yet dare they not so much as open their mouths: He receives from
his tributarie vassals, the tenthes, and first fruits of their corn and
cattle. True it is, that for the first fruits he takes no more but one for
twenty, and the whole being above twenty, he demands no more then two,
though it amount to an hundred. For every days tilth of ground he has a
ducate and a quarter, and so much likewise for every house; as also, he has
after the same rate of every person above fifteen years old, male, or female;
and when need requires, a greater sum: and to the end that the people may
the more cheerefullie pay that which is imposed upon them, he always
demands half as much more as he is to receive. Most true it is, that on the
mountains there inhabit certain fierce and vatamed people, who by reason of
the steep, craggie, and inexpugnable situation of their country cannot be
forced to tributes; that which is gotten of them, is the tenth of their corn
and fruits, only that they may be permitted to have recourse into the plains.
Besides these revenues, the king has the towles and customs of Fez, and of
other cities: For at the entering of their goods, the natural citizen pays
two in the hundred, and the stranger ten.

He has further, the revenues of milles, and many other things, the Caruuen
the principal Mahumetan temple in Fez, being a mile and an (...) about. Read
Leo, lib. 3.
sum whereof is very great: for the milles yield him little less then half
a royal of plate, for every Hanega of corn that is ground in Fez, where, (as
they say) there are above four hundred mils. The moschea of Caruuen had
fourscore thousand ducates of rent: the colleges and hospitals of Fez had
also many thousands. Al which the king has at this present. And further he is
heir to all the Alcaydes, and them that have pension of him, and at their
deaths he possesses their horses, armor, garments, and al their goods.
Howbeit if the deceased leave any sons apt for the service of the wars, he
grants them their fathers provision; but if they be but young, he brings up
the male children to years of service, and the daughters, till they be
married. And therefore, that he may have some interest in the goods of rich
men, he bestows upon them some government, or charge, with provision.
Wherefore for fear of confiscation after death, every one coueteth to (...)
his wealth, or to remove far from the court, and the kings sight. For which
cause the city of Fez comes far short of her ancient glory. Besides, his
revenues have been augmented of late years by mighty sums of gold, which he
fetches from Tombuto and Gago in the land of Negros; which gold (according to
the report of some) may yearly amount to three millions of ducates.

His Forces.
THe Xeriffo has not any Fortresses of great importance, but only upon the
seacoast, as Cabo de Guer, Larache, and Tetuan: for as the Turks and Persians
do, so he places the strength of his state in armed men: but especially in
horse. And for this cause he stands not much upon his artillery; although
he has very great store (which his predecessors took from the Portugals and
others) in Fez, Maroco, Tarodant, and in the foresaid (...); causing also more
to be cast, when need requires; for he wants not masters of Europe in this
Science. He has an house of munition in Maroco, where they make ordinarily six
and forty quintals of powder every month; as likewise also caliuers and
steele-bowes. In the year of our Lord 1569. a fire took hold on these houses
with such fury, that a great part of the city was destroyed therewith. But
for the Xeriffoes forces, they are of two sorts: the first is of two thousand
seven hundred horse, and two thousand harquibuziers, which he has partly in
Fez, but most in Maroco (where he is resident) being as it were of his daily
guard. The second is of a royal squadron of six thousand gentlemen, being all
of noble parentage, and of great account. These men are mounted upon excellent
horses, with furniture and arms, for variety of color most beautiful, and
for riches of ornament beyond measure estimable: for every thing about them
shines with gold, silver, pearl, jewels, and whatsoever else may please the
eye, or satisfy the curiosity of beholders. These men, besides provision of
corn, oil, butter, and flesh, for themselves, their wives, children, and
servants, receive further in wages, from seventy to an hundred ounces of
silver a man. The third sort of forces which he has, consists of his *
Timariotti: These are a military order, like unto them which hold land (...)
us under the (...) of knights service.
for the Xeriffo grants to all his sons, and brothers, and other persons of
account or authority among the people of Afric, or to the princes of the
Arabians, the benefit of great Lordships and tenures for sustentation of his
Cauallarie: and the Alchaides themselves till the fields, and afterward reap
rice, oil, barley, butter, sheep, hens, and money, and distribute the same
monthly to the soldiers; according to the several quality of their persons.
They also give them cloth, linen, and silk to apparel themselves, arms of
offense, and defense, and horses, with which they serve in the wars, and if
they die or be killed, they allow them other. A thing which was also used in
Rome, toward them that served on public horses. Every one of these leaders
contendeth to bring his people into the field well ordered, for arms,
apparel, and horses: besides this, they have between four and twenty and
thirty ounces of silver wages every year. His fourth military forces, are
the Arabians, who live continually in their Auari, (for so they call their
habitations, each one of them consisting of an hundred, or two hundred (...))
governed by diverse Alchaides, to the end they may be ready in time of need.
These serve on horseback, but they are rather to be accounted thieves, then
true soldiers. His fifth kind of forces military, are somewhat like unto the
trained soldiers of Christian princes; and among these, the inhabitants of
cities and villages of the kingdom, and of the mountains are enrolled. It is
true, that the king makes but little account of them, and very seldom puts
arms into their hands, for fear of insurrections and rebellions, except in
the wars against the Christians, for then he cannot conveniently forbid them:
For it being written in their law, that if a Moore kill a Christian, or is
slain by him, he goes directly into Paradise, (a diabolical invention) men,
women, and those of every age and degree, run to the wars hand over head,
that at least they may there be slain; and by this means (according to their
foolish opinion) gain heaven. No less zeal, to our confusion, may we
perceive in the Turks especially for defense of their sect: for one would
think they went to a marriage, and not to the war, scarcely being able with
patience to attend their prefixed time of going thither. They repute them holy
and happy, that die with arms in hand against their enemies; as on the
contrary, those men unhappy, and of little worth, that die at home, amidst
the lamentation of children, and outcries of women.

By the things above set down, we may easily comprehend, what numbers of men
the Xeriffo can bring into the field: but yet we may learn better by
experience. For Mullei Abdala in the year 1562. besieged Mazagan with two
hundred thousand men, choking the ditch with a mountain of earth, and beating
down the walls thereof with his Artillery: but for all this, he was enforced
by the valor of the Portugals, and the damage which he received by their
mines, to give over his siege. Besides, this Prince can not continue a great
war, above two, or three months: and the reason hereof is, because his forces
living on that provision which he has daily coming in, as well for
sustenance as for aparrell, and not being able to have all this conducted
thither, where the war requires, it follows of necessity, that in short
time they must needs return home for their maintenance of life: and further it
is an evident thing, that no man can protract a war at length, except he be
rich in treasure. Molucco who overthrew Sebastian king of Portugal, had in pay
under his ensigns forty thousand horse, and eight thousand foot besides
Arabians and adventurers: But it is thought, he could have brought into the
field, seventy thousand horse, and more foot then he did.

Of the dominions and fortresses which the king of Spain has upon the Isles
and maine lands of Africa, and of the great quantity of treasure and other
commodities which are brought from thence.
BEsides Oran, Mersalquibir, Melilla and Pennon which the king of Spain
possesses within the streights; as likewise, ceuta, Tanger, and Arzil, which
by the title of Portugal he holds very near the streights of Gibraltar; and
Mazagan in like sort without the streights mouth, twenty miles to the
southward of Arzil: he has along the coast of Afric, from Cape de Guer, to
that of Guardafu, two sorts of states: for some are immedidiately under him;
and others are as it were his adherents. The Islands of Madera, Puerto Santo,
the Canaries, the Isles of Arguin, of Cabo Verde, the isle Del Principe, with
that of Sant Thomas, and others near adioining, are immediately under his
dominion. These islands are maintained with their own victual, and provision,
and yet they have also some out of Europe, as in like manner they send some
thither: especially sugars and fruits, wherewith the isle of Madera
woonderfully abounds, as also with wine. And the island of Sant Thomas
likewise has great abundance of sugars. These States have no encumbrance, but
by the English and French men of war, Mine author here much mistaketh the
matter.
which for all that go not beyond Cape Verde. At the islands of Arguin, and at
Sant George de la Mina, the Portugals have planted factories in form of
fortresses, by means of which, they trade with the bordering people of Guinie
and Libya, and get into their hands the gold of Mandinga, and other places
near about. Among the adherent Princes, the richest and most honorable, is the
king of Congo, in that his kingdom is one of the most flourishing, and
plentiful countries in all Ethiopia. The Portugals have there two Colonies,
one in the city of S. Saluador, and an other in the island Loanda. They have
diverse rich commodities from this kingdom, but the most important is every
year about 5000. slaves, which they transport from thence, and sell them at
good round prizes in all the isles and maine lands of the west Indies: and for
the head of every slave so taken up, there is a good tax paid to the crown
of Portugal. From this kingdom one might easily go to the country of Prete
Ianni, for it is not thought to be very far off: and it does so abound with
Elephants, victual, and all other necessary things, as would bring singular
ease and commodity to such an enterprise. Upon the kingdom of Congo confineth
Angola, with whose prince of late years Paulo Dias a Portugal captain made
war: And the principal occasion of this war are certain mines of silver, in
the mountains of Cabambe, no whit inferior to those of Potossi; but by so much
are they better, as fine silver goes beyond that which is base, and course.
And out of doubt, if the Portugals had esteemed so well of things near at
hand, as they did of those farther off and remote, and had thither bent their
forces wherewith they passed Capo de buena esperanca, and went to India,
Malaca, and the Malucoes; they had more easily, and with less charge found
greater wealth: for there are no countries in the world richer in gold and
silver, then the kingdoms of Mandinga, Ethiopia, Congo, Angola, Butua, Toroa,
Maticuo, Boro, Quiticui, Monomotapa, Cafati, and Mohenemugi. But humane avarice
esteems more of an other man's, then his own, and things remote appear
greater then those near at hand. Between Cabo de buena esperanca, and Cape
Guardafu, the Portugals have the fortresses of Sena, Cephala, and Mozambique.
And by these they continue masters of the trade with the bordering nations, all
which abound in gold and iuorie. By these fortresses they have special
commodity, for their navigations to the Indies; because their fleetes sometimes
winter, and otherwhiles victual, and refresh themselves there. In these parts
the king of Melinde is their greatest friend, and those of Quiloa, and other
neighbour-islands, are their tributaries. The Portugals want nothing but men.
For besides other islands, which they leave in a manner abandoned, there is
that of Saint Laurence, one of the greatest in all the world (being a thousand
two hundred miles long, and four hundred and fower-score broad) the which,
though it be not well tilled, yet for the goodness of the soil it is apt and
fit to be manured, nature having distinguished it with rivers, harbors, and
most commodious baies. These States belonging to the crown of Portugal, fear
no other but such sea-forces, as may be brought thither by the Turks. But the
daily going to and fro of the Portugal fleetes, which coast along up and down
those seas, altogether secureth them. In the year 1589. they took near unto
Mombaza, four galleys, and a galliot, belonging to the Turks, who were so
bold as to come even thither.

The dominions of the great Turk in Africa.
THe great Turk possesses in Africa all the seacoast from Velez de Gumera, or
(as some hold opinion) from the river Muluia, which is the eastern limite of
the kingdom of Fez, even to the Arabian gulf or Red sea, except some few
places (as namely Mersalcabir, Melilla, Oran, and Pennon) which the king of
Spain holds. In which space before mentioned are situate sundry of the most
famous cities and kingdoms in all Barbary; that is to say, Tremizen, Alger,
Tenez, Bugia, Constantina, Tunis, Tripolis, and all the country of Egypt, from
Alexandria to the city of Asna, called of old Siene, together with some part
of Arabia Troglodytica, from the town of Suez to that of Suachen. Also in
Africa the grand Signor has five viceroies, called by the names of Beglerbegs
or Bassas, namely at Alger, Tunis, Tripolis, at Missir for all Egypt, and at
Suachen for those places which are challenged by the great Turk in the
dominions of Prete Ianni. Finally, in this part at Suez in the bottom of the
Arabian gulf, is one of his four principal Arsenals, or places for the
building, repairing, docking, and harboring of his warlike galleys, which may
lie here under covert, to the number of five and twenty bottomes.

A summarie discourse of the manifold Religions professed in Africa: and first
of the Gentiles.
AFrica contains four sorts of people different in religion: that is to say,
Gentiles, Jews, Mahumetans, and Christians. The Gentiles extend themselves
along the shore of the Ocean, in a manner from Cabo Blanco, or the white Cape,
even to the northren borders of Congo; as likewise, from the southerly bounds
of the same kingdom, even to Capo de buena Esperanca; and from thence, to that
De los Corrientes: and within the land they spread out, from the Ethiopick
Ocean, even unto Nilus, and beyond Nilus also from the Ethiopick, to the
Arabian sea. These Gentiles are of diverse sorts, for some of them have no light
of God, or religion, neither they are governed by any rule or law. Whereupon the
Arabians call them Cafri, that is to say, lawless, or without law. They have
but few habitations, and they live for the most part in caves of mountains,
or in woods, wherein they find some harbor from wind and rain. The ciuilest
among them, who have some understanding and light of divinity and religion,
obey the Monomotapa, whose dominion extends with a great circuit, from the
confines of Matama, to the river Cuama: but the noblest part thereof is
comprehended between the mighty river of Magnice or Spirito Sancto, and that
of (...), for the space of six hundred leagues. They have no idols, and
believe in one only God, called by them Mozimo. Little differing from these we
may esteem the subjects of Mohenemugi. But among all the Cafri, the people
called Agag or Giacchi, are reputed most brutish, inhabiting in woods and dens,
and being deuourers of man's flesh. They dwell upon the left bank of Nilus,
between the first and second lake. The Anzichi also have a shambles of man's
flesh, as we have of the flesh of oxen. They eat their enemies whom they take
in war; they sell their slaves to butchers, if they can light on no greater
prise: and they inhabit from the river Zaire, even to the deserts of Nubia.
Some others of them are rather addicted to witchcraft, then to idolatry:
considering that in a man, the fear of a superior power is so natural, that
though he adore nothing under the name and title of a God, yet does he
reverence and fear some superiority, although he know not what it is. Such
are the Biafresi, and their neighbors, all of them being addicted in such sort
to witchcraft, as that they vaunt, that by force of enchantment, they can not
only charm, and make men die, much more molest and bring them to hard point:
but further, raise winds and rain, and make the sky to thunder and lighten,
and that they can destroy all herbs and plants, and make the flocks and
herds of cattle to fall down dead. Whereupon they reverence more the devil
then any thing else: sacrificing unto him of their beasts and fruits of the
earth, yea their own blood also, and their children. Such are likewise the
priests of Angola, whom they call Ganghe. These make profession that they have
in their hands dearth and abundance; fair weather and foul; life and death.
For which cause it can not be expressed, in what veneration they are held among
these Barbarians. In the year 1587. a Portugal captain being in a part of
Angola with his soldiers, a Ganga was requested by the people, to refresh the
fields, which were dry and withered, with some quantity of water. He needed
no great entreaty, but going forth with diverse little bells, in presence of the
Portugals, he spent an half hour in fetching suudry gambols and skips, and
uttering diverse superstitious murmurings: and behold, a cloud arose in the
air, with lightning and thunder. The Portugals grew amazed; but all the
Barbarians with great joy admired and extolled unto heaven, their Ganga, who
now gave out intolerable brags, not knowing what hung over his head: For the
winds outragiously blowing, the sky thundering after a dreadful manner, in
stead of the rain by him promised, there fell a thunderbolt, which like a
sword cut his head clean from his shoulders. Some other idolaters not looking
much aloft, worship earthly things: such were the people of Congo before their
conversion, and are at this day those that have not yet received the Gospel.
For these men worship certain dragons with wings, and they foolishly nourish
them in their houses, with the delicatest meats that they have. They worship
also serpents of horrible shape, goats, tigers, and other creatures, and the
more they fear and reverence them, by how much the more deformed and monstrous
they are. Amongst the number of their gods also, they reckon bats, owls,
owlets, trees, and herbs, with their figures in wood and stone: and they do
not only worship these beasts living, but even their versy kins when they are
dead, being filled with straw, or some other matter: and the manner of their
idolatry is, to bow down before the foresaid things, to cast themselves
groueling upon the earth, to cover their faces with dust, and to offer unto
them of their best substance. Some lifting up their minds a little higher,
worship stars, such be the people of Guinie, and their neighbors, who are
inclined to the worship of the sun, the greatest part of them: and they hold
opinion, that the souls of those dead that lived well, mount up into heaven,
and there dwell perpetually near unto the sun. Neither want there amongst
these, certain others so superstitious, as they worship for God the first
thing they meet withal, coming out of their houses. They also hold their
kings in the account and estimation of Gods, whom they suppose to be descended
from heaven, and their kings, to maintain themselves in such high reputation,
are served with wonderful ceremonies, neither will they be seen but very
seldom.

Of the Jews.
THe Jews who have been dispersed by god throughout the whole world, to
confirm us in the holy faith, entered into Ethiopia in the Queen of Sabas
days, in company of a son that Solomon had by her, to the number (as the
Abassins affirm) of twelve thousand, and there multiplied their generation
exceedingly. In that they not only filled Abassia, but spread themselves
likewiseall over the neighbor provinces. So that at this day also the Abassins
affirm, that upon Nilus toward the west, there inhaibteth a most populous
nation of the Jewish stock, under a mighty K. And some of our modern
Cosmographers set down a province in those quarters, which they call The land
of the Hebrews, placed as it were under the equinoctial, in certain unknown
mountains, between the confines of Abassia, and Congo. And likewise on the
north part of the kingdom of Goiame, and the southerly quarter of the kingdom
of Gorham, there are certain mountains, peopled with Jews, who there
maintain themselves free, and absolute, through the inaccessiable situations
of the same. For in truth by this means, the inhabitants of the mountains
(speaking generally) are the most ancient, and freest people: in that the
strong situation of their native soil secureth them, from the incursions of
foreign nations, and the violence of their neighbors. Such are the Scotts in
Britain, and the Biskaines in Spain. But to return again to our purpose: the
Anzichi, who extend from the banks of the river Zaire, even to the confines of
Nubia, use circumcision, as also diverse other bordering people do, a thing that
must necessarily have been brought in by the Jews, and yet remaining still in
use, after the annihilation of the Mosaicall law amongst them. Some also think,
that the people called Cafri or Cafates at this day, who are gentiles, draw
their original from the Jews, but being environed on every side by Idolaters,
they have by little and little swarued from the law of Moses: and so are
become, as it were, insensibly, Idolaters. On the other side, the Jews being
woonderfully increased in Spain, passed one after an other into Affricke and
Mauritania, and dispersed themselves even to the confines of Numidia,
especially by means of traffic, and the profession of goldsmithes, the which
being utterly forbidden the Mahumetans, is altogether practiced amongst them by
the Jews, as are likewise diverse other mechanical crafts, but principally
that of black smithes. A thing which notably appears in mount Sefsaua in the
kingdom of Maroco, and in mount Anteta. It is said that Eitdeuet, a town in
the kingdom of Maroco, was inhabited by the Jews, of the stock (as they
affirm) of David, who notwithstanding by little and little are grown
Mahumetans. The Jews increased afterward in Afric, when first (...) king of
Spain called The catholic, and after him Emanuell king of Portugal, put them
forth of their dominions: For then many went over into the kingdoms of Fez and
Maroco, and brought in thither the arts and professions of Europe unknown
before to those Barbarians. In Bedis, Teza, Elmedina, Tefsa, and in Segelmesse
every placeis full of them. They pass also by way of traffic even to Tombuto,
although John Leo writes how that king was so greatly their enemy, that he
confiscated the goods of those that traded with them. It imports me not to
speak of Egypt, because it has ever been, as well by reason of the neernes
of Palestina, as for the commodity of traffic, whereunto they are much
inclined, as it were, their second country. Here in great number, and in a
manner in all the cities and towns thereof, they exercise mechanical arts,
and use traffic and merchandise, as also take upon them the receipt of taxes
and customs: but above all other places, in Alexandria and Cairo, where they
amount to the number of five and twenty thousand, and the ciuiller sort among
them do usually speak the Castilian tongue.

(...) much may suffice to have been spoken concerning the Jews. It now
remains, that we come to entreat of the Mahumetans of Africa. Concerning
whom, before we make any particular relation, it will not be amiss; for the
readers more perfect instruction, to speak somewhat in general: as namely of
the sinister proceedings of their first seducer Mahumet; of the variety and
propagation of their damned sects over the east and south parts of the world;
of the four principal nations which are the mainteiners and vpholders of this
diabolical religion; and of sundry other particulars most worthy the
observation.

Of Mahumet, and of his accursed religion in general.
MAhumet his father, was a certain profane Idolater called Abdala, of the
stock of Ismael, and his mother was one Or Emina.
Hennina a Jew, both of them being of very humble, and poor condition. He was
borne in the year of our Lord 562. and was endowed with a grave countenance
and a quick wit. Being grown to man's estate, the Scenite Arabians, accustomed
to rob, and run all over the country, took him prisoner, and sold him to a
Persian merchant, who discerning him to be apt, and subtle about business,
affected and held him in such account, that after his death his mistress
remaining a widow, scorned not to take him for her husband. Being therefore
enriched by this means, with goods and credit, he raised up his mind to
greater matters. The times then answered very fitly for one that would
disturb or work any innovation. For the Arabians upon some evil entreatie
were malecontented with the Emperor Heraclius. The heresies of Arrius and
Nestorius, had in a miserable sort shaken and annoied the church of God. The
Jews, though they wanted power, yet amounted they to a great number. The
Saracens prevailed mightily, both in number and force. And the Roman Empire
was full of slaves. Mahumet therefore taking hold on this opportunity, framed
a law, wherein all of them should have some part, or prerogative. In this two
Apostata Jews, and two heretics, assisted him: of which, one was John, being
a scholar of Nestorius school; and the other Sergius, of the sect of Arrius.
Whereupon the principal intention of this cursed law was wholly aimed against
the divinity of our Savior Jesus Christ, wickedly oppugned by the Jews and
Arrians. He persuaded this law, first by giving his wife to understand, and his
neighbors by her means, and by little and little others also, that he
conuersed with the angel Gabriell, unto whose brightness he ascribed the
falling sickness, which many times prostrated him upon the earth: dilating and
amplifying the same in like sort, by permitting all that which was plausible to
sense and the flesh; as also by offering liberty to all slaves that would come
to him, and receive his law. Wherefore being prosecuted hard by the masters of
those fugitive slaves led away by him, he fled to Medina Talnabi, and there
remained some time. From this flight the Mahumetans fetch the original of
their Hegeira. But questionless there was nothing that furthered more the
enlargement of the Mahumetan sect, then prosperitic in arms, and the multitude
of victories; whereby Mahumet overthrew the Persians, became lord of Arabia,
and drove the Romans out of Syria. And his successors afterward extended
their empire from Euphrates to the Atlantic Ocean, and from the river Niger to
the Pirenei mountains, and beyond. They occupied Sicilia, assailed Italy, and
with continual prosperity, as it were; for three hundred years, either
subdued, or encumbred, both the east and west. But to return to Mahumet his
law, it embraces circumcision, and makes a difference between meats pure and
vnpure, partly to allure the Jews. It denies the Divinity of Christ, to
reconcile the Arrians, who were then most mighty; it foisteth in many
frivolous fables, that it might fit the Gentiles: and loses the bridle to the
flesh, which is a thing acceptable to the greatest part of men. Whereupon
Auicen (though he were a Mahumetan) writes thus of such a law: Lex nostra
(says he) quam de dit Mahumeth, etc. that is to say, Our Law, which Mahumet
gave us, regards the disposition of felicity or misery, according to the
body. But there is another promise, which concerns the mind, or the soul:
which wise Divines had a far greater desire to apprehend, then that of the
body, which though it be given unto them, yet respect they it not, nor hold it
in any estimation, in comparison of that felicity which is a conjunction with
truth.

Mahumet being dead, Or Haly.
All, Abubequer, Omar, and Odoman his kinsemen, each of them pretending to be
his true successor, wrote distinctly every one by himself. Upon which there
did arise four several sects. All was head of the sect Imemia, being
followed by the Persians, Indians, and many Arabians, and Gelbines of Africa.
Abubequer gave foundation to the sect Melchia, embraced generally by the
Arabians, Saracens, and Africans. Omar was author of the Anefia, which is on
foot among the Turks in Syria, and in that part of Africa which is called
Zahara. Odman left behim the Banefia, or Xefaia, as we may term it, which
wants not followers among the foresaid nations. Of these four sects, in
process of time, grown sixty eight other very famous, besides some of less
renown and fame. Among the many Mahumetan sects, there are the Morabites, who
lead their lives for the most part in Hermitages, and make profession of Moral
Philosophy, with certain principles differing from the Alcoran. One of these
was that Morabite, which certain years past, showing Mahumet his name
imprinted in his breast (being done with Aqua Fortis, as I suppose, or some such
thing) raised up a great number of Arabians in Africa, and laid siege to
Tripolis; where being betrayed by his captain, he remained the Turks
prisoner, who sent his skin to the grand Signor. This man being in prison, said
to an Italian slave, his familiar, who went to visit him; I grieve at nothing
but you Christians, who have abandoned me. In that the knights of Malta only
sent him small succor, of powder and shot. These Morabites affirm, (to
declare some of their fooleries) that when All fought, he killed ten thousand
Christians with one blow of a sword, and that this sword was an hundred cubits
long. Then there is the foolish, and (...) sect of Cobtini. One of these showed
himself not many years sithence in the market places and quarters of Algier,
mounted on a reed, with a bridle and raines of leather, giving the multitude to
understand, that upon that horse in one night, he rid an hundred leagues; and
he was for this greatly honored and reverenced.

In tract of time, there grew amongst the Mahumetans, through the vanity of
their law, and the incredible variety and difference of opinions, great
disorders: For their sect being not only wicked, and treacherous (as we have
declared) but also gross and foolish, those that made profession thereof to
defend and maintain it, were enforced to make a thousand interpretations and
constructions, far sometimes from reason, and otherwhiles from the express
words of Mahumet him self. The Califas endeavored mightily to reform this;
but their provisions of greatest importance were two. For first, Moauia (this
man flourished about the year of our Lord 770) called an assembly of learned
and judicial men, to establish that which in their sect should be believed,
and to this end he caused all the books of Mahumet, and his successors, to be
gathered together. But they not agreeing amongst themselves, he chose out of
them, six of the most learned, and shutting them within an house, with the
said writings, he commanded them, that every one should make choice of that,
which seemed best unto him. These men reduced the Mahumetan doctrine into six
books, setting down the pennaltie of loss of life, to them that should
otherwise speak, or write of the law. But because the Arabians gave their
minds to Philosophy, in the universities of Bagdet, Fez, Maroco, and Cordoua
(and being of piercing and subtle wits) they could not but look into the
fopperies of their sect. There was added unto this another prouiso, which was a
statute, that forbad them the study of Philosophy: by means of which
statute, their Universities before most flourishing, have within these four
hundred years daily declined. At this day the sects of Mahumetan impiety are
distinguished more through the might and power of those nations that follow
them, then of themselves: and the principal nations are four, that is to say,
Arabians, Persians, Tartars, and Turks. The Arabians are most superstitious,
and zealous. The Persians stand more upon reason and nature: The Tartars hold
much gentilisine and simplicity: and the Turks (especially in Europe) are
most of them Libertines, and Martialistes.

The Arabians, as they that esteem it for great glory, that Mahumet was of
their nation, and buried in Mecca (or as others think in Medina Talnabi) have
labored with all art, and yet procure to spread their sect over the whole
world. In India they first prevailed with preaching, and afterward with arms.
Considering that seven hundred years sithence (king Perimal reigning in
Malabar) they began there to sow this cockle: and to bring the Gentiles more
easily within their net, they took (and at this day take) their daughters to
wife, a matter greatly esteemed of them, by reason of these men's wealth. By
this policy and the traffike of spices, which yielded them infinite profit,
they quickly set foot, and fastened it in India. They built towns, and planted
colonies, and the first place, where they grew to a body, was Calicut, which
of a small thing, by their concourse and traffike, became a mighty city. They
drew king Perimal to their sect, who at their persuasion resolved to go and end
his days at Mecca; and for that purpose he put himself onward on the voyage,
with certain ships laden with pepper and other precious commodities: but a
terrible tempest met him in the midst of his course, and drowned him in the
sea. They inhabit in Malabar where two sorts of Arabians or Moors (as we may
term them) have more exceedingly increased and prevailed, then in any other
part of the Indies: one is of strangers that arrive there by reason of the
traffike of Arabia, Cambaia, and Persia: and the other be those that daily are
borne of a (...) father, and a mother Gentile, or both of father and mother
Moors, and these (who are called Nateani, and differ from the other people, in
person, customs, and habit) make as it were a fourth part of the inhabitants
of that country. From Malabar, they went to the Maldiue, and Zeilan. Here they
began to take upon them the managing of the customs and impositions of cities
and towns; and by making them greater then in times past, they attained to the
grace and favor of the Princes and Lords, together with great reputation and
authority, yea preeminence and superiority over the common people: and
favoring those who embraced their sect, daily preached and diuulged by the
Papassi; but holding their hands heavy over such as showed themselves
repugnant, they incredibly advanced mahumetisme. Afterward perceiving
themselves strong and mighty, both in richesse, and followers, they seized on
the towns and cities. So that at this day, they command a good part of the
Maldiuae, and the ports of the most noble island of Zeilan, except that of
Columbo where the Portugals have a fortress. By like stratagem are they become
masters of the west part of (...), within little (...) then these two hundred
years, first prevailing by trade, and commerce, then by marriage and
affinity, and last of all by arms. From hence going forward, they have taken
into their hands the greatest part of the ports of that large Archipelago of
the Lucones, Malucos, Iauas, etc. They are Lords of the city of Sunda, in the
greater Iaua, they enjoy the greatest part of the Islands of Banda, and Maluco;
they reign in Burneo, and Gilolo. They came once as far as Lucon, a most noble
Island, and one of the Philippinas, and had planted therein three colonies. On
the other side, they conquered upon the firm land, first the rich kingdom of
Cambaia, and there established their sect, as they did the like, in all the
places adioining; from hence they went to Bengala, and became Lords thereof.
They cut off by little and little, from the crown of Siam, the state of
Malaca, (which the Portugals hold at this day) as likewise those of Ior, and
Pam; and more then two hundred leagues along the coast. Finally they are
entered into the most ample kingdom of China, and have built Moscheas in the
same; and if the Portugals in India and the Malucos, and afterward the
Spaniards in the Philippinas had not met them on the way, and with the gospel
and arms, interrupted their course, they would at this instant have possessed
infinite kingdoms of the east: yea in this they are so industrious and bold,
to our confusion, that even the Arabian mariners, that go in the Portugal
ships will tarry behind in the Gentile-townes, thereto publish their sect; and
in the year 1555. one of these men had passed even as far as Iapon, for this
purpose; so that if the Portugals had not remedied it in due time, he would
peradventure have wrought there some alteration.

The Persian nation, as touching their sect, a little before our time, have
been made renowned among those barbarous people, by the valor and arms of
Ismael, called the Sophi. This man accounting himself to be of the race and
blood of All, brought his own sect into credit and reputation, and waged
war against those borderers, who would not accept of it. He wore a red
Turbant, with twelve points or corners, in memorial of the twelve sons of
Ocen, the son of All, willing that all his followers should wear the like;
and many people came in unto him, and in a manner all those nations which
inhabit between the rivers Euphrates and Abianus, and between the Caspian sea
and the Persian gulphe. Tammas his son sent the said twelue-cornered Turbant
to the Mahumetan Princes of Malabar and Decan, persuading them to receive it
with his sect, and bestowing the title of a king, on whomesoeuer would accept
of it, but no others received it, save Nizzamaluco. It is a common voice and
opinion, that the greatest part of the Mahumetans of Syria and the lesser Asia
follow and affect inwardly the sect of All, and of the Persians; the which the
Turks perceiving in the vproare of Techelle, made a mighty slaughter of them,
carrying the kinsemen of the slain, and those suspected, out of Asia into
Europe.

But now let us pass to the Tartars. These (* as otherwhiles we declared) G.
B. B. Rel. un. part. 1. lib. 2. dell' Asia.
descended of the ten tribes of Israel, being transported by the order and
commission of Salmanazar, king of the Assirians, beyond India, into the of
(...). Here degenerating into rude and barbarous customs, and forgetting in a
great part, or altogether, the Moysaicall ceremonies, they hardly retained
circumcision. They came out of this their banishment, in the year of our Lord
1200. and in a small time, with the ruin of infinite nations, made themselves
terrible to all the east, and no less to the north. Pope Innocent the fourth,
being amazed at the horrible storm, that hung over the head of Christendom
(for they had spread themselves like locusts With this friar Ascelline was sent
Johannes de Plano Carpini, whose voyage is put down in the first volume of the
(...) voiages.
even to the banks of Danubius) sent from the council of Lions, Friar
Ascellino, of the order of Dominicus, with other Friars, to the great CAN in
the year 1246. to exhort him to embrace the name and faith of Christ; or at
least to let the Christians alone in peace. Of baptism he accepted not, but
promised a league with the Christians, for five years. Others notwithstanding
will needs have it, that he was converted, and that taking up arms in favor
of the Christians, he caused Mustaceno the Califa of Baldach, to die with
famine, amidst the treasures heaped up by him. But afterward either he, or
his successor, together with his people, denying their Christianity, became
Mahumetans in religion. And sithence that time, the Tartarian name and fame
growing obscure, that of the Turks began to flourish. The Tartars Petegorski
notwithstanding upon the mountains of Cumania, remained firm in the Christian
faith, but yet corrupted with the errors of the Greeks and Moscouites. The
Colmugineere the Caspian sea, continued in Paganism, who are termed
Capigliati, because they shave not off their hayres, as the other Tartarsdo.
The Kirgessi also be Idolaters, as otherwhiles we declared. The other Tartars
that are come on this side of Imaus, have all, from one to an other, embraced
Mahumetisme. And amongst others the Zagatai, who through the emulation they
have with the Persians (upon whom they border and contend for Empire) as
concerning sect, follow the opinion of the Turks, as also the Mogores their
descendents, who in these our days have enlarged their Empire, between mount
Caucasus and the Ocean, and between Ganges, and Indus. But the Tartars of
Cataya, resident beyond Imaus, and upon the desert called Lop, remain
generally in Idolatry, although there continue many Christians amongst them,
of the sect of Nestorius, neither want there some Mahumetans.

Now let us come to the Turks; who in largenes of Empire, are superior to the
other sects. Of these, part inhabit in Asia, part in Europe. Those of Asia
incline much to the opinion of the Persians, and especially they that inhabit
in Natolia, and the borders. But those of Europe are generally less
superstitious then the Asians, and by reason of their daily conversation with
Christians, they have a deeper opinion and conceit of Christ then the others,
yea, and many of them hold him for God, and Redeemer. And it is not long
sithence there were diverse put to death in Constantinople with special
constancy on their part: and it was thought that many of the grand (...) court
held the same opinion. The Turks, especially those of Europe, are of two
sorts: for some are natural Turks, others accessorie, or accidental.
Natural I term them, that are borne of Turkish parents: and them I call
accidental, who leaving our sacred faith, or the Moysaicall law, become
Mahumetans: the which the Christians perform by circumcising themselves, and
the Jews by lifting up a finger. Now the Christians become Turks, partly upon
some extreme and violent passion. Cherseogli (who afterward was great with
Bazaieth) turned Turk to be revenged of his father, who took from him his
wife, amidst the solemnity of the marriage. Or Olouchali.
Vlucciali denied the faith to be reue^ged of a slave, his companion in the
gallie, who called him scald pate. Some abjure the faith to release themselves
of torments and cruelties; others for hope of honors and temporal greatness:
and of these two sorts there are a great number in Constantinople, being
thought to be Christians in heart: and yet through slothfulnes, or first to
gather together more wealth, or expecting opportunity to carry with them,
their wives and children, or for fear of being discovered in their departure
and voyage, or else through sensuality, and for that they would not be
deprived of the licentiousnes and (...) of the life they lead, resolve not to
perform that they are bound unto; deferring thus from month to month, and
from year to year, to leave this Babylon and sink of sin. But the greatest
part of Renegados become Mahumetans without perceiving it. In that the grand
Signor sends every four years, more or less, according as need requires,
to take through his states of Europe, of every three christian male children
one, at the discretion of his Commissaries, by way of tribute, and they take
them from the age of ten, to the years of seventeen. These being brought to
Constantinople, are without other ceremonies circumcised, and part of them are
sent into Natolia and Caramania to learn the tongue, religion, and fashions of
the Turks: and part are employed about the service of the Seraglios, or
palaces of Constantinople, Pera, and Andrinople. Here living among the Turks,
far from their parents, separate from all conversation with the faithful,
and deprived of all spiritual aid and help, without perceiving, it they are
made Turks. The author of this, the most diabolical institution that ever was
made, was a certain Turkish saint, called (...) as, in the days of Amurath
the second: and in the beginning the number was but three thousand, and
afterward they exceeded not twelve thousand, until the time of Amurath the
third, who increased them to the number of four and twenty thousand. But
returning to their education: after some time they are called home again to
the Seraglios of the Zamoglans (for so are they termed, till they be enrolled
among the Ianissaries) to remain there under their heads and governors: and
in short time they become Ianissaries, or Spahies, and either they go to the
war, or are bestowed in some garrison, or else are resident in the court of
the Turk. They are called The sons of the grand Signor: they live with great
license and liberty: they do whatsoever pleases themselves: neither can they
be judged by any but the Agaes: during their lives they are seldo^times
punished, and yet when it is done, it is with great (...): in buying they make
their own prizes. These snares are strong enough to procure, that they never
care for returning any more to the bosom of the church. But that which is
woorst of all: every new Prince bestows on them a great larges, and
augmenteth their pay, at the Christians charge. They also kill and rob
whomsoever they please, especially the Christians throughout the whole
country, or in marching to the war, and the Christians dare not so much as
in a word find themselves agreeued: whereupon there grows in them such a
scorn and contempt of the Christian name, that they remain strangers to it.
That which I have said of young male children taken from out their mothers
bosoms, who without perceiving it become Mahumetanes, happens in like manner
unto them, whom the pirates by sea, or soldiers by land make slaves, presenting
them to the grand Signor. Besides the foresaid devises, the Turks further
spread abroad their sect with all kind of vantage and furtherance. For they
abase and bring to extreme misery the Christians and Moors their subjects,
not permitting them to ride, nor bear any kind of arms, nor to exercise any
manner of justice, or government. They make it lawful to take Christian women
that are not married. If the wife of a Christian turns Turk, and marries
herself with a Turk, their law permits, that the Christian husband by
turning Turk may take her again. They forbid the Christians to repair their
ruinate Churches, and suffer them in no wise to reedifie them fallen down,
without great bribes; and so the Christians through poverty let them come to
(...): by means where of the public worship of God fails, and in progress
of time also, the very Christian faith and belief. In Asia they will not
permit the (...) the use of their language, but only in sacred
administrations, to the end that together with their language, they may also
loose and forget their Christian fashions and customs. The Spahi being Lords
for term of life, of infinite villages, take such young men into their
servitude, as best pleases them; who in process of time, by conversation with
their masters, and the favors they hope after, and by the wicked fashions and
customs which they learn, as also through the sins and vices, wherein they
are drowned, do become Turks. And the Greeks children, after the example of
their companions, being thus favored and made much of, incline in such a sort
unto this evil, that upon every light occasion, they threaten their fathers
and mothers to turn Turks. Further it is forbidden the Mahumetanes to make
restitution of any place, once taken with arms, and wherein they have built a
Moschea. To conclude, they use all manner of circumstances, by mean of which
they may amplify or enlarge their dominion and sect.

Of the Mahumetans of Africa in particular.
THe Mahumetan impiety has spread it self throughout Africa beyond measure:
this pestilence entered into Egypt in the year of our Lord 637. by the arms of
Omar. From whence a captain of Odoman first passed into Africa in the year
650. with fower-score thousand fighting men, who there defeated Gregorius
Patritius. But they perpetually cast out of Africa the Romans with the people
of Absimacus, and Leontius the emperor, in the year 699. and wholly
impatronized themselves of Barbary. They pierced into Numidia and Libya in the
year 710. and overthrew the Azanaghi, and the people of Gualata, Oden, and
Tombuto. The year afterward 973. having passed Gambea, they infected the
Negroes, and the first that drunk of their poison were those of Melli. In the
year 1067. Iaiaia the son of Abubequer entered into the lower Ethiopia, and
by little and little subverted those people which confine upon the deserts of
Libya and Egypt, piercing even to Nubia and Guinea. The Arabia^s have augme^ted
their sect in Africa, first with force of arms, by banishing of the natural
inhabitants, the which they might well do, by reason of their infinite
multitude: and of them, that verse of David may well be understood: In circuitu
impij ambulant: secundum altitudinem tuam, multiplicasti filios hominum, etc.
The wicked walk round about; according to thy greatness, thou have multiplied
the sons of men. Where they could not come, nor give no blow with arms;
there they have ingraffed themselves, by preaching and traffike. The heresy of
Arrius furthered their enterprise, wherewith the Vandales and Goths being then
inhabiters of Africa were infected. To further their designments they brought
in the Arabicke language and letters. They founded Universities and Studies,
both for riches of reuenew, and magnificence of building most noble, especially
in Maroco, and Fez. But there is nothing that has greatlier furthered the
progression of the Mahumetan sect, then perpetuity of victory, and the
greatness of conquests, first of the Califas in the east, and afterward of the
Miramolines in Afric: In that the greatest part of men, yea, and in a manner
all, except such as have fastened their confidence upon the cross of Christ,
and settled their hope in eternity, follow that which best agrees with sense,
and measure the grace of God by worldly prosperity. And yet Christ (as
Justinius the Philosopher, and glorious martyr testifies) promised no earthly
reward to good works. Carnal men therefore perceiving the empire of the Califas
and Mahumetans continually to increase in the east and west, taking into their
hands both sea and land, (for this their felicity in arms continued three
hundred years, wherein they conquered all that which lies between the river
Abianus and the Atlantike Ocean, and subdued Spain, Sicilia, and a part of
Italy and France) and judging that temporal prosperity and victories were
the effects and fruits, or at least the arguments and signs of the grace and
favor of God, they easily fell into Apostasy, whereunto the impiety of
Arrius and other heretics opened the way, who for long tract of time
estranging themselves more and more from the Evangelical truth, fell in the
end into Atheism: as we see has fallen out in the course of some modern
enormities. But to return from whence we have digressed; in progress of time
there grew great differences between the Mahumetans: for their sect being no
less sottish and foolish, then wicked and perfidious, the mainteiners of it
were driven to fetch reasons far off for defense of the same. But the
Arabians not contented in Africa to have subiugated with arms, and with false
doctrine to have pestered Barbary, Numidia, Libya, and the country of
Negroes, they further on the other side assailed the lower Ethiopia, both by
sea and land. By land entered thereinto in the year 1067. Faiaia the son of
Abubequer, and by means of certain Alsachi, he dispersed that pestilence into
Nubia, and the neighbor provinces. On the other side passing the Red sea, they
first took knowledge of the coast of Ethiopia, even to Cabo de los corrientes,
by their continual traffike thither: and afterward being encouraged by the
weakness of the natural inhabitants, they erected the kingdoms of Magadazo,
Melinde, Mombazza, Quiloa, Mozambique, and seized on some ports of the island
of Saint Laurence: and gathering force by little and little, they enlarged
their empire within the land, and established therein the kingdoms of Dangali
and Adel. So that on the one side they have spread their sect, from the Red sea
to the Atlantike Ocean, and from the Mediterran sea to the river Niger, and
farther: and on the other, have taken into their hands all the eastern coast
of Africa, from Suez to Cape Guardafu, and from this, even to that De los
corrientes, and the adioining islands. In which places though the people be not
altogether Mahumetans, yet have the Mahumetans the weapons and dominion in
their hands; the which how much it imports for the bringing in of sects, we
may easily conceive. To conclude, they have often assailed the Prete Ianni;
sometimes the Turks, who have taken from him the ports of the Red sea; and
otherwhiles the Moors, under the conduct of the king of Adel, who has, and
does molest them greatly, leading into captituitie a great number of Abassins,
where they become for the most part Mahumetans.

Of the Christians of Africa.
NOw that we have declared the miseries and darkness of Afric, it remains
that we set down that little light of true religion which there is; the which
I can not pass over, without exceeding glory to the Portugal nation. In that
they with inestimable charge, and infinite travail, have first sought to open
the way to Ethiopia, and to bring the great Negus of Abassia, called by us
Prete Ianni, to the union of the christian church of Europe, performing
whatsoever, after this, for the conversion of the princes of Guinia and
Meleghette to the faith, and yet more happily of the king of Congo and the
Princes of Angola; and likewise with diverse colonies sent to the islands of the
Atlantic Ocean, they have no less adua^ced the honor of their own nation,
then the propagating of the christian faith. And finally, passing beyond Cabo
de buena esperanca, they have resisted the Mahumetan sect, which had now
extended it self on the backside of Africa, as far as Cabo de los corrientes.

Of the Christians in Egypt.
THe Christians of Egypt are partly strangers, partly home-borne in the
country; strangers come thither in regard of traffic which there flourishes
above measure, especially in the cities of Alexandria and Cairo; by reason
that this kingdom being most commodiously situate between the Red and
Mediterran seas, unites the west parts of the world with the east, by mean of
an infinite traffic; and therefore is it as it were a ladder, whereby the
wealth of India and of the Eoan Ocean, passes into the lesser Asia, into
Afric, and Europe. Whereupon not only the Venetians, Florentines, and
Ragusians come thither in great numbers; but also the French, and English. The
natural Christians of Egypt, remaining after the spoils and hauock of the
Barbarians and the cruelty of the Saracens, Mamalucks, and Turks, exceed not
the number of fifty thousand persons, and these dwell dispersed here and
there, but principally in the cities of Cairo, Messia, Monfalatto, Bucco, and
Elchiasa, all placed upon the banks of Nilus. There are also many in the
province of Minia, in which quarter appear diverse monasteries. But among the
monasteries of Egypt those of Saint Anthony, Saint Paul, and Saint Macarius
are the principal. The first lies in Troglodytica right over against Sait upon
a hill, where Saint Anthony was said to be beaten by devils: the second is
seated not far from this, in the midst of a desert: the third stands in the
wilderness, to the west of Bulac. This is the monastery which in some histories
is called Nitria, as I think, because in that quarter the waters of Nilus,
being thickened by the heat of the sun in low places, are converted into salt
and niter. Georgia stood upon Nilus, six miles from the city of Munsia, a rich
and magnificent Convent, so called after the name of Saint George. There were
in the same more then two hundred monks, to the notable benefit and ease of
pilgrims and strangers, who were there courteously lodged. But they dying all
of the plague, (about some hundred and fifty years sithence,) the place was
abandoned.

Now to deliver somewhat concerning the estates of these Christians: They are
called by some Or Coptitae.
Cofti, and by others, Christians from the girdle upward: for albeit they be
baptized, as we are, yet do they circumcise themselves like to the Jews: so as
a man may say, their Christianity comes no lower then the girdle-stead. But
that which is worse, they have for these 1000. years followed the heresy of
Eutiches, which allows but of one nature in Christ: by which heresy they
also separate and dismember themselves, from the union of the Church of Europe.
The occasion of this separation and (...), was the Ephesine council, assembled
by Dioscorus in defense of Eutiches, who was now condemned in the Calcedon
counsel by six hundred and thirty fathers congregated together, by the
authority of Leo the first. For the Cofti fearing, that to attribute two
natures unto Christ, might be all one, as if they had assigned him two
hypostases or persons, to avoid the heresy of the Nestorians, they became
Eutichians. They say their divine service in the Chaldean tongue, oftentimes
repeating Alleluia. They read the Gospel first in Chaldean, and then in
Arabic. When the priest says Pax vobis, the yoongest amongst them lays his
hand upon all the people that are present. After consecration, they give a
simple piece of bread to the standers by: a ceremony used also in Greece. They
exercise their function in the church of Saint Mark amidst the ruins of
Alexandria, and in that of Suez, upon the red sea: they obey the Patriarch of
Alexandria, and affirm themselves to be of the faith of Prete Ianni. In our
days two Popes have attempted to reduce them to the union of the Romish
church; Pius the fourth, and Gregory the thirteenth. Pius the fourth in the
year 1563. sent two Iesuit-priests for this purpose to Cairo; who stayed there
almost a year, but to no purpose, and with great danger of life: for one of
them was appointed to the fire, from which he escaped by means of a merchant;
who with eight hundred crowns pacified the Turks, and caused the priest
suddenly to fly away. But Pope Gregory entered into this enterprise with more
hope: for Paulo Mariani a famous Christian merchant, was at the same time in
Cairo, who for his wisdom, magnificence, knowledge of toongs, and long
practice in the affairs of the world, joined with wonderful eloquence, and
presence of body, was in great esteem and reputation, not only among the
Christians, but also with the Turks, who equally loved him for his liberality,
and honored him for his valor. This man had conference with the Patriarch of
Alexandria about the reconciling of his people to the Romish church: whereunto
the (...) not showing himself difficult, or hard to be entreated, was
contented to call by his letters into those parts, two priests of the same
order, who were then with the Maronites in mount Libanus. In the mean while
the Pope, who was advertised of all this business, taking the matter quickly in
hand, wrote unto the two priests, appointing one of them to go directly to
Cairo; and the other to return back to Rome. Wherefore in the year 1582 in
the month of October one of the said priests arriving at Cairo, was
courteously received by Mariani, and afterward conducted to the Patriarch,
who also made show of great joy and consolation. One might likewise perceive a
reasonable disposition in others who had any authority among the Cofti. He
advertised the Pope of all; who sent a certain other priest, with one brief
to the Patriarch, and an other to the Jesuits, wherein he exhorted them to go
forward, and to bring the union, whereof so assured hope was conceived, to good
effect. The Patriarch received the brief with great reverence he kissed it,
and according to their custom, laid it upon his head, and afterward demanded
what it comprehended: the which with great feeling, and contentment having
understood, within few days he instituted a Synod of some bishops, and
certain other principal persons of the nation. Here the said priests having
declared unto them upon how little ground they, who at the first received the
faith from Saint Mark, were sequestered from the western church by the
authority of one heretic, took much pains afterward in making them capable
of the difference that is between a nature and an Hypostasis or person, to
their exceeding great admiration, because they were in a manner destitute of
all learning. For the Patriarch even from his youth had led his life in the
monastery of Saint Macarius, far not only from the studies of learning, but
also from the conversation of men, neither appeered there any greater knowledge
in the bishops. They had (...) any book of the ancient fathers, and yet those
they had, were all dustie, and eaten with mothes: That where of they made
chiefest account, was an old volume, being torn and rent, which they called
The confession of the Fathers, full of diverse dreams and fables, whereof
notwithstanding, and of some other Arabicke books, the priests made special
good use, for the conuincing of them in their errors. Also having framed a
compendium of most necessary doctrine, they caused diverse copies of the same
to be drawn, and gave them to the learned of the Cofti, to be considered of,
who wondering at the strangenes of the things propounded unto them, and not
knowing how to answer the arguments of the priests, demanded time to search
their own writings, and to see what opinion their predecessors had held as
concerning that point. In the mean while, they came often to the priests, and
inquired of them the doctrine and form of speech used in the Romish church.
Whereupon they showed them how greatly the same church had ever detested
heresies: and how severely it had condemned the impiety of Nestorius, and
contrariwise highly esteemed the authority of Cyrillus Alexandrinus, and the
decrees of the first Ephesine Council. Neither (because it confesses two
natures in Christ, joined in one person without confusion) does it therefore
infer two hypostasis or persons. In that a nature and a person are not the
self same things. The which may clearly be understood by the deep mystery
of the holy Trinity, wherein we acknowledge one nature, and three Hypostasis
or persons. We aver therefore, that there are two natures in Christ, one divine,
which he has eternally from his Father, the other humane, which he took
temporally from the immaculate womb of his mother; both of them joined in one
hypostasis or person. By these and other like demonstrations, they cleared the
understandings, and confirmed the minds of the Cofti. Howbeit, all this
notwithstanding, the Synod being again assembled (wherein were present, the
Patriarch, five bishops, diverse abbots of monasteries, and thirty other
principal persons) they plainly answered the priests that they had turned over
their Annals and writings, and were resolved in no wise to depart from the
doctrine and faith of their predecessors. This unlooked for answer, though it
greatly troubled and displeased the priests, yet were they determined still to
continue, and to proceed further in the enterprise. Whereupon declaring unto
them again, how far they were by Dioscorus means estranged from the
doctrine taught in the Nicen, Constantinopolitan, and first Ephesine councels,
grounded on the authority of holy Scripture, and the ancient Fathers: and that
to disallow of two natures in Christ, was no other but to deny, that he was
neither true God nor man, (a matter abominable, not only to their ears, but
even to their very understandings) they prevailed so much, as that the matter
was yet deferred off to an other month. Being therefore congregated the third
time, it seemed that God himself furthered this affair more then usually: for
first with common consent they abrogated the law of circumcision, and withal
after a disputation of six hours continuance, it was decreed, that as
concerning the truth of this point, the priests were to be believed, that there
were two natures in Christ, and that the Cofti though they avoided the name and
title of two natures, yet denied they not, but that Christ was true man, and
true God. Only they were wary of the two natures, for fear of falling by
little and little into two hypostases. Thus this business being brought to so good
a pass, was by the ambition and obstinacy of one man utterly crossed and
hindered. This was the Vicar or Suffragan to the Patriarch, who aspiring
himself to the Patriarkship, and seeing that if he followed this union begun
with the Roman church, he could not attain to that dignity, but by the
Popes authority, (which he altogether misdoubted) he first made the decree of
two natures to be deferred, commanding afterward that none should subscribe
thereunto, and finally caused the Patriarch wholly to give over this business,
and to retire himself into the wilderness; whereas he continued for certain
months. Afterward the priests understanding where he was, wrote unto him a
letter, signifying therein, what a special desire they had to see him, and what
damage the retiring of himself would procure to the silly sheep recommended
unto him by God, if he ratified not fully those things which were decreed upon
in the laft assembly. He courteously answered, making show, that he would
return, when he had visited his dioces, and in the mean while they should
expect him at Cairo. But while he thought upon return, his own death
interrupted him. The Cofti have a law, or custom, that between the death of
one Patriarch and the creation of an other, there must be in a manner an whole
years space, for so long it is requisite, say they, that the church should
bewail the death of her spouse. Whereupon the priests, not to loose so much
time, determined to go home into Italy, to acquaint the Pope with the success
of all things, and afterward (need so requiring) to return. The Cofti
understanding thus much, writ letters to the Pope, wherein they partly thanked
him for the care he had of them; and partly lamented, that their reco^ciliation
with the Romish church was not fully confirmed and finished. While the priests
were about to depart on Saint Mathewes day in the morning, there came a route
of armed Turks to their lodging. These laid hands suddenly on two priests,
and another companion of theirs, and on three Friars of the order of Saint
Francis, lodged in the same house. No man knew the reason of this hurly burly,
but for as much as could be learned, all this grew through the envy of a
Frenchman. This man aspiring to the degree of Consul or Governor over his
nation, which Mariani had obtained, maliciously gave the Bassa of Cairo to
understand, that Mariani suborned the people against the grand Signor, and that
he had order from the K. of Spain to levy Christian men. And that to this end
he kept in his house certain priests, who practiced in this behalf with
Mariani for the king. There was nothing that more prejudiced the priests, then
the Cofties letters, which bred a vehement suspicion in the Turks, that such
an union might be concluded with the Roman Church, as might work some
extraordinary innovation. They were therefore cast into a filthy and stinking
prison. The Venetian Consul assayed first by word of mouth, and after by suite
and supplication, to assuage the fury and anger of the Bassa; Howbeit he
received such bitter and nipping answers, that he himself was also afraid.
But nothing prevails further with the Turks then money. For it seems that
with this only their savage fury is mitigated, and their fiercenes appeased.
Five thousand crowns therefore were disbursed for the priests liberty,
wherein the Cofti showed themselves very friendly, the richest of them
offering one after another to lend money without any interest for the same. But
this matter cost Mariani more then ten thousand crowns; and besides that, he
was deprived of his degree of Consulship. The priests being thus freed out of
prison, and observing how things went, returned one after another back to Rome.

A relation touching the state of Christian Religion in the dominions of Prete
Ianni, taken out of an oration of Matthew Dresserus, professor of the Greek
and Latin toongs, and of Histories, in the University of Lipsia. Who having
first made a general exordium to his auditorie, proceeds at length to the
peculiar handling of the foresaid argument, in manner following.
NOndum (says he) vni us seculi aet as exacta est etc. The space of one
hundred years is not as yet fully expired, since the fame of the Ethiopians
religion came first unto our ears. Which, because it is in many points
agreeable unto Christian verity, and carries an honest show of piety
therewith, is to be esteemed as a matter most worthy of our knowledge. Of this
therefore, so far forth as the short time of an oration will permit, I purpose
to entreat; to the end it may appear, both where, and what manner of
Christian church that of Ethiopia is, and what were the first beginnings
thereof.

This Ethiopian, not unfitly called As the church in all the hither parts of
Europe has been called the western, and that of Greece and Asia, the (...)
church.
The southern church, is situate in Africa far south, namely under the Torrid
Zone, between the Tropique of Cancer and the Equinoctial; some part thereof
also stretching beyond the Equinoctial, toward the Tropique of Capricorn. Two
summers they have every year, yea in a manner, one continual summer: so that
at the very same time in some fields they sow, and in others they reap.
Somewhere also they have every month ripe, some kind of earthly fruits or
other, especially pulse. The people are skorched with the heat of the sun,
and they are black, and go naked: save only that some cover their priuities
with cloth of cotton or of silk. The country is very great, and contains
well nie twenty kingdoms; Wha^tsoeuer Dresserus think eth; yet diverse other
authors of good note do hold the dominions of Prete Ianni to be nothing so
large.
so that it is almost as large as Europe, or as all Christendom in these
parts. At the beginning indeed it had not above two kingdoms; but in process
of time it was mightily enlarged by the conquest of countries adjacent. For it
is environed on all sides by unbelieving gentiles and (...), who are most
deadly enemies to the Christian religion; with whom the emperor of Ethiopia
is at continual wars, endeavoring by all possible means to reclaim them from
their heathenish Idolatry to the faith of Jesus Christ. It is reported that
certain bordering These Mores are called Dobas.
Mores bear such implacable hatred against these Christians, that none of them
may (...), before he brings testimony, that he has slain twelve of (...).

The (...) of Ethiopia is not called (as some imagine) (...) or priest; but
Precious John. For in the Ethiopian tongue he is termed Belul Gian, and in the
Chaldean, Encoe Gian, both which additions signify precious or high; so that
in a manner he comes near unto the titles of our princes, who are called
Illustres, Excelsi, Serenissimi, etc. to signify, that they are exalted and
advanced above other people. And this is a common name to all the christian
kings of Ethiopia; as Pharao was to the Egyptian kings, and Augustus, to the
Roman emperors. Neither is this Precious John a priest by profession, but a
civil magistrate; nor is he armed so much with religion and laws, as with
military forces.

Howbeit he calls himself The pillar of faith; because he is the maintainer
of the Christian faith, not only enioining his own subjects to the
observation thereof; but (what in him lies) enforcing his enemies also to
embrace it.

In times past Ethiopia was governed by Queens only. Whereupon we read in
the history of the old testament, that the Queen of the south came to King
Solomon from Saba, to hear his admirable wisdom, about the year of the
world 2954. The name of this Queen (as the Ethiopians report) was Maqueda, who
from the head-city of Ethiopia called Saba (which like an Isle, is environed on
all sides by the river Nilus) traveled by Egypt and the Red sea to Jerusalem.
And she brought unto Solomon an hundred and twenty talents of gold, which
amount to 720000. golden ducates of Hungary, that is, seven tons of gold,
and 20000 Hungarian ducates besides. This mighty sum of gold, with other
things of great value, she presented unto Solomon, who likewise requited her
with most princely gifts. She contended with him also in propounding of sage
questions, and obscure riddles. Amongst other matters (as it is reported by
Cedrenus) she brought before him certain damsels, and young men in maids
attire, asking the king, how he could discern one sex from another. He
answered, that he would find them out by the washing of their faces. And
forthwith he commanded all their faces to be washed, and they which washed
themselves strongly, were found to be males; but the residue by their tender
washing bewraied themselves to be damsels.

The Ethiopian kings suppose, that they are descended from the lineage of David,
and from the family of Solomon. And therefore they use to term themselves the
sons of David, and of Solomon, and of the holy patriarchs also, as being
sprung from their progeny. For Queen Maqueda (say they) had a son by
Solomon, whom they named Meilech. But afterward he was called David. This
Meilech (as they report) being grown to twenty years of age, was sent back
by his mother unto his father and instructor Solomon, that he might learn of
him, wisdom and understanding. Which so soon as the said Meilech or David
had attained: by the permission of Solomon, taking with him many priests and
nobles, out of all the twelve tribes, he returned to his kingdom of Ethiopia,
and took upon him the government thereof. As likewise he carried home with him
the law of God, and the rite of circumcision.

These were the beginnings of the Jewish religion in Ethiopia. And it is
reported, that even till this present none are admitted into any ministry or
canonship in the court, but such as are descended of their race that came first
out of Jury. By these therefore the doctrine of God in Ethiopia was first
planted, which afterward took such deep root, as it has since remained to
all succeeding ages. For the Ethiopians did both retain the books of the
Prophets, and travailed also to Jerusalem, that they might there worship the
true God revealed in the kingdom of Israel. Which manifestly appears Acts of
the Apost. cap. 8. verse 26.
out of the History of the Ethiopian Eunuch, whose name was Indich, which was
a principal governor under Queen Candaces, properly called Judith. For he
about the tenth year after the death and resurrection of our blessed Savior,
travailed for the space of two hundred and forty miles, to Jerusalem. Where
having performed due worship unto God, returning homeward, as he sat in his
chariot, he read the prophet Esaias. And by the commandment of the holy
Spirit, Philip one of Christ his disciples was sent unto him. And when they
were both come to the city Bethzur, three miles distant from Jerusalem; the
Eunuch at the foot of a mountain espied a certain water, wherein he was
baptized by Philip. And being returned into Ethiopia, this Eunuch baptized the
Queen, and a great part of her family and people. From which time the
Ethiopians began to be Christians, who since that have continually professed
the Christian faith.

They believe also that Philip sent into Ethiopia a disciple of his called
Lycanon, who (as they suppose) ordained the very form of religion which they
now hold.

Now these beginnings as well of the Jewish as the christian religion among the
Ethiopians being thus declared: we are next to entreat of the doctrine and
religion it self, together with the rites and ceremonies used at this present
in the Ethiopicke church, so far forth as we can gather out of the ambassages
which have bin performed from these parts thither, and back again. Besides
which there is no history nor discourse of any worth to be found, which
entreats of the religion, manners, and customs of the Ethiopians. So as it is
a matter very strange, that for so many hundred years together, Ethiopia was
so barred from our knowledge, that we had not so much as any report thereof.
Until about the year of our Lord 1440. certain ambassadors sent from thence
to Pope Eugenius, returned back with his letters, and Papal benediction to
their king. Which letters are most charily kept among the records of this
Ethiopian king, and are preserved for perpetual monuments.

From which time also, as though Ethiopia had been again quire debarred from
the knowledge and conversation of our men, there were not any Europeans that
went into Ethiopia, nor any Ethiopians that came into Europe, till the year of
our Lord 1486. what time John the second king of Portugal sent Pedro de
Couilham, and Alonco de Paiua, to search out Ethiopia. This Pedro was a man
very learned, eloquent, skillful in sundry languages, painful in his
endeavors, fortunate in his attempts, and most desirous to find out new
countries and people both by sea and land. He therefore in the year above
mentioned, together with his companion Alonco de (...), (who died in the
voyage) travailed first to Alexandria and Cairo in Egypt: from whence in the
company of certain Mores of Fez and Tremizen, he proceeded on to El Tor, an
haven town upon the Arabian shore of the Red sea, and thence to Aden, situate
without the entrance of the Arabian gulf. Where having embarked himself in a
ship of Mores, he travailed to Calicut, Goa, and other places of the east
Indies; and being fully informed of the state of the Spiceries, he crossed over
the maine Ocean to cofala, sailed thence to Ormuz, and then returned back to
Cairo. From whence (having dispatched letters unto his king) in the company of
Rabbi Joseph a Jew, he made a second voyage to Ormuz; and in his return he
took his journey toward Ethiopia, the Emperor whereof at that time, was
called Alexander. Unto whom when he had delivered a letter and a map of the
world sent from king John, he was most kindly entertained, and rewarded with
many rich gifts. And albeit he most earnestly desired to return into his own
country, yet could he never obtain leave; but had wealth, honor, and a wife
of a noble family bestowed upon him, to assuage his desire of returning home.
Wherefore in the year 1526. which was forty years after his departure out of
Portugal, he was left, by Rodrigo de Lima the Portugal ambassador, still
remaining in the court of Prete Ianni.

In all this mean while sundry Portugals came out of India to the court of the
Prete, not so much to visit and salute him, as to declare the good will and
kind affection of their king toward him. Whereupon Queen Helena, which was
then protectresse of the Ethiopian or Abassin empire, to requite the king of
Portugal with like friendship; sent unto him in the company of the foresaid
Portugals an ambassador or messenger of hers, called Matthew, who was a
merchant borne in Armenia, being a man skillful in Matthew the first ambassador
sent from Aethiopia to Portugal.
sundry languages and in many other matters. This Matthew she not only
furnished with letters requisite for such an embassage; but enioined him also
to declare by word of mouth unto the king of Portugal the principal heads of
their doctrine or belief, together with their rites and customs, and the
present state of the whole church of Ethiopia. Moreover she presented him with
a little cross made (as they suppose) of a piece of that very cross, whereon
our savior Christ was crucified; with many other tokens and pledges of mutual
christian amity. Thus Matthew being dismissed, took his journey to the east
Indies; from whence he was conducted by sea into Portugal; where arriving in
the year 1513, he did his message, according to Queen Helenas directions,
unto the king Don Emanuel.

The king taking wonderful delight at this message, and at these guiftes which
were sent him from a Christian prince so far remote, not long after prepared a
new This embassage was at the first undertaken by Odoardo Galuano: who dying at
the isle of (...) in the Red sea, it was performed by Rodrigo de Lima.
embassage, with letters, and presents of exceeding value; in which embassage
the piety and virtue of Francis Aluarez a Portugal priest extraordinarily
appeered. For he remaining six whole years in the court and country of
Ethiopia, took there most diligent notice of all matters worthy the
observation. And he had often and familiar conference not only with the
emperor himself, but also with the patriarch, concerning the whole state of
their religion, and of matters ecclesiastical; as also he was a most curious
obseruer of all their rites and ceremonies. Who in the year of Christ 1526.
being dismissed by Prete Ianni, was accompanied into Zagazabo the second
ambassador sent from AEthiopia to Portugal.
Portugal by another Ethiopian or Abassin ambassador called Zagazabo, and
brought letters also to Pope Clement the seventh, with a golden cross of a
pound weight. It seems likewise that the said ambassador of Prete Ianni was
a very honest, upright, and godly man, who by reason of their continual wars
was detained in Portugal till the year of our Lord 1539.

The letters of Prete Ianni to the Pope, were by Francis Aluarez delivered at
Bononia, in the year of Christ 1533. Where in the presence of Charles the
Emperor, and before a mighty assembly of people, they were read and approved
with great joy and acclamation. Both which letters, as well to the Pope as to
the king Don Emanuel, were full of Christian piety and love: wherein first
that mighty Emperor (though therein he was deceived) with singular reverence
and duty, submitted himself unto the Pope of Rome, as to the head of all the
church; offering by the said Francis most humble obedience, after the manner of
other Christian princes. As likewise he proffered unto them both, the offices of
benevolence, charity, and true friendship, intending to join a firm league of
amity with them, and signifying that his dominions were free and open to all
Christians, that would by sea or land frequent the same. Also he plainly seemed
to detest the mutual discords of Christians, exhorting them to bandy their
forces against the Mahumetans, and promising his royal assistance, and most
earnest endeavor, for the vanquishing of Christ's enemies, and their conversion
to the truth. Lastly he required, that men of learning, and of skill in the
holy Scriptures, as likewise diligent Printers, and all sorts of artificers
might be sent him, to be employed in the service of his church and common
wealth. Signifying that he would not violently detain any man in his
dominions, but would dismiss him into his own country, with honor, and
liberal rewards. And that he might testify his loving and kind affection to
the king of Portugal, by a most worthy monument, he sent him the crown off
his own head, as the present of (...) dutiful son to his most dear father.

Wherefore by this most admirable diligence and industry of the Portugals,
Ethiopia in these last times has been discovered and made known unto us.
Neither is there any thing in the Ethiopians religion so hidden and unrevealed,
which has not either been found out by Francis Aluarez, or most largely
declared by Zagazabo the Ethiopian ambassador. Out of the relations therefore
of these two worthy authors, as out of a fountain, we will derive the whole
substance of our speech.

The ground of the Ethiopicke religion is the profession of one true God, and
of his son Jesus Christ, which of all Christians is the peculiar and proper
mark, whereby only they are to be named Christians. Concerning this maine
point the Ethiopians faith stands most firm and entire: for they together with
us do confess and adore one God and three persons of the deity, God the
father, God the son begotten of his father from everlasting, who for us men
was incarnate, died, and rose again; and God the holy Ghost proceeding from
the father and the son. In this article they follow the holy creed of the
Apostles, and the Nicene creed. Save that they hold that Christ descended into
hell for his own soul, and for the soul of Adam, which he received of the
virgin Marie. For this opinion they do most steadfastly embrace; saying that it
came by most ancient tradition from Christ himself to his Apostles.

The old testament they so conioine with the new, as they allow and receive
both Jewish and Christian ceremonies. Upon the eight day after their birth,
Whereas the Jews circumcised the males (...).
they circumcise all children both male and female. And unless sickness urges
them to make the more haste, they defer the baptism of their male children
till they be forty, and of their females, til they be eighty days old.
Circumcision (they say) they received from Queen Maqueda, which went to hear
the wisdom of Solomon: and baptism from Saint Philip, and from the Eunuch
which Philip baptized. Yet do they steadfastly hold, that not by circumcision,
but by faith in Jesus Christ they attain unto true felicity. Their baptism
they (...) every year: for upon the day of the three Sages, otherwise called
Epiphanie, whereon Christ was baptized in Jordan, they meet in great
assemblies, and enter naked into the water; where the priest lays his hand
upon them, dippeth them thrice, and pronounces the words of baptism, saying,
I baptize thee in the name of the father, the son, and the holy ghost; adding
thereto the sign of the cross. This custom received from their predecessors
they do most carefully observe, not thereby to abase or extenuate their first
baptism; but that every year they may receive a new absolution from their
sins. Also unto their infants upon the very day of their baptism, they give
the body of our Lord, under a small morsel of bread. But such as are grown
to years of discretion before they come unto the Lords holy supper, do make
confession and receive absolution of all their sins from the priest. Then do
they all betimes in the morning both clergy and laytie receive the whole
sacrament of the body and true blood of Jesus Christ in their churches. Which
being received, they may not under pain of grievous punishment, so much as
once spit, till the going down of the sun.

Popish confirmation and unction, they neither esteem for sacraments nor use
them. The Pope of Rome, either in regard of error and ignorance, or to win his
favor, they acknowledge to be head of the church, and do pretend a kind of
obedience to the sea of Rome. Albeit that the Pope, before the Portugals
discovery of the east Indies could never communicate any assistance unto them,
Yet in the time of Pope Paul the 4. were sent certain priests with a new
created Patriarch, and two (...): who notwithstanding when they went (...)
about to bring in the (...) religion, and the supremacy of the Pope, were
crossed by the Emperor in all their proceedings.
nor yet since that time, by reason of the huge distance almost of fifteen
thousand miles. For so many miles the ambassador, which was sent out of
Portugal to Ethiopia, said that he had travailed. [ It is nothing so long a
journey through Egypt, Troglodytica, and Barnagasso, but that the way through
those countries is stopped by the (...) of the Turks.] Howbeit Queen Helena,
and after her king David, seem only to have sought and desired some
conjunction with the Roman church, and the Christians of Europe: to the end
that with their powers and forces united, they might assail and vanquish the
Mahumetans, being most deadly enemies to the Christian name.

Moreover these Ethiopick Christians do use to fast upon certain days of the
week till sun set: as namely upon Wednesdaies, to renew the sad memory of
the Jews council, wherein they decreed to crucify our Redeemer: and upon
Fridaies, that they may with thankful minds acknowledge his most bitter
passion and death. Likewise the day of Good Fridaie, whereon our blessed
Savior was nailed to the cross, they celebrate with great devotion,
especially toward the evening. Unto these they add a Lent of forty days,
wherein they live only by bread and water. The feasts both of Christ, of the
virgin Marie, and of certain Saints, they keep holy: upon which days
meeting in their churches three hours after sunnerising, they read the books
of the Prophets, and emploie themselves in holy exercises. They sanctify the
Sabbath in (...) of the Jews: and keep holy the Lords day according to the
apostles institution. On both these days they worship God by performing things
holy, and eschuing matters profane. Into their churches they may not come but
barefoote only; neither is it there lawful for any man to walk up and down,
nor to talk of worldly affairs, nor to spit, nor cough.

The chief use of the law (they say) is to show us our sins: neither do they
think any man living able to perform the same, but only Jesus Christ who
fulfilled it on our behalf. The Saints they love indeed and reverence, but do
not pray unto them. Unto the blessed virgin Marie the mother of Christ, they
ascribe great honor, but neither do they adore her, nor crave assistance at
her hands. They have every day one mass only, and that a short one, in stead
of a sacrifice: but gains thereby they make none at all. Neither do they
eleuate or hold up the sacrament of the supper, as the mass priests do: nor
apply the same to redeem dead men's souls from the pains of purgatory.
Howbeit, that there is a place of purgatory, they do not deny. Wherefore
their dead are buried with crosses and supplications, and especially with the
rehearsal of the beginning of Saint John's Gospel. Then the day following they
offer alms for them, and upon certain days after they add
funerall-banquets; supposing that upon Sabaoths and the Lords days, they which
died godly, are freed from all torments in Purgatory, and at length, having
received the full measure of chastisement for their sins, that then they go
into eternal rest. For the effecting whereof, they do not think any
indulgences of their (...), but only the mere mercy and grace of God to be
available.

Marriage is no less permitted to their clergy and priests, then to their
laie-people: yet so, that his first wife being dead, a priest cannot marry
another without the Patriarchs dispensation. Whosoever keeps a concubine is
debarred from all sacred administrations. And whatsoever bishop or clergie-man
is found to have a bastard, he is utterly deprived of holy orders, and of all
his benefices and spiritual dignities. Marriages are often solemnized without
the church, a bed being placed before the house of the bride and the
bridegroom. Then come three priests, who going thrice about the bridegromes
bed, sing with a loud voice Halleluiah, and other things. This done, they cut
one lock of hair from the bridegroomes head, and another from the head of the
bride, which they wash in wine made of honey; and then putting upon either of
their heads the others lock, they sprinkle them with a kind of holy water, and
so depart. Which being performed, the mariagefeast begins, and holds on
till the night be far spent. At length the bride and bridegroom are brought
unto their own house, out of which neither of them may go forth for the space
of an whole month after.

In some places they are married in the church by the patriarch himself. Where
the mariage-bed standing in manner aforesaid, the patriarch with sweet incense
and crosses walks thrice about it, and then turning himself toward them, he
lays his hand upon the bridegroomes head, saying: Do that which god has
commanded in his gospel, and think now that you are not two but one flesh.
Having spoken these words, he administreth the communion unto them, and
blesses them. Polygamie, or many wives at once, are permitted by the emperor
and civil magistrate unto the Ethiopians: but in their churches there is no
place at all for such as have more wives then one. Neither may any such persons
presume to enter into their churches, but are held as excommunicate, and are
not received into the congregation, before having put away all the residue of
their wives, they betake themselves to one only.

Diuorcements they use very commonly, and often upon light occasions except
only the priests, who may by no means depart from their wives. Whereby it
appears, that their priests approve not that inconstancy in a matter of so
great moment. The best remedy which they have to prevent this mischief, is at
the day of marriage to alotte some great penalty upon that person which shall
first forsake the other. Amongst them likewise, according to the law of Moses,
brothers use to marry their brothers wives, to raise up seed unto them.
Howbeit this abuse of marriage is not practiced by all, but only by the
mightier sort. For the country people and those of poorer condition, being
every one contented with his own wife, do so painefully employ themselves
about their labor, and the getting of their (...), that they are free from
those violent passions of lust.

Infants that die before baptism they name half christians, because, being
sanctified only by the faith of (...) parents, they are not as yet by baptism
thoroughly engraffed into the church. From meats, which the law of Moses
accounted unclean, they also do abstain. The heresies of Arrius, Macedonius,
and Nestorius, they reject and condemn.

The whole church of Ethiopia is governed by a patriark called in the Ethiopick
language Abuna, which signifies, A Father. This patriark of theirs is first
solemnly created at Ierurasem by the voices of those monks which keep the
sepulcher of our Lord. Afterward he is confirmed, and sent into Ethiopia by
the patriarch of Alexandria. The emperor Prete Ianni, so often as there is
need of a new patriark, sends an embassage with many gifts to Jerusalem, and
requires a patriark from thence. Which patriarch, together with a monk of the
order of Saint Antony the Hermit, being come into Ethiopia, is, according to
an ancient custom, received with the general consent, congratulation,
applause, and rejoicing of all degrees and estates of people. To this high
function is singled out some one man of singular piety, gravity, (...), and of
more ancient years then the rest. His special duties are to give holy orders,
to administer church discipline, and to excommunicate contumaces or obstinate
offenders, which are for their stubbornnes famished to death. But the
authority of giving Bishoprics and spiritual benefices, the Emperor
reserueth to himself. In Ethiopia there are infinite numbers of priests, and of
monks. Francis Aluarez saw at one time ordained by the Patriarch two thousand
three hundred fifty six priests. And the like manner of ordaining or
instalment they have every year twice. It seems that those which are chosen
into that order, are men destitute of learning and liberal arts. Unto their
priesthood none is admitted before he be full thirty years of age. It falls
out likewise, that during the vacation of the Patriarkship, the church has
great want of priests. Which vacation is often times prolonged by reason of the
continual wars between the Christians and the bordering Mahumetans, and
Gentiles: whereby all passage from Ethiopia to the monks of Jerusalem is quite
cut off. Hence proceeds great desolation in that church. But with monks all
places in this Abassin empire do mightily swarm. These do not only confine
themselves in monasteries, whereof here are great numbers, but also take upon
them offices in the court, and entangle themselves in military affairs, and
in buying and selling of merchandise. Neither are there any kind of people in
those eastern parts more conversant in trade of merchandise then priests (...)
monks. So that the old said saw is most truly verified:

What ere the world does put in ure,
The Monk will intermeddle, sure.
It is (...) to be noted, that the priests, monks, and other ministers of
(...) Ethiopian church, are not maintained by tithes and alms as they are in
Europe. They have only certain fields and gardens, which must be manured by
the monks and clergy themselves. To beg ought of the common people they are
in no wise permitted, unless perhaps some man will of his own accord bestow
somewhat in their churches for the exequies of the dead, or for some other
sacred uses.

These Ethiopians have a certain book, which they suppose to have been
written by all the Apostles when they were assembled at Jerusalem. This book
in their language they call Manda and Abetilis: and do believe that all things
therein contained are to be holden for gospel. In it, amongst other matters,
are contained certain penal statutes; as for example. If a priest be convicted
of Adultery, Manslaughter, Robbery, or perjury, he is to receive like
punishment with other malefactors. Likewise, that as well ecclesiastical, as
secular persons, are to abstain from coming to church for the space of four
and twenty hours after carnal copulation. Some laws also there are,
concerning the purification of women after their months, and their
childbirth: which, because we can make but little use of them, I do here
pass over in silence. One thing there is in this book very well provided,
namely, that twice every year there be a Synod assembled in the church of
Christ, for the handling and discussing of all matters ecclesiastical.

These are the principal points of the religion, faith, and ceremonies of the
Ethiopicke church under Prete Ianni, which hitherto have come to our knowledge.
A good part whereofis agreeable unto the scriptures of the old and new
testament. And such in very deed they are, as represent unto us the
acknowledgement of one true God, and the faith and worship of our only Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. But as never any church upon earth was quite void of
blemish: so neither is this of Ethiopia free from all stains of error. Which
notwithstanding may seem the less strange, because in Ethiopia there are no
schools nor Seminaries of liberal arts, save only, that the priests
themselves (according to their simple skill) train up their sons unto such
learning, as may in time make them capable of priesthood. Neither was there
ever any man yet, that reformed their errors. Francis Aluarez reports, that
the Patriarch of this Ethiopick church, in a certain private conference, did
grievously complain of all such errors as were there maintained, and was most
earnestly desirous of a reformation. Which desire of his, as it is most holy
and commendable; so is it by all christians to be approved. God almighty
grant, that the Ethiopians may one day attain to the accomplishment of this
his compassionate well-wishing, and may have a happy reformation of their
church. For this to desire and pray for, is far more convenient and
Christian-like, then to disgrace them with reproachful words, and to bereave
them of the name of Christians. Which hard and unchristian measure, Zagazabo
the Ethiopian ambassador, reports with grief, that he found among the
Popish priests of Portugal; by whom he was quite restrained from the use and
communion of the (...) supper, as ifhe had been a mere Gentile, or Anathema.

It is indeed an error, or rather a great infirmity, that they do as yet
retain and use some of the Jewish ceremonies. But we are (...) to impute it to
their ignorance of Christian liberty. And whereas they permit marriage to their
priests, it is neither repugnant to the sacred word of God, nor to the
institution of the Apostles. Wherefore it ought not to be disallowed of any
Christians. Unless they will prefer the decrees of the Pope before the
commandment of God, established by Christ and his apostles. Whereby it may
plainly appear how impiously and sauagely the Priests of Portugal dealt, in
that especially for this cause they so sharply inneied against the Ethiopick
ambassador, and so uncivilly entreated him.

Their yearly renewing ofbaptisme, was at the first brought in by error, and
since by ancient use and tradition, has grown authentical. For in very deed
so great is the force of antiquity and custom, that where they once take
root, they can hardly be removed. And it is a wonder that the Ethiopians do
so often repeat baptism, when as they cannot be circumcised any more then
once. But in regard of all these defects, what can we better devise to do, then
in our daily prayers to wish them minds better informed, and the purity and
integrity of faith, which is agreeable unto gods word? The Ethiopians
conceived exceeding joy at the first arrival of the Portugals in their
country: hoping that their mutual acquaintance and familiarity, would breed
a similitude and conjunction, as well of their religions, as of their
affections and minds. But I am verily afraid, least the reproachful and stern
carriage of the Popish priests and monks toward the Ethiopick ambassadors
before mentioned, has more then ever in times past estranged the minds of
that nation from the Christians of Europe.

Howbeit the singular care and industry of those two renowned Princes, John
the second, and Emanuel, kings of Portugal, is most highly to be extolled and
celebrated, who by infinite charges employed upon their nauigations to The east
Indies, and to these parts; have opened a way for the European Christians, to
the southern church of Ethiopia; and for the Ethiopians to this western
church of Europe. Which had not these two worthy Princes brought to effect,
we should not so much as have known the name of a Christian church in
Ethiopia. For thither by the way of Arabia and Egypt, in regard of the Arabians
and Mahumetans most deadly enmity to the Christian faith, it is so dangerous
and difficult to travel, as it seems to be quite barred and shut up. Unless
therefore over the Atlantike Ethiopick, and Indian seas the Portugals had
thither found a passage by navigations; it had almost been impossible for any
ambassadors or other persons, to have come out of Ethiopia into these western
parts. Thus (...) Matthew Dresserus.

An embassage sent from Pope Paul the fourth to Claudius the Emperor of
Abassia or the higher Ethiopia, for planting of the religion and ceremonies of
the church of Rome in his dominions; which embassage took none effect at all.
IN the year 1555 John the third king of Portugal, determined to leave no
means unattempted for the absolute reconciliation of Prete Ianni unto the
church of Rome. For though David's ambassador had performed obedience to Pope
Clement the seventh on his emperors behalf; yet doubted the king of Portugal
(as true it was) that for want of speedy prosecution, those forward beginnings
would prove but altogether fruitless; in that for all this, they still
embraced the heresies of Dioscorus and Eutiches, and depended on the authority
of the Patriark of Alexandria, receiving their Abuna from him, who is the sole
arbitrator of all their matters ecclesiastical, the administrer of their
sacraments, the giver of orders over all Ethiopia, master of their ceremonies,
and Instructor of their faith. Whereupon he supposed, that he could not do any
thing more profitable, or necessary, then to send thither a Patriark appointed
at Rome, who might exercise spiritual authority over them, as also with him
some priests, of singular integrity and learning, who with their sermons,
disputations, and discourses both public and private, might reduce those
people from their errors and heresies to the truth, and might confirm and
strengthen them in the same. And unto this, it seemed a wide gate was already
open; because not many years before, Claudius the emperor of Ethiopia
received great succors from the Portugals, against Graadamet king of Zeila,
who had brought him to an hard point; and in a letter written from him to
Stephen Gama, he called Christopher Gama his brother, who died in this war, by
the reverend name of a Martyr. The king of Portugal therefore having imparted
this his resolution, first with Pope Julius the third, and then with Paul the
fourth, it was by them concluded to send into Ethiopia thirteen priests, men
of principal estimation and account above others of their quality. John
Nuns Barretto was made Patriark, and there were joined unto him two assisting
Bishops, Melchior Carnero, and Andrea Oiuedo, under title of the Bishops of
Nicea, and Hierapolis. King John set forth this embassage, not only with
whatsoever the voyage it self necessarily required, but further with all
royal preparation, and rich presents for Prete Ianni. Nevertheless, the
better to lay open an entrance for the Patriarch, there was by the kings
appointment sent before from the city of Goa, Iago Dias, and with him Gonsaluo
Rodrigo, into Ethiopia, to discover the mind of the Neguz, and the disposition
of his people. These two being admitted to the presence of that Prince, showed
him the letters of king John, wherein he congratulated with him, on the behalf
of all Christians; for that following the example of his grandfather, and
father, he had embraced the Christian faith, and union. Whereat Claudius was
amazed, 'as at a thing never before thought of. And The Emperor of Ethiopia
will by no means admit the supremacy and religion of the Romish church.
it being demanded, why he had written to the king of Portugal to that effect,
he excused himself by the writer, and interpreter of his letter: adding
thereunto, that though he esteemed that king as his very good brother, yet was
he never minded to swerue one jot from the faith of his predecessors. Roderigo
for all this, was no whit daunted, but wrought all means to bring Claudius to
his opinion. But the greatest difficulty against this his busy enterprise,
was the ignorance of the emperor and the princes of Ethiopia in all the
general Councels, and ancient Histories. Afterward perceiving that the Neguz
did not willingly admit him to audience, he wrote and diuulged a book in the
Chaldean tongue; wherein confuting the opinions of the the Abassins, he labored
mightily to advance the authority of the Roman church. Which book raised so
great a tumult, that the emperor, to avoid worse inconveniences which were
likely to ensue, was feign quickly to suppress it. Iago Dias perceiving that
he did but loose time, and the term of his return approaching, took his leave
of the Neguz. And having made known in Goa, how matters stood, it was not
thought requisite that the Patriarch should expose his own person, together
with the reputation of the Roman church, unto so great hazard. But rather,
not wholly to abandon the enterprise, they determined to send thither Andrew
Ouiedo, (new elect bishop of Hierapolis) with two or three assistants, who
with greater authority might debate of that which Roderigo already had so
unfruitfully treated of. Ouiedo most willingly undertaking this attempt, put
himself on the voyage, with father Emanuel Fernandez, and some few others.
When he was come into Abassia, he stood in more need of patience then
disputation. For king Claudius within a few months after, being vanquished
and Adamas a new Emperor of Ethiopia.
slain, Adamas his brother succeeded, who was a great enemy to the sea of
Rome. This man drew (...) and his assistants, to the wars with him, and
entreated them most barbarously, as also those Abassins whom they had
converted. He likewise was afterward overthrown in battle by the Turks,
who stripped Ouiedo and his companions of all things that they had. Whereupon
they grew into such poverty and misery, as (all help failing them) they were
enforced to get their living with the plough and spade, till they all died one
after another. This Ethiopian Christianity is brought at this day to an hard
point, by the invasions of the Turks and Mores, as is before declared.
Notwithstanding their religious men affirm, that they have prophesies of the
coming of a Christian nation to their Ports from far countries, with whom
they shall go to the destruction of the Mores: and these they hold to be
Portugals. They have farther, certain presagements of Saint Sinoda, who was an
Egyptain Hermit, of the ruin of Meca, the recovery of the holy sepulcher,
and the taking of Egypt and Cairo, by the Abassins, united with the Latins.

Of the Christians of the isle of Socotera.
VIcinitie of place and conformity of customs inuit me to cross the sea,
and to visit the Christians of Socotera. This island is sixty miles long, and
five and twenty in breadth. It is situate over against the Red sea. The people
thereof received the faith from Saint Thomas the Apostle: for they affirm,
that here he suffered shipwreck, and that of the broken and battered ship he
built a church, which is as yet extant. They imitate for the most part the
rites, customs, and fashions of the Abassins, but with great ignorance and
error: for being separated from all commerce with the Christians of these
parts, they remain deprived of that spiritual help, which the western
church by communication might impart unto them. They retain circumcision, and
some other Moisaicall ceremonies. Also they pray for the dead, and observe
ordinary fasts: having prefixed hours for prayer, and bearing great reverence
to their religion, in honor whereof, they build chapels, wherein assembling
together, with an high and loud voice, they make supplications and prayers in
the Hebrew tongue. But their far distance (as I said) from these parts of
Christendom, the sterilitie of the island, and the poverty of the people, are
occasions that the little light of truth which they have, is in a manner quite
eclipsed by multitudes of errors. Unto other things may be added the tyranny
of the king of Fartac a Mahumetan, who subdued Fartac a country of Arabia
Felix; the king whereof subdued the isle of Zocotera, 1482.
them about the year of our Lord 1482. and partly by dominion, partly by
affinity and kindred, and partly also by conversation, brought in amongst them
the deadly poison of Mahumet. From this servitude they were delivered by
Tristan d' Acunna, one of the king of Portugals captains; six and twenty
years after they fell into the same. And for their better security, he
repaired the fortress, leaving therein a Portugal garrison. But because the
charges far surmounted any benefit that came of the island, not long after
the said fortress was ruinated, and the island abandoned by the Portugals.
John the third king of Portugal had a great desire to assist and free them
from the tyranny of the Turks: whereunto after the taking of Aden they were
subject. But for fear of provoking the great Turk, or giving him occasion to
disturb and molest those seas with his fleetes, as also for the dispatching of
other affairs he had in hand, he never went about that enterprise.

Of the Christians of Nubia.
FRantis Aluarez in his Aethiopicke relation, writes, that he being at the
court of Prete Ianni, there arrived certain ambassadors from Nubia, to make
(...) unto that prince, for some priests, and ministers of the Gospel and
sacraments, by whom they might be instructed in the Christian faith. But Prete
Ianni answered them, that he had not enough for his own country: whereupon
they returned home very disco^tent, so that having no help from the
Christians, and on the otherside being daily solicited by the Mahumetans, upon
whom they border on many sides, it is thought, that at this present, they
remain in a manner without any religion at all. Notwithstanding at this day,
there are more then an hundred and fifty churches standing, with diverse other
notes and signs of Christianity. Their language partaketh much with the
Egyptain, and no less with the Chaldean and Arabic.

Of the Christians in the king dome of Congo.
HItherto we have described that little, which remains of the ancient
Christianity of Africa. It now rests, that we give some notice of that, which
has been brought in of late. Congo is a kingdom about the bigness of France,
situate (as is before said) beyond the equinoctial between Cabo da Catherina,
and Bahia das vacas. It was converted to Christian religion, by the means of
Don John the second king of Portugal, in manner following. Don Diego Cano a
captain of that king, by his commission coasting along Africa, after a great
navigations, arrived at length in the great river of Zaire; and (...) to sail
up into it, he discovered along the banks thereof many towns, where he found
much more affability in the inhabitants, then in those of other countries which
before he had discovered. And that he might be able to give the more faithful
advertisement thereof to his king, his heart moved him to go to the court of
that kingdom. Whither bein^g come, and courteously brought to the kings
presence, he showed them the vanity of their Idolatry, and the high reverence
of christian faith. And he found in that Prince so good a disposition, as
returning into Portugal, besides an ambassador he was permitted to carry with
him certain youths of noble parentage, to the end they might learn the
Christian doctrine, and be well instructed therein; and being baptized also,
might afterward be sent back with Portugal priests to preach the gospel, and
to plant the Christian faith in that kingdom. These youths remained in
Portugal two years, and were there liberally entertained, and with all
diligence instructed in matters of religion, and were at length with great
solemnity baptized. When they came to riper years, king John sent them back
again into their own country, with an honorable embassage, in whose company
went for teachers and instructers of that nation three Dominick-Fryers, reputed
for men of exquisit learning and holy life. Being arrived in Congo, they first
converted Mani-Sogno the kings uncle, with one of his sons. After that ensued
the baptism of the king and Queen; for which cause in short time, there was a
goodly Church erected, under the name and title of Santa Cruz. And in the mean
while there were infinite Idols burnt. The king was called John, the Queen
Leonora, and his eldest son Alonso. This Alonso was a singular good man, who
not being satisfied in his own conversion, labored also with a kind of
Apostolical zeal for the conversion of his subjects. But let no man think,
that the planting of religion can ever pass without some labor and trouble.
These Dominick-Fryers, besides the intemperature of the air and unusual heat,
which consumed them, were also euilly entreated by the So are the inhabitants
of Congo called.
Moci-Congi. For although they showed themselves docible, and tractable enough,
while they were instructed only about ceremonies, and divine mysteries,
(because they thought, that the higher those matters were above human
capacity, the more they sorted and were agreeable to the majesty of God)
nevertheless when they began to entreat seriously of Temperance, continence,
restitution of other men's goods, forgiving of injuries, and other heads of
Christian piety, they found not only great hinderance and difficulty, but
even plain resistance and opposition. The king himself, who had from the
beginning showed notable zeal, was now somewhat cooled; who because he was
loath to abandon his soothsaiers and fortune tellers, but above all, the
multitude of his concubines (this being a general difficulty among the
Barbarians) would by no means give ear unto the Preachers. Also the women
(who were now rejected one after another) not enduring so suddenly to be
banished from their husbands, brought the court and royal city of Saint
Saluador into a great vproare. So called by Osorius lib. 3. de Reb. Gest. Eman.
But by Phil. Pigafetta. lib. 2. Cap. 2. Mani-Pango.
Paulo Aquitino second son to the king, put tow to this fire, who would by no
means be baptized; for which cause there grew great enmity betwixt him and
Alonso his elder brother, who with all his power furthered the proceedings, and
maintained the grouth of the Christian religion. During these troubles, the old
king died, and the two brothers fought a battle, which had this success; that
Alonso the Osorius de Reb. Gest. Eman. lib. 3.
true heir, with six and thirty soldiers, calling upon the name of Jesus,
discomfited the huge army of his heathenish brother, who was himself also
taken alive, and died prisoner in this his rebellion. God favored Alonso in
this war, with manifest miracles. For first they affirm, that being ready
to enter into battle, he saw a light so clear and resplendent, that he and
his company which beheld it, remained for a good while with their eyes
declined, and their minds so full and replenished with joy and a kind of
tender affection, that cannot easily be expressed. And then lifting up their
eyes unto heaven, they saw five shining swords, which the king took
afterward for his arms, and his successors use the same at this day.

Having obtained this victory, he assembled all his nobles, and straightly
enioined them to bring all the idols of his country to an appointed place, and
so upon an high hill, he caused them all to be burned. This Alonso reigned
prosperously for fifty years together, in which space he exceedingly
furthered by authority and example, as also by preaching and doctrine, the
new-planted Christianity. Neither did Don Emanuell the King of Portugal give
over this enterprise: for he sent from thence to Congo, twelve of those Friars
which the Portugals call Azzurri, of whom Friar John Mariano was head: with
architects and smiths for the building and service of Churches, and with rich
furniture for the same. After king Alonso, succeeded Don Pedro his son: in
whose time there was a Bishop appointed over the isle of Saint Thomas, who had
also committed unto him the administration of Congo. Where, at the city of
Saint Saluador, was instituted a college of eight and twenty Canons in the
Church of Santa Cruz. The second bishop was of the blood royal of Congo, who
travailed to Rome, and died in his return homeward. Don Francisco succeeded
Don Pedro, who continued but a small space: and Don Diego his near kinsman was
after his decease advanced to the crown. In whose time John the third king of
Portugal, understanding that neither the king himself cared greatly for
religion, and that the merchants and priests of Europe furthered not, but
rather with their bad life scandalized the people new converted, he sent
thither four Jesuits, to renew and reestablish matters of religion. These men
arriving first at the isle of Saint Thomas, and then at Congo, were courteously
received by the king: and presently going about the business they came for, one
of them took upon him to teach six hundred young children, the principles of
christian religion: and the other dispersed themselves over the whole country
to preach. But all of them, one after another, falling into tedious and long
diseases, they were enforced to return into Europe. At this time there was
appointed over Congo a third bishop of the Portugal nation, who through the
contumacie of the Canons and clergy, found trouble enough. In the mean while
Don Diego dying, there arose great tumults touching the succession, by means
whereof, all the Portugals in a manner, that were in Saint Saluador (except
priests) were slain. In the end, Henry brother to Don Diego obtained the
crown, and after him (for he quickly died in the wars of the Anzichi) Don
Aluaro his son in law. This man reconciled unto himself the Portugal nation,
caused all the religious and lay sort dispersed here and there, throughout the
kingdom, to be gathered together, and wrote for his discharge to the king, and
to the Bishop of Saint Thomas. The bishop having perused the letters, passed
himself into Congo: and giving some order for the discipline of the clergy,
he returned to Saint Thomas, where he ended his days. It so fell out, that
what for the absence, and what for the want of Bishops, the progression of
religion was much hindered. For one Don Francisco, a man for * Called by
Philippo Pigafetto (...).
blood and wealth of no small authority, began freely to say, that it was a
vain thing to cleave to one wife only, and afterward in the end, he fell
altogether from the faith, and was an occasion that the king grew woonderfully
cold. They affirm, that this Francisco dying, and being buried in the church
of Santa Cruz, the devils uncovered a part of that churches roof, and with
terrible noise drew his dead carcass out of the tomb, and carried it quite
away: a matter that made the king exceedingly amazed: but yet another accident
that ensued withal, struck him nearer to the heart: For the Giacchi leaving
their own habitations, entered like Locusts into the kingdom Concerning these
Giacchi, otherwise called Agag, read the discourse of Mohenemugi before the
beginning of John Leo.
of Congo, and coming to battle against Don Aluaro the king, put him to
flight: who not being secure in the head city, abandoned his kingdom, and
together with the Portugal priests, and his own princes, retired himself
unto an island of the river Zaire, called The isle of horses. Thus seeing
himself brought to such extremity (for besides the loss of his kingdom, his
people died of famine and misery, and for maintenance of life sold themselves
one to another, and to the Portugals also at a base price) for reparation of
his state and religion, he had recourse to Don Sebastian king of Portugal, and
obtained of him six hundred soldiers, by whose valor he drove his enemies out
of the kingdom, and within a year and an half, reestablished himself in his
throne. In his time Antonio di Glioun a Spaniard, was made bishop of Saint
Thomas, who after much molestation procured him by the captain of that island,
went at length into Congo, with two friars and four priests, and ordered
matters reasonably well. In the mean while Don Aluaro died, and his son of
the same name succeeded him, who failed not to solicit, both Don Sebastian
and Don Henry kings of Portugal, and the king of Spain also, that they would
send him some competent number of preachers and ecclesiastical persons for the
augmentation of the Christian faith in his kingdom: and amidst these
determinations he died, and a son of his called also Don Aluaro succeeded him.

During these tumults, certain other Portugal Priests went into Congo,
laboring to prune that vine which had been long time given over, and
forsaken. These men have built them an house in the island of Loanda, where do
remain six or seven of their company, that are ready to go sometimes
hither, and sometimes thither, as need requires. In the year of our Lord
1587. king Aluaro, (who because he was not borne of lawful matrimony, was
but little esteemed by his people) would needs have one of these priests about
him, by whose means and authority he came to reputation and credit. And God
himself favored his proceedings: for meeting a sister of his by the fathers
side, and one of her brothers, with a great army in the field, he gave him
battle, and bore himself therein with such valor, as he did not only
overthrow the forces of his enime but further slew the ringleader and general
thereof, and in the place where he was slain, he would needs build a church to
the honor of Christianity. And the more by his own example to move others,
himself was the very first man that put hand to this work: and likewise with
edicts and favorable proclamations, he furthered and does still advance the
preaching of the Gospel, and the propagation of religion.

Who so is desirous to be more fully instructed concerning the Christianity of
this kingdom, let him read the third and eight books of Osorius de Reb. gest.
Eman. and the second book of Philippo Pigafetta his story of Congo, most
properly and decently translated by the judicious master ABRAHAM HARTWELL.

Of the Christian religion in the kingdom of Angola.
THose Portugal priests that remain in the Island Loanda, as above we declared,
bend themselves more to the conversion of Angola, then of Congo. The reason is
(as I suppose) because the enterprise is new, and more nearly concerns the
Portugals, who there make war under the conduct of Paulo Diaz, to get
possession of the mountains of Cabambe which abound with rich mines of very
fine silver. It seems that god has favored the amplification of his holy
name in those parts with some myraculous victories. For first in the year
1582, a few Portugals in an excursion that they made, put to flight an
innumerable company of the Angolans. And by this victory, they brought in a
manner the half of that kingdom into their hands: and many Princes and
nobles of the land upon this, were moved to request and make suit to be
baptized. Among whom was Songa prince of Banza, the kings Father in law, whose
brother and children were baptized already. Tondella also, the second person of
Angola was converted: many Idols were thrown to the ground, and insteede
thereof they erected crosses, and built some churches. And within this little
while all the Province of Corimba is in a manner converted. Also in the year
1584, an hundred and fifty Portugals, together with such succors as were
conducted by Paul Prince of Angola, who was not long before converted;
discomfited more then a million of Ethiopians. In an other place we declared
the ready means and oportunities that the Princes of Ethiopia and of India
have, to assemble and bring together such infinite armies. They say, that
certain Ethiopians being demanded by a Portugal, how it came to pass that so
great a multitude turned their backs to so few men: they answered, that the
Portugals strength did it not, which with a blast they would have confounded,
but a woman of incomparable beawty, apparelled in shining light and brightness,
and an old man that kept her company with a flaming sword in his hand, who went
aloft in the air before the Portugals, and overthrew the squadrons of the
Angolans, putting them to flight and destruction. In the year 1588, were
converted Don Paulo Prince of Mocumba, and with him a thousand persons more.

The Christian religion of Monomotapa.
IN the dominions of the Monomotapa, the light of the faith being with
incredible ease kindled, was also as suddenly (...) by the devises of the
Mahumetans. For some Portugals going to the court of that monarche, and giving
himself, with some of his Princes and vassals, a taste of the gospel, were an
occasion afterward that Gonsaluo de Sylua, a man no less famous for the
integrity of his life, then for his blood and parentage, went over thither from
Goa in the year 1570. This man arriving with a prosperous voyage, in the
kingdom of Inambane, converted and baptized the king, his wife, children, and
sister, with his Barons and nobility, and the greatest part of his people.
Through whose persuasion Gonsaluo left his companions, prosecuting his voyage
toward the Monomotapa, only with six Portugals. Thus having passed
Mozambique, and the mouth of the river Mafuta, and of Colimane, they came to
Mengoaxano king of Quiloa, where they were courteously receiuedand entertained.
And though they had license in this place to preach the gospel, yet would not
Gonsaluo here stay, judging that upon the conversion of the Monomotapa, that of
the neighbor kings would follow without delaie. Embarking themselves therefore
upon the river Cuama, they sailed along the coast of Africa eight days, till
they came to Sena, a very populous village: where Gonsaluo baptized about five
hundred slaves, belonging to the Portugal merchants, and prepared for the
receiving of the gospel the king of Inamor, one of the Monomotapaes vassals. In
the end Antonio Caiado a Portugal gentleman came from the court, to guide
Gonsaluo toward the same place. Whither being in short time come, he was
presently visited on the emperors behalf, and bountifully presented with a
great sum of gold, and many oxen. But he returning back these presents, gave
the Monomotapa to understand, that he should know of Caiado, what he desired.
The emperor was astonished at this his magnanimity, and received him
afterward with the greatest honor, that could possibly be devised. And causing
him to sit upon the same carpet, whereon also his own mother sat, he
presently demanded how many women, how much ground, and how many oxen (things
mightily esteemed of in those countries) he would have. Gonsaluo answered, that
he would have no other thing but himself. Whereupon the emperor turning to
Caiado (who was their interpreter) said; that surely it could not be otherwise,
but that he, who made so little account of things so highly valued by others,
was no ordinary man; and so with much courtesy he sent him back to his lodging.

Not long time after, the emperor let Gonsaluo to understand, that he and his
mother were resolved to become Christians, and that therefore he should come to
baptize them. But he to instruct them better in the faith, deferred it off for
some days. Finally five and twenty days after his arrival, with
unspeakable (...) and preparation, he gave the water of baptism to the king,
and to his mother. He was called Sebastian, and she Maria. And presently
after, about three hundred of the principal in this emperors court were
baptized. Gonsaluo for his wonderful abstinence, charity, wisdom, and for
many other his singular virtues was so reverenced and esteemed by those people,
as if he had come down from heaven among them. Now as matters proceeded thus
prosperously, and with so desirable success, behold, an horrible tempest
arose which drowned the ship. There were in the court four Mahumetans most
dear unto the king. These men finding out some occasion, suggested unto him,
that Gonsaluo was a Magioian, who by witchcraftes and (...) could turn
kingdoms topsie turuie: and that he was come to pry into his estate, and to
stir up his people to rebellion, and so by this means to bring his kingdom
under subjection to the Portugals. With these and such like suggestions they
brought the king (who was but a young man) to determine the death of Gonsaluo.
The effect whereof was, that after long prayer, reposing himself a little; he
was by eight of the kings servants slain, and his body thrown into the river
Mensigine. Near unto the same place, were with like violence put to death,
fifty new-conuerted Christians. This rage and fury being over, the king was
advertised by the Principal of his kingdom, and then by the Portugals, of the
excess and outrage he had therein committed. He excused himself the best he
could, causing those Mahumetans to be slain, who had seduced him; and he
sought out some others also who lay hid, to put them to death. Whereupon it
seemed that by the death of father Gonsaluo, the conversion of this great king,
and of his empire, should have bin furthered, and no whit hindered, if the
Portugals would rather have prevailed by the word of God, then by force of
arms. The which I say, because instead of sending new preachers into those
countries, to preserve that which was already gotten, and to make new
conuersions, they resolved to revenge themselves by war. There departed
therefore out of Portugal a good fleet, with a great number of noble
Portugals therein, conducted by Francisco Barretto. At the fame of this war,
moved against him, the Monomotapa full of fear, sent to demand peace of
Barretto. But he aspiring to the infinite mines of gold in that kingdom,
contemned all conditions offered him. The effect of this enterprise was, that
this army which was so terrible to a mighty Monarke, was in few days
consumed by the intemperature of the air, which is there insupportable to the
people of Europe.

Of the fortresses and colonies maintained by the Spaniards and Portugals upon
the maine of Africa: by means whereof the Christian religion has there some
small footing. Which albeit in other respects they have been mentioned
before, yet here also in this one regard, it seems not from our purpose
briefly to remember them.
TO the propagation of Christianity, those fortresses and colonies woonderfully
help, which the Castilians, but much more the Portugals, have planted on the
coast of Africa. For they serve very fitly either to convert infidels upon
diverse occasions, or by getting an habit of their languages and customs, to
make a more easy way to their conversion. For those who are not sufficient to
preach, serve for interpreters to the preachers. And thus God has oftentimes
been well served, and with excellent fruit and effect, by the endeavor of some
soldiers. On the coast of Africa upon the Mediterran sea, the Spaniards have
Oran, Mersalchibir, Melilla, etc. and the Portugals, Tanger, and ceuta, and
without the streights of Gibraltar, Arzilla, and Mazagan; and in Ethiopia,
Saint George de la mina. They have also a settled habitation in the city of
Saint Saluador, the Metropolitan of the kingdom of Congo, and in Cumbiba, a
country of Angola. Beyond the cape de Buena esperanca; they hold the
fortresses, and colonies of Sena, Cefala, and Mozambiche. Here besides their
secular clergy, is a convent of Dominicans, who endeavor themselves to
instruct the Portugals, and the Pagans also which there inhabit, and do
traffic thither.

Of the Islands of the Atlanticke Ocean, where the Spaniards and Portugals have
planted religion.
THe Christian name is also augmented, and does still increase in the Atlantic
Ocean, by means of the colonies conducted thither, partly by the Spaniards and
partly by the Portugals. The Spaniards undertook the enterprise of the
Canaries, in the year of our Lord 1405. using therein the assistance of John
Betancort, a French gentleman, who subdued Lancarota, and Fuerteuentura. They
were taken again certain years after, and were first subdued by force of
arms, and afterward by the establishment of religion: so that at this
present, all the inhabitants are Christians. Also the Portugals have assaied to
inhabit certain other islands of that Ocean, and especially Madera, which was
discovered in the year 1420. This at the first was all over a thick and
mighty wood: but now it is one of the best manured islands that is known.
There is in the same, the city of Funcial, being the seat of a bishop. Puerto
santo, which is forty miles distant from Madera, was found out in the year
1428. and this also began presently to be inhabited. The isles of Arguin, being
six or seven, and all but little ones, came to the knowledge of the Portugals
in the year 1443. Here the king has a fortress for the traffike of those
countries. The islands of Cabo Verde were discovered in the year 1440. by
Antonio di Nolli a Genoway, or (as others affirm) in the year 1455. by
Aloizius Cadamosto. These be nine in number: the principal of them is Sant
Iago, being seventy miles in length: where the Portugals have a town situate
upon a most pleasant river, called Ribera grande, which consists at (...)
least of five hundred families. The isle of Saint Thomas being somewhat greater
then Madera, was the last island discovered by the Portugals, before they
doubled the cape De buena Esperanca. They have here a colonie called Pouasaon,
with a bishop, who is also the bishop of Congo, and it contains seven hundred
families. Under the government of Saint Thomas are the neighbor islands of
Fernando Po, and that del Principe, which are as it were boroughs belonging to
the same. The island Loanda, though it be under the king of Congo, yet is a
great part thereof inhabited by the Portugals. For here is the famous port of
Not Mazagan upon the coast of Barbary.
Mazagan, whither the ships of Portugal and Brasile do resort. Here the
fleetes are harbored, and the soldiers refreshed, and here they have their
hospital. As also here the Portugal priests (who endeavor the conversion of
the natural inhabitants) have a place of residence.

Of the Negros.
MOst of the Islands inhabited by the Portugals, especially those of Saint
Thomas and Madera, besides the Portugals themselves, contain a great multitude
of Negro-slaues, brought thither out of Congo and Angola, who till the earth,
water the sugarcanes, and serve both in the cities, and in the country. These
are for the most part gentiles, but they are daily converted rather through
continual conversation, then any other help that they have; and it is a matter
likely, that in process of some few years, they will all become Christians.
There is no greater hinderance to their conversion, then the avarice of their
masters, who, to hold them in the more subjection, are not willing that they
should become Christians.

Of those poor distressed European Christians in Africa, who are holden as
slaves unto the Turks and Mores.
But the best and most sincere christianity in all Africa, is that of those
poor christians, who are fettered by the feet with chains, being slaves to
the Arabians and Turks. For besides them that have remained there ever since
the days of Barbarossa and other Turkish captains (which were brought into
the mediterran seas by the French) as also since the great loss at Gerbi, and
the battle of Alcazar wherein Don Sebastian the king of Portugal was
overthrown: there passes not a year, but the rouers and pirates of those
parts, without granting any league or respite to the Northren shore of the
Mediterran sea, take great numbers of Christians from off the coasts of Spain,
Sardinia, Corsica, Sicilia, yea even from the very mouth of Tyber. It is
generally thought, that the number of slaves, which are in Alger amount to
eighteen thousand. In Tunis, Bona, and Biserta there are great multitudes: but
many more in Fez, and Maroco; as likewise in Mequenez and Tarodant, and in
diverse other cities of those kingdoms. The estate surely of these distressed
people is most worthy of compassion, not so much for the misery wherein they
lead their lives, as for the danger whereto their souls are subject. They
pass the day in continual travail, and the greatest part of the night
without repose or quiet, under insupportable burdens, and cruel stripes.
Beasts among us labor not more, nor are more slauishly entreated. Yea, albeit
under those brutish Barbarians, they endure all that toil, which beasts do
here with us: yet are they neither so well fed, nor so carefully looked unto,
as our beasts commonly are. They wear out the whole day in the sun, rain,
and wind, in continual labor, sometimes carrying burdens, sometimes digging
or ploughing the fields, and otherwhiles in turning of hand-milles, feeding of
beasts, or in performance of other labors: being bound to bring in so much
every day to their masters, and they themselves to live of the rest, which many
times is nothing at (...), or (if it were possible) less then nothing. They
have always the chain at their necks and feet, being naked (...) and
summer, and therefore are sometimes scorched with heat, and otherwhiles frozen
with cold. They must not fail in any iotte of their duties, and yet though
they do not, it can not be expressed with what cruelties they are tormented.
They use for the chastizing and torture of their bodies, chains of iron, dried
sinews of oxen, but-hoops steeped in water, boiling oil, melted tallow, and
scalding hot lard. The houses of those Barbarians resound again, with the
blows that are given these miserable men, on the feet and belly: and the
prisons are filled with hideous lamentations and yellings. Their companions
hair at this noise stands an end, and their very blood freezeth within them,
by considering how near themselves are to the like outrages. They pass the
nights in prisons, or in some caves of the earth, being hampered and yoaked
together like brute beasts. Here the vapor and dampe choaketh them, and the
uncleanness and filth of their lodging consumes them (as rust does iron) even
alive. But though the labors of their bodies be so grievous, yet those of
their minds are much more intolerable, for (besides that they want such as
might feed them with the word of God, and with the sacraments, and might teach
them how to live and die well, so as they remain like plants without moisture)
it can not be expressed, with whatforcible temptations their faith is
continually assailed. For not only the desire to come forth of these
unspeakable miseries, does tempt them; but the commodities and delights also
wherein they see others to live, that have damnablie renounced their
Christianity. The persecutors of the primitive church, to induce the Martyrs to
deny Christ and to sacrifice to their idols, tried them first with torments,
and then with ease and delights, which they propounded unto them, if they would
become as themselves. For to those, who in the midst of winter were thrown
into frozen lakes, there were contrariwise appointed soft and delicate beds,
with a fire kindled hard by, and a thousand other restoratiues and comforts; to
the end they might be doubly tempted, both by the rigor of the cold which
benumbed them, and by the sweetness of things comfortable and nourishing, which
allured them. The Christian slaves are at this day no less tormented; for on
the one side, they are afflicted with beggerie, nakedness, hunger, famine,
blows, reproaches, and tortures, without any hope in a manner ever to come out
thereof: and on the other side they see them that have reneged our holy faith
for Mahumets superstition, to live in all worldly prosperity and delight, to
abound with wealth, to flourish in honor, to govern cities, to conduct
armies, and to enjoy most ample liberty. But amidst all these so great
miseries, they have a double comfort. The one is of priests, who together with
themselves were taken captive. These men sometimes administering the sacraments,
and other whiles delivering the word of God in the best manner that they can,
are some help and assistance to others, being for this greatly (...) and
respected amongst them. The other is of the religious in general, who contend
and labor for their freedom. Wherein Spain deserves most high commendation.
For there be two most honorable orders, whose exercise it is, to move and
solicit for the freedom of captives. The one is called La orden de la
merced, and it flourishes most in Aragon; and the other (which is far
greater) is named Del Resgate or of ransom or redemption, the which although
it largely extends over all France, yet at this day above all other places,
it is most rife in Castilia. From whence some of them have gone into Sicilie,
to the kingdom of Naples, and to Rome: and have there begun to lay foundations
of their conuents. These two religious orders gather every year mighty sums
of money, wherewith they make speedy redemption of the forsaid captives. They
send their Agents to Fez, and to Alger, who managing this affair, with no
less diligence, then loialtie, redeem first all the religious, and priests,
and after them those of the yoonger sort, first the king of Spaines subjects,
and then others. They always leave one religious man in Alger, and another in
Fez, who inform themselves of the state and quality of the slaves, with their
necessity, to make the better way for their liberty the year following The
king of Spain (whom it most concerns) furthereth this so charitable a work,
with a bountiful and liberal hand. For ordinarily he gives as much more, as
the foresaid orders have gathered and collected by way of alms. For this is so
good an enterprise, that by the ancient canons no other is so much favored and
allowed of. Yea S. Ambrose and other holy men have pawned, for the delivery of
Christian captives, the chalices and silver vessels of their churches. And
Saint Paulinus for the same end and purpose, sold his own self. For all
other actions of charity are some spiritual, and others corporal, but this
in a very eminent degree is both spiritual and corporal together. For among
corporal miseries the servitude of infidels is most grievous, and among
spiritual calamities the danger of apostasy is of all others the greatest:
but those slaves so redeemed, are set free both from the one and from the
other. Whereupon there are very few borne in Spain, who dying, leave not some
alms behind them, for the ransoming of slaves. The (...) of redemption have
gone also many times to Constantinople: where in the year 1583. by the order
of Pope Gregory the thirteenth, they redeemed five hundred persons. The
brotherhood also of the Confalone in Rome, labor very diligently in this
point, who in Sixtus Quintus time, redeemed a great number of captives. Of whom
many also, urged partly by the hardness of servitude, and partly by the
sweetenes of liberty, free themselves, either by that which they gain over
and above their masters due, or by their good demeanor, or else by flight. And
they fly away, sometimes by repairing speedily to such fortresses as the king
of Spain has in Afric and in Barbary: and otherwhiles they seize on some
shipping, or on the self same galleies wherein they are chained. Many also
retire themselves to the Princes of Brisch, etc. who willingly receive and arm
them, using their assistance in the war which they continually make with the
Turks of Alger.

FINIS.

