A Defense of Paul Bassano the suruiuing Patentee, for the Importation of Fresh
Salmons and Lobsters, etc. by a new Invention, which he most humbly submits
to this Honorable house of Parliament.
That the Invention is New.
1. IT is a new Invention amongst the English here, to bring Lobsters alive in
Ships by Sea from foreign Seas, and streams; although the Dutchmen who are
Forrainers can do the same. And howsoever he a little before the Patent did
sell some Lobsters to the Fishmongers here, yet did not they know the secret of
his Invention how they were taken, how preserved and fed, and the Art how they
were brought; for every Wel-Boate will not bring them, nor is there yet any
Shipwright in England that knows how to make a Well for that purpose without
particular instruction. Nor did ever the Fishmongers, or any other before the
Patent, bring any Lobsters by this or any other Invention alive, by Sea from
any foreign parts. So there is no question of the newness of the Invention:
but whether it be the only Invention of the Patentees, or of the Stranger. And
who ought in our Commonweal to be preferred, they or we. But the now
opposers did never buy of the Stranger, nor bring any Lobsters by Sea, by this
or any other Invention, before the Patent.

The benefit thereof to the Commonwealth.
2. That the Flemming was the first Inuentor of bringing Lobsters alive by Sea
we deny not: but that he was the Inuentor of those things for our good we
deny. And contrariwise affirm, that by the Authority of this Patent, we have
turned this Invention which they devised for their good, to the good of our
Commonwealth. For when the Patentees upon their own adventure had employed
Ships to Sea, and from remote Coasts had brought Lobsters by Englishmen to
London, by the secret of this new Invention: 1. Then did they invent how to
prevent the extreme exaction wherewith the Dutchmen circumuented and brought
the English into thraldom. 2. How also to prevent and suppress the exaction,
which those few Fishmongers (who bought the Commodity of the Dutch) did make
upon the Company of Fishmongers, and so consequently upon the Subject. 3. How
to make the Dutchman a Servant, who before was a Master, and to keep him
within the compass of reasonable gain, that our Nation might have the better
penyworth. 4. How to have the commodity sold Cheaper, without any exaction
upon advantage of scarcity. 5. How to bring them more certainly then they were
before. 6. In more continued Plenty. 7. And better conditioned, and preserved
in reputation good and Marchantable, which before was oftentimes bad and
naught, even to the loathing of the same, and the Subject defrauded and
cousened. 8. How the eater thereof becomes more content. 9. How to raise the
little benefit that is gotten (in respect of the good which arises) out of
the Strangers purse, not our Countrymens, and yet our Nation to reap a settled
benefit hereby. 10. How to preserve (at our charge) our Bullion and Coin in
our Kingdom, which was, and otherwise would be subject to be embazeled by
the Dutchman; Two or three thousand pounds in a year, being disbursed to them
for this commodity. 11. How to increase our Navigations and Nauigators, and to
weed out the Dutchmen by degrees, as by encouragement of gain we can
strengthen our own Nation, (knowing the secret of this Invention now as well
as they) or at the least to make the other our Servant at a more reasonable
price, then we can possibly effect the same. 12. Wherein none are restrained
that had a benefit before. 13. The retayler has more gain, and the buyer
better content. 14. Former partiality is avoided, and the commodity is
distributed equally to the Company of Fishmongers, as well poor as rich. 15.
The Patentees have been at more charges, for the good of the Commonweal to
bring these things to pass, then yet they have received. 16. And the opposers
are few; but there is a general assent that this Patent may stand.

So as in conclusion, all things are carried in an even balance, whereby all
parties receive encouragement in their labors; and this Commonweal the
benefit, since this Pattent was granted, which by no other means can be
effected. And this Pattent as it has been governed, has procured a commodity
to this Commonweal and no discommodity; but if any be, it is to the Stranger
whose exaction is prevented, and not to us. And yet though he does not attain
to the height of his expectation, he rests contented, because he has no better
remedy, so long as this Pattent is in force, and daily makes suit to be
employed.

And herein the Patentees do not stand alone to justify themselves, but the
Master and Company of Fishmongers using the Trade, do generally affirm and
know the same: only some few contradicters, who (wanting experience, or for
other private respects) do oppose the same. Neither can the opposers deny it,
were they particularly examined and deposed to the questions aboue-said. This
Pattent also upon former opposition has been generally approved by the whole
Company of Fishmongers. And confirmed by the Lords of the Counsel, with this
testimony by them added, that it deserves to be continued and countenanced by
our State and Kingdom.

And whereas it has been objected that we would by virtue of this Patent,
seize upon the Lobsters of any other of our Countrymen that should bring them
from other parts, Our desire is so much for the good of the Commonweal, to
encourage our own Nation, as we are ready and willing to give free way
(notwithstanding the Pattent) to any of our Countrymen that will undertake it
and perform it accordingly, better then now it is. Only we (for that purpose)
will, as we do, by virtue of this Pattent keep off the Stranger from
exacting upon our Nation.

And now we most humbly submit it to your Honorable consideration, who speaks
most for the good of the Commonweal, either the opposers, or the affirmers.
And whether, this Pattent not being managed, (as some others have bin) to the
prejudice of any but to defend us from the exaction of the Stranger, and for
the general good of all: and these particulars being proved, your grave
judgments shall hold the same worthy your favors, and to be continued and
countenanced for the good of the Commonweal. For they desire not if it be not
found good for the State and Kingdom, that it do continue. Only they humbly
desire it would please this Honorable house to call before you, or some
Committee for that purpose, the Master and Company of Fishmongers using this
Trade, and (if these reasons seem of any importance) to make trial thereby of
the truth of that which we have affirmed.

So as the substance of the premises is this.
1. The exaction of the Dutch is prevented. 2. The exaction of the Fishmongers
also upon their Company. 3. The Dutchman is made our Servant. 4. The commodity
is sold better cheap. 5. It comes more certain. 6. In more continued plenty.
7. Better conditioned. 8. The eater is more content. 9. The benefit is made
from the Stranger not our Nation. 10. Our Bullion is preserved. 11. Our
Navigations increased. 12. None restrained that had benefit before. 13. The
retayler has more gain. 14. Former partiality is avoided. 15. The Patentees
have been at more charge then profit. 16. The opposers are but few, the assent
is general. 17. The whole Company of Fishmongers have approved the Pattent
upon opposition. 18. It has bin confirmed by the Lords of the Counsel. 19.
Free liberty is given to any of our Nation to bring Lobsters from other parts.
20. It stands with the policy of this State, by this Pattent, to preserve our
Nation from the exaction of the Dutch, which otherwise cannot be done.
And all is humbly submitted to the pleasure of this house.

Of these in order.

The Proofs.
1. THe exaction of the Dutch prevented. For whereas before the Patent, by
degrees they raised the Lobsters 35. shillings in a hundredth, we have brought
them back 20. shillings in abatement of the price; and by degrees would have
brought them lower: for they would not stand to the casualty of the Market when
they came, but be sure of their money before they went, howsoever the market
fell out here.

2. The exaction of the Fishmongers upon their Company avoided. For whereas
they who bought the Ships ladings of the Dutch in gross, did retayle them at
7.8. and 9. pound the hundredth; they are now never sold above 6. pound: and if
they be small, they have two or three hundred for one.

3. To make the Dutchman a Servant. For now we know the Invention: if he will
not go for reasonable gain, we can set others on work, and none can draw
him from us by proffer of greater gain.

4. The commodity better Cheap. For the Fishmongers buy them at 6. pound the
hundredth, whereas before they have been sold for 9. pound: and this is caused
also by the daily coming of them, and the orderly usage thereof, as the
Fishmongers themselves will justify.

5. It comes more certain. Because we make the Dutch all become partners,
though we do employ 20. Ships, for none may go before or behind another,
but 19. of them shall help to lade and furnish away the 20.th: So as by that
means we have every day a Ship ready to come away, if the wind serve from
that place, Whereas otherwise if every man should lade himself, they would be
a Fortnight or three weeks before they could be provided of a freight to
defray their charges, And so sometimes they would come altogether upon a
cluster, and be spoiled before they could be vented, and some whiles none in a
Fortnight or in a Month together, whereas now they are here every day during
the Season, the wind serving.

6. The plenty is greater. For we have that daily by this order, which before
we had but once in a Fortnight or in a Month: and then 4. Ships might happen
to come together, and sometimes but one, which confusednes caused a scarcity
afterward.

7. Better conditioned. Which must needs follow, because they now in two or
three days lade a Ship, all helping together being partners, and they are
brought away more speedily, which must needs come better, then when every one
lading for himself, is two or three Weeks lading his Boat, by which means
some are spoiled and dead whilst the rest are taking.

8. The eater is more content. Which follows by the former reasons; for the
Goodness, certainty, and cheapnes being approved, he is encouraged to eat them.

9. The benefit is raised from the Stranger not our Subjects. For we have
brought him down from his former exaction, to a lower price, from whence
arises the profit that is made, and yet they are sold cheaper to the
Fishmonger.

10. Our Coin and Bullion is preserved in our Kingdom. For we hyre one of
their own Nation here to give them Bills of exchange to receive their money in
their own Country out of his estate there, and so they receive nothing from
us but Paper.

11. Navigations is increased. Because we having learned the secret of this
Invention, have employed our own Countrymen, and still do, in Ships bought by
our selves, wherein we have lost two Ships at Sea among the rocks in the
Adventure: and do offer our Nation for their encouragement 10. shillings more
in a hundredth, then the Strangers has for Lobsters, and by degrees as we can
increase our own Nation, do intend to weed out the Dutchmen. But all cannot
be done upon the sudden: for if we bar the Dutchmen before we have
increased our own Countrymen to serve the turn, then would these opposers
complain much more that the Market is not served; and we do the rather a
while forbear, because of the uncertainty of the Patent: for if we should
build 20. Ships our selves (as we employ no less for this service) it would
be a great prejudice and loss to have them lie upon our hands. But we will
undertake, if we may have the favor of our State to our Patent, to weed out
the Dutch quite within three or four years, and to plant our own Nation
wholly in the Trade, as we have begun already, if it shall so seem good to
this Hon: Assembly.

Neither is there any hope to increase our Navigations in this kind, but by
virtue of this Pattent. For otherwise were the Dutchman at liberty, as he was
before: he would first weary our Nation in vnder-selling them, and when the
Trade were come into his own hands, exact upon them infinitely by degrees at
his pleasure as he did before, which he will effect by these means. First, he
is more industrious, and lives more hardly then our men. And next. He can have
money in his Country at 4. or 5. pound in the hundredth: so as if he make but
ten pound in the hundredth, he is a great gayner. Whereas with us money is at
ten pound, and we shall be loosers (regarding our hazard of Ships and Goods) if
we make not 15. pound in the hundredth. And thus will he undermine us, and then
make his own price as aforesaid.

12. None are restrained that had any benefit before. These few opposers never
had any Trading as aforesaid. But for those Fishmongers who bought Lobsters of
the Dutchmen, The Patentees were so ready to avoid any cause of grieuance, as
they did grant the one half of the benefit of the said Pattent to them, so as
they rest well contented, though it abridge them of their former gain, because
of the good to the Commonweal, and that by experience they do find the
confusion that was before: the good Order that is now, and what thraldom they
should fall into hereafter, in respect of the envy of some, if this Pattent
were put down, as also the Master and whole Company in general will not deny.

13. The Retayler has more gain, because that which was wont to come
monthly, comes now daily, and because they are sold to him cheaper, and
better as aforesaid: so the eater being encouraged to buy, they sell the more,
and never loose by them, being now good, which they often did when they were
bad.

14. Former partiality is avoided: for whereas before the Fishmonger who bought
a Ship of Lobsters of the Dutch, If there were profit to be gotten thereby,
would sell them to none but to his particular friends by hundreths, who traded
with him for other Commodities, so as the poorer sort could sildome or never
get any, but to their loss in a glutt. Now they are made out by lesser
parcels, equally, and so distributed to poor as well as rich: They have them
without money, and pay not till they have made their profit, and sometimes
never pay.

The other points, are sufficiently explaned in the former discourse, and
therefore to avoid prolixity omitted here.

Only this we are bold to add, that the Patentees have also in this Grant a
Privilege, for bringing Salmons fresh and unsalted by a new Invention (wherein
though they did not undertake so much) yet have they by their Invention brought
Salmons alive from Scotland to England in the hottest and most unseasonable
times of the year: and for a sample and testimony thereof, presented one alive
to the Lord Mayor of London that then was: which never any English man or other
did before. Yet seeing our Pattent has been daily opposed by some
vainglorious, or envious spirits of the Fishmongers, and threatened to be
thrown down; we have forborne to put the same in further practice, least we
should with the Be, gather honey for Drones to suck, till we see how this
Kingdom will cherish our good endeauours for the Commonweal, as the Lords of
the Counsel have done already. For it stands with the policy of all States
and Kingdoms, to support and countenance new Inventions with most favorable
constructions, when they tend and are employed to the good of the weal
public, and to the hurt of none. As this Pattent is managed.

An answer to diverse feigned surmises and objections made against this Pattent.
1. Object. THat it is not the Inue^tion of the Pa^entees: but some Fishmongers
maintained two Boats along the coasts of England, and the Dutch brought them
by the same Invention from the Holy Islands two or three years before the
Pattent.

Resp. That this is a new Invention (...), for it was never known or practiced
by any Nation till two or three years before the Pattent. It is not denied
that the Dutch did bring this Invention first to light. But for two Boats
pretended to be employed by Fishmongers upon the English coast two or three
years before the Pattent; It is not affirmed by the Pattent that the Patentees
were the only Inuentors, and if he that had such skil^, (...) for a
privilege, no doubt but he should have been embraced, but he is dead and was a
poor man (no Fishmonger) and learnt it of the Dutch. (...) we are, these few
opposers never knew nor practiced any such Invention before the Pattent, and
that the Patentees knew not at that time any such man, nor learned any such
skill of him. But the Patentees are the first that ever brought this Invention
to perfection, and settled the government thereof for the good of this Kingdom.
And for any English man who can i^stly pretend skill in this Invention, or will
employ himself; we will willingly give way to him to Traffic to places
formerly Traded to by the English, and will give him more by a crown, or an
angel in the hundredth of Lobsters then the Stranger has of us for his
encouragement. Though the opinion of Master Attorney General that last was,
certified to the Lords of the Counsel; is, That it is no Trade unless it were
of seven years continuance before the pattent.

2. Object. That two Fishmongers were imprisoned by the now Lord Chancellor
for opposing the pattentees, and driven from their Trade.

Resp. These men were no Traders with the Dutch, or otherwise venturers for
Lobsters before the pattent: but setting themselves against the pattent; they
bought some Lobsters of the Dutch, who came straggling from their fellows, with
a polliticke purpose to break the good order which was begun for the good of
the Commonweal, and thereby to bring all to confusion again. A complaint
being thereof made to the Lord Chancellor; upon due consideration of their bad
in^ention, and examination of the matter, (they being refractory and refusing
obedience to the pattent) his Lordship committed them, and upon their
submission released them again. And the most worthy of them was afterward so
far respected by the Patentees, as he was accepted to be a partner with them
to his good content. And that this was just, and a fault in the opposers,
appears in this, for that upon like complaint made to the Counsel Table, by
the same men and others, their Lordships (notwithstanding) confirmed the
pattent against their opposition, seeing the same to be convenient and good for
the Commonweal.

3. Object. That the Dutchmen brought Lobsters in such plenty before the
Patent, as they sold them for 3. pound and 40. shillings the hundredth.

Resp. This is most false, for the Dutchmen would never go but he would be
sure of his price before he came hither, which was 5. pound 15-shillings the
hundredth: and if then when they were bad and naught, they were rarely sold at
3. pound, it was to the Fishmongers great loss, and discouragement to the
eater for ever buying the commodity again. But when they were good and
scarcer, they were sold for 9. pound the hundredth to the Fishmonger, but much
more to the Subject, which was a great exaction: and now they are never sold
above 6. pound, which is the lowest price they were sold for at any time
before, (unless it were to great loss) and they have two or 3. hundredth for
one if they be small. So as one hundredth at 6. pound, in such manner delivered
good and sweet, is better then a hundredth that are stark naught at 5. pound,
whereby the Subject is but deceived, and brought to a loathing of the commodity.

4. Object. There are many Lobsters now sold by the Fishmongers which are
extreme bad and naught.

Resp. It is very true; but these are such dead Lobsters as are brought by
Mariners from Newcastle, ready sodden, which seldom or never come good. But
those that come by this Invention are delivered sweet and Marchantable.

5. Object. The Lobsters are kept at Quinborough, to the great loss of the
Flemming and spoil of the commodity.

Resp. This is a most false suggestion. For there is no comparison of them that
dye there and of those that dyed hear before the Patent: for if at any time
they stay there, they are kept for preservation in their own element the Sea,
and so fed. Whereas being taken out before they are ready to be spent, they are
out of their element, and kept in Warehouses (which must needs be worse)
four or 5. days together, where they pine away, dye, and corrupt infinitely
to the detestation of the commodity: But from Quinborough they are brought
alive, and if any do pine there, they are cast away at the Strangers charge;
the rather because there shall be no scandal upon the commodity, nor offense
thereby to the eye, stomach, or purse here. For we do not suffer any that are
bad to come hither. Nor is there any advantage by us made in this upon the
Subject, for the price is never raised: so as the opposers have rather cause to
give us thanks for our care, then thus to requite us with false aspersions, if
either they remembered what has been heretofore, or understood what would
follow. But nothing will serve their turn but a dissolution, though themselves
who are most forward to oppose (were the Pattent dissolved) would soonest find
and feel the smart.


