A defense of the honor of the right high, mighty and noble Princess Marie
Queen of Scotland and dowager of France, with a declaration as well of her
right, title and intereste to the succession of the crown of England, as that
the regimente of women is conformable to the law of God and nature.

Imprinted at London in Fleet street, at the sign of Justice Royal against
the Black bell, by Eusebius Dicaeophile. Anno Dom. 1569.

THE AUTHOR TO THE GENTLE READER.
IT is not unknown to the (gentle Reader) being an English man what great
contention has of late risen in England, what talk and writing have been
towchinge the right of the Queen of Scotla^de to the succession of the crovne
of England
what hot schools and disputations have been kept in many places here,
towchinge the right heir apparente of the crown of England, if God call to
his mercy our gratiouse Queen and Sovereign Elizabethe, with owte issewe of
her body. Neither has this stir stood with in the list of ernest and
feruente talk of each side, but men have gone on farther, and have as well by
printed as unprinted books, done their endeavor to disgrace, blemishe and
deface, as much as i^ them liethe, the just title claim and intereste of the
noble and excellent Lady Marie Queen of Scotland, to the foresaid crown:
Yea they have in vtteringe their gross ignorance, or rather their spiteful
malice against her grace, run so on headlonge, that they have expressly
denied and refused all womanlye gouernemente. All vvomans regiment refused of
some
Among other one of theys rash, hot, hasty and headye companions, has
cast abroad abowte Iulye last, a poisoned pestiferous pamflett, against the
said Queen's claim and interest. Wherein he auouchethe also that the civil
regimente of women, is repugnante both to the law of nature, and to the law
of God. It is more over well known to all England and Scotland, what a
business and stir there has been, what earnest vehemente and viole^te talk,
what false fained and forged reports and opprobriouse slanders have been
bruted, as well in the one as in the other realm, against the said virtuous
good innocence Lady and Queen, by the crafty maliciouse drifte of her
rebelliouse subjects. Who have not only blown abroad, and filled men's
ears with lothesome and heynouse accusations against her grace, towchinge the
slawghter of her late dear husband: But have also upon this false
slaunderouse crimination taken arms against her, emprisoned her, and spoiled
her of all manner her costelye apparel and Iewelles, and also bereaved her of
her princelye and Royal authority, intrudinge them selves into the same,
under the name and shadow of the young Prince her son. Towchinge all theys
poinctes, ye shall have now, good reader, in this treatise followynge divided
in to three books, The contents of the books followi^ge.
an answer. And for as much as Solomon writethe, and this good Lady so
takethe yt, that a good name is to be praised and valewed above all pretiouse
oyntementes, Ecclesi. 7.
above all gold and silver, Prove. 22.
and that the impayringe of her honor by theys foul and slawnderouse
reports, does towche and nippe her heart nerer, then may the loss of any
worldelye honor, hanginge upon her by expectation, or that she has enjoyed,
or does presentlye enjoy, or any other greauouse injuries that she has most
wrongfullye but most patiently suffered. Yt is thowght good that the defense of
her honor should forgo the other two books, whereof the former entreatethe,
debatethe and discussethe the right title and interest of the said Queen
Marye, to the succession of this crown of England. Declaringe her said right
and title to be good and lawful, by the common law of this realm, and the
acts of parliame^te therein holde^, with a full answer of such objections,
as the adversaries lay forth against her said right, by color of the said
law or parliamentes. And for as much as with our foresaid new found
doctor, neither common law, nor acts of parliamente, seame to serve for a
sufficient plea, but that we are by him driven, also to plead by the law of
nature and by scripture: We have adjoined in the third book a co^ueniente
answer to this fond fantastical and dangerous assertion, as well to the
states of other Princes, as to the state of his and our gratiouse Sovereign.
Wherein we auouche woman's regime^te to be comfortable both to the law of God,
and the law of nature. Which tretise may seem perchance to some as
superfluous, neither I greatly deny yt, and there fore might, and would
gladlye have spared so much labor and travail, if this little poisoned
pamflett had not many readers, and many also favorers and allowers, or if the
matter did not so nighe towche even our own gracious and noble Sovereign, or
if this lewd assertion were not (as yt were by a Sampsons post) withdraw the
countenance of the law of nature, and Gods holy word underpropped, or if
that Gods holy word were not now a days wretchedlye applied (God reform
yt) and licenciouslye vvreathed and wrested to the maintenance of every
private ma^s fancy and follye, and as fondelye and folisshelie credited and
embraced also of other fantastical persons, or if this man were the first, Se
the first Blaste.
or like to be the l^ste mainteyner and setter forth of such a strange and
dangerous Paradoxe. Or if, there have not already been publisshed and divulged
by printe english books, for the maintenance of the said strange doctrine.
Which was (if we shall creditt the setters forth of yt) first well
considered, and then aduisedlye allowed by such persons, as a great multitude
of people in many contreyes do now greatly esteem and honor, or if the
danger of this doctri^e stretched not to many other great Princes and
kingdoms, or to conclude, if the divulgation of this doctrine, stood only in
English Books, and that there were not, Bodinus in metho. ad cognit. hisstor.
that have showed their fond fancy therein even in the latin and most common
tongue of all. For theys and other causes, we have set in the last book a
confutation of this gross and dangerous error. where as also he e^ueyethe most
slanderouselye against her highness for the foresaid slaughter with bare
naked, but spiteful reproaches and out cries, with ovvte any manner of kind
or countenance of good proof, we will refer the Reader to the foresaid
defense of her honor. By the which answer ye shall see her integrity and
innocence, and with all that her accusers have in this matter played such a
Tragedy against their gwyltles Lady and gratiouse Sovereigne, as lightly
the world has not hard of the like. The which their false slaunderouse,
The comme^dations of diverse kings for releauinge of other Princes being in
extremity.
owtragiouse, rebelliouse doings, yt is hoped that our gratiouse Queen will
well consider and ponder, and will take some conveniente order also, as well for
the repressinge of them, as for the restitution of the said Queen Marie into
her own realm. And the rather because our said Queen is learned, and
therefore not ignorante what great co^me^dation and immortal fame, many
kings have purchased to them selves for such benefitt bestowed upon other
Princes, being in the like distress and extremity. The monume^tes of
antiquity, as well profane as Ecclesiastical are filled with the memory of
such noble factes. In holy scripture we read that Abraham cowragiouselie and
manfully delivered his brother Loathe, Genes. 14.
whith certain Kings taken prisoners by their enemies. Esdrae* 1.
Cyrus delivered the Jews from captivity. 4. Reg. c. vlt.
Evelmerodache delivered Ioachim the King of Judah ovvte of prison. 1 Machab.
15.
The Romans did write to diverse Kings in the favor of the Jews unjustly
oppressed. What shall I speak of Alexander the great, that restored Ada the
Queen of Caria? Or of the foresaid Romans that restored Masinissa the King of
Numidia, with many other Kings? Or of our noble Cordell, that set up again
in the Royal throne of our Britannie, her father driven from thence by his two
other unkind and unnatural dowghters? Some Princes of this our realm have in
their great calamity, and among other, king Henry the sixte fownde much
comfort, fre^dshippe, succor and relief, at the kings hands of Scotland.
This Lady and Queen desierethe now to taste the like at our Queen's hands.
Whereby she shall win greater commendation, then did Charles the late
Emperor, for restori^ge either of Francis Sfortia to the dukedom of Millane,
or of Muliasses to the ki^gdome of Tunes, or of his son king Philippe for
procuringe the restitution of the Duke of Sauoye. For this Lady and Queen is
her most nighe neighbor by place: And her nighe cosen and sister by blood.
She is a Queen, and therefore this were a fit benefitt for her relief from a
Queen. Yea she is, as yt were her dawghter, both by dawghterlye reverence she
bearethe her majesty, and by reason she is of God called to the daughters
place in the succession of the crown, if her majesty fail of issewe. And I
dowbte nothing, if she imploye this motherlye benefitt upon her, but that she
shall find her, a myndefull, thankful, and an obediente dawghter. For of all
women in this world, she abhorrethe ingratitude. She has hitherto depended
only upon the hope, The great trust that the Queen of Scotts has ever had
in her dear sister the Queen of England.
to have help and succor of her majesty, geuinge over, partelye voluntary,
partelye at the motion of her majesty, diverse profers of aid and succor by
other mighty and puissante Princes her friends frelye to her offered:
reposinge her self upon the fair and princelye promises that her Majesty
has made to her sondrye times as well by lettres, as by messengers, for her
relief: when so ever opportunity should occasion her to crave yt. For theys
and many other considerations, there is good hope, as is a foresaid, that our
gratiouse Maistresse will take in hand her restitution. Where upon, I trust,
shall follow such farther and entire amity between them both, and their
realms, that the benefitt, fruit, and commodity thereof shall plentifullye
redowne, as well to all the posterity of both the said realms hear after,
as to us presently.

The printer to the reader.
I Require and hartelie pray the (good and louinge reader) that if in this
praesent Book thou find any alligation not dewlye coted, or a poinct out of
place, a lettre lacki^g, or other wise altered: as, n, for, u, and such
littill light faults against orthographiae, thou wilt neither impute the same
to the author of this worthy Work, nor yet captiouslye control the error:
but rather of thy humanity and gentilnes, amend that which is amiss with thy
pen. For if thou diddist know with what difficulte the imprinting hereof was
atchiued, thou would rather curtouslye of frendlye faueur pardon many great
faults, than curiouslye with rigorouse censure to condemn one little.

Christ keep the in his faith and fear praesentlie and perpetuallye. Amen.

A DEFENSE OF THE HONEVR OF THE right high, right mighty and noble Princess
Marie Queen of Scotland, and Dowagere of France. The first Book.
IT WERE to be wisshed, that as God and nature has most decently,
ordinatelie, and providentlye furnisshed and adorned man, with two eyes, why
that nature has geven co man too eyes and two ears and but on tongue.
two ears, and butt with one mowthe, and one tongue, wo^derfulye brydled and
kept in with the lips and the teathe* So men would consider the cause of yt,
and the great providence of God therein, And after dew consideration use them
selves accordingelie. Then should we sone learn and practice a good lesson,
to hear and see many things, and yet not to rune headlo^ge, nor rudely and
rashelie to talk of all we here and see. But to talk within a compass, and
to refer all our talk to a temperancie and sobriety, and to a knoven tried
trevthe: especially where the said talk may sownde, to the blemishinge and
disgracinge of any man's good name and estimation. But now a days (the more
pity) thereis nothing almost but that as sone, as yt is perceived by the
eye or ear, must forthwithe be lasshed owte again by the mowthe, such a
superfluouse and curiouse ytchinge we have dissolutelie, and vnadvysedlie to
talk of all matters, thowghe they tend to the great hynderance and infamy
of many of our brethren. And thowghe we be nothing assured of the certain
trewthe of the matter, yea without respect to pryuate or public persons. Of
such unbridled talk, no man or woman in our days has, as I suppose more
just cause to complain, then the right excellent Princess lady Marie Queen
of Scotla^de: whose honor many have gone abowte to blotte and deface in
charginge her most falselie and iniustlie, with death of her late husbo^de
the lord darley. For the defense and mainteynynge of whose innocencye in this
behalf, we intend to lay forth, before the gentle reader, the most chief
and principal reasons, grounds and arguments, where upon the patrones, the
inuenters and workers, of all these myscheavouse and develyshe dryfts, grownded
them selves and all their owteragyouse doyngs. And then consequentlye to
infringe and repulse the same. For to rehearse, answer to, and repel all
their assertions and objections, yt would require a very long, tediouse,
and a superfluouse discourse, in as much as these iolye gaye orators,
measuringe their doings, more by nombre of false objections, then by true,
substanciall and pithie matter, to make a goodly florishe and a trime show,
to face owte and countenance their crafty iuglings, And to cover their
disordered dealings, there with all, have raked up and heaped together
onevppo^ an other, against their good maistresse and Sovereyne Queen, no small
number of slawnderouse Articles. But in all this rableme^te, in all this
rakynge and rackynge, what thing else do they butt utter and disclose their
own spiteful malice, and malicionse spite, to the discreditinge of their
cause, and them selves also. Eaven as the accusers of Aristophen among the
Athenie^ses did, by who^e he being nynetie and five times greavouselie
accused, was yet every time by the Judges cleared, and fownde gyltles. As I do
no whitte dowbte, but that this good innocente lady wylbe, by the verditt and
sentence, of all indifferente men, ridd and unburdened in like manner, of all
manner of suspicion, that theys reproachful men would by their malice and
ambition bring her into, by their wylls with all the world. For as goodelie
and as great a muster as they make, two parts of their slawnderouse
accusations, are manifest false, and open vntrewthes, and foul forged lies.
The reside we thereof, thowghe in some part they bear trewthe, and be nothing
preindiciall to the Queen in this matter, yet are they full calumniouselie, and
mervelouse maliciouselie depraved, drawn and wrested to the worste, The
effect and drifte of the whole tendethe to this, that first they would we
should beleave that after her marriage, her mind was as yt were alyenated from
her husband. Secondly theie p^tende certain letters, that theye surmise, and
would have, to have been written by her grace, whereby they seake to infer
against her many a presumption, as their wylye brains imagine. But the
most wayghtye of the^ all, seamethe to them to be her pretensed marriage,
whereof we will lastly entreat. And yet though they have done, their woorste,
though they have cast owte, all their spite and malice against her, yet
never have they been able by any direct and lawful means, to prove any
thing at all, whereby they may stain her graces honor, in any one of the
foresaid points. Had they browght forth any such necessarily concludinge
illation, we had not attempted this defense in her behalf, but would have
yielded, and geven place to an open known trewthe. But seeing that the best
matter they have to supporte their doings with all, is nothing else, but
presumptions and surmises, wiche yet are not of the surest and most probable
sort, neither such, as are presumptiones iutis, and de iure, contra quas non
admittitur probatio. Saying also, that we owght always in crminall ca^ses, but
cheifelie when a Prince is tovvched, who is Gods anointed, to be more
proclive and prone to favor, then to hatred, to be redier to absolve and
releace then to deteine and condemn. Me^ should be rather prone to absolve
then to condemn.
And that yt is far better, and a more suer, more indifferente, and upright
way to save the gvvyltyes lif, then to condemn and cast away the innocente:
I trust and am in assured hope, that all the indifere^te readers hereof (this
being the cause and woeful adversity of a Prince, whereas the like estate of
Princes ovvght, and is wont to move and stir all honest hearted men to
comiseration and pity, and to do their endeavor, to the redress and
reformation of such wrong and oppression done) will with indifferencye,
and with out all parcyallitie vveyghe and consydere the allegations of the
one and the other side, and judge of the matter as yt fallethe owte
accordyngelie, which is the very thing we most desire. And saying the
adversaries throwghe out all their cause wander by ghesses, and uncertain
presumptio^s, let us also, as I may say abuse a little part^ of ovvr defense,
what say I abuse (parchaunce trevvlye, if we had no better matter, or they
had any good matter at all) nay rather use them accordingelye for the more
ample and better trial and justification of our cause. We ask them then, why
the better and the stronger presumptions, should not frustrate avoyde and set
back the weaker and the worse? This sex naturallye abhorrethe such
butcherlye practyzes: suerly rare yt is to hear such foul practizes in
vvome^. And may we find in our heart to beleave, that yt is now at length
fovvnde in, and practiced, by such a lady and Princes, from whose person,
her noble birth, her honorable state, and princelye education, and the whole
trade of all her godly, and virtuous life past, do far repel and drive
away, all such suspision and coniecturall presumptions? And whom all
christtian Princes have had in high estimation, and vvorthie price, for her
great prudencie, and many other princely qualities, the which full goodly
do adorn and bevvtifie the grace and comlines of her royal perso^nage. Does
any man or vvoma^ fall to extreme levvdenes all at ons? No verelie, we do
both rise and fall by degrees: as well to all singular virtues, as to al
extreme nawghtines. Let the^ shevve me then if they can any euel doings in
all her former life, vvher upon to make a sinister diuinatio^ to fastenvpon her
their treacherouse accusatio^s? What vnseamelie ovvtragiouse, and vnprincelye
part has she hitherto plaide? Let the noble roiaume of France testify of
her demeanor and behavior? Let her own subiets that be not her open enemies,
charge her as far as they can? Yea let these her open enemies, and her dowble
dowble traitors accuse her hardly and spare her not? But yet let them well
think with all at their better leisure, and they shall be better advised
whether there be any indifferente parson, who vvil not both detest, and
utterly abhor, the perverse and naughty nature of such ingrate traitors.
Or that will not think yt far unlike that this noble Queen, who has so
gratiouselie perdoned them dovvble and treble treasons, would ever find in
her hatte so to use her own dear husband? This is unlikely, This is
incredible: And the more all circumstances considered. For if she had been so
desirouse to have been ridd of him, as they falselie, and maliciouselie
imagine, and report her to have been, she had good and lavvfull means to
serve her turn. Albe yt he was her hedd in wedlock, yet was he otherwise
but a membre of the Scottishe common wealth, subject to her, as to his
principal and supreme governesse, and to her laws. By the dew and
ordinary, It is nothing likely that the Queen would have sowght the
destruction of the lord Darley by this means whom she might have openly put
to death by justice.
process and course vvherof, he might justly have been convicted, condemned,
and executed, as well for the murder committed upon David her Secretary, in
whose body his dagger was fovvnde stabbed: As for the imprisoninge of the
Queen, and for th'attemptinge to remove her from civil gouuernement, to
intrude him self thereto, and for diverse other the like pagea^ts by him plaide.
Who can now reasonably think, that where she by law and justice might
have fully satisfied this her falseli surmised will and desire, that she
would not take these opportunities in this sort offered, but omitting them
all, seake unlawful means to his distrustion? This vehement presumption of
her innocence is much helped for that she would not consent to a divorce
betvve^ her and the lord Darlie (as we shall hereafter declare) though she
were moved thereto by a great number of her nobilite, and by such as be now
her greateste adversaries. ^ add farther thereto, as a great and an vrge^te
presumption, and token of her innocence and pure conscience, The Queen
contrary to the mind of her nobles came into England.
that she voluntarily came into England (refusinge the offers of diverse of
her own subjects, who besovvght her grace, to repair into their quarters,
proferringe to preserve her grace sauf therein) where she knevve right well
were the father and mother of the said lord Darlei, And a noble Queen that
would not see the bloudde of her near cosen vnrevenged, and a vvorthie sort
of men of nobility also, who would neither suffer such a fact to pass and
escape unpunished, nor so virtuous and gwyltles a Queen to remain withoWte
aid help and succor, being With rebels and traitors shamefullie opressed
and bereaved of her royal dignity The worthy sainge also of the Wise
Cassius, Cicero pro milo.
is here to be remembered, The notable saie^ge of.
Cui bono? Whereby he did signify, that in such dowbtfull co^iectural cases, a
man may make a great aim and conjecture against the person appeached,
Cassius, cui bono?
if by the fact doing he should enioie any special profitt, emolumente or
commodity, If the Queen had after his fatal and final end, purchased to her
self the matchinge in marriage With any great and mighty Prince for her
great advancement, or any other increase of her honor or advantage
whatsoever: there had been some color and show, Whereby you might have an
apparent presumption. Again she was not ignorante but that his death, either
procedinge from such nawghtie means, or otherwise naturally was likely to
be a meruelouse great stay and impedime^te to her great affairs. Among
other things the testimony and confession of diverse gwyltie (as they be
reported) and executed in Scotla^de for the said offense which they ope^lie
made at the time of their death, does tend much to the aduancinge and
approbation of her innocence. Theys men yet paradue^ture will reply and say,
that theys are but slender presumptio^s And yet were yt so, that they were of
force sufficient, they must yield to an approved trewthe. It remainethe now
then that We consider how suer and substanciall their prouf is. Concerning
therefore the first perte, We Will not al to gether deny, but that she Was
somewhate estra^ged from him, and therefore they might have spared a great
sort of their neadelesse and friuolouse arguments, and yet flatt and plain
lies Withal to prove the same. But fie upon the cruelty of these accusers,
The Queen's ennemies lay to her discord with the lord Darley whereof they were
the authors.
Who were the very authors them selves. And them selves the only Workers
and bringers to pass of all this discord: traininge this selie young
gentleman by their gwylefull and vvilie circumuentions Wretchedlie to conspire
With them against his own dear Wife, and dread Sovereign, to the most
cruel and detestable slawghter of her trusty Secretorie David, and to the
imprisonmente of the royal person of the very Queen her self. These and many
other like prancks and practices, as the reuocation of you the Earl murraie,
and of other traitors of your allie and affinity, with ovvte the Queen's
knowledge by the lord darley, his yowthfull, rash and temerariouse device, to
depart the reaulme, withdraw many other like practices, purposes and atte^pts,
for his princely parson very unmeet, and far vnseamelie, ye craftelie
suppress, and speak no word off, for fear off burning your own clothes.
I say therefore fie, and dovvble fie upon the impude^cie of these traiteurs.
Now to lay to the Queen's charge, and reprochfullie to obiecte to her
changinge of her mind tovvarde her husband, which rose and begane upon
causes, for the which they had been long erst trysed up, yff they had not
fortuned upon, and met with so gratiouse a maistresse: As I know, and they
thovvghe vndeseruinge yt do well feale, that the whole world has very
fevve her like. And yet all this your prete^sed alienation of her accustomed
faueur from him, not with sta^dinge her very motherlie care: (for besides all
other respects, thovvghe they Were not far differente in years, she was to
him not only a loyal Prince, a louinge and dear wife, but a most careful
and tender mother with all,) was never a deal lessed or minisshed: Albe yt
for a time she did dissemble and forebeare ovvtevvardelie to shevve and utter,
her inward heart and affectionate love, upon most just and good respects:
As the manner and practice of prouidente and most louinge parents oftentimes
is, tovvarde their dear children, for the better reclaiminge of the
vvanderinge mind, and vvaueringe will of the yovvthfull unadvised gentleman.
And therefore heatinge and advertissed, that he was repentante and sorrowful,
and that he desired her presence, she without delaie, thereby to renevve,
quicken and refreshe his sprites, and to comfort his heart, to the amendment
and reparinge of his health lateli by sickness sore impaired, The Queen was
fullye reconsiled to the l. Darley before his death.
hasted with such speade, as she conveniently might to see and visit him at
clasco. Where, as also at diverse other places, especially at Edenborovvghe,
she from time to time most louingelie entertained, and most tenderly
cherisshed him ever, eauen to the very last hour, that ever she savve him.
Whereby yt did to all men most euidentlye appear, that all manner of
displeasure or varia^ce, whatsoever your coniecturall surmises suppose, to
have been between them: or your seditiouse practices and ambitiouse procedings
had sown in their stomaks and minds, was not only now well asvvaged
and fully appeased, but utterly for ever quenched, as being altogether
forgotten, and trodden (to your much mislikinge, and great discomforte) under
foot of them both, never to be renewed again. But for as much as theys men
do well perceive, that y^ this be treve, (which is in dead so certai^elie
true, that they them selves are for the manifest evidence thereof, eauen
driven and forced to acknovvledge and confess the same) Then their great
Samsons post of discord and debate, where withdraw they would underprop and
uphold all their traiterouse procedings, as also this their mischiuouse
accusation, and greauouse crimination, the which they had fully now
conceived, and brovvght as they hoped to perfection, by the mischeuouse drifts
of their shrevvde vvilie develishe disposed brains against her, would fail
then, and fall to the grovnde. For this consideration I say they now
measuringe these most commendable doings of the very virtuous and well
meaning Queen, by their own deape and doble dissemblinge crafty nature,
their former drifte failinge them, begane to lay a nevve fondation to build
their longue conceived treasons on: And say, that all this courtesy, favor
love and amity, was but a set matter on her part, and colorable show, and
a dissembled drifte and fained pretense, by her colorablie conuaied, upon none
other purpose, but to flatter and entice him to Edemborovve to his bane,
which say they appearethe by her own lettres. It irkethe and greauethe
them to the very heart to hear of the reconciliation, And therefore they
toil and tumble from one kind of lienge rethoricke to an other, eauen quite
contrary. For as before they fovvnde great fault withdraw her for estranginge
her favor from him: so now at the last they mislike at her great travail
taken in her progress to visitt and conforte him, iudginge and reputinge all
her devvtifull kindenes as hypocritical and counterfeated dissimulation.
Wherein by their maliciouse co^struinge and wrong interpretation of well
and comendable doing, they represente the natural disposition and frovarde
inclination of the deuell: who has that name, for that he is vvillingelie,
and of purpose, (...)
a maliciouse false reporter and a slanderouse accuser. As for the lettres they
take hold on and slander her for, we shall hereafter examine them
vvhatvveight they bear. Well then if there were such a reconciliation made
between them, as I have said to be, as there is little or no cause at all,
why any man should think, that the Queen was privy or vvare, of the means
of his death, so may yt seame but meare superfluouse, for us either to
rehearse, what surmised difference were between them, or to confute the
falsitie of all such allegations namely saying that in some thereof, they
charge the most innocente Queen, The aduersares charge the Queen withdraw their
ovne vvycked devises.
withdraw their own most lewd, navvghtie, and vvycked devises and
detestable practices. As for an example and prouf thereof, the Earl Murraye and
his counsel perceauinge that for a time, the Queen seamed not well to like
of her husbands doings (albe it what soever her said mislikynge were, yt
was, as is before said, for the love off him in respect of his own proufit
and commodity) being very desierouse to bring home again their
co^federated mate, the Earl Morton who then was in banishmente, and remained
in England for the slavvghter of David her Secretary (with out whose
presence and present advice, their fetchinge practizes were half maimed, and
lacked force to take effect) Were earneste suitors that if she would pardon
him, they would procure a divorce between them, whereto she would not agree.
The Queen moved by the^ to make a diuors with the l. Darley.
But what have the is good men now done, think ye, in this part? Suerlie
they have played the said pageante withdraw this innocente Susan, as the two
wicked Judges did play withdraw the other former Susan. They lay hard to her
charge their own navvghtie and vvycked counsel and devise. Yt were
therefore but a vain, and lost labor for us, to stay and tarry long upon
the confutation of their own crafty maliciouse inventions and procedings,
in procuringe an alienation of the Queen's mind from her dear and well-beloved
husband, The accusation towchinge lettres sent by her to the Earl Bothvvell.
or upon any other alienation what soever, yt so being that they them selves
can not deny, but that there follovved a good pacification and reconciliation
between them. We will consequently therefore consider the second principal
point of our discourse. For theie theie say that they have a sufficient
prouf, to justify the chefest part of their accusation. A proper
justification perdie: this is their iolie witness, this is their singulier
Ievhell, whereby they set much store, the valevve vvherof in their eyes
sight, they repute and account as of an inestimable treasure. This most
necessary witness they have alvvayes attendante at hand, and ready at a beck
to serve their turn at a pinche when need requirethe, for all their purposes
and Attempts. If ye dovvte of the verity of any part of their accusations,
this witness thovvghe yt never savve nor heard of any such thing, will full
fair bleate yt ovvte, and make all things according to their mind, as
clear as cristall, or as the bright shininge son. So that if this witness
ons failethe them, then all their accusation failethe them therevvith, and by
and by quailethe. And sovvthlie this witness (yet all this not with standinge)
what else is yt, but a blind, a deaff, and a dome testimony, of certain
obscure lettres written and endited (as they most falselie, and as vainlie
avovvche, and were never hitherto able to prove) by the Queen to the Earl
Bothevvell. It is forsovvthe a box off lettres taken from one Dovvgleisshe
who was executed for the lord Darleyes death, the Earls man forsovvthe,
which lettres he received at Edenborovvghe of one Sir James Ballfoure, to
convey to his master: thus say theye. The vnlilikelie tale of the Earl Both
wells lettres surmysed to be sent to master Ballfoure.
But we say to you, as is said in Terence. Non sunt haec satis diuisa
temporibus. The very time, if nothing else were, bevvraiethe you, and your
whole cause with all. Is yt to be thovvght, that either the Earl would send
to the said Sir James, who had before assisted the faction against the Queen
with the force and strength of Edenborovvghe castle, And driven from thence
the very Earl him self, or that the said Sir James would send any such
thing to the Earl? Is yt likely? Is yt credible? Had the forgers and
inuentours of this tale by seamelie conueyance parted and divided the
distinction of his times? How say you? Where as now yt is in no case to be
supposed or coniectured, that such a wise virtuous lady would send any
such lettres. Yet putti^ge the case that she had sent them, yt is not to be
thowght, that either the receavour thereof, or that she her self, whom ye
conceive to have sent them, would have suffered them, for the hasardinge of
her estimation and honor to remain undefaced: namely saying there was a
special mention made, and vvarninge geven forthvvithe to burn them, and make
the^ away. Never thelesse, when you have taken your best advantage you can of
them, In case the surmised letres were sent by the Queen they can make no
good prouf against her.
such kind of lettres missiue and epistles, especially not conteininge any
express comma^demente of any unlawful act or deed to be committed and
perpetrated, not ratifienge or specifienge the accomplisheme^te of any such
fact alredye paste, but by unsure and uncertain ghesses aims, and
coniecturall supposings, are not able in aniewise to make a lavvfull
presumption: much less any good and substanstiall prouf not only against
your Sovereigne and Prince, but not so much as against the porest woman or
sympliest vvretched creature in all Scotland. Suerlie the civil law Wills,
that in criminal matters (for such are these) the accusers allege and bring
fourth nothing but that they may be able to approve and justify, by the
testimonye of good and lawful vvytnesses, l Fin. C. probat.
or by some other most manifest, clear and evident prouf or presumptions.
Sciant cuncti accusatores eam se rem defer in publicam notionem debere, What
exquisite proufes be required in criminal causes
quae munita sit idoneis testibus, vel instructa apertissimis documentis, vel
indicijs ad probationem indubitatis and luce clarioribus expedita. This rule
owght to be observed and kept, in the simplist and seliest poor man's cause
that is. And think you now, Theys surmised lettres neither have
superscription of the writer, nor subscription, neither any date, neither
signed nor sealed and the berer never knevven.
you most ungrate and vntha^kefull subjects, that ye may lavvfullie take arms
against your maistresse and most benign Queen, that ye may cast her into vile
prison, and spoil her of her crown? And Which is more, of her good and
honorable name, fame, and estimation? And then bleare men's eyes, and face the
World owte With the show of these lettres, as yt Were with a card of ten?
But yet say you they are her lettres: she deniethe them, and We deny them to.
There is neither subscriptio^ of the writer, nor superscriptio^ unto whom
they Were directed, they are neither sealed nor signed: there appearethe
neither date Wherein they Were dated, neither day nor monethe. There is no
mention made of the berer, Who is as yt may be supposed, for any name he
bears, the man in the moon: He Was never yet known, nor heard of that did
either receave, or deliver them. For as for him that ye surmise Was the bearer
of them, and Whom you have executed of late for the said murder, he at the
time of his said exe^cution took yt upon his death, He that was the surmised
bearer, at his death denied the same.
as he should answer before god, that he never carried any such lettre, nor
that the Queen was participa^te, or of counsel in the cause. Think ye that
wise and expert men are ignorante, how perelouse and da^ngerouse a matter
yt is, to faste^ any good prouf upon collation of lettres, and how easy yt
is to some men to imitate and counterfaite any character? the which a knight
late disseased in England, could so livelie and subtilie do, An easy thing
to co^terfeite a ma^s hand
that he Who vvrote most crabbedlie and vn^eageablie could hardly discern
his own hand Writing from the knights counterfeitinge hand. But Who
co^ferred these lr^es I pray your with your Queen's own hand writing? Dare
you to Warrante them in this so perilouse and weighty a cause, to have been so
exquisitelie and so exactelie vewed and co^ferred vith all such dew
circunstances as the civil law does require, were yt but a civil or a
money matter? You will paraduenture answer, that there was dew collation
by you made. O perfect and vvorthie collation? O mete and apt men for such a
purpose? As thovvghe yt is not notoriouselie known throvvghe ovvte the
World, that ye are her most mortal enemies, as thowghe these counterfeite
lettres were not the underpropped posts and vpholders of your whole
treachery and usurped kingdom? As thovvghe that many in Scotla^de could not
express and resemble, and counterfeite in their writing, the Queen's very
character? And as thovvghe there were not amongst your selves, some singular
artificer in this handicrafte, and that has sent lettres also in her very
name asvvellinto England, These lettres were fained and co^tritved by the
Queen's adversaries.
as to other places besides, vvithovvte either her commandment or
knowledge? How ca^ I chose the^ but say, that this dead is your shameful
handicraft, and not her hand vvriti^ge. Yea suerlye, all this is your own
fained forginge, most vile counterfeitinge. If you be a^grie withdraw me for thus
saie^ge by you, I hope you will be sone cold again, saying that I will not
bring ovvte any dead vvitnesses as ye craftelie do contrary to reason and
law. Quia testibus non testimonijs credendum est. Nor such like, but good,
sufficient and lavvfull vvitessnes, such as ye can not by any just exception
or tergiuersation, avoid or elude. And those are none other, but eauen your
selves. For either you must bring forth good and apparente vvitnesses to
prove yt her hand, or some such as Were privy to the meaning of the same
lettres, wiche ye neither yet have done, nor are likely ever to do, or ye
must grant that you Were privy to them your selves With the Queen, or at
least With the said Earl, Whom ye surmise to have received these lettres, or
that all this is by you maliciouselie driven and concluded. If ye grant us,
that ye were privy of the said lettres, we trust then you will be good to
the Q^ene, and if yt were but for your own honesties sake. If ye deny that,
and with all that you Were the co^triuers thereof your selves, We pray you to
tell us and blushe not, how you could so readily and so directelie hitt the
interpretation of these Words (our affairs) and What these words should
mean, there being so many affairs as you pretend in these your fained
false lettres between the Queen and the Earl. That only thing, that by these
words ye surmise, pretend and conjecture. I suppose that if you were well
examined of this point upon the sudden, and were urged and vehemently
pressed by any indifferente and upright judge, you would be somevvhat to
seake: And yet take at your leisure as good aduisemente, and as long
consultation withdraw your selves as ye can, and may think mete: And seake as
many fine fetches as ye list, ye never shall shifte yt of, with honesty,
norvvell rydd your hands thereof. Whereof I for my part do take my self full
assuered, and therefore do think it a neadelesse discourse for me to make any
farther descante upon such an vnpleasa^te, iarringe, and untunable plain
song of your own settinge and making: And am right well contented that ye
do make as gaie glosinge come^ts and interpretations as ye list, and as your
couninge and skill serwe you, to this your own shameful untrue texts. But
now weighe and consider withdraw your selves I hartelie pray you, and see
whether that all your legerdemaine and close co^ueiances in your false play,
as well towchinge and concerning your fit Iuglinge box, as all your other
like tricks and cuninge illusions, be not fully espied and plainly and
openly Inovvghe laid ovvte to each man's eye to behold and vewe. And as
tovvchinge your said Iuglinge box, you have been very fovvlie and
meruelousely ouersee^ in the close and clean conueiance of your fingers. For
that a man more then half blind, may perfectelie see and perceive your foul
play, for as much as the very self said dovvgleishe, whom among other ye
have executed and ridd ovvte of the way, has said and sufficie^tlie
declared, for the Queen's innocence. Nay, Nay parhapps you will say,
althovvghe our lettres, althovvghe our deadd Witnesses, and althovvghe our
other matters fail us, yet we hope that the little fainte mourninge she made
for his death, the acquitall of the Earl, and her prete^sed marriage withdraw him
will, help your cause, and give testimony against her. And why so I pray
you? Was not his body enbalmed, inseared, and enterred beside the Queen's
father, the late king James, accompaned withdraw Justice clerk, the lord of
Traquare, and withdraw diverse other gentlemen? The ceremonies in dead were the
fewer because that the greatteste part of the counsel were protestants,
One answer to the adversaries objections, that the Queen did not mourn the
death of the lord Darley.
and had before enterred their own parents, without accustomed solemnities
of ceremonies: Neither is there any such order or custom, as ye pretend and
make your reckeninge of, for the reservation of the corpse forty days, nor
any such observation was kept and used, abovvte the corpse of the very
father of the Prince, neither yet was there any such order taken or
appoi^ted by the counsel for the enterringe of the said lord Darley his
body in such sort as ye notefie, but eue^ directly to the contrary. Yea ye
are as little able to prove, that there has been any such customarie
sole^nitie observed, of so straight and strange a mourninge, as ye most
severely would restrain and bind the Queen unto, as ye be able to prove the
residevve of the premises. But in case ye could well justify some such
usual order, yet shall ye never be able to shevve, that yt does extend and
apparteine to such kind of Queen's, as she is. For they mourn their husbands
who were kings, her grace mournethe after an other sort: she a prince, her
husband a private man and her subject. They, as vvome^ most commonly do take
their honor and chief dignity of their husbands. Her husbands increase of
adua^cemente came by his matchinge with her. l Liberoru^. de his qui muta^tur
inf.
And further women by the civil law, are in diverse cases discharged and
excused for their omitting thereof, and forbearinge their so doing. And yet
did this good gentle lady bemone, even such a notable time, enioinge and
vsinge none other then candle light, as was known to all the nobility of
Scotland, and also to one master Henrye killigraue, Who Was sent thither by
the Queen of England to her comfort, according to the use and manner of
Princes. Who had a longer time in this lamentinge wise continevved, had she
not been most earnestly dehorted from her longer prolonginge thereof, by the
vehemente exhortations and persuasions of her counsel, who were moved
thereto by her physicians informations: declaringe to them the great and
iminente dangers of her health and life, if she did not in all speed break up
and leave that kind of close and solitary life, and repair to some good open
and wholesome air, which she did being this advised and earnestly thereto
solicited, by her said counsel. All Which yet notvvith sta^dinge this her
fact, is withdraw these most severe and grave Censeurs taken for and reputed as
the very next sin of all, to the most greauouse sin against the holy
ghost. But o good pitiful men who for the very tender love, and singular
affection which, you dit ever bear to the lord Darley (the Which trevvlie
Was so vehement that for your excedi^ge hott and ferue^te love toward him, ye
ever sovvght his hearts bloudd) do now so pitifully bewail him. But if she
had by reason of the closenes of the air, and somewhat longer co^tinewa^ce in
her mourninge place, and in her dumpishe desolate and doleful estate,
accelerated her own death vvithall, then had she by the Earl Murraies, and
his adherents ghostly Judgments mourned like a good honest wif, and to their
best contentation: Yt being the right way and rediest means to have
conveyed and browght the said Earl to that place, Where unto he so long and so
gredelie aspired to, and the vviche now at the length he has atchiued and
attained unto. As for the residevve of their saiengs, if there be any faut in
the Queen, yt suerlie fallethe doble and treble upon these Achitophells. And
the good innocente lady, Who has been so vvretchedlie and so vnvvorthelie by
them abused, and circumuented, is more to be pitied, then to be blamed. The
Earl Bothvvel was acquitted by his peers, according to the common and ordinary
trade and maniere in such cases usually observed. These unnatural and
disloiall subjects, these most shameful crafty colluders her aduersariers and
accusers, I mean the Earl Morton, the lord Simple, the lord Lindzaye, withdraw
their adherents and affinity especial, procured, and withdraw all diligence
labored his purgation and acquitall, wiche was afterward confirmed by the
three estates by act of parliament. These, these I say, whereof some are now
the vehement and hott fault finders, and most earneste reprouers and blamers
of the said pretended marriage, were then the principal inuentours,
practizers, perswaders, and compassers of the same. They procured a great
part of the nobility, to solicit the Queen to cowple her self I^ marriage
with the said Earl, as with a man most fit, apt, and mete for her present
estate and case. First alleadginge the da^gerouse world, The consideration
mouinge, or rather forci^ge the Q. to this pretensed marriage.
and often inculcatinge into her mind and remembrance, the present louse time
and dealings of men, wiche the better to prevent, and more suerlie to with
stand, by their counsel and per^^vadings enduced her, and by other their^
crafty doings, as yt were, enforced and constrained her to take a husband, to
be her comforter, her assisteur, her buckeler, and her shilde, to defend her
against all her whatsoever adversities and adversaries. If she would be
contented so to do, they promised him service, and to the Queen loyal
obedience. Yea many of them bownd them selves to the said Earl, by their
own hand writing, to assiste, maintain, and defend him against all men,
that would then after challe^ge or pursewe him, as gwiltie of the said crime.
The wiche their doings, the Queen consideringe and fearinge dangers i^mine^t,
and withal calling to mind the sondrie and diverse vprores and seditions,
alredie made against her, the wretched and most cruel murder of her
Secretorie in her own presence, the late strange and miserable murder of her
husband, the distress, the discomforte, and desolation wherein she was
presently bewrapped, the Earls actiuitie in martial feats, and the good and
faithful service done by him to her mother, and to her self fearinge some new^
and fresh stir and calamity, if she should refuse her nobilities requests
(thowghe very circumspecte and naturally prudente in all her other doings)
yet never thelesse a woman, and especially never to that hour, ons
admonisshed either openly or privately after the Earls acquitall, that he was
gwiltie of the said fact, nor suspectinge any thing thereof, yeldeg to that,
to the wiche these crafty colludinge seditiouse heads, and the very
necessity of the time, (as yt then to her seamed) did in a manner enforce her.
Let them now lay on lode, let them now rage and rave against this
acquitall and marriage: Let them lie, to their own shame, upon their own
devises, and doings, thereby to defame their Queen. Let them lie that the
Earl of Huntley was restored to his fathers patrimony, to procure his sisters
co^sente to the deuorse between the Earl and her, which restitution was made,
but not for that consideration, but because the Queen thovvght in her
conscience, his father vvrongfullie condemned. Let them cry owte upon the
Earl Bothvvell for that the sentence of divorce was promulged partly by
force, partly without the just and usual order of the law, and without
sufficient prouf. Let them cry ovvte upon him for his violente taking and
deteininge the Queen. Yet if they cannot preciselie prove the Queen's co^sente
to any of his unlawful acts, as they shall never do: then can they not get
or gather any just occasion (which is the thing they only seake for) to
suspecte the Queen of this greauous act. On the other side yt is well known
and easelie to be proved, that this faction, did chefelie procure, as we have
said, asvvell the acquitall, as the supposed marriage, and therefore by
likelihodd was privy of all other consequente devises and practices. Wherefore
they do nothing but blow ovvte, and blase to the world, With their own
foul filthy mowthes, their own shame. And do fare like a man, that does
thruste a svvorde throvvghe both his own sides, to prick a little, and raise
but the ovvtevvarde skin only of his enemy. Ye may now well parceaue
(gentle reader) that hitherto they have produced little matter of creditt
against their Queen, and yet as yt appearethe, verrie good matter against them
selves, and for their own discreditt. Now may ye therefore easelie
conjecture, and by these their chief and principal matters and grovvnds,
easelie perceive, what account is to be made of all the residevve of their
lewd slanders, and what small force and strenghe, all their whole sayengs
do bear. They see yt, they see yt vvelinovvghe them selves, good reader,
vvherby they well perceive, and fullye understand, that they altogether are
unable to bear ovvte and maintain by reason, justice, or law, these their
ovvtragiouse and seditiouse procedings. And therefore they set upon them the
best color and countenance they can. Where in you shall now hear, what they
did allege being in England for them selves. The adversaries declaration
before the Queen of Englands commissioners.
They say that no man can charge them, or the residevve of their nobilite,
that they have gone as much as one only step, from the office and dewtie of
good subjects, i^ taki^ge arms against the owtragiouse enormities alredie
committed, and to preue^te the great dangers imminente to the persons of
their Queen, and her dear son, to their nobility, and to the whole state
of their weal public. And that yt was no small hearts grefe to them, to
hear what vilainie all nations thowght and openly speak of them, for
sufferinge such a tragical matter to escape unpunished, which thing
engendrethe of us (say they) among strangers, and all foreign nations an ill
and sinister opinion of some common co^sente thereto made by our whole
nobylitie. Yea to see also the very executor thereof him self, by viole^te
force, to teake, deteine, and keep his and their Sovereign, and with
marienge with her to distaine her honor. Wherefore to set her majesty at
fredome owte of his bondage, to preserve her honor, and the person of her
son, and by dew punissheme^t of such a malefactor, to recover their good
name and estimation, with the rest and quietness of their cuntreye: When they
had but in vain attempted as well all other means, as by the offeringe to the
Earl singulier battle, they were driven to gather force, to resist them, Who
came to the field against them with a strong army. But he refusinge either
to wage singulier battle, Which was then offered to him, or to join in
battle with their camp, escaped by flight. The Queen in the mean while
rendered her self into the nobilities hands there assembled, and by them was
conuayed to Edenborovvghe: But afterward they Were of very necessity
compelled to sequester her, until such time, as some remedy might be fownde
for these matters, into Lochleven, where she having now advised with her
self, and fully perceaved her own disabilitie to sustain the weight of so
great a rome, freely and voluntarelie by their sainge, gave over the crown
to her son: appointinge the Earl Murraie, being at that time owte of the
realm, to be regente thereof, duringe her sons minority. The Earl Bothwell
not long after, being by them pursued fledd the realm, to escape their
hands. Now this said resignatio^, by the Queen ons made to her son, he was
forthvvithe by them solemnly crowned, and he as king, the Earl Murraie as
regent obeyed, and the state of both these regime^ts, was by act of
parliamente established. Where upon quietness begane to increase, and justice
more and more daily to take place. Which yet some persons (say they) much
enuienge at, to the dysturbance of the same, and of the king his authority,
first practiced, contrary to the said their Act of parliament, the Queen's
deliurance out of Lochleven, and then showed them selves in arms. But as
their atte^pte, say theye, was unlawful, so the victory fell against them,
on owrs the righteouse side, Whereby god him self seamethe to have given
sentence for the equity of our whole cause against our adversaries. These are
the principal allegations, these good men have proposed, for the justification
of their procedings against the Queen, before the most excellent and mighty
Princess Elizabethe Queen of England. Finally, they say that the most
part of them selves, are for particular benefitts privately so much
beholdinge to their said Queen, that a number of the^ could be contented,
and well willinge, if they might praeserue Scotland in the state of a
kingedome, preseruinge also the profession of true religion, with the kings
person, and the whole state from danger, to live Willingly in perpetual exile
and banishemente. God be thancked, that after that these seditiouse and
trayterouse subjects, have been so stovvte and storminge in the reconinge up
and accumulatinge of faults and offenses, of their innoce^te maistresse and
Queen, they are yet at the length forced to answer for them selves, and for
their excessive outragiouse rebelliouse doings: Their gaie gloriouse
glitteringe excuses, may perhapps at the first show, seame to some of the
Readers, to have a iolie face of much probabilite, great trewthe, and
feruente zeal to the Weal public. But may yt please them advysedlie and
deapelie to ponder and Weyghe, as well what we have said, as what we further
shall say, in supplemente of full answer, and then to judge and deem of the
matter, none otherwise then reason, equity, and law do crave. They shall at
length find owte, and throwghlie perceive and know, these men's dealings and
doings, Who as yet cover their foul filthy lienge, detestable practizes,
and traiterouse enormities, with such a visarde of counterfeite false fained
holiness, and such exceeding great show of zeal to the Queen's honor, in
punishinge off malefactors, and to the preservation of the state of the
realm, as thowghe all the world would fall, and go to rewen, if yt were not
vpholden and underpropped by the stre^gthe of their showlders. Theie shall see
how they will appear in their own natural likeness, so ovvgelie, that all
good hearts will utterly detest them, and think them most vvorthie for
example sake, to all the World hereafter, of extreme punisheme^te. We affirm
then first that as they have produced nothing in the world tovvchinge the
principal points: As of the lord Darleies death, the acquitall of the Earl
Bothvvell, and the Queen's marriage with him, justly to charge her vvithall: So
are theie them selves, asvvell for the said acquitall and marriage, as for
their damnable and rebellyouse attempts against their Sovereigne, and for
many other enormous crimes, so far and so deapelie charged* so fovvlie
stained, and so shamefullie marked and noted, that never shall they With all
their hypocritical fine fetches, be able to rub ovvte the dirtye blotts
thereof from their skirts. Which thing will be easelie perceaved of them, that
will vouchesauf and advisedly consider the fond, friuolouse and
contradictorie excuses, they make in their own defense. At the begininge
their open surmised quarrel (vvherby they went abovvte to dravve the
peoples hearts to them selves, and to strengthen their own faction) stood in
three points, as appearethe by their excuses, and by their pretensed
proclamations. The first was, to deliver the Queen from the Earl Bothevvell
who violently detained her, The causes that the Rebels p^tended at the
begininge.
and to prevent dangers, immine^t to her parson. The second to revenge the
kings death upon the said Both well, whom they knevve (as they pretended)
to have been the principal doer in the execution of the said murder. The
third Was, to preserve the young Prince, the Queen's son, This is their
iolie and holy pretense. Now let us see how conformable their vvorthie
procedings are, to these their colorable cloked holy collusions. The first
gentle and humble admonition that these good louinge subjects gave her, An
answer to the first.
to reform the surmised enormities, was in battle arraye at Bortvvike
castle, which they thovvght upon the sudden to have possessed with the
Queen's person: vvher upon they being disapointed thereof, gatt into the town
and fortress of Edenborowghe, by the treason of Balfoure the captain thereof,
and of Cragmiler the prouoste of the city. Wherbi they being the more
animated to follow and prosequute their wicked enterprise, begane now to be
strong in the filde. The Queen having also a good strong army, and
thinckinge her self well able thereby to encounter withdraw the ennemie, and to
repress their furiouse outrage, yet not vvithestandinge, for the great love
and pity she took of them (thovvghe rebelliouse subjects) Wilinge as much,
as in her lay to keep and preserve their bloudd from shedinge, offered them
fair of her own free motion, that if they would, peaceably come to them, and
take dew and convenient order for the redress of all such things, as might
appear by law and reason mete to be reformed. Where upon the lord Grange was
sent by the lords to her, The lord Grange promised upon his knees obedience
in all the rebels names.
Who in all their names most hu^blie upon his knees, assured her of all dew
obedience, of security, and sauftie of both her life and honor: And so the
good lady (her conscience beringe her witness of all her just and upright
dealings and therefore nothing mistrustinge) dismissinge her army, yielded her
self to the lords, Who conveyed her to Edenborowghe, and there set her at
such a meruelouse liberty, and in such securite and safety that all good
men to the Worlds end, Will vvonder at their excedi^ge good loyalty. First
kepinge her own palace, they set and placed her in a merchants house, and
used her otherwise very homely. She now consideringe, and perceauinge, to
what end these matters tended, most pitifully cried ovvte and called upon
them, to remember their late promise, or at the least, that she might be
browght before the counsel, offeringe to stand to the order and direction of
the states of the realm, but God knovvethe all in vain. For now had they
the pray, whereon they intended, to vvhett their bloody teathe, or they did
dismiss or forgo her, as the euente does declare. Wherefore in the night
priuelie she was conuaied, and withdraw haste in disgvvised apparel, The Queen
inprisoned at lochleuen.
to the strong forte of Lechleuen, and after a fevve days being stripped
ovvte and spoiled of all her princely attyreme^te, was clothed with a course
brown cassocke. After this these good loyal subjects, practisinge and
encreasinge more and more daily the performance of their said promised
obedience, never ceased until they had usurped the full authority and
regiment of the whole. In to the which thovvghe they had entruded them
selves, yet saying as blind as they were, by disordinate, vnseamlie and
unmeasurable ambition, that the Queen remained and was still Queen, and that
there was no just cause by the ordinary course of the law, or for any her
demerites and deserts to bri^ge her forth to her trial, that she might be
convicted and deposed, went like good honest plain men, and well meaning
subjects, bluntly to work, and consulted and determined to dispatche and
ridd her ovvte of her lif, unless she would yield to them and subscribe such
vvritings, as they would send to her concerning the demission of her crown
to her son, and the regimente of the reaulme to the Earl Murraie. Where upon
the Earl of Athole, Secretorie Ledington with other principal of their
factious band, sent Robert Miluen to Lechleuen to will her in any case, if
she sovvght the sauuegarde of her life, to condiscende to such demandes and to
set her hand to such vvritings as should be proposed and brovvght unto her.
Which as they said to do, The Queen threatened to be ridd away, if she would
not reno^ce her crown.
never could be prejudicial to her, being by force and violence extorted.
Sir Nicholas Throkmarton also being then ambassador there for the Queen of
England, gave her the like advice. Now at the last comethe the lord
Lindzaye, sent in comisssio^ from their counsel, to present and offer unto
her, the writings: who most greauouselie with full fearful words, and very
cruel and stern countenance threatened her, that unless she Would thereto
subscribe, she should lose her life. But call you this a free and voluntary
yeldinge over and resignation of the crown? A voluntary assignation of the
regimente to you the Earl Murraie? Yea suerlye, as free and voluntary, as a
man with his own hands, castethe into the sea his goods, in a maine and
raginge tempeste frelie and voluntarelie: savinge that paraduenture ye may
reply and say that there is so much will in him, that he had rather bide the
adventure of his goods and riches, then of his very life, being contented to
redeem the saufegarde of his life with the loss of his goods. And yet as
voluntary as ye make yt: Free and voluntary ye shall no more make yt, then ye
shall be able to prove, that the peoples good will was alienated from her, as ye
surmise. For the procuringe werof, ye have by your crafty slaunderouse
leasings and wretched practizes, done all the endeavor, your maliciouse and
spiteful brains could invente and search out. But suerlie your doings have
been so gratiouse, that if she had been so gratiouse, that if she had been
deadelie hated before, they might have procured and gotten her a vvonderfull
love and favor of the people again. And whereas she was (eauen as she well
deserved) most entierlie and tenderly beloved before, now ye have by these
your so tragical and tirannicall procedings, purchassed to her such an
augmentation and encrase of the same (especially when that the people among
whom for a while, some ye have throvvghe your colorable crafty conueyances,
made to misdeame, and have somevvhat the worse likynge of her, shall
throvvghelie and perfectelie understand and know your said vvilie policies,
as more and more daily they do) that she shall be much beholdinge, but no God
have mercy to you therefore But now to proceed and goo forevvarde withdraw your
louinge loyal procedings toward her, ye never ceased nor stayed, until ye
had procured and obtained a colorable parliame^te, vvherebie ye got your
usurped and unnatural kingdom ratefied and confirmed: And not only all your
wicked practices, alredie paste, but eauen what mischefe soever you would,
shousde afterward pass also, against her quietness and saufetie. And thus
behold these humble obediente, and lovinge subjects, have purchased and
procured a commission long before hand, the like whereof, as I suppose, was
never i^ the world hard of before, in any whatsoever rude savage, and
barbarouse nation or contreye, to slaie, kill, and murder their own
Sovereigne Queen, and a most innocente Lady, at their own wills and
pleasure. The which their said commission, they had in this wise executed
long ere this, as yt is credibly thovvght, if God had not (...), as the
proverb is, vvonderfullye eluded, and myraculouselie frustrated this their
mischevouse maliciouse purpose and entente. And yet is there one injury more,
that does greaue more, and moleste this good gvviltlesse lady, the^ all these
foretold naughty parts played of them against her. And suerlie not
without just cause of greyf, for in dead yt far passeithe and excedeithe
them all. And that is their shameful and most traiterouse diffaminge her,
being all together innoce^te therein, with the death of her husband, as
thovvghe that she had suborned the Earl Bothevvell thereto, and revvarded him
therefore with the marriage of her own body. Here perchance they will
say* Marye this is our chief quarrel in deed, this was the mark we
principally shot at. The great love and zeal we bear to Justice, An
answer to the second.
and the earnest desire we have to purge and ridd the realm of the slander
and infamy, that arisethe thereto by this horible fact, movethe and stirrethe
us up to seake by all means we can, the punisshinge of the said Earl, who
was the comitter, and chief perpetratour thereof. If yt so be, suerlie there is
upon the sudden comen upon you a meruelouse devotion. For Why? Were not ye
and your band and adherents the chief and principal authors, assisters,
favvters, ayders and abatours, for the clearinge and iustifienge of the said
Bothvvell accused and indighted, as gvviltie of the said murder? What is yt
that makethe you now so hott, that then were so could? Belike the world
and weather is a nevve changed and altered of late. Yet tell us we pray you
in good erneste, was your principal scope and zeal, to apprehende the Earl
Bothvvell? tell us then a good cause why you dimissed him, The Queen's ennemies
dimissed the Earl Bothwell when they might have taken him.
when you might have had him at your pleasure? Did not the foresaid Grange,
cominge to the Queen from you, speak to him also? did he not take him by the
hand, will him to depart, assueringe and tellinge him, that no man should
follow to pursewe him? Did not the Earl remain in the co^tree at hand many
months after, until the returni^ge home of the Earl Murraye? And then for a
face and countenance, there were made ovvte to the seas certain ships to
apprehe^de him, yt being of you pretended, that he was now become an arrant
pirate and rouer upon the seas. Nay, nay, yt was not he you so long sovvght
after: yt Was an other bird, and her ye had fast in the cadge, and therefore
ye permitted the Earl to fly vvhither he would. But yet you say in your
accusation putt up to the Queen of England and her commissioners, that as he
was the chief executour of the said lord Darleys death: so she was of the
fore knowledge and counsel, yea and the mainteiner thereof also, and therefore
she both stopped the inquisition of the fact, and punishemente of him: And
also matched her self in marriage with him: I ask then, as before of you, why
throvvghe the special suite and procuremente of your faction, he was acquitted
and set on clear board? Why did you withdraw a great part of the nobility,
move, further, and work the said marriage as most meteste and necessary for
your Queen? Why did you as by your hand writing yt will appear, The Queen's
enemies bownde by their hand wrytinge to obey the Earl Bothevvell if he
married the Queen.
proferre and promise to him your faithful service, and to her your loyal
obeyssance? Why did none of all your faction, nor any other else either
openly or privately declare and detecte this matter to your Queen, before the
pretended marriage? Was there no time nor occasion and opportunity, to geve her
warninge thereof, but by the terrible and fearful blaste and sownde of the
martial trompett? For she (good innocente lady) has upon her honor
protested and planelie declared (the wiche her protestation also, the
disorderly, ambitiouse and tragical doyngs, of these rebelliouse and
traiterouse subjects do much help and confirm) that before her taking and
imprisonmente, she never knew, who were either principal or accessarie: or by
any means culpable and blame worthy, concerning the said murder.
Towchinge the third point yt is not vvorthie the co^futinge, An answer to
the third.
for these same men knevve right Well, that the Queen had putt her son saulf
and suer inovvghe in the gvvarde and custody of the Earl of Mar. But see I
pray you the impudency of these men: And consider how much yt is to be
mused and merueled at, Who are not asshamed to publishe by open edicts and
proclamatio^s, that the Prince should be in more security and saufegarde
under the protection and kepinge of the Regente and vsurpinge rebels, then
under the hands and bringinge up of his own most natural and dear mother,
with diverse other the like unnatural, ridiculouse and absurd propositions.
God bless him and grant him no worse to speade, then his most tender and
louinge mother dailye wisshethe, and co^tinuallie praiethe for. Who, good
svvete babe, The Prince if he were at age would not like thennimes doings
against his mother.
if he had age and discretion to understand their doings, would give the
Earl Murraye and his fellows but could thancks, for the intrudinge of him
against his good mother, unto the crown and government of the realm, but
would and might well say, that this was but a color under his shadow to
strengthen him the said Earl, against his good mother and perchannce against
his own self to. His own unnatural coronation also (thovvghe these men
much brag yt solemnly and orderly to have proceeded) he Would as much
mislike. Neither would be bye yt so dear, nor come forth to be a king so
unnaturally, as the vipers enter into the world by eatinge and gnavvinge
ovvte the mothers womb. He would demand and ask what strange nevve
fovvnde solemnity, and fond manner of coronation this Was. For the matter
being of so great and weighty importance, of one hundred Earls, busshopps,
and lords, and more that have voice in parliamente, vvherof all or the more
part of them should have an agreme^te, likinge, and consent, as to all
other, so to these public doings also: there were no more present but
four Earls only. He was unlawfully crowned.
Whereof the most honorable, had not the seventhe or eight voice in the
parliamente among the Earls, nor yet the first of twenty voices among all
the states. We had farther but six lords, Who also were such, as had laid
their violente hands upon their Queen before, and putt her in prison. And
least all should be void, if they should seame to lack their full
congregation of the spiritualitie and temporalitie, in leapeth one busshoppe,
and two or three abbotts and Priours. But yet, were there not solemn
protestations I pray you then openly made, and authentical instruments
thereof made also, that what soever was that day done either for the
coronation and inuestinge of the king, or for the establisshinge of a regente,
or otherwise against the Queen's royal estate, and person: yt should not be to
her in any point hurtefull or prejudicial, as being then violently
detained and imprisoned? Well you will allege paraduenture, that all these
procedings were ratefied and confirmed by act of parliamente. Why the
confirmation of the rebels doings made by an act of parliament is nothi^ge
worth.
Yet all this not vvithstandinge, this noble impe, if he were at ripe years,
would no dowbte acknovvledge and allow no such disordered parliamente. But
would enquire of you what authority you had to call and somon the said
parliamente? He would say, that the ratefienge of the said dimission of the
crown by his mother, is not allowable or to be approved. First by cause she
was then in prison, and not at her own liberty: next by cause yt was done
by violence and forced with fear of life, and so whatsoever was builded
upon this fovvndation, being of such weakness, and so unstable, could
never be firmly and suerlie established and corroborated. He would farther
say, that diverse of the chief and most principal among the nobility, nameli
the Earls of Argile, and Huntley with the lord Herris, would not in any
wise accord or agree thereto, otherwise then yt should stand withdraw the
Queen's voluntary will, void and free from all manner of threatninges, force,
and violence. Whereof they did full earnestly and solemnly proteste, requiringe
their protestations to be enacted and recorded. He would more over say, that
he could in no wise, well like of that parliamente, that should so
dishonor his own good mother, and make her to be an infamouse Princess,
havinge none other grovvnde and prouf to lead them to do so, but only a
fevve uncertain ghesses, and unknown obscure lettres. He would no dovvbte
for all these men^ vain bostinge and bragginge of Justice and quietness, most
tenderly lament and vvofullie bewail, the miserable and pitiful case, and
dolorouse state of that selie poor ragged, and rent realm, the vvretched and
infinite robberies and spoils committed and done upon the true loiall
subjects thereof, being daily most greavouselie oppressed, and shamefullie
murdered: And the whole realm so mervelouselie maimed, that the very
outevvarde enemy does sore lamente to see yt, or hear thereof, and that
will be wondered at of all the posterity, so long as the world does stand.
He Would yet say, that in case there had been no injury offerid either to his
mother or to any other, he would not such misery should throvvghe him, or
under his name be cavvsed or occasioned, thovvghe he might purchase thereby, the
greattest empire in the world. Thus may every man see and perceive how
dishonorable and how disloiall your acts and doings have been, and also how
disagreable to your saiengs protestations and praetenses. For ye pretended, at
your first seditiouse motion (as we have declared) the Queen's liberty and
honor, and that ye would duly and feaithfullie serve her, which your
service what yt was let your doings declare. Ye make pretense that ye took
a^mes cheifelie for the apprehension of the Earl Bothvvell, and yet ye dimissed
and let him goo, being present, and never but long after, and colorablie
sovvght him. Ye pretended the quietness and peaceable gouerneme^te of the
realm, but the realm was never these many hundred years so disquieted and
turmoiled withdraw so sore storms and blustering tempests. The inconstancy of
the Que^s ennemies, first p^tendinge before the Q. and counsel of England,
her voluntary dimission of the crow^e and that afterward that she was deposed.
Ye p^tended at your first inueienge and conference against your said Maistris
before the Queen of Engla^ds comissio^ers, that she findinge her self unable
and vnme^e to rule and govern her realm and subjects, voluntarily yielded up
and surrendered the crown. But the contrary is most appare^tlie known: Yea
you your selves about two months after, quite forgetinge your first
allegatio^s say, that the states of the realm of Scotla^de deprived and
deposed her. At What time ye also made solemn hypocritical and cloked
protestatio^s, how loathe you Were to publishe and detecte any matter to her
dishonor. Whereto might be replied against you, as well the rule of the law,
that Protestatio contraria fa^to, non releuat, As the old Proverb: Crocodili
lachrymae., the false traiterouse tears of the hypocritical Crocodyll. Fie
therefore and owte upon these your Crocodile tears, whereby you would persuade
and make the world beleave, that you would redeame and save her honor with
your perpetual banissement. And as for the religion ye speak of, yt were
much to be merveled, and sore to be pitied, if that yt could not be
maintained and borne owte without such foul dyshonest and owtragiouse means
and shyfts. But all this your great fear, least that Scotla^de otherwise
should not be able to have and bear the countenance and maintenance of a
kingdom, is mere vain and frivolouse, and altogether neadlesse. For why
should you thus fear, havynge such a noble Queen liniallie descendinge from
the Royal race, of the noble Kings of Scotland, and inheritinge the crown
thereof, of right. She havinge besyds (God be thancked therefore) so goodly a
noble Impe, when the time and law callethe him thereto, to succeed his mother:
unless that ye be maistre knoxe his own good scholars, and such of his
affinity, that have set up and erected a iolie nevve scole (as we have
declared) teaching that yt is not lawefull for a woman Prince to have civil
gouuernemente. A strange doctrine of maistre knoxe against vvomans gouuernement.
These and many the like things would this good and gratiouse Impe,
reasonably, and like a good natural louinge child tell and reprove you of,
if he were of discretion and intelligence to weighe and consider your strange
procedings and deuellishe dealings, against his most dear and tender mother.
Yea he would tell you, that his mothers inestimable and unmeasurable benefitts,
were well and worthelie employed, and bestowed upon such a wicked and
ungrate generation. He would also say and tell you, that you should purchase
your selves small renovvme, and little reward of God, or of the world, for
this your false fained patience, in hearing your selves called (and that full
vvorthelie) traitors and rebels. No more suerlie then if ye had hard, as
now ye must (for this dainty dishe we have reserved for your own tothe
to the last course) and so proved vvithall, the deuisers and procurers of the
shameful, vile vilaynouse murder of the noble young lord, the lord Darley,
your own maistresse and Queen's most dear husband. Whose tender heart, never
any worldly thing so nighe and so deapelie peared as did this mischeuouse
act. Ye triumph and vante of your gloriouse victory, The Queen's ennemies
fondly triu^phe of their victory against her true subjects.
and of the unmerciful slawghter, ye have made upon the Queen's most louinge
loyal and feaithfull subjects. Ye valewe mesure and rule thereby, the goodness
and equity of your quarrel and cause. But this rule does not alvvayes hold
as never having exception and instance. The Israelites quarrel against the
tribe of Benjamin, risinge upon a trevvthe and horrible fact perpetrated and
committed by the Gabaonites, who^ the Beniamites did defend (and not upon
false fained doings and outeragiouse ambition, as yours does against your
Sovereign) was a thovvsande times better, Iudic 20.
and more just, The victory sometime falls in the worseside.
then is this your pretensed quarrel, and seditiouse uproar. And yet the
Beniamites gave them a sore greauouse and pitiful overthrow. But if
scripture only will not satisfy you, hearken to king Priamus who sayethe
that in War osten times the good and the honest go to vvracke, Iliad: 24.
whereas verletts, thieves, and liers do escape.

(...)
(...)
(...).
And suerlie yt were no ill counsel for you to remember vvithall the old
saying Respice finem: take good head what may fall ovvte at the end. Ye do
little vveighe and consider the great providence of almighty god in this
fact, Whereby he seamethe to have provided such an indifferente way and so
free from all sinister suspicion, for the prouf and justification of the Queen's
innocence and integrity, and for the maintenance and preservation of her name
and honor (the which she estemethe and preferrethe before all earthly
things) and for your utter confusion and shame, the like vvherof could not by
man be fovvnde. What shall I then say to you? How shall I begine or vverein
to you? Suerlie I may well cry ovvte o Heaven o Earth, o God, o Man,
hearken, hearken to such a heinouse deavillishe device and drifte, as
dovvbtlesse, neither tragedy nor any record of antiquity can lightly
report a more heinouse: Hearken I say to this detestable and abominable
fact. Hearken of subjects that have consented unto, and caused their own
Princes hus^ande to be slain, and not contented to enjoy their own
impunitie of so horrible and greauouse a crime, have sought and invented means
and vvayes vvillingelie and vvittingelie to have slaundered therwithall, their
most innocente maistresse and Sovereign, and have most wrongfullie and full
iniuriouselie cast her in prison, and spoiled her of all her princely estate,
bei^ge in a redines every hour to have bereaved her of her life and all: And
as they have of them selves reported, have been of nothing more repentante and
sorry, then that they have not fully executed their purposed mischief. We
say then no less boldly then trewlie. First that the Queen for this fact
is far from all fault. We say next, that ye Murraye and your companions
are the very diuisers and contriuers of the murder of this noble ge^tlema^,
your selves. But to disclose and open these matters at the full, yt does
require a very large scope and discourse. Yet will we as breefelie as the
cause will suffer prosequute the same. For the first perte that may suffice,
that We have alredie declared, shall here after declare for her innocence.
Now before we proceed to the second, for the, more euidente and open
condemnation of these men, Let us imagine that to be done, that never was
thowght of her perte, to be done. Let us imagine and suppose that the Queen
Were therein gwiltie, In case the Qu. were culpable, yet are her enemies
procedings unlawful.
^s these me^ most faulselie and slaunderouselie report. Yet are all these
their procedings of no validity or force, and she remainethe still their
Queen, and in her full authority, by good reason and law. The zeal to
punish great crimes, is commendable, so it be measured by order and law. For
as Aristotle sayethe, yt is not inowghe to do (...) a good dead, Yt is not
inowgh to do a good thing unless yt be well done.
unless yt be (...) Well done also. The one whereof respectethe the fact, the
other the form, manner and fasshon, the quality, means, and order of the
doing thereof. Quae forma dat esse rei. This form and fasshion of Well doing,
has not been observed in your procedings. For yt ca^ not be well done, that
is vnlavvfullie, vnrightuouslie, and disorderly done. If yt had been, but a
poor private ma^s cause, for the lack of dew and convenient form in the
treatinge and handlinge thereof, the Whole procedinge had been of none effect
or purpose. The laws of well ordered common wealths, especially the
civil law, The law gives exceptions to the defenda^t against the judges
the accusers and witnesses.
the principal and maistris of all other civil pollices and ordinances, do
require in all judgments to be given against the defenda^te, three several
and distinct persons: the judges, the accuser, and the vvitnesses. The
defendante has the benefitt of just and lavvfull exceptio^s, as well
against the judge, as against the accusers and vvitnesses, Each of whom may
be rejected for open enimitie tovvarde the defendant, and for diverse other
causes. Accusers may be repulsed, some for that they have received a singular
benefitte of the party defenda^te, C. qui accusat non poss. l. iniquum and l.
fi. l. q accuss. H. de accusat.
as a bond man manumitted and made free, In case he will accuse his patron
and manumissor: or if a man will accuse his educatour and bringer up. Some for
nearenesse in bloudd, and consanguinitie, as the brother. Some for nawghtie and
in famous behavior, and some for other respects. Shall these ungrateful
traitors then, that justly neither can be judge nor accuser, nor as much as
witness against there sovereign, and to them a most gratiouse Queen, by any
reason or law, play them selves all the three parts i^ the tragedy? For
they have in all these their worshipful proceadings against her, made such
a hotche potche, such a mingle mangle, such a confuse and disordered chaos
against justice and nature, that they them selves were the accusers, they them
selves the witness, they them selves the Judges and examiners of her cause.
Is there any honest meaning and gentle natured heart, that can ons pacientlie
abide and suffer to hear theys their tauntinge and intolerable owteragiouse
inueings and accusations, especially of the Earls Murraye and Morton, the
Capitaines, ringeleaders, and chief practitioners thereof, against her, to Whom
they are most deapelie bownde, as well for high prefermente undeserved, as for
diverse pardons of death, by manifold treaso^s worthelie deserved? To whom
the one of them is by nature and blood (albe yt base) as a brother entierlie
conioined. And to Whom they both owght to be with the rest, as to their
leage lady, most loyally subjected. Shall they now withdraw the lord
Lindzaye be admitted to stain and defile her honor, to seake her hearts
blood, Who long since had vvorthelie lost their ingrate chorlishe,
traiterouse blood, if they had not been preserved by her singulier and
incredible clemency? Yet let us consider their precise and most holy form
of judgment. The Queen was disorderly and rebelliouselie apprehended, she
was cast in prison, not ons heard to answer for her self most insta^tlie
and pitifully craui^ge audience. She was forced and constrained by most
veheme^te and just fear to geave over her crown, and dimisse the regimente
to the Earl Murraye. One great argume^te of the said constrainte and
compulsion among other is, that she never read such vvriti^gs, as were
offered to her, A good argume^te that the Queen by copulsion dimissed the
crown.
to be by her subscribed, nor entered into any covenante or talk for the
mainteinance of her lyuinge or saufgarde of her life, which thing she would
never by any indifferente man's judgment have done, if she had freely and
voluntarily yielded up her regal dignitye. Neither can the pretensed
parliamente be prejudicial to her, sta^dinge upon no better or suer grovvnde,
then upon such as we have rehearsed: And upon such worshipful lettres
missive, as are by them, I can not tell more falselie, or more fo^delie,
co^terfeited. Suerlie such traitors, as durst lay violente hands upon
their Queen, and intrude the^ selves into the regal gouernemente, will make
but small courtesy, in the faini^ge and forginge a lettre, thereby to work
their purposed mischief. I would then farther demand of them, What
authority they had to somon and assemble a parliame^te? And whether this fact
of hers, supposinge she were therein gvviltie, deservethe in her being a
Prince, and consideringe how heinowselie the lord Darlie had offended her
and the crown of Scotland, such extreme punishemente to be levied upon her
for one simple murder, especially by them that committed that shameful
murder upon her secretorie, that has committed so many treasons, and daily
do comitt so many horrible murders, upon the Queen's true lovinge subjects.
How many, and how crewell and terrible deaths, such traitors deserve? We
have moreover to demand of them, whereas they pretend a meruelouse and a
singular zeal to religion and holy scripture, and to measure all their
doings preciselie by scripture and order thereof, what sufficient vvarrante
they have therein, by their private authority, to set violente hands upon
their anointed Prince? I find there that king David was both an
adoulterer, and also a murderer, I find that God was highelie displeased
with him therefore. Yet find I not that he was therefore by his subjects
deposed. And here might I take occasion owte of the sacred scriptures to
declayme and discourse against your disordered doings, but that yt is
neadelesse, and our matters otherwise grovve long. But yet consider ye withdraw
your selves, you the Earls Morraye and Morton withdraw your consociates, that
eauen adioyninge the Queen were culpable and in some fault, as she is not in
this matter: Whether yt had not been much better and more available to your
common vvelthe, and to the state thereof, prudentlie to have dissembled the
matter, (as your forefathers have hertofore done in a greater cause then this,
namely in duke Roberte The Duke Roberte of Scotland.
the governor, king Roberts Brother) then to have permitted your common
vvelthe to have comen in to so miserable and wretched a state, at yt is now
fallen in, and daily is likely to be in worse case and worse. I suppose yt
will be fovvnde, that yt had been a much better policy to have reserved the
punishemente thereof to Gods own rodd and justice, in this or in any other
world: then to have taken from him, that he has reserved to his own only
judgment, and to have geaue^ to the subjects of other Princes such a wicked
presidente: that if these other subjects tread fast upon your steps, there
Will shortelie few kings and Princes in christenedome, have any sure and fast
hold of their scepter and royal dignity. We conclude then against you,
speak and do the vvorste by her that ye can inuente, that your procedings be
not agreeable or corresponde^te to law, order and justice. And therefore to be
revoked, repealed, and annulled. We say, that the common rule of the law ought
hear to take place. Spoliatus ante omnia restituendus est, unless that where
all laws asvvell Gods as man's law do favor and prefer Princes causes,
with singular privileges and prerogatives, ye have now espied ovvte a nevve
law, Whereby princes shall have and enjoy less benefitts and praeminences
in their own defense, then other private persons. We say that for these and
many other good and necessary considerations, all is void that ye have
busied your selves abovvte. We say that all your doings ovvght to be removed
reuersed and clearelie annulled, and the Queen wro^gfullie by you displaced, to
be restored to her seat and former dignity and honor. Then let the whole
matter be, if there be just cause before competente and mete judges to sit
upon a Prince, iustelie and orderly heard and determined. For as for you,
especially the Earl Murraye and Mor^ton, ye are to be charged and challenged,
beside all other just exceptions, eauen as the principal inue^tours
maintenours and workers of this shameful and cruel murder, for the which
ye have made all this hurly burly. And as I may say, stirred heaven and
earth against your own very natural Prince. Neither may the lord
Lindzaye be heard or suffered to intermedle against her, if law take place,
for diverse his demerites: Among which he standethe charged asvvell for that
he was one of the chief instruments in the slavvghter of the Queen's Secretorie
David: As also in the apprehe^dinge and imprisoninge of her grace. But I much
muse and marvel how the Busshoppe of Orkney, for shame could so
presumptiouslie and heinouslie inueighe and declaime before the Queen of
England and her commisioners, against his maistresse pretensed marriage,
withdraw the Earl Bothvvell, saying that he him self did celebrate the
solemnity thereof. Who also was your only busshoppe, that was present at
the coronatio^ of your nevve erected king. A man most apt and redye to serve
all worlds and turns. Again you the Earl Morton, besides the murder of the
Queen's Secretorie and of the lord Darley her husband, there are many just
exceptions and chalenges to be laid and taken asvveell of other misdoings, as
of manifold and apparente treasons, which ye seame to have sucked withdraw
your mothers milk, Ye have been a traitor so often times to your Prince and
Sovereign. Exceptio^s most just against the Queen's accusers but especially
against the Earl Murraye.
But the Earl Murraye yt is, whom above all other, We have to charge and
burden. His base nativity, his baser conditions, the notable saying of the
foresay de Cassius, cui bono? The trade of all his former lif, will much
stain and press him, if we do well vveyghe and mark the vveyghtie
presumptions, that be euidente and plain against him. I will make my
begininge withdraw the great and unnatural unkindness and ingratitude, by him
showed to his dear sister, and his louinge and most bountefull maistresse and
Sovereign. At what time she mi^ded, after the death of her first husband
the French king to repair into her own realm of Scotla^de, The great
benefitts employed by the Queen upon the said Earl.
she sent forthwithe for him into France, and used his advise and counsel in
all her affairs, eauen as she did also after her return into Scotland, So
far, that she had, but as yt were the name and calling, he bearinge the
very swaie of the regimente, by her entitled to, and honored and adorned
with the erledome of Murraie, and at length by one means or other furnished
with so great and ample possessions, that beside other commodities and
aduauntages, the yearly re^te thereof passethe and surmonthe the some of
tvve^tie and six thovvsande povvnds after the rate of their monoye. Behold
now the thanckfulnes of his good and grateful nature. He labored and
endeavored all that he possible could to with hold the Queen's mind, and
stay her from all manner of marriage, and to entaile the crown of the realm
unto him self, He went abovvte to entaile the crown of the realm to him
self and the Stewards.
tho vvghe he were illegitimate and incapable thereof, and to the name and blood
of the Stevvards. But when he savve and throvvghlie perceived, and well
knevve, that the Queen was fully minded and earnestly bent, and had now
determined to join her self in marriage withdraw the lord Darley, he practiced
means, by his assistance and procurements, to have slain him and his father,
and to have imprisoned her at lochleuen: And to have usurped the gouernemente
him self, as he now does. But now when he saw this his intent and
purpose disclosed and prevented, and that the sole^nization of the marriage was
alredie paste, His rebellion against the Quen.
he shevved him self with his adherents in open field and in arms, against the
Queen his Maistresse. Where upon he was driven to fly into England. At
which his there abode, he instantly solicited and besowght the Queen of
England, for aid against his Sovereign, Which she worthelie denied him.
Then begane he to practice with the Earl Morton by his lettres and messe^gers,
abowte the detestable slavvghter of David the Queen's Secretary. Who by their
mischevouse sleights and crafty persuasions, enduced the lord Darley,
promisinge him to remove the Queen from the medlinge with all politic
affairs and actuallie to putt him in possession of the crown, and of the rule
and gouernemente of the Whole realm: to ioigne withdraw them in this traiterouse
conspiracy, His co^spiracie with them that slevve the Secretary David.
against the Queen, his most dear and lovinge wife, and most dread
Sovereigne. Where upon the murder was in most horrible and traiterouse wise
committed in the Queen's own chamber of presence upon him, violently plucked
from the Queen: she also being cruelly minaced and sore threatened havinge
also a charged pistilett set to her bellye, A charged pistylett set to the
Que^s belly.
she being then great whith child, and then removed from her pryvie chamber
in to an other, where she was kept as prisoner. The young vnexperte and rash
L. Darley, woe being blinded whith outragyouse ambition, could not forsee the
deavely she dryfte, of theys crafty marchaunts: begane now, but almost to
late to epsy yt, and seeing him self as nyghe to danger, as was his wife the
Queen, repaired to her, most humbly askinge her pardon of his heinouse
atte^pte. And pytyfullie crienge ovvte to her, to provide and find owte some
present way to preserve them selves both. Who by the Queen's polytike
industry, Was privelie whithe her self conveyed away ovvte of the rebels
danger. The Que^. by her industry co^veied her self away with the lord
Darley.
And by him this wicked dryft, and the drivers and contrivers thereof were
discovered to the Queen. But lo, the next day after this slavvghter, the Earl
Murraye, entered in to Scotland, and repaired to the Queen with as fair a
countenance, as thovvghe he had been clear, asvvell for that fact, as for all
other treasons. Whereof the gentle and merciful Queen pardoned him, admyttynge
him again in to her graces love and favor. Whereat the Lord Darley much
myslykynge and vehementlye repynynge, feared least that he would be, as he Was
in dead, When he savye his time, revenged upon him, The cause why the Earl
Murraie heyted the lord Darley.
because he was of him detected to the Queen, for being one and the chief of
the counsailours, ayders and assisters, in the co^spiracie, abovvte the murder
of the Secretary, now committed. Theys and the like imaginations so deapelie
sancke in to, and pierced the young man's heart, that finally he resolved whith
him self, by one means or other, to rydd the Earl Murraye ovvte of the way.
Where abovvte he went so far forth, that he communicated his purpose to
the Queen who did most hyghelie myslike, there with, and most vehemently
deterred him from the said his intence. Yet did he break the matter farther,
as to certain other noble men, by whom at the last, Yt was reveled to the
Earl Murraye. Wherefore the Earl did continually after, bear him, a deadly
enimitie and hatred. Where upon at length all other attempts fallinge him, this
execrable murder was by him the said Earl Murraye, and by the Earl Morton
first devised, and afterward in such strange and heinouse sort, as the
world knowethe and detesteth, most horribly practiced and putt in
execution. What, paradventure some man will say, of all the men in the world,
the Earl Murraye is fartheste of, from all manner of spott and sinister
suspicion towchinge this matter: for he was not at the court when this
murder was committed: And when the Queen's grace was apprehended, he was
ovvte of Scotland. And who did drive ovvte of Scotland the Earl Bothvvell,
but the Earl Murraye? Who is he that has taken so much pains and travail
to bovvlt and find ovvte and execute such as were culpable therein, but the
Earl Murraye? In dead for his bodelie presence, at the dead doing, I will
nothing affirm, he must yield the price thereof to his hasty companion the
Earl Bothevvell. He must be contended for his share, withdraw the preemine^ce
and prerogative of his special deadly feade tovvarde the lord Darley, and
preposterous pregna^te pollice and wit, so closely, and so smothelie to
conueye and compass yt: And bear owte withdraw so great countenance so
heinouse a fact, and to reward him self for his pains taken therein, with
the extrusion of his maistresse and Queen, and intrusion of him felf, though
absente, to the regimente and government of the whole realm. This, this I
say may sufficiently serve him, for the advancement of his commendation and
praise, and for the signification of his fine politic head and invention: I
mean, for that before his departure owte of Scotla^de into France withdraw his
machiuells practizes, he had so conningelie contrived the vvole matter withdraw
his faction, that they should procure not only the Earl Bothvvell to be
acquitted of the murder, but for his good service to be revvarded, with the
Queen's espovvsalls, entendinge by this mischeuouse policy, the utter vndoi^ge
and overthrow, asvvell of him the Earl Bothvvell, as of the Queen her self
also. There never lacked good will in them, as yt well appearethe, by their
ungracious doings, to have long before overthrown their said maistresse,
but there ever lacked apparente matter, to blind men's eyes vvithall, and to
make her odiouse with the people. Now these vvilie men well knevve, that if
they might ones compass and bring this marriage thus to pass withdraw the
Earl, Whom they intended, then as fast to blase abroad for the murder by
the^ committed, as they did suppress the same before, from their good lady
and Queen: until they had brovvght her to the bait, The cause why the
enemies did impute the slavvghter to the Queen.
yt would seame very probable, not only in the eyes and judgment of the
rude and common people, but also of many sage, grave, wise and learned men
that she was privy of her husbands death. Whereby they might praetende one
execrable act against her that all men would deteste and abhor, to color
and cloak their rebelliouse trecheries. Lucifer him self could not have
fetched a finer, and a more mischevouse and deavelishe fetch, then herein
these me^ have done. As for the Earl Murraie his absence, yt does nothing
releaue or excuse him, Yea yt is singulerlie to be noted and marked, that his
very iourneies, lack not their fine fetches to serve his turn. The
vvorkinges of the Earl Murraie i^ the time of his abse^ce.
Throwghe his first iorneie into France he Wa^ne and purchased the high love
and favor of his benign Maistresse. He retornethe ovvte of England at the
very point seruinge two turns at ons, by the one thereof to circumuent his
good innocence lady, thinckinge to make her beleaue, by reason of his absence,
that he was far from the society of that conspiracy: by the other to assiste
the better with his praesence the confederates, and sodenlie to join with
them as he did. I grant that he was absente bodelie, at the fact doing,
but yet nothing was done, the which was not by his counsel or agreement
concluded. The which his devise was so horrible, that yt caused the murder
of his Souereignes Secretorie, her imprisonmente by her own husband, that the
Queen being great with child, was put in such a fear, as might have
tended to the present danger of her lief, and of her child. Yea the vere
scope of this deauelishe drifte was, eauen to have overthrown him also whom
they made their unhappy and unlucky instrumente to overthrow and depose
his own louinge wife, and most dread Sovereign. These misteres full
stuffed with such mischeuouse purposes, lo, wrought this Earl, in the time
of his absence. Now yt is to be considered, that abovvte sixtene hours
before the lord Darley was slain, the better to color the matter, he
departed from the court. Abovvte two months after ^e took his iorneye into
France, leauinge the Earl Bothevvell, as his most entire and trusty friend,
recommendinge all his causes and affairs to him before all other. At his
second return from France, he intrudethe him self into the Scepter royal
under the name and shadow of the yong^ Prince. The which thing was so
imagened, invented, and devised long ere that he departed, and in his absence,
by his trustye friends remaininge in Scotla^de, accordingly accomplished and
executed. The Queen was afterward apprehended and cast into prison at
Lochleven. Where his mother and brother dvvellethe. Unto the which Fortress
she should have been sent, as we have said, at the first co^spiracie of the
said Earl Murraye, if their maliciouse mind and intent, had not been
disapointed by the providence of god. Now what search, when and after what
sort yt was made for the said Earl Bothvvell, we have alredie declared. If
ye allege farther and say, that no man can deny, but that the said Earl
Murraie made also long, dilige^te, and narrow search for the murderers, and
did severelie punish them. To this we reply and say, that he neaded not to
travail much or far for the findi^ge out of this matter. For he mowght at
all times have fovvnde the heads of the conspiratours upon the Earl Morto^s
and his own shulders, The Earls Murraie and morto^ the heads of the
conspiracy against the lord Darley.
we say farther, that as yt is a strange, and a new ki^de of devotion in the
Earl Murraye so to quarrel for lack of sole^nitie, at the buryall of him, for
whose said burial, he longed and looked for so long: So we say likewise,
that yt seamethe Wonderful to love him so te^derlie being deceased and dead,
Who^ he so deaplie hated livinge. And to seake so seriously and severelie to
punish the murderers of him, who^ he would so often have murdered him self.
This gear seamethe to us poor simple and slender witted men unlikely,
incredible, and half repugna^te to nature: And what soever the cause be, we be
of that mind, that yt is not like, to proceed of any feruente zeal or great
affection he bearethe to the party, or to the execution of Justice. Ye are,
good Reader, desierouse paradue^ture to learn, what other cause there might
be, of so strange dealinge? Well as strange as yt is, we lack not examples of
the like crafty and subtle policy, as well in holy scripture, and in the
momuments of antiquity of other co^trees, as of England, and especialie
Scotla^de yt self, We find then in holy scripture, that there was one Onias
at Jerusalem the high priest, a man of singulier virtue and perfection, and
one that maruelousely tendered God his honor and the honor and wealth of his
country, There was also at the same time one Simo^ a very eauell disposed
and wicked creature, which went about certain naughty and wicked devises.
Lib. 2 Machab. ca. 3. and 4.
But saying that he cold not achiue his mischeuous purpose, by reason this
blessed man Onias stayed, stopped and p^uented him, he practices this wicked
devise, he causes king Seleucus to be informed of the great and inestimable
treasure remaninge and reposed in the temple at Jerusalem, where upon the
king sent Heliodorus to fetch away by force the said treasure. But
afterward when this purpos^ chanced to be frustrated and void, by reason
that this Heliodorus being vvonderfullie plaged of God was constrained to
forbear and relinquish this entreprise, and the people being vvonderfullie
offended, and in a great rage, to see such a heinous sacrilege attempted, What
does now think ye this good and honest man Simon? Surely he plays the same
part that th'erle Murrie has played with his most gracious Queen, openly
charginge the good innocent Onias with his own shameful act, and saying
that he solicited, and incensed the king to rob and spoil the Temple. We
find in the cronicles of our realm, Polycronico^. Fabia^. The cronicles in
Engliss, pre^ted anno 1498.
that albeit Vortiger aspiringe to the crown of the realm, actuallie and
reallie obtained the same, by the murtheringe of king Co^stance, which was not
done without his crafty incensinge and previe consent, yet he pretended
outwardly great sourowe, weapi^ge and lamentinge the murder of him, the
which he never theles locked for, And was the occasion of the same. Hector.
Boet. l. 11.
As for Scotland I report me to the tragical history of king Duffus slain
by a noble man named Dunvvaldus, who was in great estimation and authority
with the said king, The Earl of Murra. assembled to Du^vvaldus that procured
the slawghter of king Duffus in Scotland.
when the king was a bed, in the Casole, whereof this Dunvvaldus had the
keapinge he banketed his chamberlaines, and so sore oppressed the^, with
immoderate surfetinge and drinckinge, that when they were ons gotten abovvte
high midnight to sleep in their bedds, ye might have ronge a greate-bell
over their heads, long ere they would wake. Who bei^ge in their dead and
deape sleep, the king was murdered and slain, by such as this noble man
had suborned. His dead body was carried away and buried in a River. The
laborers that buried him were also slain, that they might tell no tales. In
the morninge the king was missinge, his bed was fownde ^mbrevved with blood,
his drovvsie drunken chamberlaines that least knevve of the matter, were had
in greateste suspicion, and With ovvte farther delay by the said Dunvvaldus
like a man zealouse to punish malefactr^s, were slain and put to death. No
man being farther a great while from suspicion then he: until first his
own over busy searchi^ge for the murderers, and afterward other things
bread upon him such suspicion, that he was thereupon apprehended, and being
fownde gwiltie worthelie executed. Idem lib. 16.
The like pra^ke Played Duke Robert, brother to the king of Scotla^de, and
governor of the realm, of whom we spoke before. The like prote played by
Duke Robert in Scotland.
He procured the Prince his nephevve to be made away and murdered: And yet
pretendinge him self, as holy as the E. Murraye does, to be zealouse in the
punishinge of such an heinouse fact, caused certain innocente persons to be
executed therefore. We say then, that the Earl Murrayes doings proceed not
from any great care he has to the maintenance of law and justice, who is
most culpable him self: But only colorablie to cloak and hide his own
mischeuouse trecheries, and to turn the blame of the fault from him self upon
his good lady and Queen, from whose person yt is farthiest, Whereof they them
selves gave in manner plain testimony and witness. For thowghe they had
openly in their pretensed and disordered parliamente detected her thereof, yet
before the Queen of Englands comissioners, they alleged other matters, as her
voluntary resignation of her crown. etc. The which allegations, when they
well savve, The Earl Murraye and his fellows being driven from all shifts
at length laid to their Queen the death of the lor. Darley before the Queen
and consaile of England.
would not serve their turn, and that men did understand, how and after
what sort they had proceaded against her in Scotla^de, they were, as yt
were driven and forced, being excluded from all other appare^te shifts, after
seven or eighe vvekes aduiseme^t, after their first inuectiue, to obiecte the
said fact. Whereof the good innocent Queen hearing, and astonished at their
strange and contumeliouse canuasings, and impude^cie in their doings, and
being sith her apprehension credibly informed and by appare^cie of matter
and proof thereof, lead and induced to beleaue and give creditt, that this
vviked entreprise was chefelie invented and compassed by the Er. Murraye and
morto^, made earnest suite by her commisioners to her God sister, our noble
Queen to arrest them, that they should not shrincke away and depart until
they had ansvvered that matter for them selves, which she fully intended most
effectually to prosequute against them and others. And so did accuse them in
deed by her comissioners. And desidered farther, that she might come in her
own person before her, and her nobility, and the ambassadors of other
contreis there reside^te, and go forevvarde with, and prosequute her said
accusation against them. Whereof they heari^ge, they fretted, they fumed, they
stamped, they stared, and for a smayl while made much hott stir. But when
that they had well considered and digested the matter, lokinge in their own
breasts, they became upon the sudden so could, that they thovvght every day
an hundred, until they were packinge home, and neauer ceased, alleaginge
many vain and friuolouse excuses to urge their dimission most
importunatelie, until they had at the last obtained their suite. O that
Cassius, Were now living, that he might lay to the Earl Murraye his charge,
his accustomed worthy saying Cui bono? He would tell him that as the Queen
by this fact, had no manner of hoped commodity, and is of over good and
virtuous a disposition and nature, in any respect of vvorldelie commodity,
so to dishonor her self and state: And eauen as the Earl of Murraye, his
birthe and natural inclination were most apt and mete to work such
neughetie practices: The causes why the Earl Murraye went abowte, as well
to make away the l. Darley, as to depose the Queen.
So were there many occasions also for his part, such as he had best
likinge and contentatio^ of, to the puttinge the same in practice. Among other
things yt pinchethe him and all his faction, and greauethe them to the very
heart, to remember the reuocation the Queen had made the April before, of all
such things, as do apperteine to the crown, that had by her self or others
in her minority, been alienated: Which said reuocatio^ by an old law and
order in Scotland, the Princes there may make before th'accomplisheme^t of
twenty and five years of age. Now had the Earl Murraye and his faction, by
one means or other gotten in to their hands and possession, two parts of the
yearlie reueneues of the whole crown. See, se, I pray the good reader, if
this were not the very vndowbted cause that made him and them so pitiful,
and so tender hearted tovvarde the lor. Darley being dead, Whose death they
had so long thristed for, and whose life they had by so many snares, and
mischeuouse vvayes assaulted, and laid wait for. Yea there was a farther
Cui bono? then this, they thowght to drive by their iolye politic practices,
all the displeasure and hatred of the fact upon the Queen: And so for this
pretensed mischeuouse fact to drive her from the possession of her crown,
and to intrude them selves, by some pretty colorable conueyances, into the sole
intermedlinge of all the public affairs, and to the government of the realm
under the title of the good infant the Queen's son, and to assure their
possessions to them selves, at least the space of twenty and five years
more. But I pray God there be not a farther and a worse fetch, then all this
comethe to. Well then all these their foretold purposes, has the deuell
brovvght to pass for them eauen according to their hearts desire. Sauinge
that he owes them a shame, and will pay yt them when they count them
selves most cock sure. And beginnethe (as yt seameth already full properly to
pay them home everye one day more then other. For as close, and as secret,
as they hidd and kept their doings from the world, especially from their
good Queen, until they had quitted the Earl Bothvvell, and coupled him most
dishonorablie with that upright and well meaning lady in pretensed marriage,
they could never bri^ge their matters to pass: And for all their vain
bragginge and ovvtfacinge (as yt were) their innocent Sovereign: their
whole wicked drifte is detected, burste owte, and come to the certain
knowledge of no small number of men. Is yt unknown think ye the Earl
Murraye, what the lord Herris said to your face ope^lie, eaue^ at your own
table a fevve days after the murder was committed? Did he not charge you
with the foreknovvledge of the same matter? Did not he Nulla circuitione vsus
flatly and plainly burden you, that ye ridinge in fiffe and cominge with
one of your most assuerid trusty servants the said day wherein you
departed from Edenborrowghe, The Earl Murraye declared the day before, that
the l. Darley sh^de be slain.
said to him among other talk, this night ere morninge the lord Darley
shall lose his life? Is yt not full well known think ye, that ye and the
Earls Bothvvell, morton, and others assembled at the castle of Cragmillar and
at other places at diverse times, to consult and devise upon this mischief?
Diverse assembles of the Earl Murraie and his adherents to co^sult upon the
slavghter of the l. Darley.
If neade were we could rehearse and recompte to you the whole some and
true effect of the oration made by the most eloque^te among you, to stir
up exhort and inflame your faction then present, to determine and resolve
them selves, to dispatche and make a hand with the lord Darley. We ca^ tell
you, that there were intercha^geable Indentures made and subscribed by you,
that he which had the first opportunity offered to make him away,
Inde^tures made and subscribed for the execution of the said purpose.
should furthvvithe take yt in hand and dispatche him. We can tell you, and
so can five thovvsande and moo of their own heari^ge, that John^ Hepborne the
Earl Bothwel his servaunte, being executed for his and your traiterouse fact,
did openly say and testify as he should answer to the contrary before
God, Diverse executed in Scotland for the said murder whereof none could charg^
(...) Queen.
that you were principal authors, counsailours and assisters, with his
master of this execrable murder, and that his Maistre so told him: And
furthermore that he him self had seen the Indentures we spoke of. We can tell
you, that John^ Haie of Galavvaye, that Povvrie, that dovvglishe, and last of
all that Paris all being put to death for this crime, took God to record at
the time of their death, that this murder was by your counsel, invention,
and drifte committed. Who also declared, that they never knevve the Queen to be
participante, or aware thereof. Well, we can farther tell you of the great
goodness of God, and of the mighty force of the trevvthe. Whereby thovvghe ye
have vvonderfullie turmoyled and tossed, thovvghe ye have racked and put to
death as well innocents as gvviltie, and your own confederates offered many
of them their pardons, so they would depose any thing against the Queen: God
has so vvrovvght, that as for no torments nor fair promises they could be
brovvght, falselie to diffame their Maistrisse: So without any torments at
all they have voluntarily purged her, and so laid the burden upon your necks
and shoulders, that ye shall never be able to shake yt of, We ca^ tell you,
that her dear Sister, and our gratiouse Queen, and the worthy nobility of
England, do Well know these your detestable practizes, neither will suffer
them selves to be spotted with the favoringe and assistinge of your abominable
doings. We can tell you that this good lady is unjustly accused, and
wrongfullie oppressed, as good Susanna was. We can tell you, that ye altogether
resemble the two old wicked governors that vvro^gfullye accused her, as an
advowtresse being the advouterers them selves, and brovvght her into danger
of present death by their false testimony (as ye have done with your well
intendinge Queen) for that she would not consent and yield to the old lusty
lecherouse Rebels. We can tell you, that if you do not the sooner repe^te, ye
see by example of them, What your reward shall be, And that in the mean while
God has as wonderfully delivered owte of your hands this our innoce^te
Susanna, as ever he did the other from them. For thovvghe she were kept
straight, in a strong fortress and castle with watch and ward in such
sort, that none of her well willers and Friends, no not so much as the
French kings or our maistresse her most dear sisters ambassadors, might be
suffered to come at, The Queen in a manuer miraculouslie delivered out of
lochleven ^rison.
or to speak with her. Thovvgh she were daile gvvarded with great number,
thovvghe the gates were every eaveninge suerlie and customablie locked, and
the keys thereof were continually night by night delivered to the lord of
the said castle. Thowghe the botes were conti^uallie fastened and locked up.
Yet god so vvrowght, that the keys of the said castle were in the said lords
very presence taken away, by a poor orphan simple boy, being not yet
eightene years old, bredd always and browght up i^ the same house. Which
feate by him Wrovvght, and a toke^ or signification geaven thereof to the Queen,
she departed ovvte of her prison house, into the court thereof at seven of
the clock at night, upon the second day of May: And so passinge, went to
the said gates, unlocked and opened by the said orphan boy, Who taking bote
also rowed her, and her waitinge maid with all, with much a do over the
water, who havinge now passed the water was on the other side received by
certain gentlemen, and by them co^veied and co^ducted to Hamilto^: where she
before her nobility revoked, annichilated and made void all that she did i^
prison before, with solemn protestation upon her oath, that she was
violently forced thereto, and putt in just fear of the loss of her life.
After this yt pleased god to putt her in mi^de, to tacke her journey into
England, as well for the special and singular trust she has in her dear
Sister, and her comfortable promises to her before her cominge by messe^gers,
letres and tokens, sent from her, both confortinge and promisinge her
(opportunity seruinge) all conueniente succor and help, as that we
Englishemen (which must neades honor and reverence her, Who is of the next
Royal bloudd and true heir apparente of the crown of this realm of
England) should throvvghelie know, and fully understand, to our great
comfort, her pureness, integrity, and innoce^cie in the matter, under pretense
vvherof, her traitors and rebelliouse subjects, thereby to accomplish their
seditiouse and ambitiouse minds and purposes, have molested, vexed and
disquieted her in manner a foresaid. And now at the last kepethe her, not
only from her crown and realm, but from all whatsoever either her private or
other goods, as unwilling that she should either keep the state and port of
a Prince, or any other meaner estate whatsoever. Neither has it altogether
fallen ovvte contrary to her expectation and desire. For the nobles of
England, that were appointed by the Queen to hear and examine all such
matters, as the rebels should lay against the Queen, have not only
fownde the said Queen innocente, and gvviltlesse of the death of her
husband, but do vvithall fully understand, that her accusers, Were the very
co^triuers, deuisers, practitioners and workers of the said murder: and have
farther also so much increased, and in such Wise renewed the good estimation,
and great hope they alvvayes had of her, now perfectly knowinge her
innocence, and thereto moved throvvghe other princely qualities resplendente
in her, with many Whereof she is much adorned, The commissioners appointed in
England to hear the Queen of Scotts matters, well liked of her said
innoce^cie, and of her title to the succession of the crown.
and singulerlie endevved, that they have in most earnest wise solicited and
e^treated the Queen of England, to give her aid and strength, whereby she
may be restored again to her honor and crown. They have moved the said
Queen of Scotland also, that yt may please her to accept and like of the
most noblest man of all England, between whom and her there might be a
marriage concluded, to the quietinge and comfort of both the realms of
England and Scotla^de. Finally the noble men of this our realm, acknovvledge
and accept her, for the very true and rigthe heir appare^te of this realm
of England, being fully minded and alvvayes ready, if God call to his
mercy the Queen that now is, then to receive and serve her as their
vndovvbted Queen, Maistresse and Sovereign, Whereby yt may easelie appear,
how Well they like of her cause, that had the hearing and trial of the
same, allthovvghe she never as yet came in their presence. These things now
and many other which for the eschewinge of prolixitie, we forebeare to
enlarge our treatise vith, may be alleged for the defense of the Queen's
integrity, and for the vprightnes of her cause, the which I would vvishe
you the Earls Murraye and Morton, withdraw your allied confederates, before all
other most deapelie and by times to vveighe and consider accordingelie, as the
weight and greatness of the cause, An exhortation of the Earls Murraye^ and
morto^ and others to reconsile themselves to the Queen.
as your own sauftie, with the wealth and honor of your native country do
require. I am not ignorante, that the matter is gone very far with you, and
that many impedime^ts do concur, to with dravve you, to seake that remedy
for the reformation of things paste, which is the best and the only
remedy: But suerlie when ye have fully vveied all things on every side
accordingelie, ye shall find no sure and sovvnde remedy, but in making a
true, a sincere and an unfeigned humble submission to your, gratiouse Queen,
vvho^ ye have so greavouselie offended and molested. Let not the greatness or
number of your treasons wrovvght against both your Queen and country: Let not
any vain false imagined opinion either of the world, or of your utter
overthrow, by reason of any such fond presumption of your present high
estate, of your great power force and strength, Let no vain expectation of
external succors stay or stop you from so necessary a devvtie, and so
comendable before God and the world. Ye best know that among all the
princely orname^tes and virtues in your Queen, her mercy and clemency are
singular and peerless. The Queen of Scotts full of mercy.
She seamethe well to have learned that lesson of the gospel. If thy brother
do offend the forgeve him not only, seven times, but seventie times seven
times. She will not only forgeve, but forgett also. She neither is ignorante
in what state her realm standethe in, nor that extreme severitie, from the
which she naturally abhorrethe, is not of all other times now against such,
as will embrace mercy offered them to be shevved and practiced. She will
rather like the law of (...) oblivio^ and forgetfulness, so much of the old
Writers commended. The great benefitt whereof ye have so often, and so
abo^dantlie received at her hands. And therefore ye neade the less to fear
the discontinuance of your high and honorable estate and condition. As for
shame yt stands in the evil doing yt self, and not in the amendinge and
reforminge of ill deeds, which amendment and reformation, if ye earnestly
and trevvlie mind, yt will be to the great contentation of your most gratiouse
Queen, and of all her louinge subjects. And in so doing you shall both
highelie auance your honorable estate and estimation, and make her a good
amends for that, which is paste, and can not be revoked. But on the other
side, if ye give over and refuse this occasion now present, and goo
forevvarde with your rebelliouse entreprises and attemptes, mindinge to abide
and try the vttermoste, ye most vvilfullie cut away and exclude from your
self all good hope of mercy and pardon, and take a wrong way for your
own sauftie and preservation. For your cause is navvght, and so ye well
know yt to be. And therefore can ye not look to have and obtain a good
prosperouse success and end thereof. Well ye may, as hitherto ye have done,
toss, turmoile and tumble all things vpside dovvnevvards for a while: But be
ye assured that gods hand Will fall and light the heuier, and With a greater
paise upon you at the length therefore. Yt is easy to be seen by the course
of all times, The end of rebels ever unhappy.
as well by your own very histories at home, as by the cronicles of all
other nations abroad, to what end commonly such seditiouse conspiracies and
treasons do come to: that is to the utter overthrow and confusion for ever of
these persons that work, attempt, practice, or maintain the same. They seame
for a while to bear great svvaye, and all the world for a while to ru^ne
with them. But in the end they fail and are clean geaue^ over. What
marvel were yt if a house should not long continevve, that is builded but
upon a yeldinde sandy grovvnde? Ye have builded and fovvnded all your doings
upon untrue and lienge slanders and treacherouse treasons, against your dread
Sovereign. The sincere verity vverof we have herein trevvlie doclared. The
which being ons throvvghlie detected, and evidently known to such, as ye
have in Scotland craftelie abused and shamefullie circumue^ted (as suerlie yt
daily burstethe ovvte more and more) ye shall se your self sodenlie left
naked, and quite forsaken, eauen of those, who have been your greattest
assisters, aiders, and furtherers. For as the old proverb is, truth is the
Davvghter of time. And as ye shall be left alone at home, so can ye not look fo
maintenance and vpbearinge of foreign Princes. They will not defyle them
selves, and their honorable vocation, withdraw helpinge so foul a cause, and
so daungerouse and perillouse a matter, that may tend to the molestation and
hurt, not only of their own state, but of the states of all kings
christened. Other Princes will not suffer the Queen of Scotts to be iniuried
by her subjects.
Nay ye must rather think, that other Princes will judge and take yt to
tovvche them to nighe, to suffer such a villainie to pass and escape
unrevenged, and so good a lady to be left destitute and desolate. The
emperor will not bear yt: France will not bear yt, Spain will not bear
yt: And especially our noble Queen of England with her vvorthie nobility
will not bear or suffer such outragiouse dealinges, against her next louinge
neighbor, and dear sister, yea against the heir apparenre of this most
noble realm. Albe yt that ye withdraw your surmised lies, the better to
maintain your usurped and nevve erected kingedome, make her to be in fear of
her own state in case she should restore the said innocente Queen to her
crown again.

The end of the first book.
THE SECOND BOOK TOWCHINGE the right title and interest of the foresaid
Lady Marie Queen of Scotland, to the Succession of the crown of England.
THE great providence (good Reader) of the eternal God, who of nothing
created al things, did not only create the same by his ineffable power, but
by the same power gave a special gift and grace also to every livinge
thing, to co^tinevve, to renevve, and to preserve each his own kind: But in
this consideration the condition of man among and above all earthly things
has his peerlesse prerogative of wit and reason, Man only has the
p^rogatiue of wit and reason among all earthely creatures.
where withdraw he only is of God gratiouslye endewed and adorned: By the which
he does provide not only for his praesente necessity and savegarde (as do
also naturalie after their sort all beasts and all other lyui^ge things
void of reason) but also by pregnancie of wytt, and reasonable discourse, does
long before foresee the dangerouse perilles that many years after may
happen, either to him self, or to his country: And then by diligence and
careful provision does inuente apt and mete remedies, for the eschevvinge of
such mischeives, as might ovvtragiously afterward occur. And the greater
the fear is of greater mischief, the greater, the deaper and the spedier care
is wont to be taken, Men are most bound to the p^seruation of their
country.
to praevente and cut of the same. Yt is also most certain by the confession
of all the world, that this care is principally dew, by each man that
has opportunity to do good therein to his Prince, his co^try and to the common
weal and good quiet of the country, for the continuance and happy
praeseruation of the same. To the praeseruation vvherof, as there are many
parts and branches belonginge, so one principal part is for subjects
lovinglie and revere^tlie, to honor, A great co^moditye to the common wealth
to know the heir apparente.
dread, and obedientlie to serve their Sovereigne, that chauncethe presently
to rule and govern. The next to foreknovve, to whom they should bear their
alleagea^ce, after the decesse of theirefore said Prince and governor. Which
being ons certain and assuredly known, as yt procures when the time
requirethe ready and serviceable obedience, withdraw the great comfort and
universal rest and quietness of the subjects: So where, for the said
successor there us among them discord and diversity of judgments: the
matter grovvethe to faction, and from faction to plain hostility, and from
hostility to the danger of many men's lives: And many times to the utter
euersion of the whole state. For the better auoidinge of such and the like
inconueniances (albe it at the begininge princes reigned not by discente of
blood and succession, but by choice and election of the worthieste) the
world was for the most part constrained to repudiate election, and so often
times for the better and the vvorthier to take a certain issewe and offspringe
of some one only person thowghe otherwise perchance not so mete. Why all the
world almost embrace succession of Princes, rather then election.
Which defecte is so supplied partly by the great benefitte of the
universal rest and quietness that the people enjoy thereby, and partly by the
grave and sage counsailours assistinge to princes: that the whole world in a
manner these many thowsande years has embraced succession by bloudd, rather
then election. And politic Prinees which have had no children of their own
to succeed them, have had ever a special care and foresight thereof for
avoidinge of civil dissension. So that the people might always cheifely,
Where there appeared any likelihodd of variety of opinions or factions to
ensewe abovvte the true and lavvfull succession in government, forknoue the
true and certain heir apparente. This care and foresight does manifestly
appear to have been not only in many Princes of foreign contreies, but also
of this realm, as well before the time of the conquest, as also after, namely
in king Edward the confessor, in declaringe and appointinge Eadgare
Athelinge his nephevves son his heir, Floreshist. an. 1057.
as also in king richard the first who before he interprised his journey to
Jerusalem (where for his chivalry he atchiued high honor) declared by
consent of his nobility and commons, Richardus canonicus sa^ctae trin. Lo^d.
stores histo. anno 1190. Polid. lib. 14.
Arthur son of his brother Duke of Brita^ne his next heir in succession of
the crown. Of the which Arthur as also of the said Eadgare athelinge, we
will speak more hereafter. This care also had king Richard the second
what time by authority of parliamente, he declared the lord Edmonde Mortimer
that married Philippe davvghter and heir to his uncle Leonell Duke of Clarence
heir apparente. Polid. lib. 20.
And to discende to later times, our late noble Sovereign king Henrye the
eight shevved his prudente and zealous care in this behalf before his last
noble viage into France: Whose davvghter our most dread Sovereign Elizabeth
does and has sit in the royal seat with such peace, quietness, and
tranquillity among all her subjects hitherto, that we have great cavvse to
render to God almighty our most hearty thancks for the same: And to crave of
him like continuance, vvherof the singular fruit and benefitt, as long as it
shall please God to preserve her to us: Which we most humble supplia^tes
desire of him for many years, with some happy issevve from her grace (if it
be his blessed will) we hope most fortunately to enjoy. But if God should
(as we be all as well Princes as others subject to mortal chances) once
bereave us of our gratiouse Prince, the hearts and judgments of men being no
better, nor more firmly settled and fixed toward the expectation of a
certain succession, then they seame now to be: then vvo and alas: Yt yrkethe
my very heart, eauen ons to think upon the immine^te and almost the
inevitable danger of this our noble realm, being like to be overwhelmed
with the raginge and roringe waves of mutual discord, and to be consumed
with the terrible fire of civil dissension. The fear vvherof is the more, by
reason alredie in these late years, some flames thereof have sparkeled and
flusshed abroad, and some part of the rage of the said fluddes have alredie
beaten upon the banckes. I mean the hott contention that has been therein in
so many places, and among so many persons: of books also, that have been
spredd abroad, and daily are spredd, being framed affectionatelie, and
sovvndinge according to the sinister opinion of every man's private appetite.
Saying therefore that there is just cause of fear and of great danger
likely to happen by this variety of men's judgments so diuerselie affected,
as well of mean men as of great personnages: I take yt the part of every
true englisheman to labor and travail each man for his possibility, and
for such talente as God has geauen him to help in convenient time for the
preuentinge of the imminent danger: We know what wit, what policy, what
pains, what charges men imploye to provide, that the Themmes or sea do not
ouerflovve such places as be most subject to danger: We know what
politic provision is made in many good cities and towns, both to foresee
that by negligence there rise no dangerouse fires, and if they chance, with
all diligence to repress the rage thereof. Wherein among other his prudente
doings, Augustus the Emperor, is commended for appointinge at Rome seven
companies ordinarily to watch the City, for the purpose before said:
Whereunto he was enduced by reason the city was in one day in seven several
places set on fire. And shall not we every man for his part and vocation have
as vigilante care and respect, to the extinguisshinge of this fire alredie
spronge owte, that may (if the matter be not wisely foreseen) destroy,
subverte and consume, not one city only, but importe an universal calamity
and destruction? Which to repress one ready and good way seamethe unto me,
if men may know and be throvvglie persuaded, in what person the right of the
succession of the crown of this our realm does stand and remain. For now
many men throwghe ignorance of the said right and title, and also the same
being depraved by certain sinister perswasio^s in some books, where unto they
have to lightly geaven creditt, be carried away from the right opinion and
good heart, that they otherwise Would and should have. The which kind of men
I do hartelie wish from their said corrupt judgment to be removed: And
shall in this treatise do my best endeavor to remove, not praesuminge upon my
self, that I am any thing better able then others this to do, (for I know my
own infirmity) But being gladd and willinge to imparte unto others such
motives (as upon the readinge of such books) as of late have been set forth
by the adversaries, and after the diligente weienge of diverse Arguments to the
contrary, seame unto me sufficient to satiffie any honest and indifferent
man, that is not obstinatlie bente to his own Wilful affections, or to some
other sinister meaning and dealinge. We say then and affirm that the right
heir and Successor apparente unto the crown of this realm of England next
after our Sovereigne Lady Queen Elizabethe and her issue, is such a one as
for the excelle^te gifts of God and nature in her most princely appearinge,
is vvorthie to inherit either this noble realm, or any other, be yt of much
more dignity and worthiness. But now I claim nothing for the worthiness of
the person, which God forbidd should be any thing prejudicial to the just
title of others: if most open and manifest right, Justice, and title do not
co^curre with the worthiness of the person: Then let the praise and Worthiness
remain where yt is, And the right Where God and the law has placed yt. But
saying God, nature and the law does call the person to this expectation,
whose intereste and claim I do now prosequute (I mean the right excellent
Lady, The Queen of Scots is the right heir appare^te to the crown of
England.
Lady Marie Queen of Scotland) I hope that when her right and just title
shall be throwghlie hard and considered by the indifferente Reader, if he be
persuaded alredie for her right, he shall be more firmly settled in his
true and good opinion, and that the other parties being of a contrary mind
shall find good cavvses and grovvndes, to remove them from the same, and to
geaue over and yield to the trevvthe. Her graces title then (if God call our
Sovereign ovvte of this transitory life, having no issue of her majesty's
body) as yt is most open and euidende, so yt is most conformable, to the
law of God, of nature, and of this realm: And consequently in a manner of
all other realms in the world, as grovvinge by the neareste proximitie of
the royal blood. She is a kings and a Queen's davvghter, her self a Queen,
Davvghter to the late king James of Scotland son to lady Margarett the
eldest sister to our late Sovereign king Henry the eight. Whose Davvghter
also the lady Lenoux is, but by a later husband. The lady Frances late wife
to Henry Marquis dorsett afterward Duke of Suffoocke: And the lady Elenour
late wife to the Earl of Cumberlande, and their progenye procedethe from the
lady Marie dowager of France youngest sister of the said king Henry, late
wife to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk. I might here fetch forth old
farne days. I might reach back to the noble and vvorthie kings long before
the conqueste, of whose royal blood she is descended, which is no part of
our purpose, neither does enforce her title more then to prove her no stranger
within this realm. But the arguments and proufes which we mean to allege
and bring forth for the confirmation of her right and title in succession,
(as heir apparente) to the crown of England, are gathered and grovvnded
upon the laws of God and nature, and not only received in the civil
policies of other nations, but also in the old laws and customs of our
own country, by reason approved, and by use and long concontinevvance of
time observed, from the first constitution of this realm in political order
unto this present day. And yet for all that, has yt been and yet is by some
men attempted, artificially to obiecte and cast many mistie dark clovvdes
before me^nes eyes, to keep from them (if yt may be) the clear light of the
said just title, the which they would extingvvishe, or at the least
blemishe with some obscure shadovve of law. But in deed against the law,
and with the shadovve of parliame^ts: But in deed against the true meaning
of the pliame^tes. And albe it, yt were inowghe for us (our cawse being so
firmly and suerlie established upon all good reason and law) to stand at
defense and only to avoid (as easelie we may) their objections, Which
principally and cheifelie are grovvnded upon the common laws and statutes of
this realm: yet for the betteringe and strengtheninge of the same, we shall
lay forth sondrie great and invincible reasons co^ioyned withdraw good and
sufficient authority of the law, so approved and confirmed that the
adversaries shall never be able justly to impugn them. And so that we
trust, after the readinge of this our treatise, and the effects of the same
well digested no manner of scruple owght to remain in any indiferent man's
heart concerning her right and title. Whose expectation and conscience
althovvghe we trust fully in this discourse to satisfy, and doubt nothing
in the world of the rightfulnes of our cause: Yet must we needs confess the
manner and form to e^treate thereof, to be full of difficulty and perplexity.
For such causes of Princes, as they be seldom and rare, so is yt more rare
and stange to find them discoursed discussed and determined by any law or
statute. Albe it now and then some statutes tend that way. Neither do our
laws not the corpse of the Roman and civil law lightly meddle With the
princely gouernemente, but with private men's causes. And yet this not
withstandinge for the better iustifienge of our cavvse, albe yt I deny not,
but that by the common law yt must be known who ovvght to have the
crown: And that the common law must discern the right as well of the
crown as of subjects: Yet I say that there is a great difference between
the kings right and the right of others. And that the title of the crown of
this realm is not subject to the rules and principles of the common law of
this realm as to be ruled and tried after such order and course as the
inheritance of private persons is by the same. The common law of this
realm is rather grounded upon a general custom then any law written.
For the prouf whereof let us consider What the common law of this rerealme is,
and how the rules thereof be grownded, and do take place. Yt is very manifest
and plain, that the common law of this realm of England, is no law Written,
but grovvnded only upon a common and general custom throvvghe ovvte the
whole realm as apparethe by the treatise of the aunciente and famous writer
upon the laws of the realm named RANVLPHVS DE GLANVILLA. In prologo suo
e^sde^ libri fol. 1. and 2.
Who wrote in the time of the noble king Henry the second, De dicto Ranulpbo
Glanuilla vide Geraldu^ Ca^bre^sem in Topogra. de vvallia.
of the law and custom of the realm of england: Being then and also in
the time of the reign of king Richard the first, the chief counsailler and
justice of the same king. And also by the famous Justice Fortescue in his
book which he wrote being Chancellor of England, Fortescue de laud legum
Angliae. ca. 17
De laudibus legum Angliae. And by 33, H. 6: 51. and by 8. E. 4. 19. Which
custom by usage and continual practice heretofore had in the kings covvrtes
within this realm is only known and maintained: 8. E. 4, 19, 33. H. 6, 51
pi^so^s printe.
Wherein we seame much agreeable to the old lacedemonia^s, who many hundred
years past, most politikelie and famouselie governed their common wealth
with law unwritten. Iusti. de iure natural. gent and civil 55. ex non script.
Whereas among the Athenienses, the written laws bear all the svvaye. This
thing being so true, that withdraw any reason or good authority yt can not
be denied: then we are farther to consider whether the kings title to the
crown can be examined, tried, and ordered by this common custom or no. If ye
say yt may, then must ye prove by some record that yt has been so used.
Otherwise ye only say yt and nothing at all prove yt. For nothing can be
sa^ed by law to be subject to any custom, unless the same has been used
accordingly, and by force of the same custom I am Well assured, that you are
not able to prove the usage and practice thereof by any record i^ any of the
kings cowrtes. Yea I will farther say unto you and also prove yt, that there
is no one rule general or special of the common law of this realm, The
adversaries have shevved no rule of the common law that bindethe the crown.
Which ye either have showed or can shevve, that has been taken by any just
construction, to extend unto or bind the king or his crown. I Will not
deny, but that to declare and set forth the praerogatiue and Jurisdiction of
the king ye may shevve many rules of the law: But to bind him (as I have
said) ye can shevve none. Ye say in your book that yt is a maxim in our
law most manifest, that Who so ever is borne ovvte of England, and of
father and mother not being of the obedience of the king of England, can not
be capable to inherit any thing in England. Which rule being general
withowte any Words of exceptio* ye also say, must neds extend unto the
crown. What you mean by your law, I know not. But if you mean (as I
think you do) the common law of England: I ansuere there is no such maxim
in the common law of this realm of England, as hereafter I shall
manifestly prove. But if yt were for arguments sake admitted for this time
that yt be a maxim, or general rule of the common law of England, yet to
say that yt is so general, as that no exception ca^ be taken against the same
rule, ye shevve your self either ignorance, or elseverie careless of your
credit: For it does plainly appear by the statute of 25. E. 3. 25. E. 3.
(being a declaration of that rule of the law which I suppose ye mean)
terminge yt a maxim, that that rule extendethe not unto the kings children.
Whereby yt most euide^tlie appearethe, that yt exte^deth not generally to
all: And if yt exte^de not to bi^de the kings children in respect of any
inheritance descended unto the^ from any of their ancetours, yt is an
argume^te a forttori, that yt does not exte^de to bi^de the ki^ge or his
crown. 5, E. 3, tit Ayle 13. E. 3, tit lettre 31, E. 3, tit tit. Coson 42. E.
3, fo. 2, 22. H. 6 fol. 43, 11. H. 4. fo. 23 and 25. litleto^ cap. vilenag.
And for a full and short answer to your authorities set forth i^ your
marginall notes as 5. E. 3. tit. Aile 13. E. 3. tit lr^e 31. E. 3. Coson 42.
Edw. 3. fol. 2, 22. H. 6. fol. 42, 11. H. 4. fol. 23. and 24. litlet. ca.
vilenag. Yt may plainly appear unto all that will read and peruse thoses
books, that there is none of them all that does so much as with a piece of a
word or by any color or shadow seame to inte^de, that the title of the
crown is bovvnde by that your supposed general rule or maxim. For every one
of the said cases argued and noted in the said book, are oneli concerning
the dishabilitie of an alien borne and not denisen, to demand any lands by
the laws of the realm by suyte and action only, as a subject under the
king, The adversaries case perteinethe to subjects only.
and nothing tovvchinge any dishabilitie to be laid to the king him self or
to his subjects. Is there any controversy abovvte the title of the crown by
reason of any such dishabilitie towched in any of these books? No verelie not
one word I dare boldly say, as may most manifestly appear to them that
will read and pervse those books. And yet ye are not ashamed to note them as
sufficient auctorities for the maintenance of your evil purpose and intent.
But as ye would seame to under stand, that your rule of dishabilitie is a
general maxim of the law, so me thincketh ye should not be ignorante, No
maxim of the law bindethe the ^rovvne, unless the crown specially be named.
that yt is also as general, yea a more general rule and maxim of the law,
that no maxim or rule in the law can extend to bind the king or the
crown, unless the same be specially mentioned therein, as may appear by
diverse principles and rules of the law, which be as general as is your said
supposed maxim, and yet neither the ki^ge nor the crown is by any of them
bownde. As for example, yt is very plain that the rule of the tenante by the
courtesy is general vvithovvte any exception at all. And yet the same bindethe
Of the tenante by the courtesy.
neither does extend to give any benefitt to him that shall marye the Queen
of england. As yt was plainly agreed by all the lavviers of this realm,
when king Phillippe was married unto Queen Marie, Althovvghe for the more
suertie and plain declaration of the intentes of king Philippe and Queen
Marie, and of all the states of this realm, yt was enacted, that king
Philippe should not claim any title to be tenante by the courtesy. Yt is also
a general rule, that if a man die seized of lands in fee simple withdraw ovvte
issevve male, having diverse davvghters: the land shall be equally devised
among the dawghters. Nor that the lands shall be divided among the daughters
and also every reasonable man knowethe by usage, takes no place in
succession of the crown, for there the eldeste enioieth all, as thowghe Nor
the Wife shall have the third perte.
and yet yt is very clear that the Queen shall not have the third part of
the lands belogi^ge to the crown as appearethe in 5, E. 3, 5, E. 3, tit.
praerogat. 20, 21. E. 3, fo 13. 9. H. 6., f. 12 and 52. 28. H. 6, fo. 15. Red.
pri^te.
tit praerogat. 21: E. 3: 9 and 28. H 6. and diverse other books. Besides that
the rule of Nor the rule of possess. fratris etc.
Possessio fratris, bei^ge gn^rall, Neither has been or ca^ be stretched to
the inheritance of the croune, for the brother of the half blood shall succeed
and not the sister of the whole 34 H 6. 58. Red. printe.
may be proved by king Etheldred brother and successor to king Edward the
Martyr, and by king Edward the confessor brother to King Edmu^de, and
diverse others who succeeded in the crown of England, being but of the half
blood. As was also the late Queen Marie, and is at this present our gracious
Sovereign Elizabethe. Who both in all records of our law vvherin their
several rightes and titles to the crown are pleaded (as by daily experience
asvvell in the exchequer, al also in all other covvrtes is manifest) do make
their conueiance as heirs in blood the one to the other, which if they
were common or private persons they could not be allowed in law, they (as
is well known) being of the half blood one to the other, Nor that the
executour shall have the goods and chatelle of the testatour.
that is to wit, begotten of one father but borne of sondrie mothers. Yt is
also a general rule in the law, that the executours shall have the goods
and chattelles of the testatour and not the heir, and yet is yt otherwise in
the case of the crown, for there the successor shall have them and not the
executour, as appearethe in 7, H. 4, by Gascoine. 7 H. 4. fo. 43, 11 H. 4, 9.
Yt is likewise a general rule, that a man Attainted of felony or treason,
his heir throwghe the corruption of blood, Nor that a traitor is unable to
take land, by disce^t and without pardon.
without pardon and restitutio^ of blood, is unable to take any lands by
discente. Which rule althowghe yt be general, yet yt extendethe not to the
discente or succession of the crown, althovvghe the same Attainder were by
act of perliame^te as may appear by the Attainder of Richard Duke of york
and king Edward his son, and also of king Henry the seaue^the, who were
attainted by act of parliamente, and never restored, and yet no dishabilitie
thereby unto Edward the fovvrethe, nor unto Henry the seaventhe to receave
the crown by lavvfull succession. But to this you would seame to answer in
your said book, saienge that Henry the seaventhe not vvithstandinge his
Attainder came to the crown, as cast upon him by the order of the law. For as
much that when the crown was cast upon him, that dishabilitie ceased.
Wherein ye confess directly, that the Attainder is no dishabilitie at all to
the succession of the crown. For althovvghe no dishabilitie can be alleged
in him that has the crown in possession, yet if there were any
dishabilitie in him before to receive and take the same by lavvfull succession,
then must ye say that he was not lavvfull king but an usurper. And
therefore in confessinge Henrye the seaventhe to be a lavvfull king, and that
the crown was lavvfullie cast upon him, ye confess directly thereby that
before he Was king in possession, there was no dishabilitie in him to take
the crown by lavvfull succession, his said Attainder not with standinge:
Which is as much as I would vvishe you to grant. But in conclusion,
understanding your self, that this your reason can not maintain your intent:
you go abovvte an other way to help your self, An answer to the
adversary maki^ge a difference between attai^der and the birthe ovvte of the
allegiance.
making a difference in the law between the case of Attainder, and the case
of foreign birthe ovvte of the kings alleagance: sainge, that in the case of
the Attainder necessity does enforce the succession of the crown upon the
party attainted: For otherwise ye say the crown shall not descend to
any. But upon the birthe ovvte of the kings allegiance, ye say yt is
otherwise. And for prouf thereof ye put a case of I. S. being seized of
lands, and havinge issevve A, and B. A, is attainted in the life of I. S. his
father, and after I. S. diethe, A livinge vnrestored. Now the land shall not
descend either to A, or B. But shall go to the lord of the fee by way of
eschete. Otherwise yt had been (ye say) if A, had been borne beyond the sea.
I, S. breakinge his allegiance to the king, and after I, S. comes again into
the realm, and has issevve B. and diethe, for now (ye say) B. shall
inherit his fathers lands. If the crown had been holden of any person, to
whom yt might have escheted, as in your case of. I, S. the land did. Then
paraduenture there had been some affinity between your said case, and the
case of the crown. But there is no such matter. Besides that, ye must
consider, that the king comes to the crown not only by discente, but also
and cheifelie by succession, as unto a corporation: And therefore ye might
easelie have seen a difference in your cases between the kings Majesty and
I, S. a subject: And also between lands holden of a lord above, and the
crown holden of no earthly lord, but of God almighty only. But yet for
arguments sake, I would feign know where you find your difference, and
what authority you can shevve for the proof thereof. Ye have made no
marginall note of any authority: And therefore unless ye also say, that ye
are Pythagoras, I will not beleve your difference. Well I am assuered, that I
can show you good authority to the contrary, And that there is no
difference in your cases. Pervse I pray you. 22. H. 6. and there may you see
the opinion of Justice Newto^, 22. H. ^. fol. 43.
that there is no difference in your cases, but that in both your cases the
land shall eschete unto the lord. And Prisote being then of counsel with
the party that claimed the lands by a discente: Where the eldeste son was
borne beyond the seas, durst not abide in law upon that title. This
authority is against your difference, and this authority, I am well
assuerid is better, then any that you have showed to prove your difference. But
if We shall admit your difference to be according to the law, yet your
cases, Whereunto you apply your difference are nothi^ge like, as I have saiede
before. But to proceed on in the proof of our purpose, as yt does appear, The
supposed maxim of the ad^saries tovchethe not kings borne beyo^de the sea, as
appears by king Stephen, and ki^ge H. 2.
that neither the ki^ge, nor his crovne is bownde by theys general rules which
before I have shevved: So do I like wise say of all the residewe of the
general rules and maxims of the law, being in a manner infinite. But to
return again unto your only supposed Maxim, which you make so general
co^cerninge the dishabilitie of persons borne beyond the seas: yt is very
plain, that yt was never taken to exte^de unto the crovne of this realm of
England, as yt may appear by king Stephen, and by king He^rie the second,
who were both strangers and French me^. And borne out of the kings
allegia^ce, and neither were they the kings children immediate nor their
pare^tes of the allegiance, And yet they have been always accounted lawful
kings of England, nor their title was by any man at any time defaced or
comptrolled for any such consideration or exception of foreign birthe. And yt
is a world to see, how you would shifte your hands from the said king
Henry. Ye say he came not to the crovne by order of the law, The
adversaries objection tovchinge king H. 2. avoided.
but by capitulatio^ or agreement, for as much, as his mother by whom he
conveied his title was then livinge. Well admit that he came to the crown by
capitulation duringe his mothers life. Yet this does not prove that he was
dishabled to receive the crown, but rather proves his ability. And
althovvghe I did also admit, that he had not the crown by order of the law
duringe his mothers life, yet after his mothers death no man has hitherto
dovvbted, but that he was king by lavvfull succession, and not against the
laws and customs of this realm. For so might you putt a dovvbte in all the
kings of this realm: that ever governed since, and drive us to seake heirs
in Scotland or else where, which thing we suppose you are over wise to goo
abowte. Besides this I have hard some of the adversaries for farther help of
their intention in this matter say that king Henry the second was a
Queen's child, and so king by the rule of the common law. Trevvlie I know,
he was an Empress child, but no Queen, of Englandes child. For althovvghe
Mavvde the Empress his mother had a right and a good title to the crown and
to be Queen of England: Yet was she never in possession, but kept from the
possession by king Stephen: And therefore king Henrye the second can not
justly be said to be a Queen of Englandes child, nor yet any kings child,
unless ye would intend the kings children by the words of infantes de Roy
etc. to be children of farther degree, and descended fom the right line of the
king: so ye might say trevvlie that he was the child of king Henrye the
first, being indede the son and heir of Mavvde the Empress, davvghter and
heir of king Henry the first. As tovvchi^ge Arthure ki^ge Richardes nephewe.
Whereby your said rule is here fovvlie foiled. And therefore ye Would feign
for the maintenance of your pretensed maxim, catch some hold upon Arthure
the son of Ieffrey one of the sons of the said Henry the second. Vt
autem pax ista and summa dilectio, tam multiplici q arctiori vi^culo co^necta^,
p^dictiscuriae vestriae magnatibus, id ex perte vr^a tracta^tibus
(dn^odispone^te) condiximus intet Arthurum egregiu^ ducem Britanniae, nepote^
nostru^ and herede^ fi forte sine prole obire nos co^^gerit, and filia^ vestra^
matrimoniu^ co^trahendu^. etc.
Ye say then like a good and iolie antiquarie, that he was rejected from the
crown, by cause he was borne ovvte of the realm. That he was borne ovvte
of the realm is very true, but that he was rejected from the crown for
that cause yt is very false. Neither have you any authority to prove your
vain opinion in this point. For yt is to be proved by the cronicles of this
realm that king Richard the first uncle unto the said Arthure, taking his
journey tovvarde Jerusalem, declared the said Arthur (as we have shevved
before) to be heir apparente In tractatu pacis inter Rich. 1. and Tancredu^
Rege^ Siciliae vid. Rog. Ho^enden and Richar. canonicu^ sancta Trinitatis
Londini.
unto the crown: Which would not have been, if he had been taken to be
unable to receive the crown by reason of fore^ birthe. And althovvghe king
Johan did usurp as well upon the said king Richard the first his eldest
brother, as also upon the said Arthur his nephevve: yet that is no proof, that
he was rejected, by cause he was borne owte of the realm. If ye cold prove
that, then had ye showed some reason and presidente to prove your intent,
Whereas hitherto you have sheued none at all, nor I am Well assured shall ever
be able to shevve. Thus may ye se (gentle reader) that neither this pretensed
maxim of the law set forth by the adversaries, nor a great number more as
general as this is (which before I have sheued) can by any reasonable means
be stretched to bi^de the crown of England. These reasons and auctorities
may for this time suffice to prove that the crown of this realm is not
subject to the rules and the principles of the common law, neither can be
ruled and tried by the same. Which thing being true, all the objections of
the adversaries made against the title of Marie the Queen of Scotland to the
succession of the crown of this realm, are fully ansvvered, and thereby
clierlie wiped away. Yet for farther arguments sake, and to the end we
might have all matters sifted to the vttermoste and thereby all things made
plain: Let us for this time some what yield unto the adversaries, admittinge
that the title of the crown of this realm were to be examined and tried by
the rules and principles of the common law, and then let us consider and
examine farther, whether there be any rule of the common law, or else
statute that by good and just construction, can seame to impugn the said
title of Marie the Queen of Scotland or no. For tovvchinge her lineall
descente from king Henrye the seauenthe, and by his eldeste davvghter (as we
have shevved) there is no man so impude^te to deny yt. What is there then to
be objected? Among all the rules, maxims, and judgments of the common law
of this realm, only one rule as a general maxim is objected against her:
And yet the same rule is so vntrevvlie sert forth, that I can not well agree,
that yt is any rule or maxim of the common law of this realm of England.
Your prete^sed Maxim is, who soever is borne ovvte of the realm of England,
A false maxim set forth by the adversary.
and of father and mother not being under the obedience of the king of
England, can not be capable to inheriteany thing in England, which rule is
nothing true but altogether false. For every stranger and alien is able to
purchasse the inheritance of lands within this realm, as yt may appear in
7 and 7. E. 4. fol. 28. 9. E. 4. fo. 5. 11. H. 4. fol. 25. 14. H. 4. f. 10.
9 of king Edward the fovvrthe. And also in, 11, and 14, of king Henry the
fovvrthe. And altovvghe the same purchasse is of some men accounted to be to
the use of the ki^ge: Yet until such time as the King be entitled there unto
by matter of record, the inheritance remaynethe in the alien by the opinion of
all men: And so is a very alien capable of inheritance within this realm. And
then it must needs fall ovvte plainly: that your general maxim where upon
you have talked and braged so much, is now become no rule of the common
law of this realm. And if it be so, then have you uttered very many words
to small purpose. But yet let us see farther whether there be any rule or
maxim in the common law that may seame any thing like to that rule,
Whereupon any matter may be gathered against the title of the said Marie Queen
of Scotland. There is one rule of the common law, in words somevvhat like
unto that, which has been alleged by the adversaries. Which rule is set
forth and declared by a statute made An. 25. of King Edward the third.
Which statute recitinge the dovvbte that then was, Whether infantes borne
ovvte of the allegiance of England should be able to demand any heritage
within the same allegia^ce or no? Yt was by the same statute ordained, that
all Infantes inheritours, Which after that time should be borne owte of the
allegiance of the king, whose father and mother at the time of their birthe,
were of the faith and allegiance of the king of England, should have and
enjoy the same benefittes and advantages to have and carry heritage within
the said allegiance, as other heirs should. Where upon yt is to be gathered
by dew, and just construction of the statute, and so has been heretofore
co^monlie taken, that the common law always was, and yet is, that no person
borne owte of the allegiance of the king of England, whose father and mother
were not of the same allegiance, should be able to have or demand any
heritage within the same allegiance as heir to any person. Which rule I take
to be the same supposed maxim, which the ad^saries do mean. But to stretche
yt generally to all inheritances (as the adversaries would seame to do) by
any reasonable means ca^ not be. The statute of Edward 3. anno 25. touchethe
inheritance and not purchasse.
For (as I have said before) every stranger and alien borne, may have and
take inheritance as a purchas^er. And if an alien do marry a woman
inheritable, the inheritance thereby is both in the alien, and also in his
wife: And the alien thereby a purchas^er. No man dowbteth but that a denizen
may purchasse lands to his own use, 11. H. 4. fol. 25.
but to inherit lands as heir to any person with in the allegiance of
England he can not by any means. So that yt seamethe very plain, that the
said rule bindethe also denizens, and does only extend to discentes of
inheritance, and not to the having of any lands by purchasse. Now will we
then consider, whether this rule by any reasonable co^struction can extend
unto the lady Marie the Queen of Scotland, for and concerning her title to
the crown of England. Yt has been said by the adversaries, that she was
borne in Scotland, which realm is owte of the allegiance of England, her
father and mother not being of the same allegiance. And therefore by the said
rule she is not inheritable to the crown of this realm. Althowghe I might at
the begininge very well and orderly deny the consequente of your argument:
yet for this time we will first examine the antecedente whether yt be true or
no: And then consider upon the consequen^e. That the Queen of Scotland was
borne in Scotland, Scotland is within the allegia^ce of England.
yt must needs be granted, but that Scotland is owte of the allegia^ce of
England, thowghe the said Queen of Scotland and all her subjects of
Scotland will stovvtely affirm the same: yet there are a great number of
men in England both learned and others that be not of that opinion, being
ledd and persuaded there unto by diverse histories, registers, records, and
instruments of homage remaininge in the treasury of this realm, Wherein is
mentioned that the kings of Scotland have acknowledged the king of England
to be the superior lord over the realm of Scotland, and have done homage
and fealty for the same. Which thing being true (not withdraw standinge yt
be comonlie denied by all Scotts men) then by the laws of this realm
Scotland must needs be accounted to be with in the allegiance of England.
And altowghe sins the time of king Henry the sixth, none of the kings of
Scotla^de have done the said service unto the kings of England: Yet that is
no reason in our law to say, that therefore the realm of Scotland at the
time of the birthe of the said Lady Marie Queen of Scotland, being in the
thirty and fovverthe year of the reign of our late Sovereign lord king
Henry the eight, was ovvte of the allegiance of the kings of England. For
the law of this realm is very plain, that thovvghe the tenaunte do not his
service unto the lord, yet has not the lord thereby lost his seigneurie, for
the land still remainethe within his fee and seigneurie that not with
standinge. The lord losethe not his s^igni^rie though the tena^te does not
his service.
But paraduenture some will obiecte and say, that by that reason France
should likewise be said to be with in the allegiance of England, for as
much as the possession of the crown of France has been within a little
more, then the space of one hundred years now last paste, lavvfullie vested
in the kings of England. Whose right and title still remainethe in the Queen's
majesty that now is. To that, there is a great difference between the
right and title which our Sovereign lady claimethe to the realm of France,
and the right and title which her highness claimethe to the realm of
Scotland: Althowghe yt be true, that the king of England has been
lavvfullie possessed of the crown of France, whose right and title by just
and lavvfull succession is deuolued unto our said Sovereign lady: Yet
duringe such time, as her highness by usurpation of other is dispossessed of
the said realm of France, the same realm by no means can be said to be
with in her highness allegea^ce: especially co^sideringe how that sins the
time of usurpation, the people of France have wholly forsaken their allegiance
and subjection, which they did owe unto the kings of England: And have given
and submitted them selves under the obedience and allegiance of the usurpers.
But as for the realm of Scotland yt is oterwise: For the title which our
Sovereign Lady and Queen and her progenitors have claimed unto the realm of
Scotla^de is not in the possession of the land and crown of Scotland, but
only unto the service of homage and fealty for the same. And althowghe the
kings of Scotland sith the time of king Henry the eight, have intermitted
to do the said homage and fealty to the kings of England: Yet for all that
the kings of Scotla^de can not by any reason or law be called usurpers. And
thus may ye see (gentle Reader) by the opinion of all indifferent men, and not
led by affection, that the realm of Scotland has been, and yet is, within
the allegiance and dominion of England: And so your antecedent or first
proposition false. And yet that makethe no prouf that the realm of France
likewise should now be said to be with in the allegia^ce of our Sovereign
Lady the Queen of England, by reason of the manifest and apparente difference
before sheued. But what if your antecedent were true, and that we did agree
both with the said Queen of Scotts and her subjects and also with you,
that Scotland were owte of the allegiance of England? Yet yt is very plain
that your co^sequente and conclusion can not by any means be true. The
causes why the crown ca^ not be com^sed with in the pretended maxim.
And that pri^cipallie for three causes. Whereof one is, for that neither the
ki^ge nor the crown (not being especially mentioned in the said rule or
pretended maxim) can be intended to be with in the meaning of the same
maxim, as we have before sufficiently proved by a great number of other
such like general rules and maxims of the laws. An other cause is, for that
the crwne ca^ not be taken to be with in the words of the said supposed
maxim: And that for two respects, one is by cawse the rule does only
dishable aliens to demand any heritage with in the allegiance of England,
which rule can not be stretched to the demand of the crown of England,
which is not with in the allegiance of England, but is the very allegiance yt
self: As for a like example. Yt is true that all the lands with in the
kings dominion are holden of the king either mediatlie or immediately, and
yet is yt not true that the crown (by which only the king has his
dominion) can be said to be holden of the king. For without the crown there
can be neither king nor allegiance: And so long as the crown restethe only
in demand not being vested in any person, with ovte the crownethere ca^
neither be King nor allegia^ce.
there is no allegiance at all. So that the crown can not be said by any
means to be with in the allegiance of England: And therefore not within the
words of the said rule or maxim. The title of the crown is also ovvte of
the words and meaning of the same rule in any other respect: And that is by
cause that rule does only dishable an alien to demand lands by disce^te as
heir: for yt does not exte^de unto lands purchassed by an alien, as we have
before sufficiently proved. 40. E. 3. f. 10. 13. E. 3. titlr^e 264. 16. E. 3.
iura^sde fai^e 17. E. 3. tit. Scire fac. 7
And then can not that rule extend unto the crown being a thing
incorporate, the right whereof does not desce^de accordi^ge to the common course
or private inheritance, but goethe by succession as other corporations do. No
man dowbtethe but that a prior alien being no denizen, A Deane a Person a
Priour being an alien may demand land in the right of his corporatio^
might alvvayes in time of peace demand land in the right of his
corporatio^. And so likewise a deane or a person being aliens and no
denizens, might demand lands in respect of their corporations, not with
standinge the said supposed rule or mxime, as may appear by diverse book
cases, as also by the statute made in the time of king Richard the second.
An. R. 23c. 36. E 3. fo. 21. tit droicte. 26 lib. Assis. p. 54. 12. lib. Assis.
tit. enf. 9 H. 6 fol. 33 3; H. 6. fo. 35. 5. E. 4: f. 71. 49 li. Ass. page 17
22. H. 6. fo. 31, 13. H. 8. fo. 14 7 E. 4 f. 29 9 E. 4 f. ^0
And altovvghe the crown has alvvayes gone according to the common covvrse
of a discente: Yet does yt not properly desce^de but succeed. And that is the
reason of the law, that althovvghe the King be more favored in all his
doings, then any common person shall be: Yet can not the King by law avoid
his grauntes and lettres patentes by reason of his nonage, as other Infantes
may do, but shall alvvayes be said to be of full age in respect of his The
ki^ge is alvayes at full age in respect of his crown.
crown: eauen as a person, vicare, or deane, or any other person incorporate
shall be: Which can not by any means be said in law to be with in age in
respect of their corporations, Altowghe the corporation be but one year
old. Besides that, the king ca^ not by the law avoid the lettres patentes
made by any usurper of the crown (unless yt be by act of parliamente no more
then other persons incorporate shall avoid the grauntes made by one that was
before vvrongfullie in their places and roumes. Whereas in discentes of
inheritances the law is otherwise. For there the heir may avoid all estates
made by the dissesor or abatour, or any other person whose estate is by law
defeated. Whereby yt does plainly appear that the king is incorporate unto
the crown, and has the same properly by succession, and not by discente
only. And that is likewise an other reason to prove, that the king and the
crown can neither be said to be with in the words, nor yet with in the
meani^ge of the said general rule or maxim. The third and most principal
cause of all is, for that the said statute where upon the said supposed rule
or maxim is gathered: the children discendants and descended of the blood
royal by the words of Enfa^ts du Roy, The Kings children are expresselye
excepted from the surmised maxim.
are expresseli excepted owte of the said supposed rule or maxim. Which
words the adversaries do much abuse i^ restraini^ge and co^struinge the^ to
extend but to the first degree only. whereas the same words may very well
bear a more large and ample interpretation. And that for three causes and
considerations. First by the civil law, this word Liberi (which the
words Enfants being the usual and original words of the statute written
in the French tongue counteruaileth) does comprehend by proper and peculier
signification not only the children of the first degree, L. liberoru^ de
verborum signific. ff.
but other discendants also In the law saying, that he who is manumissed or
made free shall not commence any action against the children of the patron or
manumissor vvithovvte license, L. sed and si ff. de in Ius voca^do instit. de
heredibus ab intest.
not only the first degree, but the other also is contained. The like is when
the law of the twelve tables sayethe: The first place and room of
succession after the death of the parents that dye intestate, is due to the
children, which succession apperteinethe as well to degrees removed as to
the first. L. lucius ff. de heredi. Instit. l. iusta et l. natoru^ and l.
liberoru^de verbor. signify.
Yea in all causes favorable (as ovvrs is) this word Son Filius:
conteinethe the nephevve, thowghe not by the property of the voice or speech,
yet by interpretation admittable, in all such things as the law disposethe
of. As tovvchinge this word Ensans in French we say that yt reachethe to
other descendants, L. 2.. Si matter ad S. C. Tertu. l. filius ad S. C.
as well as to the first degree. Wherein I do refer me to such as be
expert in the said tongue. We have no one word (for the barenes of Enfants
in franche cou^teruailethe this word liberi in laten.
our english tongue) to counterpaise the said french word Enfans, Maced. l.
senate de ritu nupt. l. quod si nepotes ff. de test. tutel cu^ nota^is ibidem.
or the laten word Liberi. Therefore do we supply yt as well as we may by
this word children. The Spaniardes also use this word Infa^tes in this ample
sort when they call the next heir to the heir apparente the infant of
Spain: Eaven as the late deceased lord Charles of Austriche was called, his
father and grandfather then livinge. If then the original word of the statute
declaringe the said rule, may naturally and properly appertine to all the
descendants, why should we strain and bind yt to the first degree only,
otherwise then the nature of the word or reason will bear? For I suppose
verelie, that yt will be very hard for the adversary to geave any good and
substanciall reason, d. l. liberorum.
why to make a diversity in the cases. But towchynge the contrary, there are
good and probable considerations which shall serve us for the second cause.
As for that the grandfathers call their nephews The grandfathers call their
nephevves sonnes^
as by a more pleasante plausible name not only their children but their
sons also, and for that the son being deceased (the grand father
surviuinge) not only the grand fathers affection, but also the such right
title and intereste that the son has by the law, and by proximitie of
bloudde, grow and draw all to L. Gallus. instituens ff. de libert. and post l
fi C. d. impub. and alijs subst. cap. ia^ 1. q. 4. The father and son are
co^pted in person and flesh inmanicre one.
the nephewe, Who representethe and suppliethe the fathers place, the father
and the son being compted in parson and in flesh in manier but as one: Why
shall then the bare and naked consideration of the external and accidental
place of the birthe only sever and sonder such an entire, inward and
natural conjunction? Add there unto the many and great absurdities that may
hereof spring and ensewe. The great absur litie that might follow in
excludi^ge the tr^we and right successor for the place of his birthe only.
Diverse of the kings of this realm, as well before the time of king Edward
the third (in wose time this statute was made) as after him, gave their
dawghters owte to foreign, and some times to mean Princes in marriage, which
they would never so often times have done, if they had thowght, that while
they went abowte to set forth and advance their issewe, their doings
should have tended to the disheritynge of them from so great, large, and
noble a Realm as this is: Which might have chanced if the dawghter having a
son or dawghter had died, her father liui^ge. For there should this supposed
maxim have been a bar to their children, to succedde their grand father.
This absurdity would have been more notable, if yt had cha^^ced abowte the
time of king Henry the second, or this king Edward, or king Henry the
first and sixth, when the possessions of the crown of this realm were so
amply enlarged in other contreyes beyond the seas. And yet never so notable,
as yt might have been hereafter in our fresh memory and remembrance, if any
such thing had chanced (as by possibility yt might have chanced) by the
late marriage of king Philippe and Queen Marie. For Admittinge their dawghter
married to a Foreign Prince should have died before them, she leauinge a son
survivinge his father and grand mother, they having none other issewe so nighe
in degree, then would this late framed maxim have excluded the same son
lame^tablie and unnaturally, from the succession of the crown of England,
and also the same crown from the inheritance of the realms of Spain, of both
Sicilies, with their appourtenances, of the Dukedom of Millaine and other
lands and dominions in Lumbardie and Italy, as also from the Dukedomes of
Brabante, Luxembourge, Geldres, Zutphan, Burgundye, Friselande, from the
contreyes of Flaunders, Arthois, Hollande, Zelande, and Namours, and from the
new fownde lands, parcel of the said kingdom of Spain. Which are
(unless I be deceived) more ample by doble or treble, then all the contreyes
now rehearsed. All the which contreyes by the foresaid marriage should have
been by all right deuolued to the said son, if any such child had been
borne. If either the same by the force of this iolie new found maxim had
been excluded from the crown of England: or the said crown from the
inheritance of the fore said contreyes: Were there any reason to be yielded for
the maintenance of this supposed rule or maxim in that case? Or might there
possibly rise any commodity to the realm by obseruinge there in this
rigorouse p^tensed rule, that should by one hundred perte counteruaile this
importable loss and spoil of the crown, and of the lawful inheritour of the
same? But perchance for the auoidinge of this exception limited unto the blood
royal: some will say that the same was but a privilege granted to the kings
children not in respect of the succession of the crown, but of other lands
An evasion avoided prete^dinge the privilege of the kings children not to be
in respect of the crown but of other lands.
descendinge to them from their Auncettours. Which altowghe we might very
well admit and allow: yet can yt not be denied, but that the same privilege
was granted unto the kings children and other descendants of the bloudd
royal by reason of the dignity and worthiness of the crown, which the king
their father did enjoy, And the great reverence which the law geuethe of
dewtie thereunto: And therefore if ye would go abowte to restrain and with
draw from the crown the privilege which the law geuethe to the kings
children for the crowns sake: ye should do therein contrary to all reason,
and against the rules of the arre of reasoninge which saiethe that propter quod
vnu^quodque and illud magis. Propter quod vnu^ quodque and illud magis.
Beside that, I would feign know by what reason might a man say, that they of
the kings bloudd borne owte of the allegiance of England, may inherit
lands with in this realm as heirs unto their Auncetours, not being able to
inherit the crown. Trewelie in mine opinion yt were against all reason. But
on the contrary side the very force of reason must drive us to grant the
like: Yea more great and ample privilege and benefitt of the law in the
succession of the crown. For the royal blood where soever yt be fownde, The
royal blood bearethe his honor with yt, wheresoever yt be.
will be taken as a praecious and singular Jewel, and will carrye with yt, his
worthy estimation and honor with the people, and where yt is dew his right
with all. By the civil law the right of the inheritance of private persons,
is hemmed and ynched with in the ba^des of the tenthe degree. Vide Ant.
Corsetu^ de potest. and excel. regia q. 106
The blood royal ronnethe a farther race, and so farther race, and so far
as yt may be fownde, where with the great and mighty co^querers are glad
and feign to join with all, ever fearinge the weakness of their bloody
sword, Co^querers glad to ioynewith the royal blood.
in respect of the great strength and force of the same. For this cause was
Henry the first, called for his learning and wisdom Beauclerke, glad to
consociate and cupple him self with the Ancient royal blood of the Saxones,
Henry the first.
which co^tinewinge in the princely succession from worthy king Alured, was
cut of by the death of the good king Edward. And by the marienge of
Mathildis being in the fowrthe degree in linia^l discente to the said king
Edward, Was revived and reunited. From this Edward the Queen of Scotts (as
we have before showed) takethe her noble anciente petigrevve. These then and
diverse other reasons and causes moo, may be alleged for the vvaye^ge and
setti^ge forth of the true meani^ge and inte^te of the said l. we. Now
in case these two causes and co^sideratio^s will not satisfy the adversary,
We will adioyne there unto a third: Whi^he he shall never by any good and
honest shifte avoid, And that is the use and practice of the realm, as well
in the time foregoinge the said statute, as after ward We stand upon the
interpretation of the common law recited and declared by the said statute.
And how shall we better understand what the law is therein, l. fi ff. de
le.
the^ by the use and practice of the said law. Common use and practice the
best interpretation of the law.
For the best interp^tatio^ of the law is custom. But the realm before this
statute admitted to the crown not only kings children and others of the
first degree, but also of a farther degree. And such as were plainly borne
ovvte of the kings allegia^ce. The foresaid use and practice appearethe^.
Eode^ Anno Rex cu^ in diebus suis processiss^^ Aeldredu^ Vigornie^sem Ep^um ad
regem Hungar. tra^smitte^s, reuocauit inde filiu^ f^is sui Edmu^di, Edvvardum,
cu^ tota familia sua vt vel ^pse vel filij eius sibi succederent in regnum.
Flor. ^ist. An. 1057* Flor. hist. 1066.
vell before as since the time me of the conqueste. Among other, king
Edward the confessor being destitute of a lavvfull heir with in this
realm, sent i^to Hu^garie for Edward his nepheve surnamed Owtlavve, son to
king Edmunde called Iro^side, after many years of his exile to return into
England, to the intent the said Ovvtlavve should inherit this realm;
which nevertheless came not to effect, by reason the said Ovvtlavve died
before the said king Edward his uncle. After whose death the said king
appointed Eadger Etheli^ge son of the said Ovvtlavve, bei^ge his next cosen
and heir, as he was of right, to the crown of England. And for that the
said Eadgar, was then but of yo^ge and render years, and not able to take
upon him so great a gouernemente, the said king committed the protection
asvvell of the young Prince, as also of the realm to Harold Earl of kente,
until such time as the said Eadger had obtained perfect age to be able to
Weilde the state of a king. Aelred. Rhievale^s. de regib.
Which Harolde nevertheless contrary to the trust, suppla^ted the said
yo^ge Prince of the kingdom, Anglor. ad regem Henr. 2.
and putt the crovne upon his owe head. By this yt is apparante that foreign
birthe was not accounted of before the time of the co^queste, a just cause to
repel and reiecte any man, being of the next proximitie in blood from the
title of the crown. And thowghe the said king Edward the confessors will
and purpose took not such force and effect as he desidered, and the law
craved, yet the like succession took place effectuouslie in king Stephen and
king Henry the second, King Stephen and k. H. 2.
as we have alredie declared. Neither will the adversaries shifte of forriners
borne of father and mother which be not of the kings allegiance, help him:
For as much as this clawse of the said statute is not to be applied to the
kings children, The ad^er saries seamed by imagination that king Henry the 2
shouldecome to the crown by compositio^ and not by proximitie of bloud^.
but to others, as appearethe in the same statute. And these two kings
Stephen, and Henry the second, as they were borne in a foreign place, so
their fathers and mothers were not of the kings allegiance, but mere aliens
and strangers. And how fond, notoriouse a vain thing yt is, that the
adversary would persuade us, that the said king Henry the second rather
came in by force of a composition, then by the proximitie and nearenes of
blood: I leave yt to every man to consider that has any manner of fealinge
in the discourse of the stories of this realm: The composition did procure him
quietness and rest for the time, with a good and suer hope of quiet and
peaceable entrance also after the death of king Stephen: And so yt follovved
in Rex Stepha nus cu^ here^^ viduatusp^ter solummodo duce^ Henricu^ recog^ouit
in co^ue^tu ^piscopo^u^, and alioru^ de regno optimatu^, quod dux He^. ius
hereditariu^ in regnu^ Angliae habebat, and dux benign conc^ssit, vt Rex
Stephanus tota vita sua suu^regnu^ pacifice possideret. ^ta tame^ co^firmatu^
est pactu^ quoth ipse rex and ipsi tune p^se^tes cu^ caeterisregni optimatibus
iurare^t, quoth dux H. post morte^ regis (...) superuiueret reguu^ fine aliqua
contradictione obtineret.
deed, but there grevve to him no more right thereby the^ was due to him
before, for he was the true heir to the crown, as appearethe by Stephen his
adversaries own confession. Henry the first married his davvghter Mathildie
to Henry the Emperor, by whom he had no children: And no dovvbte in case she
had any children by the Emperor, they shoud have been heirs by succession to
the crown of England. After whose death she returned to her father, yet
did king Henry cause all the nobility by an express oath to embrace her
after his death as Queen, olid.
and after her, her children. Not long after she was Married to Geffrey
Plantagenet a Frencheman borne, Earl of Anievve, who begart of her this Henry
the second being in France. Where upon the said king did revive and renevve
the like oath of allegea^ce asvvell to her as to her son after her. With the
like false persvvasion the adversary abusethe him The like fo^de imagination
to vvchynge^k. Rich. hu nephewe
self and his Reader towchinge Arthur Duke of Britanie, nephewe to king
Richard the first. As thowghe for sowthe he were justly excluded by king
John^ his uncle by cause he was a forrainer borne. Flores historiarum. an 1153.
If he had said that he was excluded by reason the uncle owght to be preferred
before the nephevve: thovvghe yt should have been a false allegation and
plain against the rules of the laws of this realm (as may well appear
among other things by king Richard the second who succeeded his grandfather
king Edward the third, which Richard had di^ers worthy and noble uncles,
who neither for lack of knowledge could be ignora^te of their right,
Diversity of opinions towchinge the uncle and nephewe whether of them ovvght
to be preferred in the royal government.
neither for lack of Friends, cowrage, and power, be enforced to forbear to
challenge their title and intereste) yet should he have had some countenance
of reason and probabilitye, by cause many arguments, and the authority of
many learned and notable ciuilia^s do co^curre for the uncles right before the
nephewe. But to make the place, of the nativity of an inheritour to a kingdom
a sufficient bar against the right of his blood, Polid.
yt seameth to have but a weak and slender hold and grovvnde: And in our case
yt is a most unsure and false grownde, saying yt is most true that king
Richard the first (as vwe have said) declared the said Arthur borne in
Britanye, and not son of a king, but his brother Geffreys son Duke of
Britanye heir apparente, Flores his. an. 1190.
his uncle John^ yet living, and for such a one is he taken in all our
stories, and for such a one did all the world take him after the said king
Richard his death. Neither was king John^ taken for other, then for an
usurper, by excludinge him, The possessions of the crown of ^nglands that were
beyo^de the seas seized into the French ki^gs hands for the murder of Arthur.
and afterward for a murderer for imprisoninge him, and priuelie making him
away. For the which fact the French king seized upon all the goodly
contreies in France belonginge to the king of England, as forfeited to him
being the chief lord. By this ovvtragiouse deed of king John^ we lost
Normandy with all, and our possibility to the inheritance of all Britanie,
the right and title to the said Britanie being dew to the said Arthur and
his heirs, by the right of his mother Constance. And thovvghe the said king
John^ by the practice and ambition of Queen Elenour his mother, and by the
special procuremente of Huberte then Archbusshoppe of Caunterburie, and of
some other factious persons in England, preven tid the said Arthur his
nephewe (as yt was easy for him to do, havinge gotten into his hands all his
brother Richardes treasure, besides many other rentes then in England, And the
said Arthur being an enfante, and remayninge beyond the sea in the custody
of the said Constance) Yet of this fact, being against all justice, as well
the said Archebusshoppe, as also many of the other, did after most
earnestly repent, consideringe the crewell and the unjust puttinge to death
of the said Arthur procured, Polid. lib. 15. Flor. histor. an. 1208.
and after some authors, comytted, by the said John^ him self: which most
foul and shameful act the said John^ neaded not to have committed, if by
foreign birthe the said Arthur had been barred to inherit the crown of
England. And much less to have imprisoned that most innocente lady Elenour
Sister to the said Ar^hur in Bristowe castle, where she miserably ended her
life. If that ga^e Maxim would have served to have excluded these two
children, by cawse theye were strangers borne in the parteis beyond the seas.
Yea yt appearethe in other doings also of the said time, and by the story of
the said John^, that the birthe owte of the legeance of England by father and
mother foreign, was not taken for a sufficient repulse and reiection to the
right and title of the crown. For the Barons of England being then at
dissension with the said king John^, and renowncinge their allegiance to him,
received Jews the eldeste Son of Phillippe the french king, to be their
king in the right of Blanch his wife, which was a stranger borne, Albeit the
lawfullnece of the said Richard, and dawghter to Alpho^s king of castill,
begotten on the body of Elenour his wife one of the dawghters of king Henrye
the second, and sister to the said king Richard and king John^. Which
story I allege only to this purpose, thereby to gather the opinion of the
time Jews the fra^che kings son claimed the crovne of this realm i^ the
title of his wife.
that foreign birthe was then thowght no bar in the title of the crown. For
otherwise how could Jews of France Pro here ditatevxoris i^re scilicet
neptis Reg Io. vsque ^d mortem (...) necessitas exigeret decertab^
pretend title to the crown in the right of the said Blanch his wife being
borne in Spain. These examples are sufficie^te I suppose, to satisfy and
content any man that is not obstinately vvedded to his own fond fantasies
and froward friuoulous imaginations, Flores histo. An. 1216.
or otherwise worse dep^aued for a good suer and substanciall interp^tation of
the common law. And yt were not altogether from the purpose here to consider
and weighe, with what and how greauouse plagues this realm has been often
afflicted and scowrged by reason of wro^gfull and usurped titles. I will not
revive by odiouse rehearshall the greatness and number of the same plagues,
as well otherwise, as especially by the contention of the noble howses and
famelies of york and La^caster* Saying yt is so fortunately and almost with
in ma^s remembrance exti^ct^ and buried. Haroldus muneribus and genore fretus
regni diadema inuasit. He^r. Hunt. hist^. Angliae. li. 6.
I will now putt the gentle Reader in remembrance of those only with whose
vsurpinge titles we are now p^sentlie in hand. And to begi^ne with the most
ancient, Cui regnum iure hereditario, debebatur. Ealredus Rieuall. in hist. R.
Angl. ad H. 2.
what became I pray you of Harolde that by briberie and help of his ki^red
usurped the crown against the foresaid young Eadgar (as I have said) and as
the old monume^rs of our historiopraphers do plainly testify, was the true
and lawful h^ire. Cui de iure debebat^ regnu^ Anglo ru^. Io. ^od. in chronic.
Angliae.
Could he think you enjoy his ambitiouse and nawghtie vsurpinge one whole
and e^tier year? No suerlie ear the first year of his usurped reign turned
about, he was spoiled and turned out both of crovne and Rex Edvvardus misit
etc. Vt vel^p^e Edvvardus vel filiae e^us sibi succedere^t etc. Rich. Cicest.
vid vvil. Malmesb. de regi. Ang. l. 2. c. 45. l. 3. cap. 5.
his lief with all. Fade^ verba sunt in Mat. vvestmo. 1^ flor. hist An^o. 1066.
Yea his vsurpatio^ occasio^ed the co^queste of the whole realm by william
Duke of Norma^die bastard Son to Roberte the sixte duke of the same. And
may we think all saufe and sownde now from like danger, if we should
tread the said vvro^ge steps withdraw Harolde, forsakinge the right and high
way of law and justice? What shall I now speak of the crevvell and civil
vvarres between king Stephen and king He^rie the second, Which vvarres rose
by reason the said Henry was unjustly kept from the crovne deve to his
mother mavvde, and to him afterward. The petifull reign of the said John^
who does not lamente with the lamentable loss of Normandy, Aquitanie, and
the possibility of the Dukedom of Britanie, What cala mities fell to this
real me by the vsurpi^g of king Harrold K. Stephen and John^.
and with the loss of our other goodly possessions in France? Whereof the
crown of England was robbed and spoiled by the unlawful vsurpinge of him
against his nephevve Arthur. Well, let us leave theys greauouse and loathsome
remembrances, and let us yet seake if we may find any later interpretation
either of the said statute, or rather of the common law for our purpose. And
loa the great goodness and providence of God, who has (if the foresaid
examples would not serve) provided a later, but so good, so sure, so apt and
mete interpretation for our cause, as any reasonable heart may desire. The
interpretation directly tovvchethe our case, which I mean by the marriage of
the Lady Margaret eldest davvghter to king He^rie the seave^the, unto James
the fowrthe, king of Scotland, and by the opinion of the said most prudente
Prince in bestowinge his said dawghter into Scotland: A matter sufficient
inoughe to overthrow all those cauellinge inventions of the adversary. For
what time king James the fowerth sen^e his ambassador to king Henry the
seauenthe to obtain his good will to espouse the said Lady Margaret, Polid.
26.
there were of his counsel not ignorante of the laws and customs of the
realm, King H. with his cownsaile is a good interp^tour of our present cause.
that did not well like upon the said marriage, saying yt might so fall
ovvte, that the right and title of the crown might be deuolued to the Lady
Margaret and her children: And the realm thereby might be subject to
Scotland. To the which the prudente and wise king ansvvered, that in case
any such deuolution should happen, yt would be nothing prejudicial to
England: For England as the chief and principal and worthieste part of the
Isle, should draw Scot land to yt, as yt did Normandy from the time of the
co^queste: which answer was vvonderfullie well liked of all the counsel.
And so co^sequentlie the marriage took effect, as appearethe by Polidor the
historiogropher of this realm: And such a one as vvrote the acts of the time
by the instruction of the king him self. I say the^ the wise worthy Salomo^
foreseinge that such deuolutio^ might happen, was an interpretatour with his
prudent and sage consayle for our cause, for eles they neaded not to reason of
any such subjection to Scotland. If the children of the Lady Margaret might
not lavvfullie inherit the crown of England: For as to her husband we
could not be subject, having him self no right by this marriage to the title
of the crown of this realm. Where upon I may well infer that the said
nevve maxim of these men (whereby they would rule and over rule the succession
of Princes) was not known to the said wise king, neither to any of his
counsel: Or if yt were, yet was yt taken not to reach to his bloudd royal
borne in Scotland. And so on every side the title of Queen Marye is assuerid:
So that now by this that we have said, yt may easelie be seen, by what light
and ^klender consideration, the adversary has gone abowte to strain the
words, Enfants or children to the first degree only. Of the like weight is his
other consideration, imageninge and surmisinge this statute to be made by cawse
the king had so many occasions to be so often over the sea with his spowse
the Queen. As thowghe diverse kings before him used not often to pass over the
seas? As thowghe this were a personal statute made of special purpose, and
not to be taken as a declaration of the common law: Which to say is most
directly repugna^te and contrarious to the letter of the said statute: Or as
thowghe his children also did not very often repair to owterwarde contreies,
as John^ of Gawnte Duke of Lancaster, Polid Polychr, Froserd.
that Married Peter's the king of castilles eldest dawghter, by whose right he
claimed the crovne of castill, as his brother Edmunde, The marriages of k. E. 3.
sons.
Earl of camebridge that married the yongeste dawghter, as lionell Duke of
clarence that married at Millain Violane Dawghter and heir to Galiatius Duke of
Millan, But especially Prince Edward which most victoriously took in
battle John^ the French king, and browght him into England his prisoner to
the great triumph and reioicinge of the realm, whose eldest son Edward
that died in short time after, was borne beyond the seas in Gascoigne, and
his other son Richard that succeeded his grandfather was borne at Burdeauxe.
As these noble king Edwardes sons Married with forrainers: So did theye
give ovvte their dawghters in Marriage to foreign Princes. As the Duke of
Lancaster his dawghter Philippe to the king of Portingale, and his dawghter
Katherin to the King of Spain, And his nece Ioha^ dawghter to his son Earl
of Somersett was joined in marriage to the King of Scotts, Ioha^ dawghter to
his brother The mas of Wodstocke Duke of Glo^cester was Queen of Spain, And
his other dawghter Marie Duches of Bretaigne. Now by this man's interpretation
none of the issewe of all these noble women, could have enjoyed the crown of
England, when yt had fallen to them (thowghe they had been of the neareste
royal bloudd) after the death of their Auncesters. Which suerlie had been
against the auncient^ presidentes and examples that we have declared, and
against the common law, The which must not be thowght by this statute any
thing taken away, but only declared, and against all good reason also. For
as we would have thowght this realm greatly injured if yt had been defrawded
of Spain or any of the foresaid contreies, being devolued to the same by the
foresaid marriages, As we think our self at this day injured for the with
holdinge of France: so the issewe of the foresaid noble women might and would
have thowght them hardly and injuriously handled, if any such case had
happened. Neither such frivelouse interpretation and gloses, as this man now
framethe and makethe upon the statute, Would then have served, nor now will
serve. But of all other his frivelouse and folishe ghessinge upon the cause of
the statute for Enfans du Roy, A fo^de imagination of the ad^sarie of the
statute 25. ^. 3.
there ^s one most fo^de of all, for he would make us beleave, such is the
ma^s skyll, that this statute towchinge Enfants du Roy, was made for the great
bowbte more in them then in other persons tovvchinge their inheritance to
their Auncesters. For being then a maxim (says he) in the law, that none
could inherit to his Auncesters, being not of father and mother under the
obedience of the king: saying the king him self could not be under the
obedience, yt plainly seamed that the kings children were of far worse
condition then others, and quite excluded. And therefore he sayethe that this
statute was not to give them any other privilege, but to make the^ equal
with other. And that therefore this statute tovvchinge the kings children, is
rather in the superficial part of the word then in effect. Now among
other things he saiethe (as we have shevved before) that this word Enfants
du Roy in this statute mentioned, must be taken for the children of the first
degree, Which he seamethe to prove by an note taken ovvte of maistre Rastall.
There was no dovbte made off the kings children borne beyond the seas.
But to this we answer that this man svvetly dreamed, when he imagined this
fond and fantastical exposition: And that he shevvethe him self a very
Infant in law and reason: For this was no Maxim, or at least not so
certain before the making of this statute, which geauethe no nevve right to
the kings children, nor answerethe any dowbte towchinge them and their
inheritance: But saiethe that the law of the crown of England is and
always has been, which law sayethe the king, say the lords, say the
commons, we allow and affirm for ever, that the kings children shall be hable
to inherit the lands of their Auncesters, where so ever they be borne. All
the dovvbte was for other persons, as appearethe euide^tlie by the tenor of
the Statute, whether by the common law (they being borne ovvte of the
allegea^ce) where heritable to their Auncesters. And yt appearethe that the
adversary is driven to the hard wall, when he is feign to catch hold upon
a felye poor marginall note of Maistre Rastall, of the kings children, and
not of the kings childres children. Which yet nothing at all seruethe his
purpose towchinge this Statute. But he or the printer, or who soever he be, As
he draws ovvte of the text many other notes of the matter therein
comprised: So upon these french words Les Enfants du Roy, he notes in the
margente the kings children: But how far that word reachethe he sayethe
neither more nor less: Neither yt is any thing prejudicial to the said
Queen's right or title. Whether the said words Infantes owght to be taken
stritkelie for the first degree, or farther enlarged. For if this statute
towchethe only the succession of the kings children to their Auncesters for
other inheritance, and not for the crown (as most men take yt) and as yt may
be as we have said very well taken and allowed. Then does this supposed
Maxim of foreign borne, that seameth to be gathered owte of this statute
nothing anoye or hinder the Queen of Scotts title to the crown, as not there
to apperteininge. On the other side if by the inheritance of the kings
children, the crown also is me^te, yet neither may we e^force the rule of
foreign borne, upon the kings children, Which are by the express words i^
the Statute excepted: Neither i^force the word Enfa^s to the first degree
only; This statute towchethe not the Quen^ of Scotts as one not borne beyond
the seas.
For such reasons, preside^tes, and examples, and other prouffes largely by us
before set forth to the contrary. Sei^g that the right of the crovne fallinge
upon them, they may well be called the kiges children, or at least children
of the crown. There is also one other cause why, though this Statute reach
to the crown, and may and owght to be exded of the same, the said Queen is
owte of the reach and compass of the said statute. For the said statute can
not be understood of any persons borne in Scotla^de or wales, but only of
persons borne beyo^de the sea owte of the allegiance of the king of England:
That is to wit France, Flawnders and such like: For England, Scotla^de, and
wales be all within one territory, and not divided by any sea. And all old
records of the law concerning service to be done i^ those two contreyes,
have theys words Infra quatu^r maria, within the four seas, which must needs
be understand in Scotland and wales, asvvell as in England, by cavvse they
be all with in one continente, compassed withdraw four seas. And likewise be
many Anciente statutes of this realm written in the Norman french, Which
have these words Deins lez quatre mers, that is within the four seas. Now
concerning this statute, the title of the same is, of those that are borne
beyo^de the sea, the dowbte moved in the corpse of the said Statute, is also of
children borne beyond the sea owte of the allegiance, with diverse other
branches of the Statute tendinge that way. Whereby yt seamethe that no part
of the Statute tovchethe these that are borne in wales or Scotland. Vide
statuta vvallie in magna carta.
And albeyt at this time, and before in the reign of Edward the first,
Wales was under the allegea^ce of England before yt was united to the
cr^nve.
wales was fully reduced, anexed, and united to the proper dominion of
England: yet was yt before subjected to the crown and king of England, as
to the lord and Seignour, as well as Scotland. Wherefore if this Statute had
been made before the time of the said Edward the first, yt seamethe that yt
could not have been stretched to wales, no more then yt can now to Scotland.
I do not therefore a litke marvel, that ever this man for pure shame could
find in his heart so childishelie to wrangle upon this word Enfants, and so
openly to detorte, deprave, and corrupt the common law and the acts of
parliamente. And thus may you see, gentle Reader, that nothing can be
gathered either ovvte of the said supposed general rule or Maxim, or of any
other rule or principle of the law, that by any good and reasonable
construction can seame to impugn the title of the said Lady Marye now Queen
of Scotts, of and to the crown of this realm of England, as is aforesaid.
We are therefore now last of all to consider, Whether there be any statute or
act of parliamente, that does seame either to take away or prejudice the
title of the said Lady Marie. And by cause tovchinge the foresaid mentionedd
Statute of the 25. year of king Edward the third, being only a
declaration of the common law, we have alredie sufficie^tlie answered* We
will pass yt over, and consider upon the Statute of 28. and 36. of king Henry
the eight, being the only shoteanker of all the adversaries, Whether there be
any matter therein contained or dependinge upon the same, that can by any
means destroy^ or hurt the title of the said Lady Marie Queen of Scotland
to the succession of the crown of England. The statutes of ki^ge H. 8.
towchinge the succession of the crown.
Yt does appear by the said Statute of 28. of king He^rie the eight, that
there was a^cthorie geaven him by the same to declare, limitte, appointe, and
assign the succession of the crown by his lettres patentes, or by his last
will signed with his own hand. Yt appearethe also by the foresaid Statute
made 35. of the said king, that yt was by the same enacted, that the crown
of this realm should go and be to the said king and to the heirs of his
body lawfully begotten, that is to say, unto his hyghnes first son of his
body between him and the Lady Jane then his wife, begotten: and for defaulte
of such issewe, then unto the Lady Marie his dawghter, and to the heirs of
her body lawfully begotten. And for defaulte of such issewe, the^ unto the
Lady Elizabeth his dawghter our Sovereign Lady the Queen's Majesty that now
is, and to the heirs of her Majesty's Body Lawfully begotten. And for
defaulte of such issewe, unto such person or persons in remaynder or
reversio^, as should please our late Sovereigne Lord king Henry the eight,
and according to such estate, and after such manner, order, and condition,
as should be expressed, declared, named and limited in his highness lettres
patentes, or by his last will in writing, seigned with his own hand. By
virtue of which said act of parliamente the adversaries do allege, that the
said late ki^ge He^rie the eight afterward by his last will in writi^ge
signed with his own hand, did ordain and appointe, that if yt happen the
said Prince Edward, Lady Marye, and Lady Elizabethe to dye withowte issewe
of their bodies lavvfullie begotten, then the crown of this realm of
England, should goo and remain unto the heirs of the body of the Lady
Fraunces his nece, and the eldeste davvghter of the Franche Queen. And for
defaulte of such issevve to the heirs of the body of the Lady Elenour his
niece second dawghter to the French Queen lavvfullie begotten. And if yt
happened the said Lady Elenour to die withovvte issevve of her body
lawfully begotten, to remain and come to the next rightful heirs. Where upon
the aduesaries do infer, that the succession of the crown ovvght to goo to
the children of the said Lady Frances, and to their heirs according to the
said supposed will of our late Sovereign Lord king Henry the eight: And
not unto the Lady Marie Queen of Scotts that now is. ^n a^swere to the
fore^ide statutes.
To this yt is on the behalf of the said Lady Marie Queen of Scotland among
other things asvvered, that king Henry the eight never signed the pretensed
will with his own hand: And that therefore the said will can not be any
whitte p^iudiciall to the said Queen. Against which answer for the defense
and vpholdinge of the said will, yt is replied by the adversaries, First
that there were diverse copies of his will fovvnde signed with his own hand,
The effect of the adversaries Arguments for the exclusion of the Q. of Scots
by a p^tensed will of kin. H. 8.
or at the least wise enterlined, and some for the most perte vvritte^ with
his own hand: Owte of the which yt is likely that the original will
co^monlie called king Henry the eightes will was taken, and fayer drawn
owte. Then that there be great and veheme^te presumptions, that for the
fatherly love that he bare to the common wealth, and for the auoidinge of
the uncertainty of the succession, he well liked upon and accepted the
authority geauen him by parliament, and signed with his own hand the said
original will, which had the said limitation and assignatio^ of the crown.
And these presumptions are the more enforced, for that he had no cause why he
should bear any affection either to the said Queen of Scotla^de, or to the
Lady Lenneux: And having with all no cause to be greaued or offended withdraw
his sisters the french Queen's children, But to putt the matter quite owte of
all ambiguitie and dowbte. Yt appear the (they say) that there were eleven
witnesses purposelie calledd by the king, Who were present at the signinge of
the said will, and subscribed their names to the same. Yea the chief lords
of the counsel were made and appointed executours of the said will: And they
and other had great legaties geaue^ the^ in the said will, which were
paid, and other things comprised in the will acco^plisshed accordingly.
There passed also purchases and lettres pate^tes between king Edward and the
executours of the said will and others, for the execution and performance of
the same. Finally the said testamente was recorded in the chauncerie.
Wherefore they affirm that there owght no manner of dowbte move any man to the
contrary. And that either we must grant this will to be signed with his
hand, or that he made no will at all: Both must be granted, or both
denied. If any will deny yt in case he be one of the vvitnesses, he shall
impugn his own testimony: If he be one of the executours, he shall overthrow
the fowndation of all his doings, in procuringe the said will to be enrolled,
and set forth under the great seal. And so by their dubblenes they shall
make the^ selves no mete witnesses. Now a man can not ligthlie imagine how any
other besides these two ki^des of witnesses (for some of the^, and of the
executours were such as were continually waytinge upon the kings person) may
impugn this will, and prove that the king did not sign the same, but if any
such impugn the said will, Yt would be considered how many they are, and
what their are: And yt will be very hard to prove Negatiuam facto. But yt is
euide^te say theye, that there was never any such lawful prouffe against
the said will producted. For if yt had been, yt would have been publisshed in
the star chamber, preached at Pawles cross, declared by act of parliamente,
proclaimed in every quarter of the realm. Yea admittinge say they, that yt
were proved that the said pretensed will lacked the kings hand, yet
nevertheless say they, the very copies we have spoken of, being written and
signed, or at least interlined with his own hand, may be said a
sufficient signinge with his own hand. For saying the scope and final
purpose of the statute was, to have the succession provided for, and
asserteined, which is sufficiently done in the said will: And saying his
own hand was required, but only for eschevvinge evil and sinister
dealinge, vvherof there is no suspicion in this will to be gathered: What
matter in the world, or what difference is there, When the king fulfilled
and accomplished this gracious act; that was looked for at his hands, Whether
he signed the will with his own hand or no. If yt be objected that the
king was obliged and bovvnde to a certain precise order and form, which he
could in no wise shifte, but that the act without yt must perish, and be
of no valewe, Then say they, we undo whole perliame^tes, asvvell in Queen
Mary's time, as in king Henry the eightes time. In Queen Mary's time by cawse
she omitted the style appointed by parliamente Anno Henrici octaui tricefim^
quinto. Ann. H. 8. 35.
In king Henry's time by reason there was a Statute that the kings will
abse^te may be geaven to an act of parliament by his lettres pate^tes signed
with his hand, Ann. H. 8. 33. 21.
thowghe he be not there personally. And yet did the said king supply full
often his consent by the stamp only. This yet not with standinge, the said
parliamentes for the omission of forms so exactelie and precisely appointed,
An answer by the way of reioynder to the same.
are not distroied and disanulled. After this sort in effect, Have the
adversaries replied for the defense of the said pretensed will. To this we
will make our reioynder, and say, First that our principal matter is not to
join an issewe, whether the said king made and ordained any sufficient will
or no, We leave that to an other time: But whether he made any testamente in
such order and form as the statute require the. Wherefore if yt be defective
in the said form, as we affirm yt to be, were yt otherwise never so good and
perfect, thowghe yt were exemplified by the great seal, and recorded in the
chauncerie, and taken co^monlie for his will and so accomplished, yt is
nothing to the principal question. Yt rests then for us to consider the
weight of the adversaries presumptions, whereby they would enforce a
probability, that the testamente had the foresaid requisite form: yet first
yt is to be considered, what presumptions and of what force and number do
occur to avoid and frustrate the adversaries presumptions, and all other
like. We say then there occur many likelihoddes, Diverse p^sumptions and
reasons against the supposed will.
many presumptions, many great and weighty reasons to make us to think,
that as the king never had good and just cause to mind and entreprise such
an act as is pretended: So likewise he did entreprise no such act in deed.
I deny not, but that their was such authority geaue^ him, neither deny but
that he might also in some honorable sort have practiced the same to the
honor and welthe of the realm, and to the good co^te^tatio^ of the same
realm. But that he had either cause or did exercise the said authority in
such strange and dishonorable sort, as is p^te^ded, I plainly deny. For
being at the time of this p^tensed will furniss^ed and adorned with issewe our
late ki^ge Edward, and lady Marie late Queen, and with our graciouse
sovereign Elizabeth, their state and succession being also lately by act
of perlame^te established, what need or likelyhode was there for the king the^
to practice such new devises, as never did (I suppose) any king in the realm
before, and few in any other beside. And where they were practiced commonly
had unfortunate and lamentable success. What likeliehodd was there for him to
practice such devises, especially in his later days when wisdom, the love
of God, and his realm should have been most ripe in him? That were likely to
stir up a greater fire of greauouse contention and woeful destruction in
England, Then ever did the deadly faction of the redd rose and the white,
lately by the incorporation and vnio^ of the howses of york and Lancaster, in
the person of his father throwghe the marriage of Lady Elizabeth, eldeste
dawghter to king Edward the fowrth, most happily extinguished and buried.
And thowghe yt might be thowght or said, that there would be no such cause of
fear, by reason the matter passed by parliame^te, yet could not he be
ignorante that nether p^liame^tes made for Henry the fowrthe, or continewance
of two discentes (Which take no place in geuinge any title touching the
crown) in king Henry the sixte, nor parliamentes made for king Richard the
third, nor perliamentes of attaynder made against his father, could either
prejudice his fathers right or releue other against such, as pretended just
right and title, And as he could not be ignorante thereof, so yt is not to be
thought, that he would abuse the great confidence putt upon him by the
parliamente, and disherite with ovvte any apparente cause, the next royal
blood, and think all things suer by the color of a perliamente. The little
force vvherof against the right inheritour, he had to his fathers and his
own so ample benefitt, so lately and so largely seen and felt, and yet if
he minded at any time to prejudice the said Lady Marie Queen of Scotland, of
all times he would not have done yt then, when all his care was by all
possible means to contriue and compass a marriage between his son Edward,
and the said Lady and Queen. Suerlie he was to wise of him self, and was
furnisshed withdraw to wise counsailours to take such an homely way to
procure and purchasse the said marriage by. And lest of all can we say he
attempted that disshonorable disherison, for any special inclination or
favor he bare to the french Queen his sisters children. For there have been
of his nere and privy counsel, that have reported, that the king never had
any great likinge of the marriage of his sister with the Duke of Suff. Who
married her first priuelie in France, and afterward openly in England (and
as yt is said) had his pardon for the same privy marriage in writing. How
soever this matter goethe certain yt is, that if this pretensed will be
true, he transferred and transposed the reuersion of the crown, not only
from the Queen of Scotland, from my Lady Lenneux and their issewe, but eauen
from my Lady Fraunces and my Lady Elenour also dawghters to the French
Queen, which is a thing in a manner incredible, and therefore nothing
likely. I must now gentle reader putt the in remembrance of two other most
pregnante and notable conjectures and presumptions, for among all other
inconveniences and absurdities that do and may accompanye this rash and
unadvised act by this pretensed will inco^sideratelye maintained, yt is
principally to be noted, that this act geuethe appare^te and just occasion
of perpetual disherison of the style and title of France incorporated and
united to the crown of this realm. The supposed will is p^iudiciall to the
crown of England for the claim of the crovne of France.
For whereby do or have the French men hitherto excluded the kings of this
realm claymenge the crown of France by the title of Edward the third,
fallinge upon him by the right of his mother, then by a politic and civil
law of their own, that barrethe the female from the right of the crown?
And what does this pretensed act of king Henry, but iustifiethe and
strengthens their quarrel, and ouerthrowethe the fowndation and bulworke,
whereby we maintain our foresaid title and claim? If we may by our
Municipall law exclude the said Queen of Scotla^de, being called to this
crown by the title of general heritage. Then is their municipall law
likewise good and effectual, and consequently we do and have made all this
while an unjust and wrongful claim to the crown of France. But now to go
somewhat farther in the matter, or rather to come nerer home and to the quick
of the matter, we say as there was some apparente and good cause why the
king should the twenty and eight year of his reygne thyncke upon some
limitatio^ and appointmente of the crown (king Edward as yet unborn) so
after he was borne, and that the title and intereste of the reuersion of the
crown after him was the thirty and fifte year by parlamente confirmed to the
late Queen Marie, and our gratiouse Sovereign Elizabethe: Yt is not to be
thowght that he would afterward ieperde so great a matter by a testamente and
will, which may easelie be altered and counterfeited. And least of all
make such assignation of the crown, as is now pretended. For being a Prince
of such wisdom and experience he could not be ignorante, that this was the
next and redieste way to putt the state, at least of both his dawghters to
great peril and utter disherison. This supposed will geauethe occasion of
ambitious aspiringe.
For the kings example and boldness in interruptinge and cuttinge away so
many branches of the nereste side and line, might sone bread in aspiringe and
ambitious hearts a bold and wicked attempt, the way being so far browght
in and prepared to their hands by the king him self, and their natures so
ready and prone to follow evil presidentes, and to cli^me high by some
colorable means or other, to spoil and deprive the said dawghters of their
right of the crown, that should discende and fall upon them: And to convey
the same to the heirs of the said Lady Fraunces. And did not, I pray you
this drifte and devise fall owre eauen so, tendinge to the utter exclusion of
the late Queen Marie, and our gracious Sovereign Elizabethe: If God had not of
his great mercy most graciously and wonderfully repressed and ouerthroune
the same? These reasons then and p^sumptions may seame well hable and
sufficie^te to bear dovne, to break and overthrow the weke and sle^der
p^sumptions of the adversaries, grownded upon uncertain and mere surmises,
ghesses, and co^iectures, as among other, that the king was offended with
the Queen of Scotla^de and with the lady Lenneux: which is not true. And
as for the lady Lenneux, yt has no manner of probability: As yt has not
in deed in the said Queen. And if yt had, yet yt is as probable and much
more probable, that the king would have especially at that time, for such
cavvse as we have declared, suppressed the same displeasure, Grau^tinge now
that there were some such displeasure, was yt honorable either for the king
or the realm, or was yt think ye ever thovvght by the parliament that the
king should disherite them for every light displeasure? And if as the
adversaries confess the king had no cavvse to be offended with the French
Queen's children, why did he disherite the Lady Fraunces, and the Lady
Elenour also? Their other presumption which they grownde upon the auoydinge
of the uncertainty of the succession by reason of his will, The succession to
the croune is more uncertain by the supposed will then before.
is of small force, and rather turnethe against them: For yt is so far of,
that by this means the succession is made more certain and suer, that
contrary wise yt is subject to more uncertainty and to less suertie then
before. For where as before the right and claim to the crown honge upon
ordinary and certain covvrse of common law, upon the certain and assuerid
right of the royal and unspotted blood: Yea upon the very law of nature
(whereby many inconveniences, many troubles, dangers and seditions are in
all contreyes politikelie avoided), There is mucheforgerie and counterfeyting
of testamentes.
So now dependinge upon statute only, yt is as easy by an other stature to
be infringed and overthrown: And dependinge upon a testame^te, is subject to
many corruptions, sinister dealinges, cauillacions, yea and just ouerthrovves
by the dishability of the testatour, vvitnesses, or the legatorie him self, or
for lack of dew order to be observed, or by the death of the vvitnesses
unexamined, and for many other like considerations. The monumentes of all
antiquity, the memory of all ages, and of our own age, and daily
experience can tell and shevve us many lamentable examples of many a good and
lavvfull testamente by vndevve and crafty means, by false and suborned
vvitnesses, Valerius Maximus dedict. and fact. lib. 9 cap. 4.
by the couuetous bearinge and maintenance of such as be in authority quite
undone and overthrown. Wherefore. Valerius Maximus cry the owte against, M.
Crassus and Q. Hortensuis lumina curiae, ornamenta fori, Quod scelus vindicare
debuerant, lucri captura inuitati suis authoritatibus texerint. This
presumption then of the adversaries rather makes for us, and ministrethe to us
good occasion to think that the king would not hasarde the weight and
importance of such a matter, to rest upon the validity or inualiditie of a
bare testame^te only. By this that we have said, we may probablely gather,
that the king had no cause to adventure so great an enterprise by a bare
will and testamente. Ye shall now hear also why we think he did never
attempt or entreprise any such thing. Yt is well known, the king was not
wont lightly to ouerslippe the occasion of any great commodity presently
offered: And yet this not vvithsta^dinge having given to him by act of
parliame^te, the orderinge and disposition of all chauntries and colleges, He
did never or very little practice and execute this aucthorite. And shall we
think (oneles full and sufficient proof necessarily enforce our creditt)
that the king to his no prese^te comoditie and advantage: but yet to his
great dishonor, to the great obloquie of his subjects, and other co^treyes,
to the notable disherison of so many of the next royal blood, did use any
such authority, as is surmised? Again if he had made any such assignation:
In this supposed will is no condition for the marriage of theyres of the Lady
Fra^ces, as is for the kings own davvghters.
Who dowbtethe but that as he conditioned in the said pretensed will, with
his noble dawghters to marry with his counsels advice, either else not to
enjoy the benefitt of the succession: He would have tied the said Lady
Fraunces and Lady Elenours heirs to the same condition. Farthermore, I am
driven to think, that there passed no such limitatio^ by the said king
Henry's will, by reason there is not, nor was these many years any
original copy thereof, nor any authentical record in the chauncerie or else
where to be showed in all England, as the adversaries them selves confess,
and in the copies that be spredd abroad, the vvitnesses pretended to be
present at the signinge of the said will be such for the meanenes of their
state of the one side, and for the greatenes and weight of the cause on the
other side, as seame not the most sufficie^te for such a case. The importance
of the cause being no less, then the disherison of so many heirs of the
crown, As well from the one sister as from the other, requirid and craved
some one or other of the privy counsel, or some one honorable and notable
person to have been p^sente at the said signinge: or that some notification
should have been made afterward to such persons by the king him self, or
at least before some notarie and authentical person, for the better
strengtheninge of the said will. Hear is now farther to be considered, that
saying the intereste to the crown is become a plain testame^tarie matter and
claim, and dependethe upon a last will, when and before what ordinary this
will was exhibited allowed and proved? Where and of whom took the executours
their oath for the true performance of the will. No order taken for the
probatio^ of the supposed will.
Who committed to them the administration of the kings goods and chatttelles.
When and to whom have they browght in the inue^torie of the same, Who examined
the vvitnesses upon their oath for the tenor and trevvthe of the said
testamente. Namely upon the signement of the kings hand, wherein only
consistethe the weight of no less, then of the crown yt self: Where or in
what spiritual or temporal cowrte may one find their depositions. But yt
were a very hard thing to find that, that as far as men can learn never
was. And yet if the matter were so plain, so good, and so sownde, as these me^
bear us in hand, if the original testament had been such as might have
bydden the towchestone, the trial, the light and the sight of the world: Why
did not theye that enjoyed most commodity thereby, and for the swaye and
authority they bare, might and owght best to have done yt, take co^uenyent
and suer order, that the original might have been dewlie and saufelie
preserved, or at the least, the ordinary probate which is in every poor
man's testame^te diligently observed, might have been procured or seen? One or
other authentical instrumente thereof reserved? The ad^saries the^ selves see
well inowghe, yea and are feign to confess these defectes, but to help this
micheif they would feign have the enrolemente in the chauncerie to be taken for
a sufficient probate, The enrollement in the chauncerie is n^ probation.
by cawse as they say, both the spiritual and temporal authority did
concur in the kings person. Yet do they know well inowghe that this
plaster will not cure the sore, And that this is but a pore help and shifte.
For neither the l^es patentes, nor the enroleme^te may in any wise be cownted
a sufficie^te probate. The chauncerie is not the cowrte or ordinary place for
the probate of vvilles, not the rolls for recordinges the same. Both must be
done in the spiritual cowrtes, where the executours also must be impleaded,
and give their account, where the weakness or strength of the will must be
tried, the witnesses examined. Finally the probate and all other things
thereto requisite dispatched: or if yt may be done by any other person, yet
must his authority be showed, the probate and all things must be done
accordingelie. And among other things the usual clause of Saluo iure
cuiuscunque must not be omitted. Which things, I am assuerid, the
recordi^ge in the chauncerie can not importe, but this cautio^ and prouiso of
Saluo iure cuiuscunque (which is most comfortable to all law and reason) did
little serve some men's turn. And therefore there was an other caution and
prouiso, that thowghe the poorest ma^s testame^te in all England has this
prouiso, at the probate of the same, yet for this testame^te the weighty este,
I trow, that ever was made in England, no such probate or clawse can be
fownde either in the one or the other cowrte: Yet we needs must, all this not
with sta^dinge, be borne in hand and borne down, that there was a testamente
and will formablie framed according to the purpose and effect of the statute:
Yet must the right of the imperial crown of England be conveyed and carried
away with the color and shadow only of a will, I say the shadow only, by
reason of an other conjecture and presumption which I shall tell you of.
Which is so lively and effectual, that I verelie suppose yt will be very hard
for any man by any good and probable reason, to answer and avoid the same:
And is so importante and vehement, that this only might seame utterly to
destroy all the adversaries coniecturall prouffes, concerning the maintenance
of this supposed will. We say therefore and affirm, that in case there had
been any good and suer help and hand fast, to take and hold the crown for
the heirs of the Lady Frances by the said will, that the faction that
unjustly intruded the Lady Jane eldest dawghter to the said Lady Frances,
to the possession of the crown: would never have omitted to take, receive,
and embrace the occasion and benefitt thereof, to them presently offered. They
neither would nor could have ben^ driven to so hard and bare a shifte, as to
color their vsurpatio^ against the late Queen Marie only and our gracious
Sovereign Elizabethe, A great p^sumptio^ agai^ste the supposed will, for
that the late pretensed Q. Jane, did not use the benefitt of the same against
the Queen of Sco^es and others.
with the lettres patentes of king Edward the sixte, and with the consent of
such as they had p^ocurid. Which king by law had no authority (as yt is
notoriouse) to make any limitation and assignatio^ of the crown, otherwise
then the common law does dispose yt. Yt was neade for them I say, as they
procured such lr^es patentes, so to have set forth also the said pretensed
will, if there had been then any such will in deed sufficiently and dewlie
to be proved, as is now surmised there was. The record of the said surmised
will was in the chauncerie, which they might have used with the pretensed
witnesses, and with the original pretensed will, and with all other things
thereto belonginge to their best advantage. Yt can not be thowght, that either
they were ignora^te of yt, or that they would forbear and forgo so great a
commodity offered, and such a plausible pretexte of their pretensed
vsurpatio^ bearinge the countenance and authority of the kings will, and of
the whole parliament^ for the exclusion of the Queen of Scotts and others of
the nearer royal blood* Neither can yt be said, that the lettres pate^tes
were made as yt were for a stronger corroboration and confirmation only of the
said p^tensed will. For that there is not so much as one word in their
whole pretensed proclamation for the supposed right of the said Lady lane by
the force of that surmised will, See the proclamation made the fiuete^th of
Iulie the first year of her p^te^sed reygne.
Whereby yt might any thing appear, that king He^rie the eight made any
manner of limitation or assignation of the crown to the heirs of the said
Lady Fra^ces. Whereupon yt may well be gathered, that either they knew of no
such limitation to the children of the Lady Frances by the said supposed
will, or took yt to be such as could give no good and lawful force and
strength to aid and maintain their vsurpatio^, for the manifest forgerie
of the same. And therefore they purposelie (for ignorance can not be pretended
in them) kept back and suppressed in the said Ir^es patentes, this pretensed
limitation surmised to be made for the children of the said Lady Fraunces,
which nevertheless the adversaries do now withdraw so great and vehemente
asseueration blow into all men's ears. Wiche is utterly rejected and
overthrowe^ and yt were by nothing else, but by this proclamation for the
pretensed title of the said Lady Jane. So that we neade to travail no
farther for any more prouf against the said asseueratio^. But yet in case any
man do look for any other and more persuasion and prouff, which as I said
neade not, (O the great providence of God, o his great favor and goodness to
this realm, of the Which yt has been said, Regnum Anglie est regnum Dei,
Polyd. l. 8.
And that God has ever had a special care of yt, o his great goodness, I
say to this realm even in this case also) for he has opened and browght to
light the very trewthe of the Matter. Which is burste owte, thowghe never so
craftelie suppresed and kept under. We say then that the king never signed
the prete^sed will with his own hand neither do we say yt by bare hear
say, or gather yt by our former conjectures and presumptio^s only, thowge
very effectual and probable, but by good and hable witnesses that avouche and
justify of their own certain knowledge, that the Stamp only was put to
the said will, and that even when the king him self was now dead. ordini^ge
and paste all remembrance, the Lord Pagett being one of the privy consaile
with Queen Marie, of his own free will and godly motion for the honor of the
realm, for reverence of trewthe and justice, thowghe in the fact him self
culpable, and in a manner thereto by great aucthorite forced, The forgerie of
this supposed will, disclosed before the perleme^t by the. L. Pagett.
did first of all me^ disclose the matter. First to the said counsel, and
then before the whole parliame^te. Sire Edward Montegewe also the chief
Justice, that was privy and present at the said doings, did confess the
same as well before the counsel, as before the parliame^te. Yea william
Clarke ascribed among other pretensed witnesses, confessed the p^misses to be
true. And that him self putt the stamp to the said will, and afterward
purchased his charter of pardon for the said fact. Upon the which
depositions well and advisedly vveyed and pondered, Queen Marie with the
advice of her counsel, to the honor of God and this realm, to the
maintenance of trewthe and justice, and the righfull succession of the crown,
for the eschewenge of many foul mischeyffes that might upon this forgerie
ensewe, cawsed the record of the said forged will remayninge in the
chauncerie to be cancelled defaced and abolished, A vvorthie deed for a Prince
to cancel false re^ordes*
as not worthy to remain among the true and sincere records of this noble
realm. Which her noble fact deseruethe imortalitie of eternal praise and
fame: No less the^ the fact of the Romans that abolisshed the name and
memory of the Tarquinians, for the foul act of Sextus Tarquinius in
defilinge Lucrecia: No less then the fact of the Ephesians, Cice. 3. off.
who made a law, that the name of the wicked Erostratus should never be
recorded in the books of any their historiographers. No less then the fact
of the famelie of the Manlians at Rome, taking a sosolempne oath, that none
among them should ever be called capitolinus, by cause M. Manlius Capitalinus
had sowght to oppress his contreye with tyranny. Sueton. de viris illustr.
And to come nerer home, no less then our forefathers deserved, which quite
rased owte of the years and times, the memory and name of the wicked
Apostates Osricus and Eanfridus, ^ed. lib. 3. histor. ecc^ie. ca. 1.
numbringe their time under the reign of the good king Oswaldus. The
adversaries therefore are much to be blamed, goinge abowte to stain and
blotte the memory of the said Queen and magistrates, as thowghe they had done
this thing disorderly, and as thowghe there had been some special commodity
therein to them which is apparentlie false, for as the said abolition was
nothing beneficial to other magistrates: So if yt had been a true and an
vndowbted will, the said Queen would never have caused yt to be cancelled,
as well for her honor and conscience sake, as for private respect, saying her
own royal estate was by the same set forth and confirmed. Yet would they
feign blemishe and disgrace the testimonye of the said lord Pagett, and Sir
Edward Montigewe, they set against them eleven witnesses, thynckinge to
match and overmatche them with the nombre. But hear yt must be remembered,
that thowghe they be eleven, yet they are to sle^der and weak for the weight
and importance of the matter. l. Test. ff. de testib. l. Ob carmen ibid.
Yt is again to be remembered that often times the law does as well wey the
creditt, as number the persons of the witnesses, Alias (says Calistratus)
numerus, alias dignitas and authoritas, confirmat rei de qua agitur fidem.
According to this saiet halso Arcadius. (confirmabit iudex motum animi sui ex
argumentis and testimonijs que rei aptiora and vero proximiora esse compererit,
non enim ad multitudinem respicere oportet, sed ad sinceram testimonioru^
fidem, and testimonia quibus potius lux veritatis assistit. Yt has not
lightly been hard or seen, that men of such state and vocation in so great
and weighty a cause, would incur first the displeasure of God, the^ of
their Pri^^e, and of some other of the best sort if their depositio^s were
untrue, and would purchase the^ selffes dishonor, slander, and infamy. Yea
disclose their own shame to their own no manner of weye hoped commodity,
nor to the commodity of other their friends, or disco^moditie and hurt of
their enemies. This sufficie^tlie does purge them, I will not say of their
fact and fault, yet from all sinister suspicion for this their deposition
and testimony: their depositio^ proceadinge, as yt plainly seame the from no
affection, corruption or parcialitie, but from a zeal to the trewthe, and to
the honor of the realm. And thowghe parchance if they had been thereof
iudiciallie co^uicted and condemned, No just cause to rep^ll the testimony
of the Lord Pagett and others.
and had not by dew penance the^ selves reformed, some exceptions might have
been laid against the^ by any pertieie iudiciallie convicted for his better
advantage. Yet as the case standethe now, there is no cawse in the world to
discredit their testimony: Yea and by the way of accusation also such
persons as be otherwise dishablet, are in treason, and other public matters
tovvchinge the state enhabled both to accuse and testify. l. famosi ff. ad l
^ul maresci. l. mulier. ff. de accusa.
As for the eleven vvitnesses, the best of them, Sire Johan Gates, we know
by what means is departed owte of this life. One other the said willim Clarke
is so gone from them, that he geveth good cause to misdeame and mistruste the
Whole matter. How many of the residevve live I know not. To who^ parchance
some thing might be said if we ons know what the^ selves say. Which saying
yt does not by authentical record appear, bare names of du^me witnesses can
in no wise hinder and deface so solemn a testimony, of the foresaid Lord
Pagett and Sire Edward Mountagevve. Neither is the difficulty so great as
the adversaries pretend, in provinge negatiuam facti: Which as we grante yt to
be true, How a negative may be proved.
when yt standethe within the limittes of a mere negative, so being
restrained and referred to time and place, may be asvvell proved as the
affirmative. Glos. and doct. c. bonae de elec.
Yt appearethe now then by the praemisses, that the adversaries arguments,
whereby they would weake^ and discreditte the testimony either of the
witnesses, or of the executours, that have or may come in against the said
p^te^sed will, are but of small force and strength. A superficial rethoricke
of the adversary
And especially their slender exaggeration by a superficial rethoricke
enforced: wherebye they would abuse the ignorance of the people, and make them
believe, that there was no good and substanciall proof browght furthe against
the forgerie of this supposed will, because the vntrewthe of the same was not
preached at Pawles cross, and declared in all open places and assembles
throwghe the realm. When they know well ^^owghe that there was no necessity
so to do. And that yt was notoryouslie known by reason yt was disclosed by the
said Lord Pagett, as well to the counsel, as to the hier and lower house of
the parlemente. And the foresaid forged record in the chauncerie thereupon
worthelie defaced and abolished. The disclosinge Whereof saying yt came forth
by such, How and when the later testimony is to be accepted before the former.
and in such sort and order as we have specified: As yt does nothing deface
or blemishe the testimony geven against the said supposed will, whether yt
were of any of the witnesses, or executours: so is there no neade at all, why
any other witnesses besides those that have alredie impugned the same should
be now farther producted. I deny not but, that if any such witness or
executour had upon his oath, before a lawful Judge deposed of his own
certain notice and knowledge that the said will was signed with the kings
own hand, In case he should afterward contrary and revoke this his
solemn deposition, yt owght not lightly to be discredited for any such
contradiction afterward happeninge. But as I have said, such authentical
and ordinary examinations and depositions we find not, nor yet hear of any
such so passed. Now contrariwise if any of the said Witnesses or
executours have or shall before a competente Judge, especially not producted
of any party, or against any party for any private suite commenced, but as I
have said, moved of conscience only and of a zeal to trevvthe, and to the
honor of God and the realm, frelie and voluntarily discover and detecte such
forgerie (althovvghe parchance yt tovvchethe them selves for some thing done
or said of them to the contrary,) or being called by the said competente
judge (have or shall declare and testify any thing against the same, this
later testimony may be well credited by good reason and law. Where as now
they would infer, that either this pretensed will was king Henry's will,
or that he made none at all, I do not as I have said intend nor neade not
curiously to examine and discuss this thing, as a matter not apparteyninge
to our principal purpose. And well yt may be, that he made a will
conteininge the whole tenor of this pretensed will (sauinge for the
limitation of the crown) and that these supposed witnesses were present,
either when he subscribed the same with his own hand, or when by his
commandemente the stamp (of the which and of his own hand^, the common
sort of men make no difference, as in deed in diverse other cases there is no
difference, which these vvitnesses might take to be as yt were his own
hand) was set to the will. This I say might after some sort so be, and
yet this not withdraw standinge there might be (as there was in deed) an other
will towchinge the pretensed limitation of the crown by the kings own hand
counterfeited and suborned after his death falselie and colorablie, bearinge
the countenance of his own hand, and of the pretensed witnesses names. How
so ever yt be, yt is but to small purpose, to go abovvte any full and
exquisite answer towchinge this point, saying that neither the original
surmised will, Whereof these vvitnesses are supposed to be privy is extant,
nor their depositions any where appear, not yet that yt appearethe that ever
they were (as we have said) iudiciallie examined. Saying now then, that yt
so fallethe ovvte that the principal will, and that that was by the great
seal exemplified, and in the chauncerie recorded, had not at (least towchinge
the clawse of the limitation and assigneme^te of the crown) the kings hand
to yt: We neade not, nor will not tarry abowte certain scrowles and copies of
the said will, that the adversaries pretend to have been either written or
signed with his hand. A kingdom is to heavy to be so easelie carried away
by such scrowles and copies. When all this faylethe, the adversaries have yet
one shifte left for the last cast: they urge the aequitie of the matter, and
the mind of the perliame^t: Which is, they say, accomplisshed and satisffed
by making this assignation, for the establishinge of the succession, and
prouidinge that the realm should not be left void of a governor. And
therefore we must not subuerte the statute in cauillinge for the defecte of
the kings hand. For as much as the parliamente might have had aucthorised
his consent only withowte any hand writing. Which as I do not deny, so in
these great affairs and so ample a commission in such absolute authority
given to him, yt was prouidentlie and necessarily foreseen to bind the act
to the kings own hand, for auoydinge all sinister and evil dealinge, the
which the advsaries would hauevs in no case to misdowte or mistruste of the
fact, and the lamentable euente of things do openly declare the same, and
pitifully criethe owte against yt. Neither will we grante to them that the
mind and purpose of the parliament is satisfied, Why the stamp cannot
counteruaile the king^s hand in this case.
for such causes as we have and shall hereafter more largely declare. And if
yt were otherwise true, yet does this only defecte of the kings hand,
breeke and infringe the whole act. For this is a statute correctorie and
derogatorie to the common cowrse of the law, as cuttinge away the succession
of the lawful and true inheritours. yt is also as appearethe by the tenor of
the same a most greauouse penal law, and therefore we may not shifte or
alter the words of the law: Neither may we supply the manner and doing of
the act aequiuale^te. So that albe yt in some other thing, the stamp or the
kings certain and known co^^ente may counterpaise his hand: Yet as the
case standethe here, yt will not serve the turn, by reason there is a precise
order and form praescribed and appointed. Wherefore if by a statute of a city,
there be certain persons appointed to do a certain act, and the whole people
do the same act in the presence of the said persons, Ioa^. And. i^ adit.
specul. tit. de requisitis consil. ad finem.
the act by the judgment of learned ciuilians, is viciouse and of no valewe:
Yea thowghe the reason of the law cease, yet must the form be observed. For
yt is a rule and a maxim, that where the law appointethe and prescribethe a
certain pla^t form, whereby the act must be bownde and tied, L si fundus ff
rebus eoru^ cap 1. de rebus eccl. in 6.
in that case thowghe the reason of the law cease, yet is the act void and
nowght. And where as the adversaries obiecte against this rule the parliamentes
made by Queen Marie with owte the usual style called and somoned, An answer
to the adversaries tovchinge acts of parliament, that they allege to pr^ove
that the kings ovne hand was not necessary to the supposed will.
this objection may sone be answered. For yt may sone appear to all them
that read and peruse the said statute of An. 35. Henrici octaui, conteininge
the said style, that by any especial words therein mentioned, yt is not
there limited and appointed, that the form of the style therein set forth
should be observed in every writ. And therefore not to be compared unto the
said statutes of 28 and 35. Henrici octaui. Wherein by special words one
express form and order for the limittinge of the succession of the crown by
the king is declared and set furthe. Besides that the said writtes being
made both according to the ancient form of the registre, and also by
express commandment of the Prince utterly refusinge the said style could,
neither be derogatorie to the said Queen's Majesty and her crown, nor
meaning of the said statute. Concerning the said style, and for a final
and full answer unto this matter: Yt is to be noted, that the vvrittes being
the acts of the cowrte, thowghe they want the p^scripte form set furthe
either by the common law, or statute: Yet are not they, nor the judgments
subsequent thereupon abated or void, but only abatable and voydable by
exception of the pertie, 18. E. 3. fol. 30.
by iudgeme^te of the cowrte. For if the pertie withowte any exception do
admit the form of the said writ, 3. H. 4. fo. 3. and 1^.
and plead unto the matter, Whereupon the covvrte does proceed, 11. H. 4. fol.
67.
then does the writ and the judgment thereupon followynge remain good and
effectual in law. 9, H. 6. fol. 6.
And therefore admitti^ge that the said statute of 35. H. 8. had by special
words, 19, H. 6. f. 7. and 10.
appointed the said style to be put in every writ, 35 H. 6. fol. 12.
and that for that cause the said writtes of somons were vicious vvantinge
their prescript form, 10, H. 6: fol. 26.
yet when the parties unto the said vvrittes had admitted them for good, 3,
H. 6: fol. 8.
both by their election and also by their appearance upon the same, the law
does admit the said writtes and all acts subsequente upon the same to be
good and effectual. 33, E. 3: 13. Vide prisott. 33 H. 6: fol. 35.
And yet this make the no prouf, that therefore the said supposed will
vva^thinge the p^script order and form should likewise be good and
effectual in law. For as tovvchinge specialties, estates, and conueyances or
any other external act to be done or made by any person, whose form and
order is p^scribed either by the common law or by statute, if they want any
pa^te of their p^scripte form, they are accounted in law to be of no
validity or effect. As for example, the law does appointe every specialtie
or deed to be made either in the first person or in the third person.
Therefore if part of a deed be made in the first person, 9 H. 6 fo. 35. 35
H. 6. fol. 34. ^ O Ed. 3: fol. 2.
and the residewe in the third person, that deed is not effectual, but void
in the law, besides that the law has appointed, that in every deed
mention should be made that the party has putto his seal to the same. 40.
E. 3. fo. 2. 21 E. 4. fol. 97. 7 H. 7. fo. 15.
If therefore any deed does want that special clause and mention, althowghe
the party in deed has putt his seal unto the same, yet is that deed or
specialtie void i^ law. So likewise the law geuethe authority unto the
Lord to distraine upon the land holden of him for his rentes and services
dew for the same, and farther does appointe to carry or drive the same
distress unto the povvnde, 9. E. 4: fo. 2. 22 E. 4. fo 47.
there to remain as a gage in law for his said rentes and services. If the
Lord shall either distraine his tenaunte owte of his Fee or seignorie, 29 H.
6. fol. 6.
or if he shall labor and occupy the chattelles distrained, 29. li. Assiar.
The distress so taken by him is iniuriouse and vvrongfull in law. p. 64
For as much as he has not done according to the prescribed order of the
law. The statute made Anno 32. H. 8. geuethe authority unto tena^te in
tail, and to others being seized of land in the right of their vviues or
churches, to make leases of the same. Wherein also a prescripte order and form
for the same is set forth: If any of the said persons shall make any lease,
wherein he does not observe the same prescribed order in all points, the same
lease is not vvarented in any point by the said statute. Likewise the statute
made in Anno 27. H. 8. of bargains and sales of land, appointethe a form and
order for the same, 27. H. 8. cap. 10.
that is, they must be by writing inde^ted, sealed, and enrolled within
six months next after the dates of the same writings, If any bargain and
sale of land be made wherein any of the things appointed by the said
statute are omitted, the same is vicious and void in the law. So likewise
the statute made in An. 32. H. 8. geaueth authority to dispose lands and
teneme^tes by last will and restamente in writing. 32. H. 8. cap. 1.
If a man do demisse his land by his last will and restame^te nuncupatiue
vvithovvte vvrittinge, this demise is insufficie^te in law, and is not
warranted by the said statute. We leave of a number of like cases that we might
multiple in the proof of this matter: Wherein we have tarried the longer by
cause the ad^saries make so great a countenance thereupon. And by cause all
under one, yt may serve for the answer also tovvchinge the kings royal
assente to be geven to parliamentes by his lettres patentes signed with his
hand: Which is nothing else but a declaration and affirma^ce of the common
law. And no new authority geven to him to do that he could not do before,
or any form praescribed to bind him unto. Besides that in this case, there is
no fear in the world of forginge and counterfeytinge the kings hand. Where
as in the testamentarie cause yt is fa^re other wise, as the world knovvethe,
and daily experience teaches. And so with all do we conclude that by reason
this surmised will was not signed with the kings hand, yt can not any way
hurt or hinder the just right and claim of the Queen of Scotland, to the
succession of the crown of England. Now supposinge that neither the Lord
Pagett, nor Sire Edward Mountegevve and willim Clarke had testified or
published any thing to the infringinge and overthrowinge of the adversaries
assertion, towchinge the signinge of the said will. Yet is not therebye the
Queen of Scotlandes title altogether hindered. For she yet has her just and
lawful defense for the oppugninge of the said Assertion, as well against the
persons and saienge of the witnesses, if any shall come forth, as otherwise
she may justly require the said will to be browght furthe to light, and
especially the signinge of the same with the kings hand, to be dewly and
consideratelie pondered, weied, and conferred. She has her just defense and
exceptions, and must have. And yt were against all laws, and the law of
nature yt self, to spoil her of the same. And all good reason geavethe, that
the said original will standinge upon the trial of the k^nges hand be
exhibited, that yt may be compared with his other certain and well known
hand writing, and that other things may be done requisite in this behalf.
But yet all this notwithstanding, let us now imagine and suppose, that the
king him self (whose har^e and hand Were dovvbtelesse far from any such
doings) Let us yet I say admit, that he had signed the said Will with
his own hand: Yet for all that, the adversaries parchance shall not find,
no not in this case, that the Queen's just title right and intereste does any
thing fail or quayle. The supposed will ca^ not prejudice the Q. of. Scotts
thovvghe yt had been signed with the Kings own hand.
Or rather lest us vvithovvte any perchance say, the justice and aequitie of
her cause, and the invincible force of trevvthe to be such, that neither the
stamp nor the kings own hand can bear and beat yt down. Which thing
we speak not with ovvte good probable and weighty reasons. Neither do we
at this time mind to debate and discovvrse, what power and authority, and
how far the parlamente has yt in this and like cases, Which parchance some
other would here do. We will only intermedle with other things, that
reach not so far nor so high, and seame in this our present question
vvorthie and necessary to be considered. And first before we enter into other
matters, we ask this reasonable and necessary question. Whether these
general words, whereby this large and ample authority is conveyed to
king Henry must be as generally, and as amply taken, or be restrained by
some manner of limitation, and restriction agreeable to such mind and purpose
of the parliamente, as must of very necessity or great lykelyhodde be
construed to be the very mind and purpose of the said parliamente. Ye will
say perchance, that the power and authority of assignation must be taken
generally and absolutely withowte exception, sauinge for the owtewarde
signinge of the will. Trewthe yt is, there is nothing else expressed: But yet
was there some thing else principally intended, and yet for all that, there
must needs be some qualification and restrai^t of the general words of the
statute.
neaded not to be specified. The owtewarde manner was so specially and
preciselie appointed and specified to avoid suspicious dealinge, to avoid
corruption and forgerie: And yet was the will good and effectual vvithowte
the kings hand: Yea and the assignation to had been good, had not that
restrainte of the kings hand, been added by the parliamente. But for the
qualification of the person to be limited and assigned, and so for the
necessary restriction and limitation of the words, were they never so large
and ample, there is, thowghe nothing were spoken thereof, an ordinary help
and remedy otherwise. If the realm had been set over to a furious, or a made
man, or to an idiot, or to some foreign, and Machometicall Prince (and to
such a one our stories testify that king John^ would have submitted him
self and his realm) or to any other notoriouse incapable or unable person.
Matheus parisiensis in Ioanne.
The generaltie of the words seame to bear yt: But the good mind and
purpose of the perliamente, and man's reason do in no wise bear yt. If ye
graunre that these words must needs have some good and honest construction
and interpretation (as reason does force you to grant it) Yet will I ask
farther, whether as the king cut of in this pretensed will the whole noble
race of the eldeste sister, and the first issewe of the yongeste sister: So if
he had cut of also all the ofspringe as well of the said yo^geste sister, as
of the remnante of the royal blood, and placed some bei^ge not of the said
blood, and perchance otherwise unable, this assignation had been good and
valable in law, as comfortable to reason, and to the mind and purpose of the
parliamente. Yt were suerlie to great an absurdity to grant yt. There
must be therefore in this matter some reasonable moderation and interpretation
as well towchinge the persons comp^hended with in this assignatio^ and their
qualities, and for the persons also having right, and yet excluded: As for the
manner of the doing of the act, and signinge the will. For the king as king
could not dispose the crown by his will And was in this behalf but an
arbiter and comissioner. Wherefore his doings must be directed and ruled by
the law, and accordi^ge to the good mi^de and meaning of those that gave the
authority. And what their mind was, yt will appear well inowghe even in
the statute yt self. Yt was for the auoidinge of all a^biguities, dowbtes, and
divisions towchinge the succession. They putt their whole trust upon the
ki^ge, as one whom they thought most earnestly to mind the wealth of the
realm, as one that would and could best and most prudentlie consider and
weighe the matter of the succession, and provide for the same accordinglye. If
the doings of the king do not plainlye and euidentlye tend to this end and
scope, if a zealous mind to the common welthe, if prudence and vvisdome did not
rule and measure all theys doings: but contrary wise parciall affection and
displeasure, if this arbitreme^te putter he not away all contentions and
striffes, if the mind and purpose of the honorable parliament be not
satisfied, if there be dishonorable devises and assignimentes of the crown in
this will and testamente, if there be a nevve succession unnaturally devised.
Finally if this be not a testame^te and last will, such as Modestinus
definethe: testame^tum est iusta voluntatis nostrae sententia, de co quod quis
post mortem suam fiert velit. Then thovvghe the kings hand were put to yt, l.
1. ff. qui testamenta facere. The definition of a testament.
the matter goes not al together so well and so smothe. But yet there is good
and great cause farther to consider and debate upon yt. Whether yt be so or
no, let the indifferente, When theye have well thowght upon yt, judge
accordingly. The adversaries them selves can not altogether deny, but that
this testame^te is not correspondente to such expectation, as men worthelie
should have of yt. Which thing they do plainly confess: for in vrginge
their presumptions, whereof we have spoken, and myndinge to prove that this
will, which they say is co^monlie called king Henryes will, was no new will
devised in his sickness, but eave^ the very same, Where of (as they say) were
dyvers old copies. Theye infer these Words, saienge thus: For if yt be a
new will then devised, Who could think that either him self would, or any
man durst have moved him, to putt therein so many things contrary to his
honor: much less durst they them selves devise any new succession, or move
him to altre yt otherwise then they found yt, when they saw that naturally
yt could not be otherwise disposed. Wherein they say very trevvlie: For yt
is certain that not only the common law of this realm, but nature yt self
tellethe us, that the Queen of Scotland (if our gracious Sovereign should
happen to dye having no heirs of her dodie) is the next and right full heir
of the crown. Wherefore the king, if he had excluded her, he had done an
unnatural act. Ye will say he had some cause to do this, by reason she was a
forrainer and borne owte of the realm, yet this not with sta^dinge he did very
unnaturally, Yea vnadvisedlie, inconsideratelie and wrongfullie, and to the
great praeiudice and danger of his own title to the crown of France, as
we have alredie declared. And more over, yt is well to be weighed, that
reason and aequitie, and ius gentium does require and crave: That as the
kings of this realm would think them selves to be injuriously handled and
openly vvronged, if they marrienge with the heirs of Spain, Scotland or
any other country (where the succession of the crown deuoluethe to the
woman) were shutt ovvte and barred from their said right dew to them by
the vviues (as we have said) So likewise they ovvght to think of women of
theirr Royal blood, that Marry in Scotland: that they may well judge and
take them selves much injured, unnaturally and vvrongfullye dealt with all,
to be thruste from the succession of this crown, being thereto called by the
next proximitie of the Royal blood. And such deuolution of other kingdoms
to the crown of England, by foreign marriage, might by possibility oftimes
have chanced, and was eauen now in this our time very like to have chanced
for Scotland, if the intended marriage with the Queen of Scotts that now
is, and the late king Edward the sixte with his longer life, and some
issevve had taken place, But now that she is no such forrainer, as is not
capable of the crown, we have at large alredye discussed, Yea I will now
say farther, that supposinge the parliamente minded to exclude her and migh
rightfullye so do, and that the king by virtue of this statute did exclude her
in his supposed will: Yet is she not a plain forrainer, and incapable of the
crown. For if the lavvfull heirs of the said Lady Frances, and of the Lady
Elenour should hapen to fail, which seame now to fail at the least in the
Lady Katherine and her issue (for whose title to great stir has latelye
been) by reason of a sentence diffinitiue lately geauen against a pretensed
matrimony of the said Lady with the Earl of Harforde, by my Lord of
Canterbury and other commissionners, then is there no stay or stop either
by the parliament, or by the said supposed will: But that she the said Queen
of Scotland and her heirs, may have and obtain their just title and
claim. For by the said pretensed will yt is limited, that for defaulte of
the lavvfull heirs of the said Ladies Frances and Elenour, that the crown
shall remayme and come to the next rightful heirs. But if she shall be said
to be a forrainer for the time, for the induction of farther argument: Then
what say the ad^saries to my Lady Le^noux borne at Herbotell in England, and
from thertene years of age browghtvppe also in England and co^monlie taken and
reputed as well of the king and nobility, as of other the lawful ne^e of the
said king. Yea to turn now to the other sister of the king married to
Charles Brandon Duke of Suff. and her children the Lady Fraunces, and the
Lady Elenour. Why are they also disherited? Suerlie if there be no just
cause, neither in the Lady Le^noux, nor in the other, yt seamethe the king
has made a plain donatiue of the crown. Which thing whether he could do,
or whether yt be conformable to the expectation of the parliamente, or for the
kings honor, or for the honor of the realm, I leave yt to the further
consideration of other. Now what causes should move the ki^ge to shutt them
owte by his pretensed will, from the title of the crown, I mind not, nor
neade not (especially saying I take no notice of any such will towchinge the
limitation of the said crown) here to propsequute or examine. Yet am I not
ignorante what impedime^tes many do talk of, and some as well by pri^ted as
vnpri^ted books do write of. Wherein I will not take upon me any asseueratio^,
any resolution or judgment. This only will I propownde, as yt were by the
way of consideration dewly and deaplye to be wayed and thowght upon: That is
for as much as the benefitt of this surmised will tendethe with the extrusion
of the Queen of Scotla^de and others altogether to the issewe of the French
Queen, whether in case the king had no cause to be offended with his sisters
the French Queen's children (as the adversaries them selves confess he had
not) and that there was no lawful impedime^te in them to take the succession
of the croune, yt were any thing reasonable, or ever was ones mente of the
parliamente, that the king withowte cause should disherite and exclude them
from the title of the crown. On the other side if there were any such
impedimente (Whereof this surmised will geuethe owte a great suspicion) yt is
to be considered, whether yt standethe with reason and justice, with the
honor of the king, and the whole realm, or with the mind, purpose, and
intent of the said perliamente, that the king should not only frustrate
and exclude such, l. fi pater ff. quo in fraud. credit. l. filij famil. ff. de
donat.
whose right by the common law is most evidente and notorious, but call and
substitute such other, l. 1. C. quae respign. l. obligationem ff. de pignot.
c. in general. de regul. iuris in 6.
as by the same law are plainly excluded. In consideration whereof many
notable rules of the cyuill law do concur: First that whosover gevethe any
man a general aucthotitie to do any thing, In giuinge general aucthority
that seameth not to be comprised that the per^ie would not have granted being
specially demanded.
seamethe not to give him authority to do that thing which he would not
have granted, if his mi^de therein had been severallie and specially asked
and required. Again general words either of the testatours, or of such as
make any contracte, I. promitte^do cu^ notat. ibid. ff de iure dotium.
and specially of statutes towchinge any persons to do or enjoy any thing,
ovvght to be restrained and referred to hable, I. quidam ff. de verb. signific.
mete, and capable persons only. Yt is further more a rule and a principle, I.
vt gradat.. 1. de muner. and honor.
that statutes must be ruled measured and interpreted according to the mind
and direction of the general and common law. General words must be
referred to hable persons.
Wherefore the king in limitinge the succession of the crovne in this sort,
I. 2. C^de Nopal.
as is praetended, seamethe not to answer and satisfy the expectation of the
parliamente, puttinge the case there were any such surmised impediment, as
also on the other side likewise if there were no such supposed impediment. For
here an other rule must be regarded, which is that in testamentes, contractes,
and namely in statutes, the generality of words must be gentilie and
cyvilie moderated and mesured by the common law, l. Fin in co^putatione C. de
iur^ de liber. and ^bi notat.
and restrained, when so ever any man should by that generality take any
do^mage and hurt vndeservinglie. Yea the Statute shall rather in that case
cease and quail, and be taken as void. As for example yt appears by the
civil law, Alciat. l. 1. verb. sig.
that if yt be enacted by Statute in some cities, that no man shall plead
against an instrumente, no not the executours: Yet this not withstandinge, if
the executour make a true and perfect inventory of the goods of the
testatour, if he deal feaithfullie and trew^ie, rather then he should
vvrongfullye and with out cause pay the testatours debte of his own, he may
come and plead against the instrumente. Wherefore the kings doings seame
either much defective in the said Lady Frances and Lady Elenour, or much
excessive in their children. And so thowghe he had signed the said will with
his hand, yet the said doings seame not comfortable to the mind and purpose
of the parliamente. We will now go forewarde and propownde other great and
grave considerations, seruinge our said purpose and inte^te, whereof one is,
that in limitinge the crown unto the heirs of the body of the Lady Fra^ces,
the same Lady then, and so long after living, the said king did not
appointe the succession of the crown according to the order and meaning of
the honorable parliamente: For as much as the said act of parliamente gave
to him authority to limitt and appointe the crown to such person or persons
in reuersion or remainder, as should please his highness: meaning therbye some
person certain, of whom the people might have certain knowledge and
understanding after the death of king Henry the eight. Which persons
certain the heirs of the Lady Fraunces could not by any means, be
intended: For as much as the said Lady Frances was then living, and
therefore could then have no heirs at all. By reason vvherof the people of
this realm could not have certain knowledge and perfect understanding of
the succession, 11, H. 4: fol 72.
according to the true meaning and intent of the said act of
parliamente. 19, H. 6: fol. 24.
But to this matter some peradventure would seame to answer and say, 11, H.
6: fol. 15.
that althovvghe at the time of the said king Henry's death, the heirs of
the body of the said Lady Frances begotten were uncertain: yet at such
time as the said remainder should happen to fall, the said heirs might then
certainlye be known. In deed I will not deny, but that paraduenture they
might be then certaynlie known: but what great mischeiffes and inconveniences
might have ensewed and yet may, if the will take place upon that peradventure
and uncertain limitation. I would vvishe all men well to note and consider.
Yt is not to be doubted, but that yt might have fortuned at such time as the
remainder should happen to fall to the said heirs of the Lady Frances, the
same Lady Frances should then be also living. Who I pray you then should
have had the crown? Paraduenture ye would say, the hey^es of the body of the
Lady Ele^^our, to whom the next remainder was appointed. Vndowbtedlie that
were contrary unto the meaning of the said supposed will For so much as the
remainder is there by limited unto the heirs of the body of the lady Elenour,
only for defaulte of issewe of the said Lady Frances. Whereby yt may be
very plainly gathered upon the said supposed will, that the meaning thereof
was not that the Children of the Lady Elenour should enjoy the crown before
the Children of the Lady Frances. But what if the said Lady Elenour, had
been then also lyvinge (which might have happened, for as much as both the
said lady Fra^ces, and Lady Elenour by common cowrse of nature might have
lived longer, then until this day:) Who then should have had the crown?
Trewlie the right heir whom this supposed will mente to exclude, so long as
there should remain any issewe, either of the body, of the said Lady
Fraunces, or of the body of the said Lady Elenour lawfully begotten. And
therefore quite contrary to the mea^ninge of the said supposed will. Wherefore
I do verelie think, that yt would hardly syncke into any reasonnable man's
head that had any experience of the great wisdom and advised doings of
king Henrye the eight abowte other matters, being of nothing like weight,
that he would so slenderly, so vnadvisedlie, and so vnlearnedlie dispose the
succession of the crown (Where upon the whole estate of this Realm does
depend) in such Wise, that they to whom he meant to geve the same by his
will, could not enjoy yt by the law: Where upon ye may plainly see, not
only the great unlikely hodde, that king Henry the eight would make any
such will with such slender advice: But also that by the limitation of the
said will, the succession of the crown is made more uncertain and
dowbtefull, the^ yt was before the making of the said Acts of Parliamente,
which is contrary to the meaning and inte^te of the said Acts, and
therefore with owte any sufficient warrante in Law. But paradventure some
here will say, that althowghe these dangers and vncerteinties might have
ensewed upon the limitation of the said* will, yet for as much as they have
not happened, neither be like to happen, they are therefore not to be spoken
of. Yes verily yt was not to be omitted. For althovvghe theys things have not
happened, and there fore the more tolerable: Yet for as much as theye might
have happened by the limitation of the said supposed will, contrary to the
meaning of the said acts, the will ca^ not by any means be said, to be
made according to the meaning and intent of the makers of the said
statutes. And therefore in that respect, the said will is insufficient in
law. And to aggravate the matter farthere, ye shall understand of great
inco^veniences and imminent dangers, which as yet are l^kelie to ensevve, if
that supposed will should take place. Yt is not unknown, but that at the time
of the making of the said will, the said Lady Frances had no issewe male,
but only three dawghters between her, and Henry Duke of Suff. Afterward in
the time of our late Sovereigne Lady Queen Marie, the said Duke of Suff was
attainted, and sufferid accordingly. After whose death the said Lady
Fra^ces to her greare dishonor and abasinge of her self, took to her husband
one Adrian Stocks, who was before her serua^te, a man of very mean estate
and vocation, and had issewe by him. Which issewe (if yt were a son, and be
also yet livinge) by the words of the said supposed will is to inherit the
crown of this Realm, before the dawghters between her and the said late duke
of Suff. begotten. Which thing was neither intended nor meant by the makers of
the said Acts. Who can with any reason or common defense think, that all
the states of the Realm assembled together at the said Parliame^te, did mean
to geve authority to King Henry the eight by his lettres patentes or last
Will, to disherite the Queen of Scotts liniallie disce^ded of the blood
Royal of this Realm, and to appointe the son of Adrian Stokes, then a mean
servinge man of the Duke of Suff. to be King and governor over this noble
Realm of England? The inco^venience whereof, as also of the like that might
have followed of the pretensed marriage of Maistre Keys the late sergeante
Porter, I refer to the grave consideratio^s and judgments of the ho^norable
and worshipful of this Realm. Some paradventure will say, that king Henry
the eight mente by his will to dispose the crown unto the heirs of the body
of the said Laid Frances by the said Duke lawfully begotten: And not unto
the heirs by any other person to be begotten. Wiche meaning althowghe yt
might very hardly be gathered upon the said supposed will, yet can not the
same be with owte as great inco^uenie^ces as the other. For if the crown
shoul de now remain unto the heirs of the body of the said Lady Fraunces,
by the said Duke begotten: then should yt remain unto two dawghters
iointelie, they both being termed and certainly accounted in law but one
heir. And by that means the state and government of this Realm should be
changed from the ancient Monarchy, unto the governemente of many. For the
title of the Lady Fraunces being bywaye of remainder, which is compted in law
a joint purchase, does make all the issue female inheritable alyke, and can
not go according to the aunciente law of a discente to the crown. Which is
that the crown by disce^te must go to the eldeste dawghter only, as is
before said. For great differences be in law, where one comes to any title
by discente, and where as a purchasser. And also if the one of those issewe
female dye, the^ were her heir in the title, as a several tenante in tail.
And so there should follow, that so many dawghters so many general
governors, and so might their issewe being heirs females make the
governeme^t grow infinite, which thing was most far from the meaning of
the makers of the said parliamente. What if the said King had by his last
will disposed this realm in to two or three parts, devidinge the governemente
thereof to three persons, to rule as several kings? As for exemple, wales unto
one, the North parts unto an other, the Sowthe parts unto the third, and by
that means had miserably re^te this realm in to parts. Had this ben
according to the inte^te and meaning of the said acts of parliament? or had
yt been a good and sufficient limitation in law? No verelie, I thyncke no man
of any reasonable understanding will so say. And no more can he either say
or thyncke of the remainder limited unto the heirs of the body of the said
Lady Fra^ces, by the said supposed will. Now to complete and finishe this
our treatise towchinge the Queen of Scotlandes title to the succession of the
crovne, as we have done, so let us frelie and liberally grant the
adversaries that which is not true: that is, that the said supposed will
was signed with the kings own hand: Let the heirs of the Lady Fraunces
come forth in gods name, and lay forth to the world their demand and
supposed right, against the said Queen of Scotlandes intereste. The Queen on
the other side, to fortefie and st^engthen her claim layethe forth to the
open sight of all the world, her just title and interest signed and always a
fore this time allowed, nor only as with the seals, but with the oaths
also, of all the kings that ever were in England, taken at the time of their
coronation for the continuance of the laws of this noble realm of England,
Signed and allowed I say, almost of all the world besides: Yea signed with
God and nature their own fingers. Her right is as open, and as clear, as the
bright son. Now to darken and shadow this glorious light, What do the
heirs of the said Lady Frances or others bring forth to grownde their
just claim and demand upon? When all is done, they are feign to ru^ne and
catch hold upon king He^rie the eightes written will, signed with his own
hand. Well let them take as good hand fast thereon, as they can: But yet let
the^ show to the said Queen the said original will. Yt is well known,
that they them selves have said, that, that to do they can not. Yet let them
at least lay forth some authentical record of the same. Yt is also
notorious they can not. If then the fowndation of their claim, being the
will of such a Prince, and of so late and fresh memory made neither the
original, nor yet any good and vvorthie record sufficiently authorized
remain of the same: By what color will they exclude the said Queen? They
must claim either by proximitie of blood, or by charter. For the fir^te,
nature has excluded them, charter they have none to show. They will
perchance cry owte and complain of the loss and imbecillinge of the same,
and say that such a casualtie should not distroye and extingwishe their
right. This were some thing perchance, if yt were in a private man's case: Yt
were some what if their demand did not destroy the common law, and the
law of nature also. Yt were somevvhat if their supposed charter were
perisshed, or by any fraudulent means intercepted by the said Queen, upon
whom in this point yt is not possible to fasten any the very least sinister
suspicion. Yt were somewhat. if they did not aspire to take gain and lucre. Or
if the Queen sowght not to avoid dommage. For do^mage yt is, when any person
is spoiled of any right dew to him by law and reason. And there is a great
odds in the consideration of the law and reason between avancinge our gain
(and gain we do that, that does grow and accrevve unto us by mere gift or
legacy, as does the crown, Non est par ratio, lucra non capere, and damna
sentire. l. fi C. codici^lle and l. proculus ff. de da^no inflic. i^stitut. de
leg. si res. de leg. fin. C.
to these competitoures and heirs of the Lady Frances) and eschevvenge
do^mage and loss. And loss the law accompteth to be, when we are defeated
of our auncetours inheritance. So that both being putt in the indifferent
balance of reason, law, and conscience, the do^mage shall overvveyghe the
mere lucre and gain. Yea I will say more, that in case either the said
Queen of Scotland or any other were in possession of the crovne havinge no
right to the same, yet if the issevve of the Lady Frances had no farther nor
better right, then these pretended vvritynges, the defendant cleavinge to the
only possession, Were sauf and suer, and were not bovvnde to shevve to them
their title. For yt is a rule of the law, that if the plaintiff fail in his
proof, l. qui accusare C. de edendo.. co^modum Inst. de interdict.
the defenda^te shall be discharged. Yea thovvghe he has no better right, then
bare and naked possession. Neither could they any thing be relived, thowghe
the prete^sed record of the chaun cerie were yet extante, not for such
cavvses only as we have specified, but for diverse other. For yt may well be
doubted, though the said record might bear sufficient creditt among the
subjects of this Realm, Wether yt may bear the same agai^ste one that is no
subject. Again yt is a rule, l. si quis in aliquo docume^to. C. de ede^do.
that the public instrume^te making mention of an other, does nothing prove
against the party in respect of any thing so mentioned, oneles the
original yt self be producted. If therefore these co^petitours have lost
their instruments and evidences, where upon they must of necessity build
their demand and claim to the exclusion of an other notorious right and
title, they must bear the discommoditie thereof that sovvght there by their
lucrative advancement and commodity, not the person that demands nothing
else but that to him lavvfullie and orderly is dew. Yea they and we to,
have good cavvse to think that this thing (in case any such vville were)
is vvonderfullie vvrovvght by gods permission and providence. For yt is
almost incredible to hear and beleaue such kind of writings and in so
great and weighty a matter as this pretensed will comprisethe, so sone
extinguished and perished as yt were for special purpose, to preserve to this
noble realm, the true and sincere succession of the next royal blood, which
if yt should be certain, I can not tell what enterlined papers and scrowles
be derived and transferred to any other vvrongfull heirs. Yt will be a
vvonderfull and strange thing to the world to hear, and to importable to us
and to our posterity to bear yt. Yt will then be so far of, that that
thing which the parliamente most regarded in this commission shall by this
pretensed will be procured and purchassed to this realm, as to have a
certain known vndowbted lawful governor and king, to have striffe
contentions and deuisions for the crown cut away, that eue^ the very
thing the parliament most feared, is most infortunatlie and most
lamentablye like soneste to chance. He that remembrethe the tragical
procedinges of the last by name, and not by right king Richard, neadeth not
gretelye to dowbte, but that, as he could find in his heart to bastard his
eldeste brother, and lavvfull king, and to diffame his own natural mother
as an harlott, eaue^ so now there will some be fovvnde that will easelie be
induced for the auancinge and settinge forth of their supposed right and
title to the crown, to seake means to vvringe them ovvte, that shall
vvrongfullye sit in the royal throne, And to seake to extorte the crown
from their possession. Which unhappy day if yt should ons chance (as God
forre bid) then may we cry owte and singe a woeful and doleful song: Then
may we, not with ovvte cause, look for the botomlesse Ocean sea of infinite
trobles, miseries and myscheiffes to o^ whelme the realm, The which my mind
and heart abhorrethe to think upon, and my pen in my hand tremblethe to
write thereof.

The end of the second book.
THE THIRD BOOK, WHERE IN IS DECLARED that the regimente of whomen is
conformable to the law of God and nature.
ALBE yt (good Reader) you have now heard a conueniente and a sufficient
prouf, so far as the laws of this realm may serve, for the right title and
claim of the Queen of Scotland and so we might right well seame to have
fully discharged our promise and office: Yet as the matter now fallethe
owte, especially if we shall give any creditt to an infamouse libell, An
infamouse lybell made lately against the Queen of Scotts.
or rather a fire brande of sedition late cast abroad, all our cost is for
lorne, all our travail employed in vain, we must begine a fresh, for all
this not withstandinge, her right is dowbtefull (says this man) and such as
against which is just exception taken by the law of God and man. Yt will
never be proved by the law, no, not by her best friends: so will the crown
never be geauen het by just and common counsel. I mean not the consent of
unquiet spirits and brawlinge brains, but of a great number of them, which
are to be accounted among the best, for the love of religion, and of the
common vvelthe. Suerlye these are iolye words: this is confidentlie spoken.
But yet let us hear with all what proufes this sober braynde man, and so
feruente a zelatour of religion, and of the common welthe bringethe forth, for
the auouchinge of his sturdye allegation. What law, what act of parliamente,
what custom or usage, what auncie^te record of history of this realm, does
this man lay forth for him self? Suerlye none at all. And as he layethe
forth not so much as one Jot this way: so no doubt he shall never be able
to lay forth any thing of like weight as that, that alredye is aleaged. No,
no, good Reader, this man goethe not by act of parliamente, nor by any law
of this realm, nor what soever he speakethe of man's law for a brave
countenance, by civil or by any other humane law. This extraordinary wilye
fellow runethe an other race, all theys laws are but beggarly baggage to
him, and arguments of brawlinge brains. This sober brayned man will not
abase him self, with intermedlinge with so law matters, but aspirethe and
amowntethe a lofte, and fetchethe a marvelouse high fetch and reach, and
being as yt were ghostly rauisshed, conte^ninge as it seameth all humane
laws and polices he makethe, as yt were a plain demurre with us in law,
that We have pleaded our matters all this while in a vvro^ge court. For ^o,
this matter by this sober man's judgment seameth not triable either in the
Arches, or co^sistorye of Pawles by the Civil or Ca^no^ law: or in
westimister hall by any law or act of perliamente. This plee must be only
maintained withdraw the records of holy scripture, The author of the same
seamethe little to regard touching the succession of the crown, any law but
holy scripture.
but of his own sober brains interpretation only, and holden before him
self, and his new erected tribunal, furnisshed and adorned withdraw such quiet
and sober sprites, as him self is. The infallable verity, the high Majesty of
the sacred scriptures, I do most hartelye confess and most humblye reverence.
But yet if ye will intrude your self to be the supreme arbitror and vmpier
thereof, and therebye wret^hedlie will abuse your self and others with the
promulginge from your nevve tribunal seat, such and so strange paradoxes and
sentences, to the utter overthrowinge of all humane policies and laws, yea to
the present and immine^t danger of our own maistresse and Queen (as ye do)
we must be so bold to see what vvarra^te and commission you have, and to
examine and well to vewe the same, we must buckle with you and try, whether
the authority of holy scripture, which is your only refuge, will uphold
and bear ovvte your strange and stowte conclusion. The place then where upon he
growndeth him self is this. He grovndethe him self chefely upon the: 17. of
Deuteronomy.
Thowe shall make him ki^ge over the, who^ ^he lord thy God shall chose from
among thye brethren: him shallt thovve make a king among the^. From this
authority he fetchethe owte all his high mystical and supernatural
co^clusio^s: and first he excludes the Queen of Scotland by cause she is an
Alien and not ex fratribus. And therefore not chosen of God. Whereunto he
addethe that the King must be such, as the people may say to him, as the
Israelites said to king David. 2. Sam. 5.
Ecce os tuum and caro tua nos sumus. We are of one nation and blood. There
unto he adioynethe, that yt is assigned as one just cavvse, Why Athalia, was
turned owte of her kingdom by cause she was Alienigina, 2: Reg. 11.
an alien: Maternum genus ducens a Tyrijs and Sidonijs. Theys now are all the
proufes deduced by this man owte of holy scripture, for other has he none,
why the Queen of Scotts being a stranger owght to be disherited, and
rejected from all such claim, as she p^te^dethe to the crown of England. An
answer tovchinge the 17. of Deuteronomy.
Now for answer, and first to the 17. of Deuteronomie, wherein as I will not
quarrel with you for the shrewde meaning that perchance some man may
probablye gather owte of this treatise, and small likinge that ye have to the
gouernemente proceadinge from succession only: so I plainelye affirm, first
that we are not bownde to the ceremonial, or judicial, or other precepts of
the Iewishe law (except the Decaloge) farther then the church or civil
policy have renewed and revived again. I say then farther, that this
authority of the Deuteronomye can not fittlye serve your purpose, for that yt
takethe place when the people chosethe a king, and not when there is a lawful
and ordinary succession, As was even among the Jews from king Dauidis
time, albe yt he and king Saul before him came in by goods and the peoples
special election. Wherefore I do admit your principle to be well grownded
upon scripture, that the choice and election of Princes must be directed and
measured by gods holy word, will, and pleasure. What then? I would feign
know, by what logike, by what reason a man may thus conclude: We owght to
chose no stranger to our prince, Ergo a stranger thowghe he be the just and
next inheritour to the crown, must be displaced. The one dependethe of our
own free will and election, Great difference between succession and election.
which we may measure and rule, as we see good cause. The other hangs only
upon the disposition and providence of God. There we may pick owte choice:
Here we must take such as God sendethe. There consent bearethe the stroke:
Here proximitie of blood bearethe the swaye. There we offer no injury to any
party in acceptinge the one, and leaui^ge the other: Here do we injury to God
that does send, and to the party that is by him sent. And to say the
trewthe, it is but a maleparte controulemente of gods own direction and
providence. For in the former part we be the chosers, and must direct and
govern our choice by reason and disctetion, by the merit and worthiness of the
person: Here all the choice, all the voices are in gods hand only. As good
right has the infant in the svvadlinge clowtes, as has any man called at
his perfect age and wisdom. Yt is a true saie^ge. Christiani fimus. August.
de merit. and remis. pec. co^tra Pel. l. 3. ^. 8. and 9 tom. 7. and i^ questi.
ex nouo test c. 8. tom. 4
we are made christian men: we are not borne christian men: Non nascimur. But
in this case of succession. Reges nascuntur, non fiunt, me^ are borne and no^
made kings. Let this fellow therefore conclude as strongelie as he can or
will against the chosinge of strangers: Yet if he bri^ge forth no place out
of scripture against the succession of a stranger claiminge by proximitie of
blood Royal, as far as the man shotethe, he shotethe to short to hitt the
mark. But lord what an ill favored short shote will yt be accounted, if she
be fownde no stranger at all? Yt is very probable that in this place the
scripture meanethe of a mere forener and stranger: such as were neither borne
in Jury, nor of the Iewishe blood. For with such aliens they were forbidden
also to cople in marriage, by reason they were Idolatours, and might thereby
the^ selves be occasioned (as they were often times in deed) aba^done and
forsake their true and sincere religion. Such a stranger, I am well assured,
this Lady is not to us if she be any stranger at all. The Scotts and we be
all christians and of one Island, of one tongue, and almost of one fashions
and manners, customs an laws: So that we can not in any wise account them
among such kind of strangers that this place of Moses mentionethe, namely
the Lady Marie the Queen of Scotts, being not only in heart well
affectioned and minded to all English men (as has by many experimentes been
well known) But also by disce^te and Royal blood all English, which she
takethe from the noble kings long before the co^queste, and after the
conqueste, from the worthy Princes Henry the first, and Edward the third,
and of late days, from the excellent Prince king Henrye the seaventhe, and
his davvghter Lady Margaret her grand mother. All which causes with some
other in such number concurrante, The Queen of Scotts no stranger.
ovvght rather to enforce us to think, and to take her, as no stranger to us,
then to estrange her from us, by the only place of her Nativity: Which is
yet nevertheless within the four seaes, and very nighe to England, by
Osbrede bovvndinge at Sterlinge bridge. Last of all tovchinge the foresaid
chapter of Deutronomye we affirm, that yt is untrue that ye say, as well that
this law of gouerneme^te binds our kings to the havinge and followinge of
this law, as we have said, unless to omit other things, ye would bind our
kings also, to receive the deuteronomie, at the ha^d^s of the leviticall
tribe, as that ye say that God gave here a law to the Jews, to make, or
chose a ki^ge, and so co^sequentlie all your illatio^s owte of this place seame
to be of small force. For to say the trewthe, as god neither gave the^ this,
or any other law, for chosenge of a king, nor did ^idde, or will them to
chose a king: so did the people most grevouselie offend God in demandinge a
king. 3. Politic.
For (thowghe by the Iudgeme^te of Aristotle and other Philosophers) a
Monarchy well and orderly used, is the best kind of all other regimentes
(which God does also well like) yet would he have no such magistrate among
the Jews. But as he chose them for his proper, peculier and selecte people,
and ruled them as well in the deserte, as in Iudaea, by a several peculier, and
distinct order and governeme^te from other nations, and after such wonderful
and miraculouse sort, as the like was never hard of in any regime^te
besides: so would he also reserve to him self only, the said supremacye and
monarchye. Neither was he a ^itle angree with the Jews, nor they co^mited any
small fault, but (as yt were) renovvnced and rejected gods own monarchy in
cravinge a king, as holy scripture plainelye and openly testifiethe. 1. Reg:
c. 8.
Non te (inquit) reieceru^t, sed me ne regnem super eos. And the people
afterward acknowledged their fault. Addidimus vniuersis peccatis nostris
malum, 1. Reg. 12.
vt peteremus nobis regem. God therefore did not bidd them, or will them to
chose a ki^ge, but foreknovvenge long before by his eternal foresight, what
they would do, (thovvghe contrary to his blessed will and pleasure) did in
this, as in other matters, bear withdraw their vvekenes, and condiscended unto
the same. And foretold them in this said, 17. chapter, that in case they
would needs have a king, of what kind and sort he should be. And therefore
immediatelye before the words that ye recite (thowe shall make him a king
over them) is this text, Cum ingressus fueris terram, quam dominus Deus dabit
tibi, and possideris eam, habitauerisque in ill a and dixeris: Co^stituam super
me regem sicut habent omnes per circuitu^ nationes, eu^ co^stitues. etc. And
when thowe shall come into the land which the lord thie God geaveth the,
and shall possess yt and dwell therein, if thovve say I will set a king
over me, like as all the nations that are abowte me, then thou shallt make him
king over the whom, etc. Which words making for the illustration of this
place, ye have omitted. Wherefore, as this place servethe nothing, for any
absolute election of a king, the which you seame especially to regard and
grownde your self upon, so does yt (as we have showed, as little relieve you,
to prove thereby your conclusions, especially against the ordinary
succession, either of a stranger, or of a woman, that ye would gather and
conclude, owte of the same. Thus have we sufficiently answered the place of
Deuteronomie for this one purpose. The other two aucthorities may be much
more easelie answered. The people mente nothing else by their said words
spoken to David, An anssvvere to the second of Samuel c. 5.
but that they were of the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as well as he,
and intended with true and sincere hearts unfeignedly to agnyse him, as
their chief lord and Sovereigne. For at that time the tribe of Judah only
(whereof king David came by liniall discente) did acknowledge him as king.
Now the residevve which before held with Saules son, did also incorporate
and unite them selves to the said kingdom. If this man look well upon the
matter, he shall find I trow, that the Queen of Scotts may as well call her
se^f the bones and flesh of the noble Princes of England, as this people call
them selves the bones and flesh of king David. But yet the great terrible
batteri^ge ca^no^ Athalia is behi^de. She being in possession of the ki^gdome,
seaue^ years, was justly thrust owte, by cause she was an alien: we may
then, sayethe this man, iustelye deny the Queen of Scotts before hand the
right of that, which if she had in possession, she could not iustelye enjoy.
Yet Sir, if the Queen of Scotts be no alien, as we have said, then is your
cannon shot more fearful then dangerouse. We deny not, but that Athalia
was lavvfullie deposed, but we beseache you to tell us your authors name, that
does assign the cause to be such, as ye allege. Suerlie for my perte after
diligente search, I find no such authors. Truth yt is that Josephus
writes as ye do, Iosep. Iud. antiq. li. 9 c. 6.
that she descended by the mothers side of the Tyrians and Sydonians, yet never
thelesse he assignethe no such cause as ye do: And as ye are in this your
pretty poisoned pamflett the first, I trow, of all christian men (I Will not
except either latin or greek, unless yt be some fantastycall fond and new
vpstarte Doctors, as Maistre Knoxe or some the like: neither Jew, Chaldyan
nor Arabyan) that has thus strangelye glosed and deformed this place of the
holy scripture, against the ordinary succeffion of women Princes, so are
you first also, A nevve fovnde and mad inter pretation, who is an alie^ made
by the adversary.
of all either deuines or lawiers through owte the world, that has set
forth this new fownde folishe law, that the kings child must be counted
an Alie^, whose father and mother are not of the same and one country. If the
French or Spanishe king chance to marrye an English woman, or the king of
England to marry a french, a Spanishe, or any other country woman, their
children by this new Lycurgus are Aliens, and so co^sequentlie in all other
nations all such as have been shall be aliens, by this your new oracle. For
what other cause show you, that this Athalia was an alien, but by cause her
mother was an alien Genus ducens, Iosep. li. 9. cap. 7.
say you a Tyrijs and Sidonijs, coming by liniall discente, by the mothers
side, from the Tyrians and Sydonians. King Achas married her mother, dawghter
to Ithoball king of the said Tyrians and Sydonians. This Athalia, whom
Josephus callethe Gotholia, Achas dawghter married Ioram king of Judah (her
brother called also Ioram being king of Israel) after the decease of his
father Achas. Athalia was no alie^ among the Jews.
So then ye see that this Athalia was no more an ali^n among the Jews, then
king Edbaldus was, the son of Bertha a French woman, and of king
Ethelbertus, the first christian king of the English nation: No more then
was the noble ki^ge Edward the third, borne of a French woman: No more then
Queen Marie was: No more then should have been the issewe of the said Queen
Marie, or our gracious Souereignes issewe should be, in case she married with
any foreign Prince. I perceive that your fellows, that would feign make king
Shephen and king Henry the second, and Arthure nephewe to king Richard the
first, aliens, had but rude, dull and gross heads in comparion of your
fine, subtle and high fetches. If I should now desire your patience, not
withstandinge the allegatio^s of all your divinity, to be conte^te a while,
and towchinge this matter to hearken to the most excellent ciuilian Vlpian,
thowghe he were an Ethnic, ye would parchance make little account of him, and
be angrye with me for producinge a profane witness against you. And yet
trewlye in this I offerre neither to you, nor yet to gods holy word any
injury in the world. For Christ his high and divine doctrine does not
subuerte nor impugn humane o^ civil policy, being not repugna^te to his
express word and will. Let us then hear who^ the said Vlpian makes an
Alien, Who is an alie^ by Vlpian.
and who^ he definethe to be an Alien. He is a Campane (sayethe this Vlpian)
that is borne of father and mother, being Campanes: Yea if his father be a
Campane, and his mother be a Puteolane, yet is the child a citezin or burgess
of Campanie. And then he shewethe farther, that in some contreyes, as among
the Ilians, the Delphians, and them of Pontus, the child shall be cownted to be
origiginallye of the mothers, and not of the fathers contreye. His words in
latin as he wrote them are these. L. 1. ff. ad muni. c. 1. pec.
Qui ex duobus Campanis parentibus natus est, Campanus est. Sed si ex patre
Campano, matre Puteolana aeque municeps, Campanus est, nisi forte priuilegio
aliquo materna origo censeatur: tunc enim maternae originis erit municeps,
vtopte Iliensibus concessum est, vt qui matre Iliensi est, sit eorum municeps.
Etiam Delphis hoc idem tributum and conseruatum est. Celsus etia^ refert,
ponticis ex beneficio Pompeij Magni compepetere, vt qui Po^tica matre natus
esset, Poticus esset. Which his saying is direct against you, for this your
strange declaration of Alienigen^ an alien. Well if neither the declaration of
Vlpian, nor yet the practice of the world, most conformable also to reason,
nor any thing else will satisfy you, unless yt be derived and taken owte of
holy scripture: we are co^tente to join issewe with you, and to be tried by
the same only. Matt. 1. and Iosue: 6.
Christ came liniallie of Booz, who^ Salmo^ begatt of Raab (as the most
common opinion of writers is) that betrayed Hierico to Iosue. And may we now
saulfly think that this Booz was a stranger, an Alien, and no Jew? And so
with all infringe, break, and peruerte the genalogiae of Christ, and the
continual succession of the Jews Christ's progenitors? Ye know that as
Athalias mother was a Tyrian or a Sidonian: so was Ruthe a Moabite. This Ruthe
married the foresaid Booz. I ask you now again, Whether Obed the son of
the said Booz and Ruth, were alie^s among the Jews? If you say he was not,
then must you needs confess the same of Athalia. If you say he was, then the
holy scripture makethe euide^tlie against you: David and Christ disce^de of
Obed Ruthes son
For of this Obed Christ came liniallye. And if you step forewarde as you
lustily begin, a foot or two more, ye will, or as well ye may make king
David also, to whom Obed was grande father, yea and Christ him self, not much
better then aliens. And so has Athalia at length spunne a fair threde for
you. We deny then that this Athalia was an alien among the Israelites, 4:
Reg. 11.
and therefore she could not be barred from any inheritance dew unto the
dawghter, among the children of Israel. Why Athalia was deposed.
Neither was she removed from the kingdom, as this sober man being best
awaked dreamethe, by cause she was a stranger: but for that she most cruelly
and unnaturally slaye^ge and murtheringe her own nephews the sons of her
son king Othozias lately killed, of Iehu by shameful means, usurped her
self the crown, apperteininge to her nephevve loas, who by the providence of
God, was (she being usurper of yt) praeserued from her butcherye. And after
seven years by the help of loada the high priest was anointed king, and
she deposed, and worthelie put to death. And this cause does appear eaven in
the very chapter and place, that this quiet and sober man does so soberlie
against the brawlinge brains allege. As for the cause he him self
proponethe: we will not stick with him to give him a longer day, to fetch
owte and shevve us his records, and his authors at his good leisure, Well
this stringe will not serve his bow. We will therefore listen again to him
and consider how well he harpethe upon the next stringe: Which suerlie does
geve as ill favored a iarringe, and as untunable a noise as the first, or
rather more untunable. Wherein our good quiet brother does so strain and
wreste this word (ex fratribus) among the brethren: that he wresteth away
not only the right and intereste the Queen of Scotts pretendethe to the
succession of the crown: But does vvreste with all the crown from all
Princes necks that have been, are, or shall be women: And of all such as have,
do, or shall claim their inheritance, An vnbrotherlye and fond straininge of
these words ex fratribus.
by the title and intereste of their motheres. which ca^n have no better
title, the^ their progenitors from whom they claim. For among his new
notable notes that he noteh owte of this seave^te^the chapter of deuteronomie,
for the chosinge of a king, we may note (sayethe he) the sex by the
masculine gender used in this word ex fratribus, for under the other sex
Ataxia most commonly creapethe into the stock and contrie. He sayethe also
afterward, This politic law that God did give the Jews, is grovvnded upon
the law of nature, and is also as everlastinge as nature yt self is, and is
of all natural men to be observed. Yt is (sayethe he) of nature that the
prescribed sex should govern the other: He meanethe women should be
governed. Then he knitteth up the conclusion of his nevve pestiferouse
policy: which I conclude, that gods law, nature and good reason do reiecte
the Queen of Scotts and deny her that kingdom, which she would so feign
possess. Who would ever have thowght that such a quiet sober brain, owte of
this one word fratribus, could have fownd in his heart so vnbrotherlye, yea so
vnchristianlye, and so fondlye with all, to extorte such an interpretation,
as is able (If yt were received) to disturb, infringe, and break the quiet
and lawful possession and inheritance of a great part of the Princes of the
world, and especially of his own and our gratiouse and Sovereign, good
Lady and Queen. Yea and as fondely and unnaturally to frame of him self a
nevve law of nature also: And so most vvretchedlye to corrupt, deprave, and
mayme both the law of God and nature. Yet by cause this man gives owte his
matters as yt were compe^diouse oracles, An answer to the adversary
towchinge the law of nature which he vvresteth against vvomens gouernemente.
and lest some might think, that such a sober man has some good and
substantial grovvnde in this his saying: saying he is so bold with his
own glosses upon the holy scriptures: I will be as bold upon him a little, to
siste and examine the weight and verity of them. And first tovvchinge the
law of nature, which he makethe as a pick axe to undermine the state of so
many Princes, and of his own Sovereign with all: We might here enlarge
many things how and in what sort the law of nature may be taken: l. 1.
ff. de iustir. and iure. L. veluti l. ex hoe l. o^nis eod. Est^em^ haec no^
scripta sed natalex: quam non didicimus, accepimus, legimus, verum ex natura
arripuimus, hau simus, expressimus, ad qua^ no^ docti sed facti, non i^stituti,
sed imbuti sumus: vt si vita nr^a in aliquas insidias si in vim, in tela aut
lattonu^ aut inimicoru^incidis set, omnis honesta ratio esset expediendae;
salutis.
but we will be therein compendiouse and short. The law of nature co^monlye
is proper and apperteininge asvvell to other living things as to man. As
Vlpian the notable lavvier vvritethe. There is an other law, that is called
Ius gentium, the law of all nations, And yt is called also the law of all
nature, by cause the discourse of natural reason forcethe all nations to obey
and keep this law, as to honor God, to obey our pare^tes and magistrates, to
keep and maynteine our bargains and promises i^ bie^ge and sellinge, and in
other co^tractes, to defend our selves from violence and injury, with a
number of such other. I suppose the adversary meanethe not of the first ki^de,
but of the second: Whereof he must neades mean, if he mean to speak any
thing to the purpose. I say then that this is a false, and an unnatural
assertion, to make this surmised law euerlasti^ge as nature it self is. The
law of nature or Ius gentiu^, is and ever Was after the time that there Were
any nations or people, and ever shall be. This co^terfeate lave of nature neither
is, nor ever was, nor as far as reason may reach to, ever shall be. Yt
shall be inowghe for us to o^throvve and cast underfoot this counterfeate law:
to shevve and prove that women have from time to Cicero pr^ Milone.
time borne princely regimente in the most notable parts i^ the world, The
practice of woman's regiment in Asia, Aphrica, and Europa.
and in the best and most famous common wealths that ever have been. For
the knowledge whereof, Solinus in collect.
I refer the Reader to auncie^te histories, being the noble registers of
antiquity, Plinius lib. 6. cap. 10.
which do plainly testify the same to have been often practiced in Asia,
Strab: geographe. lib. 14.
Aphrike, Arian. lib. 8 gest. Alex. Ma. Justinius lib. 1. Herod. lib. 1. Strabo.
lib. 16. Geogra. li. 16. Iosep. lib. 20. cap. 2. Antiq. ca. 20. Eusebius. lib. 2.
ca. 12. Ruff. eccle. hist. l. 2. c. 6. Clem. Alex and. lib. 1.
and Europe. Co^cerninge Asia, Queen Artemesia.
I find that Artemesia who builded the Sepulcre of her husband Mausolus one
of the notable spectacles and wonders of the world, Queen Ada.
and her sister Ada with others reigned in Caria. This Ada bei^ge thruste owte
was restored by Alexander the great. Vvomans regiment in Pandea a country of
India.
The country also of Pandea i^ India was governed by women. The gouernemente of
the Queen Semiramis and Nicocris in the empire of Babylon. Queen Semiranus and
Nicocris.
Of Queen Thomyris among the Masagites, Stromat. 1. Justinius li. 1.
is to their great praise and commendation in aunciente monumentes recorded.
Queen Thomeris.
Josephus makes me^tio^ of Helena Helena.
the Queen of the Adiabe^s. Mammia.
Eusebius, of Mammia the Queen of Saraze^s. Woman's reg^mente in Media Queen
Atossa.
Atossa was gouernesse of the Persians, a most excellent woman also for
learning. Yt may also appear by the story that Iustine writethe of Astyages
the king of the Medians, that in Media the woman supplied the lack and want
of male children in the princelye gouernemente. Tacitus li. 2. stat^m a
principio.
There is mention made also of Erato whom the Parthians did chose to be their
Queen. Queen Erato.
We will now make up our conclusion for Asia with Claudianus verse.
Claudianus li. 1. in Eutropium.


Maedis leuibusque Sabaeis
Imperat hic sexus reginarumque sub armis Strab. lib. 12. and 17.

Barbariae pars magna iacet. Just. li. 18.

OWte of the which we have purposelye left Iudaea, Diado. Sie lib 1. ca. 2.
and 4, 19.
reseruinge yt a principal help, for the utter ouerthrowinge of this man's
fantastical interpretation of the foresaid word fratribus. Woman's regiment
in Aphrike.
In the stories and monumentes towchinge Aphrike, we read of Queen Dido at
Catharge, Queen Dido.
Cleopatra i^ Aegypte, and of diverse other Queen's there. The first king of
Egypt was Osiris, Queen Cl^opatra.
who in his abse^ce committed the whole regime^te to his wife Isis. Que^. Isis.
In Aethiopia where reignethe a mighty Prince a christian man* Damianu^ a Goes
demoribus and fide Aethioph.
and one that has many kings subjected to him, not many years since in
the nonage of king David, his grand mother the Que. did most politikelie
wisely and godly rule these realms. And yt appearethe in the old stories
that i^ christ's time and before, Beda* c. 8 i^ Act. Apost. Eusebius. l. 2. eccl.
histo. cap. 1.
that country had no other princes the^ women, which were called all Candaces
such a one reigned there abowte the time of Christ's passion, whose chief
seruante was converted to Christ's faith by saint Phillippe. Plinius l. 6.
cap 29.
By whose means the Queen also upon his return, Strab. l. 17 Act. Apo. cap.
8.
became with her subjects a Christian vvoma^: And that is thovvght to be the
first country, Doretheus de vita and obitu prophet. and A. Hier. c. 52.
that publikelie embraced the faith of Christ. And there upon the saying of
the Prophet David seamethe to be verified, saying Aethiopia preveniet manus
Aethiopia the first christened among other co^treyes, but Britaniae the first
among the Provinces of Rome.
eius Deo. Esaie. Hill. in psa: 67.
And yet that not with standinge owre worthy Brytanie among all the Princes
that were of the Roman empire, Eusebius: l. 2. cap. 1.
has thereof the noble praerogatiue. Women were the chief magistrates among
the Tenesians and Sebrites. Sabellicus. Srabo. lib. 16.
In the time of king Solomon, Woman's regiment in Aethiopia the Queen of Saba.
the noble vvoma^, that came from the utter most part of the earth to hear
the vvisdome 3. Regum 10. and 2. Par. 9. Matthew. 12. and Luc 11.
of the said Salomo^, whom the old testamente callethe the Queen of Saba: the
new testamente the Queen of the Sowthe: was a Queen, and as Josephus writethe
the Queen of Aethiopia and Aegypte, Iosep. Antiq. Iudai. lib. 8. ca. 2.
contreyes of such greatenes and largenes, as no one Prince throvvgh ovvte all
our Empire, has so ample dominion with in the same. Parchaunce her dominion
did stretche to Cephala, which dravvethe well tovvarde the fartheste part
of Aphrica. Which interpretation seamethe not far a square from the words
of the holy scripture, from thence, as the Annals of the said contreye
record, Saloma^s ships every third year browght meruelouse plentye of
gold and silver: Salomans ships fetched gold from Cephala.
other suppose that the said navy went to the late found lands of the
weste India, especially to the Island now called Spaniola. I find in the
said Aphrike one strange and found kind of people called Buaoi, Stobeus
sermo. 42 ex Nicolao de moribus ge^tium.
where men governed men only and women governed women only. And yet were not
they so hard masters to women, as ye are, nor thowghte women's regimente (as
ye do) to be against nature. And to finishe this second part, yt seameth by
Lucane that in theys quarters of the world, yt was no new or strange thing
to see a woman a Princee, as appearethe by theys words of Queen Cleopatra.

Non vrbeis prima tenebo
Foemina Niliacas: Luc. li. 10, Justin. l. 14 and 20.
nullo discrimine sexus
Reginam scit far Pharos.
AS for Europe, Vvomans regiment in Europa. Queen Olympias in Epire.
as yt is better known to us, so therein have we with all greater store of
examples of this kind of gouernemente. In Epire, yt appearethe by Olympias
dawghter to Pyr^hus: In Macedonia where a woman called also Olympias succeeded
after the death of Alexander the great: Olympias i^ Macedonia Iren^.
Yea and in the great and famous empire of Constantinople, where Irene,
Theodora, Theodora
Zoe Zono. tom 3. Annal. P^inius: l 34 cap. 6.
an other Theodora, and Eudocia Eudocia.
were the cheyf and high magistrates. The said second and last Theodora
answered the Ambassadors her self, and iudiciallye in her own person gave
sentence, as well in public as in private causes. W^me^s regiment in Spain
Porti^gale* Burgundy and Flaunders Irmelgardis daughter of Conrade Duke of
Fra^con.
Whose government was also prosperouse happy and fortunate. More over yt
appears that the Illyria^s and Slauons were ruled by Queen Teuca, what shall
I speak of Spain and Portugale, of the Dukedom of Burgu^dye and of the
Erledome of Flaunders, and of other parts of lower Germany? Conrade the Duke
of Fra^conye and La^rgraue of Hesse was made countye Palatine of Rhene and
Duke of Lorra^ne, by the inheritance of his wife Irmelgardis. Monster Cos^.
universal li. 3. page 620.
He had but one daughter, who was married to Co^rade duke of Sueuia, whereby he
was made comtye Palatine of Rhene. Agnes wife to Henry duke of Saxony
This Conrade had a daw^hter called Agnes married to He^rie Duke of Saxony and
Lim^burge, who thereby enjoyed the county Palatine. The like may be said of
diverse other parts of the Germanicall Empire. Agenes wif to Henry the 3.
Emperor.
Yea a woman has ruled and governed the said whole Empire, as yt is
euide^te in Agnes the vvif of the Emperor Henry the third, duringe the time
of the minority of her son He^rie the fowrthe. And yet the same Empire, Paul
Aemil lib. 3.
ye wot well passes by choice and election, and not by liniall succession of
blood. Chari. li. 3.
Yea many hundrethe years ere she was borne, and in the floreshinge time of
the old Roman Empire, Fulgo. l. 8. cap 16. de dict. and fac. memor.
Mesa Varia gra^dmother to the Emperors Heliogabalus and Alexander Seuerus,
sat with the senate at Rome, heard and examined the weighty causes of the
Empire, Crana noah daughter.
and set her hand also to such things as passed towchinge the public
affairs. I do now adioine the kingdom of Sicilie, Beros. li. 5. L^u^: lib.
1. Dec. 1.
and Naples in Italye of the which I talye, Noah (whom the propha^e vvriters
call Ianus) made Crana his dawghter rul^r and Queen. Aene. Sylui: de Asia, ca.
20.
Where also Lauinia reigned after the death of Aeneas. And as for Naples, this
presidente of vvomanlye gouerneme^te, is not to be fownde there only of later
years in both the Queen's called Iohanne, Queen of Naples Amalacintha.
but eauen from very Ancient time. Which thing the stories do record in
Amalasyntha that governed after king Theodoricus with her son Athalaricus.
Cronic. Palmerij and H. contracti. Mu^st. universe. Cosmo. lib 4.
The said Amalasyntha was mother to Almaricus king of Spain and after his
death ruled her self the said realm. Wome^s regiment in Loraine and Mantua.
Let us now add further the Dukedomes of Lorane and Mantua, the ki^gdomes of
Swethia, Aeneas Siluius in desc. Asi^: c. 10. Hector. Boet: l. 1. H^ Sco. Vide
la Geneal. des Rois de Fra^c. impr. Paris. 1561 in Carolo Magno.
of Dania, and of Noruegia. In the ki^gdome of Svvethia Dania and Norwegia
Boeame Hungary and Scotland.
Whereof Margarett the dawghter of waldema^us was gouernes^e and Queen. The
kingdoms of Beam and of Hungary. And to draw nerer home, the realm also of
Scotla^de, which realm has denomination of a woman, as their stories
report, as has likewise Flanders. The like some of our stories report of
England, wherein I will make no fast foringe. Now touchi^ge the feminine
succession to the right of the croune of England, England
it is no new fownde succession: and much less unnatural. We read in our
cronicles of Queen Cordell, the third heir and davghter of king Leire the
tenthe king of Britannie, that restored her father to the ki^gdome, being
deposed by her two other sisters. We read that abowte three hundred fifty
and five years, before the Nativity of Christ, Martia proba Martiae proba:
duringe the nonage of her son, did govern this realm full politikelye and
vvise^ye: Hele^a mother to Co^sta^tine the great.
and established certain laws called Leges Martianae. There be as well of our
own, as of external historiographers, that for a most certaintye affirm,
that Helena the noble Constantine his mother was a Britane, Onuph. de Romans
pri^c. Eus^bi. de vita Co^sta^. l^. 1.
and the only dawghter and heir of Coelus king of Britane, and that the
said constantine was borne in Britanie. suerlye that his father Constantinus
died in Britanye at york, Eutropius.
and that the said Constantinus begane his noble victoriouse race of his most
worthy Empire in Britanye, yt is reported by Aunciente vvriters, and of great
faith and creditt. And likewise that long before the said Helens time,
women bare the greateste svvaye. Britanes had women for their Capitaines in
warfare. Voadic^.
Among other Co^n^lius Tacitus writethe thus. His atque alijs inuicem
instructi Voadica generis regij foemina duce (neque enim sexum in imperijs
discernunt) sumpsere vniuersi bellum. In vita Agricolae.
We have now alredie shevved of Henry the second, Henry the seco^d^ king by
his mothers right.
who obtained the crown by his mothers right. Which said king by the title
of his wife, and after him his successors kings of England, did enjoy the
Dukedom of Aquitania, and the Erldo^e of Poyctieres, Vide Allia^t geneal.
claud. paradini 1561.
as the said kings successors should have done also (as we have showed
before) the Dukedom of Britanye, if Arthure king Richardes nephevve had not
by the vsurpinge of king Johan, and his unnatural crueltye, died withovvte
issewe. And by what other right then by the woman's inheritance dew to king
Edward the third by his mother the French kings Davvghter, do the kings of
this realm bear the Arms and title of the kings of France? The French men
make not vvomens regiment unnatural.
And thovvghe the french men th^n^ke their part the better against us, yt is
not but upon an old politic law of their own (as they say) and not upon
any such fond grovvnde as ye pretend, that women's regiment is unnatural.
Which regimente, ye stowtelie affirm to be far a sonder from any natural
regimente. Yea trewlie as far, as was the boys head from the shovlders the
last Bartholomewe fair at London, Which many a poor soul did beleave to be
true. For as the boys head remained still upon his neck and shoulders,
thowghe yt seamed by a light livelie Legerdemayne to be a great way from the
body: So would ye now cast a myste before our eyes and make us beleave, that
womanly governemente and nature, be so divided and sondred, that they may in
no w^se be linked and cowpled to gether. But suerlie the French nation was
never so unwise, to think this kind of governemente repugnante to nature, or
to gods h^lie word: for then they would never have suffered their realm to
have been so often governed and ruled by women in the time of the Nonage or
absence of their kings, as by Adela the mother of king Philippus, and by
Blaunche the mother of Saint jews, Adela King Philips mother and Blaunche the
mother, of S. jews.
and by the wife of the late king Frances taken prisoner at Pavia, and by
diverse other. Neither should the said Ad^la, and Blaunche have been so
commended for their said noble and worthy rule and governemente. The said
frenchemen, Se the preface of the said Alliances.
thowghe by policy they have provided to exclude strangers from the
inheritance of the crown: The French me^ hold great principalities by the
vvomens right.
Yet they them selves hold at this day by the vvomans title and intereste the
Dukedom of Britanie with diverse other goodly possessions. And we have showed
before how jews the Dolphine of France made part title to the crovne of
this realm, in the title of his wife. The co^clusio^ against the Adversary:
towchi^ge the law of nature.
Thus I have, as I suppose, sufficiently proved, that this kind of regime^te
is not against nature, by the anciente and continual practice of Asia,
Aphrica, and Europa. For the parfitinge of the which last part of Europa,
and of the whole three parts, I end with the notable Poet virgilles verses.

Filius huic fato diuum prolesque virilis
Nulla fuit, Virg. li. 7.
primaque ^riens erepta iuuenta est.
Sola domum, and tantas seruabat filia seeds.
WE knytt up therefore our conclusion against you after this sort: That
law and usage can not be covvnted against the law of nature, or ius gentium,
which the most part of all contreies, and one great or notable part of the
whole world does and has ever used, But this law or usage is such, Ergo
yt is not agai^ste the law of nature. The mayor neadethe no prouf: as for the
proof of the minor, we neade to imploye no farther labor, then we have
already done. Wherevpo^ the co^seque^t^ must neades be inferred, that this law
or usage does well agree and stand with the law of nature. The reason thereof
is, that yt is most natural, the davvghter to inherit her fathers patrimony,
Where unto if there be a dignity annexed, both are so united and knitt
together, that they ca^ in no wise be vnlinked. Marie, if you had driven your
argume^te of the dewtie and obedience that the wife owethe to her husband, and
had argued, yt is the law of nature, that the wife should be ruled and
governed by her husband, Ergo yt is against nature, that the wife should be
head to her husband in respect that she is his wife: then had you argued
conformablie to reason, scripture, and nature. But if you will thereof infer,
Ergo she can in no wise be head to her husband: The wife in some case may be
head to her husband.
then play you the Sophister, making a fallible and vitiouse argument: and
making a confuse minglinge of those things, that be of sondrie and diverse
natures. The child must obey his Scholemaister and pare^tes, and may justly
of the^ be chastened, thowghe he be a Prince: Yet this not withstandinge, the
said child may use his aucthoriti^ by his magistrates against his
scholemayster: Yea and if the case so require, against his parents to. As did
Edward the confessor, and king Edward the third, against their mothers,
eauen so the case farethe with the husband and the wife. The wife may with
ovv^e any impairinge or maiminge of her dew^ie to God, or to her wedloke,
repres^e her husbands misdemeanure, if yt be noifull to the common wealth:
And yet is she not therebye exempted from such dewtie, as the matrimonial
co^iunctio^ crauethe of the wife toward her husband. Ye frame an other
argument of inconveniences, as thowghe under the vvomans regime^te, Ataxia,
that is to say disorder most co^monlye creapethe in. I will not deny, but
sometime yt is so, but that most co^monlye yt is so, that I deny. Let both
the regimentes be compared and matched together, and weighed by an indifferent
balla^ce, and I am deceived, but the inconveniences of the man's regimente for
the rat^* will ouerpaise the other. And yt is full unmeet vnseamelye and
daungerouse matter, Princes right mate not be ruled by bli^d ghesses.
to rule Prices right and titles by such blind ghesses. Well you will yet
say, ye have scripture on your side. Ye say the Jews were commanded to
take no king but ex fratribus, a brother. Ergo we can have no sister to our
Queen. To this objection also my two former answers may sufficie^tlye serve.
First you must prove, that all Christian Princes are obliged and subjected to
this part of Moses law, and that shall ye never be able to do, which thing
ye saw well inowghe, and therefore ye were feign to underprop and uphold
this your ruinouse and vveake buildinge, with the strong force, of the law
of nature. But this force, as you have heard, is but the force of a bull
reshe. Ovvre second answer also will sone infringe and break this your
conclisio^, which respectethe only the free and voluntary election and choice
of a king. But we speak of birthe and succession, wherein we have none
intereste: but God, who is the only Judge and vmpier, and has by his divine
providence made to our hand his choice alredye, which if we would undo and
reuerse, we might seame to be very sawcye and maleperte with him. But we
will remove and reli^quishe all theys helps, What absurdity follows by
straininge this wo^de ex fratribus.
and see what and how fa^re this authority forcethe by the very words.
Frater is the masculine gender (ye say) and therefore women are to be removed
Then by this rule women also must be excluded from their salvation, by cause
scripture says: He that shall beleaue and be baptized shall be saved. Marci
vltus Ps. 1. and 40.
Holy scripture abowndethe of like places: Matthew. 5.
As, Beatus vir qui non abijt in consilio impiorum: L^uc^us.. quaesitu^ if. de
lege Tert. and ibi Bart.
etc. Beatus qui intelligit: etc. And by this rule women are excluded, from
the eight beatitudes, But we will not shifte your own word, Brother. We say
therefore that this word must not be taken so straightly, Gene. 13.
and narowlie as ye take yt: for first not only in scripture, Apollon.
Rhodius li. Argon. 8. le. 1. ff. de verborum signif.
but in old aunciente profane authors, yt comprehendethe the brothers
child: Yea and sometime in civil law cosen germa^s, coming of two
brethren. Le. tres fr^es. ff. de pactis and l. lucius ff. famil. herciscund.
Abraham called Loathe his brother, Medea also callethe her sister Chalciopes
sons, her brethren speakinge to her sister in this sort.

(...) Leuit. 19.

(...).
Again as in the civil law the masculine gender comprehendethe the
feminine: Deuteronomy. 29.
so does yt in your word brother. Zachar, 7.
Modestinus vvritethe thus: Matthew. 18.
Tres fratres, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
Titius, Menius and Seia. 1. loan 2.
Paulus also Lucius and Titia fratres. Quesitu^ est a^ quod heredes fratribus
rogati essent restitute etia^ ad sorores pettineret, respo^dit pertinere, nisi
aliud sensisse testatore^ probetur, dicta leg. lucius. quaesitu^ leg. Tert.
Sceuola sayethe. the bequestes made by the testatour fratribus, to his
brethren, shall be beneficial to his sisters also, unless yt may be proved,
that the testatourmente otherwise. Now when the holy scripture saiethe,
thovve shalt not hate thy brother. Thovve shall not lend upon usury to thye
brother, Let every man use his brother mercifullye, if thye brother trespass
against thee forgive him, with draw your selves from every brother vvalkinge
disorderlye, He that hatethe his brother is in Darkness, with a number of like
suite: Shall we infer there upon that we may hate our sister, that we
may oppress our sister with vsurye, that we may use our sister as
vnmercifullye as we will, with owte any remorse of conscience, and are not
bownde to forgive her, nor to eschew her company being excommunicated, or a
notoriouse offendour? Neither this word brother excludethe a sister, nor this
word King a Queen, by any scripture.
Wherefore neither this word brother excludethe a sister, nor this word
king in scripture excludethe a Queen: In the greek tongue one word
representethe both br^ther and sister, sauinge that there is a difference of
gender, (...) after the same rate the words king and Queen are knitt up in
both one, ansvell in the greek (...), as in the hebrewe Melech and Malcha, and
i^ the French Roy and Royne, and from this the latin tongue Rex and Regina,
does not far disagree. Saying then by interpretatation this word brother,
conteinethe the word sister also in scripture, and the word king by
property of one and the same voice and signification, expressethe the Queen
both in scripture and in other to^ges: why should we not as well communicate
to women the dignity apperteyninge to the name, and resembled by the same, as
the name yt self? For eaven in this our own country, albe yt the names of the
king and of the Queen do utterly varye one from the other, and also the
aunciente statutes of the realm, do not only attribute and refer all
praerogatiue and praeeminence, power and Jurisdiction, unto the name of a
king, but do geve also, assign, and appointe, the correction and punishemente
of all offenders, against the realm and dignity of the crown and the laws
of the realm, unto the king: Yet are all manner of the foresaid
jurisdictions and other praerogatiues, and ovvght to be, as fully as wholly
and as absolute lie in the Prince female, as in the male, Anno Marie. 1. ca. 2.
and so was yt ever deamed judged and accepted, before the statute made for the
farther declaration in that point. The like we say of both the foresaid
words Brother, and Rex used in this place of scripture, whereof if there do yet
remain any scruple or dowbte to any man, for the avoidinge and clear
extinguissinge of the same, we will refer the Reader to the noble civilia^
Paulus, l. fin. ff. de legibus.
and to the rule before by us towched. Si de interpretatione legis quaeratur,
The l^ves never interpreted this word after the sorteas the adversary does.
in primis inspiciendum est quo iure ciu^^as re^ro in eiusmodi c^sibus vsa
fuit, optima enim legum interpres consuetudo. Yt is for us then to consider
whether in Iudaea and Jerusalem, women have at any time been the chief rulers
and governesses: And whether the Jews ever interpreted this place, after the
meaning and sense of this man? Vide dictas, Allia^ce Cl. paradini.
Suerlie at such time as christian me^ bare rule at Jerusalem, we know well
there was no such interpretation. For among other Fulke the comte of Aniowe,
Fulke and other Kings of Jerusalem by their wives right. Salo^. Herodes
sister a gouernesse in Judea.
who left his said county to Geffrey his son, father to Henry the second
by the Empress Maude, and went to Jerusalem to king Baldewin the second,
and there married Meli^ende his dawghter and heir, was afterward by his wives
title king of Jerusalem. Salome Herodes sister was made governesse by
Augustus Caesar, of Iamnia, Azotu^, Phasalidea and Ascolania, Joseph. lib. Ant.
Iudic. 17. c. 13:
which thing is a good prouf that the Romans thovvght yt not unnatural (as
ye think) for a woman to enioie; civil gouernemente. The wives of Ioannes
Aristobulus and Alex. governed the leves.
I might here add the wives of Johannes, of Aristobulus, and of Alexander, who
governed and ruled the said Jews after the death of their husbands with
such other, which stories thovvghe they be not in scripture, Joseph. li. 1^.
c. 19. 20 Egesip. de excid:
yet are they authe^ticall and of good creditt. And yet are we not altogether
unfurnished of a scripturelie example, but rather we are so furnisshed, that
God, Hier. lib. 1. cap. 12.
as long before foreseinge that there should come such unnatural cauillinge
quarrellers, against his creature and providence, and against their own
natural Princes, has as yt were all at ons met with them, and ansvvered to
all such calumniouse cauillinge of yours and such other, as ye shall by and
by understand. A woman pardie, A woman the Image of God, as well as man.
if we believe you, must not keep the state and honor of a Prince and Queen,
and why so I pray your? Was not she created to the Image of God as well as
man? And does nor she represe^te the majesty of God? Did not God bless them
both? Genesis 1. and 3.
Did not God bid them rule over the fish of the sea, and over the fovle of
heaven, and over everye beast that moves upon the earth? But what thing
mean ye by the Image of god? Ephe. 4.
Mean you as sai^te Paul seameth to mean? That man was created in
righteousness and true holiness? This is true also in the woman. Some thyncke
that the Image of god representeh the blessed Trinity, which is (as such an
high thing may be) some what resembled by memory, by will, and by
understanding: Which are in women, as well as in men. What thing is there
that reason, wytt and understanding may reatche to, that woman has not,
Women learned.
or may not atchieve and attain? For learni^ge, there have been many women
exacthe learned in Music, Astronomye, Clem. Ale. Stromat. li. 1. Plato in
Menexemo.
Phylosophye, Oratorye, Physyke, in Poetrye, in law and Deuinitye. Atossa the
Queen of the Persyans, of whom we have spoken before, was the first that
invented the manner of writing of epistoles: Socrates i^ Symposio Platonis.
Aspasia was schole maistresse to that notable Orator and Captain Perycles:
Albericus lib. 6. qui filiu^. ff. vbi pupil. ed. Diod Sic. lib. 1 and 5.
Bibliot.
the noble Philosopher Socrates was not ashamed to be tawght of Dictina.
Accursius his daughter professed the Civil law ope^lie at Bononie. The
Sibilles be famous among writers ^swel christians as other. Paula and her
davghber Eustochio^ were notable learned: and diverse other women in Saint
Hieromes time (as yt appearethe in his works) besides diverse other before his
time, Hieron. praefat. in Sopho^n.
or Who^ he makethe mention, as also of the before named Aspasia, of Sappho,
Cornelia, and such like. Hypatia passed all the philosophers of her time,
Trip. hist. li. 11. c. 12.
and succeeded Plotinus in Plato his schole ope^lye professinge at Alexandria
diverse liberal sciences. Diod. Sioul li. 1. and 5. Bibliot.
And what were the nine Muses, but virgins most excellent in the same: Who is
called the Goddess of learning, but Minerua? Which also found owte the Art
of pla^tinge and settinge. What should I now speak of the noble learned
women of our Britanie? Of Ca^bra the dawghter of king Belin, who promulged the
laws which of her name (as some of our country men writ) have their
denomination and are called Sicambricae. Of Martia Proba, of Helena, and such
other the like. We neade not ru^ne up to so high and far years: we have
hereof at home late and also present, and worthy examples, emonge whom I may
set with the first and best our Queen's noble majesty. Percha^ce ye will
obiecte, that women are unable and insufficiente to consulte of great and
weighty affairs, as being but of weak and feeble wit and counsel. Illa
Numae co^iux consiliumque fuit. Ovid. 3. fast.
If this reason hold, Iustini. auth. vt i^dic. fine quoque suffrag. in princ.
leg. been: C. de p^script. quadriennal. Herod. halli. l. 1. Tripert. l. 9. ca.
31. Paulus Diaco. de gestis long. Beda: li. 1. cc^ie hist.
ye must exclude from all princely honor and regimente, all kings that be
under age, or otherwise that lack discretion, Justinian and other Princes
co^sulted with their vviues in publuke af faires.
as well as women. And yet as weak as they are, Numa king of the Romans and
the great Monarche Justinian, besides others, did consulte to the singulier
commodity of them selves and their commonweals, with their wives, for the
better orderinge of the public affairs. The life of the great monarch Cyrus
was preserved by the counsel of an heardemans wife Theodosius also the
Emperor took great benefitt by the God counsel of his wife. Women the
occasion that Kings their husbundes were converted to the faith
Thodelinda was the occasion that her husband Agillolphus king of the
Lumbardes, Paulus Aemil. lib. 1. Pluta. in co^para. Nume and Lieur. and and in
vita Aegidis. Aug. de ciui. dei: l. 18 c. 9.
and Bertha that our king Ethelbertus* Clotildis that Clodoueus the king of
France received the Christian faith. Th^deli^da
The Lacedemonia^s the wisest people among the Graecians, Bertha.
and the Athenienses also used in the old time to have women present,
Clotildis.
at the debatinge of public affairs, which thing was practiced among the
old Germa^s. Cornel. Tacit. de moribus Germanorum.
Neither Socrates nor plato, do altogether remove women being apt and mete
thereto, from public administration. Aristotle confesses, that in the common
wealth of the Lacedemonia^s, Plato de repub. 5. Aristot. Pol. 7.
many things were done by Women. The said Aristotle thowghe he p^ferre the
rule and gouerneme^te of men: Plato and Aristotle do not utterly reiecte
woman's government.
Yet does he not reiecte the other, as unnatural, but grauntch. (...). That
so^etime women bei^ge great i^heritours* have the pri^cipalitie. Now that
many commonweals have been co^mendablie and worthelie governed by them,
Ethic li. 8. ca. 10.
and that in their gouernemente lacked neither wit, policye, dexteritye,
prudence, liberalitye, justice, nor mercy (which among all her other
princelye qualityes, glistereth most orientelye in our most gratiouse
Sovereign) neither any other thing mete for a Prince, I could easelie
declare, but I do forbear by reason of tedieusnes, and for that in the
perusinge and dyscussinge of the stories by me alredie rehearsed: yt Will most
easelie, most fullye, and most euide^tlie fall owte to all such, as be
desirouse to travail therein. In case all this will not satisfye you and that
ye think yt still to be unnatural and against scripture, for a woman that is
ordained to be subjected to her husband, to be the gouernesse and head of a
public state: And that ye thi^cke also that thowghe for all other respects, a
Woman might be a governesse yet consideringe, that she must have the managinge
of Martial exploytes, which in deed may seame in no wise agreeable to a
Woman, and is suerlie the difficultiste matter of all in our case and question,
and that you can not, or will not be satisfied, unless ye may for this, and
all other dowbtes, be by scripture persuaded: Lo then I bring to you one
authority of holy scripture, to serve all turns. Debora was gouernesse of
the jews by Gods special appoi^teme^te.
I Bring, I say, noble Debora, to decide and determine all this controversy
and contention. who^, ye ca^ not deny, was the chief and supreme magistrate,
over the people of God, to Gods well likinge, and by his own especial
gratiouse appoi^teme^te. She heard, determined, and decided all manner of
litigiouse, Iudic. 4.
and dowbtefull controversies, as well for bargaynes and contractes, as for
dowbtes and a^biguities of the law: And that not by other magistrates
intermedia^te, but by her self personally. Erat aute^ Prophetissa. she was a
prophetisse. Hom. 4. in 4. c. Iudic.
Which words Origines singulerlie well does note: saie^ge that holy
scripture does not use such phrase of speakinge of any other of the Judges:
least that any man should grudge and repyne (as the froward natured man
does) at wome^s regime^te. Pollio vopiscus in vita Aureliani.
Let no man tell me now of the cowragiouse Amazones? Let no man tell me of
zenobia the Queen of the Palmeryes, Hero. l. 8.
and beside her excelle^te learning of her noble cheualerye, Just. lib. 2.
nor of Artemisias, that white liuored and cowarde Perses, his manly wife, nor
of our manly voadica? Nor of any other the wise polityke victoriouse Queen's,
Iudic. 4.
that we have before named, or of any such like. Joseph. antiq.
Owre Debora shall serve us, Iudic li. 5. cap. 6.
one for all. Iabin the king of the chanonites had kept the people of Israel,
for their sins and offenses to God, twe^tye years in great miserye
slavery and bondage. He had three hundred thowsande fotemen, ten thowsande
horsemen, and three thowesande chariottes, seruinge for the exploites of his
wars. This noble Debora sent for Baracke, willinge him to muster the people,
and with ten thowsande men to set upon Sysira Iabins captain. The great
victory of Debora.
But Baracke would not go unless she went also: well says she, I will go
with the. When they should have buckeled, Baracke and the Israelytes, fearinge
the huge multitude of the enemies would have recoyled back into some saulfer
and surer places. Nay says Debora, depart not, pluck up your hearts, for
all is ours. And upon this they encountered with the enemy, and behold there
fell sodenlie upon the enemies faces so vehemente a storm of rain and hayle,
that yt took from the^ their sight, and did so sore beat them, that for very
could and weakness they were not able to hold their weapons in their
hands. There upon being wonderfully discowraged, breakinge their arraye
they took them to their feet, and in fleinge some were slain by the
Israelites, some by their own horse men and chariottes. Sysi^a him self was
also slain. I speak not this of Debora by cause, I think warlike matters
properly and so well to apperteine to women as to men. I know and do well
allow the saying in Homer of Hectour to his wife.

(...)
(...)
(...). Iiad. 6.

I speak yt to this purpose only to show that a women may not only have
ciuilll regimente in other things, but may intermedle also when the case
requirethe with warlike matters, The ceremonies that kings of England used
in their coronation.
and be present with the army in the field. And this also among other
aunciente and sole^me ceremonies, the gyrdinge of our Sovereign at her
coronation with a sword, the settinge of a pair of Spurs to her heales
may well signify. Which ceremonies, thovghe they have been used from the time
of king Edward the confessor at least, Vide speculu^ histo Richa. Cicest.
lib. 3. cap. 3.
or from the noble Allured, and that upon kings only, except our own time:
Yet the reason and signification of the same may and does take place in women
Princes also, and in our Sovereign, All be yt ^. Ambr. li. de vid. thinks,
her to have been a widove, and Barach to be her son, sai^ge: strenuos enim
no^ sexus, sed^tus facit. vid. caeter. ibidem.
to putt her in remembrance to chastise and repress malefactors with
convenient Justice. Yea with speade to pursue not only by her under
officiers, but in her own Royal person (if the necessity of the time does
require yt) her majesty's inward, or owterwarde ennemies, wherein she has a
presidente in this vvorthie Debora. This Baracke of whom we have spoken by the
consent of the most part of the expositors of holy scripture was Deboras
husband: Whereby ye may see, that the matrimonial duty of the wife to the
husband does nothing repugne to the public administration and office of the
wife each with other may fre^delye and peaceablye agree, She may serve all
turns to the contentation of God, her husband, and of the common welthe. For
the respect whereof, the said husband being but a member and percell of the
same, and as subject to his wife in that respect, as any other: She may,
yea and owght to command the said husband, and as the case may stand,
severely to punish his owteragiouse behavior and doings tovardes the said
common wealth. This noble Debora therefore co^demnethe your co^clusio^, both
unnatural and derogatiue to holy scripture. Neither will this evasion releaue
you (that some of your affinite, for the maintenance of this so wrong an
opinion have used)* that this is but one bare and an extraordinarye priueleged
and personal example, One only example in scripture a suffice^te p^^idente.
haui^ge none other the like in scripture: and therefore not to be drawn to
make thereof a rule or preside^te, for woma^lye gouerneme^te. If this your
reply be effectual, then farewell the baptism of yo^ge children, whereof yt
will be hard to find more then one, if that one example may be fownde in all
the holy scripture. The^ fare well a number of rightes, ceremonies, customs,
and orders as well i^ ecclesiastical, as i^ political affairs, all which have
but one, and some no one example at all therein: Yet yt so being that the use
thereof is not repugna^te to the said holy scripture, they have been, they
are, and may well here after be kept, used and observed. And yet I know no
cause, but that the worthy Iudithe Judith: 13.
may be an other example also. Woe thowghe she were not the gouernesse of the
common wealth at that time, Judith. c. 8.
but others: Yet played she that part, that seamed most abhorringe and
strange to woman kind in deuisinge, yea and most manfullye and meruelouslye
executinge in her own person the renowned slawghter of the arrogante, haughtye
and proud Tyra^te Holofernes. The slawghter of Holofernes by Judith.
As her stomach and cowrage was manlye and stowte in that act, so was she
not only a noble virtuous woman, but a meruelouse wise woman with all, and
so was taken and judged to be of all the people. Whereby yt will follow by
good reason, that in case she had been the gouernesse of all the people, her
go^neme^te would have been as well profitable to the common welthe, as
comfortable both to nature and the holy scripture also. Which example thowghe
yt may seame sufficient to overthrow your answer, be yt never so
artificiallye forged, to Debora: Yet to refute and to refell yt utterly, not
only by examples, but eauen by plain and full authority of holy
scriptures, let me be so bold, as to dema^de your answer to a question or
two? First whether if a man seized in lands and possessions die with owte
issue male, his dawghter by holy scripture, shall enjoy the said lands and
inheritance, or no? In case ye say she shall not, the plain words of the
scripture euidentlye do reprove you. Leuit. c. 6.
If you grant yt, then ask I farther, what if any civil gouernemente more
or less be annexed and united to these inheritances (As yt is not only in
Empires and kingedomes, but in many Dukedomes, Yt seameth plai^e by the rules
and words of holy scripture that a woman may have civil gouernemente.
Erledomes, yea and Lordeshippes also) Whether she shall be excluded from the
said her inheritance? If ye say yea, then do you say against the scripture:
if ye say that the Inheritance must remain in her, and the civil
gouernemente to others, then say ye against all reason, against the use
manner and custom of the whole world. Yt is but your own fond folishe
gloss. Where upon I do infer, that vvomanlye gouernemente is admitted not
only by theys examples, but eauen by the very words, rules, and decrees of
the holy scripture. And so I trust ye are* or have cause to be fullye
satisfied, as well towchi^ge your allegatio^ that vvoma^lye regime^te is
against nature, as also touchi^ge a brother to be chose^ king. Neither the
law of God nor reason is against the Queen of Scotts right, as the
adversaries pretend^.
And therefore I conclude against you, that neither the law of God, nor of
nature, nor yet reason, upon the which also you grownde your self, do reiecte
the said Qu. marie fra^che succession of the crown of England. Your reason
is, that where the people erecte them self an head of their own kindred and
nation, there nature assuerethe the people of natural gouernemente. And where
a stranger cariethe opinion of unnatural tyranie, yt assuerethe the ruler of
natural subjection. To a stranger is murmorre and rebellion threatened. But
now if this excellent Lady and Princess be no stranger, and be of our own
kindred, and of the aunciente and late Royal blood of this realm (as we have
declared) then is your reason also with all avoided, which may and does
oftentimes take place i^ more stre^gers, coming in by violent and forcible
means. But here as natural a man, as ye make your self, ye seame to go
altogether against reason, and against nature also. If Princes children were
to be counted strangers and aliens, or to be suspected as enemies and Tyra^s,
succedinge to their own progenitors inheritance. Yt was an unnatural
part, and a great follye in the noble kings of this and many other realms,
to give ovvte their dawghters to foreign Princes in marriage: and in stead of
p^ferringe and auancinge them by threire marriage, and procuringe thereby
fre^dshippe and amity with other Princes, to disable their said children
from their auncetours inheritances in those contreyes, from whence they
originallye proceeded. And as it seamethe by your kind of reasoninge, to
purchasse and procure beside to them thereby an opinion of ennemitie and
tyranie. This, this I say, is a frovvarde and an unnatural interpretation. A
frovvarde and an unnatural interpretation of the adversary.
Nature mouethe and drives us to think otherwise, and that both a a prince
will favor, love, and cherishe the people from vvhe^ce he fetches his royal
blood, and by vvho^ he must now maintain keep and defend his royal
estate, and that the people likewise will bear singular love and affection to
such a one, especially of such known princelye qualities, as this noble
Lady is adorned with all. Suerly yt is no more unnatural to such a Prince
descendinge from the aunciente and late Royal blood of the kings of
England, The Que. of Scotts no stranger to England.
to bear rule in England, and as yt were to return to the head and fowntaine
from whence originallye she sprange: Then yt is for all flouddes and rivers,
(which as homer sayethe) flow ovvte of the great Ocea^ sea.

(...)
(...). 21. Iliad.

To reuerte, Ecclesiastes cap. 1.
return, and reflovve again to the said Ocean. This coherence, coniunctio^,
copulation, inclination and favor runinge interchangeablye, betwixt such a
Prince and the people, is no more strange to nature, then is the conjunction of
the tree and the rote thereof, then of the fowntaine and the river issuenge from
thence, then of the son, and the son beams: and finally, then is the
conjunction betvvixte the old ancient louinge grand mother and her yo^ge and
tender dawghter. Neither do I well know how I may better call noble
England, then a louinge grandmother to this good gentle Lady whom we (I do
not dowbte, if ever God call her to the Royal seat thereof) shall not only
find a louinge and gratiouse maistresse, but a most dear and tender good
dawghter. For these and other considerations, the laws of the realm do not,
nor ever did estra^ge such princes from the succession of the crown of the
realm. Which by reason of the said natural inclination and benevolence of
the one to the other, standethe with the law of God and nature, and with all
good reason. And therefore your co^clusio^ is against Gods law, nature, and
all good reason: Whereby you full ungodly, unnaturally and vnreasonablie, do
conclude an exclusio^ of the Queen of Scotland (pretendinge her to be a
stranger) to that right, that God, nature, and reason, and the true hearts of
all good natural Englishemen, do call her unto, as the dear sister and heir
apparente to our noble Queen Elizabethe. The which her said just right title
and intereste, we trust we have now fullye proved and justified, and
sufficiently repulsed the sondrie objections of the adversaries. And as these
being the principal ovvght to bread no dowbte or scruple in any man, so
many other folyshe, fond and fantastical objections, not worthy of any
answer, that busy quarrelinge heads do cast forth to dishable her right,
or to disgrace and blemishe, either her honor, or this happy union of both
realms, if God shall send yt, in taking our gratiouse Sovereigne from us
withowte issue (which God forbide) ovvght much less to move any man. Whose
majesty God long preserve and shylde, and bless her if yt be his pleasure
with happy issue. But if yt please him either to bereave us of her majesty,
or her majesty of all such issue, then yet (that we may not be altogether
left desolate and confortlesse) this happy union will recompense and supply
a great part of this our distress. An happy union I call yt, by cause yt
shall not only take away the long mortal enemitie, The great commodity
that shall come to Englande^ and Scotla^de by the union of the^ in case this
succession chance.
the deadly hatred, the most cruel and sharp vvarres, that have so many
hundred years been and continued betwixt our neighbors the Scotts and us,
but shall so entierlie consociate and conioyne, and so honorably set forth
and advance us both and the whole Island of Britanye, as neither tongue can
express the greatenesse of our felicity and happiness, nor heart vvishe any
greater. The old enemitie has trode^ down and kept us both under foot,
and has given occasion to the common enemy, as the Danes and other to spoil
us both. Yt has caused for these thowsande years and more, so infinite and
so ovvgelie slavvghter, as it Will greaue and pity any man's heart to
remember, and yet neither to the greater augme^tation of our possessions at
this day, nor to their much loss. They having lost nothing of their
old aunciente inheritance sauinge Barwikle only. If this conjunction ons
happen, and if we be ons united and knitt together in one kingedome and
dominion, in one entire brotherly love and amity, as we are alredie knit by
neighbourhode, by tongue, and almost by all ma^ners, fasshio^s, and behavior,
then will all unnatural and butcherly slawgher, so long hither to practiced,
cease. The^ will rest, quietness, welche, and prosperitye increase at home:
The^ will all owtewarde Princes our Fre^des rejoice, and be comforted: and our
enemies dread us. Then will the honor, fame and majesty of the Island of
Albion daily grow more and more, and her power and strength so greatly
increase, as to the friend yt will be a good shilde: And to the enemy an
horrible terror. The shall the owtevvarde enemy little endomage us. Then shall
we with our children after us, reap the plea^^^te fruits of this noble
conjunction wrovvght this to our hands by Gods good and gratiouse providence
vvithovvte expe^ce, force or slawghter, which hitherto a number of our
covvragiouse, wise and mighty Princes, have these thovvsande years and
vpvvarde, sovvght for (but in vain as yet) with so excessive charges, withdraw
so great pains, with so many and main armies, and with the blood of so
many of their subjects. Then shall we most fortunately see, and most
gloriously enjoy a perfect and entire monarchy of this I Will of Britanie or
Albion united and incorporated after a most maruelouse sort, and in the
vvorthie and excellent person of a Prince mete and capable of such a
monarchy. As in whose person beside her vvorthie, noble and princelye
qualities, not only the Royal and unspotted blood of the aunciente and noble
kings of Scotland, but of the Normans and of the English kings with all, as
well long before, as since the conqueste, yea and of the Britains also, the
most aunciente inhabitans and lords of this Island, do wonderfullye, and (as
yt were) eauen for such a notable purpose, but the great providence of God,
most happelye concur. The euidente trewthe whereof, the said Queen's
petigrewe does most plainly and openly set forth, to every man's sight
and eye. Then I say, may this noble realm and Island be called not Albion
only, but rather Olbion, that is fortunate, happy and blessed. Which happy
and blessed conjunction (when yt chauncethe) if we vnthanckefullye refuse, We
refuse our health and welfare, and Gods good blessinge upon us. We refuse
our dewtie to God, who sendethe our dewtie to the party whom he sendethe, and
our dewtie to our native country to whom he sendethe such a person to be our
Maistresse: and such commodities and honor with all coming thereby (as I
have said) to whole Albion, as greater we can not wish for. And finallye we
procure and purchase as much as in us liethe, such disturba^ce of the common
wealth, such vexations, trobles, and wars, as may te^de to the utter
subuersio^ of this realm. From which dangers God of his great and
unspeakable mercy defend and preserve us, and keep protecte and defend this
realm with our noble Queen Elizabethe, and the said Lady Marie Queen of
Scotland, with the nobility and subjects of both the realms in mutual
frendshyppe and godly amitye, with long prosperouse estate and all good
quietness.

Amen.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Fleet street at the sign of Justice Royal, against
the Black bell, by Eusebius Dicaeophile, anno D. 1569. and are to be sold in
Paul's church yearde, at the signs of Time and Truth, by the Brazen Serpent,
in the shoppes of Ptolome and Nicephore Lycosthenes brethren Germans.


