A fruitful Sermon made in Poules church at London in the shroudes the
second day of February by Thomas Lever: Anno. M.D and fifty.

GGO be merciful unto us. Good Christen people Christ Jesus the son of God,
the wisdom of the father, the savior of the world, which has redeemed us
with his precious blood most pitifully lamentyng our myseries, and earnestlye
threateninge our wylfull blyndnes, cries out by the voice of the wise king
Salomo^, saying: Quia uocaui, et renuistis. et cete. Prove. i. Because I have
called (says the wisdom of God) and ye have denied, I have stretched forth
my hand, and there was none that would behold: yea ye have despised all my
councels, and my rebukes have ye not regarded, I therefore shall laugh at your
destruction, and I shall mock, when it is come upon you which ye have feared.
Assuredlye good people, God, Qui mortem non fecit, nec letatur in perdicione
viroru^, God which (as the book of wisdom says) made not death, ne does
not delyghte in the perdicion of man, cannot be of such affeccion, as to
delyghte in laughing or mockyng our miseries: but even as that man which
does delyghte to laughe at other men's griefs, is a man most far of from
lamenting and pytyinge them to do them good: so is God so sore offended and
dyspleased with them that dispyse his counselles, threatening or promises, while
they might have mercy, that he will as it were rather of mockyng, laughe and
skorne, then of pitye lamente and help their miserable wretched griefs, when
as they would have conforte. Se therefore how mercyfully God has called by the
sayings and wrytinges of Moses, the Propheres, and the Apostles, and how
few have harkened to believe. Se how wonderfully God has stretched forth his
hand, in creatynge heaven and earth, and all things in them contained, to
the use, commodity, and conforte to man: and how few do daily behold these
creatures, to be thankful unto the creatoure. Se how much good counsel and
earneste threatenynge God has given of late unto England, by setting forth
of his word in the english tongue, causynge it to be read daily in ye
churches, to be preached purely in the pulpites, and to be rehearsed every
wherein communicacio^, and how many continuing, yea increasynge their wicked
lines, regard not gods word, dyspise his threateninges, desire not his
mercy, fear not his vengeance. Without doubt good people very many have
deserved the vengeance of God, and yet by repentance found plentye of
mercy: but never none that ever refused the mercy of God has escaped the
vengeance of God in the time of his wrath* and furye.

Yea but what mercyes of God have we refused, or wha^ threatenynge of God have
we here in England not regarded: which have forsaken the Pope, abolyshed
idolatrye and supersticion, received gods word so gladly, reformed all
things accordinglye thereto so spedily, and have all things most nere the
order of the primitive church universally? Alas good brethren, as truly as
al is not gold that glystereth, so is it not virtue and honesty, but very vice
and hypocrisy, whereof England at this day does most glory. Wherefore the
word is plain, and the sayings be terryble, by the which at this time God
threateneth to punyshe, to plage, and to destroy England. It is a wondrous
plain word to say that England shall be destroyed: and upon this word
ensuinge, it should be a terrible sight to se hundred thousands of Scotts,
French men, Papists, and Turks, entryng in on every side, to murder,
spoil, and to destroy. This plain word of a credyble person spoken, with
this terrible seeing before our eyes in sight would make our courage to fall, and
our hertes to ryue in pieces, for woeful sorrow, fear, and heaviness.

Alas England, God, whom thou may believe for, his truth, has said plainly
thou shall be destroyed, and all thine enemies, both Scots, Frenchmen,
Papists, and Turks, I do not mean the men in whom is some mercy, but the
most cruel vices of these thy enemies being without all pity, as the
couetousenes of Scotland, the pride of France, the hipocrysy of Rome, and the
Idolatrye of the Turks. A hundred thousand of these enemies are landed at thy
havens, have entered thy fortes, and do proceed to spoil, murder, and utterly
destroy: and yet for all this thou wretched England beleuest not gods word,
regardest not his threatninge, call not for mercy, ne feareste not gods
vengeance. Wherefore God being true of his word, and righteous in his deeds,
thou England which wylt have no mercy, shall have vengeance, which will
not be saved, shalt be destroyed. For God has spoken, and it is written. Omne
regnum in se diuisum desolabitu^.
Every kingdom that is divided in it self, shall be desolate, and destroyed.
And Solomon says: Because they have hated learning and not received the fear
of God, destruction comes sodaynlye: Yea truly, and brings Idolaters unto
misery, and proud men unto shame. Ye all here feel, see, know, and have
experience, how that this Realm is divided in it self by opynyons in
relygyon, by rebellious sedicion, yea and by couetouse am^icion, every manne
pulling and halynge toward them selves, one from another.

It is not only diuyded, but also rent, torn, and plucked clean in pieces.
Yea and every couetouse manne is an Idolater, setting that mind and love upon
riches, which ought to be given unto God only.

Every couetouse man hates learning, and receives not the fear of God, for
the gredy desire that he has to the lucre of this world. Every couetouse
man is proud, thinking himself more worthy a pound, then a another man a
penye, more fit to have change of sylkes and veluettes, then other to have
bare frise cloth, and more co^ueniente for him to have abundance of diverse
dilicates for his daintye toth, then for other to have plenty of biefes and
muttons for their hongry bellyes: and finnally that he is more worthy to have
gorgeouse houses to take his pleasure in, in bankettynge, then laboring men to
have poor cotages to take rest in, in slepynge. Undoubtedlye God will make all
those to fall with shame, which set them selves up in pride so high, that they
can not see other men to be children of the same heavenly father, heirs of
the same kingdom, and bought with the same price of Christ's blood, that they
take them selves to be. That realm, that realm that is full of covetousness,
is full of division* is full of contempt of godd^s mercy, yea and sclaunder of
his w^^de, is full of Idolatry and is full of pride. Division is a sign of
destruction, contemning of gods mercy causes his vengeance to come
suddenly: Idolatrye ever ends in misery, and pride never escapes shame. Then
if you feel, know, and have experyence, that England by reason of covetousness
is full of division, is full of contempt of gods mercy, is full of
Idolatrye, is full of pride, Flatter not your selves in your own pha^sies,
but believe the word of God, which tells you truly that England shall be
destroyed suddenly, miserably, and shamefullye. The same destruction was told
to the Sodomites, was told to the Ninevites: was deserved of the Sodomites,
and was deserved of the Niniuities: but came upon the Sodomites, and was
turned from the Niniuytes. And why? For because the Sodomytes regarded not
gods threatenynges and were plaged with gods vengeance, the Niniuytes
regarded gods threatenings, and escaped gods vengeance.

Now all you English men at the reverence of God, for the tender mercyes of
Jesus Christ, for the reverent love to your most gentle and gracious king, for
the sauegarde of your cuntry, and for tender pyty of your own wives, your
children, and your selves, cause not England to be destroyed with gods
vengeance, as was the City of the Sodomites: but repent, lament and amend
your lives, as did the good Ninevites. For if ye spedely repent, and myserably
lamente, and be ashamed of your vainglory, covetousness, and ambicio^, ye shall
cause covetous, sedicious, proud, and vicious England, suddenly, miserablye yea
and shamefully in the syghte and judgment of the world, to vanysh away. And so
sin and abhominacion destroyed by the repentance of man, this pleasant
place of England, and good people shall be preserved and saved by thy mercy of
God. For else if man will not for sake his sin, God will not spare to destroy
both the man and his plate with his sin.

Wherefore the Epistle by the order now taken, appointed for this fourth
Sunday after twelfe tide, is a lesson most mete to teach you to know and
lamente your grievous sins of late committed, which as yet be in such case,
that man without great repentance cannot sone amend them, nor god of his
ryghteousnes much longer suffer them. It is written in the beginning of
the.iii. Chap. of Paul to the Romans on this wise.

Every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there is no power but of
God. Those powers which be, are ordained of God. Wherefore he that resysteth
power, resysteth the ordinance of God, but they whhche do resist, shall
receive to themselves iudgemen^. For Rulers are not to be feared for good
doings, but for evil. Would thou not f^are the power? do that which is
good, and thou shall have praise of it. But if thou do evil, fear: for he
bears not the sweard without a cause, for he is the minister of God to avenge
in wrath, him that does evil. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only
for wrath, but also for conscience sake. For this do ye pay tribute: For they
are the ministers of God attendyng to this same thing. Give therefore unto
every one duties: tribute to who^e trybute is due, custom to whom custum is
due, fear to whom fear is due, honor to whom honor is due.

Thus have ye heard how that every one ought to be under obedience, and give
unto other that which is due. Howbeit experience declares how that here in
England pore men have been rebels, and rich men have not done their duty.
Both have done evil to provoke gods vengeance, neither does repent to
procure gods mercy.

Now for the better understanding of this matter, here in this text, first is
to be noted, how that Anima, the soul, for as much as it is the chief part
of man, is taken for the whole man: as we in our english tongue, take the
body being the worse part for the whole. As if I say, every body here, I
mean every man or woman here. So in the fourth of Leuiti. Anima que
peccauerit, ipsa morietur. The soul that sins, it shall dye: meaning the
man or woman that synneth. And even so here Paul by the Ebrue phrase and manner
of speech, commands every soul, which is by the english phrase every
body, that is to say, every person, man, woman, and child to be subject. As
thou art in deed, so acknoweledge thy self in thine own mind Hypot^ssestho,
yt is to say, set or placed under the ^ygher powers, ye^ and that by God. For
as there is no power of authorithy but of god, so is there none put in
subieccion under them but by God. Those powers which be are ordained of God.
As is the power of the father over his children of the husband over his wife,
of the master over his servants, and of the king over his land and
subjects: with all kind of magistrates in their offices over their charge.

Now to prove that these be the ordinances of God, we have by gods word
both in the old testamente and in the new, their names rehearsed, their
offices dyscribed, and their duties commanded. Yet that notwythstandynge some
there be that labor by wrestynge of the scripture to pulle them selves from
under due obedience: saiynge that it appears in the acts of the Apostles how
that they had all things commen, and therefore none more goods or riches,
power or authority, then other, but all alyke.

Truth it is, that the Apostles had all things comen, yea and that christen
men, in that they are christen men rather then covetous men, have all things
comen, even unto this day. How be it there can be nothing more contrary or
further disagreyng from that fantastical commennesse, or rather from that
diuelyshe disorder, and unrighteous robry, where as Idle lubbers might live
of honest men's labors, then to have all things comen as the Apostles
had. as christen men have, and as I do mean. And this is their usage, and my
meaning: that rich men should keep to them selves no more then they need,
and give unto the poor so much as they need. For so Paul writes to the
Corinthes. I mean not (says Paull, speaking to the rich) to have other so
eased, that you thereby should be brought in trouble of need, but after an
indifrence, that at this time your abundaunce, might help their need. And so
did the Apostles take order as appears in the fourth of the acts. Quotquot
habebant agros et possessiones. etc. As many as had lands and possessions
did sell them, and brought the prices unto the feet of the Apostles, and
division was made unto every one according unto every man's need. So they
which might spare did frelye give, and they which had need did
thankefully receive.

For so is it mete, that christian men's goods should be comen unto every man's
need, and private to no man's lust. And those comune goods to be disposed by
liberal geuers, and not spoiled by gredy catchers. So that every man may have
according to his need sufficient, and not according to his spoil so much as
he can catch, no nor according to the value of the thing, every man a penye,
a grote, or a shyllyng. For they that Imagyne, covet, or wyshe to have all
things comune, in such sort that every man might take what him lust, would
have all things comen and open unto every man's lust, and nothing reserved
or kept for any man's need. And they that would have like quantity of every
thing to be given to every man, entendyng thereby to make all alyke, do utterly
destroy the congregacyon, the mystical body of Christ, where as there must
needs be diverse members in diverse places, having diverse duetyes. For as Paul
says: if all the body be an eye, where is then hearing? or if all be an ear,
where is then smellyng? meaning thereby, that if all be of one sort, estate,
and room in the come^ wealth, how can then diverse duetyes of diverse
necessary offices be done? So that the fre heart, and liberal gift of the
rich, must make all that he may spare, comen to releue the need of the poor:
yea if there be great necessitye, he must sell both lands and goods, to
maynteyne charity: And thus to have all things comen, does derogate or take a
way nothing from the authority of rulers. But to will to have all things
comen, in such sort that ^dle lubbers (as I said) might ^ake and waste the
geines of laborers with out restraint of authority, or to have like quantitye
of every thing to be given to every man, is under a pretense to mende al,
purposely to mar all. For those same men prete^dinge to hate covetousness,
would be as rych as the rych^st: and saying that they hate pride, would be as
hyghly taken as the best, and semynge to abhor envy, can not be content to
se any other rycher or better then they them selves be. Now I hear some say
that this error is the fruit of the scripture in english. No, neither this,
nor no other error comes because the scripture is set forth in the english
tongue, but because the rude people lacking the counsel of learned men to
teach them the true meaning when they read it, or hear it, must needs
follow their own Imaginacion in taking of it. And the chiefest cause that
makes the^ to imagine this abominable error, that there should be no rich
men nor rulers, cu^meth because some rich men and rulers (mark that I say
some, for all be not such) but I say some rich men, and rulers by the abuse
of their riches and aucthoritye, does more harm then good unto the comen
wealth, and more grief then confort unto the people. For now a days rich
men and rulers do catch, purchesse, and procure unto them selves great
commodities from many men, and do few and small pleasures unto any men. As for
example of rich men, look at the merchau^tes of London, and ye shall se, when
as by their honest vocacio^, and trade of marcha^dise god has endowed the^
with great obu^daunce of riches, then can they not be content with the prosperous
wealth of that vocacion to satisfye them selves, and to help other, but their
riches must abroad in the country to biefermes out of the hands of
w^rshypfull gentlemen, honest yeomen, and pore laboring husbands. Yea now
also to bye personages, and benefices, where as they do not only bye lands
and goods, bu^ also lives and souls of men, from God and the comen wealth,
unto the devil and them selves. A myscheuouse mart of werchandrie is this,
and yet now so comenly used, that thereby shepeheardes be turned to thieves,
dogs into wolves, and the poor flock of Christ, redeemed with his precious
blood, most miserablye pylled, and spoiled, yea cruelly devoured. Be thou
merchant of the city, or be thou gentleman in the country, be thou lawer, be
y^ courtear, or what manner of man soever thou be, that can not, yea if thou be
master doctor of divinity, that will not do thy duty, it is not lawful for
the to have personage, benefice, or any such living, except thou do feed the
flock spiritually with gods word, and bodily with honest hospitalitye. I
will touch diverse kinds of rich men and rulers, that ye may^ se what harm
some of them do with their riches and authority. And especially I will
begin with them that be best learned, for they seem belyke to do most good
with riches and authority unto them committed. If I therefore being a young
simple scholar might be so bold, I would ask an ancient, wise, and well
learned doctor of divinity, which comes not at his benefice, whether he were
bound to feed his flock in teaching of gods word, and keeping hospitality
or no? He would answer and say: sir my curate supplieth my room in teaching,
and my farmer in keeping of house. Yea but master doctor by your leave, both
these more for your vauntage then for the paryshe conforte: and therefore the mo
such servants that ye keep there, the more harm is it for your paryshe, and
the more sin and shame for you. Ye may think that I am sumwhat saucye to
lay sin and shame to a doctor of divinity in this solemn audience, for
some of them use to excuse the matter, and say: Those which I leave in mine
absence do far better then I should do, if I tarried there my self.

Now good master doctor ye say the very truth, and therefore be they more
worthy to have the benefice then you your self, and yet neither of you both
sufficient mete, or able: they for lack of h^bilitye, and you for lack of
good will. Good will quod he? Nay I would with all my heart, but I am called
to serve the king in other places, and to take other offices in the comen
wealth. Hear then what I shall answer yet once again: There is lyuynges
and rewards due and belongyng to them that labor in those offices, and so
ought you to be content with the living and reward of that office only, and
take no more, the duetye of the which office by your labor and diligence ye
can discharge only, and do no more. And so Paul writes unto the Corrinth.
saying: The Lord has ordained that they which preach the Gospel, should
live upon the Gospel. And unto the Tessalonians. He that does not labor
should not eat.

By these textes well set together, you may conclude and learn, that there as
you bestow your labor, there may ye take a living, and there as ye bestow
no labor, there ought ye to take no living. Well let us proceed further unto
other now, for I perceive that all that which I have spoken against them that
take great geynes of their benefices, and do little good to their benefice,
may seem to be spoken against the universities, yea and against the kings
mnyestye: which now b^ reason of improperacions have no little geynes of
benefices, and yet bestow no great labor nor alms upon the paryshioners of
those benefices. Surely, for as m^che as I fear the vengeance of God more if
I should not speak the truth, then the displeasure of man if he be offended
in h^arynge of the truth, truly I will tell you. Seeing that improperacions
being so evil that no man can allow them, be now so employed unto the
universities, yea and unto the yerelye revenues of the kings majesty, that
few dare speak against them, ye may se that some men, not only by the
abuse of riches and authority, but also by the abuse of wysedom and policy
do much harm, and specially those, by whose means this realm is now brought
into such case that either learning in the university, and necessary revenues
belonging to the most high authority is like to decay, or else
improperacions to be maynteined, which ^othe be so deuyllyshe and abominable
that if either of the^ come to effect, it will cause the ve^geaunce of God
utterly to destroy this realm. Do not think that I mean any thing against
that which the Kings mayestye by act of Parliament has done: no nor that I
will cover in scilence, or allow by flattery that which couetouse officers
(some as I suppose now being present) contrary to gods laws, the kings
honor, and the comen wealth use to do. For in suppressinge of Abbeyes,
Cloisters, Colleges, and Chauntries, the entente of the kings majesty that
dead is, was, and of this our king now, is very godly, and the purpose or
else the pretense of other, wonderouse goodlye: that thereby such abundaunce of
goods as was supersticiously spente upon vain ceremonies, or voluptuously
upon idle bellies, might come to the kings hands to bear his great charges,
necessarily bestowed in the comen wealth, or partly unto other men's hands,
for the better releue of the pore, the mayntenaunce of learning, and the
settinge forth o^ gods word. How beit couetouse officers have so used this
matter, that even those goods which did serve to the releue of the poor, the
mayntenaunce of learning, and to confortable necessary hospitality in ye come^
wealth, be now turned to maynteyne worldly wicked couetouse ambicion. I ^ell
you, at the first the intent was ve^ie godly, the pretense wond^rouse goodly,
but now the use or rather the abuse and mysorder of these things is worldly,
is wicked, is deuilyshe, is abominable.

The king may have, and would to God he had in his hands to bestow
better, all that was evil mis^ente upon supersticious Ceremonies, and
voluptuous Idle bellyes.

But you which have gotten these goods into your own hands, to turn them
from evil to worse, and other goods mo from good unto evil, be ye sure it
is even you that have offended God, begyled the king, robbed the rich,
spoiled the pore, and brought a comen wealth into a comen miserye. It is even
you, that must either be plaged with gods vengeance as were the Sodomytes, or
amend by repe^tau^ce as did the Nineuites. Eue^ you it is that must either
make restitucion and amends spedely, or else ^ele the vengeance of God
grievously. Do not think that by restitucion and amends making I mean the
building a gain of abbeyes or cloyste^s, no I do not: For if charitable
alms, honest hospitality, and necessary schools, for the bringing up of
yougth had been indifferently maynteyned and not clean taken away in some
places, I would not at this time have spoken of restitucion. How be it sure I
am, that if at the orderinge of these things there had been in the officers as
much godliness as there was covetousness, supersticious men had not been put from
their liuinges to their pensions out of those houses, where they might have had
schole masters to have taught them to be good, and for less wages: or for the
reseruacion of their pensions, received into cures, and personages, where as
they can do no good, and will do much harm. Here as concerning these things
I say, if man do not make restitucion, God will take vengeance. For the
people that by this means continue in deuelyshe supersticion, and begin
ungracious rebellion, do dye, and are damned in their own sins but the blood
of their bodies and souls shall be required at your hands. Yea and the
abominable error of those that would have no rulers in authority, comes
partly by your occasion, which unto your own vain glory, and pryuate
commodity, do abuse the power and authority ordained of God to his glory,
and to the commen wealth. Thus ye perceive how that some rich men and
rulers abusing their riches and authority, do make some either to judge that
it should be far better then it is, if there were neither rich me^ nor
rulers: Howbeit those men are far deceived. And Paul tells the truth,
saying that those which be, are ordained of God.

Then some will ask this questyon: Seeing there is no evil of God, how can
evil rulers or officers be of God? You honest men that be here, and dwell in
the country, hear this lesson, and mark it, and take it home with you, for
your selves, and your neighbor. It is God, Qui facit hypocrit^ regnare propter
peccata populi. It is God, as the scripture in the.xxxiiii. of Job does
testifye, which makes an hypocritie to be a ruler for the sins of the
people. Now the people of the country use to say, that their gentlemen and
officers were never so full of fair words and evil deeds (which is
hypocrisy) as they now be. For a gentleman will say that he loves his tenant
as well as his father did, but he keeps not so good a house to make them chere
as his father did, and yet he takes mo fynes, and greater rentes to make them
neadye, then his father had.

Another will say that he would bye a Lordshyppe of the king, for the love that
he has to the tenauntes thereof, but as soon as he has boughte it, by taking
of fynes, heyghnyng of rentes, and sellyng away of commodities, he makes the
same tenantes pay for it. Another says that he would have an office to do good
in his country, but as soon as he has authority to take the fee to him self,
he sets his servant to do his duetye, and instede of wages he gives them
authority to live of pyllage, brybry and extorcion in the country.

Now you of the country, mark your lesson I say, and take it home with you.
It is God that makes these evil men to be gentlemen rulers, and officers in
the country: it is the sins of the people that causes God to make these men
your rulers. The man is sometimes evil, but the authority from God is
always good, and God gives good authority unto evil men, to punyshe the
sins of the evil people. It is not therefore repynyng, rebellyng, or
resistyng gods ordinance, that will amend evil rulers. For Paul says, that
all powers be of gods ordinance. And in Job it is plain, that evil men
be made rulers by God: So that who soever resysteth the officers, be the men
never so evil that be in office, he resists the ordinance of God, he can not
prevail against God, but surely he shall be plaged of God. And as the people
can have no remedy against evil rulers by rebellyon, so can the rulers have
no redress of rebellious people by oppressyon. Example of both we have in the
third book of the Kings, where as it appears that Roboam leauyng good
counsel to use the people with gentleness and following evil counsel to keep
them under by extremytye, did so exasperate and stir up the hertes of the
people against him being their king, that ten parts of them did by sedicious
rebellion, burste out from him, and were never after subject unto him, nor to
none of his posterity. And those rebellious people by Jeroboam whom they them
selves chose to be their king, or rather the captain of their rebellyon, were
brought into far worse case and more myserye then ever they were before,
compelled to forsake God, and to use Idolatrye, and were ever after plaged with
sodeyne death, honger, dearthe, wars, captyuytie, and all kind of myserye.

Learn therefore ye people if ye enforce to ease your selves, whereas ye
imagine that ye be evil entreated of men, be ye sure that ye shall feel in
deed that ye shall be more greuouslye afflycted by the ordinance of God. And
learn ye rulers if ye intend by only suppression to keep under rebellion, be
ye sure if ye thruste it down in one place it will braste out with more
vyolence and greater danger in ten other places, to the further dysquietynge
of you being rulars, and to the utter destruccyon of all your people being
rebels. Hear ye people what God says by those people that will not be in
subieccion, because they think the men to be evil which be in authority. Yea
hark what the Lord says as concerning the proud, ambycyouse, and
vncyrcumcysed King Nabugodonozer which was an evil manne in deed, in the
twenty and seven Chapter of Hieremye. Gens et regnum. et cetera. That people
and realm that does not serve Nabugodonezer ye king of Babylon, and whosoever
puts not his neck under the yocke of Nabugodnozer the king of Babylon, I
(says the Lord) will viset upon that people in sweard, honger, and in
pestylence. And in the.xxvii. of the same Prophet. Catenas ligneas
contriuisti, et facies pro eis ferreas. Thou have broken the fetters of wood,
and shall make for the^ fetters of iron. By the which he declares yt as a
prisoner in ye keeping of a gayler, if he break his fetters of wood, shall not
therefore by the gayler be set at lybertye, but rather cheyned with more
strong fetters of iron: Even so, people being in the keeping of God, if they
by rebellyon break their yocke of subieccion, which they now have, shall not
therefore by God be put at liberty, but rather be thruste into a more
strait, grievous, and stronger yocke, where they shall be sure never to have
liberty nor ease. Wherefore ye people, if ye feel your burden is heavy, and
your yocke greuouse, pacyently suffer, and call unto the Lord: for then he
will hear thee, and he will relieve thee, and he will deliver thee.

And you rulers, because ye know that the people ought not to forsake or
refuse what burden or yoke so ever ye charge them with all, see that ye charge
them with no more then they may bear and suffer. For if they cry unto you for
relief and easemente, and you will not regard their sorrows, but imagynynge
that they be to wealthy, ye will increase their miserye, and decay their
wealth, as Pharao, and Roboam did: Well then, if the examples of Pharao and
Roboam will not suffyce you, marcke what God, by the prophet Ezechi* says (I
pray you) in the.xxxiiii. of Ezechiel, Audite pastores. etc. Do not think that
for because pastors be named there, yt therefore it is al spoken only unto the
clargye, but for as much as all officers and rulers ought rather to be feders
then spoilers, it is spoken unto you officers, which do not enter in by ye door
of love, as a shephearde to feed, but ^lime over another away through
covetousness as a thief, to rob and spoil the flock of Christ in your
office. Here what the Lord says unto you officers yt feed your selves by
seking of gains, and not your flock by doing your duty. Thus says the Lord:
I my self will up on these pastors, and I will require my sheep at their hands,
and will make the^ to cease from fedyng of my flock, yea the pastors shall feed
the^ selves no more, for I will deliver my flock out of their hands, and they
shall be no longer a pray for the^ to feed upon. Undoubtedly if ye should
ente^de by your authority rather your selves to live in riote, the^ to keep ye
people in quietness, your rulynge should not long continue. Surely there is none
other remedy for rich or poor, high or low, ge^tlema^ or yeoma^, to help to
amend the disquietnes in this realm, but to pulle and rote that out of your
hertes, which is roted in every one of your hertes, the rote of all evil,
which is covetousness. For even you husbandmen which cry out upon the
covetousness of gentlemen and officers, it is even covetousness in you, ye
causes, and inge^dreth covetousness in the^. For, for to get your neighbors
ferme, ye will offer and disire the^ to take bribes, fynes, and rentes more
the^ they look for, or the^ you your selves be well able to pay It is a
wondrous thing to se ge^tlemen take so great rentes, fynes, and ingressaunce
for covetousness to advance their own lands: Howebeit it is a far more
wonderful thing to see husband men offer and give so great fynes, rentes,
incomes, yea and bribes for covetousness to get other men's fermes. It seems
to come of great covetousness for rich men, to make strayte laws to save their
own goods: Howebeit it is in deed a far more covetousness for poor men by
rebellion to rob, and spoil other men's goods. And this dare I say, taking
all you to bear record, that the sorest laws that ever any tyrant made in
any land, if they should continue many years could not cause such and so
great murder, myschiefe, and wretchedness as ye perceive and know that this
rebellyon in England contynuynge but a few months, has caused: by the which
ye may learn that although lawers be comenly called most covetous, yet
compare them with rebels, and as pickinge theft, is less then murtheryng
robrye: so is the covetousness of gredy lawers which begyle craftily, farlesse
then the covetousness of rebels, which spoil cruelly. Let us therefore
every one acknoweledgynge our own fautes, where as most evil spryngeth,
there labor first with most diligence to pluck up the root of that evil,
which is covetousness: that God ingraftynge grace in us, may give occasyon
unto our Rulars rather to be occupied in rewardynge of virtue, then in
punysheyng of vice: Yea that God be not provoked by our sins to send evil
rulers to punyshe evil men, but rather moved by our repentance, to preserve
these good rulers which be sent already to the great comfort of all good
men: especially the kings majesty, whose godlynes, virtue, and grace, is like
to make this realm to floryshe, if our sins do not cause God to think our
realm unworthy to enjoy the treasure of so precious a Jewel. Many other
noble men there be as I trust, some that I do certaynlye know, whose tender
hearts do much lamente your griefs, and whose godly provision will be
much unto your comfort, if your vnpaciente stubburnes do not disapoynte
their good purpose. If ever at any time God did send unto any afflycted people
releyfe, comfort, and prosperytye, it came always by good rulers, at such
time as the people being in afflyccyon, did humble them selves in pacyence,
and cried unto the Lord with prayer, as is apparente in the houndreth and
seven Psalm. Clamauerunt ad dominum cum tribularentur, et de necessitatibus
eorum liberauit eos. When they were in trouble they called unto thee Lord, and
he delivered them forth of their troublousesome gryefes. And in the books of
the judges and of the kings, ye may read how that God, to deliver his people
forth of miserye, and to prosper them in wealth, did reyse up good rulers as
Gedeon, Barac, Iepthe, Sampson. David, Samuel, and such other. And without
doubt even at this time here in England, God has raised up a gracyous king,
and some such noble men as be neither cruel nor covetous. If there be therefore
in us patience, humility, thankfulness, and prayer, surely we shall soon feel
relyefe, conforte and prosperity. They therefore yt as yet feel the^ selves
grieved, let the^ call unto ye lord, lokinge for his help in paciente suffering,
not provoking his vengeance by ungracious rebellinge against his officers,
unhappy resisting his ordinance: unhappy resistyng may I well call it, for
unhappy are all they that use it, purchasing thereby to them selves judgment,
vengeance, and damnacyon. O how unhappy have they been here in England,
which have not quietlye suffered a confortable reformacion of their greatest
griefs and harms, to proceed from god to the^ by his ordinance, but
vnpacientlye grudginge have offended god, disquieted this realm, and undone
them selves, by resystynge gods ordinance. For the greatest grief that
has been unto the people in this realm, has been the enclosing of comens,
as concerning the which the powers ordained of GOD for th^^ purpose, made an
act of parlyamente, forbiddynge any man to enclose unto his pryuate use, that
which of long time had been taken, and used as common. And afterward, the
same powers did send forth proclamacions, warning them which contrary to
this act of parliament had enclosed grounds, offendynge the people, that they
according to these Proclamacions should lay the same enclosed lands abroad
again, to satysfye the act of parliamente, and to releue the people. And for
because neither of these ways took effect, there was immediately further
commissions dyrected to put such men in authoryty, as could easelye, and
would gladly, and were purposed spedely to have laid unlawful enclosed
lands abroad again, in such qui^^ ^orte as should have been most to the
kings honor, to ye w^^lth of this realm, and to the gr^atest comfo^t of
tho^^ which were most grieved. Now how the people did take or rather how they
did resyste and wythstand this, ye know. And I shall rehearse when as I have
telled you of one other thing which being of longer contynuance in England,
has done far more harm, and yet the g^ye^ there offer less, yea nothing at
all felt. For the deadely wound thereof did bring the people past all feeling
of gryefe. And the venomous poys^n brought the people in such a Maze, that
they did not feel and p^^ceyue them ^elues to be in most hor^yble my^^rable
wretchedness, when as the word of GOD, the (...) of l^fe, the saving health in
Christ Jesus, was taken away, and in a strange language shut, and closed up
from them, so that they without felyng were led from God by man's tradicions
unto vain ceremonis, to be most venemously poisoned with devilish
supersticion. Therefore when as the merciful goodness of God beholding the
miseries of the people, by the prouydence of the kings majesty, and his
counsel, purposely ordained of God to confort, healpe, and amend the, people
of this realm, by the restoryng of gods word, and setting it playnelye
forth in the Englysh tongue, with the right use and dew admin^stracion of his
sacraments to be imprynted, and confyrmed in our hearts: When as I say, by
these gracyous means, and godly order, God him self did offer unto the
people, relyefe, comfort, and prosperitye: Then the ungodly, ungracious ^
unhappy people, being moost^ unkind, where as they should have been most
thankful, dystrusted GOD, dyspised his ordinance, and presumed of their own
wylfulnes so far as they could or might, to wythstand the ordinance of
God, refused the grace of God, and pro^ured to them selves the ve^geaunce of
God. Wherefore we having this terrible example in fresh memory, and seeing a
gracyous King, and Godly rulars ordained of GOD, to amend our gryefes,
although all that cannot be amended in one day, which has been appayryng
many years, yet let us patiently suffer for a time, not doubting but that
that relief, comfort, and wealth, which God has promised unto England by
his word, offered of his goodness, and begone by his ordinance, shall be brought
unto pass, by his wisdom and might: in such wise as shall be most for his
glory, the kings honor, the wealth of the realm, and most to the conforte
of them that most pacyentlye in* hop^, trust to gods goodness. These
examples have I rehearsed to teach you as it were by experience, how true this
saying of Paul is: They which wythstande or resyste the powers ordained of
God, receyu^ unto them selves Judgment: which is vengeance, and damnacion.
Let us therefore amend our lives, and be good men, and we shall not need to hate
and fear, but have great occasion to love, and trust those which be now
our chyefe rula^s. For they be as Paul says, made rulars, not to put them
in fear that do good, but them which do evil: so that none needs to fear
these rul^rs, but evil doers. Which in evil doing have deserved of the
r^lers to be punyshed, and in resystynge their power ordained of GGD, do
hasten, and agg^au^te toward them selves* the ^or^ vengeance of GOD. It
f^loweth: Would thou be without fear of power, do that whych^ is good, and
thou shalt have praise of it: for he is the m^nyster of God to do the good,
but y^ thou do (...), fear. For he bears not (...) swearde without a cause,
but is the mynister of GOD to aduenge in wrath him that does evil. All these
words Peter concludes bryefelye in the second of his f^rst Epistle, saying
that those that have rule and authorytye, be sent ad uindictant malorum,
laudem ^ero ^onorum. That is to say: to take vengeance of evil (...), and to
commend the good.

Whosoever thou art therefore and of whatsoever degree or sort thou be, if
thou be a Subject thou must remember, and consider how that powers be
ordained of God for the, if thou be evil to make the good by dew correccyon:
if thou be good to make the better, by the encoragemente of commendacyon,
praise, and mayntenaunce. Look therefore all you that have power, and
authorytye of GOD, that ye use it, as ye are commanded by God: to correct and
punyshe the evil doer, and to encorage, reward, and mayntaine the good.

Se that for so far as your power extends, there be no evil unpunished,
nor no good unrewarded. But harcke a little, and I shall tell you of an
a^omynable robbery done in the Ci^ye, (...) to the officers of the city, and as
yet not punyshed, but rather mayntayned in the city. There is a great sum of
monye sent from an honorable Lord by his servant unto those whom he is
indetted vn^^ in the city. The officers knowing that they to whom this monye
is s^nte have great need of it, know also in what places, at what times these
vnthryftye servants by whom it is sent, at ga^^ynge, banckettyng, and riot,
do spend it. If this be an evil deed, why is it not punyshed? Because it is
not known some say. But whyther they mean that it is not known to be done,
or not known to be evil I doubt. And therefore here now will I make it
openly known boeth to be done, and also to be evil done, and worse suffered.
But does not many of you know? sure I am tha^ all you that be officers
ought to know that all that riches and treasures which rych men, and
rufflers, waste at gredye gamning, glotonous bancketting, and such riote, is
not their own, but sent by them from the honorable Lord of heaven, unto
other that be honest, pore, and nedye: unto whom God by his promise is
indetted. Ye know, that Domini est terra et plenitudo ^ius. The yearthe is the
Lords, and the plenty thereof. So that no man has any thing of his own: But
has received all of the Lord. For, Quid habes quod non accepisti? What haste
thou that thou have not received: Yea thou as a servant haste received of thy
Lord, which gives unto his servants the Talentes of his treasures. And to
know for what purpose he gives them unto you, read Esaye, the.xviii. Fr^ng^
esurienti pane* tuum* et^. Breacke thy bread unto the hungrye, and the nedye:
and the wanderyng lead into thy house: when thou see one naked cloth him,
and do not dyspy^e thine own flesh. Hear you servants of the Lord, which
have received the treasures of the lord, unto whom the lord by you has sent
them: unto the houngrye, the nedye, the naked* and those that be of the same
flesh and blood that you your selu^^ ^e. Now you* officers knowing tha^
great riches, and treasures sent from the honorable lord of heaven, unto his
well beloved people, the nedy members of Christ's, body, by th^se vnthriftye
servants is s^ente at ga^^ynge, and riote, within your offices, ye must
needs know that an ^uyll deed is done. Let us therefore I pray you, know how
it is punyshed. Peradventure ye will say: there is no law in England that
appoynteth any punyshmente for gamners. If therefore evil deeds may be done
in England without fear, than is the sweard of authority borne in England,
without a cause. But I will tell the that art an offycer in England or in what
Christen land so ^uer it be: whereas there is no certain punyshme^t for any
evil deed by man's law there the offycer may and ought to use any kind of
punishment to amend or restreyne the evil doer, by gods law. But without
doubt if those same men should spend in the same sort of riot, so great
treasures sent from the Kings Maiesty^ unto the Aldermenne of this City,
there should be punyshmente, correccyon, and reamedye found for them
quyckely.

And of very conscience is not go^ as much to be feared as the kyng^ and the
poor, and nedye as will to be pytied and provided for as the rych and wealthy*

Well, gamners, ryotters, and all evil doe^s, if they do not ^epente, shall be
damned in their own sins: but the blood of their souls shall be required
(...) the hands of the officers, which by f^a^^ should have caused them to
leave sin. Y^a but what shall m^ ^han say by (...), which is now made so
lawefull (...) an offyc^r y^ he would, can not punysh, to make men to leave it?
As concerning this matter we have plain commau^demente in the fif^ene of
Deutro. And in the fyfte of Math. To lend to him that needs, and would borowe.
And in the syxte of Luke it is plain. Da^^ mu^uo, nihil inde spe^an^es. Lend
says Chris^e. trus^ing to have no gayn thereby. Here we have two
commandments, the one is to lend, and the other not to lend for lukar: now
he that breaks gods commandment must needs go to the devil. So that in
breaking these two commandments, here is two ways for you rich men to go
to the dyuyll: Either in lendynge for luker, or else in not lendynge any thing
at all. Many of you there be, that whosoever says nay, will needs the one of
these two ways. For y^ man's law do stop up vsurye, ^o yt by lendyng thou
can have no gaynes, than will thou the other way apace, and lend nothing at
all. So shalt thou be suer to come there away to the devil. For than shall no
man in no case have any use of thy goods. Therefore neither the law, nor the
officer in sufferynge a little vsurye, and commaundinge none, does maintain or
allow vsurye, But for because y^ being no ^surer will needs to the dyuell,
they suffer the to goo such away as some commodytye might (...) to other by
some use of thy goods, rather than by stoppynge by that way, to drive the
three away as no man could have any use of any of thy gooddes. For where as
God commands, and thy nedy neighbor desires the to lend, and thou neither
at the reverence of God, nor for pitye of thy neighbor will lend of love
frelye: but contrary to gods commandment with out pytye of the poor,
thou will not stycke to lend for gredynesse of luker couetouslye: thy own
deeds declare the to be so void of all godly charity, and so full of diuilysh
covetousness, that thou art f^r past all man's cure, and help, either by law or
punishmente. So will I leave the, and speak of those that might, and ought to
be healed by men being in authorytye, and yet will not.

For there be sum such ioyly fellows that they wylbe subject to no powers,
which by fear might cause them to forbear their vain pleasures in evil: unto
those now consequentlye does Paul speak, saying: ye must needs be subject,
not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. If ye be such ioyly
fellows that ye fear not the wrath or dyspleasure of officers, when as ye do
evil, yet grope your own conscience, that ye may feel what a grievous sin
it is to wythstande the powers ordained of GOD to minister dew correccyon unto
evil doers. For not only thy conscience, but also thine own deed in that
thou doeste pay tribute for this thing, shall testifye against the: that thou
knowwest them to be the mynisters of GOD, attendynge to this same thing, to
this bringing evil doers in ^eare. It is therefore a matter of conscience for
the so to with stand the powers ordained of God, that they take no place in the,
but that thou wylt do evil without fear, and maintain that which is evil
done, by worse presumpcion. I do not say that whatsoever the magystrates
command is a matter of conscience, but what soever is evil, is a matter of
conscience. And to resyste right by might, so that thou will not be subject
in humylitye, unto those powers which God by his right has set over the in
authority is a great evil, and therefore a great matter of conscience. Many
examples we have which does prove that every commandment of magistrates be
not matters in conscice^e, and yet every resisting or rebelling against their
authority is a matter in conscience. The Jews had a custtume confirmed by their
elders which were magistrates, that no man should eat with vnwashe^ hands:
Christ Jesus least this custom, brake this tradicion without any grudge of
conscience.

David knowing Saul the king to be a wicked man and his deadly enemy, and
having Saul in a den, where as if he would, he might have killed him: this
David had a good conscience not to touch the lords anointed, to suffer
Saul to be king and to submit him self. Daniel was commanded not to pray
to God: the Apostles were commanded not to preach gods word. These did not
rebel against the higher powers, no nor yet for conscience obey men, but
rather they obeyed God. For Daniell did pray, and the Apostles did preach. So
rise not, rebel not, resist not, what soever the rulers them selves do: And
be ye not so scrupulous as to think the bond in conscience unto every thing
that a man being a ruler commands the to do it especially, if God command
the contrary. Now it follows, give unto every one that which is due: Every
duty belonging to every body, can not here be declared, no nor at this time
rehearsed, I will therefore speak briefly of one thing which shall be a
general example for all duties. Pau. i. unto the Cor. xi. Vnus panis unu^
corpus multi sumus: One bred says he one body we are y^ be many: by the
which he declares that as of diverse corns of wheat by the liquor of water
knode^ into dough is made one loaf of bread: so we being diverse men, by love
and charity, which is the liquor of life, joined into one congregation, be
made as diverse members of one mystical body of Christ, where by I say, as by
one example in the stead of many, learn that the more gorgeous you your
selves be in silks and veluettes, the more shame is it for you to see other
poor and neady, being members of the same body, in rags and clothe, yea
bare and naked.

Do thou not think them to be members of the same body that thou art?
Then art not thou a member of Christ, then art not thou a child of God,
then art no^ thou a christen man. One member ought as well to be provided for,
as another: I do not say that one ought to have as costely provision as a
another.

But as there be diverse members in diverse places, having diverse duties, so to
have diverse provision in feedyng and clothyng. And as they be all in one body,
so none to be without that feeding and clothyng, which for that part of the
body is meet and necessary. Even as ye do provide indifferentlye for every
part of your natural body, by reason of the which, ye are bound, and
subject to corruption: So let no part or member of your Christen body be
unprovided for: By reason of the which body, ye be heirs of the heavenly
kingdom. And this one example generally shall teach you to give that which is
due unto every one severally. Now here follows but eue^.iiii. words:
Tribute, cus^ume, fere, honor. Of these iiii. words will I conclude almost
in.iiii. words. Ye must give trybute, to whom trybute is due: custom, to
whom custom is due: fear, to who^ fear is due: honor, to whom honor is
due. Under trybute be contained taxes, fiftenth, subsides, and such as be
paid at sometimes to the Rulers, and be not continual. Customs be tithes,
tolles, rentes, and such as the people pay unto the officers continually. For
payinge of trybute besides this commandment of Paul, we have example of
Christ's mother, which being at the hour of her travel went out of Galyle
unto Bethlem, a town in Iewry, there to be taxed, and pay trybute unto Caesar.

As concerning custom, Christ himself commanded Peter to pay for them both,
lest that they should offend: that is, lest that they, in not paying, should
give evil example unto the people. So Christen men must needs pay both
trybute and custom. What trybute and custom good men may take, it appears in
that that goes before: surely even so much and no more as shall sufficientlye
dyscharge their costs, necessaryly bestowed in correctynge of evil, and
rewardyng good. Mark that I say they may or ought to take no more: for here I
tell them their duty. For truly if they do require more of you that be their
subjects, then is it your duty to pay that which they ask, and not to be
curyous to know for what cause it is asked, but this only to take heed that
with due reverence ye pay it, as Paul commands, and as Christ and his
mother have given you example. Fear and honor belong chieflye, yea in a
manner only unto God. For God only for him self is to be feared and honored.

All other for gods cause, are so to be feared and honored: as that fear and
honor which is given unto them, may proceed and come finally unto God. For,
dominu^ deum tuum adorabis et illum solum coals. Thou shalt honor the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou reuerentlye serve. As for the Devil, fear
him not, for he will do no less harm unto thee then he can: he can do no
more then God will suffer him. Fear therefore lest that thou offend God, and
he sufferre the Devil to utter his malice, and myschyefe toward thee.

That fear, honor, or service which according to gods commandment is
done unto those persons whom God has authorysed to receive it in his name,
is done unto God.

As that money which by thy commandment is paid to thy servant in thy
name, is paid unto the. Therefore Christ rulynge in magistrates by authorytye,
and being houngrye and could in the poor by pytye, does command us to
give, and promyseth that he him self will receive and reward that honor of
reverence, service and obedyence done to the higher powers, as to his
ordinance in the common welath: and also that honor of charitable alms,
relyefe, and conforte, which is bestowed upon the poor and neady, as upon the
lively members of his own body. As for that which without gods
commandment, of man's fantastical imaginacion is done unto Images, must
needs be high dyshonoure, and grievous displeasure unto God, when as the lively
image of God created with his own hand in flesh and blood, does honor,
reverence, and homage unto a dead picture of man, graven in stock or stone,
with a workemans tools

God is also honored in all his creatures, when as they be taken with thanks,
and used as he has commanded: and therefore, when as they be unthankfully
taken, or wyckedly abused, then is he dishonored, and displeased.

Now, hear a short conclusion, Qui ex deo est, uerbum dei audit: He that is
of God, hears the word of God. All you I say that be Christen men, Gods
children, and endued with Gods spirit, will hear the word of Gods
threatenyng, and fearyng his vengeance, repent, will hear the word of gods
commandment, and following his counsels amend your lives, will hear the word
of Gods promise, and patiently sufferynge, trust to his goodness. As for you
that will not hear and regard gods word, ye declare your selves not to be
of God. But for because ye have the devil to your father, ye will fulfill the
lusts and desires of the Devil, which is your father. And the lust and
desire of the Devil is, to hinder the work and pleasure of God: and this is
the work and will of God, that we should repose our faith and trust in
Christ Jesus, and bestow our labor and diligence in our own vocacyon.
Therefore the devil poysonynge all his with greadye couetousenes, will cause
them ever to trust to their own provision, and never to be content with their
own vocacion, but being called of God to be merchant, gentleman, lawer, or
courtear, yet to be ready at a beck of their father the devil, besides this
their godly vocacion, deuyllyshelye to proule for, seek, and purchase farms,
personages, and benefices, to discourage housbandemenne from tyllynge of the
ground, and ministers from preaching of Gods word: that thereby may come
a greuouse honger, dearth, and lack both of natural substance for the body,
and also of heavenly food for the soul And then those in the country that be
not gods children, but deuyllyshe vipers, will hysse, whisper, and swell with
venomous presumpcion, and their sting of rebellion to destroy both them selves,
and all the cuntry. But they of ye cuntry or else where, that be the children of
God in deed, knowing covetous rich men and officers to be sparpled abrod in
the cu^try as the scourges of god, to beat the^ for their sins, like gentle
children, will acknowledge their own fautes, and patiently suffryng correccion,
pitifullye cry unto their heavenly father for mercy, forgiveness, and
conforte. So all you in England, th^^ have any godly knowledge, grace, and
charity, will say with the prophet David: Verga tua, et baculus tuus, ipsa me
consolata sunt: Thy rod, O Lord and thy staff, they it be which have
conforted me. Thy rod of correccio^, which is these covetous rich men, and
officers, and thy staff of conforte, which is the kings majesty, whom thou
have endowed with a gracious gentle nature, godly educacion, wonderful wit, and
great learning: yea, and those noble men whom thou have called from their vain
plesures, to take great pains, of a reverent love toward the king, and of a
charital^^ pity toward us, to bestow their lands and goods, time, and
study, and all that ever they have, to prosper the King, to provide for his
realm, and to cherish us his people thereof. Thus thy rod of correccion, O
Lord, has taught us to be subject in humility unto all higher powers, as to
thy ordinance: and this thy staff of comfort o Lord, does encorage us to
love and trust the^, especially unto whom thou have given highest power and
authority. So that we can now wyllynglye give unto every one that which is
due: unto ye higher powers, reverence, service, and obedience, unto all
ingeneral faithful dealing, and unto the poor and needye, charitable alms,
relief and conforte.

Give therefore unto us, o Lord, mercy and grace, that we may render unto thee
thanks and praise for ever. Amen.

Imprinted at London by John Dare, dwellinge over Alderigate, and Wylliam Seres
dwelling in Peter College.

The year of our Lord God M.D.L. the nynth day of April.


