A TREATISE TENDING TO UNITY: IN A SERMON PREACHED AT DROGHEDAH ON WHITSVNDAY
(being the ninth of June 1622.) before the Kings Majesty's Commissioners for
IRELAND.

By Henry Leslie.

Quoties dicimus, toties judicamur.

Hierom. DUBLIN, Printed by the Society of Stationers. 1623.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, CHRISTOPHER, by Gods providence Archbishop
of Ardmagh, Primate of all Ireland, and Metropolitan, and one of his Majesty's
most honorable Privy Council.
MOST REVEREND;
IT was by your Graces direction that this Sermon was preached; and now by the
same appointment it is published: that the world may see it contains nothing
but truth, and is free from undiscreet raylings, wherewith it was charged by
them who dare adventure to censure us before they hear us.

Now these my small labors, and the labors of some few days, being the first
fruits of my weak engine, I here present unto your Grace, to whom I owe my
self, and all I have, much more my service, with the labor of my hands, head
and heart, as most bounden. Indeed this small offering is no more equivalent to
my debt, than a molehill is to a mountain: But whatsoever my barren ground
can afford, shall be ever at your Honors command: to which most humbly I
prostrate my self, praying always, that God would be pleased to continue your
Grace long unto this poor Church of Ireland, that like another Nehemiah, you
may build up the walls of this decayed JERUSALEM.

Your Graces most bounden Chaplain, HENRY LESLY.

A TREATISE TENDING TO UNITY.
I. TIM. II. V. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the
man Christ Jesus.


Under the Old Testament they observed the Feast of Pentecost in remembrance of
the Law given at Sinai: so it has been the practice of the Church under the
New Testament, to keep the like Feast, at the same time, in remembrance of the
Gospel which came from Jerusalem. For if the Law should be thus honored,
which is the ministration of death, 2. Cor. 3.7.
how much more the Gospel, which is the ministration of life, and that not
written in tables of stone, as was the Law, but in the tables of our hearts by
the holy Spirit? for this Spirit did descend upon the Apostles in a visible
shape on the day of Pentecost, Act. 2*
according to Christ's promise, that he would send unto them another comforter,
Ioh. 14.16, 17, 26.
even the Spirit of truth, Ioh. 16.13. 1. Cor. 2.10.
to lead them into all truth, to teach them all things, even the deep things
of God. So that those great and secret mysteries, which under the Old Testament
were shut up from the people, like unto the Sanctuary, into which entrance was
seldom made; are now made open to the understanding of all the faithful: for
this Spirit has revealed them unto the Apostles, and the Apostles in their
writings have clearly taught them unto us. Even in these few words which I
have read, behold a bundle of these mysteries, but obscurely known in former
times, now plainly set forth unto us: as the mystery of the Godhead, of our
reconciliation to God, of Christ's mediation, and of his incarnation. There is
one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.

The words contain the sum of the Gospel, and chief heads of our Christian
faith, catechizing us plainly in six maine grounds and principles of Religion:
I. That there is a God, else how should he be one? II. that this God is one;
there is one God. III. that this one God is reconciled and made one with us by
a mediator; for there is a mediator between God and men. IV. that this
mediator is one; and one mediator. V. that Christ Jesus is this one mediator.
VI. that Christ Jesus is a man; the man Christ Jesus. There is one God, and one
mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.

Thus he leads us by the hand from those things which are most commonly
known and received, to these that be less manifest, every one of these
principles revealing unto us a greater mystery, and further degree of
knowledge. For the first, that there is a God is acknowledged by all men. The
second, that this God is one, is not so commonly known as the former; for the
Gentiles worshipped a multitude of gods: yet is it generally confessed, not
only by the Church, but also by the wisest of the Heathen. The third, that this
God is reconciled to us by a mediator, exceeds the knowledge of all Gentiles
whatsoever, who had nothing but the light of nature: for it is not known by
nature, but by revelation from God; yet is it granted by many false teachers,
Papists, Jews, and also others who receive but a parcel of Gods word. But the
fourth, that this mediator is one, is less manifest yet: for it is refused by
the Papists, yet received by the Jews. But the fifth, that Christ Jesus is this
one mediator, does exceed their faith also: yet is it acknowledged by many
Heretics, who notwithstanding denied the humane nature of Christ. So that the
sixth and last, that Christ Jesus is a man, is most hid and privy, as being the
proper faith of the true Church.

As every one of these principles reveals a further degree of knowledge; so
also a greater measure of comfort. The first, that there is a God, to whom we
may have recourse in the day of trouble, is a great comfort to us: but if there
were many Gods, so that we knew not to which of them we should run for
help, our comfort were but small; therefore the second principle shows that
this God is only one. But albeit there be a God, and only one God; yet if we
be at enmity with him, we have greater cause to fear than to rejoice: in the
third place therefore, he removes this fear, showing that there is a
mediator by whom man is reconciled unto God. But yet if there were not one, but
many mediators, and we knew not to whom rather to betake us, what better
should we be? therefore in the fourth he takes away this doubt also,
affirming that there is one mediator. But though there be but one mediator, yet
what if he be unknown to us? we are still as before: therefore the fifth
position leads us, by the hand, unto the particular person, Christ Jesus, who
is this one mediator. But what of all this, if Christ Jesus be only God, and so
as strange to us as the pattic it self with whom we are at enmity? therefore
to make our joy full, the sixth principle tells us that he is a man. A man, and
so near unto us, not in place, for he is contained within the heavens
according to his manhood: but near unto us in blood; for he is a brother of
ours, bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh: and near unto us in affection;
for he has compassionate bowels, he is touched with a feeling of our
infirmities, Heb. 4.15.
and was in all sorts tempted in like sort as we are, yet without sin. And so
forasmuch as Christ Jesus is a man, we may go boldly unto him, and by him
have access unto the one God, he being the only mediator between God and man.
This is the fullness of all comfort. So this Text is like Jacobs ladder,
arising step by step till it bring us to comfort. My speech then at this time,
shall as it were climb up by these six stairs; 1. That there is a God: 2.
That this God is one: 3. That he is made one with us by a mediator: 4. That the
mediator is one: 5. That this one mediator is Christ: 6. That Christ Jesus is a
man.
In handling whereof, you will perceive me to omit many points that are
incident; for I must attend upon the time, and aim at the occasion.

As to the first, that there is a God; I should spend my breath in vain, if I
should labor to prove it: for it is ingrafted into every man's heart by nature,
and plainly taught by all the dumb and senseless creatures; so that never
man denied it but a fool, The fool says in his heart, Psalm. 19.1. Romans 1.20.
there is no God, Psalm. 14.1. Therefore as it is presupposed in my Text, so
shall it be in my speech.

The second is, that this God is one; whereby three things are signified of
God: that he is indivisible, one only, not many: that he is immutable and
unchangeable, one and the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever: and that he
is without all respect of persons, one and alike to all sorts of men. First,
God is one, that is, indivisible, one only, and not many; according to that,
1. Cor. 8.6. Unto us there is but one God. So does the Nicen Creed acknowledge,
I believe in one God: For God (as Bernard says) is Vnissimus, most one. Si non
est unus, non est, says Tertullian; either one or none. Here we must take
heed of sundry wicked errors and heresies on each side: on the right hand, we
have those who acknowledged many Gods: on the left hand, we have those who
do so far maintain God to be one, that they fall upon the other extremity,
to deny that there are three persons subsisting in this one God, or divine
nature. And of either side there be several sorts, differing one from another,
as they do all from the truth: all which I forbear to remember, as unworthie
to be named at all, unfit to be mentioned in the Pulpit. It is enough for you
to know, that amids those rocks on every side, our safest course is to hold
the middle way, so acknowledging God to be one, that we deny him not also to
be three: one in essence, but three in person, the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; distinct each from other by their personal proprieties, the Father
being from none, the Son from the Father, the Holy Ghost from them both: yet
not divided one from another, because there is but one divine essence, which
being infinite, is all and whole in the Father, all and whole in the Son, all
and whole in the Holy Ghost: Therefore (says Athanasius in his Creed) Deus
Pater, Deus Filius, Deus Spiritus Sanctus, and tamen non tres Dij, sed unus
Deus. For (says he) as we are compelled by the Christian verity, to
acknowledge every person by himself to be God; so are we forbidden by the
Catholic Religion to say there be three Gods. So that in all things, unity
in trinity, and trinity in unity is to be worshipped.

I cannot stand here to confirm the truth of this by testimony out of
Scripture: only to say something in a word; for the unity of Gods nature, take
my Text for a sufficient proof, There is one God. and for the trinity and
distinction of the persons, I will only allege one instance, which I am
occasioned by this present feast to remember; When the Holy Ghost did descend
upon the Apostles on this day: there ye have a distinction of all the three
persons. The third person he is sent, and appears in a visible shape of cloven
tongues: the first person he sends him: and the second, by interceding with the
first person, procures the third person to be sent. So does our Savior
distinguish them, Ioh. 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another comforter. there is the Son, praying to the Father, that the
Comforter, which is the holy Spirit, might be given unto the Disciples: and
therefore those three must be distinct persons, forasmuch as several actions
are ascribed to every one of them in the same work that was done on this day.

The Fathers, to express this incomprehensible mystery, have used sundry
similitudes taken from things natural; as the similitude of the soul of man,
wherein there be three distinct faculties, and yet but one essence of them all.
The similitude of the fountain; the stream flowing from it, and the river
flowing from them both: which being three distinct things, yet for substance
are but one water. The similitude of a tree, wherein there be three distinct
things, the root, the stock, and the branch: the root depending from none,
the stock from the root, and the branch from them both; yet all are but one
tree. Finally, the light of the Sun, the light of the Moon, and the light of
the air, are three distinct lights: the light of the Sun is from none, the
light of the Moon is from the Sun, and the light of the air from them both,
and yet for substance they are but one and the same light. Even so the Father,
the Son, the Holy Ghost, are three distinct persons: the Father from none,
the Son from the Father, the Holy Ghost from them both, and yet all three are
but one God. But for all these similitudes, we must acknowledge with Cyprian,
Nulla creatura talis esse potest, qualis est creator; ideo sicut sine exemplo
est divina essentia; ita sine exemplo est divina majestas: as there is no
creature such as is the creator, so there is no example can express either the
essence, or the majesty of GOD. For this is a mystery of mysteries, far
surpassing the reach of the understanding of any creature: which the Seraphims
profess, Esai. 6.2. when at the presence of this one God, they cover their
faces with their wings, acknowledging their inabilitie to behold, much less to
comprehend, so glorious a majesty.

Secondly, by this that God is one, is signified that he is immutable and
unchangeable, Heb. 13.8.
one and the same (as says the Apostle) yesterday and to day, and the same for
ever. In this sense it may be, God is called one, Gal. 3.20. But God is one. He
is one or immutable in his nature, in his decrees, in his actions. His nature
or essence is one and the same immutable and unchangeable, because he is void
of all kind of composition, both physical and metaphysicall, and (as we
speak in the Schools) actus purus. So that he is not subject unto any
change, whether we consider his being, or his attributes: for if we respect
his being, he is eternal, that is, without beginning, without end, and always
the same: for as time, being (as the Philosopher defines it) men sura motus per
prius and posterius: has in it three things; there is principium, successio
and finis: even so eternity, which is contrary to time, must be free of all
these, free from beginning, from end, and from all change or succession So
Phavorinus has observed, that the word (...) signifies one, qui non solum non
desinit esse, sed neque etiam desinit talis esse. and this word is used of God,
Romans 1.20. So that, as I said, he is not only without beginning and without
end, but also while he is, he is ever the same; as David says, Psalm. 102.25.
Thou have laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the works of
thy hand. They shall perish, but thou shall endure, yea all of them shall wax
old like a garment: as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be
changed. But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end. And as his
Being, so also his Attributes are eternal, not subject to any change: his
Justice, his Mercy, his Wisdom, his Power, all are immutable, and
unchangeable, for they are his very nature: whatsoever is in God, is God
himself.

Again, he is one and the same in his Will his Council, and his Decrees: for
God is not as man that he should lie, neither as the son of man that he
should repent. has he said, and shall he not do it? has he spoken, and shall
he not accomplish it? Numb 23.19. I am the Lord and change not, Mal. 3.6. My
counsel shall stand, and my will shall be done, Isai. 46.10. For when one
changes his purpose, it is either because he sees that his purpose is not
good, at least, that he might have purposed better than he did: or else it is
because he perceives that he cannot bring to pass his former purpose; and so
the change of his counsel does argue either want of wisdom, or want of
power. But God wants neither of them; he is, and always was, the same most
wise God, and so could not have taken any better counsel, than that which
he took from all eternity. And as he is most wise, so also omnipotent, able
to effect all his counsels: He does whatsoever he will, Psalm. 115.3. Yea who
has resisted his will? Romans 9.19. And therefore that doctrine of the
mutabilitie of Gods predestination, as it is contrary to the Scripture, which
teaches that Gods purpose according to election, must stand, Romans 9.11. so it
is most blasphemous against God. For, to say that Gods predestination may be
changed, that the elect may become reprobate, and so damned, and on the
contrary, the reprobate become elect, and so saved; is as much as to say that
Gods absolute Will, which is himself, may be changed, that his Prescience or
Knowledge may be deceived, that his omnipotent power may be weakened, that his
actions may be impeded, and so that God may become no God.

Finally, he is one and the same in his actions; which may be declared three
manner of ways: 1. where the occasion is the same, Gods action is of the same
kind: for example; Did God in former times execute his judgments against
rebellious sinners? ye may be sure that he will do the like now. Upon this
ground the Apostle reasons, Romans 11.21. For if God spared not the natural
branches, take heed least he also spare not thee. As if he should say, They
were cast off because of unbeleefe, and if thou fall into the same sin, thou
may be sure to taste of the same punishment; forasmuch as where the occasion is
the same, Gods actions are always the same. So the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10.
alleges Gods judgments upon the Jews in the wilderness: and the Apostle
Peter the great judgments upon the Angels that sinned, upon the old world, and
upon Sodom and Gomorrhe, 2 Pet. 2. concluding from thence, That if he spared
not them, so neither will he spare us, if we do as they did. For the wrath of
God is revealed from heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men, Romans 1.18. Again, has God in former times performed mercy and
deliverance to his own people? ye may be sure that he will do the same
still. Upon this ground David built his assurance; The Lord that delivered me
out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me
out of the hand of this Philistim, 1. Sam. 17.37. And so in many places of the
Psalms, where he lamenteth the miseries of the Church, he reckons up Gods
former benefits bestowed upon her, that by the experience of Gods former
favors, both himself and others might be assured of a future deliverance;
forasmuch as God is always the same, visiting the iniquities of the fathers
upon the children to the third and fourth generation of them that hate him, and
showing mercy unto thousands of them that love him, and keep his
commandments. Secondly, God is one and the same in his actions, as being the
same means to bring men to the same end. There is not one way for the Jews to
be saved, another for the Gentiles, but it is one God which shall justify
circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision through faith; Romans 3.30. There is
for all, the same Savior, Christ; the same instrument, Faith; the same degrees
of salvation interveening between Gods decree and the execution thereof,
namely, Vocation, Justification, Santification; and the same outward means,
Gods Word and Sacraments. But here we must remember, that albeit God works
the same things in all the faithful, yet not in the same measure and degree.
He did illuminate his Saints under the old Testament, but not in that measure
that he does his people under the Gospel. The Disciples received the holy
Spirit when they were first called, and after when Christ breathed on them, and
said, Receive the holy Ghost, Ioh. 20.22. but not in that measure that they did
in the day of Pentecost, when the Spirit came down upon them in a visible
shape. Before they had only tasted of the Spirit, Act. 2.4.
but then they are said to be filled with the Holy Ghost. Eadem semper fuit
virtus charismatum, quamvis non eadem semper mensura donorum, says Leo: The
day of Pentecost was not the first time they had received the holy Ghost, non
fuit inchoatio muneris, sed adjectio largitatis, says the same Leo: but yet in
respect of the abundance of the Spirit, which was powered out on this day, they
are formerly said, not to have received the Spirit. And well may this day be
called the feast of the descending of the holy Ghost, because the holy Ghost
did never come down in such a measure, nor in such a manner, as upon this day.
Thirdly, God is said to be unchangeable in his actions, because when he
begins a good work he never leaves it, till he bring it to an end. Whom he
elected, them he calls; whom he called, them he justifies; whom he
justified, them he sanctifies; whom he sanctified, them he glorifieth: For the
gifts and calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11.29 This serves
mightily to confirm us in the certainety of our salvation: for howsoever we be
changeable, and ready to fall away from God at every occasion; yet God is one
and the same, and does always perfect the good work which he has begun: and
we keep not him, but he keeps us. Because I am not changed, therefore ye
are not consumed, O ye sons of Jacob, Mal. 3.6. So you see, that whether you
consider God in his nature, or in his decrees, or in his actions; it is always
true that the Apostle James says, With him there is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning. Iam. 1.17.

Thirdly, by this that God is one, he will signify that he is without all
respect of persons; one and alike to all. In this sense God is called one, Romans
3.29.30. God: Is he the God of the Jews only, and not of the Gentiles also?
yes even of the Gentiles also. For it is one God who shall justify
circumcision of faith, and uncircumcision through faith. And this is the intent
of the Apostle in this place: for these words are an argument to confirm his
exhortation set down in the beginning of the chapter; where the Apostle
requires, that without limitation, we pray and give thanks for all men. To
stir us up to the practice hereof, he propounds unto us the pleasure and
will of God, verse. 3.4. and next, the dealing of God and of Christ, and their
equal respect unto all, verse. 5. There is one God and one Mediator. As if he
should say: God is one to all, both to Jews and Gentiles, and all sorts of
men, so is the Mediator one and alike to all men. and therefore should we
carry our selves equally toward all, secluding none from the benefit of our
prayers.

Now that ye may perceive how God is one and alike to all, we will consider him
in a fourfold respect, according to the diverse persons which he carries,
and according to which he works. Some things he does as a free Lord, having
power over all: some things as God, creator and conserver of all things: and
some things he works, as the God of his own people only, the father of his
children: and other things, as he is the Judge of the whole world. As Lord of
all, when all were sinners guilty before him, he ordained some for life,
others for destruction: he loved Jacob, he hated Esau: he has mercy on whom
he will, and whom he will he hardneth: some he makes vessels of mercy, and
others vessels of wrath: some he calls, but draws not: others he both
calls and draws, and others he neither calls nor draws; and yet in so
doing, he is without all respect of persons, one and alike to all. For he is
a respecter of persons, who in judgment, contrary to law, distributes unto
equals unequally, that which is equally due unto them: or he who gives not
alike unto equals, when of right he is bound to give them alike; but so
gratifyeth the one, that he wrongeth the other, and that for some outward
condition in the party, besides the justice of his cause, as either for his
kindred, or his country, or carnal propinquitie, or his dignity, or his
riches, or some other office he has done, and such like external qualities,
by which men in judgment are moved to favor one party more than another. Now
God electing one, rejecting another, while all were alike, even sinners in
Adam, cannot be said to be guilty of this: first, because the mercy he shows
unto some, is not debt, but a gift of his free grace. and it is Austins rule,
Ibi esse acceptionem personaru^, ubi quae aequalibus ex aequo debentur,
inaequaliter distribuuntur. But where the things given are not due, but free
gifts; there, albeit there be not an equal distribution toward them who in
themselves are equal, yet it is no respect of persons, nor any injustice at
all. S. Austin clears this reason by two examples: the first is of a man that
has two debtors, and forgives the one, but exacts it of the other. This is not
respect of persons, because he is not bound to forgive either of them; and
forgiving the one out of his own good will, he wrongeth not the other: for he
is free to dispense his own gifts as he will. Hear S. Austin in his own
words: Si autem quispiam duos habeat debitores, and alteri vellet dimittere, Ad
dua^ Epist. Pelagian. l. 2. cap 7.
ab altero exigere, cui vult donat, sed neminem fraudat, nec acceptio
personarum dicenda est, quando iniquitas nulla est. His second instance is of
the Householder in the Gospel, who paying laborers who had wrought in his
Vineyard, Matthew. 20.
gave as much unto them that had wrought but one hour, as unto them that had
borne the burden and heat of the day: and when they murmured against him for
his partiality, he answered, and said; Friend, I do thee no wrong: did
thou not agree with me for a penny? Verses 3* 14, 15.
Take that thine is, and go thy way; I will give unto this last even as unto
thee. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? On which
words, S. Austin does paraphrase after this manner: Volo autem huic dare sicut
and tibi, etc. nempe hic totae justitia est: hoc volo: tibi inquit reddidi;
huic donavi: neque ut huic darem, tibi aliquid abstuli, aut quod debebam vel
minui, vel negavi, etc. The sum is: He freeth himself from injustice, for
that unto them all he had given as much as he was bound to give; and to some
he had given more than he was bound: wherein he was gracious unto them, but not
unjust toward the others; for that it is lawful for him to do what he will
with his own. Hence S. Austin infers, That as there was no acception of
persons in this man, distributing his own favor unequally: so neither in God,
electing one, rejecting another, while all were alike; for his election is no
debt, but a gift of his free grace, which he may bestow as he pleases, either
on all, or on none, or on some, and not on others. As the one have cause to
extol his mercy, so the other cannot accuse his justice: for he might have
past by them all, and appointed them for damnation, all being guilty. And
therefore that he has mercy on some, he is freely good; because he gives that
which he is not bound to give: that he passes by others, he is not unjust;
because he owes them nothing: finally, that he condemns those whom he
rejected for their sins, he is just; because he pays them that which he
owes. This is the first reason, why God electing one, rejecting another, while
all were alike, cannot be said to be a respecter of persons.

Secondly, for further clearing of Gods justice, let us consider that God
electeth some, rejects others, citra cujusquam injuriam: for, as S. Austin
says, Sic alius gratis honoratur, ut alius debito non fraudetur. though some
be bountifully rewarded, yet others are not wronged. Indeed a Judge in
judgment, favoring one more than his cause deserves; by how much he
gratifieth the one party, by as much he damnifieth the other: and therefore he
is a respecter of persons. But though God favor some so far, that whereas
they deserve damnation, he calls them unto salvation, yet the rest fare not
the worse for this: the glory of the elect adds nothing to the pain of the
reprobate; the wicked receive their own measure, neither more not less than
they should have done though none had been saved. Finally, God electing some,
and rejecting others, is free from respect of persons; because he is not moved
to favor the one more than the other, by any cause or condition in
themselves, but merely by his own good will and pleasure. And it is well
observed by some, that when it is said in Scripture, that God is no respecter
of persons; the word persona, signifies not the man himself, but some
external quality, which being considered, might procure unto him, either
favor or hatred: as beauty or deformity, nobility or baseness, riches or
poverty, and such like. These outward qualities God does no ways respect in
men: he regards not men's riches more than their poverty, Iam. 2. nor their
freedom more than their bondage, Col. 3.11. neither does he so distinguish
between the Jew and the Grecian, that only for respect of the nation, he
embraces the one, and rejects the other, Act. 10.34. but of every nation,
of all sorts and conditions of men, he chooses some. So that if ye consider
God, even in this respect, as an absolute Lord, using his liberty over his
creatures, wherein he seems most partial unto carnal minded men; yet ye
see that he is without all respect of persons, one and alike unto all.

Next, God may be considered as the God of all: in which respect he created all
things, conserveth all things, does good unto all; but with great difference
and inequality: for though he have made all things good, yet their essential
goodness does not exclude an inequality of degrees, which was so requisite
for the perfection and ornament of this Universe: for in a great house are not
only vessels of gold and silver, but also of vvood and of earth, 2. Tim. 2.20.
The Potter, albeit of the same lump of clay, yet must not make all his vessels
the same, but some for honest uses, some for baser employments, because men
stand in need of both: so God, albeit he have made all things good, and given
unto them all powers fitting the condition of their natures, and sufficient for
their own ends and operations, yet he has made some of a farte more noble
condition than others; for unto some things he has given only being, unto
other things being and life, unto others being, life and sense, and unto
others being, life, sense, and reason, yea and a supernatural light to see
many things that cannot be understood by natural reason. so that there is
great difference inter Vermiculos in coeno, and Angelos in coelo. And as there
is inequality to be seen in the creation, so also in the preservation: for
though Gods providence be extended unto all things, even unto the Fowls of
the heaven, Matthew. 6.26. to the grass of the field, ver. 30. to the hayres of
our head, Matthew. 10.30. yet he has greater care of some things than of other.
By how much the creature comes nearer unto God, by so much the higher place
it has in the order of his providence: so says Christ, that God has a
greater care of men, than of Fowls, Matt. 6.26. etc.
or of Lillies. And there is good reason for it; for it is only for man's sake,
that God has care of these things: for his sake they were made, for his sake
it is that they are continued; and therefore God much more must have a care of
man himself. But albeit Gods goodness be not extended in like measure to all
his creatures, yet is he not a respecter of persons; because (as I said before)
his gifts are no debt, but free grace, and he does not wrong any of his
creatures. And lastly, he is not moved to be more bountiful to some than to
others, by any cause and condition in themselves, but merely by his own good
will and pleasure.

There is a third consideration of God, as he is the God of his own people,
the Father of his children, the Savior of his body, the Head and Husband of
his Church: and in this respect Gods actions do respect only those that are
of his own family. He has not done so unto every nation, as he has done
unto them: for he begets them, he saves them, he rules them, he quickneth
them. But howsoever Gods special love and favor be extended unto them all;
yet here also we must acknowledge an inequality. It is true, that God
communicates spiritual life to all his members indifferently, insomuch as the
least is a member of his body so well as the greatest: and in this respect all
parts are peers. But yet there are diverse functions, diverse gifts, diverse
measures of gifts, and so by consequence for fashion, and function, and
imparitie. First, I say, there are diverse functions: for as we have many
members in one body, and all members have not the same office, Romans 12.4. so it
is with the mystical body of Christ; there are many members, and all have
not the same office: but some are as the head, some as the eyes, others as the
hands, 1. Cor. 12.21.
others as the feet. Christ ascending on high, gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11.
Again, there are diverse gifts, namely extraordinary gifts, which are not
necessarily required in every one to salvation, as the gift of prophecy and
discerning of spirits, the gifts of miracles, of tongues, and of interpretation
of tongues. Of these, and such like says the Apostle: 1. Cor. 12 ver. 4.8.9.10.
There are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit. To one is given by the
Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge, to another the
gifts of healing, etc. the like is, Romans 12.6. Finally, there are diverse
measures of saving graces, and of such gifts as are absolutely necessary to
salvation: for all have not the same measure of knowledge, but some are babes,
and some are men of full age: all have not the same measure of faith; for
Christ mentions a great faith, and a little faith: all have not the same
measure of sanctification; for some are termed perfect in respect of others:
lastly, neither shall all have the same measure of glory, but some shall shine
as the Sun, and others as the Stars in the firmament. But notwithstanding
this diversity of gifts that God bestows upon his children, he cannot be
said to be a respecter of persons, for the same reasons that are formerly
alleged. And besides, it was fit it should be so, for many reasons: as that
every one might stand in need of another help; The eye cannot say unto the
hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the head to the feet I have no need
of you, 1. Cor. 12.21. and especially, that by this diversity, the beauty of
the whole body might be set forth: Tota pulchra es amica mea: Christ's
mystical body is all fair. Can 4.7.
Now beauty consists in variety of colors, and in a concine disposition of
sundry different parts. If all the whole body were an eye, where were the
hearing? if the whole were hearing, where were the smelling? 1. Cor. 12.17.

Finally, if ye consider God as the Judge of the whole world, his actions are
to give sentence and judgment upon his creatures, not the same sentence upon
all, but the sentence of absolution unto some, the sentence of condemnation
against others: between which two, there is as great difference as betwixt
life and death, and yet no inequality, far less any respect of persons. In
the three former considerations, God did not always give alike to them, who in
themselves were equal; but here there is ever an equal distribution toward
them, who in themselves are alike: neither are any distinguished in their
recompense, that were not different in their lives. He observes the rule of
distributive justice, which is, suum cuique tribuere; for, as the Scripture
says in many places, Ier. 17.10. Psalm. 62.18. Matthew. 16.27. Rom 2 6. Rev.
22.12.
He rewards every man according to his works. (...), not (...): the
particle (...) signifies not the merit, but the measure and the rule by which
the undeserved rewards shall be distributed, and the deserved punishments shall
be inflicted. So it signifies in other places; as Matthew. 9.29. According to
your faith, be it unto you. and Matthew. 23.3. After their works, or, According
to their works, do not. And so it must signify in these places, where it is
said that God will reward every man according to his works: for Revel. 22.12.
this phrase (...), is expounded to be, (...), My reward is with me, to give
every man according as his work shall be. that is, according as the quality
of it shall be, whether good or bad; and also according as the quantity of it
shall be, both for weight and number, whether great or small, many or few: for
God is so just and unpartiall in his judgments, that he has respect both to
the quality and to the quantity of our work, and accordingly does apportion
a proportionable reward unto them. First, the quality of every man's works
shall be tried, whether they be good or bad, and their reward will be divided
accordingly. It shall be well with the just, for they shall eat the fruit of
their works: and woe to the wicked, it shall be evil with him, for the reward
of his hands shall be given him, Esai 3.10. He will render to every man
according to his deeds. -- Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that
does evil, of the lew first, and also of the Gentile. But glory, honor, and
peace to every man that works good, etc. Romans 2.6.9.10.11. For we must all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive the
things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or
bad, 2. Cor. 5.10. They shall come forth that have done good, unto the
resurrection of life, but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
condemnation, Ioh. 5.29. Again, the quantity of every man's works shall be
tried, both their number and their weight, and the measure of reward
proportioned thereunto. For the number, he keeps an exact record and
inventorie of all our works: he has a bottle for our tears, Psalm. 56.8. a
bag for our alms, Luke 12.33. and a book for our good works, as also for
the sins of the wicked. Dan. 7.10. The judgment was set, and the books
opened. Revel. 20.12. The books are opened, and the dead are judged of those
things which are written in the books. These books are two; libriscientiae
Dei, and conscientiae nostrae, the lieger book of Gods knowledge, and the
count book of our own conscience: wherein both the good works of the godly,
and the sins of the wicked, are so particularly written, that not any of our
good works shall be forgotten, Heb. 6.10. nor yet any of the sins of the
wicked; not so much as an idle word, but they shall give account thereof in the
day of judgment, Matthew. 12.36. And as the number of our works, so also the
weight shall be scanned: for he comes with a balance in his hand, and in
this balance of justice, will he poize, both the goodness of men's works and
the grievousnesse of their sins. Now from this difference, both of the sins
of the wicked, and of the good works of the godly, in their number and weight,
shall arise different degrees, both of punishments in hell, and of joys in
heaven. According to the number of men's sins, shall be the number of their
pains: Revel. 18.7. As much as she lived in pleasures, so much give you to her
torment and sorrow. and according to the grievousnesse of their sins, shall
be the greatness of their punishment. It shall be easier for Tyrus and Sidon,
than for Corazin and Bethsaida, Luke 10.14. He that sins of ignorance shall
be beaten with fewer stripes, than he who sins of knowledge, Luke 12.47.48.
The like may be said of the joys of heaven: though all shall receive fullness
of joy, yet there shall be several degrees of joy, according to the several
degrees of present grace, by which they are diversely capable of future glory.
He that has done many good works, shall receive many rewards; for God is
not unrighteous, that he should forget any of our good works, Heb. 6.10. No,
not a cup of cold water shall slip unrewarded, Matthew. 10.42. He that sows
plenteously, shall reap plenteously, 2. Cor. 9.6. And a weightier good done,
has a weightier reward given: Thou shall rest and stand up in thy lot at the
end of the days, said the Angel to Daniel, Dan. 12.13. There is one general
lot, for all them that be wise, to shine as the brightness of the firmament:
but they that turn many to righteousness, have a special lot, to shine as
the stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. So that, albeit eternal happiness
be due only by promise, as a portion of grace, yet it is duly performed by
proportion of justice. God uses an equal inequality: for every one shall
receive his own reward according to his own labor, 1. Cor. 3.8. So that God
every way is both just and unpartiall. Thus have I showed, that in what
respect soever we consider God, he is without all respect of persons, one and
alike to all: There is one God.

The third thing we have to speak of, is, that God is made one with us by a
Mediator: for there is a Mediator between God and man. A mediator is a middle
person, that comes between two parties that be at variance, to be a mean of
atonement and peace; who deals with each party, until he bring them under
some contract and covenant. Now it is plain, that God and man were at enmity;
man the party offending, God the party offended: a middle person comes in
between, and labors a reconciliation, binding up a covenant between them, That
man shall satisfy for the wrong he has done, and perform obedience in times
coming; as also on the other part, That God shall remit his wrath, receive man
into his favor, and give unto him eternal life. But because man was unable to
perform his part of the covenant, this same Mediator becomes his suertie,
and undertaketh for him, both to satisfy the law and justice of God for man's
sin, and also to make him perform obedience in time following, by renewing
him again unto the image, which he had lost in Adam. That he might perform
the first, he behoved to be a Priest, to offer up himself in an expiatorie
sacrifice: and that he might perform the second, it was needful that he
should be a Prophet and a King. for the corruption of man, which he was to take
away, that man might perform obedience to God, had two parts; ignorance in the
mind, and enormitie or rebellion in the will and affections. To cure our
ignorance, he behoved to be a Prophet to instruct us: to take away our
enormitie and rebellion, he must be a King, powerfully to convert our hearts,
and to rule the same by his spirit; that so he might make us to obey God all
the rest of our life, we being once made partakers of his satisfaction. So our
Mediator being our suertie, was both a Priest, a Prophet and a King: a Priest
after the order of Melchizedeck, Psalm. 110.4. a Prophet, to be heard when Moses
should hold his peace, Deuteronomy. 18.18. a King, to save his people, whose name
should be the Lord our righteousness, Ier. 23.6. David's Priest, Moses his
Prophet, Ieremies King. and these formerly had met double, two of them in some
other; Melchizedeck, King and Priest; Samuel, Priest and Prophet; David,
Prophet and King: never all three, but in him alone.

As he who is Mediator between God and man, is suertie for man performing his
part: so also does he perform Gods part to man. He who as Mediator, or rather
Suertie, satisfied for sin, does, as he is God, remit that sin which he
satisfied for, receive man into his favor, give him grace in this life, and
glory in the life to come; and, in a word, performs all Gods part of the
covenant. For this cause the Apostle to the Hebrews calls the covenant, in
respect of Gods part, Christ's Testament; because Christ has bequeathed those
things unto us in his legacy, namely, remission of sins, justification, and
eternal life. So that we have a double benefit by the death of our Mediator:
one, that thereby he has satisfied for our sins, as he is our Suertie:
another, that thereby he has confirmed his Testament, containing a disposition
of these things, which God has bound himself by covenant to give us; For a
Testament is of no strength while the Testator lives, Heb. 9.16. Thus after a
wonderful manner, one is both Mediator to draw on an agreement between these
two parties, and suertie for man's part of the bargain; and also he performs
Gods part of the covenant, bequeathing unto us in legacy these things which
God has promised to give us, and as a faithful testator confirming the same
by his death.

Then God is reconciled to man by a mediator: but have the Angels no benefit
by his mediation, seeing the Apostle only says that there is a mediator
between God and man? I answer; that they have, though not so great as man: 1.
They have this benefit, that they are gathered and united under one head
together with the rest of the Church; for all things, both which are in heaven,
and which are in earth, are gathered together in one, in Christ, Ephesians. 1.10.
2. They have this benefit also, that their friendship with man is renewed, he
being reconciled to God. 3. By this mediator their ruins are repaired, and
their number filled: because men that are reconciled, succeed in the place of
Angels that fell, says S. Austin. 4. He furnishes unto them matter of joy;
for they rejoice at the conversion of a sinner. 5. By him they get greater
knowledge of the mysteries of God revealed unto them. 6. By him they are
confirmed so in grace that they cannot fall, they being changeable of
themselves: therefore we say in the Schools, That though they have not a
mediator of redemption, yet they have a mediator of confirmation.
according to that of Bernard: Qui erexit hominem lapsum, dedit stanti Angelo
ne laberetur: sic illum de captivitate eruens, sicut hunc a captivitate
defendens. Finally, some say they have this benefit also, that their obedience
being not perfect enough of it self, nor able to stand before God; for he
finds iniquity in the Angels: is accepted as most perfect for this mediators
sake. and therefore they are said even to be reconciled to God by this
mediator, Col. 1.20. Others go further, saying, that the Angels, as also all
other creatures, besides man, had declined somewhat from their first beginning;
but were restored again to their integrity by this mediator. and so they
understand the word recapitulat, Ephesians. 1.10. for (...), signifies to call a
thing back to the first beginning, as well as to gather in one head; as the
word (...) signifies both the head, and beginning of a thing.

The fourth point set down here, is, that this mediator is one; There is one
Mediator. Whereby, as I said before of the one God, three things are signified:
that he is indivisible, immutable, and alike to all. 1. He is one, that is,
indivisible, one only, not many; and that both in respect of his person, and
in respect of his office. His person is indivisible and only one: for albeit
he be God and man, yet he is not two, but one. Non alter ex patre, alter ex
matre; sed aliter ex patre, aliter ex matre, as was concluded against the
wicked heresy of Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, who divided the two
natures of our mediator, making them two persons. He was condemned in the third
general Council at Ephesus, where it was decreed that the blessed Virgin was
(...), the mother of God, because there was but one person, that was both God
begotten of the Father, and man borne of his mother. and in the Council of
Chalcedon, which was the fourth general, to show that his person was but one,
against Nestorius, they used two adverbes, saying that his natures were united
(...) and (...), without division, without separation: which the Fathers
express by sundry similitudes. Justin uses the similitude of the soul and
the body, which are so united that they make but one person. Damascen the
similitude of an hot iron, which being but one thing subsisting, has in it
two distinct natures, the fire and the iron; every one whereof, has his
several action concurring to one work: the heat burns, the iron cutteth.
Even so the mediator being one person, has two distinct natures, every one
whereof has his several action, concurring to the work of mediation. But the
most significant similitude is that of a Vine tree, and a bough graffed into
the Vine: for even as that bough has no being or subsistence of it self, but
both grows and lives in the stock of the Vine; so the humane nature of our
mediator, having no subsistence of it self, is, as it were, ingraffed into the
person of the Son, who is the true Vine, and is wholly supported and
sustained by it. therefore there be not two persons, but one; the humane nature
being (...), void of all personalitie or subsistence, and assumed by the Son
of God, who is (...), a person subsisting of himself and by himself.

Again, as his person, so likewise his office is indivisible: for he received
an unchangeable Priesthood, which cannot pass from him unto any other, Heb.
7.24. So that besides him, there is no other mediator, neither can be. For in a
true and sufficient mediator there must be four properties, which are not to
be found in any but him: 1. The word of God must reveal and propound him to
the Church, that in conscience we may be assured, that praying to God in his
name, we shall be heard: but there is no Scripture that mentions any other
mediator but only one. 2. He that is mediator between God and man, must
partake of both natures: for a Mediator is not of one, Gal. 3.20. So then he
that is Mediator between God and man must not be of one nature, he must be
both God and man: he must be God, that he may speak to God for us: he must
be man, that he may speak from God to man. Mediatorem inter nos and Deum
(says S. Austin) and mortalitatem habere opportuit transeuntem, and beatitatem
permanentem. but there is only one that is both God and man. 3. A mediator
must be perfectly just: for such an high Priest became us, who is holy,
blameless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens,
Heb. 7.26. As the Apostle shows that they could not be high Priests, who had
need to offer for their own sins, as well as for the sins of the people,
Heb. 7.27. so they cannot be mediators, who had need of a mediator for
themselves. Now none is perfectly just but only one. The Saints in heaven,
howsoever they be fully justified, sanctified, glorified, yet in themselves
they are sinners, and therefore must needs stand before God by the mediation of
another: So that S. Austin reasons well, that he is the only true mediator,
pro quo nullus interpellat, sed ipse pro omnibus. 4. A mediator must be a
propitiator, that is, bring something to God that may satisfy his justice for
our sins: therefore S. John having told us, that we have an advocate with the
Father, he adds, and he is a propitiation for our sins, 1. Ioh. 2.2.
But there is none other that is a propitiation for our sins; therefore but
one Mediator.

But the Papists think to escape this by a rotten distinction of mediators of
redemption, and intercession. There is but one mediator of redemption (say
they) but many mediators of intercession, even all the Saints in heaven.
Whereunto I say, 1. That these four properties are especially required in an
advocate and mediator of intercession, rather then in a redeemer: but they are
not to be found in any but in one. 2. The Apostle here affirming that there
is one mediator, means rather a mediator of intercession: for throughout this
whole chapter he is speaking of prayers and intercessions. 3. And this
distinction is idle; because none can be an advocate or mediator of
intercession, but he that is our redeemer: for the word (Advocate) is borrowed
of Lawyers and signifies him only that does plead the justice of his clients
cause. A stranger in the Court, may become a petitioner to the Judge, and
entreat favor for the guilty person: but advocates are Proctors and patrons
of their clyents; therefore he alone is our advocate, who being our redeemer,
can plead his justice bestowed upon us. and Saints, though they be petitioners
to God in our behalf, yet because they redeemed us not, they cannot be our
advocates to plead the justice of our cause. It is sure that Ministers pray
for the people, and that ex efficio: yet S. Augustine reproves Parmonian, Lib.
2. cont. ep. Parm. c. 8.
for placing the Bishop mediator between God and the people. 4. The Saints do
not so much as intercede for us, namely, particularly: for it is as impossible
for them to be intercessors, as redeemers.
for he who is an intercessor for us, must hear our prayers, know what things
we stand in need of, and understand our very secret wants and groans: But
this none but God can do, as Solomon confesses, 1. King. 8.39. Thou only
know the heart. and Eccles. 9.5. The dead know nothing at all. Therefore is
it said of Josiah, that he was taken away by death, that he might not see the
evil that was to come; which cannot be true, if so be that Josiah being a
Saint in heaven, did see and know the particulars that were done upon the
earth. Finally, this the Church does acknowledge unto God, Esa. 03.16. Abraham
is Ignorant of us, and Jacob knows us not. Upon which place, S. Austin
reasons very well: If so great Patriarchs were Ignorant what became of the
people which were borne of their loins: how is it like that other dead can be
present, to understand men's affairs? Lastly, this distinction is overthrown
by themselves: for they make Saints mediators of redemption, as well as of
intercession. Aquinas does avow, a. 2^^. q 83. ar. 4.
that our prayers are effectual by the merits of Saints. And ye know what is
the doctrine of their whole Church for humane satisfactions, namely,
passionibus sanctorum expiari delicta, as Bellarmine says: Bellar de indulgen.
l. 1. c. 2.
which is a blasphemy worthy the tearing of garments. Thus they sometimes
make Saints mediators of redemption, sometimes they deny it, and so contradict
both themselves and the Apostle here, affirming that our mediator is one.

As hereby hesignifieth that the mediator is one only, not many: so likewise
that he is immutable and unchangeable, one and the same yesterday, to day, and
for ever. So says the author of the book of Wisdom, speaking of this
Mediator, that uncreated Wisdom: Being one, she can do all things. And the
Apostle, Heb. 1.12. applies that place of the Psalm to him; Thou art the
same, and thy years shall not fail. He is one and the same objective,
subjective, effective: Objective, the same in his word; for he who yesterday
was shadowed in the Law, is to day showed in the Gospel. Idem subjective, the
same in his person, and in his attributes and office: in his person, the same
before and after his Incarnation; for taking upon him our nature, he was no
more changed thereby, than a man is by putting on a vesture. Homo quippe Deo
accessit, non Deus a se recessit; home factus naturam suscipiende nostram, non
amittende suam. as the divine Poet very sweetly:

Ille manet quod semper erat, quod non erat esse incipiens. He did not leave
off to be what he was, but he begun to be what he was not. Again, he is the
same in his attributes, in his power, in his office; being always the Lord of
his people, the shepherd of his flock, the head of his Church, the mediator
between God and man. Finally, he is idem effective, the same in his works, in
his goodness, in his grace: he who yesterday was a mediator for Abraham,
Izaac, and Jacob, is to day a mediator for us: he is as well now the light of
the Gentiles, as he was before the glory of his people Israel.

Last of all, by this that he is one, is signified that he is without all
respect of persons, one and alike to all; not the mediator of the Jews only,
but of the Gentiles also. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither
bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for all are one in Christ.
Gal. 3.28. He is peace to him that is near, and peace to him that is far
off, Esa. 57.19. that is, as the Fathers expound it, peace to the Jews that
are near, and peace to the Gentiles that are far off. This one blessed
peacemaker has made atonement for both, and appears daily in the sight of
God to plead our pardon, as a faithful Advocate and high Priest. S. Augustine
says, that his arms were stretched out upon the cross, to signify this,
That he was now to embrace, not an handful of people, as he did before the
nation of the Jews; but as many as his arms were able to contain: that now
he was to break down that partition wall, which for a long time had been
between Jews and Gentiles, and become one to all. There is one Mediator.

But as yet we know not who is this one Mediator: therefore lest the Jews
should say that it were their long looked for Messiah; or the Turks, their
Mahomet; or the Friars, that it were S. Francis, or S. Dominick, or finally all
Papists, who construe it of the Virgin Mary: for there is more mention of her
in their prayers, than of Christ; and the prophetical Psalms of Christ are
transferred unto Mary, and what else is magnifically spoken of him in
Scripture, even the first promise that was made of this Mediator, Genesis 3.15.
translated as spoken of her in their most approved Bible, ipsa conteret caput
tuum. although (as their own Jesuit Ribera confesses) the Hebrew text, the
Chaldee paraphrase, the Septuagints translation, and all good Latin copies
read ipse conteret. For this cause the Apostle in the fifth place, leads us,
as it were by the hand, to the very person, describing him by his proper name,
and surname: Jesus Christ, he is this one Mediator, who therefore is called the
Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. and, the covenant of the people, Esa. 49.8.
the Mediator of the new covenant, whose blood speaks better things then the
blood of Abel, Heb. 12.24. Our peace, Ephesians. ^.14. The way and the door by which
we have access unto the Father, Ioh. 14.6. The way into the holiest of all,
Heb. 9.8. finally, an high Priest who came by a more perfect Tabernacle, not
made with hands; and who not by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own
blood entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption
for us, Heb. 9.11.

I come to the last head, that Christ Jesus is a man; The man Christ Jesus.
Homo verus, but not homo merus: he is a true man, as having 1. the substance of
a true body and soul: 2. the essential and natural properties of soul and
body: 3. the infirmities also, and such defects as be natural.
I say such as be natural, to exclude two sorts of infirmities; 1. these which
do not universally follow the nature of man, but are only personal
appertayning to some particular men, and arising from private causes, and
particular judgments: as to be borne a fool, to be sick of an ague,
consumption, leprosy, and such like diseases. 2. Sins, which be infirmities
indeed, but not natural, but rather contrary to nature;
because they belong not to nature as it is whole, but as it is corrupt.
Neither of these Christ took upon him; because it behoved him to be like man
in general, not like to this or that man in particular: again, like unto man
in general in all things, except sin, Heb. 4.15.

It behoved Christ to be like unto us, a man as we are whether we consider him
as he was our Suertie, or as our high Priest, or as our Ransom, or as our
Redeemer, or as our Mediator, or finally, as he is our Physician. In all these
respects it behoved him to be a man. 1. Because he was our Suertie, to make
satisfaction to God for our debt: and the justice of God requires, that
satisfaction be made in the same nature that finned. 2. Because our high
Priest: For every high Priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices;
wherefore it is of necessity that this man also have somewhat to offer, Heb.
8.3. now if he had remained God only, he should not have had any thing to
offer. 3. Because our Ransom; for as he was the high Priest, so he was the
sacrifice: he must offer up himself for us. He was our suertie to satisfy for
us, and his satisfaction behoved to be passive and penal, yea it must extend
it self unto death; for without shedding of blood there is no remission, Heb.
9.22. but remaining God only, he could not have dyed. 4. Because our
Redeemer; for by the Law, he that redeemeth another, must be his brother or
kinsman, one that has the right of propinquitie unto him, Levit. 25.48. and
therefore the Hebrew word Goel, which signifies a Redeemer, does also signify
a Kinsman. 5. Because our Mediator and Advocate; for, (as I said before) a
Mediator is not of one, Gal. 3.20. that is, he is not of one nature. But he
that is mediator between God and man, must be both God and man: God, that he
may speak to God for us: man, that he may speak to us from God.
Finally, he must be man, because our Physician; for it was fit that our
Physician should be acquainted with our conditions, and should have experience
in his own person of our infirmities: that being tempted in like sort as we
are, he might be able to succor us that are tempted, Heb. 2.17. So that Christ
both is, and must have been a man

The consideration hereof, serves us for consolation. It is the key of all
comfort: for all true comfort stands in happiness, all happiness is in
fellowship with God; and never could there be so great fellowship with God, as
this: for God has entered in alliance with us, sending his Son to be made of
a woman, to become a man, and so our brother, even Emanuel, God with us, or in
our flesh. Hereby God comforted our first parents, when they were cast down
with a sight of their sins, and a fear of punishment, Genesis 3.15. Hereby he
comforted Jacob, Genesis 28.12.
by the vision of a ladder reaching from heaven to earth: this ladder is the
Son of God made man. Job 19.2^.
Job comforts himself with this, that he had a redeemer in his own flesh. By
this did Gabriel the Angel comfort Daniel, Dan. 9.21. etc. and finally, by
this do the Angels comfort the Shepherd; Behold I bring you good tidings of
great joy, which shall be to all people: for unto you is borne this day in the
city of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord, Luke 2.10. Yea this is that
wherewith we must all be comforted: for if Christ Jesus be a man, then be ye
well assured, that he will be a merciful high Priest, a favorable Judge, a
homely Mediator, to whom we may go boldly as unto a brother of ours.

This we are to hold fast, it being the greatest ground of all comfort; and the
rather also, because the Devil in all ages has oppugned this doctrine, and
either in whole or in part, labored to obscure the verity of Christ's humane
nature, and to bereave us of this comfort, that Christ Jesus is a man. First,
he raised up some immediately after the Apostles days, who taught that Christ
was not a true man, but only in show, having a fantastical body: against
whom Ignatius did write. These were first one Cerdon, after him Marcion, whom
Polycarpus called primogenitum Satanae, the Devils eldest son. but since he
has had many brethren: for a short while after came the Manichees,
maintaining the same. Secondly, but because this was so notoriously false that
it could not take place, Satan raised up others to mince and mitigate this
blasphemy, saying, that he had an humane body indeed, yet not like unto ours:
not of the substance of the Virgin, but either of the substance of God
himself, or of the matter of the heavens, or of the stars, or finally, made
of the elements, which passed through the womb of the Virgin, as water through
a conduit-pipe. These were the Valentinians, whose heresy was renewed of late
by the Anabaptists. Thirdly, because these could not prevail, he raised up
others, who taught, That howsoever he had a true body, yet he lacked a
soul: these were the Arrians. These were condemned in the Council of Nice.
Fourthly, and therefore Satan raised up others to fine this heresy better,
saying, That he had the vegetative and sensitive part of the soul, but wanted
the reasonable part. This was Apolinaris Bishop of Laodicea: he was condemned
in a Synod holden at Rome, under Pope Damasus. Fifthly, arose Eutyches Abbot of
Constantinople, and taught, That howsoever before the union he had a perfect
humane nature, yet after the union this humane nature was converted, consumed,
and swallowed up by his Godhead. He was condemned in the Council of Chalcedon,
where it was decreed, that the natures of Christ were united, (...), without
change, and confusion. Sixthly, but albeit he was condemned, Satan left it not
so, but raised up others, who propounded this heresy in other terms; namely,
Dioscorus, who maintained, That although his manhood was not consumed of his
Godhead by the union; yet of both mixed together, there was compounded a third
nature. And to make the same heresy more plausible yet, Satan sent forth
others to fine and polish it better, to wit, the Acephali (so called, because
it was not known who was their head) affirming, That at least the properties
of both natures were confounded; the properties of the manhood communicate to
the Godhead, and the properties of the Godhead transfused into the manhood.
This heresy has been renewed in our age, first by Hoffmannus an Anabaptist:
then after by Schwencfeldius; and lastly, by the Ubiquitaties, who falsely boast
themselves of the name of Luther. Seventhly, because this way succeeded not,
Satan went about another way to bereave us of Christ's manhood: he sent out
Macarius Patriarch of Antiochia, and Honorius Bishop of Rome, who taught, That
Christ as he was man wanted some part of his reasonable soul, namely, a will;
who for this cause were called Monotheletae. They were condemned in the sixth
general Council, which was the third holden at Constantinople. Eighthly, he
stirred up others, whose doctrine was more plausible, teaching, That he had a
perfect humane nature; yet could not properly be called a man, for the humane
nature was assumed by him, only as a man does a vesture, by an accidental,
not by an essential union: against whom Damascen does prove, that Christ's
natures were united (...), essentially. Ninthly, because all these heresies did
oppugn the substance of Christ's humanity, in whole, or in part; or else the
properties thereof, and so could not take place in the Church: therefore the
Devil stirred up others, at least to take away the infirmities of his manhood,
these were the Aphthardokitae, teaching That Christ's body was not subject to
any passions. And albeit this was resisted when it came by them, yet Satan
advanced his purpose mightily by some others, being otherwise good men and
orthodox; who taught, That Christ had corpus ad patiendum, sed non naturam ad
dolendum. Finally, the last who have fought in this quarrel, under the Devils
Banner, are the Papists. And they are most dangerous, because they do not
directly deny his manhood: for then few would believe them; but by way of
consequence, depriving his body of the essential properties of a true body,
while they teach, that his body is not visible, nor sensible, nor
circumscribed in one place: but an invisible, insensible, uncircumscribed
body, which is present, with all dimensions, in ten thousand places at once.
This is as much as to say, that it is no body, nor Christ himself a true man.
Against all these heresies, the very naming of my Text is a sufficient
refutation, that Christ Jesus is a man.

There be other heresies on the other hand, which seem to accord better with my
Text: as first, That Christ is not God, but only man; which was the blasphemy
of Ebion, Cerinthus, Carpocrates, Photinus, Samosatenus, and the rest of that
damnable crew. 2. That though he both be God and man, yet he is mediator only
as man; which is the doctrine of the Papists Both claim this Text for a
warrant and ground of their opinion: but in vain. for the Apostle calls him
not a man, to signify that he is a mere man; for that were contrary to his
own doctrine: nor yet does he call him man, to show that he is mediator only as
man; for that were as contrary to the truth: it being plain, that Christ
wrought the work of mediation, according to both natures, by a different act
and operation. And therefore Damascen learnedly distinguishes four things in
the mediator: 1. (...), the agent or worker, which is the person of Christ: 2.
(...), the beginning from which the action does proceed, which is twofold; his
divine, and his humane natures: 3. (...), the action it self: 4. (...), the
external work of our redemption, called by Dyonisius Areopagit.
opus (...), because it does proceed from him who is both God and man. and to
the effecting of it both the natures, with their distinct actions, in one and
the same person, did concur: According to that of Leo, approved by the whole
Council of Chalcedon; Vtraque forma agit quod suum est, cum communione
alterius, verbo (scilicet) agente quod verbi est, and carne exequente quod
carnis est. This he manifests by examples: In his humane nature (says he) he
wrought our salvation, by keeping of the Law, suffering and dying: in his
divine nature, by giving strength unto his manhood to endure death, and worth
to his blood to be a sufficient satisfaction. Therefore S. Austin concludes
well: Non mediator homo preter divinitatem, divina humanitas, and humana
divinitas mediatrix. It is the divine humanity, and humane divinity, that is
our mediator.

But why then is he called a man? I answer, for many reasons: 1. To insinuate
unto us a reason why he is one and alike to all; because he took upon him the
common nature of men: he is a man, alike near to all that be men. 2. To
express the perfection of his mediatorship: he was our mediator from the
beginning, but never a complete mediator till he became man; for there are
many works of his mediatorship, which could not be performed but in our
nature. 3. To signify the order by which we are conjoined with God: We are
joined to God by a mediator. and forasmuch as this mediator is both God and
man, we are united first into his manhood, and thereby unto his Godhead. We
must fasten the eyes of our faith first of all upon the flesh of Christ, as it
were upon the veil by which the entrance was into the Sancta sanctorum, where
the glory of God shined; and then after that, enter, as it were, into the
Sanctuary it self, to behold his Godhead. 4. He calls him a man for our
comfort.
There is a certain baseness of an abject mind, and slavish fear, which the
Devil works in men; persuading them, that it were great boldness to go
directly unto Christ: as if he were of that austeritie and stateliness that
earthly Princes are, and therefore we must send the Saints unto him to
solicit him in our behalf. This is all the ground the Papists have for their
invocation of Saints: but the Apostle calls it voluntary or slavish humility,
Col. 1.18. and here he meets with it directly, calling Christ a man: he is a
man, and therefore as near unto us, and has as compassionate bowels as any
Saint. Indeed if we consider Christ as he is God, dwelling in light
unaccessible, I know not what confidence we can have to go unto him: but when
we cast our eyes below upon his manhood, how that he is like unto us in all
things except sin, tempted in all sort as we are, that he might be able to
succor us when we are tempted, Heb. 2.17, 18.
and such a one as can be touched with the sense of our infirmities; and 4.15,
16.
then (as says the Apostle) we may go boldly unto the throne of grace; we may
cast the anchor of our hope within the veyle: and 6.19, 20.
then may we be bold to enter into the holiest of all, and 10.19, 20.
through his blood, by the new and living way, which he has prepared for us,
through the veil, that is, his flesh.

I doubt not now but that these things have been sufficiently cleared, by way
of explication; That there is a God, That this God is one, That he is made one
with us by a Mediator, That the Mediator is one, That this one Mediator is
Christ Jesus, That Christ Jesus is a man. But as these things are sufficiently
cleared, so I beseech you suffer them to be effectually enforced. The point
which I will press for use and application, is that which is both the scope
and the thread of this Text, namely, the unity of God and of the Mediator. The
use we should make hereof, is for instruction, and imitation: and it is
twofold; special, for Magistrates; general, for all Christians.

First (I say) for Magistrates. God is said to be one to all, that is, without
all respect of persons: and therefore forasmuch as Princes, Magistrates and
Judges are styled Gods in Scripture, Psalm. 82.6.
as being the Lievetenants of God upon earth, and as it were the finger of that
hand that rules the whole world: they should imitate him; be one to all, as he
is one; be no respecters of persons, as there is no respect of persons with
him. as they stand in Gods place, so should they walk in Gods path, Ephesians. 5.1.
being followers of him as dear children. To this purpose there are many
precepts in the Law: Deuteronomy. 1.17. Ye shall hear the small as well as the
great. Deuteronomy. 16.9. Wrest not the Law, nor respect any man's person, neither
take reward. Levit. 19.15. Thou shall not favor the person of the poor, nor
honor the person of the mighty, but thou shall judge thy neighbor uprightly.
For it is not good to have respect of any person in judgment, Prove. 24.23.
The Thebanes hereupon portured their Judges blind, with eats, and without
hands: blind, that he might not distinguish persons, friend from foe: with
ears, that he might hear both parties indifferently: without hands, that he
might not receive gifts to corrupt justice; For the gift blinds the wise, and
perverteth the words of the righteous, Exodus 23.8. To conclude this point; I
could wish that all who are in authority, would always have before their eyes
that charge which Iehoshaphat gave unto his Judges: 2. Chron. 19.6. And he said
to the Judges, Take heed what ye do: for ye execute not the judgment of
man, but of the Lord -- Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be with you;
take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, neither
respect of persons, nor receiving of reward.

The scond use is general for all Christians: If God be one, the mediator one;
then should we likewise be one. So the Apostle reasons, Ephesians. 4.4. There is
one body, one spirit, one hope, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and
father of all. whereupon follows the conclusion, set down verse. 3. that we
should endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. So say
I: There is one God and one Mediator; and therefore should we who worship this
one God, through this one Mediator, be one, as they are one. But how should we
be one? One in opinion, one in affection. First (I say) one in opinion; all
holding the same things, believing the same things, teaching the same things,
worshipping God after the same manner: for look how commendable variety is in
all other things, it is as much to be abhorred in religion. even those who have
held the greatest falsehoods, hold that there is but one truth. I never read of
more then one heretic, that held all heresies true: Philastrius relates the
opinion of one Rhetorius, who said that all religions did well. and which is
much like unto this, there was in the same age, a foolish frantic fellow
named Postellus, wrote a (...), wherein he takes upon him to reconcile all
the religions of all nations, and calls it Concordiam Orbis. Yea and little
better are those, who would make a reconciliation between the Papists and us,
being altogether indifferent in things most different. They are kind-hearted
Philistims that would bring the Ark of God and Dagon under one roof: they are
of his mind that Turonensis writes of, who said, It is best of all, si and
illa, and illa colantur; neque esse noxium si inter gentilium aras and Dei
ecclesiam quis transiens, utraque veneretur. They are (as one says) the ghosts
of that heretic Apelles, whose speech it was, That it is sufficient to believe
in Christ crucified, and that there should be no discussing of the particular
warrants and reasons of our faith: Or the brood of Leonas, one of the Courtiers
of Constantius, and his Deputy in the Seleucian Council, who when the Fathers
hotely contended, as there was good cause, for the consubstantialitie of the
Son: Get you home (said be) and trouble not the Church with these trifles.
These things seemed but trifles unto carnal men, yet were they matters of
great importance: and so be the differences between us and the Papists, of
such weight as thereupon depends the truth of Gods worship, the life of his
Church, the salvation of our souls. And therefore no hope of peace; but though
many means of reconciliation have been used, yet never any could prevail.
The Emperors, Ferdinand and Maximilian, traveled painfully herein, and by
their appointment Cassander, a great and learned Papist, drew a project to show
his judgment; so did Fricius and the Interimists: but all was in vain; for
Babylon could not be cured, her grapes were become as the grapes of Admah, and
her vine as the vine of Tseboim. And as she could not be reformed, so we could
not admit of any agreement by meeting in a middle course: For the truth it is
on high (says Leo) they may ascend to us, but for us to go down to them, it
is neither safe nor honest. Now it is no more plain that the City of Rome
has descended from the seven hills, on which it was seated in old times, unto
the Martian plains that lie below; than it is, that the Church of Rome has
fallen away from that faith which once was commended in her. Bethel is become
Bethaven, the faithful city is become an harlot, her silver is turned into
dross: so that unless we would betray the truth, we we cannot yield to them
in any thing wherein they dissent from us* but if there be any agreement
amongst us, they must come out of Babell, that is, wholly renounce their own
parts, and join hands with us; whereof there is but little hope, when we
consider what small effect Reformation has taken in this kingdom these years
past. As king Ioash asked Iehoiada the high Priest, 2. King. 12.7.
and the other Priests, why they did not repair the ruins of the Temple; so
may our truly religions King question us that are the Priests, why the Temple
of the Lord is so long in repayring in this land: nay, what is the cause that
the ruins of the Temple grow greater every day; more falling away from the
truth, than that are reclaymed from error? Surely the causes hereof are
manifest: give me leave to observe unto you such as I hold to be the chief
things that continue this people in their blindness, and hinders reformation.

The first is their custom and long continuance in error, there being nothing
harder than to break an ignorant man of his custom. De doctrina Christ. l. 4.
c. 24.
S. Augustine coming to Cesarea, where the people had an ancient custom once
a year, for certain days together, to divide themselves into parts, and
throw stones one at another, whereby many were slain; found it an exceeding
hard matter to dissuade them from it. This is noted by that Father, to have
hindered the reformation of the Donatists: Some were bound not by truth, but by
an hard knot of obdurate custom, Epist. 48.
etc. And surely this is a people, of all other most zealous of their ancient
customs. Secondly, the society and alliance, whereby they are linked one to
another, restrayneth them; being ashamed and afraid to part with their
acquaintance. This is noted by S. Basil to be the thing that hindered the
conversion of the Arrians in his time: Epist. 70.
There is, says he, small hope of reducing them to the truth, who are linked
to heretics with the band of long amity. and S. Austin yields the same
reason, why the Donatists in his age could not be reclaimed: Epist. 48 ad
Vincent.
How many (says he) being moved with the truth, would have been good
Catholics, and yet deferred it, fearing the offense of their friends. So have
I heard many say in this kingdom; If such and such men would go to Church, I
would go also: but if I should begin, I should have the ill will of all the
country. Thirdly, the busy trafficking of Priests and Jesuits for the
maintenance of their great goddess Diana, by whom they have their living. What
skillful workmen they are, and how cunningly they keep them in blindness,
were long to relate: this, I hope, is sufficiently known unto our State, that
they have been the chief causes, not only of the peoples unconformitie in
religion; but also of all their treasons and rebellions. The people are like
the Sea, and the Priests are like the wind: the sea of it self would be
calm, if the wind did not set it in agitation; so would the people, but for
the Priests. The fourth cause, is the want of a sufficient Ministry. In many
places there is no Minister at all; in many places a Minister as good as none,
even a dumb dog that cannot bark, an idol shepherd who is not apt to
teach, not able to confute: in other places a lewd and scandalous Minister,
whose not Gospel-like behavior is a stumbling block to them that are without.
Even as the Prince of Cuba in India, said he would not go to heaven, Span.
col. p. 1^.
if the Spaniards went thither; because he thought that could be no good place,
where such cruel tyrants were: so many of this country will not be of our
religion, because they think that can be no true religion, which has so
unconscionable professors and Ministers. And the chief cause of this want of a
sufficient ministry, is lack of maintenance: for as there could be no
Physician in Lacedemon, because there was no rewards; so neither can there be
sufficient Ministers here, for want of maintenance. for our great
Nebuchadnezzers will not allow us so much maintenance, as to keep life and
soul together. We would be content with David's order, albeit a very
unrighteous one; to divide with Ziba: but covetous Ziba takes all away, both
small and great, both Tithe and offering. He will be both Lord, and Parson, and
Vicar; and it is pity that he is not brought to be Curate too. The last thing
I will observe, that hinders the reformation of this land, is, the
miseducation of our youth; all of them being brought up beyond the Seas, or
else taught at home by Popish Schoolemasters, who are no more careful to teach
them the Roman tongue, than they are to instruct them in the Romish faith.

Thus have I discovered the causes of our sickness, hoping that we shall
receive some help and comfort by your means. For I doubt not (right
Honorable) but what was the intent of Iehoshaphat in sending his
Commissioners, 2. Chron. 17.
the same was the purpose of our gracious Sovereign, in sending you; namely,
for the repayring of the Temple, and that the people might be taught in the Law
of the Lord: for the like choice of Commissioners has been made; some nobles,
some Priests and Levites, some learned Scribes: and the like charge has been
given unto you, that ye look to the good of the Church. And therefore, though
I may not seem to prescribe, yet give me leave to entreat you that ye would
take into your chiefest care the miserable estate of this Church: and as ye
have heard the causes of her ruin, so ye would labor to remove them, by
applying of fit remedies* which in my weak judgment, are these:

Whereas custom and continuance in error, is a maine hinderance unto
reformation: the remedy against this is, That some compulsion be used; for
old sores are not cured without cutting and lancing: And fear is that which
will overcome custom; as may appear by the Antiochians, who though they had a
custom to wash themselves in the Bathes, yet the King forbidding them, they
all left for fear of his displeasure. Whereupon S. Chrysostom does conclude
after this manner; Hom. 14. ad pop. Antioch.
Lo, you may see that where fear is, there our wonted custom is left
presently: fear easily overmasters custom, though it be never so ancient. The
same Father in another place, makes mention of one, Hom 7. ad pop. Ant.
who had got an ill-favored fashion of moving his right shoulder when he
went; which yet he corrected by laying a sword over it, in such manner, that it
should be in danger of cutting, if so it moved: and so by fear of incision, he
taught his shoulder better manners and motions. In like manner should you who
have authority, deal with those who are blinded with long custom in error.
For (says S. Austin) si doceantur and non terreantur, vetustate consuetudinis
obdurati, ad capescendam salutis viam pigrius surgent. You are the second
servants of our Lord, sent forth with this commission, Compel them to come in,
that my house may be full. Ye must compel them by laws and punishments, as
Artaxerxes writes unto Esdras: Whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and
the Kings law, let him have judgment without delay, whether it be unto death,
or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. Thus King
Asa enacted, that, If any would not seek the Lord God of Israel, he should be
slain, 2. Chron. 15.13. So Josiah compelled all that were found in Israel, to
serve the Lord their God, 2. Chron. 34.33. Epist. 48.
Constantine the great (as S Augustine witnesses) decreed against the
Sacrifices of Pagans, upon pain of death: against wilful heretics, upon
confiscation of their goods. The godly Emperor Theodosius, December libris auri
mutotaretur. Aug. ep. 50.
being moved thereunto by the zealous Bishop Amphilochius, banished all the
Arrians out of his dominions. and Theodosius the younger, set a fine of ten
pounds of Gold upon the Donatists, who were the Recusants of that age: which,
as S. Augustine witnesses, had a very good success; For (says he) thereby
many of them were moved to profess Religion. and though at first they did
profess it merely by compulsion: yet afterward they professed only for
devotion. These were the proceedings of godly Kings and Emperors, against such
as would not conform themselves to the true worship of God, established by the
laws of the land. In alleging whereof, let no man think that I would seem
to prescribe rules to Authority; far be that from me: or that I would
persivade extraordinary severe courses to be taken with a blind and misled
people. God is my witness, I seek not theirs, but them: my only purpose is to
justify the law of this land, and practice of our Church, and that our people
may see what a mild government they live under, if they will but consider, how
their Fines, besides that they are so neglected in the execution, that the
hundredth man is not charged with them; are even in themselves a great deal
lighter, than those punishments which formerly have been inflicted by godly
Magistrates, upon offenders of the like nature. But especially they must
confess, that they are gently entreated, if they will remember what was the
proceedings of their Church against us: for in former ages they proceeded
against the Waldenses, and the first reformers of our Church and even at this
time they do proceed against Protestants in other countries, not with mulcts
and imprisonment; but with sword, fire, and faggot. They fine them indeed, but
it is with fire; as witness their houses of Inquisition in Spain and Italy,
and their bloody wars in France and Germany, for the cause of religion. But
the time of retribution will come, and God will move Kings and Magistrates, to
harken to that exhortation, Rev. 18.6. which is directed unto them, and
directly respects these times of ours: Reward her even as she has rewarded
you: give her double according to her works, and in the cup that she has
filled to you, fill her the double. Psalm. 137.8. O daughter of Babel worthy to
be destroyed, blessed shall he be that rewards thee, as thou have served us.
Blessed shall he be that takes and dasheth thy children against the stones.

2. Whereas fear of men restrayneth many from joining with us: The remedy to
be used against this, is, to press and urge first and chiefly the great ones;
for they cannot plead this, That they dare not for their friends. for the eyes
of the people are upon them, and all are ready to follow them, not to lead
them. 3 Whereas Priests and Jesuits are a great let unto reformation; for
remedy against this, let a severe course be taken with them for they are the
seducers of the people, instruments of Idolatry, authors of rebellion, bellows
and brands of sedition. Ye shall scarce ever read in the old Testament of any
reformation of religion, and abolishing of Idolatry, but the Priests were cut
off: Elijah slew all the Priests of Baal, 1. King. 18.40. so did Iehu, 2. King.
10.25. Ioash the King, and Iehoiada the Priest, with all the people, slew
Mattan the Priest of Baall before the Altars, 2. Chron. 23.17. and Josiah burnt
the bones of the Priests upon their Altars, 2. Chron. 34.5. And though our
Priests deserve no less, yet I desire not their blood, but only that they
might be removed, and restrained from seducing of the people: for in this
question of putting heretics to death, as in all other, I submit my self to
the judgment of our Church, and practice of our country; which never put any
to death, religionis causa merae, sed mixtae, Tortur. tor^ p 133.
mixtae cum mala mente and side in principem.

The fourth cause of their blindness and error, is want of a sufficient
Ministry, caused through the want of maintenance: for remedy against this,
great care would be taken for to plant able and painful Ministers, and to
provide a sufficient maintenance for them. Thus Hezekiah appointed Priests and
Levites, and provided for their living: For he commanded the people to give the
portion of the Priests and Levites, that they might be encouraged in the Law of
the Lord, 2. Chron. 31.4. there is a good precedent for you. We have such an
Hezekiah to command, but we lack such subjects to obey: for our Church-robbers,
albeit commanded by the King, yet will not give the Priests their own portion,
nor any part of their portion, not the meanest offering; all is too little to
buy and maintain their sacrilegious honor. But surely if they be not
compelled to allow some competent maintenance for a Minister, but their
impropriations be allowed; it is but in vain to look for any reformation. I
will say that the old saying is like to prove a true prophecy; Hibernia ante
diem judicij non reformabitur. The last thing I named that hinders a
reformation, is the miseducation of their youth: for remedy against this, a
course would be taken, that none be suffered to go beyond Seas for to study;
that no Popish Schoolmasters be permitted at home, and that all, who are of
ability, be compelled to send their children to be brought up in our
Schools. There has been directions given to this purpose, but there is no
such thing performed: that evil is not cured but increased.

Now if these things were done; Severe punishments inflicted, The great ones
chiefly urged, The Priests removed, Able Ministers planted, Popish Schools
and School masters restrained: there were some hope that they would join with
us, and all of us become one Church and one sheepefold, as there is one God and
one Mediator.

But what should I speak of an unity with Papists, while we are not all one
amongst our selves; but still contesting about trifles, 5 King. 2.5.
and (as it is said of Ioah) shedding the blood of war in peace? which gives
occasion to the Papists to insult over us, crying out, That we are not the true
Church, because divided in sundry sects and opinions. which was the rotten
argument of profane Celsus; Christianos non habere veram religionem, quod in
varias sectas divisi essent. Here I could answer; first; That unity is no
property of the Church, being not always inseparably and incommunicably found
therein. Secondly, that many false Churches have an agreement amongst
themselves. Thirdly, that the true Church was never without divisions.
Fourthly, that our differences are not so great nor so many, as our
adversaries would make men believe;
but a great part of them, are invented by our adversaries: another part
concern not us, nor any of our Church, but are the doctrines of certain sects
and heretics which have sprung up with the revived light of the Gospel, and
are gone out of the reformed Churches: some of them are only quatrels between
some particular men, not any differences between Churches; and the greatest
part of them all, are not real but verbal, not in matters of faith, but about
ceremonies and matters of no importance: finally, that there is greater discord
in the Church of Rome; for there is not one point in all divinity (except
those wherein we accord with them) wherein they all speak the same. But
albert these things being all true (as were easy to prove) be sufficient to
stop the mouths of the adversaries; yet I could rather wish, that we did not
need to use this Apology: for certainly this earth has nothing more
lamentable, than the civil iarres of one faith. Constantine the Emperor said
unto the Bishops of the Council of Nice, Zozom. l. 1. c. 17.
That he thought this worse than all the evils to be utrered, that he saw the
Church of God dissenting by contentions, and contrary opinions. For first,
division in faith, has ever been a mother of Atheism. Sozomen says, (...).
1. cap. 16.
The contrarieties of opinions among the learned at that time, was so
scandalous, that it turned many away from embracing the Christian Religion.
and so at this time there be many who will be of no religion, till they see
the differences amongst the learned reconciled. Yea contention does extinguish
the very life of Religion, which is brotherly love: and therefore they who
make so much ado about ceremonies, had need to take heed, that in the mean
time they lose not that which is more precious, even Christian charity it
self. They are like unto a man who came to a Physician, to desire a cure for
the Whitlay in his finger; and while the Physician looks upon him, he
perceives death in his face. Secondly, by our contentions our adversaries get
advantage. It was a true speech, cyted from that Father S Hilary, by Bellarm.
Bellum haereticorum, pax est ecclesiae: but our experience does invert it upon
us; Bellum ecclesiae pax haereticorum. Our discord is their music, our ruin
their glory: they laugh, and scorn, and clap their hands at our bickerings.
Thirdly, it is a most grievous oftence against God to rent the Church, which is
his body, with schisms and contentions: it is no less than sacrilege, no
better than Idolatry; For (as an ancient Father says) Non minor is est laudis
non scindere ecclesiam, Dyonis. apud Niceph.
quam idolo non sacrificare. S. Cyprian thought that God sent the persecutions
of his time, Lib. 4. epist. 4.
for no other cause than their contentions. and Eusebius beginning to entreat
of the bloody persecution which the Church suffered under Dioclesian, Lib. 1.
hift. c. 2.
says, The contentions of the learned therein, was the cause. And why may not
I say, That it was for this same cause, that God at this time suffers our
neighbor Churches to be under so cruel persecution, and threatens the like
judgment against us? he will try if affliction can humble us, and the rage of
the common enemy make us friends. For so do men use (says an old History,
speaking of this matter) as long as strangers wrong them, to hold together;
Zozom. l. 6. c. 4.
but when they are delivered from outward troubles, then they fall out among
themselves. These be the hurts we sustain by our dissentions: And therefore if
ever we would see the good days of the Gospel, the flourishing of religion,
the unhorsing and confusion of the strumpet Rome, if we desire to escape the
judgments of God, which did fall upon the primitive Church for their
contentions: let us labor to reconcile our selves, and at length to embrace
unity; let us all compose our selves to peace and love. Oh pray for the peace
of Jerusalem.

But, thanks be to God, the Church of this land, is not much troubled with
such iarres; and therefore I come to the other sort of unity: As we are one
in opinion, so must we be one in affection. Ye that are of one Church, and
profess one faith, be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord
and of one judgment, Philip. 2.2.
that nothing be done through contention and vainglory, etc. Let us dwell
together as brethren, Psalm 13 3.1.
which is a good and comely thing: let us love one another, as God has loved
us; Ioh. 13.35.
for hereby shall it be known that we are Christ's disciples, if we love one
another. This is indeed the mark of a Christian, the commandment of God, the
fulfilling of the law: and especially at this time, when we celebrate this
Feast of Pentecost, should our hearts be united together, through love. For it
is said when the Apostles were waiting for the coming of the holy Ghost on the
day of Pentecost, that they were all (...), Act. 2.1.
with one accord in one place. and then did the Spirit come down upon them in
a visible shape. So if we would have the holy Ghost to descend on us this day,
and every day, though not in a visible shape, yet in invisible favors, leading
us into all truth, and making our whole life a merry Whitsontide: we must be,
as the Apostles were, unanimes, with one accord in one place. For he is the
spirit of love, and will not rest in a contentious heart: but where there is
unity of spirit, there does rest this spirit of unity; and the fruit of this
spirit is Love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, Gal. 5.22.
etc. but on the other part, Hatred, variance, emulations, Gal. 5.19.20.
wrath, strife, seditions, are not the fruits of the spirit, but the works of
the flesh. Wherefore since it is so, I beseech you, Men, Brethren, and Fathers,
let me speak to you in the words of the Apostle S. Paul: Put on (as the elect
of God holy and beloved) bowels of mercy, Col. 3.12, 13, 14.
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering: forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any:
even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. And above all these things, put on
Charity, which is the bond of perfectness. And let the peace of God rule in
your hearts. So shall we be one, as God is one and the Mediator one: Ioh. 17.2^.
in this life, one amongst our selves; and the life to come, one with God in
glory. To this one God, etc. Amen.

FINIS.

