A Crucifixe: OR, A Meditation upon Repentance, and, The holy Passion.

Written by CHRISTOPHER LEVER.

Nocet indulgentia nobis.

AT LONDON

Printed by V. S. for John Budge, and are to be sold at his shop at the great
south door of Paul's. 1607.

To the Reader.
THe Writings of Men, as they are diverse, so are they diversely affected: yet
ever in this inequality; that mo to the bad, than to the better be disposed.
The reason is, corruption in Judgment, dullness of Understanding, blindness
in Election, and a deprauednesse in the whole frame of Nature: whereof it
comes that many deceive themselves in their choice, neglecting what is of
nearest consideration, yet embrace that (with strong appetite,) which is most
pernicious, and pestilent. I write not this to offend any one, but to remember
all: for I had rather profit than please: and to give friendly admonishment is
better than silence. That great Apostle Saint Paul defired to know nothing
but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, and does detest to rejoice in aught save
in the Cross and sufferings of his Lord and Master. A lesson worthy so
great a Doctor, and worth our immitation. This is that one thing which is
only necessary; whereof, who has true knowledge, has all knowledge. This
Cross, this Crucifix, and this Passion I present thee (gentle Reader) not in
their exact forms, (for that exceedes the power of Mortality) but in a little
resemblance: wishing thee to read, not for Mirth, but for Matter; and with
holy Paul, faithfully to apply to thy soul, the glory and reioycings of the
holy Passion. Farewell.

To the most reverend father in God, RICHARD ( by Divine providence) Archbishop
of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of England.
My singular good Lord and Patron.
RIght Reverend Lord) There is a disease in the Natures of men, most powerful
in the vulgar and base multitude, to mis-interpret, (yet to interpret) all men's
proceedings: Therefore the best cause does most need protection, lest
otherwise, it receive wrong in their injurious and false constructions. For
this particular; the frame and disposition is my own, and therefore I
willingly submit that to a merciful Judgment. The Subject is not mine, but
Gods, being extract from sacred Authorities; and therefore of it self able to
resist all opposition. Here-hence I derive my comfort, that the worthiness of
the Subject may give supplyment to my verse, that wants worth: and that in the
opinion of good men, I shall be thought to have done more, in giving a
religious matter this poor form, than others (that with much industry and
art) have painted the deformed face, of profane and idle Inventions. The
reasons (my good Lord) that move me to this dedication, are these; First, the
many testimonies I have of your Lordships gracious respecting me, which
earnestly press me, to return this little demonstration of thanks, where I
have received so much favor. Next, your Lordships travel, to continue the body
of Religion united; or rather, to make up the rent and division. Wherein God
has made you prosperous* giving you spirit to enterprise, and victory to
finish a care of that religious importance. And because this Crucifix I
present, is a Meditation of the sufferings and death of Christ, represented to
us in the ceremony of the Cross, (in the holy use whereof, your Lordshippe
has fortunately traveled.) I have therefore thought this Dedication (of right)
to belong unto your Grace, assuring my self, that where the Shadow, there the
Substance; where the Figure, there the Truth; and where the Cross, there the
Christ, shall find gracious and glad acceptance. The which, with all respects
of duty and humbleness, I offer unto your Lordship: beseeching God to give
you to support the reputation of Learning, (helpful to both the States of
Church and kingdom:) and after this life* perpetuity with the holy Angels and
Saints.

Your Graces in all duty and service. CHRISTOPHER LEVER.

A CRVCIFIX, OR A Meditation upon Repentance, and the holy Passion.
THere is a grief, which far exceedes the skill
Of many learned spirits to define:
And this derived is from doing ill;
Yet does it rectify, and much refine,
The blurred Image, of that power divine.
Which in our purer souls, at our creation,
Made us beloved, and of estimation.
Such is the terror of a wounded Soul,
Stretched upon the painful rack of try all,
Presented with that black accusing scroule,
The register of sin, the Lords espiall;
Authorities, that never admit denial.
For when our Conscience does display our sin,
Then true affected grief, does first begin.
It were in vain, I labored to express,
The just proportion, and the quality
Of horred grief: nor what amazedness,
Attends this court of law, and equity,
The Soul* must here implead impiety
Against the Soul. The Judge that here preceedeth
Against himself, himself the law impleadeth.
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
(...) that have (...) for your sins*
(...) bath*d your (...) in your repentan^ ^eares*
(...) when your reformation first begins
(...) ^ur (...) hearts, tell me what fears*
(...) horrednesse, remorsefull conscience bears:
(...) rather, do confess, as does my verse;
There is no power of words, can it rehearse.
The Father Judge, that sits his Son to try*
Cannot resist the torture of his mind:
When he denounces sentence ( thou must die)
Examples may be fitted to this kind:
But to resemble ours no like we find:
For here the Judge, that gives the dying word,
Condemns himself: even of his own accord.
The eye, condemns the sight, the sight the eye;
The power of speech, our much offending tongue:
All qualities, their instruments envy;
And say, their aptness to offense and wrong,
Impels the sense; the weaker by the strong,
Is capt^uate: And sin that has the reins;
The common wealth in man, to sin constraines.
Like as that Bull, Perillus framed of brass;
To be a wondrous instrument of woe:
Within whose womb, when the offender was*
In brutish sort, he as a Bull did low,
The organe of the beast, did cause it so.
Right so our bodies, beastly by our sin;
Do bestifie the soul, that lives within.
In opposition to this formal plea;
The body, to the soul again replyeth.
The state of sin, has his estate in thee:
Our souls without, sin in our bodies dies;
Nature to liuelesse things, all act denies.
For as the Air, is moved with the wind,
So are our subject bodies, by the mind.
Who ever yet accused the murderous knife,
As actor of that horrible effect:
The agent, must be somewhat that has life.
It is the living hand, that does direct
The mortal blade: Nor is there had respect,
To isntrumental causes of offending:
For in the agent, guilt has his depending.
(...) of ho^ contention:
(...) himself divide.
^
(...) which jud^ment has descride:
(...) the conscience anght can hide*
(...) state of wretchedness does dwell
(...) them my verse (...) tell
(...) the (...) cup of pleasure;
(...) in nothing but expending*
(...) fall his treasure*
(...) shame with much commending,
(...) your (...) lives* shall never have ending.
(...) remembrance of repentant tears*
(...) enlarge your fears.
(...), where death is eminent*
(...) bubble of this life, cannot secure thee:
There is an after-state, most permanent,
(...) in honor, o^ in death assure thee*
(...) to honor, now to die mure thee:
(...) he, whose life will mortify no sin,
(...) find the gate of Mercy shut to him.
Thy life is truly by resemblance said
To be a shadow: shado^es from the Sun
Derived be: for sure there is no shade,
Where ^haebus does not guild our horizon:
So we may say, the pride of life is done,
When as the Sun of Glory shall deny,
To give the beams of his resplendent Eye.
Change your corrupt opinions of delight.
Sometime delight in tears, in bitter woe.
To lance and cut, often heales the wounded Knight.
If we to heaven; we must as Pilgrims go:
It is a Christian pleasure to do so:
For he that does appoint al times for pleasure:
To his repentance can admit no leisure.
Were it, that he that over-loads the sense,
In surffetting the much forbidden tree,
Could with the habit of his sins dispense,
Whilst he might view his souls enormitie,
And with the judgment of Discretions eye,
Sentence his vain, exorbitant delight,
And all his pleasures that do sin invite.
Then might he see the power of much offending,
The little power of him that so offends:
That war of souls that never can have ending,
Where sin in opposition, death intends,
To him that (prodigal) in sin expendeth
His very self, and like a traitor thief,
In his own treason makes himself a chief.
Who ever saw a General in Arms,
Whenas the day determines the war;
To be imprisoned in the treacherous arms
Of such as nearest to his person are,
Unto himself may make a like compare:
For such are we when our delightful pleasure,
Upon our souls (like traitors) make a seasure.
(...) like, as when the man reported borned,
(...) chased by the servants of his pleasure;
(...) ^hen by monstrous sin, we are deformed,
(...) find offensive, what we held our treasure*
(...) ^ame affects (like dogs) do make a seasure
(...) ^on our souls: and like the hunted Dear*
(...) our loud yelping sins, we stand in feere
When we can truly, thus survey our sin,
Our state of death, our death in our offending:
The war intestine, that we have within;
(...) infinite of grief, thereof depending;
(...) little power we have, of our amending.
When this we know, we know our stat's not well:
(...) does the sick, that hears his passing bell.
^hen in the balance of suspense, we say,
Our little hope, the mountain of our care.
The scale of sear, by much does over sway*
Our own assurances, that nothings are:
(...) makes, this sick man of his health despair
And were it not, that grace did us avail,
We should not stand, the trial of the scaile.
(...) had I need* a new to invoke,
That all sufficient, to direct my verse:
My self much sinful, cannot sin relate.
Whose largeness dis^inables my rehearse.
O give me power to beautify the hearse
Of Penitence: which then is said to die.
When men live most in their security.
If ever thing of greatest admiration,
Could draw the vulgar eye, for to admire it;
Then let the subject, of this poor relation,
Be powerful in their hearts, that shall desire it:
It is a heavenly act, for to inspire it.
For though our penance, be a crabbed tree,
Yet is the fruit, of rare propriety.
Suppose thy self, araigned at the bar,
Laden with fetters of thine own offense;
Thy crying sins, thy adverse Lawyers are*
The Devil, does his action here commence,
And for his witness, has thy conscience.
Suppose this courthouse, in thy soul to be,
Thy self to plead, thy self to answer thee.
That part, which best remembers, plays the Clarke,
Who, when the word of silence, is proclaimed.
Intreates, that great assembly well to mark
Th'inditement of that Traitor: who ashamed,
Stands at the bar of death: and being named,
Holds up his guilty hand. The Clarke then reads,
Those treasons, which my utterance much exceeds*
Yet as I may: This I suppose was said.
( Traitor) thou art more ancient in thy sin
Then in thy days: It cannot be denai'd,
But when thy first fore-father did begin,
To listen to his wifes soliciting:
Thou in him then, did with him give consent,
To further, that his treasonous intent.
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
(...) Patents did produce thee,
(...) thy soul more blind.
(...) to execuse thee.
(...) ^n ^y mind:
(...) body, can^t thou find
(...) Fathers generation.
(...) not gives it limitation.
(...) thy (...), so do thy sins augment:
(...), they ou^ ^trip thy time in forwardness.
^or long before thy childishnes be spent,
Thou will be aged in thy wickedness.
Childrens first aptitudes do well express,
Whether the progress of their lives intend*
For like beginning, often has like end.
What though thy Parents in their providence,
Covet to better thee, by education.
Yet is their travel, but a vain expense,
Thy time of youth, will give an intimation,
How much unlike thou art thy first creation.
Never could any precepts from the wise,
Er'e rectify a man's infirmities.
Thus do thou make gradation in thy sin,
Till thou attain, the utmost step of life;
And like Report, when it does first begin,
Is then the least; yet when it waxes rife,
It does enlarge it self: So sinful life,
By custom, and continuance in sinning,
Men are much worse, then in their first beginning.
For when their time does bring them to that state,
That makes a man; the strength of nature then,
Does their injurious parts corroborate.
The length of years, does ever give to man,
Ability in wickedness: and when
Depraved man, has means of doing ill,
He makes them serve, his much depraved will.
Like as the neighbor Rivers to the Sea
Cannot support upon their shallowe backs;
The huge proportion of an Argosie,
Because the little current water lackes:
Yet when the Sea (that all resistance wrackes)
Shall fill the empty channel with his Tide;
The greatest vessel with great ease may glide.
(...) are the first unable years of man,
(...) ^eake ^n moving the huge bulk of sin:
(...) when the ^ide of years approaches, than
(...) more impudent in their committing;
(...) ^ceiue the mightiest vessels in,
(...) ha^bour, in their little stream of Time,
(...) and, shall cut their little twine.
(...) a wondrous task to make relation,
(...) grieuance in particular:
(...) ^nes of blood, of wanton agitation.
(...) ^inite in every kind they are,
Hearts may suppose; but Speech cannot declare.
For when that man in Nature is most strong;
He is most powrefull then, in doing wrong.
See, if thy time grow aged with expense
Of many years, be less in thy offending:
T^me is the giver of experience:
Old age will preach to youth, their youths offending;
^et ^outhful sins, in youth have not their ending.
For when old men are stepping to their grave,
^n youthful sinning, strong desires they have.
^ld age, (though cold) can never quench the fire
Of ^full youth* Though age be in thy flesh,
Yet in thy thoughts, thou do maintain desire;
which in performance, thou can not express,
By reason of thy bodies ^eeblenesse.
Yet know, that when Desire is in thy heart,
It is as much, as thou an Actor were.
This thy Desire, incends the noble parts
Of reason, and blunteth thy discretion.
Makes a combustion in obdurate hearts;
Depraues the sense, and blinds thy election;
Dries up repentant tears, (thy souls refection:)
And sure that man, eternally shall die,
Whose heart will not give water to his eye.
Thus (O thou worst of Gods creation!)
Thou do reuerse the ordinance of Nature.
All other Beings, keep their ordination;
Obedience lives, in every other creature;
Only in him, that has the goodliest feature.
He that from God, most blessings has derived;
He against God, most treasons has conspired.
Search the immence circumference of Earth,
The many wondrous mouers in the Sea,
The Element of Air, wherein we breathe,
The regiment of Heaven, and sympathy
Of moving orbs, and starrie deity.
In all the parts of this circumference,
No one like man in dis-obedience.
If God command the Seas to patience:
They still their noise, and smooth their horred face.
Let him again be moved to offense,
The raging wind, the swelling billows chase,
Unto the daring rocks that do embrace
Their violence, and there does bound the Seas,
Until a calm, their troubles do^ appease.
(...) ^ommand (...) ^owdes (...) ^eare the Avr^
(...) in the ^lade.
^
^
^
^
^
(...) Time ^o give the year*
(...) ^oures for her distinction.
(...) Time well ordered were*
(...) and Time to Ordination;
(...) unto Gods creation*
(...) ^at Times ^nconstant are;
(...) they are more certain far.
(...) ^he Sea-deuouring (...)*
(...) ^oore ^onas to the shore.
(...) Eg^pt do avail*
(...) war: ^ay more.
(...) the (...) chamber ^ore,
(...) person, of a mighty King,
(...) they had a warranting.
(...) his sacred breath on (...)*
(...) countervaile the Angels that erst fell:
^ing thy soul of his Eternity;
Yet thrust thy betters, for less sin to hell.
Did God refuse those Spirits that excel
In holy worship; to partake thy nature?
He did, for thy redemption this (O Traitor)
If God command let this, or that be done;
The little Creature, that is bid to do it,
Is wondrous quick in execution:
Yet unto man, that has the power of (...);
And in the very place of God does sit:
Is given a law, the which was never kept*
By any one: (The son of God except.)
Now to enlarge the huge proportion
Of thy offense ( Traitor) thou did attempt,
That treason, which exceedes comparison:
Whose horror did bed imme the Element:
Both Heaven, and Earth in wonders did consent;
To point it out, for greatest admiration,
Which far exceeds the power of all relation.
This little out of much. God to redeem,
The lost integrity, of man his creature.
Did his defaced Image so esteem,
As he invested in thy humane nature,
The son of God, (the word that made each creature*)
Eternal Christ, who in his flesh did merit,
Eternal life, for each believing spirit.
See how thou do return him recompense.
Thou gave him poverty, that was a King:
Justice it self, yet blam'st his innocence:
Great majesty, had but the poor attending:
Nor had thy treasons, in these wrongs their ending.
But did with (wicked Jews) conspire his death,
That first did give, thy first fore-father breath.
And did prevail. Thy tongue did sentence him;
Thy hands (O wicked instruments of sin)
Bound the most free, and tortured every lim;
Nor so content, labored to vex within
His sacred Spirit, with most vile profaning*
And last, to please the spirits of thine eye,
The Holy Lamb between two thieues must die.
Was this enough, or art thou still more great
In thy offense? O still thou do augment it:
Thou want not sin, but I words to repeat
Thy infinites: thy soul cannot repent it;
For thy delight is ever to augment it:
Witness thy horred customary swearing,
Wherewith each day his body thou art tearing.
^ Here let the Conscience make some little pause,
Whilst that the Devil that intends the plea,
Produces witnesses to prove the cause;
Showing large records of impiety:
And with a wondrous skill in Sophistry,
Gives a proportion to his sinful state,
Hoping to make the Guilty desperate.
Hoping to make the guilty desperate,
He does augment the Volume of our sinning*
Adding inlargements to exasperate
The Judge, that stands to sentence our offending:
Even from our birth, to these our days of ending:
It has, and will be still his exercise,
Against our happy beings to devise.
Witness his envy at our first creation,
That did deny our state of innocence,
A little breathing rest from his temptation;
But with the smoothed face of fair pretense,
Suggests into our natures his offense:
Witness again this time of our repentance,
How he incites the Judge to cruel sentence.
No one (howeuer skillful in his Art)
Can give more fit expressing forms to sin.
He makes a privy search within the heart,
And lays that open that was hid within;
And with most curious workmanship does limme
The ugly forms of our impieties;
And then presents their Terror to our eyes.
This, and much more this enemy of man,
And then the Conscience does again begin;
(Traitor) how is it, this thy accuser can
Produce these certain probats of thy sin?
Speak; can thou clear thy self of guilt herein?
Thy cause will not find help in thy denial,
For in the court of Conscience is thy trial.
Like unto him, that in a mighty throng,
Labors to hasten to some business,
With heat and sweat does vex himself among
The moving multitude, that in their prease,
Arrest his haste, and stop his forwardness:
So do our sighs, our tears and grief within,
Arrest our words, when gladly we begin.
(Alas) what else, but Guilty in the weak!
Which he, in broken accents would relate.
He puffes it out in sighs, that cannot speak;
The sense of sin, does so exanimate
Those faculties, that on our souls do wa^te:
As with a lawful warrant, may be said,
In this estate, our very Souls are dead.
Our Reason then, demandes our guilty spirit;
What for our justice we can argument.
Whether our Judgment correspond our merit;
Or if corruption in this parliament,
Here in thy own free hold, we do convent;
The Jury, that does sentence what thou art,
Are of thy Tenants, dwelling in thy heart.
Nothing (alas) the Conscience can reply.
Nothing (indeed) nor no word to excuse us;
Where all is Sin, there is no integrity.
All our cuasions, in this case refuse us;
Nothing in us can comfort, but accuse us.
For he that has this sorrow in his flesh;
Has least of joy, and most of heaviness.
The judgment then (for judgment must be just)
Denounces sentence of our condemnation.
( Traitor) thy flesh, shall first return to dust;
The matter of thy first formation)
Thy Soul transported to that strange vexation;
Whereas the souls of damned do begin,
To act the woeful parts, of tragike Sin.
This is the law, and thus we sentence thee;
Our power extends not for to moderate;
This court is Justice, Justice we decree.
The seat of Mercy is predominate,
And lives in God, he that did first create
Thy Innocence. To him thou must appeal,
If this our Condemnation thou repeal.
Thus far the law: Now to our work of Grace*
To wash this Moore, and give him Innocence:
To reobtaine what ^r'st he did deface,
Integrity: To cancel his offense;
In lieu whereof, to give him excellence.
To make that glorious, that before was base,
(Doubt those that list) It is a work of Grace.
Of Grace? me thinks th'vngratious will reply,
I rob Gods Image of his worthiness.
Because to sinful man, I do deny
Innatiue power to work his holiness.
Will you (O men deceived) I confess,
That God will share the glory of his name,
With men, whose lives dishonor most the same.
Here is the world, in great dispute and strife,
Whence does arise, this penitential fire,
That purges Sin, and rectifies the life:
Some will derive it from their own desire:
Others, the blessed Angels do inspire;
Some in their Friends, and many in their Priest,
In Error all, in God they place it least.
When God did give a spirit unto man,
He did but gently breathe it in his flesh;
But if he once call back the same again,
He speaks loud, and groans with painfulness:
Adam, and Lazarus do well express,
That he that can determine sinful strife;
Does somewhat more, than he that gave us life.
It were a well deserving work, to set
The kirnell that is a prisoner in the shell:
Which, when the Sun does warm, and heavens wet*
Receives a life, yet does it far excel
In curious Art, to make that prosper well;
Which (like a rotten member of a tree)
For fuel fit, for Grace unfit to be.
Me thinks, I hear the Mutinous repine.
And blame the hard construction of my verse:
And to the fire condemn this discipline;
Or wish, my recantation to reuerse,
The doom I censure on this universe.
(Thus these repiners) God should wrong our spirits*
To give us Laws, and take away our Mer^.
Thus may your earthen vessels make dispute,
And ask, how hap the Potter made them so?
Do you not know, that God is absolute?
Nor gives a reason for his doing so?
Shall God out of himself for wisdom go?
How dare thou argument with God maintain,
Being his vassaile, he thy Sovereign.
To make it best, thus I compare thy state,
Like to a Candle well prepared for light:
The reason why I thus do estimate,
Is thy Discourse, thy Reason, and Delight
To understand each cause. But the insight
Of that which nearest does concern thy mind*
In this thou art not sighted, but stark blind.
Suppose ten thousand torches in the night;
They give no light, unless thou give them fire:
So is thy Reason, and thy judgments sight,
Blind in it self, if Grace give not desire.
It is the God of Spirits, does inspire
Thy soul with Grace, For when it wants his light;
It is more black, then is the darkest night.
And in this darkness, this our man of Grief,
(Whom we proportion,) is in darkness placed.
Within himself, he cannot find relief:
What was divine in him, is now defaced.
The pride of his deseruings is disgraced.
And when a man in this dejection lies,
He wastes in sorrow, and in tears he dies.
And die he must, in his repentant tears,
Before his reformation can begin:
The grain must die, before the blade appears;
New birth is gotten, by the death of sin.
When thus we die, our spirit that is within,
Respires a life, that never will deceive us;
Whereof, nor Time, nor Envy can berea^e us.
The manner how: This out of my report.
When man is ouer-charged with the cares
Arising from the judgment of this Court.
And when within himself he much despaires;
The holy Spirit, then to him repaires,
And brings his Pardon, testified good,
With this subscription ( JESUS) writ in blood.
And thus (this sacred instrument of life)
(Poor man) we add not, to thy heaviness:
To speak in anger or contentious strife;
Mercy is only in our business:
We come to make thy much affliction less;
And offer to thy near despairing spirit,
The Psalm of Mercy. Mercy best can merit.
See here, the book of Life I do present thee;
Wherein thou may Eternity behold.
Thou can not read, before thou first repent thee;
Thou must first know thy self, and then unfold
This sacred volume. The Spirit then does hold,
Before the darkened spirits of his eye,
A Representment, how his Christ did die.
Said I, a representment, and no more;
It is much more, then in my words can be*
My soul conceits, a very Christ before;
Spreading his sacred body on the Tree.
Me thinks, his very torments I do see*
This Crucifix, is that most sacred book,
Wherein each happy Spirit needs must look.
And this the holy Ghost presents the eye,
And bids us read our penitential verse:
If we can (Clarkely) read this mystery,
He promises, our judgment for to trauerse,
And all our condemnation to reuerse:
But Sin (alas) so darkened has the mind,
As in this holy learning we are blind.
Like when th'vnlearned Fellon has his book,
Without a Prompter, he no letter reads;
Although with much desire, he thereon look,
Even so our Souls, as much (unlearned) needs,
The help of that sweet comfort that proceeds.
For if that God assist us not the better,
We understand, no sense, no word, nor letter.
In this condition, this our man of sin,
Cannot read mercy in these mysteries,
Before Gods holy spirit do begin,
To cleanse the soul of his impieties.
To move the heart, and clear the darkened eyes:
When once this grace, in us has but a being,
In holy secrets, we have perfect seeing.
The leaprous man, to heal his filthiness,
Must seven times water his contagious skin*
Is holy water of that worthiness?
Then with repentant tears let us begin,
To wash the leaprous body of our sin.
Seven times is nothing, multiply thy seven,
We must wash clean, ere we can enter heaven.
This is our first degree of holiness;
Which at the first, (as all beginnings are)
Little (in truth) but large in hopefulnesse.
He that begins this sorrow with a tear,
Unto a better work does but prepare.
And when in us this grace has but beginning,
We live to hope, and die unto our sinning.
Take for an instance him whom we proport:
No more of sin, but now the child of Grace.
As he wastes tears, his benefits resort;
The bad thrust out, the betters have the place,
What was delightful now he does deface:
When thus he has a new begotten mind,
His eyes are open, that before were blind.
No sooner open, but with eagerness,
They gaze upon that sanctimonious tree
The holy Cross, (O sacred Worthiness!)
That bears the fruit of Immortality:
And with a greedy appetite does eye,
This Crucifix, this Christ, that's nailde thereon,
This God, this man, this our redemption.
Not so^m'd in mettle, or with curious paint,
Nor hallowed with earthen sanctity;
We estimate not much, a wooden Saint,
Nor can a Painter learn the mystery,
To make a Christ, or give divinity.
Thus then of all I would be understood,
This Crucifix, nor mettle, paint, nor wood.
But very Christ, which with a faithful eye,
This son of Grace reuiews with good affection:
In every part he earnestly does pry
For sacred blood, which is the souls refection:
For without blood we seal not our election.
Now give him words, or else we do him wrong,
To give him much Desire, and not a Tongue.
Sacred (he says) most glorious, most divine;
Thou Word that made, thou Christ that sav'dst all;
Thou Son that everlastingly do shine,
Coequall God, and consubstantiall;
Thou Gate of mercy, way to life Eternal:
O since thou giv'st me sorrow for my sin,
Open thy Mercy gate, and let me in.
Thou art that Food, and ever-liuing Spring,
Whereof who tastes, shall never thirst again.
O I am thirst, with my much sorrowing;
Even as the parched land that gaspes for rain:
Do not thy heavenly droppings then detain.
If that my soul this holy water want,
What thriueth it, I set, I sow, or plant?
But want I cannot, if I but desire it;
Thy mercy does prevent my forwardness:
Thou give grace before we can require it.
If in our hearts there be but willingness,
Thou come unto us, ere we can express
What we determine. In this, scarce one
Of mortal raze, loves imitation.
This, and ten thousand testaments of Love,
T'vnworthy men, are daily multiplide,
Which might their blunted understandings move
To Love and Honor, whom they crucified,
Their King and Savior Jesus is denied.
For ever be it hateful in the Jews,
To choose a villain, and the Just refuse.
Pilate, thou can not wash in Innocence;
Nor Cayphas, how er'e in holy place,
You give a monstrous sin, a fair pretense;
Your greatness cannot countenance the case:
Both Prince and Prelate, and the vulgar base
Conspire in one. These discords can agree
To plot, and practice this conspiracy.
Traitors, hold off your black and treasonous hands,
Touch not his pure and neuer-tainted flesh:
Villains, your King, must he be locked in bands?
How prodigal you be in wickedness!
To buffet, bind, and whippe his sacred flesh.
Let me my sinful body interpose,
The sin was mine, let me bear off the blows.
See how his blood spirts from their cruel stripes;
(O sacred blood, O sacred body bleeding.)
These Jews have less compassion than their whippes,
To sp^ll that blood, which is the holy feeding
Of blessed souls* O cruelty exceeding!
Traitors, you little know one drop of blood,
Would be enough to do all sinners good.
(Sweet Ies^,) may thy servant beg this grace,
To be a vessel, to receive this spilling.
The earth my Lord's a far unworthy place;
A place of blood, a slaughterhouse of killing*
Since I have wounds, O Jesus be thou willing,
That some of this, these Jews shed on the ground*
I may reserve, to cure a mortal wound.
In this array, their God, our Christ they bring
Unto the place of execution:
His enemies entitle him a King;
Yet that is done in their derision.
The Stage is Calueri^ they act upon;
A place of Skulles, the moral may be this:
We are but rotten bones without his bliss.
Look, as a Pyrate roauing at the Seas,
When by adventure hitting on a prise;
Does first upon their stoage make a sease,
Then on their victor'd lives does tyrannise:
These hel-houndes so their envy exercise.
First, they do strippe our Savior of his clothing,
Then of his life, and thus they leave him nothing.
Is it not wonder this rebellious rout;
Trauells in sweat, to work their fatal woe?
See, with what painfulness they go about
This horred act; herein they are not slow,
That to a work of Grace could never go.
They dragge, they bind, they na^le, they fasten on;
Our holy life, but their damnation.
Between two malefactors they did place him;
In scorn of his most perfect innocence.
These Thieves there set, of purpose to disgrace him,
Yet did these Varlets fail in their pretense;
Their neerenesse, could not gi^e him their offense.
For that is said to be the virtuous mean,
That on each hand, has neighbored the extreme.
Now they have reared up this Crucifix,
See how their resting time they entertain.
Some vinegre and gall together mix;
Others deride, and all of them disdain,
In scorn they call him, Lord, and Sovereign.
The soldiers, that above the rest do rave,
Do cast the Dice, who should his garment have.
My Lord is now in other business,
Building the frame of man's salvation:
These drops of blood, and water do express
His inward grief: he gives a demonstration
Of torment, that exceeds all relation.
For, he that would bring merit unto man,
Must suffer more, then any other can.
O what is man whom thou regardest so!
A stained cloth, a beauty withered.
Yet did my Lord his greatness humble so,
As he inuests our Nature that was dead;
He brings again what erst was perished.
Now by his Blood, and ever by his Grace,
He makes us worthy that before were base.
What though they heap iniquity on sin?
He lays not his saving work away:
He helps most, when they most torture him;
To give us life, he does his own defray.
(Lord Christ) thou did for thy tormentors pray,
Father forgive them, (thus thy innocence)
Forgive them (gracious Father) their offense.
The horror of this act, did blind the Sun,
Remove the Earth, the holy Temple rend:
Dead bodies from their Sepulchers did run;
And preach to many how these Jews offend:
All things reprou'd, and nothing did commend.
The Sun, the Earth, the Temple, and the Grave,
Have more of Grace, then these Tormentors have.
The Sun does hide his euer-burning face,
Abhorring to survey their damned fact.
The Earth did shame it, as her own disgrace;
Because upon her body they did act.
The Graves disclaim, and dis-alowe the fact*
The holy Temple does it self divide,
Because a holier they have crucifide.
Now give me breath (O sacred breathing spirit!)
With faithful affectation to apply,
This Death, this Christ, this compotence of merit
Unto my soul; that in it self would die,
If not supported by the hand of Mercy.
How helps it the hurt-man to be sound,
Unless the Salve be plasterd to the wound.
And as the holy Prophet that did spread,
His living body on the liuelesse corse,
And so brought back, the spirit vanished,
And made a contract where there was divorce:
So, when our souls are mantled with this cross;
That life of Grace, we erst had lost with sinning*
Has then a second time in us beginning.
And to make sit for good digestion
This bread of life; we must the loaf divide;
Our faithful souls in morsels feeds thereon,
So by degrees my Lord was crucified.
In Civil fellowship it is denied,
To gobbet up a supper at a bit,
When we have time and leisure for to sit.
It were good order we begin the lowest,
When we this Jacobs ladder would ascend;
In happy progress we attain the rest,
And then we give our trauells happy end.
This only co^nsaile I do recommend:
That he that would ascend these holy stairs*
Must to his footing first direct his cares.
Then with his blessed Feet let us begin,
That now are stained with the streaming blood
That (...) from the Nail, that sticks therein.
O that my eyes, would do my heart that good,
To be as mo^st, as is the swelling flood!
For holy (...) does instruct my tears,
To wash, and then to wipe them with my hairs.
These holy passengers do never haste,
To guilty blood, nor unto lustful fire.
No little minute of a time they waste,
To minister to any vain desire.
In envy therefore did the Jews conspire,
To nail those holy moovers unto wood,
That were such forward instruments of good.
Their travel was, to travel to the weak;
Bring comfort to the unrespected poor;
To give the lame to go, the dumb to speak,
And ^it applyments unto every sore;
A greater yet than what was said before:
They brought the news of Peace unto our spirit.
And therefore our acceptance they do merit.
See how his sacred Knees be marked with praire,
A demonstration of his sanctity.
To Adulation they vncustom'd are;
Nor fawn they with official flattery.
Give me (sweet Lord) these merits to app^:
These marks are no disgrace unto my skin*
Better be marked with holy Prayer, than Sin.
Now let me reach my meditation higher,
And touch my Lords most blessed Heart that bleedeth:
This blood cannot extinguish holy fire;
That in this holy principal exceeds:
He warmes with Zeal, and with his Blood he feeds
Our spirits that are cold and hunger-starued,
Wanting this Grace we men have not deserved.
This Heart is not the nursery of Pride*
Of Murder, Lust, of Mammon, and Debate:
Within his secrets there is not implide,
The new invention to Equivocate.
This Heart must think what ere his words relat^*
Lying is sin, all sin is from the Devil,
The Art of Reservation then is evil.
No sin had ere admittance in this place,
(O place, most sanctimonious, most divine!)
The Presence Chamber, and the seat of Grace,
Whereas his soul in majesty did shine.
How can it be the Holiest should incline,
To entertain into his Chair of State,
The ^east of evils we can estimate?
May I (sweet Jesus) view in every part,
The secret closet of thy thoughts within;
The Spea^e has made a passage to thy Heart;
The entrance then is open; let me in
To see the merit that has vanquished sin.
Do not thy mercy gate against me lock,
For I will ever at thy Mercy knock.
See, here is nothing that presents my eye,
But Love, but Favor, and Compassion:
In every quarter Mercy I epsy;
Mercie's the brief of all I look upon;
Mercy the cause and means of my salvation.
O, since there is such mercy in thy heart,
(Sweet Jesus) give my grieved soul a part.
Like to a Prince that in his royal throne,
Bethinkes what may his people benefit;
Sends this his good determination,
To such as at his Counsel Table sit,
That by their Wisdoms they may order it:
So does the Heart determine first the deed,
Then sends it to the counsel in the head.
Let me alittle higher now ascend,
Whereas my Lord his holy Arms does spread,
This moralles how his Mercy does extend;
Invites to save what would be perished:
Come unto me all that are wearied,
I will support your life, unload your cares,
Infuse my Grace, and wipe away your tears*
Then since I am invited to this Grace,
(Sweet Jesus) give my spirit entertain;
I would unload my burden in this place,
Whose weight is more than I can well sustain:
(Lord Jesus) ease thy servant of this pain:
Take off this heavy bondage of my sin,
Thy yoke is easy, let me live therein.
These Hands (O sacred instruments of health!)
That never failed yet in any cure;
The sick man's comfort, and the poor man's wealth:
Whose holy virtue ever shall endure,
And ever for to help will them inure:
Why do the Jews these holy helpers wound,
Whose very touch made the diseased sound?
These merciful and free bestowing Hands,
Are ever reaching their benevolence:
He gives aught to any that demands;
Never respecting gainefull recompense;
His bounty is not wasted with expense.
For as the Springs supply the wasting Streams,
So has his Grace supplyment from the heavens.
His Flesh they wound, and mortise it in wood,
T'vnfit my Lord, from healing any more;
As they strike in, out starts the sacred blood,
That cures more than did his hands before:
One dram of this will help the greatest sore.
These people in their purpose (then) did fail,:
For here is Virtue which they cannot nail.
This holy Virtue (might my Lord be pleased,)
T'infuse my Soul, all hackt with mortal sin;
Wounded, and sore, in every part diseasd;
I should my restoration then begin.
My hands have blood, that ouer-spreads my skin
With sinful Guilt* O let thy blood divine
Exp^ my guilt, and then my blood refine!
Now I arrive my much desired Port;
The Orb wherein all holiness does move,
The place whereto all wisdom does resort,
The Court of Mercy, Majesty, and Love,
Furnished with all acquirements from above.
Such is my Lords most sacred holy Head,
With all these rich induments furnished.
This is that one and universal Head,
That over all has true pre-eminence;
Who seeks a second, from the first is dead:
Two Universals have no excellence.
Who can corriuall Christ without offense?
(Lord Savior Christ) it does my soul content*
To be a member in thy regiment.
From this First head derived is all Grace;
That gives the members life, and holy being*
The head is said to be the fittest place,
Where our immortal spirits be decreeing,
How to repair this house of flesh; then seeing
The lower parts to Reason are but dead,
They must repair for wisdom to the Head.
See how these Jews this Head do dignisie;
His temples, with a crown they do adorn.
They call him King, yet this their King must d^*
They give him state, but that is done in scorn,
A Diadem they fashion him of thorn.
Yet know (you Traitors) when it touched his head,
Never was Crown so richly garnished.
A crown of thorn? O let their great offense,
Re-eccho back my indignation!
Were ye (good people) at this great expense,
To solemnize his coronation,
That was the King, that gave all Kings creation.
See you these drops, that trickle from the thorn?
They damn your deed, but do his Grace adorn.
His holy Eyes, (O sacred lamps of light!)
The busy searchers of all men's distress:
Whose seeing is not let by the night,
In naked forms they all things can express*
They have all knowledge, and all holiness.
These Pla^s that are mouers in this Heaven*
Have better Constellation then the Seven.
( Lord Jesus) let thy holy Eyes reflect
Their influence, upon my earthen state:
Thy heavenly presence is a fair aspect;
There does my soul delight to speculate.
For by those Stars, I best can calculate
My lot of Grace: which never is denied
To him, that viewes this Christ thus cruci^i'd.
But O the organe of his holy Speech;
That breaths life to every faithful ear!
This holy one, his holy word did preach:
He gi^es for nothing what would cost us dear;
And makes assurance, where before was ^eare.
( Lord Jesus) give me knowledge in thy teaching,
I shall less need these Times contentious preaching.
His breath he forms into holy prayer*
Which does ascend the thro^e of majesty.
For us poor men, all his petitions were;
He advocates for us perpetually.
Think ye, the Father will his son deny?
What need I for more Int^rcessors care,
When holy Christ does interceede his prayer?
Thou Splendour of thy Fathers majesty.
Thou God of God, thou man, all men's Redeemer.
Thou King of Jews, thou Christ they crucify.
Thou one, wherein all graces treasured are.
Thou merciful, thou all, thou every where.
To thee ( O Savior Jesus) I repair,
Exhibit (Lord) my pardon in thy prayer.
Pardon my youthful sinning, and my old;
Pardon my secret, and revealed ^nes;
Pardon my Errors, that be m^old.
Pardon committings, and omitions.
Pardon my Nature stained with corruptions.
(Lord) pardon all, in all I have offended:
Thy pardon's free, to all be it extended.
Now ( holy Joseph) help me to interre
This sacred Corse: my hart's a fitting place,
Wherein thou may, his Sepulcher prepare.
Dig deep ( old man) this Grave will not disgrace
My willing heart, but dignifie the place.
( Lord Jesus) if this resting place may please,
Not three days (Lord) but rest here many threes.
God forbid that I should rejoice, but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. Galat. 6. 14.

