EXURGAT DEUS DISSIPENTUR INIMICI *

THE HISTORY OF THE DEfendors of the Catholic Faith. Whearevnto are added
Observations Divine. Politic. Morrall.
By Christopher Lever

Nostrum in Coelo Negotium. LONDON Printed for Nicholas Fussell and Humphrey
Moseley, at the sign of the Ball in Paul's Church yard. 1627.

POSUI DEUM ADIUTOREM MEUM

NON NATVRA SED PON TIFICIORVM ART FEROX.

SEMPER EADEM

BEATI PACIFICI

DONEC PAX REDDITA TERRIS F. Hulsuis. sculp.



THE HISTORY OF THE DEFENDORS OF THE CATHOLIQVE FAITH. Discoursing the state
of RELIGION in England, and the care of the politic state for Religion during
the reigns of King HENRRY 8. King EDWARD. 6. Queen MARIE. Queen ELIZABETH.
And our late Sovereign, King JAMES. Kings and Queens of England, France and
Ireland, Defendors of the most True, most Ancient, and most CATHOLIQVE FAITH,
etc.. With all, Declaring by what means these Kings and Queens have obtained
this Title, Defendor of the Faith, and wherein they have deserved it, whereunto
are added, Observations DIVINE. POLITIQVE. MORAL.
BY CHRISTOPHER LEVER.

Nostrum in Coelo Negotium. Printed at London by G. M. for Nicolas Fussell and
Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the
Ball. 1627.

TO THE MOST HIGH, MIGHTY, And most Gracious PRINCE, CHARLES: By the grace of
God, King of Great Britain, France and Jreland, Defender of the CATHOLIC
FAITH.
YOUR MAJESTY'S MOst humble, and unworthy Servant, CHRISTOPHER LEVER;

with all humility dedicateth this History of the Defendors of the Catholic
Faith, unto your Majesty, beseeching Almighty God to derive upon your sacred
name and house a perpetual succession of able and resolute Defendors of the
Faith; to the honor of God, the peace of the Church, the prosperity of the
State, the blessed memory of your Royal Name, and the Confusion of Antichrist.

AMEN.
A CATALOGVE OF the Chapters contained in this HISTORY.
King HENRY 8.
1.AN induction to this History briefly declaring the variable change of
Times, from the beginning to the time of this History. page 1. 2. By whom and
what means this Title Defendor of the Faith was given to the Crown of
England. page 19. 3. King HENRY'S first Act of Defense for the Catholic Faith.
page 31 4. Of what importance this Act for the Kings Supremacy was to the
state of England, in respect of Piety and Policy. page 38. 5. Of the
suppressing of Abbeys and Religious houses in England. page 48. 6. Of the Kings
remiss and cold proceeding in the work of Reformation. page 60. 7. Of the
six Articles and the evil which thereof ensewed. page 77. 8. Observations out
of the general view of this latter time of King HENRY 8. page 91. 9. In what
state King Henry left the kingdom to the next Defendor of the Faith, King
Edward 6. p. 109 10. A comparison between King Henry 8. of England, and
Frederick Barbarossa the Emperor of Germany. page 119.
King EDWARD the 6.
11. OF the next Defendor of the Faith, King Edward 6. page 125. 12. Of the
benefit that redounds to a state by a lawful succession of blood. page 131.
13. Of King Edwards defending the Catholic Faith and wherein he chiefly
defended it. p. 139. 14. The trouble of the State, at this time of King Edward,
how they were occasioned and how compounded. p. 152. 15. A discourse of the
misery of man's life upon occasion of the Duke of Summersets death. p. 165. 16.
Of king Edwards death, and how he left the state to the next succession. 179.
17. A Comparison between king Josias of Judah, and king Edward of England. p.
187.
Queen MARIE.
18. OF Queen Marie, and of the alteration of the State in the beginning of
her government. page 191. 19. In what particulars Queen Marie did most offend
the Catholic Faith. p. 201. 20. Of certain discontents whereat Queen Marie
took great offense. page 225. 21. Of rebellion a discourse. p. 237. 22. A
Comparison between Queen Marie of England, and Katherine de Medicies,
Queene-mother of France. p. 245.
Queen ELIZABETH.
23. OF the next Defendresse of the FAITH, Queen Elizabeth, and through what
difficulties she attained the kingdom. p. 249. 24. The first act of the
Queens defense for the Catholic Faith, after she was Queen. p. 262. 25. Of
certain state considerations which in respect of Policy, might have dissuaded
the Queen from reforming the state of Religion. p. 268. 26. Of the care the
Queen and State had to suppress the enemies of the Catholic Faith. p. 282.
27. Of what importance these statutes were in the 13. year of the Queen in
respect of the Church and state. p. 296. 28. Of the Christian care Queen
Elizabeth had to defend certain Christian Princes and their States. p. 306.
29. A remembrance of some particulars, wherein God has defended this
Defendresse of the Faith, Queen Elizabeth. p. 321. 30. Of Q. Elizabeth her
resolute continuing in defense of the Catholic Faith. p. 329. 31. Of the last
Act of the Queens defense for the Catholic Faith. p. 333.
King JAMES.
32. OF the next Defendor of the Faith King James, the Kings Majesty that last
was. p. 335. 33. Of the Kings defending the Catholic Faith in Scotland before
he was King of England. p. 343. 34. In what particulars King James our
Sovereign has principally defended the Catholic Faith. p. 347. 35. A
remembrance of some particulars whereby God has wonderfully defended the Kings
Majesty. p. 361. 36. Of the diversity of Religions. p. 364.
THE HISTORY of the Defendors of the CATHOLIC FAITH.
AN INDVCTION to this History, briefly declaring the variable change of times,
from the first beginning to the time of this present History.
CHAP. I.
THE first time was in the first Creation, for before God made things there
could be no time; time being a deriuing of things to such ends, whereto in Gods
decree they are directed. For whatsoever is earthly, What Time is.
even man and the number of his trauells, with their circumstances, are bound
by God to a necessity of time, beyound which all the power of earth cannot
reach. Their opinion then is both foolish and wicked, who imagine all things to
happen by fortune, and that there is a special power in the Orbs and Elements
(which they call Nature) by which, both heaven and earth and every work
thereof is directed. And this opinion of Atheism is grounded upon this doubt,
that whereas we define God to be the beginner of all things. It is by them
demanded, where that God had his beginning, and from what he descended. By
which form of reasoning they conclude against their own unbelief, their
doubting what should begin, acknowledges a beginning, the which beginning is
God, not that God himself had beginning, but that all things had their essence
and deriuation from him: he himself being infinite, and without time. For as
in the figure of a Circle, is not to be found any limit or term of beginning,
or ending: So God within whose Circle all things be that are; in whom we live,
move, and have our being, is infinite in time, and infinite in all his
attributes.

Secondly, The Judgment of Philosophy.
This divine Truth is confirmed by the sentence of the best Philosophers, who
(with their eyes of Nature) could discern and distinguish this Truth. But
because I write to a Christian Prince I will not therefore strengthen my self
with profane authors, but much rather content me with the testimony of God,
whose words has sufficient Majesty to answer all opposition. By this word I
know that God in the beginning, Genesis 1. 1.
created the world of nothing, there being no preexistent matter whereof to
make it: and then of the dust of the Earth made he Man, a most noble Creature,
of a matter most base, and breathed into his Nostrills the breath of Life, The
Creation of Man.
a soul so pure and spiritual as nothing but God could be more, being the
sacred breath which he himself inspired, whereby our souls (even after our
fall) yet relish of that divinity, and whereby we yet reach our meditation and
spiritual exercise to God who did inspire them.

Thirdly, And to this Man thus made, did God give, All things given to Man.
the heaven, the earth, and all the beauty of them; For he himself in whom
was the fullness of all things needed not ought that was made, but gave them to
his servant Man; to whom he had made all things servants, reserving Man to his
own service only. And for this end has God given Man a Law, which limits him
with strict obedience, and binds him to the due execution of such services, as
may direct him to his end, which is Gods Glory. The observance of which Law is
called Religion, the not observing it a Rebellion against God; because thereby
we oppose against that power that made us. The world divided by Religion.
This observance of the Law of God which we call Religon, is that which has
divided the world into so many disagreements, the which like fire that deuideth
the metttle and dross, does cull out the most approved of Mankind, upon whom
Gods decree has set the distinction of mercy, and does mark such for the
inheritance of eternal life. Among all which differences the maintainers of
every several call it their Religion to which they chiefly adheare disclayming
all diversity.

Fourthly, Yet as there is but one God, One God one Truth.
so of necessity there can be but one Truth, and but one manner of true serving
that only God, and such for me must that service have as may please the
liberty of the Master, and not the base condition of servants to appoint. The
reason of Multiplicitie of Religions.
And from hence does arise the multiplicity of Religions, that men interpose
betwixt God and his service, and so deny the most able and absolute God, both
power and wisdom in the ordering of his own affairs. And therefore do men
form Religions not only diverse, but adverse to God, and to his own
prescriptions. These wrongs does God suffer in his creatures, not by violence
but at pleasure, and for the finishing of such determinations, (as but to
himself) are most secret neither ought these differences to distress any man's
Christian belief, or make him doubt the certainty of Religion, because of many
uncertain Religions. For Christ Jesus who is the truth and wisdom of his
Father, says, that he came not to bring peace (though the Gospel of peace)
but the sword and difference, that through the fiery trial the Saints might
pass to the glory of eternal happiness.

Fifthly, The first schism.
The first difference in Religion, was in the first family, in Adams house the
first Man, and that between two Brethren, Caine and Habell. Genesis 4. 3.
Habell brought for his offering to God the first fruits of his Sheep, and the
fat of them, the which Sacrifice God accepted. But Caine would not offer a
Sacrifice of that value or nature* but presents God with fruit and trash, which
God would not accept. And this conceived in Caine, an envious emulation against
his brother Habell, which wanting grace to moderate, grew to the highest degree
of Envy, whose nature is to feed on blood, for so did envious Caine upon the
blood of virtuous Habell. This Caine, Genesis 4. 8. Caine the Father of Scisme.
this first man of blood, is a Father to all them that love difference,
especially in Religion, and their Religion (of all others) is nearest Caines
that stain their profession and themselves with blood, especially with the
blood of righteous Habells. For God is the God of mercy and not of misery, and
his delight is in the good, and not in the blood of the righteous.

Sixthly, The first alteration of Time.
In this generation of Adam was the first alteration of Time. For God created
all things good, and in purity he formed them; but Man made them evil, and by
sin deformed them. For when sin en^red our Natures, then Man and the
Creatures God had given him endured alteration, and lost that name of
Goodness, God gave them in their Creation. So that nothing is now (in his own
Nature,) Good, but only by consequence and Gods act, because by sin Man has
spread corruption (like Leprosy) over all the generations of Earth, and has
made an alteration of times, and a difference in the Natures of things, which
had not been, but for the curse of sin, which has altered their property,
and made them subject to evil change, which otherwise should have had
perpetuity of happiness.

Seventhly, And as Rivers the longer they run, the larger they spread
themselves, so sin and the evil thereof, Time the worse for time.
for the times that are, are much worse, then the times that were: as may
appear; if we compare times, and descend from these beginnings to a larger
process. In the beginning, among three men two were good, and then the greater
number were the better, but in the time of Noah, among a world of people, God
found not a righteous man, but only one Noah; and then the better number was
by much the less. At this time God looked down from heaven, and beheld the
earth how it was deformed with sin, therefore he resolves to wash iniquity
from the face of the earth, Genesis 6. 13.
and to bring a general destruction upon all flesh. In which Judgment his
mercy saved Noah only and his Family. After the Flood, when God had thus
cleansed the earth, yet found he in Man's nature concupiscence and a pronenesse
to evil, the which grew up with time to a marvelous strength; for as the
generation of men enlarge, the generation of sin does much more enlarge,
spreading it self over all the earth, and begetting in this new generation of
men, new and unknown inventions of evil, whereby they exceeded their evil
progenitors both in the number, and quallity of their evils. For at this time
popularity and greatness began to be affected, and the desire of Empire, The
first desire of Empire.
in ambi^ious and proud spirits made men so audaciously proud, that they durst
dare heaven and give God the challenge. And at this time and not before, was
there use of Policy, to contriue this or that evil, to steal, murder,
waste, usurp and depopulate whole Kingdoms.

Eighthly, This alteration of manners, occasioned a strange alteration in the
state of things, for these differences did reach beyond particular quarrels,
even to the subversion of whole states; whereby it came to pass, that one
kingdom devoured another, and one people did subiugate many. As the Assyrians
first, The four Monarchies.
who erected the first Monarchy under Ninus and Simeramis, the Parsians under
Cyrus, the Macedonians under Alexander, and the Romans under the government
and Conquests of Julius Caes^r. yet all these have had their alterations and
have endured the misery of Conquest, even by such whom they reputed for
barbarous and base people.

Ninthly, The general care that was had of these worldly occasions, was the
cause that Religion was scarce known, and not regarded: and therefore the
Church then, The state of the Church in the old world.
exceeded not the number of some few families, being translated from one holy
Man to anotther, such as were Abraham, Lot, and Job; unto the time of the
twelve Patriakes, when it began to spread into a holy generation; and after the
afflictions of Egypt and the wilderness it came to a flourishing and princely
state, especially in the times of David and Solomon Kings of Israel; but not
long after in Reobohams time, ten parts of twelve fell back from Religion,
and became Apostates; yea, and many times that little Judah, that handful of
Gods people, being drunk with ease and prosperity, would forget God their
mighty deliverer, forget his Sabbath and his Sanctuary, and give themselves to
Idolatrous pleasures, with such general appetite, as if God had given them
license for wickedness, no appearance or mark of Religion in Judah.

Tenthly, Gods Judgments do correct and not destroy.
The merciful God willing to cure the infirmity of those times, comes with
his Judgments, Famine, Sword and Pestilence, (not as in the old world to
destroy) but to correct the disobedience of his people; who no sooner relish
the sweetness of his mercy, but wantonly return to their former remissness,
and sin with greater appetite then before: yet for all this does not God
forget to be merciful, but continues himself in his own nature a God most
merciful, and most compassionate; who to demonstrate the infinite degree of
his love to his servant Man, takes from him the burden some condition of the
Law, which he could not keep, and gives him a new covenant, the covenant of
Grace the Gospel of Peace. God alters the t^n^r of our Obligation.
And thus mercifully he alters the tenor of our obligation, and to give this
work of Graceful authority, he sends his only begotten the Lord Christ,
to satisfy the old, and to rat^fi^ the new Covenant both by his active and
passive righteousness.

Eleuenthly, The happy alteration of time.
Here was the greatest alteration that ever was in the witness of time, for
before this we were commanded, to do and live, else to die: but now to believe
only and live. Never was there a more large demonstration of Gods favor; nor
a like time, wherein Grace was so freely offered, or the gates of heaven so
wide set open; as if God should reach his hand of mercy to earth, How God does
inuit men to their Salvation.
to inuit us to his eternal inheritance, and (with the fairest promises of
Love) to allure us to a state of most absolute blessedness: yet
notwithstanding all this Grace, and all these fair inuitements, so constant
were the men of those times in their evils, that they refuse to indent with
God, be the condition never so easy, or his promise never so absolute: but
they combine themselves with all endeavor to resist the Grace of God; they
will not have Grace though God give it freely; they are all Moses no Christ,
all Law no Gospel* so powerful were they in their own opinions, as if the
Law had been an easy performance; And therefore did they despise the work of
Grace, crucifying the Lord of Life, that brought it, and that bought it with
the value of his life; a price inestimable, killing also the Apostles his
faithful witnesses, and persecuting the Saints, to whom God gave Grace to
apprehend this Mystery.

Twelfthly, Here may a Christian man spend his holy meditations in considering
the deprauednesse of Man, the gross dulnes of his Nature, and how inclinable
he is to all evil. Contrariwise the infinite measure of Gods mercy; who
notwithstanding our disobedience, will not utterly destroy us his creatures,
but in a wonderful degree of favor, yields himself to the weakness of our
flesh, knowing that our nature has a pronenesse to evil only: And therefore
has he given free passage to the Gospel, making it fruitfully prosper in the
blood of holy Martyrs, shed in the persecuting times of Tyrants and
wicked-Emperors.

13. And in this passage of blood did Religion march until the time of
Constantine the Great, Religion did live in death*
who intertaining the Christian Faith with good affection gave it warrant for
public exercise, whereby it spread over all the known world with such
admirable increase, as God only could give to a cause so heavenly. The cause
of scisme in Christian Religion.
And yet in the height of this prosperity, (according to the Nature of our
flesh) the state of Christendom grew proud, with good success, and wanting
the opposition of heathen enemies, divided themselves into heresies and
factions, whereof insewed the greatest calamity that could be in a Christian
state, every faction receiving authority and greatness, according as they were
favored or not by the Emperors.

14. And this diversity of fortune continued in Christendom for many years,
yet so as Christianity might be well said to flourish, until the time that the
Popes did arrogate to their seat supremacy and universal power (or as the
History of Florence reports it) until the time of Charles and Pippin Kings
of France, The Practices of the French.
who in policy to secure to them and theirs the possession of the west
Empire, bound the Bishop of Rome (whose authority might help that practice) by
favors and friendly entertainements to their faction. And therefore did the
French pronounce this sentence. That the Pope being the Vicar of Christ, ought
not to be judged by men, but to Judge all men and to determine every
difference. This sentence (whether by the Popes themselves, or by their
favorites, the French Kings,) was assuredly the Ladder for the Popes ambition,
and the cause whereof has ensued so much evil to the state of the Catholic
Church, as that Christendom yet is full of the marks of that misery.

15. Now the power of God that sees the most secret practice on Earth, whose
providence cannot be prevented with policy, suffers the measure of this
evil time to fill and ouerrunne with iniquity; so that a true Christian might
have thought of himself, as Elias, when he thought he was only left of Gods
people: yet in that height of iniquity, there wanted not many Obediahs, who hid
the faithful from the stroke of persecution; neither wanted there some even
in this darkness of Time, who willingly offered their faith to the trial of
fire, and sealed the testimony of their Religion, with the witness of their
blood.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, from this extremity of evil time does this following History take
beginning, Divine.
and here may be generally noted from the Observations of all times, that God
does never suffer the light of his truth to be utterly extinct, though many
times in that degree of adversity, as that the eye of this world cannot see it.
This is evident in the sacred Stories of the Bible, and also in the condition
of these times whereof I write. When ignorance and Error like a double veil
did blind the face of Truth: yet God whose eye of providence is ever open,
sees the envy of evil men. And (in the time of his good pleasure) he takes
off this double Veil, and presents Truth naked to the view of all men, as in
the sequel of this History shall appear most evident.

Secondly, Pollitique.
Here hence also we may note the instability of earthly things; and how that
Sovereignty, and Empire (the pollitique ends and the extremities of men's
endeavors) are built upon uncertainties, and most unconstant turnings, the
which false foundation, has suddenly cast down, what many years, much
study, and many men's labors had erected. Therefore is that principle of
Policy, not altogether without reason, that Authority and Greatness of State
receives strength by discords and Faction. For it is both the nature of things
and the travel of men to endeavor alterations, and to transpose things from
the present condition wherein they are, for from this cause all Empires have
had their beginning strength, and death.

Thirdly, Moral.
It is a Moral respect, that in our constructions we Judge not properties by
external evidence only, for virtue and merit is not given by Suffrage, because
it is often included in the far inferior number, and is often banished to
poverty and contemptible fortune.

Fourthly, For as it is no proof of truth to produce multiplicitie of
witnesses, where there is a necessary relation to favor. So virtues and moral
deserts, are not Judged by common examples or opinions, because both the one
and other are not free and voluntary, but forced on us by the gross and
palpable flatteries of our infirmities.

Fifthly, It is also a moral institution that men should somewhat disgrace
themselves in their own dignities, not that their actions may endure disgrace,
but that their own opinions exceed not in their own estimations, which error
does often make the most fortunate most wretched; For if kingdoms, Empires,
and the Catholic Church have endured bad alterations. Let no man dare to
secure himself in their uncertainties.

CHAP. II.
By whom and what means this Title Defendor of the Faith was given to the
Crown of England.
FIRST, there is not in this last age of the world any thing more admirable, or
that better does merit the memory of writing, then the reformation of
Christian Religion, reducing it to that purity of Doctrine, wherein it was
first delivered. And this in a double respect deserves everlasting memory.
First, the worthiness of the act it self, being the restoring of Religion to
the purity of Doctrine, whereby so much good does redound to the state of
Christendom as that greater cannot. Religion being the key that does open the
passage to happiness, and the Ladder by which we ascend the presence of God
and holy Angels, whereby we are interessed into Gods favor, and without which
it is impossible to please God. It is admirable also in respect of the manner
and means, whereby this work was wrought, being directed by the special
power of Gods providence, to the admiration of al them that truly consider it.

Secondly, The reformation of Religion.
For the Act it self, all the learned in the world are in controversy,
whether (thereby) Religion was deformed, or reformed. To both which opinions
many excellent learned men, diversely adhered, whereby they divide the unity of
Religion into these two diversities; Christian Religion divided into
Protestants and Papists.
Protestants and Papists, either of these subdeuiding it self again, into
many seueralls; whereby the plain and honest understanding of men less
learned are distract; To see Religion, (which in truth is but one) divided into
so many diversities: now because the handling of this does rather belong to
argument, then History; to a disputation, rather than to a relation of the
occurrents of Time. I therefore leave that as impertinent to this business, and
only tie my self to relate the manner how Christian Religion was reformed:
How Religion was reformed.
and (in special) how by the Crown of England this was done; whereby that
Nation has all other Kingdoms of the Earth, (in the highest degrees of honor
and reputation) much exceeded it being the first that with victory, England the
first that with victory did oppose the Pope.
dared to cast off that awful and needless yoke of obedience to the seat of
Rome.

Thirdly, The first occasion of the alteration of Religion.
The first occasion hereof was in the time of Martin Luther, who by his
diligence in preaching and writing had got great estimation in Germany,
especially with the Duke of Saxony, because in his teaching he opposed the
usurped authority of the Pope, and for detesting those gross heresies, which
by long continuance in the Church, had gotten a general allowance, Luthers
Book de Captiuitate Babyl.
among (almost all men.) This Luther writ a book, entitled, de captiuitate
Babylonica so offensive to the state of Papacy, as the Pope and all his
special favorites, were therewith very much displeased. Whereupon King Henery
the Eighth (whether of his own accord, K. Henery the Eighth against Luther.
or by the persuasion of others, I know not) writ against Luther, and in
special against that book of his de Capt. Babil. in defense of the Popes
Supremacy. The purpose of the Kings Book.
The purpose of the Kings book, being specially to conclude the doctrine of
Pardons. Secondly, of the Popes Supremacy. Thirdly, of the Sacraments of the
Church: whether this was the Kings own labor, or that he only Fathered it to
give it authority, is not certainly known, and diversely believed. Many think
it was not, and that his Fathering of it was only a policy of state, both to
gain himself a reputation in learning, and that by this special
demonstration, the Pope might be tied to the Kings favor, and assist him in
his Wars against the French King: and they have these reasons of likelihood,
that upon the instant publishing the said Book, the Pope did not only favor
the Kings enterprise, but also gave him many other witnesses of thanks, and
among many this above all, that (to his other titles of honor) he added this
above all, that in remembrance of the Kings princely care for the State of the
Catholic Religion, he and his Successors for ever should be styled Defendors
of the most Catholic Faith.

Fourthly, The greatness of the Pope at those times.
And herein appeared the greatness of the Pope at that time, that the greatest
Princes of Christendom, thought themselves highly rewarded, for their greatest
trauells, if the Pope should but give them, the allowance of his favor, or
demonstrate himself in any particular kindness (how small soever.) And this
was a matter very considerable, in that pollitique Religion, to gain such
opinion of holiness as made him reverenced of the greatest Potentates. The Popes
policy.
For by this he often made exchange, with great advantage, giving them words
for things, and receiving the services of men, for thanks, indulgences, and
pardons, which nothing benefited the Receivers, The Popes secret purpose in
stiling the K. Defendour of the Faith.
but much enlarged his own private ends. Such reward had King Henery for
writing against Luther, in which may be understood the Popes secret practice,
for in giving this honor to King Henry to be styled Defendor of the Faith, he
thereby had a farther end then to honor the King, which was to bind him to
his perpetual service, which he thought he could not better do then by this
obligation of honor, which indeed is the greatest that can be to a princely
mind. The Pope knows that the King by accepting of this style Defendor of
the Faith, was bound in the terms of honor to defend that whereof he had
taken the protection, and so by consequence was he bound to all the Popes
occasions; he being in the common opinion of the world the universal head of
that faith, which the Kings Title did bind him to defend. And this (howsoever
the success did not answer to the purpose,) yet was it great policy in the
Pope, especially considering the danger of the times, and that many eyes began
with dislike to pry into the deformities of the Church.

Fifthly But who can contriue against God with success, for the Pope in this
case shot his evil arrow against heaven, which in a perpendiculer line, fell
upon his own pate. God retorting the evil against him that sent it, making him
fast in his own snare and to fall in that pit which he had dug for another.
This is Gods doing and it is wonderful in our eyes. The Popes purpose
disappointed by providence.
For this K. whom the Pope had thought to have made the instrument of his
greatness, did God make the instrument of his fall* the Pope gave him the name
of Defendor; But God made the King to defend the Faith against the Pope the
enemy of Faith. For policy cannot prevent piety; and God confounds the
wisdom of men, and can make their subtle practices many times hitt that
mark they never aimed at; as in this particular, the Pope making particular
choice of the King for his Champion, whom God (the contrary party) would employ
for the Popes destruction, giving him invincible spirit, to be the first
Christian K* that durst put to his Princely hand to Ruin the walls of Babylon.

Sixthly, And if the Kings nature, and the circumstance of time were rightly
considered, God moves the King against his natural disposition.
it will appear so admirable as God only could work that alteration in the
Kings mind, the King himself being so stiff and resolute, as none of his
predecessors (I think) in this did equal him; especially in the term of
honor and reputation: and then considering the King had written and published
his protestation to defend the Supremacy of the Pope, and the Religion then
professed: it may seem the greatest obligation that could be to bind his
princely Nature, to continue his defense of that which before he had defended,
especially in a matter of that consequence, the rather having declared himself
to the witness of all men.

Seventhly, Again, if we consider that Reply of Luthers to the Kings Book,
Luthers bitter writing.
so full of heat and bitterness, as that every page (almost) has
prouocations, rather to obdurate the Kings heart, and to incense him to a more
resolute obstinacy, then any ways to quallifie or reform him: Luther
scoffingly answering the Kings arguments, with words of such disgrace, as ill
fitted the gravity of Luther to give, or the Majesty of so great a Prince (with
any patience) to endure. Luthers misconceiuing.
And doubtless this in Luther was a great oversight and a misconceiuing, to
think to help his cause by traducing the Kings person; For the resolutions of
great men are not moved by power, but by the persuasions of inferiors. And
Luther in writing this book against King Henery, Luthers zeal without
discretion.
does rather express his zeal then his discretion: For in all Controuerfies,
the heat of words (especially in the grauer) is a want of that moderation, and
Judgment, which only gives seemelinesse, and good form to all our actions:
yet notwithstanding all these back occasions, which (in man's Judgment) might
seem to hinder, this gracious work, did God effect it, and that by his
instrument, King Henery, whom both the Pope and Luther, had rather fitted for
the contrary.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
God does often interrupt and destroy the violence of wicked men, and their
practice, by a contemptible, and unthought of means: for so was Luther
thought, in respect of the great and general authority, which then Antichrist
had: the reason is this, that where God does place his omnipotent Spirit, that
strength is then invincible, but able to convince all resistance. For God
(only) can contract in the person of one man, Valor and victory to order and
reform the world.

Secondly, Politic.
The Politic practice here is observed in the Pope, who with demonstrations
of Love without charge, could bind the service of Princes and great States
unto him. For as it is most needful that the bodies of great Authorities
should have strong and able supporters. So it is necessary in the wisdom of
state, to gain and continue that correspondencie, and indifferency, which may
support our estimation. In which care this politic form is very necessary,
that in disposing our gifts of favor we give least gifts to greatest men, but
with most large circumstance: because that where there is any neerenesse of
equality of state, it is not possible to make gifts valuable, but with
Ceremonies.

Thirdly, In Luther may be noted a marvelous defect of policy, to labor a
spiritual cause with such untempered heat. For if Luthers spirit had had
moderation, and that pollitique wisdom which was but necessary in his
Religion and high attempts, he would have made a difference between a
principal and a second, the Pope and the King, and not have prosecuted against
them both with like severity. For Luther could not be ignorant, that the only
means to finish the reformation he intended, was by the favor and assistance
of Christian Princes, which care in the cause and person of King Henry, Luther
did not observe.

Fourthly, Moral.
It is a precept worthy of general practice, that in all societies, men should
be Communicable, and translate their offices of love from one to another. For
gifts and retributions, howsoever they are less worthy then our affections,
yet are they our best witnesses, and do the better, and more often remember
us: because they are more open, and evident to sense.

Fifthly, Again, moderation of spirit which is our indifferent esteeming of
our selves with others, does comprehend the very excellence of all humanity,
being the most noble degree in our nature, and the very next to the dignity of
Grace. Neither is there any moral virtue, which does more commend men to
general estimation, because it gives desert to every man that has it, and
does often give (from it self) dignities to such as want them.

CHAP. III.
King Henry's first Act of Defense for the Catholic Faith.
THE first Act of the Kings Defense was in retyring himself from the Popes
service for at that time, The first Act of the Kings Defense.
were all Christian Princes his servants. This Act of the kings was that which
many Emperors and great Potentates desired might be done, yet never durst
attempt to do, or succesfully attempted it. Frederick Barbarossa.
Such as was the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, who notwithstanding his
greatness both of power and spirit, yet failed he in his attempt, though he
never pursued any thing with greater stomach. Henry the Second.
Also King Henry the Second of England, who failing in the fortunes of this
business, yielded himself (though valiant and princely) to such base
conditions of penance, as well may declare the greatness of the Pope that
imposed them: but with this King Henry the Eight it may seem, that God
himself did conspire, to make the work prosperous, and the king for being
Gods instrument perpetually famous.

Secondly, The first occasion of difference between King Henry and the Pope.
The first occasion of difference between King Henry and the Pope, was the
proceedings in the divorce of Queen Katherine the kings first wife, who before
had been wife to Prince Arthur his Brother, wherein the Pope used such small
regard to quiet the trouble of the kings Conscience, as thereby the king and
the State were very much offended, and then such as did not favor the faction
of the Pope, (for so I may call it) took the advantage of time, and grew bold
to lay open to the king the deformities of the present time, and the glory he
might purchase in restoring Religion to that purity, which now (in that holy
profession) was altogether defaced.

Thirdly, Those occasions so move the kings offense, that he sommons his High
Court of Parlyament at Westminster, laying before them his grief, which was
the overmuch power the Pope had in his kingdom, and the small respect that he
and his State had from the Pope: whereupon a Statute past by consent of the
three estates, whereby the king was made supreme Head over the Church of
England, The King first made supreme Head.
as well in ecclesiastical as temporal matters, cutting off al manner of Papal
authority from the crown of England. Anno regni. 26.
And herein may appear the greatness of the king, An Argument of the Kings
greatness.
and the reverence of his Subjects, who framed themselves to the pleasure of
the king, The benefit of Majesty.
in a matter of much difficulty and beyond all expectation. And this was the
benefit of Majesty, which begot in them such duty and awful regard, which to a
remiss and familiar Prince had not been granted

Fourthly, This grant of the kings Supremacy was the first mortal wound the
Church of Rome received, loosing at that time the best Crown she had in
keeping, whereby a president was given to all other Christian Princes, to free
themselves from the Captivity of that Babylon, with whose Fornications the
whole Earth was made drunk. And this Act of the State of England was so well
approved in the Judgment of Christendom, as that many the best parts thereof,
(in immitation of King Henry,) have cast from them the bond of Papal
authority; yea, doubtless so desired it is of all States, as (might it be
done with security) their is no Prince or State, either Religious or politic,
but does so envy the greatness of foreign Supremacy, as gladly they would
be cleared thereof, finding many times to the great detriment of state, the
injury of this power, in interdictions and Papal curses, as if we read the
divisions of Italy we may in them most clearly judge, The inconvenience of
Papal authority.
the inconvenience of the Popes universal power, the abuse whereof is so
common in those states, as that they are never obeyed, but when there wants
temporal power to withstand them. And therefore did King Henry nobly perform
his kingly Office, and well defend the Catholic Faith, in depriving the Pope
of that power, wherewith the Christian Faith was offended,

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
God does what he list, by what means he list, so does he produce his
miracles by causes naturally unfitting, and so this miraculous alteration in
the state of Christendom, was effected by the king his instrument, who both in
Nature and opinion, was thought unlike for such Religious effects, being rather
armed both by the Pope and Luther to oppose the enterprise. So does God snare
the engine maker; For the Wisdom of this World is but folly with God.

Secondly, Pollitique.
To observe a just proportion of state is good in all degrees, but in a
Sovereign necessary, yet he that exceeds his state, does impair his state,
and by taking more then his own, he does loose his own.

CHAP. IV.
Of what importance this Act for the Kings Supremacy was to the state of
England in respect of Piety and Policy.
FIRST, If we consider the trauells of men on earth, and the continual passage
of all their actions, we shall find that every particular man of Spirit, or
that has but more then common understanding directs himself and his whole
travel to one of these two ends; Goodness and greatness the two ends whereto
all men intend.
either to be Good, or to be Great, and according to his choice of these, he
does frame the practice of his life, as if to goodness then is his care good,
and he does exercise those good means, that may lead him to his good end.
For there is no way to attain good end, but by good means. But he that aymeth
at greatness, the care of his life is much different, for to him there is no
direct way of lawfulness or honesty to run in, for he breaks these
limits, and trauells in every by passage how vnlawfullsoeuer: and therefore
they of this nature allow, only of this one principal, that whatsoever may
direct them to their end, be it sin, or shame they give it allowance. Such
was the resolution of that Tyrant, Richard the Third of England.
who making Empire his desired end, cared not to travel thither in the steps
of his nearest blood, so deep as (perhaps) to damn himself. And like unto
him are all such whose desires lead them to unlawful ends, who resolving to
obtain their desires, resolve likewise upon the practice of all ungodliness.

Secondly, And this practice of evil men is in common construction called
Policy, whereby the name of Policy does receive much wrong by their gross
and senseless understanding it, for Policy may be either good or bad
according to the end whereto (...) out of these considerations. First, the
liberty that was recovered in the person of the Prince, he resuming that
absolute authority to himself, which before was given to a stranger his enemy,
whereby the King did add to his own greatness, and diminish the power of him
that loved him not. And how important this is to the prosperity of a State, let
the Judgment of any sense judge it. Again, there is no State or Kingdom,
under the awe of Popish Supremacy that can be said (truly) to be a free State,
or the King thereof an absolute Prince, because that Kingdom is subiugate, and
that King Subordinate to the power of another; The government Monarchiall the
best.
whereby the government Monarchiall (which of all others is most excellent)
cannot be said to be in that State, where the authority of the Prince is
divided, or rather translated into the person of another, as in the case of
Popish Supremacy is most evident.

Sixthly, Again, to inherit by succession of blood, (which is of very special
consideration) is by this foreign Supremacy much endangered: because where
this power is granted An inconvenience of Popish Supremacy.
there is also given to the Pope the power to alter, and dispose of Kings and
Kingdoms at his pleasure, and to translate the inheritance of States according
as he shall please to favor or dis-fauour the true owners, whereof many times
has ensued much misery, and many calamities; So that I verily think there is
no part of Christendom, that has not had a woeful experience in this great
misery. That were the Prince or the cause never so Just, and holy, or the Pope
and his wicked life never so apparently evil, yet by this universal power,
he had power given him to alter the State, and to translate Succession at his
pleasure: pretending a Religious good, Pretend and intend.
but intending either the advancement of his base kindred, or else some other
envious and evil end. And how dangerous this may be to a Kingdom let any
Judgment determine. Lastly, this inconvenience does follow of Popish
Supremacy, The practice of many Treas^ns.
the practice of so many Treasons, wherewith the name of Christendom is much
spotted; For he that is resolved (...) the sufficiency of other men's writings
to this purpose: This only Argument, that whereas by the testimony of holy
Scripture we are taught to know that man of sin, whom the spirit of God
calls Antichrist by this special sensible sign of pride, Pride the most
sensible sign of Antichrist.
in that he being but man, shall presume to exalt himself above all that is
called God. Now that Kings and Princes of the Earth, are (by the sentence of
Scripture) called Gods, it is most evident, in that place where he says, I
have said ye are Gods: that is, Psalm.
nearest to my self in your dignity of place, representing my power and my
Majesty, in the highest degree upon Earth. Then whosoever shall exalt himself
above these degrees of Majesty, must of necessity be he whom the Spirit of God
calls that man of sin that Antichrist, because his sin is like the sin
of the Devils in the Creation; The sin of the Devils in the Creation Nymrods
sin Supremacy.
for as they did, so does he contend for the highest Supremacy: and
(Nymrod-like) he builds himself aloft above the reach of Earth, reaching his
ambition, beyond the limits of mortality, even above all that is called God.

Eighthly, And therefore great reason had the King, and so have all the Kings
of the Earth, to cast off all friendly intertainement with him, that would
exalt himself above all flesh, nay, above all that is called God: and I am
verily persuaded, that this one respect of pride is that mark whereby she is
best known to be that Babylon, with whose Fornications the whole Earth has
been poisoned, yet in these latter times has she got more ugly visors to
mask in Blood and Treason; two such deformities, as would be very apparent in
the face of Religion. And God no doubt has set these marks in her forehead
(as he marked Cain) that all his beloved in the world, might know her at the
first blush, and avoid the filth of her Fornications. For where those evils
are; God is not in the honor of his service, but in his Justice and angry
Majesty.

CHAP. V.
Of the suppressing of Abbeyes and Religious Houses in England.
FIRST, the work of Gods providence is most worthy of consideration, leading
(by variable turnings) the passage of all transitory things to that end,
whereto God has decreed them. In which work howsoever, God never alters his
purpose.
God does never change the purpose of his will, yet the events (many times)
seem very admirable to our v^derstandings by reason of their change and
varieties. Vicessitudo rerum.
For all things in this world are in continual motion, being moved as shall
please the hand of providence, every thing being like the moving Sea, sometimes
flowing, sometimes in their ebb again, sometimes up, sometimes down,
according as shall please that power that moves them. And from this moving
cause is derived that variety in the state of Earth which men (falsely) call
Fortune, The variety of Fortunes.
the often change whereof to a Christian Judgment is not strange, because he
considers the power that God has over all his creatures, and how inclinable
they be to alteration.

Secondly, And for particular instances: Though Religion before these times had
endured an evil change, changing the truth for many superstitious Ceremonies,
yet so venerable was the name of Religion to the people of those times, as
(notwithstanding their misconceiuing the truth thereof) they gave such large
demonstrations of love and zeal to that profession, and the Professors as no
people at any time did ever exceed them; The regard that was given to the Pop:
Church.
enriching the state of Religion, both with honorable regard, and with very
ample possessions. Insomuch as the Church then might rather seem a Triumphant,
then a Church Militant; So high was it exalted in the degrees of worldly
prosperity: yet for all this flourish, God comes with his rod of correction,
and (finding evil in the greatness thereof) he alters their present
Condition, that as they had forsaken the truth of his service, So he would
bereave them their earthly honor, wherewith the true name of their false
Religion was gorgeously decked.

Thirdly, The first cause of alteration of Religion.
The first cause then of this alteration was God himself, who, when he sees
the vessel of men's iniquity full, he fills his violl with wrath, to reform
and correct, what evil men had before deformed, and being most Jealous of his
honor, God most jealous of his honor.
he comes with more then common corrections, to reform the truth of his
service. For so did God at this time, his angry hand reaching destruction,
beyond the lives of those evil men, even to their lands, houses and
possessions, making King Henry utterly extirpe these abused Monasteries, as the
Israelites did the Cananites, for their monstrous and heathenish sins. And
therefore no doubt did God make particular choice of King Henry for his
instrument, fitting him with extraordinary spirit, The King well fitted for
this business.
that he might the better manage this great business, whereto God had
ordained him, and wherein God did wonderfully assist him.

Fourthly, What might move the K. in respect of himself.
But what might move the King in respect of himself, many men many ways
conjecture. Some, by the spoil of these houses that he might enrich himself,
and relieve the occasions of his Wars, which then did much distress him* But
howsoever, Master Fox in the Act and Mon^.
this has credit with him that writes this Story at large, yet in that
opinion I do not believe him. For it is not likely that any Christian Prince
in the world, would for any respect of spoil, destroy the estates of so many
(at that time reputed) Religious and Godly men. Others think the King did this
out of Stomach, the Pope being then in full opposition with the King, for
taking Supremacy from him in the Church of England, that had but lately given
to him and his Successors for ever the title of Defendor of the Faith; the King
imagining he could not secure to his posterity, the continuance of his
Supremacy, where his enemy (the Pope) was so strong both by the number and by
the worth of these Religious houses: The Popes strength.
and therefore it is thought the King did suppress them in Policy, making
that his own strength which he found to strength his enemy. And this howsoever
has a likelihood, being near the Kings disposition, yet I verily think the
King would not for any pollitique regard, have brought a general destruction
upon that State which then was held Religious. The cause moving the King to the
subersion of the Abbeye^*
But rather understanding by his Visitors the great disorder and ungodliness
of men and women (in those places) professing Religion, did (in the care of
conscience) scatter their assemblies, ruin their houses, and justly seize that
to his use which they with so much impiety had abused.

Fifthly, The outrruding of Friars, etc.
Upon this consideration, did the King outtrude the Rabble of Monks, Nuns,
and Friars, and seize their possessions, finding that their large allowance of
wealth and easy life, was cause of their wanton and wicked trade of living,
and that prayer, and the exercise of true Devotion (whereto they were dedicate,
was not that whereunto they employed the large benevolence of their
Benefactors. They using (only) the forms of some superstitious prayers, and a
formality in their attire, wherein they observed a precise order, being in the
maine carriage of their lives of all people most disorderly. The suppressing of
Abbeyes good to the Church and Commonwealth
To reform which was not only necessary for the truth of holy Religion, but
very convenient for the better government of the Commonwealth, the State
receiving great detriment by allowing so largely to those lazy and
unprofitable members, and the Church great scandalls, by their ungodly and
heathenish lives. To reform this then, was an Act in the King very gracious,
tending directly for the good of both states, whereby he gave proof, that God,
and not the Pope, made special choice of him and his Successors, to defend the
most True, Ancient, and Apostolic Faith.

Sixthly, A doubt.
Yet here it may be doubted, whether the King did better in the utter
extirpation of these men, their order, and houses, or if he had reformed only
the abuse, and left their places and possessions to others of better life, and
professing the truth of holy Religion, whereby the evil might have been taken
away only, leaving their maintenance to be employed in holy and Religious
uses, especially considering that the want in the Protestants Religion is the
want of maintenance, whereby many well deserving Scholars live in the penury
of life vnsupported, which by this means might abundantly have been supplied.

Seventhly, Answer 1.
To this doubt many in their several opinions diversely answer, some that the
standing still of their houses in the former condition of a corporation was
dangerous, least upon every alteration of the Prince, the dispossessed might
again reenter, whereby the latter condition, might prove worse then the
former. And this reason were good, if there might not have been assurance to
have secured them, from all danger of repossessing, (the which no doubt) might
have been done, if the providence of the State had regarded it.

Eighthly, Others think the King, 2.
too severe in this his manner of correction, supposing it had been enough for
him to correct but not to destroy, to reform the abuse, not utterly to have
subverted both the abusers and the places abused: and that his converting their
wealth to his own private benefit, was an argument that he did this; not in
zeal to reform their abuses, but rather to interest himself into that
abundance of wealth they then possessed; following herein the example of
Cardinal Wolsey, Cardinal Wolsey, an evil president.
who in the year 1525: obtained license to suppress certain Religious
houses, to furnish him toward the building of his two Colleges at Oxford and
Ipswich, the which Colleges being founded upon this false ground, never had
the good fortune to be finished but perished in their Birth.

Ninthly, And I verily believe, that howsoever the King had a further respect
then to inherit their wealth, yet was there both that and many other by
occasions, strong inducements to move him to this severity in punishing. And
herein the King may be (...) was and is in the person of the Pope, an ambitious
desire of universality of Empire, with universal neglect and hatred.

Thirdly, Ungodly practice has not always evil success, if we respect the
present but if we respect events further of, they are ever evil and certain
in their destruction.

Fourthly, Pollitique.
to dissemble our intents, with fair pretense is a principle in policy,
which I commend not, but remember only. For though no man be bound at all
times and in every cause to declare himself in direct evidence; yet does it
much advance the honor of a Prince to be square in all, without difference or
disproportion.

Fifthly, In a general cause, it is necessary to be generally respective, and
not to confer that upon one, which (with satisfaction) may be given to many.
Therefore was it good Policy in the King to distribute the possessions of the
Abbeyes he suppressed, to many of principal authority in the State: For it is
wisdom to satisfy their offense that have authority, rather then such as
want it.

Sixthly, Moral.
It was the wisdom of the best moral Philosophers not to place felicity in
Fortune, because of uncertainties, for he is only happy, that cannot be
miserable.

CHAP. VI.
Of King Henry's remiss and cold proceeding in the work of reformation.
FIRST, there is nothing in the Earth more certain then the uncertainty of al
earthly things. For Man (one of the best of Gods Creatures, in respect of the
excellency of his reasonable soul) does so often times change the condition
of his life, as if he were not of that excellency, nor had not that power of
Judgment and understanding which he has. And this is Gods work in the depth
of his wisdom, to whom only all things are certain, and with whom there is
no shadow of change. God reserving to himself the secrets of those things
whereof his will is we shall be ignorant, imparting only so much to us his
creatures, as may serve for the work of his service, he himself still guiding
us by his hand of providence, to those ends, whereto his decree has ordained
us. And by this does God give us a demonstration of his power, and our
weakness, of his power in being most certain in all those things, which to
us are casual* and of our weakness, because we are like the air, we breath
carried whithersoeuer it shall please the wind to move us.

Secondly, The truth of this may appear (in the Kings particular) who
notwithstanding the greatness of his spirit, and the honorable attempt he had
made in the cause of Religion, whereby he had run himself so far in the
trauells of that business, as that he could not well retire, without
dishonorable shame, the expectation of Christendom seeming to depend much upon
the Kings continuance in that course: yet even then did the King surcease from
that Religious work, which with so much honorable success he had begun. Where
it may seem strange, that a Prince of his greatness, having the advice of an
honorable and wise council, The weakness of the Kings resolution.
should lay upon his name the imputation of weakness, not to go forward with
that whereto his honor was so much engaged.

Thirdly, But if we consider the time, and the difference of opinions in those
great men, The King ruled by persuasion and not by Judgment.
to whom the King did show himself most gracious, it will then appear, the
business went forward, or not, according to the affection of the Kings
Favorites.

Fourthly, As in the time of Cardinal Wolsey, Cardinal Wolsey.
a man so great in the favor of his Prince, as that our English Chronicles
cannot match him, who in the time of his prosperity, did so possess the King,
as that the King may be said to sail with no wind but the Cardinals, the
king being but the body to his soul, he moving it according to the pleasure of
his own appetite, and therefore at this time was the king all Cardinal,
putting himself in Print to defend the Supremacy of Popes. But this time did
end with the Cardinals fortunes, who being puffed up and high swollen with the
spirit of ambition, run himself into strange contempts, against the Majesty
of his Prince: who finding him so Cardinallike in pride, and vain glory stripped
him of those honors which before he so lauishly had given him, translating his
favor upon Thomas Cranmer Thomas Cranmer.
Archbishop of Canterbury, whom the king finding Religious, honest, and
learned, gave his opinion good authority.

Fifthly, And at this time the Protestants Religion, began to have the favor
of the Kings protection: yet by reason of the peaceable Nature of this Man, D.
Cranmer.
and because of many other important considerations of inconvenience; the cause
of Religion went not with that prosperity forward, as otherwise it might. For
howsoever we may justly conceive of this learned man, that he wanted neither
spirit nor power, to travel in the most important affairs of State, the which
he has well declared by his resolute and learned proceedings, in the Kings
divorce: yet considering in what terms the State then stood, and the
particular condition of his State, it will appear that a necessary providence
of his own security, did enforce him to a violent patience, and to silence and
suppress his zealous spirit, which otherwise would have ventured upon much
more hazard.

Sixthly, For at this time Cranmer contrary to the laws then enforce, was
married, and did live with his wife to the great hazard of his life: and this
was one respect why he suffered so much the practice of his enemies, keeping
good correspondence, and indifferent favor, least his Marriage should be called
in question, whereby both his state and life had been exposed, into a danger
most eminent.

Seventhly, And if any man object that these regards of Cranmer proceeded from
his fear of temporal loss, and that he fainted in the maine execution of his
Christian Office. I answer, that no fear but a Christian providence was the
cause of this wariness; For he might well know, that if he proceeded in the
difference of Religion by violent and forcible means; he should then have had
the whole power of the contrary faction bent against him: and being (by reason
of his marriage) within the danger of law, it could not be avoided but the
severity of the law should have proceeded against him.

Eighthly, Yet notwithstanding when the necessary care of Religion did require
him, there was no respect could bind him from his earnest endeavors, as may
well appear, by this most resolute opposing against the Statute of the six
Articles. So that Cranmer (in true estimation) has well deserved, and worthily
acquitted himself of all imputation; yet by reason of these occasions, he
could not do that, which the opportunity of the Kings favor did offer him.

Ninthly, Upon this advantage Stephen Gardener Stephen Gardener.
builds his strength, who by observance, and cunning insinuation, shifting
himself into the Kings favor, got great authority in the State, and according
to the nature of his working spirit, troubles the waters of peace of fish for
Romish Religion, whereto in his heart he was much inclined. And this man,
Gardener a great Politician.
(not like Cranmer but Matchiuellike) grounded in the secrets of Policy,
seems what he is not, and is content to proportion himself to the fashions of
the time, with purpose to alter that fashion. And this howsoever it were a
thing very dishonest especially in the office of a Bishop, yet was it a very
pollitique Regard, and that miste whereby he wrought all his enchantments, for
by his observance he continued in the Kings favor, and by that favor, he
erected the whole frame of his Policies.

Tenthly, The six Articles.
And from this cause had the six Articles beginning. Articles so bloody, as
the letters in them, cannot number the blood which was shed in England for
them, whereby may appear the greatness of Stephen Gardiners wit, that could
make the King sail with a contrary wind, and destroy that cause which before
he had protected: and this was, notwithstanding Cranmer his opposite had then
great favor with the king, and the highest authority and place in the kingdom.

Eleuenthly, Another of the Kings Favorites in those times of difference, was
Sir Thomas More then Lord Chancellor of England. Sir Thomas Moore.
A gentleman (in respect of his natural ornaments) worthy of much honor, for
besides the beauty of his learning, which in great personages is very
deserving; he had so good a moderation and temper in all his actions, The
excellent ornaments in Nature in Sir Thomas Moore.
as no adversity could deiect him, neither any prosperity make him less in the
use of regard, and civil humanity. And notwithstanding he was diverse from me
in that profession which I hold for truth, yet because I write the truth of
History, it were very unworthy in me to obscure, the deseruings of any man,
The error of such as write History.
into which error many others, and especially such as have recorded the passage
of those times, have unadvisedly fallen, traducing the persons of men for their
opinions sake, and making them altogether evil, that in many commendable
things were excellent. And because that all good things are from God, (who
gives them according to the pleasure of his will) it were therefore much
injury to obscure the goodness of God, wheresoever it shall please him to
place it, and this I write in favor of truth, Truth the life of all History.
which may be well said to be the life, and true moving soul of all History.

Twelfthly, This Sir Thomas Moore howsoever he was an enemy to the truth of the
Gospel, Moore an euemie to the Protestant Religion.
yet if we compare him with Stephen Gardener, the comparison will make Sir
Thomas Moore less evil, the other being so monstrous in his wicked practices;
for the one made conscience to equivocate and dissemble himself, of which the
other made no reckoning. Sir Thomas utterly refusing the oath of Supremacy,
The unequal comparison between Moore and Gardener.
because in conscience he thought he might not take it; Gardener had the like
witness of his conscience yet did take it, and therefore Stephen by
dissembling saved his life, which the other (by plain expressing himself
lost. So that both these, though they conspire one end, yet in themselves are
they very diverse, the one with a manly resolution, and with the witness of his
blood professed himself and his resolution, the other by swearing and for
swearing to banne and disclaim that, which (in his purpose) was the mark
whereto he shot himself and his evil policies: the one ending all
opposition in his own voluntary death: the other by subtilty continuing his
evil life, that life being the death of many the dear Children of God.

13. Another highly in the Kings favor, and most worthy of high favor, was
the Lord Cromwell, Lord Cromwell.
a man so resolute in the work he had begun, as never any did pursue a holy
business with better Spirit, who notwithstanding the greatness of his
enemies, who after the fashion of all Courts, envy such most, unto whom the
Prince is most gracious, and then most, when the degrees of honor are derived
upon any of mean beginning: In moderation.
yet so could this man rule the prosperity of his fortunes, as neither in
general opinion, was he thought proudly to delight them, nor yet not to
understand what those honors were, which the Kings favor had given him. So
advised was he in the passage of his honorable life, as that use (which sees
the least advantage) could never find just occasion (though occasions were
sought) to scandalize his reputation, in the general opinion of good men. And
howsoever God did suffer the evil of his enemies to prevail over his life,
yet never to the death of his honorable remembrance, to whose Godly care, all
the lovers of Religion in Christendom are beholding, England beholding to the
labors of the Lord Cromwell.
especially the English Nation, he being a principal instrument, whereby the
King was moved to reform Religion.

14. In this man's time the Religious then living had great hope of prosperity
in their holy cause, In this time Religion did proceed well.
as well in respect of his diligence to that end directed, as also of the Kings
inclinable nature, which did seem to consent with the honorable desires of
the Lord Cromwell, intertaining him in all favorable regard, giving him names,
and places of high honor, whereby his godly cares went the better forward
having the strength of the Kings authority, which he applied to no other end,
but that God might receive honor, in restoring the truth of his service, and
that the king might not receive dishonor in aba^doning the protection of
faith, whereof God by the sentence of his enemy had made him defe^dor. His
constancy in one course.
And this good cause, did this good man prosecute, with the best strength of
his indeauor, not regarding his life more then God that gave it, nor the
honors of his life, more then the honors of his king, from whose bou^ty his
honors were derived.

15. Thus we see the diversity in the king, whereby he grew remiss in
following this holy care, Diversity of opinions cause of the Kings inconstancy.
which was because of the diversity of opinions in those men, whom the king
most trusted in the state, he suffering himself to be driven against the
current of his own streams, by the violence of other men's persuasions.

16. And here is offered a large consideration of the Kings Nature, who
notwithstanding his great spirit, and his many other honorable deseruings, he
had this infirmity. That he would be induced to do those things, The Kings
infirmity.
which were much disagreeing in themselves, and to go forward and backward in
one course, and suffer himself to be moved, whether the violence of other men's
affections would carry him, sometime for, sometimes against Religion: and by
this he gave an open demonstration of the weakness of his nature For there is
no alteration in a State that is not dangerous, Every alteration in a state is
dangerous.
and then is the danger most, when the great ones (great in authority and
near in the favor of the Prince) divide themselves. For difference, if it be
not compounded by the awful Majesty of the Prince, it will grow to faction,
and by consequence to open breach. And though the Prince so govern, that they
dare not come to open difference, yet will they work by conspiracy, and
secret practice the confusion of each other. For where faction is, there can be
no assurance, and men will seek to assure themselves though it be by the fall of
others; And this evil is best prevented by the providence of the Prince; who
when he sees deformity in the body of the State, and that of necessity there
must be alteration, to make such choice of instruments, as best love the cure,
least otherwise in stead of physic they administer poison, and so not cure,
but destroy the body diseased.

17. And this was the Kings error The Kings error.
(who though his purpose to reform was good, yet the course he took was not
good, making ill choice of particulers to whose trust he commended that
business, some of them being Protestants, some Papists; so that the King may
be said to build with one hand, and to cast down with another, to reform
Religion and to deforme it again. And therefore this advice I dare give the
best Prince in the world. Let those you love best, and trust most, be one in
themselves and one with their Sovereign, and work not upon the foundation
Truth by contrary means, for he that so builds, builds Babel, that is,
confusion, and not the walls of Jerusalem.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
to intertaine and begin a Religious work, is both an honorable and a holy
attempt, but to finish it is more, because it is possible, that unworthy men
may undertake and retire: But Piety, is not Piety, if not constant. For no
virtue is rewarded but perseverance.

Secondly, To faint in the prosecution of a Religious cause, is of all
cowherdice the most shameful and recreant, because in all such quarrels. God
is our General, and does arm his soldiers in complete security.

Thirdly, Pollitique.
A Prince that has many about his person, cannot but must have much difference
in their quallities: his pollitique part is to observe, and judge the
difference, and to distinguish them to such service in the State, as may make
them emulous to exceed, and not envious to extirpe the prosperities of one
another.

Fourthly, It has been thought good Policy, that in a Senate or Counsel of
State, it were good to have men of opposite Judgment, because it does provoke
both factions, from exact declaration of their best endeavors. This, in a
state merely pollitique may have pretense, but in a Religious State it has
none; because it is impossible to go to one God, in one truth, by contrary
steps.

Fifthly, It were dishonorable and dangerous for a Prince, that has his state
free, and in quiet to dissemble or to divide himself to contrarieties, because
he that does not declare himself certain to one, does remain suspected of
all, and does give a general hope to general varieties.

Sixthly, Moral.
The error and vice is greater in retyring from virtuous proceedings, then the
virtue is to undertake them. For we are tempted by all reason to undertake
them, but by none to leave them.

Seventhly, He that composeth himself of contrarieties, does wear a
monstrous Shape; for humanity and civil Society is bound to the Rules of
virtue, as Piety and Religion to the Rules of GOD.

CHAP. VII.
Of the six Articles, and the evil that thereof insued.
FIRST, the original cause of this evil was pretended The cause pretended of
the six Articles.
to be a remedy, against the many Sects of Religion, which then began to
multiply, when Religion was in restoring; the State whereof being unsettled,
gave occasion that many busy Spirits, according to their several Judgments,
would diversely determine, what was the true form of Gods Service, and what was
not, whereof it came to pass, that many idle and gross opinions, The cause of
many gross and senseless opinions.
had many that would stiffly adheare to this or that, according as their blind
judgments did direct them. For it has ever been and ever will be, the nature
of the worst understanding people, to desire innovation, and ever to affect
that most, which has most singularity, The nature of the Vulgar
ever opposing the judgment of the learned, and the power of lawful
authority; and this is a natural Antipathy between the base and the Noble,
the foolish and the wise, the bad and the better sort of people.

Secondly, To cure An evil cure
this disease in the State of England, was very needful, but the care they
applied was both unlawful, and very prejudicial, laying such salve to the
soar, as made the wound wider, and the grief much more sensible. For if we
remember the whole story of King Henry's Life, there is not any other Act that
ever passed the consent of a Parliament, so dishonorable to the King, and of
like offense to the Catholic Faith, as was this of the six Articles, Six
Articles.
especially then when the King had set his Princely hand to the work of
reformation; whereby he did (in a manner) disclaiming his former proceedings,
pulling down the holy frame, which with so much labor he had formerly
erected.

Thirdly, Yet so strong is the power of persuasion, The power of persuasion.
especially in them we trust, as that oftentimes we suffer our selves to be
led to those ends, that greatly disadvantage us. And this is well seen in this
Act of the Kings, which in truth did altogether tend to the pleasure of evil
men about him, and not to his honor, nor the good of his Kingdoms; he being
thus persuaded by Stephen Gardener pretending thereby a provident good, but
intending fire, blood, and persecution to the cause of Religion, and to the
holy Professors thereof.

Fourthly, For these Articles (whereto the King did inioyne his Subjects to
confirm them) were all of them contrary to the Catholic Faith of the
Protestants Religion, being no better then the Ladders whereby the Bishops of
Rome, have ascended the stepps of reputation, and worldly greatness; some of
them being for his gain, others for his regard, all of them the limbs of
Policy, and none of them proportionable to the rule of the Catholic
Religion. And therefore was Stephen Gardener much deceived, when he thought to
square out Truth, by false Rules; making these Articles The six Articles what
they were.
to judge who was in the Catholic Faith, yet these themselves not Catholic,
but rather worldly inventions and tricks of Policy.



Primitive Church for many hundreds of years.

Saint Paul's opinion, the practice of the Church, and the judgment of holy
Scripture.



to get money only, and ridiculous to the judgment of all learning.

The sixth, of the necessity of auriculer Pollitique devise whereby the Pope
has understanding in all states, making his Priests intelligences, and binding
the consciences of Christians, to that slavery, from which God has made them
free. And these were those Articles, which were made the Tryers of Christian
Religion, whereto every man was to give his consent, or else to have the
judgment of law as fellons, being adjudged (by the sentence of the Church)
Heretics, cast out from the favor of God, and from the society of the
Catholic Church.

Fifthly, By this then may appear the evil that redounds to a state when the
Counsel of a Prince is divided, The evil that redounds to a State when the
Counsel are divided.
not conspiring one but diverse ends, especially then; when the Prince puts off
the power of his Majesty, and suffers himself to be led by the easy
persuasions of them near him by his favor. For if the King had had as much
the spirit of Divinity, as he had of Majesty, he would never have had both a
Cranmer, and a Garidiner, a Cromwell and a Moore, to order him in the affairs
of his Church and kingdom. But according as he had been resolved in Religion
he would only have made choice of such for his counsel, as had conspired one
and the same end with him their Sovereign, neither is it good in the wisdom
of state, The care of State.
to entertain them near us in love and place, whom we find to far from us
in the opinion of Truth, because there is no obligation, can make such men
assured, that work to bring us to a course against our purpose, giving us the
reins only so far as may lead us to their desired ends.

Sixthly, If this man and his evil practice had not prevailed more with the
King then the better persuasion of the Lord Cranmer and Cromwell, the
reformation Gardener the means to hinder the King from reformation.
of Religion had not been let in so hopeful a proceeding, neither had the
King and Parlyament passed any such Act so bloody, as was this of the six
Articles: whereby the King did blurre the honor of that reputation he had
formerly gotten, and retired himself in the pursuit of that enterprise, which
worthily had made him very famous. And this does prove the greatness of his
evil wit, Gardiners wit.
that made this alteration in the Kings Nature, and doubtless if God had given
this man grace to have loved honesty and truth; he had many other quallities
of good commendation, which would have been most flourishing in a man of holy
life, Gardiners gifts.
as his learning, wit, and spirit, whereby he was well fitted to travel in
State business, but misapplying those to ungodly ends, they were the defects
and blemishes in the person that so had them, and very pestilent to the State
where such men have authority.

Seventhly, And if we remember the time of these six Articles, we shall find
it plentiful in the Records of Holy Martyrs, that shed their blood in
opposition of that false doctrine, neither wanted they some likewise at that
time that suffered death in defense of the Popes Supremacy. The Religion at
this time in England, was neither the Protestant nor the Papist
So that the Religion then professed in England, was neither that of the
Protestant, nor this of the Papist, for at that time one and the same Law, did
denounce Judgment against the maintainers of both kinds, condemning the
Protestant for not subscribing to the six Articles, and the Papist for not
allowing the Kings Supremacy. And therefore good cause had he of admiration,
who seeing at this time in England three Protestants and three Papists to die
at one time, and in one place, and by the sentence of one Law, for their
conscience, Three Protestants and three Papists die at one time and in one
place for their Conscience.
admireth thus: Deus bone, quomodo hic viuunt gentes, hic suspenduntur
Papistae, illic comburuntur Antepapistae. Jesus says he) how do men live
here, Acts and Mon page 1375.
for there hangs the Papist, and here burns the Protestant for Religion.

Eighthly, And this came to pass because the Kings counsel, were divided into
parts, one half Protestants, the other Papists. The Kings Counsel, the one
half Protestants the other Papists.
The Protestants maintaining the Act for the kings Supremacy. The Papists that
of the six Articles, either party executing the judgment of the Law,
according as in their several opinions they were affected: whereof insued the
greatest calamity that could be in a Christian State, The misery of these
times
no man making conscience of Religion in either profession that escaped
punishment, only such were free and under protection, who either did
dissemble, or conform them to the fashion of the time. And this had not been
if the Prince and his Lords had conspired one end, for take unity away, you
take Truth with it, Toll vnum, toll verum.
and disagreements do most assuredly presage loss if not destruction.

Ninthly, But God who denied to his servant David the building of his Temple,
because his hands had been in blood, and did reserve the honor of that work
for Solomon his Son, 2 Samuel 7. 5.
a Prince of peace; So in this work of reformation. God would not King Henry
to effect it, because he had been in blood, and War, as was David Salomons
Father, but he reserues it for King Edward, God would not that K. Henry but
that King Edward should finish this reformation.
a true Solomon in the wisdom and justice of Solomon; And this Prince did God
ordain to restore the truth of his service. King Henry his Father (as did
Salomons Father) preparing only matter for this heavenly work, which his
Princely Son and not himself was to finish.

Tenthly, And howsoever King Henry did not go forward to this work with that
constancy, as the worthiness of the cause deserved: being let by the envy
of evil Ministers, yet has he well deserved honorable remembrance, having
done more than any other King Henry deserved well in doing more then was done
before him by any other.
Prince in Christendom before him ever did. And if we consider the kings
Nature (being most resolute and stiff in any business he undertook) there
never was any of his Predecessors better fitted to enter into such a business
of stomach as he was, neither can it be said truly of the king that he
failed in this enterprise, for he performed all he undertook, and would have
done more if either his own opinion, or the counsel of his friend, had further
directed him. And therefore has he done honorably, in doing more than before
was done, and in doing all he had undertaken, wherein he exceeded the
expectation The King exceeded expectation.
that all men had of him, it being a matter thought impossible, to prevail (in
this) against the Pope, at this time a power so absolute, as that both kings
and Emperors, had before failed in the like attempt.

Eleuenthly, And therefore I verily believe that God by his extraordinary power
was with King Henry, making him (in this) invincible and powerful to prevail
in just opposition, he looking down with his eyes of judgment, upon the pride
and open wickedness of Papacy, and hating that the order of his service
should be so corrupted, incites and assists the king, God assisted the King.
to reform what the iniquity of others had deformed, so gross and senseless
was the Liturgy of the Church in those black days of ignorance and blind
superstition, as would grieve any true Catholic Christian to consider, and
shame the better sort of Papists themselves to remember. And therefore it is
reason we acknowledge our dutiful thanks to God for altering this state of
misery, into a condition most happy and prosperous: The Kings desert.
and that we honor their remembrance, whom God did use as fit instruments to
this holy and most Religious work.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
It does not conclude, but it does argue against Piety and the Truth of
Religion, where there is severity in execution. For as God is both most just
and most merciful; So all Ecclesiastical prosecutions must have temper, and
indifferent mixture.

Secondly, Calamities, Death, and persecutions cannot effect that in the
Catholic Church, which they commonly effect in Pollitique States; to the one
they are a cause of decay and ruin; to the other of enlargement, for there is
difference in the form of Gods general providence, and of the particular care
of his Church.

Thirdly, To ordain or decree Articles, Canons, or Statutes to judge and bind
the conscience, it is necessary to be directed by spiritual instruction. For
though authority be in every Prince, yet judgment is not.

Fourthly, It is dangerous for a Prince to commit the forming of spiritual
constitutions, to disagreeing minds; for diversity of opinions (when it goes
by suffrage) does utterly destroy the sincerity of al co^clusions.

Fifthly, It has been and is the Pollitique Pollitique.
practice of the Roman State, to support the body of her greatness with most
terrible persecutions, the effect does judge the cause, and that policy is
found wicked, in the daily fall and lessening, of that antichristian Empire.

Sixthly, Tolleration of Religion, is (in some States) reputed a necessary
policy, but a Religious Prince that does love God more then State, can never
tolerate that policy, for God does hate all conniuencie, and he is lame in
truth, that halteth between two opinions.

Seventhly, It is necessary wisdom for a Prince, to make difference between
obedient and disobedient subjects, in the case of Religion, yet is there a
great difference to be had in punishing disobedient opinions, and disobedient
facts.

Eighthly, It does much respect a man's particular happiness, to avoid
singularity, and not easily to be drawn from the common opinion: because,
(naturally) we have a liking of our selves, and a dislike of others.

Ninthly, Moral.
To a civil happiness, is required to be able to bear all fortunes, and not
to contemn them. For it is not possible for Fortune with her infinite
occasions, to subduce the greatness of a virtuous mind.

Tenthly, A virtuous disposition cannot be suppressed by opposition, for there is
nothing can strength Patience but exercise.

CHAP. VIII.
Observations out of the general view of this latter time of King Henry's
Reign.
FIRST, the importance of this difference between the King of England and the
Pope, was such as that all Christendom, had earnest expectation what would be
the issue of so strange an opposition; it being thought very dangerous in the
King, The difficulty in the Kings attempt.
to oppose himself against a power so general, as the Pope then was, and in a
quarrel wherein no Prince in Christendom would assist him. And doubtless in
respect of State practice, the attempt was very hazerdous, and of little hope
to bring it to that honorable end, as (by the favor of God) he did wherein
the King did exceed the expectation of all men save himself, and erected the
Trophyes of his honor higher, then any one before him durst reach. And
therefore this dangerous (but honorable attempt, was not by the providence of
State, or by any earthly wisdom but by the power of heaven, This opposition
was ordered by the power of God.
God leading him thorough many dangers, and vnlikelihoods, to an end most holy
and honorable, whereby God would seem to make the work his own, and to
deny to Policy, and the vain contriuements of men, the honor thereof, who
(commonly) proud themselves to much in their own opinion of wisdom, The
wisdom of policy is foolishness with God.
which with God is found lighter, than vanity and folly it self.

Secondly, For the Kings particular, it may appear how much he did hazard the
peace, and fortunes of his kingdom, in giving advantage to them that loved him
not, The King gave advantage to his enemies.
to combine with his great enemy the Pope, who with all diligence sought to
make the King odious to all other Princes, sowing the seeds of envy in the
hearts of all men, against this practice of the Kings, cursing him from the
favor of God, The Popes Curses upon King Henry
and traducing him with all dishonor, his evil practice could devise. And this
in those times was great disadvantage; because the greater part of the Kings
Subjects thought they were in conscience bound, The power of the Popes censure.
to obey the Popes Censure, whereby the Kings strength (being divided in it
self) became weak, and by this means was the kingdom made fit for foreign
invasion. For this is general in the practice of all states, that where we
purpose War, there we must have faction, Faction the first part of Conquest.
for faction is the first part of Conquest; because there is no opposition more
resolute, then that which is nearest to it self; and therefore of all War
the civil is most dangerous, being led by the greatest fury of hate, and the
continual offer of occasions.

Thirdly, A second Reason.
Again the several Kingdoms of Christendom at this time were come to that
equality of power, as made them enuiously regard one another; not as in the
time of the Roman Emperors, subordinate to one absolute Prince of all, neither
as in the time before them, when as that which is now but one, The equal
partage of Christendom to many Princes.
was many several kingdoms. So equal was the partage to Christian Princes at
this time, and every State had need to fear the greatness of his neighbor, and
to take the least advantage to lesson him in his reputation and strength,
especially then, when the power of any one, became extraordinary; or their
reputation in Arms so fortunate, as might threaten their Neighbor Nations.

Fourthly, The care of those times
This was the care of those times, and in particular a matter most
considerable, between those two famous kingdoms of England and France, which
Nations (what by reason of the King of Englands claim to the Crown of France,
England and France in continual faction.
as also being both of them provoked with envious honor, to exceed each other
in the honor, of arms;) there has often been emulation, and difference,
between these neighbor Nations, never (almost) concluding peace, but for
policy, sometimes making Sessation from War, that they might again begin
with greater violence: A pollitique regard.
and therefore would they ever combine themselves with such, when the enemies
had most reason to fear, England with Spain, France with Scotland
co^federates.
as England would confederate with Spain, and France with Scotland, the
neighbors of each other, being most envious one of another. The wisdom of
State trusting them best, who live furthest from us, The advantage the French
had of the English, by reason of this popish quarrel.
because they are least able to hurt us. The King then may be thought by making
the Pope his enemy, not only to give great advantage to his enemy the
French, but also to divide himself from the love of all Christian Princes, the
Spaniards and all other his confederates, for all these were divided from him
by his division, no Prince daring to support him against the sentence of the
Pope. God and not policy ordered the king.
And therefore the King was ruled by a greater power then that of Policy, by
the power of God, which made him both useful and very excellently fit to
finish this holy business.

Fifthly, Considerations in respect of the Pope.
Again, in respect of the Pope, this business is very considerable, as that
which for the length of many years, did most importune him, being the first
step of his descent, from the honor of his universal power, which to
himself he had appropriate. For he could not but foresee the danger, The Pope
degraded of authority.
whereinto he fell, if the Kings attempt succeeded, who sought to degrade him
from his usurped authority: and he might think that other Princes having this
president, might happily attempt as much as King Henry had done, The Kings
example dangerous for the Pope.
especially considering the controversy was for regallity, which of all
earthly things is most desired, especially by them who have lofty place, and
whose spirits are most free and generous. And this needed special prevention
in the Pope, The Pope envied of Christian Princes.
considering the envy his greatness had procured him, and the general
dislike was had of his too much authority, which he used not for the peace of
the Catholic Church, but unto many ungodly ends, whereto the Popes many times
aspired.

Sixthly, And therefore did it much import the Pope, to make up the breach King
Henry had made, and to calm those troubled Seas, that threaten wrack and
desolation to his highest authorities. The Popes diligence.
to And surely there wanted not any diligence the Pope could use, make up this
Rent the king had made, yet was it done with such respect to the Popes
greatness, as that the king should rather in his obedience seek it, then the
Pope out of any demonstration of fear offer it, The respect the Pope had to
the dishonorable yealding.
so respectfull was this man of earthly Majesty, and honor, as he forgot the
use of piety and humbleness, quallities that (of necessity) are tied to the
persons of all that truly be Religious.

Seventhly, How it did import the Pope to continue friendly intertainement with
the King.
In these respects it did much respect the Pope to continue a friendly
intertainement with England, and not to loose a Member whereof the whole body
had such use, which had supported him many times against the power of his
greatest enemies, especially in the time of such a Prince, who had published
his love in print, not only to defend the Pope, but also the lawfullnesse of
his universal power, which universally was disliked. King Henry offering
himself with his two friends Mars and Mercury, The Pope lost the King by his
too much neglect and pride.
the Word, and the sword, to defend him against all opposition. And therefore
the Pope to loose such a friend, such a king, and such a defense, by his too
much neglect, and scorn to satisfy the trouble of that Kings Conscience, may
be thought in his judgment foolish, in his life wicked, and in his downefale
worthily punished, and that God willed it, the king wrought it, and the Pope in
despite suffered it, to the Glory of God, the kings honor, and the confusion
of Antichrist.

Eighthly, From this oversight of the Popes, this may be observed: Authority in
an evil person ruins it self.
that authority and greatness in an evil person, ruins it self with his
own weight; neither can the greatness of power stand safe, where it is not
supported by the strength of justice, and honest proceeding, A saying of Byas.
And that (as Byas says) promotions declare best what a man is. So it is true,
that where authority is so absolute, that there is liberty without check. Then
do men give best demonstrations of their Natures, and most apparently discover
their affections, How to judge men.
and to what ends they are most inclined. For by the work we may judge the
workman, by the fruit of the Tree, and by the life, the truth, and holy faith
of every man.

Ninthly, Again, upon this proud and ambitious Bishop, may be observed, how
God confounds him in his own practice, God confounds the Popes policy
he contriueth to make the King of England his fast friend, and his prop,
whereupon to support his unspeakable pride; but God he determines otherwise of
that King; and leads him to a work more holy, honest, and honorable. The
Pope in policy intitles him Defendor of the Catholic Faith, because he writ
in defense of his usurped Supremacy, But God makes him and his (in deeds) to
defend the true faith, and to deny that Supremacy. God and the Pope utterly
disagree.
So that what the Pope would have, God will not have, he commands, God
countermandeth, he deuiseth, God disposes and makes the King shoot right,
whom the Pope made to level wrong. But before all may be observed the Popes
false understanding judgment, in this case (in respect of Piety and
conscience) how much he was led from the truth of Religion, and from the
witness of Truth (Gods Word) to maintain his universal power, Papal
suprepremacie gotten by state practice
which his predecessors had by state practice gotten. For it cannot be but in
this, their judgments were exceedingly blinded, they having no example of any
Church at any time for their imitation. When the Law was given, God gave it
Moses, to give Aaron and the people, and not Aron to give Moses and the people,
and in every cause both of state and Religion Aron the Priest was obedient to
Moses the Prince, he receiving the dignity of his office from Moses, unto whom
God gave power to give it.

Tenthly, The like order was in the Jewish Church, where the Prince might judge
the Priest, and not the Priest the Prince; and so in the practice of all times,
and in all places, until that CHARLES the Great, Charles the Great father of
the Popes ambition.
breathed the spirit of Ambition where it is, and where it has for many years
disturbed the peace of Christendom: yet with such evidence was this error laid
open, to the universal eye of the world, by the diligence of Martin Luther and
others, Luther.
as the Pope could not but understand it: yet against the witness of his own
conscience, Areason of the Popes obstinacy.
did he still stiffly defend it, and this was a pollitique regard, least the
world understanding him to fail in a matter so important, might thereupon call
in question the truth of that opinion, (which in truth) is the state and
strength of that Religion. A principal of Papistrie.
That in precept and doctrine the Pope cannot err, if then he had yielded to
have erred in this, he denied the truth of his foundation, without which his
greatness cannot stand.

Eleuenthly, The fashion of ancient Heretics.
And therefore (after the fashion of ancient heretics) he would not yield to
the persuasion of truth, because he would not have his judgment contradicted,
and shamed (by recantation to acknowledge himself to have done amiss:) And
this is only the pride and Stomach of the too much authority of these
Bishops, The pride of the Pope.
that respect greatness more then goodness, the world more then God, falsehood
than truth, desiring darkness to obscure the many deformities, wherewith
they have defaced the name of Christian Religion.

Twelfthly, To know how to distinguish good and evil by their ends
By this we may learn to distinguish the good and evil, the holy and
profane by their end, whereto they principally aspire; for good men make
goodness their only end whereto they reach, but evil men make it only their
pretense, and like the Lapwing, fly most where there Nest is not, and such
has been the care of the Roman Church, The Pope intituleth himself the
servant of Gods servants but insulteth over Emperors.
intituling their Bishops, servants of Gods servants, yet arrogate
principallity over the highest of Gods Creatures; They profess humility and
Christian obedience, but practice a tyranny unsupportable. They call Christian
Princes their beloved sons, but make them slaves, and servants to their
ungodly wills. And from them has the world learned dissimulation and cunning
practice; Dissimulation commonly in.
for we see that many men form themselves very precisely, in the habit of all
Christian duties outwardly to gain a reputation, and the honor of high place,
which (when they have obtained) they cast off that face of holiness, and
discover themselves in their true inventions, such was (and still is) the
practice of Popes, The Popes greatness like Nebuchadnezzars Tree covered the
whole Earth.
who by the forms of holiness, have got a reputation in the world, which at
length came to the growth, that it became like Nabuchadnezzars Tree, to cover
the whole earth, and to spread it over all principality; and then in the height
of that prosperity, When great dissemblers dare discover themselves.
they cast off their vizard, and discover themselves to be but Pope, and not
Pastors, casting from them the Word, that they may with more dexterity use the
sword, with which (like Thieves) they Rob Christian Princes of that Regality,
which God gave them.

13. And therefore King Henry's proceedings were very considerable, The Kings
proceedings very important.
whereof it behooved the Pope to be very regardfull, as did threaten the ruin
of that frame, which the pride and policy of his predecessors had erected:
and the rather because the king began at the top of his dignities, The Kings
orderly proceeding.
to throw down his Supremacy, which had ouertopped the most sovereign of al
Christian power whatsoever. And herein the King may seem to understand well
what he had to do, for by striking the root he was sure to perish the
branches; The body of Popery must needs fall when Supremacy the head was cut
off.
and the best way to ruin a house, is to undermine the foundation, and in
War the victory is sure, when the enemy has lost that power wherein his
chief strength consisted: and so the body of Popery must (...)

17. For these respects the Christian world stood mute at the Kings business,
The Christian Princes stood mute at the Kings business.
no man daring to set to his helping hand, so much danger their judgments
could see in attempting it, as that all could be content to be spectators, but
no actor like King Henry, every man having earnest expectation, what would be
the issue of so strange and hazerdous an enterprise.

18. It is also very considerable, The French had at this time advantage of the
English by reason of the Pope.
that the French King had at this time advantage offered him, against the King
of England. The King being now in the heat of so great a business, divided
from his confederate the Pope, vnassisted by any foreign state, and in the
danger of domesticke troubles, whereby he was unfurnished of a great part of
his former strength: And considering also the honor the Kings of England had
got, by the conquest of France, and the strong emulation of those two Neighbor
Nations; England and France envious of one another glori^.
being both of them envious of one another reputation, and greatness: the
English being ever fortunate in those French quarrels, and the French most
desirous to suppress the growing reputation of the English. And therefore it
may seem, at this time was offered an occasion to the French, to recover their
reputation in Arms, and to repossesse those places, which the English then
held in France; yet for all these occasions, so fortunate was the King and his
people, The King fortunate.
as no misfortune at that time did disadvantage our Nation. God protecting it
against the evil, and beyond the expectation of all men.

19. And lastly, the King sending his Ambassadors to all Christian Princes,
The Kings care to satisfy the Princes of Christendom.
to give them satisfaction; for that he had done, was a care very Princely and
Christian, for by this he prevented, the many slanderous constructions that
otherwise would have censured him; he himself by his Ambassadors, declaring
the true purpose of his enterprise. The reason thereof.
And this was a demonstration, that the king reputed such whom he desired to
satisfy as his kingly Brethren, and that all of them being powers, immediately
under God, in their own Christian Kingdoms, it was reason he should give them
a Christian satisfaction, that he proceeded not in these diffrences, without
the persuasion of Learned, and Religious judgment, A pollitique discretion.
neither was it evil order in the King to have first effected what he meant,
and then to satisfy opinion. For if he had sent for their advise before he
had attempted it, he had then lost the honor of the enterprise, and had either
tied himself to the pleasures of other men, or else have opposed against them
all, the first had been dishonorable; the other very dangerous.

CHAP. IX.
In what State King Henry left his Kingdoms to the next Defendor of the
Faith, King Edward the Sixth.
FIRST, it may seem strange to him that shall read this History, to consider
the state of Religion, in this last time of King Henry's Reign: Religion lying
then as it were in equal balance, inclinable to be sweighed, according as
shall please the next succeding Prince to favor it. For as yet Religion was
not reformed, but only a preparation made for reformation; Religion at this
time but in reforming
the King having taken from the Pope his Supremacy, and his universal
authority, but not the number of his idle ceremonies, insomuch as the Pope may
be said to have his head then broken, The Pope had his head broken.
in loosing his authority, but his tail yet vnperisht, reteining still the
number of his fabulous obseruances. And if I were demanded what was the
Religion then professed in England, I could not give it name, being no better
then a Farrago, or a Religion compounded of many diverse; the State being yet
unsettled, and but moving to a reformation, for both that of the Papist and this
of the Protestant endured like extremities.

Secondly, And the reason was, because the laws then in force, were occasioned
by men diverse in opinion, Diverse lawmakers, diverse laws.
yet near in the greatness of place, either part persecuting or prosecuting
according to their several affections. So that men zealous in any profession
of Religion, were in danger of Law, and such (only) secure that made their
conscience yield to general practice, and opinion, whereby the best and most
conscionable, had least favor in the judgment of those laws, The evil
government of the state at this time.
and whereby the Commonwealth did often lose her most useful members, to the
detriment of State, and against all advice both of policy and piety.

Thirdly, For that the King was of himself otherwise inclined, The King
himself otherwise inclined.
may appear both by the testimony of them, near his person, as also by the
witness of his own words, as in particular to Bruno, Ambassador from John
Frederick Duke of Saxony, D. of Saxony
to whom imploring his aid against the Emperor; he answered, that if the
quarrel between him, and the Emperor, Master Fox Act. and Mon. page 1478.
were only for Religion, he should then stand to it stoutly, and he would in
that quarrel take his part.

Fourthly, It may appear also by the kings dislike of such men as had withheld
his forwardness to reform, The Kings dislike of Gardener
as in special Stephen Gardener, whom the king now found to contriue against
him, and to have haled him on to those ends he most disliked. And therefore the
King (before his death) did withdraw his favor from him. And howsoever he
forgave him the forfeit of his life, yet did he for ever after discountenance
him, causing his name to be rased out of the number of Executors, to whose
trust he had commend the execution of his last will. The repentance and sorrow
the King made for the Lord Cromwell,
Besides the repentance and sorrow, the King made for the Lord Cromwells death,
whom he had found so faithful and fit for this business as never any Prince
was better furnished: the King finding the want of so choice an instrument,
would often (in grief of words) say, he wanted his Cromwell in so needful a
business as he had undertaken.

Fifthly, And therefore assuredly the king had good affection to reform the
enormious abuses of the Church, The Kings affection.
and to have purged it from all Idolatrous service. But God reserving that for
the honor of Prince Edward, the next Defendor, accepted of the Kings good
purpose. And that God who gave him will to desire well, and his son the
honor to finish well, gave them both (we trust) his grace to die well, and to
breath their souls into his hands of mercy. And in these terms did the king
leave the state to the next Defendor his Princely Son, How the K. left the
state.
a state full of storm and great business, having entered so far into an
honorable passage, as that the Prince, who was to inherit his Fathers cares,
could not in the terms of honor but second the most honorable attempt of his
Father.

Sixthly, Whether the King defended the faith or not.
It may be demanded now whether King Henry (according to his new style) did
defend the Catholic Faith or not, and in what particulars he best defended it.
For it may be objected, Objection.
that the King not having reformed Religion, but only in some few particulars
has not merited the honor of his style, because the Catholic Faith was not
so defended in his time, and in his kingdom, but it endured much affliction.
To this I answer, that howsoever the king did fail in the maine execution of
his office, yet considering the greatness of his attempt, he has well deserved
everlasting memory, and to be recorded the first Christian king Defendor of
the Faith, The King the first Christian King Defendor of the Faith.
and the first that with honor and victory, dated to oppose himself against
the spiritual power of the Popes, and if we consider the danger of his attempt,
we shall find it an act of great spirit and consequence, and such as may
worthily compare with the deeds of ancient Romans, which were of most
admiration and wonder.

Seventhly, The King defended the Faith in two particulars.
And in these two particulars has he principally defended the Catholic Faith.
First, in taking from the enemy of Faith, authority and greatness (by the act
of Supremacy) for this (as I have said) was the first step to the Popes
downfall; and therefore by disinabling the enemy of Faith he did well defend
it. Secondly, in dissoluing the wicked assemblies of evil men professing
religion, the Friars and Monks, he therein performed the duty of his
Christian office, because these men did not only by their evil life, disgrace
the Christian profession, but like drones idle themselves, yet prodigally
spending the fat of other men's labors: a double inconvenience to a Christian
state. A double inconvenience to a Christian state.
First, in maintaining such numbers of unprofitable men. Secondly, in the evil
wasting of that which might well have served, the necessities of many profitable
uses.

Eigthly, And therefore though king Henry went forward in this holy business
but slowly, yet laid he the passage open for his son, The King made way for his
Son.
and disarmed the enemy of his greatest strength whereby the next Defendor K.
Edward might the better take from this Thief the spoils of Christian Princes,
wherewith he had made himself appear most glorious. King Edward finished what
his Father had attempted.
And so did that princely Edward, to the glory of his God, and the perpetual
honor of his princely name.

Ninthly, A comparison between King Henry and King Edward.
Now if I should compare these two Defendors, the Father K. Henry, and the Son
K. Edward together, and determine, whether of them has better merited, the
honor of their new style, I shall rather give the palm to K. Edward, To
finish a good is more then to begin it.
because to finish a good, is more and more deserving then to begin it. For
though king Henry did deserve well in acting his princely part of great
Majesty, yet did king Edward deserve better, continuing the Scene to the last
period, ever acting one and the same part, and not diverse as did king Henry
his Father.

Tenthly, In respect of greatness K. Henry was more excellent, in respect of
goodness King Edward.
Again, if we respect greatness in their actions, the Father has the
greater pre-eminence; but if goodness, the son has the greater; the Father
exceeding his Son, in respect of Majesty, and bold attempting; but the Son his
Father, in zealous prosecuting a holy cause begun. So that between these two,
the Father and the Son, was shared both greatness and goodness; both of them
having, both these in reasonable proportion, and either exceeding other in his
particular. King Henry the Father he takes from the Pope the Idol of false
religion, King Henry did wound Idolatry, but King Edward destroyed it.
authority and wealth, by denying his Supremacy, and by suppressing of
Monasteries, these being his two legs, whereupon he did support the body of
his greatness. The Pope wanting these supporters (Idol-like) falls to the ground
where the king there leaves him. But king Edward with better zeal entering
Gods House, and finding this Idol body, and idle body in the Church of
England, casts out that body from the Church, which his Father left wounded
in the Church, cleansing the holy Sanctuary, which by false service had been
long profaned* This holy Edward (in respect of his youth and great place)
admirable for his wisdom and holy life. And therefore did king Henry deserve
well, and somewhat defended the Catholic Faith. But king Edward deserved
better and defended it best.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
It is no note of the Catholic Church, neither of piety, to inflict adversity,
disgrace, and death: but of the contrary, For God does give to his own these
little demonstrations, to remember them his judgments, and to make them the
better relish eternal felicities.

Secondly, God in the work of his judgments, does indifferently use the
service of good and badd instruments, but in his mercies he does ever employ
his best: for Mercy is his most excellent attribute, and does rejoice against
Judgment.

Thirdly, Pollitique.
It has been the most general and the most Pollitique practice of our times,
to disioyne a Prince, from his power, and by Faction to make a Fraction in his
state, for a faction does ever destroy one part, if not both.

Fourthly, It is a Court error, and (almost) common in all States, that men
with general acclamation, applaude both the love and hatred of the Prince,
wheresoever he shall place them; but a wise Prince will suspect all such
assentations, because they intend but to please, and not to profit.

Fifthly, Moral.
He that would continue himself in general estimation must be both active
and passive. For he that can suffer well is able to confound Envy.

Sixthly, The same degrees of virtue are not given to all men alike, but to all
men there is given a possibility of having virtues in some degree, because to
every man is given an understanding soul, which may apprehend it.

CHAP. X.
A Comparison between King Henry the Eighth of England, and Frederick
(surnamed Barbarossa) Emperor of Germany.
FIRST, these two mighty Princes, King Henry of England and the Emperor
Frederick Barbarossa, The King and the Emperor famous for their bold Attempts.
were most notable in these last Ages, for the greatness of their Spirits, and
for the boldness of their attempting, both of them attempting one fortune, but
with great difference of succesfull fortune; and both of them attempting with
such resolute stoutnesse, as that in themselves they are of near comparison,
though in their fortunes they were not comparable. The Emperor he attempts
against Pope Alexander, The Emperor against Pope Alexander, the King against
Pope ^leme^t They both quarrel the Pope for Sovereignty.
The King against Pope Clement, in this they conspire, but the Emperor failed
in his enterprise, wherein the King got the garland, and triumphed, and in this
they agree not. The Emperor he quarrels the Pope for Soueraignety, and
because he thought it indignity and dishonor, to this imperial place, to be
crowned and confirmed by the Popes allowance. King Henry his quarrel was for
Supremacy, thinking it dishonor to his kingly dignity, to be second to any
man in his own dominions, and in this they very nearly consent.

Secondly, The King intended reformation, the Emperor did not.
Again, the King he intends a further care then this business of State, the
reformation of Christian Religion, the which he found to be much corrupted. The
Emperor had not this good intention, but trauells principally to reobtaine the
Sovereign liberty of his place, which by the power of the Popes was taken from
him, and in this they agree not. The Emperor more forward least fortunate.
Again, the Emperor never fainted in himself* but continued his princely
courage to the last, though the disadvantage advantage of fortune, made him
fail in his great attempting, and though most basely he did humble himself at
the Pope his enemies feet, yet was he forced to this by extremities, and not
by any deiection or weakness of his former haughty spirit. But the King
though he had the Conquest, and prevailed against the Pope in all he
undertook, yet fainted he in the hope of his greatest business, not reforming
Religion but in part, which he might have done at his own pleasure, being
provoked thereto by the persuasion of prosperous fortune. The Kings weakness
was the weakness of Nature not of Courage.
But this failing in the King, was not caused by the weakness of his courage,
but by the weakness of his Nature being easily ruled by the persuasion of his
near favorites, and therefore in this they were unequal.

Thirdly, The two Popes their enemies nearly agree
In respect of the Popes their enemies, they were both alike handled, both of
them being by both their enemies interdict and deposed from their gouernements,
but yet with unequal success. For Pope Alexander, did curse more effectually
and to better purpose then Pope Clement. The Emperor being constrained by his
interdictions, They both curse, but with unequal success.
and bannings to surcease his forward Arms, and with great humility to
reconcile and submit himself. But King Henry's Pope was not so happy in his
curses, For he did banne, and curse the King, as much as any other Pope in the
world could do, yet was it fruitless, and to no purpose; the King not
thriuing worse but the better, These banning Pope^ like Shemei and Balam.
for this bitter banning Shemei, who like Balam the banning Prophet, offer
sacrifice to curse with holy pretense, and for good prosperity.

Fourthly, The Princes agree not in their ends.
Lastly in their ends, were they most unlike, for the Emperor was continually
followed with evil fortune, being forced many times to many great extremities,
The Emperors bad fortunes.
and many dishonorable fallings. First, was he disarmed by the power of the
Popes Censure, his own people forsaking him in his best hope, and in a time of
most importance, then was he constrained by inevitable necessity, to submit
himself to the Pope, and to implore his favor, and either to receive the
Crown and the dignity of his place, at the courtesy of his enemy, or else to
be deprived of all sovereign State. The indignities wherewith the Pope did
use the Emperor.
Again, the indignities wherewith the Pope did use the Emperor, to whom when
the Emperor made his humble submission, the Pope in scorn of his debased
Majesty, set his foot on the Emperors neck, with his misapplyed phrase of
Scripture. The Popes insulting pride.
Super Aspidem, etc. the which how grievous it must needs be to a person of
such Majesty and spirit; let any man that has spirit judge it. The Emperors
end unfortunate.
Lastly, his end was unfortunate, the natural course of his life being
prevented by violent and sudden death. The King very fortunate.
But the Kings fortunes were for the most part prosperous, and much unequal to
the Emperor; for he did not only shun these dangerous fortunes, but most
bravely acquitted himself of all dishonorable retiring; finishing whatsoever
he attempted, with such ease and prosperity, as if no resistance had been made
against him. In respect of themselves the two Princes were equals, in respect
of their fortunes they disagree.
In respect then of themselves, and of their noble and haughty spirits, were
these Princes of most equal and fit comparison, in respect also of their
attempts they did both conspire one; But in their fortunes they were much
disagreeing. The King finishing that with victory and success, wherein the
Emperor ever failed. And yet this praise may be given the Emperor, The
Emperors praise.
that if the Kings fortunes had been given him, it is most certain he would
have used them to greater advantage; the king being satisfied with that title
which could not have satisfied the great ambition of the Emperor.

OF THE NEXT DEFENDOR OF THE Faith, King EDWARD the Sixth.
CHAP. XI.
FIRST, there is nothing good, that is not derived from God, God the fountain
of goodness.
the fountain of all goodness, for man and all the passage of his life, from
his birth to his burial is altogether evil, so generally is deprauednesse,
spread over all the sons of Nature, All men naturally evil.
that there was never any (Jesus Christ excepted) from the first man Adam, to
him that shall be the last borne, free from the infection of sin, so
generally is that leprosy spread over all mankind, as that no part of the
body, or any faculty of the soul is altogether free from the evil thereof,
every man being by nature inclinable to every sin, no man having power to do
well, for grace is the gift of God, Grace the gift of God.
neither can any man attain it, but he to whom it shall please God to give it.
And therefore, when God has a work of grace to be wrought by men, he gives to
such whom he shall choose for instruments, so much of his good spirit, as to
enable them for his holy purpose; So that, God decrees the good and deuiseth
the means.
God both decrees the good, and deuiseth the means to compass it. Man being
passive, and moved to goodness as shall please the spirit of God to lead him.
And therefore the glory of every good action belongs to God only, by whose
spirit it is only wrought and not otherwise.

Secondly, And for particular instance of this, K. Edward.
we have King Edward; to consider, a Prince composed all of goodness, having
extraordinary induments of holiness, so abundant was Gods grace in this
Prince, K. Edward fit to finish the work of Reformation
as thereby he was well fitted to finish the work of Reformation, yet we may
not give the honor of the business to the King, but to God, who inspired him
with this abundance of grace. And thus far only we honor the King as Gods
instrument, whereby it did please him to work; and that we admire the gifts of
Gods spirit in him, whereby he was made to exceed all other Princes then
living: having received from God the sword of the spirit, and the Shield of
Faith, whereby he was well able to defend the Catholic Faith; and to retorte
all the fiery darts of the Devil. And therefore the greatest glory be to God,
God had the greatest part in this business.
who has the greatest part in this business; and let the King have honor
too, whom God did please to honor as his choice instrument.

Thirdly, Such was this most noble Prince, and princely Defendor King Edward,
as the King his Father may be said to have defended the Catholic Faith in
nothing more, then in leaving the succession of his cares, to such a son,
such a Prince, and such a Defendor: who (notwithstanding his youth and the many
combrances of State at that time,) went forward in reforming with such spirit,
and success, as was admirable; his zeal effecting, that his Fathers coldness
had left undone. The King beloved of God.
So that God may seem to have loved him as he did Moses, giving so much of his
spirit, as sufficiently would suffice many others. The King the best of all
Christian Princes then living.
For let him be compared with all other Princes in the world then living, and
he shall be found in true judgment to exceed them all; having dedicate
himself (wholly) to the faithful executing of Gods will, manifesting his holy
affections, by his continual cares to that end directed. The Nation happy in
K. Edward to defend the Faith.
And therefore happy was K. Henry, and happy was this Nation, in having this
Son of Grace to second him, and to perfect his religious cares whom God had
found like holy David, answerable to his own heart; whose honorable name
lives with those names of most honor; whose faithful service to God and
Religion, does now flourish in many parts of Christendom; and whose soul
lives in the favor of God, and in the happy fellowship of holy Angels and
Saints.

Fourthly, This most gracious and excellent Prince, as he was derived the
Defendor of the Faith, and did by natural descent inherit his fathers titles:
so as his nearest and principal care, did he entertain the cause, and like as
he was Gods Lieftenant, he did maintain those spiritual wars his Father
had undertaken; and did proceed with such spirit and success, as all those
quarrels have, that have Christ Jesus for their general, and Antichrist for
an enemy: so divine was the heavenly composition of his Nature, and so well
ordered was his education, as if both heaven and earth had desire to make him
excellent, and to make his Character an exact demonstration, able to instruct
the most excellent Christian Prince, how to moderate between the power of
Majesty, and the duty of conscience. For if State would judge his Zeal, and
Religion his State, he shall be found to deserve this high praise I give him,
and both Religion and State would judge him to be worthy and fit to govern a
Religious State.

Fifthly This happy Prince (in the little time of his government) gave a
large testimony of his worth, The praise of King Edward.
and did both exceed the expectation was had of him, and enlarge their
expectations that did hope well, who though he was but young when he entered
his government, yet at his very entrance did he better the State, laboring
(with admirable care and constance) in the better reforming of Religion, and
for the safe protection of the Catholic Faith, which Truth, (God willing) in
the process of this History shall appear most evident.

Sixthly, And most Gracious Prince, to whom I write and dedicate these labors,
let me (with reverence and exception of your Grace) report my opinion, that
this Nation never had such a Solomon, who in so poor a number of years, had a
like measure of those his rich treasures of Zeal, Wisdom, Love, and State.

Of the benefit that redounds to a State by a lawful succession of blood.
CHAP. XII.
FIRST, the benefit that redounds to a State by a lawful succession of blood,
may appear by the misery of many kingdoms and great states, The misery of
many kingdoms.
the which (for want of succession) have endured the greatest extremities that
could be; the examples whereof are very common in the stories both of
Christian and heathen kings. Therefore I will only produce one of the old
world, Alexander of Macedon.
the mighty Alexander, whose fortunes in the conquest of war, made the world
tremble at his awful name, having subdued the greatest and best part of the
earth, yet leaving the conquest of his sword to his friends divided, Alexander
leaving his Empire to his friend divided, did sooner perish.
and not to his own succeeding blood entire and wholly; the Empire he had got
and thus left, could not stand, being not united in one sovereign successor,
but divided into parts; whereof insued emulation and envy, and at the last
utter desolation; which happily had not been, if Alexander had had a Son
Alexander to have succeeded in his Empire.

Secondly, An example nearer us, both in respect of time and place, is the
Kingdom of France, The kingdoms of France.
our Neighbor Nation. A kingdom that has endured the greatest extremities,
the misery of War could lay upon it; and this was only occasioned by want of
succession in blood: the French King then not having Issue Male to succeed him
in his Empire, gave occasion that the king of England Edward the Third, Edward
the Third.
made claim to the kingdom of France, in the right of his Mother, The title
of England to the crown of France.
being suruiuing heir to Phillip surnamed the Fair, to whom (by the most
allowable Law) the Right must needs descend; which the French utterly withstand
by reason of the salique Law, which dis-inableth women in such inheritance: yet
hence has proceeded the greatest alteration in that state that ever was, the
kings of England, France much vexed with English wars.
by many notable attempts and victories, defacing the beauty of that famous
kingdom, which (for largeness of Empire, and all other earthly blessings) may
be said to be the most sovereign of all Christendom. And therefore the
spoil of such a kingdom is very lamentable, and the cause of that spoil much
to be condemned: yea so great is the misery of that evil cause to that
kingdom, as that they still stand in the hazard of good or evil fortune,
France still in the hazard of English wars.
expecting a dangerous war, whenever the Majesty of any English King shall
please to make claim to that kingdom, which both by succession and conquest
is his own.

Thirdly, Within our selves also we have notable examples of the misery of
state, English examples.
when lawful succession does either fail, or is (by intrusion) interrupted.
For upon this foundation was builded that most famous quarrel, between the
two houses of York and Lancaster, York and Lancaster.
a difference that made England to bleed in every vain, neither could it ever
be compounded, until the succession of both those lines met in one particular,
whereby the Canons did know one undoubted successor without competitor, to
whose service they might address themselves, whereas before they were divided
into parts; some adhering to this, others to that, as authority and love could
move them, whereby they broake their unity to make a fraction; and the truth of
succession The cause of the E^glish civil wars was the interrupting of
lawful Succession.
being doubtfully understood, was the cause that men were more easily drawn
(by persuasion) to the bloody enterprise of War, which happily had not been
(or at the least) not so violent, if the right of inheritance had not been
interrupted by intrusion.

Fourthly, But that most Worthy of note, is the late time of Queen Elizabeth's
Queen Elizabeth.
Reign, a Lady worthy of best memory; who being unmarried, made her Subjects
have doubtful expectation, who should succeed her; the which then was most
dangerous, The danger that was feared by her want of Issue
when the Queen was past the hope of having natural issue. And this did not
only breed a Jealousy in the heads of her own people; but also gave
occasion, that foreign Princes had regardfull eye to the uncertain
conditions of those times; and among them, such especially as did most envy
the prosperity of our Nation. For they might then hopefully believe, The danger
of the State.
that the Queen leaving the State in these uncertainties, and (as they
thought) to many Competitors; it could not be, but needs the glory thereof
would ruin, by civil discord, and part-taking, and that then would a time be
offered them, to revenge and in rich themselves. And how soever God has
prevented Gods prevention.
the evil which was (worthily) feared, yet certainly even then was the danger
great, and the evil hopes of our enemies upon likelihood conceived; neither
is there any that has understanding in the affairs of State, but will
acknowledge the eue^t of these times, did exceed the expectation The event did
exceed expectation.
that all men had of them, and that the Kings Majesty's coming in (that last
was,) was a work of Gods special providence, whereby he did direct those
judgments, the which at this time did very much threaten our Nation.

Fifthly, By those examples may be understood the danger that redounds to a
state, when succession does either fail, or is (by intrusion) interrupted, the
evil experience whereof is not only to be found in the alteration of states,
but also in the subversion of private houses. The subversion of great houses.
For a Son is nearer in disposition and consent of Nature, then one further off
in the degrees of blood; and for state, such are most fit to succeed in
government that are the seed of Governors; The Sons of governors are best
fitted for government.
Nature traducing to them, the Majesty and judgments of their Progenitors: and
for the favor of the people; that Prince or heir apparent has it most
assured, whose interest is believed before he inherit; because that breeds a
general regard in the hearts of all men, and preuenteth the mischief which
otherwise might happen by conspirators. And in this was our English Nation most
happy, in having this Princely Son King Edward, King Edward did exceed and
succeed his Father.
not only to succeed his Father in the rule of his kingdom, but also to
exceed him much in Religion and holy life.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
Procreation and to derive posterity, is one cause in the ordinance of
Marriage; for therefore has God placed that desire in our Flesh so pronely,
because the generations of our kind should not fail, but he continued both in
number and quallitie to maintain the Truths of Gods Decree.

Secondly, None can derive any thing from their Parent, but what their Parents
have Naturally. Therefore is there often much difference in the quallities of
Father, and Son; because our Parents give us our Nature as it is, but God as
he will please to have it.

Thirdly, Pollitique.
It was ever hazardous, and will be to the prosperity and saftie of the State,
when the Prince is childlesse, or does want one certain, known, undoubted
heir, because when there is not a certainty of lawful Succession, there is
just occasion to fear unlawful intrusion.

Fourthly, Men generally are better content to give the respects due to
sovereignty, to a Prince derived, and home borne, than to one that does
attain sovereignty either by suffrage or conquest, because though there be a
necessity of duty in both yet the one is voluntary, the other violent.

Fifthly, Moral.
Some Philosophers have thought it better to adopt children than beget them,
because it is in our power to choose the virtuous, but not to forget them.

Sixthly, It has been thought a shame to die childlesse, because he that has
one leaves a part of himself, or at least the Image of all.

CHAP. XIII.
Of King Edwards defending the Catholic Faith, and wherein he chiefly
defended it.
FIRST, it is not possible I should relate at full the worthiness of this
Son of Grace, and princely Defendor King Edward; he deserving by much, a more
honorable rememberance, then the tract of this History can give. So large is
he in his goodness, as therein he has done more then many his predecessors,
and has best deserved everlasting memory, The Kings praise.
and to have his name live in the Rank of the best Christian Princes that ever
were, so rare were the gifts of God in him, that he seemed to aspire no other
end but holiness, His mercy to his enemies.
and so modest in his zeal, as no mark of violence could ever be discerned
in him; abhorring the effusion of all blood, even of that of his enemies,
insomuch that I may report (with confidence) that in his royal person, mercy
and truth were met, and that righteousness and peace did kiss each other: and
to conclude his praise, I believe him to have deserved a greater commendation
then this I give him.

Secondly, The particular of his deserts.
And to consider the particulars whereby the King has principally deserved his
new Style of Defendor of the Faith: First he no sooner had authority, but he
applied it to this holy end; beginning this care with his Empire, and with the
inheritance of his kingdom, The King did inherit his kingdom and h^^ care for
Religion together.
took upon him the protection of Faith, and holy worship as if he regarded not
his kingly office, but only to be the better able to serve these heavenly
occasions whereto in his resolution he was only devoted.

Thirdly, And therefore at his first entrance, His first care.
into his sovereignty did he publish himself to the world; and declared what
men should expect from him, and how he was in the case of Religion affected:
whereupon he made protestation to defend, what the King his Father had done,
He secondeth his Fathers attempt.
in degrading the Pope from his Supremacy, and in scattering the wicked
fraternities of Friars and Religious men and women, falsely professing Religion:
in which two particulars only, K. Henry may seem to have defended the
Catholic Faith. And therefore in giving allowance to his Fathers act, he has
well merited to share in the honor of the deed; and this his approving what
was well done, may be said to be his first good deed; and therefore do I rank
it for the first holy act of King Edward, whereby he has deserved to be
styled Defendor of the most Catholic Faith. His first act of defense to the
Faith.


Fourthly, This honorable beginning of King Edward, was not interrupted by
evil means, as was that of King Henry his Father, King Edward was not
tempted, as was King Henry by evil counsel.
neither did he retire himself from the pursuit of an enterprise so
honorable, but with a holy resolution went on, in the travel of so needful a
business, resolving with a Christian purpose to finish what his Father had so
hopefully begun; His holy zeal for reformation.
so strong was he in his desire to reform Religion, as that all his other
endeavors were but servants to that only end directed, wherein he used such
endeavor, as was very admirable in his years, and might well witness how
much he was in the favor of God, who gave him such rare induments in so
plentiful a manner; whereby he was extraordinarily fitted for the office of
his great place, The King well fitted for this business.
and for the defense of the Catholic Faith, whereof he was made a patron.

Fifthly, And this defense the king undertook not as a practice of state,
whereby to enlarge his particular in any earthly regard, but he was led
thereto only by his zeal, The King not moved by any respect.
and the persuasion of his conscience, who finding by that judgment God had
given him, how much the face of Religion was become deformed, by superstition
and gross service; and being moved by the Spirit of God to undertake a
reformation, would not by disobedience resist that power, that both made him
and did move him to that purpose: And therefore with the best spirit of a
Christian Prince, he did not only second his Fathers honorable attempting,
but far outstript him in that most honorable course of Reformation; his whole
life being no other then the practice of his holy care, regarding nothing that
did not regard the advancement thereof, and gladly giving his assent to
whatsoever might further it.

Sixthly, But that wherein he has principally defended the Catholic Faith,
Wherein K. Edward principally defended the Faith.
and exceeded all other Princes in his holy care, was the utter extirping of
Papacy from his dominions; Popery utterly extirped by the King.
denying the warrant of his authority for the public exercise thereof;
exchanging falsehood for Truth, and confusion for Order, reformed Religion,
which (by long custom, and evil practice) was deformed. And this he did with
such orderly assent in Parliament, The consent of Parliament.
they establishing what the kings Prerogative had commanded; the King and the
State jointly agreeing upon an uniform order of common prayer, An uniform
order of common prayer appointed by the King.
inioyning al obedient Subjects to the exercise thereof, and denouncing such
for disobedient and rebellious, as should dare to use the forbidden Ceremonies
of Popery, or any other form diverse, from that which had authority from the
King and Parliament: the king and the State well understanding, that the verity
of Religion, Verity could not stand without unity.
could not better be continued, than by uniformity and order.

Seventhly, And this is that which deservedly has made the king worthy of
honorable name, and most worthy of all others to be styled Defendor of the
most Catholic Faith, never any Prince before him, having done more, and with
greater zeal for Religion, then this very act king Edward did: being in this
comparable with Josias Josias of Judah.
the good king of the Jews, who with all industry did travel in Gods
business, destroying the groaues, and high places, where the Idols had that
divine worship, which (of duty) is only belonging to God. And such were those
fantastical Ceremonies then used, The ceremonies of Popery like the rites of
the Heathen Priests.
more like the exercise of Heathen than of Christian Priests, and such was the
kings care to reform and rectefie, as may well equal that of king Josias, and
worthily exceed all his predecessors, the kings of England before him. To
recite the particulars of his honorable merit were a travel infinite, the
passage of his kingly life being nothing but in exercise of goodness, the
benefit whereof this Nation does presently enjoy, and the renown thereof
spread over all Christendom, and therefore I will only remember some
particulars of nearest consideration, and such, whose remembrance may most
dignifie the author and contriuer of them.

Eighthly, In the year 1547, Anno 1547.
and the first of King Edwards Reign, the King by act of Parliament, did
repeal all former Statutes concerning Religion; The repeal of statutes
concerning Religion.
by which Statutes the professors of Truth had been judged Heretics, and
Heretics and false Professors approved: among the number of evil Statutes
then repealed, was that of the six Articles; Six Articles.
a Statute guilty of the blood of many the dearest Children of God, which like
an evil soar spread over all the Kingdom, culling out such for the day of
slaughter, whom God had ordained to inherit eternal life: the evil fury thereof
set on fire by the turbulent Spirits of evil men, then in authority such as
were Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, Bonner Gardener Bonner.
Bishop of London and others who by evil Counsel and pollice, made the latter
time of King Henry, fill our English Chronicles with the stories of blood, and
persecution.

Ninthly, And therefore be it famous for the honor of King Edward and most
worthy of his holy title, The Kings renown.
that his princely care gave end to this bloody evil, and that he for the
honor of his God, and for the peace of his saints, has put out these
destroying fires, and blunted that edge of persecution, The King put out the
fires of persecution.
which then did Tiranize the space of six years, by the authority of the six
evil Articles. By this repeal did King Edward cure the wound his Father had
made The King did cure the wound his Father made
so dangerous in the Church and State of England; reconciling himself, and the
authority of his place to the favor of God, which (by these bloody Articles)
his Father had very much endangered.

Tenthly, Again the Kings The Kings furtherance.
holy care did not here end, but yet respected a further benefit to the
Catholic Faith, never satisfying himself to have done well, whilst there was
ought left undone, which either the service of his place, and kingly office, or
the necessity of the present times required. And therefore when he had cast out
the abhominatio^ of his Israel, (Popish Idolatry) and the many errors of that
Ceremonious Service; he contenteth not himself with this good deed, but
proceeds to a higher degree of merit, to the true establishment of the truth
of Gods service; thinking it unworthy the honor of his name, to take off from
the church the rags it then wore, and so to leave it naked, and therefore did
he inuest it with orders and ornaments of decency, The orders of the Church
^stablish^d by the King.
fitting the fashion of Christ's Spouse (the Church Militant) whereby she might
be distinguished from all diversity whatsoever.

Eleuenthly, And by this means the Liturgy of the Church was brought into a
right square, and proportionable to the Rule of Gods Word, which ought to
fashion every Christian care, but principally the form of Religion and holy
Service.

Twelfthly, Moreover, the commiseration he had of the necessities of men, The
King most merciful and compassionate.
does deserve a worthy remembrance, and to be ranked among those holy cares,
that have made him very famous. For clemency and pitiful regard in a person
of such Majesty, is that whereby great men nearest resemble the Nature of God,
In mercy men resemble God.
who is most mighty, yet most merciful. In which heavenly respect, this good
King has so far exceeded example, as that I cannot give him equal
comparison, with any earthly creature in those times living: who
notwithstanding his greatness of Majesty, and high place, would (in his
provident care) descend to the lowest of his Subjects; to the lame, the poor,
His care for poor.
and the fatherless; and with the eyes of Christian compassion, would he view
their necessities, and accordingly provide for them of his own accord, not led
thereto by the persuasion of any, save of Gods Spirit, which did continually
move him to holy exercise; the witness of which his holy care, will ever live
in the thankful prayers of poor people, who at this day are relieved in
Hospitalls, by him erected and given. Hospitalls by him erected.
And in this respect has he well deserved the style of Defendor of the
Catholic Faith, defending and providing for poor Christians (the Children of
Faith) against the powerful enemy necessity.

13. And these works of mercy are the best demonstrations we can give, The
works of mercy the best witnesses of holy Faith.
that we are in the Catholic Faith: for he that has not mercy, has not
faith, they being as inseperable, as the good Tree and the good fruit. And such
was this Noble Prince, and so rare was he in the work of holiness, as that
worthily and before all others, he has deserved to be styled Defendor of the
most True, The King deserved his Style.
most Ancient, and most Catholic Faith.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
A wicked Prince may effect Religious deeds, but affect them he cannot, because
such deeds, in such a one, are not done for themselves, but for the service of
unlawful and wicked ends.

Secondly, In Gods affairs, the Prince his servant, may neither exceed his
Commission in presuming, neither neglect it with coldness, but so proportion
all his Christian proceedings, that they may receive allowance from the
testimony of God; for as the body of a pollitique State (Subjects) are in all
civil respects obedient to their temporal Lord. So all Potentates, Powers,
and dignities have their superintendent (God) who is their Lord paramont and
does command and judge them as his vassalls.

Thirdly, Such only are fit to be reformers of Christian Religion as have
Authority, Truth and Zeal, Authority to do, Truth to distinguish and Zeal to
persevere: all which had being and life in the person of King Edward.

Fourthly, Pollitique.
It was a Christian Policy in the King, to establish Religion with uniformity
and order, and it is that Policy that does still maintain the State united.
For difference, (though it be but in ceremony) is a most necessary cause of
most unnecessary discords.

Fifthly, Such Senators are honorable, that present themselves to causes of
general profit but such are both wise and honorable that can either frame
their Prince for such intentions, or do apprehend and forward his good
determinations.

Sixthly, Moral.
To prevent disgrace and evil, (even in a moral life) it is necessary to
destroy all cause (not only of evil doing) but of evil suspicion. For common
reputation is nothing but Opinion which is got and lost, as well with Ceremonies
as with Truth.

CHAP. XIIII.
The trouble of the State at this time of King Edward how they were occasioned
and how compounded.
FIRST, it has ever been the nature of evil men, then to show themselves
most, when goodness and good men are most eminent and glorious; and the reason
is in nature, which makes all contraries then most powerful when they are in
opposition: Contraries judge one another.
for vice is judged by virtue, falsehood by truth, and every evil is best made
manifest by the opposition of goodness. So of the contrary, every good thing
is made apparent by the envy of evil, which like fire that wastes his own
substance, to try the golden metal; so does evil Ruin in self in envy
and evil Note.
practice, not wasting the good, but making it much more glorious to the view
of the world. Examples of this are in every testimony of time, and in every
condition and state in the world, it being only possible for him to alter this
natural discord, to whom it is possible to destroy the work of Nature. There
must be faction.
Neither it is ever to be hoped, that all men shall conspire one end, without
opposition and strife, till God purge this earth, and alter the condition of
his creatures. Neither ought we (for this) to condemn the divine providence,
Providence.
as if God could not otherwise dispose Nature, or that he will not prevent this
evil, but suffer the cause he best loves, oftentimes to endure most. For
howsoever in the wisdom of God, are many unsearchable reasons of his will to
us unknown: The reason of this opposition of good and evil.
yet for the reason of this opposition of good and evil, humane reason and
wisdom may suffice to judge it, because as I have said gold is not the worse,
but the better for his fiery trial, and a good cause is not confounded, but
confirmed by the opposition of evil. Goodness not confounded but confirmed by
the opposition of evil.
And therefore does God many times suffer evil to prevail, but never to the
destruction of good; and to whomsoever it shall please God to give the
inheritance of heaven, it is reason he direct us the way, be it by danger or
by death. For if God lead us to Heaven by the gates of Hell, The way is good
if the end be happy
the way is good because the end is happy; for most happy are they who reach
life, be the passage never so dangerous, Truth.
and for ever blessed be Truth, be the opposition of envy and evil men never
so malignant.

Secondly, The stories of these times is sufficient witness to prove the
envious Nature of evil men. For now that God had given our Nation a Solomon
for Wisdom, and a Josias for his Devotion, and Zeal; changing our misery
into mirth, our tears into laughter, whose holy care did free holy Martyrs
from torture, and cruel persecutions; giving to all his Subjects liberty in
the true serving of God, which for many years they had wanted, and with much
blood had been witnessed; yet notwithstanding this good King, and the goodness
he wrought, were there many seditious and evil men, Evil men and evil
practice against the King.
who (like the conspiracy of Corath) combine themselves in Rebellion and
wicked practice against the Lords anointed, and their sovereign: some
pretending Religion which they called their conscience; others other grieuances
in the state, according as they could devise them. Neither wanted there
occasions in Scotland to trouble the peace of those times; Scotland.
the Scots denying to perform that whereunto (by oath) they were obliged, for
they had bound themselves by oath to King Henry the Eighth, to perform the
marriage between King Edward his Son, The Marriage with Q. Mary of Scotland.
and the Lady Mary of Scotland, whereby the inheritance of both kingdoms, had
descended to one interested heir without competitor; The importance of that
Marriage.
the importance whereof, how important it was to the English State, may to any
judgment appear, the not performing, begetting a discontent in both States,
and a Ielosie of both their proceedings, and such as could not be otherwise
then with the sword determined, God reserving the marriage of those two warlike
Nations to honor the memory of King James our Sovereign, King James our
Sovereign.
now in whose royal person these two disagreeing kingdoms, are (for ever)
united: yet not withstanding all these hard occasions, and the Kings minority,
whereby he was less able to travel in those weighty affairs of State, did
God still support him, and the prosperity of his kingdoms, The King ever
victor.
giving him victory over all that did contriue against him, and power to
chastise the revolt and disobedience of such his Subjects, as wickedly did
bandie themselves against him their Sovereign. Neither is it otherwise to be
thought, but this body of the common people, Rebellion moved by persuasion and
not by any proper motion.
was not moved to Rebellion by any proper motion of it own, but rather led by
the instigation of others. For the vulgar is like a body senseless, which
cannot move it self, yet subject to be carried with every breath of wind,
being altogether moved by persuasion and general opinion; and then such as did
distaste the government of the State (as those of the Popes faction) being the
parties only discontent with reforming Religion, The Papists.
stirs this rebellious body with the violence of persuasion, wherein by
reason of their common experience they are cunningly fitted, The practice of
reb^l^ious Jesuits and Priests.
and wherewith (in truth) they conueigh the spirit of enmity, and civil
strife into the states of all Christian Princes, whereby that Religion has got
a name of policy, but utterly lost the renown of piety, the greatest
Professors thereof, being found the greatest practisers in State that be. And
by these instigators, were the troubles in the English Nation at that time,
(and ever sithence) occasioned, to the glory and strength of the cause which
God has protected, and to their confusion that thus wickedly conspire.

Thirdly, But these troubles, as they were occasioned by the turbulent spirits
of men desiring innovation and change, so were they happily determined by the
providence of the State: The Duke of Somerset Protector.
the Lord Protector the Duke of Somerset, approving himself forward and
fortunate in discharge of his high place, to whose trust both the person of the
King, and the government of his kingdom were commended. And doubtless even in
this has the Duke deserved special commendation, His deserts.
and to be thought worthy the honor of his high place, considering the danger
of the time, and the number of discontented persons in the state; The reforming
of Religion divided the kingdom into a faction.
the reforming of Religion dividing the strength of the kingdom into an
envious faction; whereby the dispossessed (the Papists) used all means both of
power and policy, to reobtaine what by reformation of Religion they had lost;
and the Protestants endeavoring to secure, and continue what (by the favor of
God) they had lawfully gotten. And therefore the honorable compounding of
these differences does conclude the wisdom and faithful service, The Dukes
care to compound these differences.
of such as then did govern the state. For if the Duke had been ambitious, and
had aspired the sovereignty, he would never have lost the advantage of this
occasion, the time then serving best to have attempted it, the body of the
Rebellious wanting only such a head, to have led them to any desperate attempt
whatsoever. And therefore howsoever his enemies did brand his name with
dishonorable imputations, The Duke slandered.
it is very unlikely the Duke should have any such disloyal affections,
neglecting (as I have said) these opportune occasions, and being so strong in
the favor of the people.

Fourthly, But that which did most discontent the King and threaten the state,
The variance between the Lord Protector and the Barrons. Honor and desert
beget dangerous envy.
was the variance between the Lord Protector and the Barrons: whose high
place, and honorable deserving had got him much dangerous envy in the State,
which he by too much sufferance, gave advantage to prevail, so far as to
his own destruction. For if the Duke by his authority, had cut off the first
beginnings of this evil, The Dukes error in policy.
he had prevented the mischief which thereof insued, and so he might have done
that in the opportunity of time with ease, which afterward he would most
gladly have done, but could not with all the authority he had compass; because
the opportunity was past, Post est occasio Calua.
and then he could not recall occasions, which then fly from us, when they are
not entertained. Note.
For it be hooueth him of great place, that would prevent the danger of envy,
(not to forbear the cause of envy, which is goodness) but to destroy the first
beginnings of envy, and not to give that evil weed sufferance, which in
(short time) will grow to a strength uncontrollable; and then who so offers to
strike, shall but wound himself, and like a bird in a trap, lock himself
more strongly in, by striving to escape. And this assuredly was the Dukes error
to suffer his enemies to grow to a strength he could not command, and then
being in their danger, he sought by strong hand to rid himself; This oversight
was his death.
wherein he found he was much deceived, to the loss of his life, and to the
glory of his enemies; now from what cause this discord had beginning is
diversely imagined, The cause of this discord.
neither does our English Chronicles determine it, so that many several
conjectures diversely interpret it: some blame the Dukes improuidence, The Dukes
improuide^ce.
and that he did not regard his own security, so much as the danger of his
place required; and therefore suffered his enemies to practice against him with
all advantage. Others that his evil governing the State, His evil government
of the State.
did so offend the Lords, as in their honorable care of the State they sought
redress; and that the Duke might either surrender his authority, or else
reform the disordered course of his former proceedings; to the more honor of
the King, Ambition.
and the better government of the Commonwealth: others think that he
aspired the principality, and thereby run himself into the highest degree of
treason; which opinion is all malice, This opinion is all malice, no truth.
and no Truth. For questionless, if the Duke had been guilty of Treason, his
enemies would never have condemned him of Felony. Lastly, it is thought the
cause was nothing but a practice of envy, The true cause was a practice of
envy.
which his honorable life and zealous care for Religion had procured him, who
advancing his endeavor with all constancy for the reforming of Religion, and
traveling in the state with much prosperity and honor; he by these means
got a double enemy, A double enemy.
his religious care procured him the hatred of the discontented persons in the
State (which then were many, and his honorable life got him envy in the great
ones: who then covet to suppress the growing reputation of any, The nature of
great and envious spirits.
whose merit may challenge the highest degrees of honor; for men envy not the
evil but the good of others; and he (always) is most subject to be envied,
Virtue most subject to envy.
whose virtuous life shall least deserve it.

Sixthly, And from this cause was the unfortunate end of the good Duke, the
Lord Protector, whom his enemies did not destroy for his evil, but for his
honorable and virtuous life. And this howsoever it had the course of orderly
proceeding, according to the trial of law, The trial of law only a color to
satisfy reports.
yet was that only a color to give it some reasonable pretense; whereby the
common mouth of the vulgar might be stopped, which in such cases is most daring
and prodigal: and surely it is very remarkable, that a Prince of his
authority and greatness, Uncle to the King, and protector of his person and
state; should be thus forced to these hard extremities, The Dukes extremity
of hard fortune.
and that in a Kingdom which himself did protect to be arrested, condemned,
and executed for Felony: and example so rare, as no time can produce the like,
The greatest are most subject to the fall of Fortune.
and such as may remember the greatest, how subject they be to the fall of
Fortune; who foyleth them most that fall from the highest dignities.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
God does often suffer his own cause Religion, even in the hope and prosperity
thereof, to endure contrary fortunes; sometimes by intrusion of Errors, often
by the interruption of peace. For without these trials of opposition, and
adversity, there can be no distinction of good and bad, neither could it merit
extraordinary praise to be a Christian.

Secondly, In the Judgment of Divinity it does not destroy the Truth of any
cause, to suffer injury and violence, because the most sacred Son of God,
did endure them in their extremities. Therefore are they deceived, that make
temporal prosperity a note of spiritual Truth, because Truth (in this life)
may live in banishment.

Thirdly, Pollitique.
It was a wicked policy in the kings enemies (but powerful,) to sow Discord
in his nearest blood, for by that means it was easy for them to gain that,
which otherwise had been difficult, because such disagreements are most
implacable that have had power to destroy natural affections, for there is no
hate like that, which is translated out of love.

Fourthly, It is one of the most principal respects that should be in a
Prince, to be able to contain his own secrets, and in all his important
affairs, to understand more than he shall discover; for by this means, he
shall both delude the purpose of him that would deceive him, and by Pollitique
observations discover designs far off.

Fifthly, Moral.
Particular disquiets in a Moral life, are civil wars that would destroy a
blessed peace, for as every man is a little world. So the order or disorder of
that world has resemblance and fit comparison with the state of this world.

CHAP. XV.
A Discourse of the miseries of man's life upon occasion of the Duke of
Somersets death.
FIRST, It is true that at our birth we begin to die, Life is a sickness.
our life being no better then a continual sickness, which (by many
extremities) lead us to our grave, the sanctuary and house of Rest; and
therefore the best men have least desired it, The contempt of life.
and the holiest despised it, and that which does stay them from the fruition
of eternal happiness, and tie them to the bondage of flesh (which of all
other prisons) is most slavish; especially to a soul of divine and heavenly
contemplation. For the holy men of all ages have never thought it burden some
to die, but have desired death, to release them from the miseries of life,
neither have they feared the Image of death, Holy men never feared the Image of
death.
when it has been presented in the most dreadful form, that Tyrants and
wicked men could devise: because such men make their life but servant to their
death, desiring only to live to the glory of their God, that so they may die
in his favor; Holy death sets open the gates of life.
for such death sets open the gates of eternity, whereas every hour of this
our transitory life, is subject to many deaths, and many hard extremities.

Secondly, The experience of this is common, and therefore less admirable;
neither is it strange that Christian men should despise transitory life, and
the vain glory of flesh, because they are bound thereto by the duty of
Christianity; Christ himself, the examples of Christians, both commanding and
commending it. And therefore is this obedienc^ most worthy in the Children of
Grace, The Children of Grace. The sons of nature.
but most strange in the sons of Nature, such as have only a general
understanding of God, and of his mighty power, not knowing him in his mercy,
nor in the hope of salvation; who by the natural judgment of sense, The
judgment of sense can judge misery of man's life.
could judge the miseries of man's life, and therefore would prefer death
before a life so unconstant and variable. Such were the noble spirits of many
worthy men in former ages; and such were many of those grave and learned
Philosophers, The ancient Romans and Grecia^s.
who contemned the vain glory of man's life, and triumphed in the hope of
death, being their comfort, and that which in their opinion, would conclude
their infinite travel, and secure them in the pleasure of perpetual rest. And
such were they who understanding the immortality of the soul, and how the
faculties thereof were let in their divine offices, by the indisposition of
their bodies, and the natural pronenesse thereof to adversity and evil, would
(by violent death) have freed their souls from the prison of their flesh. The
which howsoever it was by the rule of Religion, Against the rule of Religion.
both damnable and foolish; yet they not knowing Religion nor the duty of
conscience, gave a notable demonstration how much they esteemed death, A
notable demonstration
more than a life so full of misery and change.

Thirdly, Such is the miserable condition of man's life, as that every minute
thereof is subject to evil change, no man having power to resist the infinite
number of occasions that daily threaten him: insomuch as if God withdraw his
providence, and leave us to our guidance: Man has more to afflict him than all
other Creatures. Because of sin.
we are then the most miserable of all others, having more to afflict us than
all the other creatures of God* because by our offending the Lord of all, we
have made both him and them our enemies. So that all occasions and every work
of nature, watch the advantage of Gods sufferance, to revenge themselves on
man, for whose sin they have endured the curse of evil. And from hence does
issue the infinite number of grieuances, The cause of the many grieuances of
man's life.
which continually threaten the prosperity of man's life, whereby the most
pleasurable time of man's life, is subject to this great misery, that he cannot
secure any little continuance of those pleasures, wherein he so delights:
neither can he prevent the sorrows of his life, nor rid himself from the
least of them; neither can he (as he is natural) with any patience bear them.
So that both with them and without them, he is most miserable, and so for ever
would be, if the mercy of God, did not supply to this weakness, and evil
condition of our Nature.

Fourthly, Now to relate some particulars of these infinite miseries, I first
begin with sickness, Sickness.
an infirmity that begins with our life, Sickness ordained to subdue the
pride of our nature.
and ends in our grave, which God has ordained to subdue the pride of man's
nature, least being puffed up with too much prosperity, we should forget that we
are mortal and but creatures. And this in a double respect is very grievous to
our Natures: A double respect. First, the number of sicknesses.
first in respect of the diversity of sicknesses, which being infinite in
number, seem like so many enemies to threaten our tranquillity and quiet.
Secondly, the generality. All men being subject at all times to all infirmities.
Secondly, in respect of our selves, all men being at all times, subject to all
infirmities. And therefore they that have heaped the glory and treasure of this
world, and seem to ingrosse the pleasures of this life, are notwithstanding
arrested by sickness, Rich men.
and that many times with such violence as they earnestly desire death, to
release them of the miseries of life, neither is the basest condition of men,
exempt from this general infirmity, The poor and the rich are both alike
^fflicted with sickness.
the rich and the poor, the base and the Noble, being in this respect equals,
all men being alike servants to the sorrow of sickness, whose general power
preuailes to the destruction of all flesh.

Fifthly, Poverty of life.
Another maine grieuance is poverty of life, which does depresse the spirits of
many, which otherwise would rise to those deseruings, which in the judgment of
the world are most honorable. And this is both in it self evil and a
punishment for sin, and also in general opinion it is most hateful,
Poverty hateful to men.
and that which (almost) all men carefully shun, because in the reputation of
the world, men are estimated not according to their being, what they are; but
after their having, how much they are in the favor of fortune. The false
opinion of the world.
And such men are only esteemed honorable, and best worthy who are most
worth, in vain and vile possessions; the better sort of men, commonly enjoying
the least part of those earthly blessings, which God has given his creatures;
by which uneven distribution it comes to pass, that many times the
honorable man, The honorable and the vile man do o^cupi^ on the others place.
has the vilde place; and the vilde man the honorable, the servant many times
exceeding his Lord, in the true worth of honesty, and virtue, by whom he is
exceeded in vain glory and honor. And this must needs be a great deiection to
such as have spirit to understand themselves for when men live in a
disproportion to their worth, Want d^iecteth the spirits of well deserving men.
it exceedingly blunteth that alacrity and good spirit, which (in a better
condition of fortune) would be graceful. The grief of noble spirits.
And surely it cannot but grieve the spirit of understanding men, to see the
blockish and most unworthy, like idols with ornaments and trappings to be
invested with dignities, and high preferments that only know to use those
dignities to their covetous profit, and not to any honorable deserving. And
though poverty to a good man, Poverty to a good man is like the foil to the
Diamond.
be but like the foil to a diamond, to make it appear the more beautiful,
yet generally to mankind it is most hateful, and that which is only endured
by necessity, and Christian patience, The desperate effects of poverty.
begetting many times most dangerous discontentments in them of best
apprehension, and obscuring the gifts of God and nature, which otherwise would
appear most glorious.

Sixthly Again, Mutability and change.
the variable change of man's life, whereby he is violently carried to many
disagreeing ends, sometime to the better sometime to the worse, according to
the several power of occasions: insomuch as in this respect a man is like a
vessel at Sea, The continual trouble of man's life.
driven with many contrary winds, too and fro, always in the extremities of
storm and weary passage, neither can any man ariue his peaceful port before
death bring him to his grave, The grave the resting place.
his life being nothing but a breath of contrary winds bearing him to endure
the misery of many hard and variable fortunes. And this evil is most sensible
to those unto whom Fortune has been most gracious; who enjoying the pleasures
of life with full appetite, and by the change of fortune, forced to change that
state, wherein they thought themselves most happy. For then is adversity in
full strength, (...)
being in him whose former life has been most prosperous; for the common
enduring of bitterness and misery, dulleth the edge thereof, and makes it (by
much less sensible) to him whom Custom has made familiar with grief;
Custom is another nature.
neither are men's natures so inclineable to the good, as to the bad alteration;
it being general in all men to move themselves, Men by their natural motions
move to evil, but to goodness by the moving of Grace.
to their own destruction, the motion to perfection not being our own, but
the work of Grace, which only has the glory of every good work.

Seventhly, It were needless to give particular instance of this mutability of
fortune, every particular man having instance in himself to witness it, and
for those of extraordinary glory and greatness we may remember that Roman
Conqueror, That Roman Conqueror.
who passing the streets of Rome in the glory of his Triumph, had his brains
beaten forth with a Tyle, which by casualty fell upon him, The Duke of Somerset.
or that of better memory the Duke of Somerset. (the occasion of this
discourse,) who from the highest degree of a Subject, fell into the ignominy
of Treason and untimely timely death. And therefore the ancient Romans
understanding ^he misery of variable fortune ordained, A custom among the
ancient Romans.
that when any of their worthy Captains, should ride in triumph; a slave
should ride with him in his triumphall Chariot, holding fast with his slavish
hand, the laurel Crown upon the Conquerours head, who then did triumph* both
to moderate the vain glory of the Conqueror, and also to remember him, to
what condition he himself was subject, and therefore in respect of mutability
of fortune, Variable fortune makes men miserable.
is man's life most miserable, no man being able to secure himself in any
reasonable condition of life.

Eighthly, Discontent
But that which of all other is most burdensome is Discontent, the disease of
the soul, and that which of all other infirmities is most dangerous, Mind.
and hard to cure, especially in spirits of best apprehension, and in them who
have aspired the reputation of high place. Discontent a dangerous disease.
For the spirits of great men, are not moved to impatience without dangerous
events, because their anger makes them willing, and their greatness makes them
able to revenge. The danger in discontenting great spirits.
And therefore such men are never disco^ntent, but it provoke either their
own or other men's destruction; neither is this evil tied to particular men
only, but like a general Plague it spreads it self over all degrees of men,
though not in like vehemency. For the best, and the worst, the basest and the
most noble, have at some time their discontents, All men have at some times
their discontents.
whereby they are offended in themselves, and wish to die; and that which is
more admirable, those men renowned for holiness of life, have had this
loathing to live, and desired to die as Job, Elias, Holy men have been
discontented.
and many other holy men, which may well conclude the misery of a discontented
mind, and how insupportable it is in his extremity, for as the soul exceeds
the body in the excellency of their Natures; Grief is a greater torment then
sickness.
So the grieuances of the soul, are much more sensible to our faculties, then
those of our bodies; because grief is properly belonging to the soul, and to
the body only by consequence or participation. And if I were to define the
greatest misery on earth next to that of hell, The greatness of Discontent.
sin, and damnation, I should call it discontent in his extremity, because
(next the sorrow of sin) the living part of man his soul, has not any thing
of like torment and affliction: and as all other miseries are the seed from
whence does proceed this Monster Discontent. So from discontent can be expected
no better then destruction and death.

Ninthly, The last misery of our life is Death, Death.
the which at one stroke does revenge all the evil of man's life; and this
howsoever in it self it be not evil. yet in men's general understanding, it
is thought the worst of all evils, and the most fearful of all other
miseries. And therefore the very name of death, has oftentimes stroke
astonishment and terror in the hearts of tyrants and evil men; knowing that
death was an enemy, Death an enemy against whom there is no resistance.
against whom there was no resista^ce, having prevailed against them of the
first age, though they lived many hundreds of years. For if the honors and
pleasures of this life were infinite, and the enioyers of them eternal, then
were not the life of man so miserable a condition; but having death to
control the most glorious among men, Death does control the prosperities of
our life.
and to deprive them of their prosperity and honors; in this respect the best
of man's life, is no better then misery and grief, because he foreseeth the end
of all his prosperity, the remembrance of death sowring the greatest part of
the pleasures of life, every man having grief to loose that wherein he so
much delights.

Tenthly, Yet Death though his power be geuerall over all flesh, is not
therefore a misery to all men, Death is not a misery to all men.
but to many an end most happy and desired. For though it be a curse for sin
to be mortal and die, yet is Death most happy to them that die well: God by
the death of his Son, having reconsiled himself to his servant Man; Death
makes holy men immortal.
which by no other means could be made immortal. But this condition of
happiness, is not in the Nature of Man; Good men hope for death and bad men
fear it.
but in the favor and grace of God. And therefore is death that which good men
hope, and bad men fear; the poor man's comfort and the rich man's terror, and
that which makes the King and the Subject, Death and the grave make all things
equal
the rich and the poor equal, making of every man's flesh but earth and
putrefaction. And therefore the life of man even from the womb to the Grave,
is nothing but misery, and vexation of Sipirit, no natural man having the
pleasures thereof, No man has pleasures but with limitation.
but with such limitation, as makes pleasure it self burdensome.

Eleuenthly, The holy and good men of the world not otherwise regarding life,
then as a time wherein to exercise their Christian offices, To good men there
is no misery.
and to such there is no misery, neither in life nor death: happy are such to
whom God shall give Grace to despise the vain glory of earth, and that use
the creatures of God with christian moderation, How to use the pleasures of
this life.
not affecting them more then the Lord of them, nor applying them to any other
end then holiness, for which all things were created; and most happy are they
who for the honor of their God, Who are happy.
and for the testimony of his truth, have forsaken the pleasures of this
transitory life, and have given themselves a sacrifice to God, for so to die is
to enjoy immortality and perpetual rest.

CHAP. XVI.
Of King Edwards Death and how he left the State to the next Successor.
FIRST, it were foolish and vain for any man, to desire to know the secrets of
Gods will; because no man can understand more of Gods secret, No man can know
any part of Gods secrets unless God reueals them.
than he himself shall please to reveal: and therefore is man's knowledge
limited, being able only to iudg^ by reason, and consequence; whereas Gods
divine works exceed the judgment of sense, God not contrary but above reason.
being (not contrary but) above the reach of reason. And from this cause is it,
that men commonly offend in their false constructions, The cause of false
constructions.
judging of Gods work grossly, according to humane understanding, and not
considering his wisdom and power by whose providence all things are directed.
For in Gods matters Christians must believe, In divine matters Christians must
believe when they cannot judge
when they cannot judge, and it is sufficient argument to conclude the
goodness of any work, when we know that God is the Author: for those things
which to a natural man seem strange, to a reformed judgment appear much
otherwise; and there is nothing be it never so evil in man's judgment but God
can make it serve for the work of his glory: The use that God can make of all
our actions.
he being able to make the evils of men respect an end beyond their
expectations, and in that wherein we judge our selves, most miserable, can he
make us most happy.

Secondly, And for particular instance we may consider K. Edward, K. Edward.
whom God elected from among many thousands for the work of his glory; having
defended the Catholic Faith, with a resolution most zealous and constant; yet
notwithstanding in the growth of his prosperity, did God take him from the
world, and deprive the Children of faith, of their Patron, The wonderful
effects of Gods providence.
and princely Defendor, whereby (in common judgment) God may seem to be
offended with his own, and to leave his Saints undefended, to the stroke of
persecution, from which this holy King had defended them* But thus to judge of
God were wicked and false; because we see the Gospel (by that interruption)
did spread it self with much more general acceptance: the blood of holy
Martyrs being a holy seed, The blood of the Martyrs was the seed of the Gospel.
whereby the Church spread into a large generation, and who knows but God (to
manifest to all the world, the faith and obedience of his holy Saints in the
Church of England,) suffered this persecution for the glory of their memory,
and for a demonstration to all men, what numbers of true Catholic Christians
had flourished under the protection of King Edward their Patron and princely
Defendor. The Saints hereby exchanging their mortal and variable life, for
eternity and perpetual rest; their deaths begetting the lives of many holy men
like them, The deaths of a few, was the life of many.
whereby the number of Gods servants was much augmented, to the glory of God,
and prosperity of his Church. And therefore let no man condemn the work of
Gods providence, but yield his obedience to the good pleasure of God, and let
him know that God is merciful even in his judgments; God is merciful in his
judgments.
and that he can make that which does seem to threaten us most, to be the
Ladder whereby we may ascend the highest of all preferments, the favor of God,
and the fellowship of his holy Saints.

Thirdly, The Kings death.
King Edward being dead, the state grew very stormy and full of great
business the cause being who should succeed the King, in which controversy
the kingdom was divided; Great occasions of trouble in the kingdom.
the greatest part of the Counsel, and the Nobility, proclaiming Lady Jane
Daughter to the Duke of Suffolk, whose Mother was Daughter to Mary King
Henry's Sister, first married to the French King, and after to Charles Brandon
Duke of Suffolk. The nobility and comm^ns disagree in the choice of their
Prince.
But the greatest part of the Commons, and some of the Nobility, adhering to
Lady Mary eldest Daughter to King Henry the Eighth, by his first wife Queen
Katherine of Spain: and this occasion was the trouble and death of many
honorable and worthy personages; King Edward evil counseled.
For whether King Edward of his own election, or wrought by the persuasion of
others (I know not) had by his last Will and Testament, interested the Lady
Jane, to the inheritance of his kingdoms; for this cause (as was pretended)
that the State might still continue the profession of the Protestant Religion,
which could not be hoped in the government of Queen Mary. But howsoever the
King did thus bequeath his kingdoms, it is very likely he was drawn thereto
by persuasion of his nobles; especially of the two Dukes; Northumberland and
Suffolk the cause of this great injury Reasons why the King did it not of his
own motion but by persuasion.
Northumberland and Suffolk, because hereby the inheritance was conueyghed to
their issue, to whom (in right) it did not belong, neither is it likely the
King of his own motion, would have disinherited his own Legitimate sisters,
to interest one further off. And if Religion was the cause, why was not choice
rather made of Queen Elizabe^h, then Lady Jane? She being by much nearer in
the degrees of blood, and altogether as assured in the Protestant Religion. And
therefore certainly the King was moved by others to offer this injury to his
nearest blood

Fourthly, A doubtful question resolved.
And if the question be demanded, whether in this case it was lawful for the
King to translate the inheritance of his kingdoms. I answer, that howsoever
the pretense is fair and good, yet was the practice evil, because wrong was
offered; and those ends are never good, Good ends cannot be compassed by evil
means.
the which are compassed by evil means; and to translate inheritance where it
ought not, is to contradict Gods providence, by whose wisdom all things are
ordered. And therefore (no doubt) this offense of those Dukes and their
confederates, conspiring with them this unlawful end, was the cause that God
did suffer the power of their enemies, to prevail to their destruction. God is
the Father of truth.
For God is the Father of Truth, and the God of Justice; neither would he that
men should attempt to alter the course of his providence, or (by any violent
and evil means) pursue an end, be it never so Religious and holy. What good
men must do.
For good men must use only good means to reach good ends. And therefore this
practice of these Dukes in the judgment of Religion was not good,
notwithstanding in state practice it has example, and may seem allowable.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
there is no pretense how fair soever, can give authority and strength to
unlawful actions. For God who is all-sufficient, and who has decreed all good
things, has likewise devised all good means to compass them; therefore every
good work does consist of lawful matter and form, for no evil thing can be
well done, neither can any good thing be done euilly.

Secondly, When God by death does prevent the hopes that are had of a virtuous
Prince, it does not argue against the worthiness of the Prince, but it does
argue and conclude the unworthiness of the times, for in such a case the
Prince does inherit happiness, but his people suffer misery.

Thirdly, It was both foolish and wicked in the two Dukes, Northumberland and
Suffolk to labor to erect and secure a state to their posterity, with
injuries so apparent, and palpable. For though God many times suffer intrusions
into titles, he does never establish them.

Fourthly, Pollitique.
In the discretion of State it cannot be thought otherwise, but where there is
usurpation and false intrusion, there is a miserable affliction with fear and
Iealosie, which neither the power or policy of any such State can avoid, so
long as God shall not suffer their violence to prevail against the lives of
the true inheritors.

Fifthly, It is a Pollitique wisdom in a Prince to suspect the sincerity of
al such state advise, that has principal reference to the advancement of such
Counselors. For in this case it is often true, that men will not speak their
judgments but their affections.

Sixthly, Moral
To be ordered by lawfulness in all our actions, is not only the judgment of
conscience but of humanity and Moral discipline; For Moral learning does
determine that there is nothing profitable, that is not lawful.

CHAP. XVII.
A Comparison between King Josias of Judah, and King Edward of England.
FIRST, Josias of Judah and Edward of England.
to compare King Josias of Judah, with King Edward of England, is the most
equal comparison of any two in the Story of holy Kings, both of them having
with equal diligence, and victory, fought Gods quarrel, to the glory of their
God, the reformation of his service, the abolishing of Idolatry, and the
confusion of the evil Ministers thereof. First, Their age when they began
their Reign.
for their age when they began their Reigns: King Josias began his government
the eighth year of his age; and King Edward the ninth of his, wherein they
very nearly consent, and whereby God has given proof to the world, that the
power of his Spirit, can as well prevail in them of youth, as in those of
better years and experience; he being able to make the Child and the strong
man, alike victorious, in a cause which he shall please to protect; as was
this of these two holy Kings, Both of these Kings conspiring one holy end.
both of them equally conspiring one end, (the truth of Religion) and holy
worship. Again, Amon, Josias his Father left the kingdom of Judah in the
exercise of Idolatry, and so did King Henry Edwards Father leave the State of
England in the practice of Popish Idolatry; Both their Kingdoms were
corrupted with idolatry.
having only by suppressing of Abbeyes, taken from those Idols their ornaments
and wealth, not utterly destroying them as did Josias and King Edward. Again,
Josias when he understood the will of God by hearing his Chancellor Shaphem
read the book of the Law, did accordingly frame himself in all obedience. So
King Edward when he understood by the Learned men of his Realm, Both of them
yield their obed^ence to holy persuasion and effect their purpose
such as Cranmer, Latymer, Ridley and others, followed the Lords business with
like zeal and constancy, as did Josias; not only abolishing the false, but
establishing the true form of Gods service. Again, as Josias left the
kingdom of Judah to an evil Successor, his Son Iehoahaz, who again provoked
the people to Idolatry: Both these Kings left their States to holy ends but
evil successors.
So likewise King Edward left the inheritance of the Church and kingdom of
England, to his Sister Mary, who (like Iehoahaz Josias his Son) did again
restore the evil practice of Idolatry and superstitious Popery utterly
defacing the godly building, which her holy Brother had so carefully erected.
Again, as God did keep his promise with Josias, which was to preserve Israel
the time of his life, in prosperity and rest. Both of them fortunate to their
Kingdoms.
So did God likewise preserve England in plenty and victory, all the time of
King Edward. And therefore these two holy kings, seem to conspire in all save
their deaths. Josias dying in the field, king Edward in his bed; the one
reigning thirty and one years, the other but six years and odd months; and
yet in this has king Edward the greater honor, The honor of King Edward.
that he in six years did happily finish that, which the other was thirty one
years in compassing, but above all has he exceeded him in leaving to
posterity that most famous Defendresse the Lady Elizabeth his Sister, Q.
Elizabeth.
who afterward did prove the glory of her Sex, and the admiration of all the
world.

OF QVEENE MARIE, AND of the alteration of the State in the beginning of her
Time.
CHAP. XVIII.
FIRST, I am now to change my Argument, and to write not of mercy, but of
misery, of the adversity, not of the prosperity of the Gospel, and how the
Catholic Faith was offended and not defended, Q. Marie. The change she made
in the Church of England.
by the Successor Queen Marie, who made the most miserable change in the state
of England, that ever that Nation endured; she defacing the glorious work of
her Predecessor of K. Edward her princely brother, extinguishing the lights of
Truth, The light of Truth put out.
whereby men were directed in the way of life, and obscuring al knowledge in
the mist of Ignorance, and black error, in which blindness the Christian
world had for many years wandered. This Eclipse being now again (by the
interpositio^ of her dark time) brought upon this Nation. The Queen obscured
the glory of this Nation.
So that no light of Truth was in her time to be seen, save only at the
burning Stakes of Martyrs, which holy fire did kindle a Religious zeal in many
Spectators, that beheld the merciless cruelty of the tormentors, and the
Christian patience of holy Saints tormented.

Secondly, And therefore I am not (as before) to declare wherein Queen Marie
has defended the Catholic Faith, The purpose of the History of this Queens
time.
because she never defended it in the least particular: but (of the contrary)
how she did bend the powers of her endeavor, both against the profession and
the professors of true Christian Faith, seeking by all violent and bloody
means, to depresse the prosperity of Religion, whereof (by the dignity of her
place) she was made defendresse. And in Truth it does grieve me that I am to
write the dishonor of this Queen; which willingly I would avoid, were the
cause any other but Religion, and but that the declaration of these times, do
tie me to a necessity of Truth, from which I dare not aberre: The truth of
History must not for any consideration be concealed.
for it were an evil presumption in any one, to presume to write History, and
then to obscure the truth thereof upon what cause soever. For thereof would
issue a double inconvenience. The inconvenience of misreporting the truth of
History.
First he should wrong the understandings of men in misreporting the Truth, and
also lay an evil imputation on his name, in suppressing the knowledge of Truth;
which is the life and true moving soul of all History.

Thirdly, Queen Marie her extraordinary induments of Nature.
And this I write in favor of Q. Marie, because of her extraordinary induments
of Nature. God having given her so much Majesty, and princely spirit, as might
serve to rule the greatest command in the world; and if to her other gifts, God
had given her the knowledge of his Truth, she had well deserved to have been
named most excellent, and to have exceeded all the famous Queens in the world,
save her sister the most famous Elizabeth, Q. Elizabeth incomparable.
who has exceeded her and all the world in the honor of true deserving.

Fourthly, Yet notwithstanding, all these rare excellencies of nature merit
little but only pity: for if the best beauty of nature, have not the benefit
of grace, the greatest ornaments thereof, are (then) but punishment to them that
so enjoy them. And therefore they that have not the gifts of grace, have
nothing of worth though they have all that nature can give them: Nature without
grace does merit nothing.
and happy had Q. Marie been if nature had given her less, and grace more;
The least gift of grace is more worth then the whole riches of Nature.
because any little breath of Gods Spirit is more worth than all other
blessings whatsoever; For nature adornes the body, and grace the soul of every
one that has it, The gifts of Grace.
and commonly where the power of wit and great spirit is in any one Subject,
not moderated by grace, The gifts of nature without grace are dangerous in him
that has them.
they are then means to make the enioyers of them most dangerous instruments,
because nature cannot move it self to good, but naturally to evil; and as the
natural motion is more easy to the mouer than the violent. The motion of
Grace is (...) against Nature.
So the gifts of nature are more inclinable to evil than to good ends, being
moved to evil by their own proper motion, but to goodness by the motion of
grace, which in all natural things is violent and against nature. And therefore
was the Q. more dangerous, having so much of nature, because she was thereby
armed for evil, the want of grace making her run her natural course, and her
great spirit and other natural induments, The Queen an enemy to her self.
spurring her forward in her evil passage, whereby she became enemy to her
self, moving her self to her own destruction.

Fifthly, The Q. great oversight.
But that which made Q. Marie monstrous in her evil, was the two much credit
she gave to evil counsel, suffering her self to be transported, Gardener,
Bonner the Queens evil instruments.
by the violent spirits of evil and reuengefull men, who conceiving a grounded
displeasure for some hard usage they endured in K. Edwards time, now take
advantage to revenge the cause for which they had endured displeasure; and
these men (like evil spirits) breathed the spirits of indignation into the
Queens heart, and moved her to effect most bloody and horrible deeds, to the
great displeasure of God, and dishonor of her princely place.

Sixthly, for it cannot be imagined that a Lady of her spirit, The Q* good
nature much abused.
being (in humane respects) merciful and compassionate, would have entered her
government with such tyranny and terror; She entered her government with great
Tyranni^.
bearing in both hands destruction, and (like Revenge her self) entering the
stage of her government with fire and blood) had she not been moved thereto by
evil persuasion. Neither can it be but the Q. conscience would condemn the
course of her violent proceeding, and that she would judge the large effusio^
of christian blood, stood not with the honor of her name, nor with the Truth
of Religion: yet so powerful is the authority of them we trust, Those we
trust most may best deceive us.
(especially in the case of Religion and conscience,) as that many times we
suffer our selus to be led against our own perswasio^s, by a reverence we bear
to other men's opinions

Seventhly, And this no doubt was the cause why the Queen was so resolved in
in her bloody persecutions, A bad persuasion.
she giving credit to their persuasion whom she reputed most Reverend, and
Learned; and they persuading her, she could not discharge the office of her
Sovereign place, nor defend the Catholic Faith, but by the extirping the
Protestant Religion, which (in their opinion) was Heresy in the highest
degree: neither could she (as they thought) suppress the general favor,
that profession had got in general estimation; but by severity and rigorous
laws, These evil Counselors much deceived.
wherein they were far deceived For it is impossible that any Policy of man
should be able to supplant Gods Husbandry, which he has made prosperous: the
Truth whereof is manifest in the experience of these persecuting times, when as
the death of one holy man was the life of many. God raises a new generation of
holy men, from the ashes of Martyrdom.
God raising a holy generation out of the ashes of his holy Martyrs, the Church
not decresing but increasing by the stroke of persecution. And in this case
was the Queen counseled, as Rehoboams was by his young states men, to make
the yoke of persecution heavy: and whereas her Father did chastise with
rodds, she should correct with scourges: and this was the evil counsel
wherewith the Queen was ordered, 1 King. 12. 10
for she made her yoke heavier than all her Predecessors had done, and (in
truth) insupportable for any true Christian Professor.

Eighthly, Their Counsel was wicked policy, but no piety.
And therefore this Counsel of theirs may have Policy but no Piety, for if
the State in King Edwards time, had used Gardener and Bonner with like
severity, and had taken from them their evil lives, which they had justly
forfeited, then had not these evil Ministers been the cause of so much blood
shed, neither happily, should the Queen have had any such as they, to have
provoked her to such dishonor and ungodly practice; A respect of policy.
for it is needful Policy, that the haughty spirits of men, that have
authority and greatness, must either not be offended, or being moved to
offense, must be then made sure from taking Revenge. And it had been good for
the Christian State, that the ambitious spirit of Winchester, had either not
been discontented, by his disgrace and imprisonment, or being so offended, to
have made him sure from reuengefull practice; and if this had thus come to
pass, no doubt much Christian blood had been saved, which by his means
perished. Neither had the Queen come into that ignominy of blood and cruelty;
Gardener the evil spirit which most tempted the Queen to her severity.
she being in her own Nature rather inclined to pity, and merciful respect
then otherwise. And therefore though the time of Queen Mary's government, was
the most bloody persecution that ever was in this Land, (I think) ever since
it had a Christian Prince, yet was this Lady, otherwise disposed in her own
Nature; neither would she have made her name so monstrous in blood, The power
of conscience.
had not her conscience persuaded a necessity, she being so resolved by their
persuasion, who (she thought had authority to judge her.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
Divinity does admit no distinction of men, but the difference of good and bad;
for Gods favor does not look as man's does; men judge by external, but God by
internal evidence. God is no accepter of persons, but men accept nothing but
the persons of men: and therefore it is often seen, that thus God and the world
divide their seueralls; God marks his with Grace, the world hers with Nature
and Fortune.

Secondly, Pollitique.
It is a policy of long practice and large proof, that Priests, Jesuits,
and men of spiritual function, are appointed for State designs, as the most
pregnant and convenient m^n; for they have this odds, that besides their helps
of learning, and much experience; they have always the reverence of their
profession, which undoubtedly (with people of their own faith) does gain
them, and their persuasions extraordinary credit.

Thirdly, Moral.
It is a providence worthy of every particular man, not rashly to be moved to
any fact or opinion, by the love or reverence we have to the persons of them
that would persuade us; because in this case we do not satisfy reason, but
affection.

CHAP. XIX.
In what particulars Queen Marie did most offend the Catholic Faith.
FIRST, to remember every particular grieua^ce in this Queens time, were a
labor infinite, neither is it my purpose to travel so largely therein, as
others before me have done. And therefore I will (only) reduce to memory,
some particulars of most consequence, referring him that shall require further
satisfaction, to the ecclesiastical writings of those times, wherein they are
largely discoursed: The Duke of Northumberland.
neither among these the evil fortunes of the Duke of Northumberland, nor of
his Son and daughter, the Lord Gilford Dudley, and the Lady Jane his Wife,
because the Duke has worthily deserved his fortunes, The Duke guilty of his
fortunes.
and therefore did not receive wrong from the Queen and State. And though the
Lady Jane and the Lord Gilford her Husband, were forced to take the
enterprise, they themselves being merely passive in that business, yet having
proceeded therein so far as they did. I see not how Queen Marie could give
them life and secure her self, especially considering the present condition of
the State, In respect of State.
how inclineable it was then to embrace any occasion of quarrel.

Secondly, The Q. first offense.
That wherein the Queen did first offend the Christian Faith, was in taking
into her protection, such who had before declared themselves enemies to truth
and Religion, and this was at her first coming to the Crown, giving liberty
and honor to such men, whom her princely brother had before imprisoned,
Gardener Bonner and others.
and degraded; for by this she opened hell, and let loose those evil spirits
which King Edward had shut up; who breathing Revenge, set the Kingdom in
combustion, The cruelties of these times.
burning and bloodying the holiest and best members thereof, to the dishonor
of the Prince and Nation; the discomfort of holy Christians, and to the
discountenance of the Catholic Faith, A double respect.
and this (in a double respect) was evil in Queen Marie: First,

Thirdly, How the Q. began her government
And with this prologue, did Queen Marie begin the Tragedy of her life,
fitting her with actors who had well learned their parts of blood and
persecution; outtruding them of much better merit, whom she found in
honorable and Reverend places established, D. Cranmer and others.
as Doctor Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, the Archbishop of York, the
Bishop of Winchester and many others, giving their dignities and places to
their greatest enemies; men not comparable to them in learning and holy life,
exceeding them only in cruelty and blood: who having gotten the sword of
authority (once) into their hands, The Papists.
would not sheath it, before it had been made drunk with the blood of Saints,
nor before the measure of their sins were full, whom God (for the pleasure of
his will, and for the glory of his Saints) did suffer and for a time forbear.

Fourthly, in restoring the Nurseries of all abominations, In restoring the
Abbeyes.
the Abbeyes and Monasteries she had in giving; she did much offend the
Catholic Faith; because those assemblies were found to abuse the name of
holiness, making it a cloak to cover the body of their wickedness: who
(like horseleeches) suck the blood and best maintenance of the Kingdom, The
evil of a bloody life.
to support their lazy and most licentious trade of living; In respect of
State.
and in this did the Queen not only offend the truth of Religion, but also
the prosperity of her State in being so evil a president, and in giving so
much wealth to idle and altogether unprofitable people, and not only idle but
evil users of their riches and large possessions; Idle and evil users of
wealth.
to the high offending of God, the wrong to Christian Religion, and the
impouerishing of the Commonwealth: all which respects the Queen ought
carefully to have regarded.

Fifthly, Again, the Queen restoring them did condemn the government of her
Father, The Queen in her judgment condemned her Father.
by whom they were dissolved, her making them of such necessity in a Christian
Kingdom, made him an evil doer to suppress them, whereby she did dishonor
her Father in that wherein he was most honorable, he deserving the honor of
his new style, in this and in his act of Supremacy only; both which she
utterly disclaimeth, damning the deed, The Queen erecteth that Idolatry which
her Father had defaced.
and the honorable merit of her Father, building again that evil foundation,
which he to his honor had cast down. And therefore if he by suppressing them
has deserved to be styled Defendor of the Faith: she then by supporting
them, E contrario.
may be judged to have offended that Catholic Faith whereof she was made
Defendresse.

Sixthly, But that which is most worthy of sad remembrance in this Queens time
was the alteration of Religion: The worst of the Queens evils.
she reducing the Church of England to their former condition of Popish
Idolatry, which (in the happy time of King Edward) had been discontinued, she
inhibiting al her subjects upon grievous pains, Her establishing of Popery.
to acknowledge that profession of Religion, which she found in the State
established, binding them to severe laws, to that Romish obedience which
formerly they had abiured.

Seventhly, And in this she did oppose her self with all violence against the
Catholic Faith, Her full opposition against the Catholic Faith.
as if she meant at one blow to be the death of faith and true religion; Her
forwardnes in punishing.
she disclaiming the good and proclaiming the bad; destroying Gods holy Temple,
to build the groaues and altars of Idols, and this she did with such appetite,
that her government was scarce begun before this was finished. So easily is
ma^s nature carried by violence and forcible pursuit, Man's nature.
to execute the most wicked and ungodly ends.

Eighthly, And as this alteration of Religion, The alteration of Religion is
prejudicial to the Commo^-Wealth.
was greatly to the offense of Catholic Faith, so was it also very
prejudicial to the State, the Kingdom hereby loosing the Lordship of it
self, which King Henry with much hazard, and great travel had recovered. And
assuredly if the Q. conscience could have been persuaded, she would never for
any cause, The Q* conscience abused.
have given the Pope or any other Potentate, the supremacy of her own state,
and among all other least of all to the Pope, The Pope has not principality
proper.
who has no principality proper, but only a government compounded of many
thefts; he having taken from every christian Prince somewhat of reuenew or
dignity to make up the measure of his greatness. And it was great oversight in
the Q. to commend the trust of her state to the Pope, The Q. oversight.
whose ambition and avarice, has made him ever inclineable to deceive: for
when the covetous has the treasure in keeping, it is hard to make him honest;
and he that has nothing but by theft, will be glad to embrace opportunity and
fit occasion. And therefore by thus altering religion, The English nation
dishonored by the Queen.
she did not only offend the Catholic faith, but dishonor the English nation,
binding it again in the bonds of foreign power from which her brother had
redeemed it.

Ninthly, And from this act of Q. Mary's did proceed another equally evil or
worse, whereby she has got a name of blood and cruelty, and whereby she has
run her self into the highest degree of evil and this was the persecution of
holy and faithful men; The Q. persecutions of holy men.
slaughtering Gods Saints, with such fury and heathenish heat, as may well
declare the Religion and Faith of the persecutors. No profession of Religion
but the Popes that think to merit by blood and persecution.
For there is no profession of Christian Religion in all the world, except the
Papisticall that think to merit by murder, blood and persecution: neither is
there any that have made their names so odious, by the effusion of Christian
blood as they, whereby they have made themselves the friends or Antichrist, but
enemies to God, and to the truth of his holy Gospel. God having commanded his
servants to suffer, and not to inflict afflictions; for a Christians
profession, is to bear the Cross, Christians must bear the Cross and not
make it.
and not to make it; and in every evil work holy men must suffer, and wicked
men do, for such was the condition of Christ the Lord of Christians, bearing
the rebukes of all men; The example ^f Christ.
applying his sacred hands to heal the infirmities of men and not to wound and
destroy them, and as (in the Nature of God) his mercy does rejoice over all
his works, Mercy the (...) gift of grace.
so all the sons of Grace delight in the works of mercy, and abhor the
deeds of misery, and desire to preserve and not to destroy the Images of God,
nor the Temples of his holy Spirit, for such were these holy Martyrs, The
Martyrs.
who in this time of Queen Mary, witnessed the truth of their Christian
profession, in the burning flames of persecution and cruel torture.

Tenthly, So great was the persecution in these times, The vehemency of this
persecution.
as that no Sex, no age, nor any condition of men were spared, the blind, the
aged, and the Infant sleeping in the holy death of Martyrdom: And if we may
believe the remembrance of those miseries as they are recorded, For his book
of Acts and Monuments
then children newborn at the stake, did perish at the stake, little (but
holy) Martyrs giving their lives, as soon as they had them for the witness of
their Lord Christ Jesus, and his truth, an example of strange and incomparable
cruelty, yet did the envy of these times reach further, to the Sepultures of
holy men deceassed, Strange examples of envy.
where the persecutions even there also would triumph, raking up the bones and
ashes of good men, and after with great Ceremony and acclamation burn them; a
revenge very admirable, and such as only the malice of the devil could
devise. The grave is every man's Sanctuary.
For the Grave is every man's Sanctuary, from which no man nor no offense can
take him, without the breach of the Laws of Nature and humanity: and to
persecute and burn men's bones the life having long before left them, is a
Judgment most merciless, for the doom of Nature will have one man to die but
once, The doom of Nature.
neither ought revenge to reach the graves of our greatest enemies; it being
enough for any that his enemy is dead, but more then cruelty to revive his
death and to make him die again. And therefore as Job did blame his
uncomfortable friend, Note.
because they did persecute him as God, and were not content with his flesh. So
we may lawfully condemn this Popish persecution, A revenge like the revenge
of Devils.
because they revenge like Devils, and are not content with the Death of them
they love not, but will then persecute the body, when they cannot the soul.
God having taken that into his bosom of mercy, and into the saftie of his
protection.

Eleuenthly, And if we truly consider the bloody persecution of Queen Mary's
time, and with what vehemence it was moved, it will appear to be of like
cruelty with them of the heathen Emperors in the Primitive Church, This
persecution equal with them of the Primitive Church.
not for the number though very many, but for the manner and cruel
circumstance.

Twelfthly, Again the Queen in marrying with King Philip of Spain, King
Philip of Spain.
may be said to have offended the Catholic Faith, because by that means she
took away all hope, to be reclaimed from the stiff defense of Popish
superstition, The confederacy of the Spani^h King and the Pope
the King of Spain being in most near confederacy with the Pope. And this
how prejudicial it was to the profession of the Catholic Faith, may be easily
considered, he being chosen to assist the Queen in her defense of faith, by
whom the enemies of faith were principally to be supported, The Jesuits
supported by the Spanish King.
and one so nearely bound to the Popes favor, Rome and Spain the ladders of
one another rising.
in respect of State practice, the Pope and the Spanish King being one another
Ladder, whereby they have ascended the steps of reputation and worldly
greatness.

13. Again, if we regard the care of State, (...) respect of State.
the Queens marriage with the Spanish King, was not for the prosperity and
honor of the English Nation, but rather a means to depresse the glory
thereof. For howsoever the Queen and the State, did articulate with King
Philip, The Spanish King bound to certain conditions.
thinking thereby they had secured the souereigntie of England, by binding him
to certain Limitations; yet was that no assurance, but only a false color,
to blind and satisfy the gross understandings of the vulgar, lest by
Rebellion and tumult, they should oppose themselves against that purpose; for
it is not to be thought, No obligation can bind the desire of the ambitious.
that any obligation can bind such men, as aspire sovereignty, neither is it
in the practice of great States, to bind themselves, but only for advantage,
and then to cast off their bonds, when their practice is ripe, and when they
dare discover their true intentions. Note.
For bonds to him that has power to break them, rather offend then profit,
and in great Spirits, the remembrance to be tied to any Conditions, does beget
in them a desire of Liberty, and provokes them to break that faith, whereunto
they are obliged. And from this marriage of Queen Marie what could be hoped,
The inconvenience of the Queens Marriage.
but either civil strife in disposing the Succession, which by this means
might have had many Competitors, or else that this Kingdom and the dominions
thereof belonging, The greatness of Spain.
should have been united to the Sovereignty of Spain, which already (like
Hydra) is become monstrous in largeness; having united to that one body many
heads many large dominions. The expectation of Spain
And if this had succeeded (which no doubt was the expectation of Spain) then
had the glory of this Isle even then perished, and our condition had been alike
miserable as is now that heretofore famous Kingdom of Portingale, Portingale.
and other great States by him obtained. And this kingdom which heretofore
has benee the supporter of that, England the supporter of Spain.
should then have stood at discretion loosing the soueraigatie, and fortunate
honor which worthily had made it very famous; the ambition of that State
rising by the fall of ours; the misery of this raising the glory of that, and
we of Conquerors should have been servants, The inconvenience.
and slaves, to that people whom before we had conquered: and they (by our
oppression) should have wanted a power to have restrained them from the
general Conquest of Christendom, the which by us has principally been
let, and by them most desirously pursued. In respect of policy.
And therefore (in respect of Policy and the practice of State) this marriage
of Spain was very hurtful for our Nation, aiming directly at the utter
overthrow of the English Monarchy; wherein Queen Marie was neither Poilitique
nor Holy, The Queen neither pollitique nor holy.
not holy in not defending the Catholic Faith, combining her self so nearly
with the Popes Confederate; and not pollitique, in hazerding the honor of her
Kingdoms, in the hands of one so dangerous, as the King of Spain then was,
who already was so great, as made him justly feared, and his proceedings
suspected. God (of his goodness) disposing otherwise of this business, The
providence of God in this business.
deriuing still a Succession of Kingly power within our selves of our own
nation and of our own Kingly line; to the better defense of the Catholic
Faith, and to the perpetual honor of this our English Monarchy.

14. Lastly, Queen Marie in her vehement and unjust persecuting her most
virtuous Sister the Lady Elizabeth (afterward Queen) did hereby very much
offend the Catholic Faith, Queen Elizabeth.
because among all the Religions at that time in England; this Lady was
chief, not only for holiness of life, but also for her eminence of place,
and dignity; being heir apparent to the Crown, and in whom the hope of King
Henry's issue only remained. The hope of King Henry his issue.
And therefore the right of Succession remaining in her Royal person, made her
more than a private one, and made the evil of her Sisters persecution more
monstrous, being directed against the life of one both holy, and a Princess,
and to whom God had purposed, to give the inheritance of these kingdoms, and
the office to defend the profession of faith, and holy worship. And if we but
remember the most gracious government of this Lady, The government when she
was Q.
the time she was Queen, and how nobly she has defended the profession of
Faith and Religion, we shall thereby judge how much evil Queen Marie had
done, if the evil practice against her Sister Elizabeth had prevailed. Never
any Defendresse nor ever any Queen in the world, Queen Elizabeth incomparable.
having finished Gods quarrel with more honor, or with better resolution than
she did. And therefore if this holy life had perished, What hurt the Q. death
had been to Christendom
the glory of her honorable actions had been prevented, neither had the world
ever seen the admirations of her time, nor the several states of
christendom, ever had so noble a Patroness to support them, in their just
quarrels, against the aspiring insolency of the ambitious: nor had the holy
Saints on earth lived secure, under the late protection of her merciful wings,
whose holy faith she has victoriously defended against all oppositions,
cutting off (not by Policy) only (as did Judith) but by her power the head
of Holophernes (Idolatry.) Judith and Holophernes.
And thus triumphing in the spoil of Gods enemies she has purchased, an
everliving name of honor, and an everlasting inheritance in heaven, with God
and with the Children of Faith, The glory of Queen Elizabeth's deeds.
whose quarrel she has most honorably defended.

15. And Queen Marie in seeking to destroy so holy a life did not the office
of her Christian place, nor defend the quarrel of Faith whereunto her title
bound her.

16. In respect of State likewise, In respect of State.
was this very evil in the Queen, because by this injury to her nearest
blood, she sought to hinder the lawful succession. For the Lady Elizabeth
being dead, it might prove quarrelsome, The inconvenience.
who should next inherit. Queen Marie having no issue to succeed her, was like
to leave the State to much trouble, and to many Competitors. And if Queen
Elizabeth had not succeeded, The glory of the English Nati^^ (...) of Q.
Elizabeth.
happily our Nation had not been so famous in the honor and reputation of
warlike exercise as now it is, neither had it flourished in the glory of
Learning, nor in the travel of industrious arts as it has, nor had there
been that peace, that plenty, and that security which presently we enjoy; nor
happily had the State been thus left as by her it is, to a Prince of peace,
King James our Sovereign.
full of hopeful issue, by whom and by whose posterity, England may hope never
to want a noble Defendor of it, and of the Catholic Faith. And therefore God
only be praised who did prevent the evil, God only prevented the evil
purpose of evil men.
that evil men intended against that Lady, against this Nation, and against
the Catholic Faith. In all these respects may appear the evil government of
these times, Queen Marie led to dishonorable ends.
and how the Queen was led by dishonorable means to an end most dangerous,
the cause (as I have said) was only the too much trust the Queen gave to
evil Counsel whereby she was violently carried against her own Nature, to
most unchristian designs; The cause the persuasion of her conscience.
for her conscience did persuade her, that those things were of absolute
necessity, which (in truth) were altogether unlawful. And this was the Bishop
of Winchester Stephen Gardiners care, Winchester Gardener.
to set an edge on the Queens offense, and to fit her for the stroke of
persecution, whereto in her Nature she was not fit. And this he did by the
authority of his Religious place, whereto the Queen had special reverence,
framing her self to do that only, which in her abused conscience, she
thought was necessary. For there is nothing can persuade like conscience,
Nothing can persuade like conscience.
which in men of all Religions will desire satisfaction and ease. And though
our conscience judge falsely of Truth, yet cannot that Judgment be
unsatisfied, whithout Torment and much affliction: neither is there any so
powerful to persuade us, Who are most powerful to perswadevs.
as them of whom we conceive a reverend opinion, and think Religious and holy;
because the opinion of holiness takes away all suspicion. And therefore many
times men seeming devout, and very precise, Men seeming devout are best able
to deceive.
are best able to deceive; because they are best credited; the greatest
pollititians working their most damned proiects by men professing sanctimonious
life: this being ever a foundation in that vile Art, The ground of evil
policy.
that pretense and false couller are the hands of Policy, whereby she
effects that which otherwise were impossible. And if we remember the number
of Conspiracies, and Treasonous designs attempted in this last age of the
world, Who are the chief plotters and actors of treasons.
we shall scarce find any one wherein men professing Religion were not
principalls, either plotters or practisers. The experience of the time, finding
such men most fit instruments for such desperate attempts; Why Priests are most
fit for treasons.
because they dare do any thing, and can keep counsel, and as it is
ieastingly said of plays, they are not pleasant without a Fool; so it may be
seriously said of Treasons, they are not bloody without a Priest, The office
of Jesuits.
these men having got them a name of admiration, for acting the most horrible
parts of blood and treason; wherein they have approved themselves forward but
most vnfortunane. And by these men was the better nature of Queen Marie much
abused, By whom the Queens nature was most abused.
making her (by their evil counsel) become odious to posterity in shedding
without mercy the blood of many holy Martyrs, treading upon the face of truth,
and dignifying Idolatrous and evil service. Unfortunate Queen to be deceived
by these evil Ministers; but woe unto them by whom the offense came; happy
had she been, if they had never been, and happy were we, if with us they were
not, for where they are, Who they be that trouble the peace of Israel.
there is Faction, Conspiracy, and Treason; and it is they and their house
only (that is the house of Popery) that troubles Israel.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
There is nothing in this world, that can continue prosperity without all
interruption. For the Spouse of Christ (the Church) had never any such
immunity, but (like all other things, and for the work of Gods glory) she
does often vary her State, and like the Sun often in clouds, and sometimes in
Eclipse. The reason is the will of God who has determined to lead us through
this wilderness, our pilgrimage to new Jerusalem.

Secondly, It is the Popish Religion, but no Religion, to destroy and not
correct, to judge without mercy, and to be terrible in the prosecuting their
persecutions. But our most divine and sacred Lord Christ has said Blessed are
ye when ye suffer these things. Surely then cursed are they that do them.

Thirdly, The judgments of God have relation to men's offense, being the effect
of that cause, and therefore who knows but that God in judgment to K.
Henry, gave him this contrariety in his Children, to condradict and
countermand one another in the form of their gouernements, because the King
himself was so full of contrariety and unsettled constancy, at one time
persecuting both professions.

Fourthly, Pollitique.
To reinduce the P^pall authority into the English State was a marvelous
improuidence in the Queen, and so direct against all rule of State, as that
questionless the Queen in this made her judgment yield to conscience (as she
deemed it) which if she had not been a woman, she would never have done, or at
the least never so done without all limitation

Fifthly, The Marriage of Queen Marie with Spain, was an opportunity for
Spain to depresse the glory of this Nation, for if the Queen had had issue by
him, the principality had been translated to such a Prince, as may yet justly
be feared, to what extremities his growing Empire intends.

Sixthly, The Queens error in these proceedings, was to receive her State
instructions, from such Counselors as did labor only to frame her to their
own designs, not regarding the public benefit of the State. For doubtless
had the Queen been ordered by her Pollitique State, or by any one Counselor
in the State of honorable quallity, she had not given so much of her title and
Majesty to Rome and Spain as by the persuasion of her Clergy Counsel she
did.

Seventhly, Moral.
So full of labor, strife and error is their life that undertake the charge of
much business and great place, that the Moral Philosophers do pronounce them
most happy and rich that can be content with blessed poverty.

CHAP. XX.
Of certain Discontents whereat Queen Marie took great offense.
FIRST, there is no man in this life, (especially if he be of great place or
great spirit) that can free himself from occasions of discontent, No man can
free himself from Discontent.
wherein every man may make trial of his own virtue, and exercise his
Christian patience in his moderate bearing them: The greatest (...) servitude.
For there is no victory equal to that a man has of himself, neither any
servitude so base as to be overcome of Discont^nt. And therefore the most
worthy men have ever triumphed over Fortune, thinking it a debasing of their
Noble spirits, to be vanquished by so mean an enemy. And howsoever such men
(in common Construction) are reputed most miserable, The error of common
judgment.
that have most cause of grief, yet in true understanding it is otherwise: and
then especially, when the grieved has patience (that true part of Manhood)
whereby he is able to make the greatest burden of grief easy. The power of
patience.
For so did the famous men in old time by manly Constancy, and so do
Christians now by patience support a living courage, in the midst of greatest
extremities: Yet ever must this moderation be regarded, A moderation in grief
that as our grief may not utterly deiect us, so we must have sense to feel
and apprehend it, least in the one extreme we prove cowherds, in the other
Fools. For grief is the true physic of the mind.
For grief is the true physic of the mind, which being well applied does
correct and heal us, but otherwise it does destroy and make desperate, and in
this case do men revenge themselves on themselves, The evil of coffeehouse.
and double the measure of grief wherewith they are afflicted.

Secondly, Queen Mary's punishment.
And this was Q* Mary's punishment, who doubtless did very much afflict her
self in the remembrance of her evil fortunes; some whereof I will relate, not
observing the order of the time, wherein they were occasioned, but rank them
according to their degrees in greatness, and as the Queen found them most
offensive. And as the greatest, I remember first the trouble of her Conscience,
The trouble of her conscience.
whereby she became enemy to her self, and hateful to her former
proceedings, Her own judgment of her own proceedings.
judging them much more violent, then the cause required, or then might stand
with the honor of her name, and with the discharge of Christian Conscience,
and this she understood by a general sense of mercy, Her Nature.
whereto in her Nature she was inclinable, and from which she was violently
moved by the breath of bad persuasion. For though the Queen was made to
believe, that her vehement persecuting the Protestants Religion, Protestants.
was necessary for both states of Church and kingdom: yet when Christian
blood was shed in that abundance, The queens grief.
it much repented her; that she (by that means) had given her name so bloody
a remembrance. And in this case might she say of Gardener and Bonner (as Jacob
did of his two Sonns, Gardener Bonner. Genesis 34. 30.
Simion and Leui) that they had made her name odious to every man's ears, and
that therefore they were Children of Blood. And surely the remorse of
conscience, for her bloody government, The Queen very much in her self
offended.
did very much afflict the Queens mind, whereof she would oftentimes give
demonstration, and by words of dislike, witness how much she did distaste the
fury of persecution, and the general waste those fires had made in her
Kingdoms.

Thirdly, Neither need this seem strange to any that Q. Marie should dislike
her self in her own practice, because we know that Princes (though they have
sovereign power over their Subjects; How the power of Princes is limited.
yet has it such limitation, as that Princes themselves, sometimes are not
free, nor can compass those ends, which most desirously they would; and
sometimes are they forced to that they would not. The reason is, The reason.
because no prince in the world can support himself, without the assurance of
his Subjects: Faction.
and when the State is in Faction (as then it was for Religion) it is most
dangerous for the Prince, Faction.
to Discontent them by whom he is principally supported. And Queen Mary taking
upon her the protection of the Romish Religion, did then bind her self to the
heads of that faction, lest by discontenting them, she should have run her
self into a general offense, and so have hazzerded the fortunes of her State.
The torment of an offended conscience.
And this was to the Queen so great offense, as they only can conceive, who
have endured the torment of an offended conscience.

Fourthly, Another cause of Queen Mary's discontent was King Philip her
husband, King Philip of Spain.
who either in truth or as she thought, did not so lovingly respect her as the
sacred bonds of marriage required, neither had she issue by him according to
her own hope, Her want of issue.
and the expectation of her Subjects, and this did very much offend the Queens
patience, The natures of women.
being by the Nature of her Sex most inclinable to apprehend such discourtesie,
and the rather because of her princely place, The Kings not regarding her.
and the great spirit of Majesty, which she wanted not. For the Kings not
regarding, or his cold regarding her did conclude that (in his opinion) she
wanted of that worthiness he had formerly imagined, and that she did not
merit the truth of his love and most kind affection, Her jealousy of her own
merit.
whereto his bond of Marriage did bind him, his not regarding her, debasing
her in worth and estimation, whereat she might worthily take offense; the
rather because the Queen in her own election, The queens deserving of King
Philip.
had preferred him to her love, and to the honor of that Marriage before all
other Princes in Christendom, communicating with him the honors of her Crown
and Dignities, to the hazard of her life and State, being contrary to the
general liking of her Subjects, and for which had been very dangerous
Rebellion in her kingdom. And therefore this offense taking of the Queen, The
queens offense in respect of King Philip very causefull.
was very causefull, and upon just consideration conceived; she having done so
much for him that deserved so little, and he not recompensing the merit of her
high deserving.

Fifthly, The third cause of her Discontent was the loss of Callis.
A third cause of Queen Mary's grief was the loss of Callis, a town of most
importance for the English State, especially considering the quarrel of those
two kingdoms, England and France, who (besides the English claim to that
Crown and Dignity) have ever had an honorable Contention to exceed each other
in the reputation of Arms and warlike exercise; neither is it in reason to be
hoped that these two warlike Nations shall always conspire peace, and for ever
forget the emulation and glorious conquests of former times, having these maine
prouocations to hinder it, Note.
the nearenesse of place, the equallity of power, the difference of Religion,
and the claim to the lawful inheritance, the least of which occasions, may
serve to incense a forward spirit with desire of honorable War and Conquest.
Prouocations to French wars.
And then considering the importance of the Town of Callis, for the English
wars, and how by having it, the passage was ever open to enter that kingdom:
and being recovered by the French, Callis the key of France.
England may be then said to have lost the key, by which it has heretofore so
easily entered, In these respects had the Queen good cause to grieve at so
dishonorable a loss, The reason of the Queens grief for the loss of Callis.
and the rather it being lost by a mean power and in little space, which had
been honorably defended many years against the whole power of France, and what
other envy soever to the glory of her predecessors, the disadvantage of her
Successors and her own perpetual dishonor.

Sixthly and lastly, The rebellion of her subjects.
the rebelling of her subjects did very much discontent her, because she
thereby understood* how her government was disliked, by many of her best
Subjects. For though it be not a necessary Conclusion, that where there is
Rebellion, there the State is misgouerned: yet is Rebellion ever a cause that
the government is suspected, Rebellion a cause that the government is
suspected.
and those grieuances that are able to provoke such numbers of people against
their Sovereign, are generally believed to arise upon more then common
considerations. What is required in the person of a Prince.
And therefore it is required in the person of a Prince, not only to be of
worthy deserving, but also to seem to be such, because it is most needful
for them to satisfy opinion, without which no Prince in the world can be said
to be great.

Seventhly, The forward success of the Rebels.
Again, the Rebels had such forward success in their attempting, as thereby
they did much distress the Queen, and threaten the fortunes of her state. For
if the project had proceeded according to their plot, and as it was devised by
the chief Conspirators; the issue was likely to have proved much more
dangerous. But Sir Thomas Wyatt one of the chief Conspirators, One chief
cause why they failed in their project.
imagining the project was revealed, discovered himself in Arms, before the
practice was Ripe, and before the time agreed upon; whereby he was vnassisted
by his other Confederates, and the practice by this means became abortiue and
perished by untimely birth; which in likelihood had otherwise succeeded, if the
whole power of the Conspirators, Sir Thomas Wyat of Kent.
had been united. Sir Thomas only with his Countrie-men of Kent, having done
so much as may seem to have wanted but little, to have finished the whole
business. And this no doubt was GODS work, God the enemy of all Conspirators
who is enemy to every evil practice, be the pretense never so fare and
reasonable.

Eighthly, Those and many other occasions of Discontent, had Queen Marie,
whereby God gave her to understand, how much he was displeased with her bloody
government, and whereby (it may be) he had mercy on her weakness, Gods
mercy in thus punishing the Queen.
in laying these gentle corrections on her, who had deserved the severity of
his angry Justice; she being most unjust and most severe in her persecuting
the Children of faith, whom by the authority of her princely place she was
bound to protect. The mercy of God to this Nation in the Queens death.
The God of mercy be for ever praised, who has ended in this Kingdom the
misery of persecution, making it die in the Death of Queen Marie, in whose
government it had got authority and life; and may it ever please God to derive
upon his Church of England a perpetual succession of holy and resolute
Defendors of the Catholic Faith, to the honor of Gods divine Majesty, the
good of his beloved Children (the Children of Faith) and the true glory of the
English Nation, Amen.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
Gods temporal afflictions are mercies, for they do but remember us our
sins, and inuit our repentance; yet they have contrary effects in contrary
subjects. For to some they are physic to others poison, they rectify some
and destroy others. This difference have the elect and the reprobate.

Secondly, Pollitique.
The common pretenced quarrel in all Rebellions, is either Religion, or
usurpation of Empire; yet neither of these can give success to such
treasonable attempts, because they that would alter and transpose of Gods
government, and his officers, do but fight against his providence, and
contradict God in his own appointments. In this case then, the best Policy
is for men with patience to suffer, and let God with victory do.

Thirdly, Moral.
Coffeehouse is such a sickness in the soul, as that where it is
vnmoderated, there is a necessary destruction. Therefore the wise Moral man
will oppose this enemy with reason, and invincible patience and outtrude him
from all society with his thoughts. For if there be any thing on Earth that can
resemble hell it is Discontent.

CHAP. XXI.
OF REBELLION.
FIRST, It is not in my purpose to reckon up the several opinions of men in
this argument neither to discourse at large herein, The diverse opinions of men
in this Argument.
but only to report my own Judgment, and that which I think is answerable in
this question to Religion and holy reason. For if this controversy were
disputed, according to the Pollitique practice of time, This controversy must
be judged by Religion and not by policy
and not by the rules of Religion, and reformed judgment, it would be then
very controuersall, and require large circumstance, because the Matchiuells of
these times, diversely disagree in their several judgments, The Testimony of
God the best authority.
but if men desire only to satisfy conscience, to such men the testimony of
God is sufficient, which ought to square the practices of all degrees of
Christian men, and to determine all controversies, be they never so important;
But this trial has not always authority in government merely pollitique,
for Religion and Policy, Religion and Policy two diverse.
are two diverse (or rather in full opposition) and that (many times) in the
practice of State is commendable which in the judgment of Religion is most
damnable, The difference of their ends and practice.
because they conspire not one, but disagreeing ends, neither can the quarrel
of these two be ever reconciled, but only by these conditions, that Piety may
command Policy, How to reconcile piety and policy.
and that such Policy may be only in Christian States allowable as may be
servant to the work of holiness, and judged lawful by the sentence of true
Religion. And if these respects, had regard in Christian States, then should
not Christendom have had that dishonorable imputation, to be reputed (of the
barbarous Nations) unfaithful and full of dishonorable practice: wherein the
Popes have especially abused the Christian Faith, The Popes have abused the
Christian Faith.
who (under the outward face of holiness) have contrived and effected
Conspiracies and Treasons of most horrible report, and such as never were the
like by men or devils invented.

Secondly, And these evil Ministers do arrogate to themselves, The Pope does
challenge authority to license Rebellion.
authority (which they would derive from God) not only to license Rebellion in
a Christian State, but also to command it upon pain of damnation; a power
which never any Christian Prince durst challenge, and a policy, whereby they
have principally enriched themselves, How the Pope does enrich himself.
with wealth and dignities, taken at the spoil of Christian Princes; and
wherewith he does yet underprop the falling state of his Empire. And this how
unequal it is with Gods Word, may appear to any judgment, The Pope no
follower of any holy example.
there being no example in the Story of the Bible for his imitation, where any
Priest did ever challenge any such sovereign authority.

Thirdly, And in respect of State practice, In respect of State practice.
there was never any thing more dishonorable, then for Princes and free States
to enter voluntary into a servitude so base and slavish, taking their honors
from their own heads, to dignifie their mortal enemy, and to feed his
ambition, which (like Hell) cannot be satisfied, who has ever fed upon the
bowels of their wealth, and on the blood of Saints, and does glorify himself
in the spoil of Christian Princes, and thus will do, until God shall please
to destroy him with the breath of his displeasure.

Fourthly, The example of K. David The example of King David.
may suffice to conclude against this doctrine, who notwithstanding he had Gods
promise to inherit the kingdom of Israel, being by the Prophet anointed (by
which God did crown him King) and knowing moreover, that God had forsaken his
master Saul, having taken his good Spirit from him, whereby he was Anathemate,
and interdict by the sentence of God himself; David would not conspire the
death of Saul though he were a Reprobate.
yet did not David (for all this) conspire against his master Saul, but only
sought to secure his life, by withdrawing him from the kings presence, who he
assuredly knew did seek after his life. And when opportunity was offered him
so fit, David refuses the offer of opportunity to revenge.
as that he at one stroke, might both have revenged the injuries of his
greatest Enemy, and upon such an Enemy, as stood between him and a Kingdom,
yet would he not destroy him being urged thereto by the earnest persuasion of
his follower, but withstood both them and opportunity, enduring the trouble of
his Conscience, for presuming to cut off (not his Masters head, but) the lap of
his garment only.

Fifthly, 1 Samuel 24. v. 5, 6, 7.
Another time Saul pursuing after David to destroy him was found by David and
Abishai, sleeping with his spear at his head, as if occasion should have led
David to an opportunity most fit, and thus have persuaded him. Arare example of
a holy King.
See, here is thy enemy sleeping, and here is a weapon to destroy him; which
advantage when Abishai would most gladly have embraced, he was dissuaded by
David, with this answer; Note.
Destroy him not, for who can lay his hand upon the Lords Anointed, 1 Samuel 2.
6. 9
and be guiltless: whereby he concludes it to be impossible for any man
whosoever, to conspire the death or damage of his sovereign, David and the
Pope disagree in their opinions.
with the testimony of good conscience. And this opinion of King David's, is
adverse to the practice of the Roman State, which has often laid their hands
of blood, and death upon the Lords anointed; neither have they ever done as
David did, deny the offer of fit occasion to revenge, wherein they are
answerable to their Italian proverb. An Italian proverb Count Baltezer.
If thy enemy be up to his knees in water, reach him thy hand to help him:
But if he stand up to the Chinne, set thy foot upon him to destroy him.

Sixthly, Now if King David's example and authority will not serve, because he
was but Man, I will then produce his witness, who was both God and Man the
Lord Jesus; who commanded the Jews, The example of Christ.
to give obedience to Caesar in all those duties which respect Sovereignty;
though Caesar did not acknowledge the Jewish Religion, but rather did persecute
that profession. Neither did he persuade rebellion against the Roman state,
though in his divine wisdom he did foresee that the Kingdom of the Jews,
(which he so much loved) should be utterly wasted by the power of the Romans,
God who only makes Kings, can only depose them.
whereby he would teach us, that as by God (only) Kings do Reign, so by him
only are they both supported, (and as he shall only please,) are they
displanted and deposed from their dignities.

Seventhly, It is evident then, by the testimony of them who are most holy and
absolute, (that no earthly man by the authority of his place) has or can give
license, to conspire, against any Sovereign power whatsoever, No earthly power
can give licensce for Rebellion.
and the reason is, because there is no power but from God, and the powers that
be are ordained of God: and therefore to resist that power, is to withstand God
and his ordinance, and to condemn the form of Gods government. And such are
all they, who go about to translate authority, where God has not given it,
and to throw down and depose them whom God has established, and such are all
they who either plot or practice Rebellion, Conspiracy, or Treason, All
traitors oppose against Gods providence.
or that can give allowance thereto. Traitors they be to God, Traitors to their
Prince, Traitors to their Country and to themselves, Traitors whom God will
withstand as Traitors, and judge as Enemies.

Eighthly, The Pope his Dispensation.
And though the Pope challenge to be able, to give that dispensation, which
Iehu had given him of God; yet is that only presumption in the Pope, for
neither is he God to give any such warrant, neither is he Gods Prophet, whose
authority we may trust, neither does God reveal his will immediately to the
Pope, as he did to his Prophet Elisha, neither have his Iehues ever had that
fortune and prosperous success, as had this; God confounding many thousands of
their damned and Rebellious practices, to the honor of his name and to the
shame of all such evil Ministers, for this is an unanswerable argument, that
the Popes power to dispense in this kind is not from God, because many of
their practices succeed not, which if they were from God they must of necessity
prosper. And therefore neither Prince, Priest, or Pope, can give dispensation
in this kind. God only being able to make that lawful, which without his
special direction is most damnable.

CHAP. XXII.
A Comparison between Queen Mary of England, and the Queene-Mother of France,
Katherine de Medices.
THESE two Ladies, Queen Mary. Queen Katherine.
of all whom the Histories of our times record, are nearest suitable to a
parallel; having been both of them honorable in place of dignity, both of
them admirable in endowments of Nature, and both of them transported by ill
counsel, too much effusion of Christian blood, by persecution of the
Protestant Religion in the several precincts of their government. I desire
not to disparrage the memory of noble personages. History will speak
impartially; and the Christian hearts which read or hear of their
persecutions, Commiseration and Christian pity.
will compassionate the troubles which holy men have endured: and though the
sense of sorrows be past and not sensible to them who endured them; yet will
the knowledge of them beget a kind of sense of those sorrows which other men
have formerly sustained; and (according to our affections) as we love or hate
the cause it self, so shall we give our censure of the Authors of the
persecutions. I forbear therefore to prosecute the comparison in particulars;
The woman a weak Sex.
the more, because I pity the frailty of their Sex, which having but weak
judgment, is the less able to make resistance against strong temptations. I
only deplore their ill hap, to suck the milk of so venomous a breast as the
Church of Rome; which is indeed the Circe of the world, transforming men by her
enchanted potions into beasts, and metamorphosing even the innocent disposition
of gentle Ladies, The venomous nature of the Romish doctrine.
and Princesses into a Leonine and Tiger like savageness; that Lupa Romana,
which as she first fostered Romulus with the teats of a shee-Woolfe, so
nurseth now all others with the like milk, and propounds the highest rewards
of heaven to them that will most play the hell hounds upon earth; she which
puts Princes upon persecution of the Church under color of zeal for the
Church, and stirs up Subjects to rebellion by pretense of piety, and gives
the laurel of Martyrdom unto Treason: to her we are to impute the
miscarriages of these and many other worthyes, whose better nature was
empoysoned by bad principles instilled into them: especially we may commiserate
her of France, because her persecution there feasted Saint Bartholmew with more
Christian souls at one Supper, Saint Bartholmewes supper of S^ul^^.
then perished by Queen Mary the whole time of her life: pray we almighty God,
that the blood sucking tyranny of that Romish strumpet may have an end; that
she may be no longer drunken with the blood of the Saints, nor the Princes of
the earth no more intoxicated with her cups of abominations; and so pass we
from this sorrowful and sad theme to the joyful times of blessed Queen
ELIZABETH.

OF THE NEXT DEFENDRES OF THE Faith, Queen ELIZABETH, and by what difficulties
she attained the Kingdom.
CHAP. XXIII.
FIRST, I am now again to change my Argument, the government being thus
happily changed, and to report a time of mercy, and not misery; of
preservation and not persecution, and how the Catholic Faith was defended not
offended; of Queen Elizabeth, and not Queen Marie Sisters (indeed) by the
bond of Nature, but most disagreeing in the gifts of Grace, and holy ornaments.
The one defacing, the other restoring, the one wounding, the other saluing, the
one offending, the other defending the most Catholic Faith, Queen Marie in
blood, The different nature of two Sisters.
Queen Elizabeth in peace, in peace with God, in peace with his Saints, in
peace with all men, save the enemy of God and Man, the Idolatrous and false
worship of Antichrist, the which (with most zealous resolution) she has most
victoriously opposed, to the eternal honor of her name on earth, and to her
everlasting happiness in heaven; where now she has most honorable place
among the fellowship of those holy ones, who have best fought the Lords
quarrel, and best defended the profession of Faith: and as it is said, the
day and night divide the year like indifferent partners: The day and night
divide the year.
so we may say, that these two Sisters, Queen Elizabeth and Queen Marie, have
divided the Renown of the world, Queen Elizabeth (like the day) having got
the better part of fame, honorable and holy remembrance: and Queen Marie her
Sister (like the night) the worse part a name of blood, which being uttered,
reduces to memory the stories of blood; and how the Saints of God were
slaughtered, whereby she her self is made more black than night, in giving
her name so black and so bad a remembrance.

Secondly, The difference of good and bad.
This difference of good and bad is (indeed) very common in the generations of
mankind, and not common to any other kind of creature save Man. For
inuegitable things we see, that from one root do proceed many branches, yet
all of them of one and the same Nature, and all bearing one and the same fruit:
but in the generations of Man it is otherwise, for from on Father commonly
proceeds children of disagreeing quallities, The difference of Natures.
as from one Adam was derived both righteous Habel: and a wicked Caine, and
from one Isaac, a Jacob and an Esau, and so from one Henry an Elizabeth, and a
Marie, a day and a night, a mercy and a misery, a blessed protector and a
most bloody persecutor of the Christian Faith. And therefore was King Henry
much in Gods savor, and to us was he favorable, in making the greater part
of the Kings Children the better part, Of King Henry's happiness.
(which seldom to any one man living happens. God in his anger gave our
Nation but one Marie, but in his love he gave us both an Edward and an
Elizabeth, for so is God double as much in mercy as in judgment; God is
double as much in mercy as in Judgment.
neither will he that has care over all his creatures, suffer the cause he so
dearly loves to want protection, but if he give his Church a Marie to try it
in the fire of persecution, he will also give it an Elizabeth, to restore and
refresh it. Such was our noble Defendresse, whose care did medicine the body
of Religion and State, Queen Elizabeth is helper to cure the wounds her Sister
had made in the State.
which her Sister had grievously wounded. And for my own particular, though
there was never any Princess in the world, whose name I would more gladly
honor than Queen Elizabeth, yet dare I not take upon me to report her worth
(not for that I fear the face of any man in that honest performance) but
because I am far unable to give so much of honorable remembrance as her most
princely life has well deserved: and by failing (in reporting less than
truth) I shall wrong the reputation of her name, which most tenderly I love,
and whereto I will ever be a servant. And therefore let such as desire to know
her worth; Wherein we may behold the deserts of Queen Elizabeth.
read the large story thereof, in the most honorable deeds of late times,
there being almost no memorable Act in Christendom, for the space of forty
years of her time, wherein she had not some part of princely deserving; Let
him view the prosperous face of this Nation, and therein behold her merit, let
him remember her fortunate and victorious in her most famous victories, wise in
the government of her state, just in the liberty of Laws, merciful in
judgment, and just in determining, Let him remember England, France, Scotland,
Ireland, Spain, Portingale, Italy and Belgica, and all the quarters of
Christendom, in every part whereof is spread the remembrance of her merit, let
him ask the Turk, the Tartare and those Emperors of most distance, and they
can report the honor and name of Queen Elizabeth; Let him inquire at the
envy of the greatest Potentates in Christendom, and that will declare her
worthy of most worthy praise: if there be any one a stranger in this Israel,
and does not or will not know her merit, let him consult with these, or with
any of these, and he may receive satisfaction and better knowledge: or if this
suffice not to make her enough honorable, let him remember how her holy hands
put out the fires of trouble and grievous persecutions, loosing the holy
Martyrs from the stakes of of death and (like Gods Angel) binding the mouth of
death, The highest of her deserts
and tribulation which had wasted a great part of Gods inheritance. And then
how she restored the Truth of Gods service, utterly abolishing Idolatry and
gross superstition* And this is that which best merited honorable
remembrance; insomuch as if I had envy and coueted to obscure her princely
deserving, this her most godly act, would (in despite of envy and me) declare
her most worthy, and condemn the envious breach of all them that dare traduce
her. In respect of greatness and goodness.
And therefore I dare boldly say of Queen Elizabeth, that in respect both of
greatness and goodness, she was such an Empress as the world never had
another to match her; and for her Sex she was such a woman as (worthily) may
be said to have exceeded all other but that most sacred Virgin* Virgin Marie.
with whom I neither will nor dare make comparison.

Thirdly, Now that wherein Queen Elizabeth was most absolute, Queen Elizabeth
most excellent in the respects of mercy and Majesty.
was principally in those heavenly respects of mercy and Majesty, wherein I
think she was most excellent and without comparison; the which, like two hands
she applied to every good work of Church and Commonwealth; for by her mercy
she approved her self most Christian, and by her Majesty a most Princely
Sovereign. In both which respects, was this Lady so singular, as if Grace and
Nature had given them for ornaments to make her most excellent, and as if God
would (by her) demonstrate to the world surpassing he can make that Creature
upon whom he shall cast his heavenly ornaments. Neither do I think it
disparagement to any Prince in the world, Disparagement.
that I report Queen Elizabeth most excellent, both because she was so in
true estimation; and also for that it may suffice (for the honor of any
prince) to come near Queen Elizabeth in these honorable deseruings, she
being matchless for mercy unless in the comparison of K. James our
Sovereign, King James.
and her successor which with her Kingdoms has inherited that most gracious
indument. But for Majesty she was never exceeded, The Queen matchless for
Majesty.
neither can I give that comparison without wrong to Queen Elizabeth, and
flattery to them whom I should compare her.

Fourthly, And were I worthy to advise in a matter so serious, An importa^t
advise to all Princes.
there is no Prince in the world whom I love; to whom I do not wish this
regard of Majesty, for there is nothing more necessary in the person of a
Prince then Majesty, which when it has the moderation of mercy and advised
judgment to order it, it is then of most excellent beauty, and of most
special use. Because where it is thus ordered, A Reason.
it begets in men's hearts an admiration and a Reverence to the person of
such Majesty, for commonly that which men admire they love, and too much
familiarity does oftentimes beget presumption, and neglect of duty, neither is
there any thing that does more incourrage disobedience in Subjects, than
remissness and want of Majesty in the sovereign. And this is pretily
alluded in the fable of the frogs, Esop in moral Fables.
to whom (dema^ding a King) Jupiter cast into a poole where they were
assembled, a block which falling with much noise stroke a terror and a
Reverend fear in the Frogs; but when they perceived it blockish, and to want
Majesty, leap and insult over it in derision and scorn, hating to give their
obedience to that which wanted the Majesty to command them. And this Moral
did Queen Elizabeth well understand, who most Princelike did ever maintain
the Majesty of her high place, yet ever with the wisdom of such moderation,
The queens moderation.
as that her Majesty was merciful, and her mercy maiesticke, of these two
principalls compounding a government most honorable and virtuous.

Fifthly, Such was this noble Queen, and much more noble than I can report
her, who before she was Queen, Her defense of Faith before she was Queen.
did worthily defend the profession of the Catholic Faith, even to the hazard
of her princely life. God giving her that relish of adversity, the better to
taste the pleasures of her most happy time which was to follow. And if the
particulars of her troubles were indifferently considered, she would be found
very constant, and faithful to Godward; and to have endured much for the
testimony of Faith, and to have had a glorious Conquest over all the enemies
of her religious life. An evil practice to disinherit the Queen.
First, their practice who thought to dis-inherit her, and her Sister, by
intruding into the seat of this Empire the Lady Jane, whereby it was likely
the inheritance should have been conveyed another way, and translated into
another Succession, which could not have been without apparent danger of her
life and her Sisters; because authority that is usurped, cannot be otherwise
secured but by their death that can make lawful claim: Note.
yet God who does ever protect truth did otherwise dispose of this great
business; Her trouble in her Sisters time.
but if we compare this with her trouble (in the time of her Sisters
government) the comparison will make this little, and that monstrous; she
having endured so much for the trial of her Faith, as may well approve her to
be most valiant in Christian patience, and to have worthily defended the
profession of the Catholic Faith, before she was made Defendresse; the story
of which her most virtuous suffering, Queen Elizaheths Tears.
I have heretofore written in verse; and therefore in this place I forbear to
make particular Narration of that which formerly I have declared. And in this I
receive special contentment, that in my knowledge of this Sovereign Lady
Queen Elizabeth, I dare confidently report to have found more (in the travel
of my time) than King Solomon withal his experience and wisdom could ever
find, Solomon. A good woman.
A good Woman.

(...)
FIRST, (...) common with God then to help, when the disease is highest, and
the expectation of good is furthest off, for in this does God show his
omnipotency, and the difference between the actions of himself, and his
creatures; for man to produce his effects does covet the advantage of natural
fitting causes, but it is sufficient cause in God that he is willing.

Secondly, There is this difference in the punishments of good and evil men,
temporal, and eternal; the good man's temporal punishment must of necessity
end; the evil man's spiritual punishment has an everlasting necessity of
being. For God has determined all men to taste of both cups, but with
different measure.

Thirdly, Pollitique.
It was a wisdom both Religious and Pollitique in the Queen to enter her
State with general peace; for though she had the sword of authority in her
hand, and found in the power of her command such as had been very grievous unto
her; yet did she like a wise Princess take no further revenge, then only name
them for her enemies, and so distinguish them from better friends. For it is
most needful for a Prince at the entering his State, to gain the opinion of
mercy, because there is nothing can better secure him, then the hearts and
faithful service of his people.

Fourthly, Moral.
There is this greatness even in men of inferior fortune, that they either
despise the dignities they have not, or can with a modest patience hope them.
For seeing that all worldly things are moved with variable motions; what man
can have reason to despair the fortune of some prosperity.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the first Act of Queen Elizabeth's defense for the Catholic Faith after
she was Queen.
FIRST, Queen Elizabeth (in her gracious disposition) was like the sune, which
no sooner is up, but it rises to the comfort of all Creatures: so the Queen
no sooner in the seat of Majesty, but she applies her cares to the use of
mercy and virtuous deeds, casting upon the general face of this Nation, her
heavenly aspect and influence, which (in the black time of her Sisters
government) lay in the shadow of darkness and black obscurity. And as the
nearest to her Religious heart she begins (being of important consideration)
first with Gods cause Religion, Her first care for Religion. A love principium.
laying that for her foundation, whereupon she determined to erect the whole
frame of her holy life; For she well understood, there was nothing could
support her in the true estimation of honor and virtuous living but Religion
without the exercise whereof, all other things are vicious and of evil merit.
And therefore did she pursue this end with a most steadfast resolution, daring
to do any thing (were it never so hazerdous) that might advantage it, and
removing every impediment, which any way might hinder the prosperity of that
proceeding. And because she found the body of her State dangerously wounded by
disorder, The queens care to cure the diseased State.
and evil government, she therefore (very carefully, and skilfully) applies
present remedy, least otherwise the disease might prove incureable, and the
cause of Religion might then be like the common cause of Patients, The
practice of bad physisitions.
who have their patience tried by deferments and lingering cures, which in the
trade and practice of many bad Physicians is very frequent. And this disgrace
has the Queen well avoided, in determining first the general cause of the
Commonwealth, before any particular end that might respect her own private.

Secondly, The evidence of this her holy and princely care is most apparent in
the restoring of Religion, to that Truth and Authority, Her restoring Religion
to purity of Doctrine.
wherein in King Edwards time it was worthily established, abolishing
superstitious Popery, which in the time of Queen Marie her Sister, had
usurped the place and dignity of true Religion. And this false worship has
Queen Elizabeth (like a most victorious Empress) for ever vanquished,
bringing it down to that poverty of strength, as the favorers thereof have
little reason ever to hope a restoration of that, which she and her Successor,
Popery for ever banished from this Island.
our Sovereign King James have for ever banished from the bonds of great
Britain.

Thirdly, And in this has Queen Elizabeth very fortunately defended the
Catholic Faith, King Edward ouermatched by Queen Elizabeth.
and finished that holy quarrel with as much honor, as ever did any Christian
Prince before her, being in this worthily able to match if not, to over match
her most princely brother K. Edward, (who but for her) may be thought (for his
holy care) singular and without comparison.

Fourthly, To reckon up the particulars of Queen Elizabeth's merit, were a
needless travel, both because I cannot so report them as they are worthly,
and also because they are yet visible in the view of the government of the
Church and State of England, Her desert visible in the face of England.
as now it stands; our Church being still in the flourish of that prosperity,
wherein she left it established to the next Defendor of the Faith, and wherein
K. James her successor our Sovereign does yet continue it, and wherein (we
hope) it will be ever continued in his hopeful posterity.

Fifthly, This noble beginning of Queen Elizabeth, was so much to the
advancement of the Catholic Faith, that being (by report) made known to the
world, was a cause that the Children of faith who (in Queen Mary's time) did
willingly banish themselves into places of far distance; The returning of
holy men from banishment to England.
now hearing of this alteration resort again to their Country, and to the
protection of this Noble Defendresse, who did free them from the misery of
persecution, and under whose defense they peaceably enjoyed their lives and the
liberty of Reformed Conscience. And with this holy exordium did Queen
Elizabeth begin the Story of her virtuous life.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
It is a precept given us by our best Master. First seek the Kingdom of God.
This lesson had the Queen learned from that Doctor, who therefore did apply
her first cares to this principal end, for which God did succeed her in
others; for it is unquestionable true, that he that seeks God, shall find
all his necessary things though he seek them not.

Secondly, Pollitique.
The Queen by her direct manifesting her resolute purpose how in the case of
Religion, she was resolved, was both in her self Religious, and had this
Pollitique respect, that thereby she took fear from her friends, and hope
from her enemies, making hope and fear shift places, for that did satisfy the
expectation of her friends, which in such case is doubtful, and prevent the
forward hopes of the contrary faction, which in all such alterations is
ouer-daring.

Thirdly, Moral.
There is this benefit in afflictions that their use and acquaintance, make men
valiant and able to undergo all fortunes, for it is possible to make pleasure
of sorrows, and to use them for recreations.

Fourthly, It is a commendable pride, modestly to esteem ourselves in our
adversities, but he that can moderate his pride in his prosperities, is
thought the more rare example, and deserves imitation.

CHAP. XXV.
Of certain considerations, which in respect of Policy might have diswaded
the Queen from reforming the State of Religion.
FIRST, It may seem strange to many that their should be any consideration
able to diswade from doing well or that any by-respect should be so respected,
as to withdraw the purpose of one resolved to holy cares. And this in truth
were strange, if common experience did not teach us otherwise. Experience.
For it is often times seen that such men who have gained favor in general
opinion, and are assuredly thought to be constant, and most resolute, in that
wherein they are so reputed, do notwithstanding fall off from this their
reputed Constancy, and yield themselves overcome by the persuasion of
dishonest and by considerations.

Secondly, And therefore is their judgment much deceived who believe that any
thing in this world is of that assurednes, and unvariable co^sta^cie, Nothing
that is earthly is free from inconstancy.
as that no time, nor any persuasion can altar. For the most excellent men, and
the most excellent virtues of men, are not supported by their own power, or by
any earthly assistance, but by the hand of God only: in so much that when this
most absolute power, shall not supply to any particular, the strength of such a
one is but weakness, and his constancy but faintnes; God the only supporter
of men's resolution.
because (without this heavenly prop) he cannot support the body of his
virtues, and so of necessity both he and they must incline to bad alteration:
if then the question were demanded, what should be the condition of all men? I
would answer, to be constant in their holy purposes: The nature of all men.
but if it be demanded what is the Nature of all men? I answer, that all of all
manner of conditions, are inclineable to evil only and that such who ascend
the degrees of best reputation, do it not by their own^ power, neither have
they power to continue that state, but naturally cast themselves from those
deseruings whereunto God has raised them. Be it therefore the everlasting
honor of their names, who have valiantly resisted the power of those earthen
temptations, and have had their regardfull eyes to holy and Religious ends
only. And such was Queen Elizabeth, Queen Elizabeth most constant.
who (in respect of her dangerous fortunes, was assuredly much tempted to these
earthly regards, the which she nothing regarded in comparison of her heavenly
cares, whereto she was wholly and assuredly devoted.

Thirdly, And therefore I report not what could, but what would have diswaded
the Queen (in respect of Policy) from reforming Religion; and I will plainly
express my self in this particular, because I would most gladly avoid the
evil of misconceiuing which commonly arises from doubtful understanding. To
avoid the misco^ceiuing


Fourthly, The Queen never fainted in her resolution.
And for the Queen, though she never fainted in the care she had undertaken
for Religion, but ever continued her course in one resolute passage, and ever
traveled therein with much prosperity and honor; yet there wanted not many
regards of Policy, Yet much tempted by state considerations.
and state considerations, which might have allured her, from her holy
constancy, and have made her more remiss and cold in the pursuit of her holy
business; such as heretofore have altered the strongest purposes of other
Christian Princes, and such as would have altered the Queen her self, had not
God (by the power of his Grace) given her extraordinary supportations. For (as
I have said) Religion and Policy respect not always one end, Religion and
Policy respect diverse ends.
neither do they work by one and the same means. And though in Christian
Commonwealths it is most needful that Religion order state, Religion ought to
order state.
and that Christian Princes suffer themselves to be directed by the Law of God,
and by the duty of Conscience; Religion is perverted and Scripture wrested to
maintain unlawfulness.
yet in the practice of many states it is otherwise, where the truth of
Religion is perverted, and the sense of Scripture wrested, to maintain the
unlawful use of such state practices, as (in the truth of holy judgment) are
most damnable.

Fifthly, This truth is evident in the government of such Christan States, In
Popish states.
whereby license, dispensation and pardons, men may adulterate, lie and
Murder, and by the favor of their laws, commit such outrage as (in the
judgment of Gods Law) is death: Regards of state.
and these are regards of State, which (for advantage and profit) tolerate and
protect those things, which (in the stricktnesse of Conscience) are altogether
unlawful.

It is evident then both by general observation and by special instance that
Christian Princes have many earthly prouocations to withdraw them from the
zealous pursuit of holy and Religious purposes, and that God only is able to
support the best, and most worthy, from dishonorable recusancie; and from
retyring from those divine services, whereunto they have with great hope and
much acclamation entered.

Sixthly, And in this noble deserving has Queen Elizabeth exceeded many of
her princely predecessors; and therefore I report this as one the chief of all
her honorable deeds, One of the chief of Q. Elizabeth's honorable deeds.
whereby she has well declared her self beloved of God, constant in her holy
purpose, and best able to defend the holy quarrel of the Catholic Faith. For
by this victory she had of her self, The victory she had of her self.
she has done that which all the world could not do; God having made her
invincible, and not to be conquered but by her self.

Seventhly, To relate the several considerations of state were much travel
and impertinent to this business; because the number of them is great, and for
the much diversity, they altering according to the variable government of
state, and as the alterations of time would make them useful. I will therefore
(only) report some few which at this time, and in this state were very
considerable. The first consideration of State.
And first the alteration the State endured by the Q. altering Religion: for
she could not but understand, that her new forming the order of Religion in her
Kingdoms, The danger of altering Religion.
(was in the wisdom of State) very hazerdous; A Reason.
because thereby she must needs discontent the greater number of her subjects,
whereby she became subject to the displeasure of her own people, and less
able to suppress the disobedience of such as should dare to attempt against
her. For at this time the Protestant Religion (to which the Queen was
zealously devoted) had not equal greatness in this Kingdom, with that of the
Romish, the Papist exceeding the Protestant in Number and power. The Queen
made choice of the weaker to assist her against the stronger.
And therefore the Queen (in her election) made choice of the weaker and less
able part, to support her against her better provided enemies. And this she
would not have done, if she had yielded to this persuasion of State, or had
regarded the dignity of her temporal life, Her holy trust.
more than the honor and dignity of her Christian Name. But she that could not
be overcome with evil, overcame this evil temptation, and resisted the power
thereof by her virtue and godly constancy.

Eighthly, The second State consideration was the difficulty in finishing
Again, the Q in thus altering the State of Religion, did attempt a matter
very difficult, and of no easy performance, and this she might understand by
her judgment in Philosophy, and by observing the course of all natural
things. For we see that those things which move themselves, An argument from
the order of nature
in their natural motion, are carried with less veheme^ce then those that are
moved by violent and forced means. And the body of this kingdom (at that time
of the Q. entering the state) moving in the favor of romish religion, wherein
it had formerly moved for many years, could not without much violence and
great difficulty be moved against that customary motion, The importance of
this consideration
nor be forced to retire back in the same steps, wherein it had formerly
proceeded: and therefore this difficulty in finishing was a consideration of
state, which (in respect of state) might have diswaded the Q. holy care from
the reforming of religion, and which would have prevailed with any prince in
the world, who had regarded the felicity of their temporal life, more than the
honor of God or the prosperity of the Catholic Church.

Ninthly, Third consideration. The displeasure of foreign princes.
the coffeehouse of her neighbor nations* and the displeasure of the
greatest part of Christian princes, was a special consideration, and such as
that nothing but grace could be able to withstand, for it is necessary and
natural in the Natures of Princes, and in the spirits of great persons, The
desires of great persons.
to desire general reputation, and that their names may live in the favor of
good estimation, hating to be held hateful, or not to have place, in the love
of their neighbor nations. For this foreign regard as it exceedingly
cotenteth the noble spirits of such as desire it; The use of foreign regard.
so also it is most behoofull for the security of their persons and states;
kingdoms and great states being in this respect like particular men, In
respect of England.
not able to live in prosperity, and flourishing wealth, without communicating
to each other their several profits: neither is there any part in the world,
where the regard of co^federacy and foreign co^bination is so behoofull as in
the states of christendom, A Reason.
because of the equal partage of christendom to many several princes,
whereby they live in jealousy of one another; and commonly confederate with
such foreign power, as (in the discretion of state) is thought to be of most
conueniency, both to advance the glory of their nation, and to advantage them
against their most feared enemies, whereas it is otherwise in the spacious
government of mighty Empires; The Spanyard has now larger Dominions than the
Duke of Muscouy.
such as at this day the Turk, the Persian and the Russian Emperors be, and
such as heretofore the Roman Emperors were, who (by reason of their huge
bodies of State,) move almost without resistance, neither care these mighty
Emperors (so much) to confederate with their Neighbors, because they know
that (of necessity) those lesser states must like Rivers discharge their
service into their Ocean. England in the midst of many disagreeing Nations.
But this Kingdom of England being in the midst of many disagreeing Nations.
This consideration of state did therefore nearly concern the Queen to
consider of, and these importances would doubtless have diswaded her holy
cares, had her cares been any other than holy.

Tenthly, But this Noble Defendresse of the Faith, howsoever she understood as
much in the wisdom of State, The queens constancy.
as any other Prince than living. Yet would she not be ruled by that wisdom,
but (like her self, a most Christian Princess) she contradicts Policy with
Piety. And she whose Religious Judgment might and could teach her, that God
was able to support her Princely State against all opposition, and to supply to
al her necessities would (not for any State consideration) distrust the mighty
power of his providence, or forsake the safety of his protection for any cause
whatsoever. For she knew well that God was altogether as able to prevail with
the less as with the greater number, and that he was not like man, to work
only by the advantage of means, God is able to work without as well as with
means.
for without means can he effect whatsoever shall please him, were the whole
power of earth and hell to withstand him. And therefore as Sampson strong in God,
Sampson.
could with his weak weapon destroy a Thousand of his enemies; so this most
resolute Defendresse of the Faith, refusing the power of earth, has with the
truth of Religion only, vanquished not a thousand only, but many thousands of
Gods enemies whereby she has most nobly guarded the safe passage of the
Catholic Faith.

Eleuenthly, And this I report in honor of this most excellent Queen, The
honor of Queen Elizabeth.
whom no respect of danger or State consideration, could remove from her holy
constancy; and whom all the power of the earth was not able to bereave of her
noble spirit, whereby she was most excellent fit for the defense of Faith, and
wherewith she has defended it, with as much honorable merit, as ever any
Christian Prince in the world did.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
God does then try the faith and love of his servants, when they are presented
with strong and able temptations; for these trials though they cannot confirm
in God any opinion of Truth, in whom there is all knowledge, yet they serve for
the imitation of other, and for their judgment that will not imitate.

Secondly, He that shall fall from the service of God, for any respect
whatsoever; does judge himself an Apostate, and unworthy of Gods favor,
because even those that love God, if they love him for respect, they love the
respect and not God.

Thirdly, Pollitique.
In state reason it may seem hazardous for the Queen to alter the State of
Religion, because it might have occasioned such discords in the State, as might
much distress her peaceable beginnings, being yet unsettled; yet considering in
what terms the State then stood, the Faction being almost indifferent in
number and strength, she might very well think that the authority of her
opinion would carry many thousands with it; because the gross multitude does
ever move in the current of the common opinion.

Fourthly, In the proceedings of State affairs the prosecutions must be
ordered by a discreet and settled judgment, and not with desperate
undertakings, which some call Manhood and heroical spirit. For if there be
difference between a private man and an ordinary officer in the State; there
must also be difference between the particular cause and the general State.

Fifthly, It is the strength of a Pollitique State, to have assured
confederacy, and combination with neighbor Nations, but the wisdom of that
state is in nothing more justified, than in the profitable use of such
confederacy; for therein does appear the excellence of wit, when with the
only charge of wit, we can employ another man's power to our own purposes.

Sixthly, Moral.
To resist and vanquish the common known enemies of a virtuous life is a
victory, which moral men have obtained, and does assuredly justify (for
good) the happy composition of such a Nature.

Seventhly, To maintain correspondence and indifferent favor in mutual
society, is most necessary to a man's happy condition; because he that has
the favor of general opinion, has interest in every man's estate.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of the care the Queen and State had to depresse the enemies of the Catholic
Faith.
FIRST, Mercy.
the best witness of a Christian life is Mercy, and the best demonstration of
mercy, is that favor that men show to their enemies; for such kindness is
against the persuasion of flesh, and only caused by the moving of Grace. And
therefore mercy (even in an evil man) does merit admiration at the least, The
reward of Mercy.
and to be reputed as a beauteous ornament in a base subject. But mercy in the
good is a most worthy commendation, and a worthiness for which God will
exchange his best benefits. For there is nothing wherein God is more delighted
then the works of Mercy in the heavenly exercise, whereof he himself is
wonderfully contented, gladding his most sacred divinity, that in Mercy he
does triumph, and that his mercy has the greatest part in all his workings.

Secondly, And as this respect of mercy has pre-eminence in the Nature of
God, Mercy has prehemine^ce in the nature of God.
so has it also in the reformed natures of good men, who desire (principally)
to square themselves to this most holy proportion. And in this gracious respect
of mercy has Queen Elizabeth equalled the best Princes that ever were so
rarely was this Queen composed of Mercy and Majesty, Queen Elizabeth very
merciful.
as that in Majesty she may justly be reputed most excellent, and yet in
Mercy more excellent than in Majesty; the which she would often declare
(even) to the enemies of her life and soul: For often would she reach her
hands of favor to them whose hands were ever ready to her destruction* An
admirable degree of Mercy.
This truth is most evident in the view of her gracious government, who
abhorred their death, who most traitorously sought hers, and suffered such
peacefully to enjoy their evil consciences, who practiced to destroy her for
her zeal, and constancy in the Catholic Faith.

Thirdly, For if the Papists in the time of Queen Marie, or if now in such
places where that Religion is professed, were or had been so merciful in the
judgment of their Laws, The mercy of Popish laws and Papists.
as Queen Elizabeth was the time of her government; then had not those times
been stained with the crying sins of Blood and Persecution, neither had the
bodies of Saints perished in that abundance at the holy fires of Martyrdom.
May it therefore be for ever recorded for the honor of Queen Elizabeth's name;
How much the Queen has exceeded her Sister in mercy.
that her mercy was more to the bad, then theirs to the better sort of people;
and that in this most gracious indument, she is most worthy to be compared
with the most merciful Prince that ever was.

Fourthly, The first years of her government may sufficiently prove this her
merciful disposition, in which time the favor of her hardest Laws, were such
as that her greatest enemies (the enemies of her life and Religion) could not
but acknowledge them very merciful, The purpose of the queens Laws.
seeking only to reform, and not to destroy the estate or life of any one.

Fifthly, Upon this advantage the evil spirits of men, practice against her
life and dignity. No means to reclaim the inueterate envy of men.
For it is not possible that the inueterate envy of men, can be satisfied, by
any manner of fair persuasion, or suppressed by any violent means, unless
severity reach to the very life of one so envious: for mercy to an evil man
makes him presumptuous, and severity makes him desperate; So that this
disease of envy is not curable unless God please to do it. For in this
peaceful time of the Q* when mercy was so generally conferd, Proiects devised
by the Pope.
did the Pope the enemy of Faith and the great Politician of the world, devise
dangerous proiects against the Q. and the state of Religion in England, the
which he prosecuted with much instance, and withal the forcible means he
could devise The course he took was answerable to the practice of former
Popes, anathemating and banning the Queen from the hope of salvation,
Interdictions
interdicting her Kingdoms, and absoluing her subjects from the duty of their
natural obedience, commanding upon pain of damnation to do that, which in
the Judgment of Gods Law is damnation to do. This instrument Pius Quintus the
Pope, Pope Pius Quintus.
sent over into England, and according to his ungodly command was it diuulged
and spread before the general face of this Kingdom; whereby many of the
Queens people in the North, and in places of least knowledge and ciuility,
reconcile themselves to the Popes favor, The evil effect of the Popes Bull.
and like Calves ran wild after the lowing of this cursed and cursing Bull,
sent forth by the impious Pope Pius.

Sixthly, The Queen and State apprehending the danger of these proceedings,
and knowing how hazzardous it might be to her life and state, to suffer this
violence to pass without resistance; A Parliament.
Call a Parliament, and there agree upon such Statutes, as in their wisdoms
were thought most convenient, to prevent the mischief intended against the
Queens life, her State, and the Catholic Faith.

Seventhly, The cause of the statutes against Recusants.
The cause then moving the Queen and State to enact those laws (which they
call severity) was themselves, by reason of their turbulent and evil spirits
desiring innovation; yea, and invasion (who) if they could have been content
with the benefit of peace, which they the^ enjoyed, and wherewith the holy men
of all ages have been most gladly contented, they had then prevented those
laws, which they so much condemn; neither had they run their names, nor
their cause of Religion, into that suspicion of the State, as by these their
treasonable designs they have most justly merited. Exmalis moribus nascuntur
bona leges.
But it is ancient and true, that from evil manners are derived good and
wholesome laws, and they by desire to harm the state, they did arm it with
wholesome and provident laws, whereby it was made the better able to prevent
and resist their harmefull intentions. And from their evil is this Good
occasioned, that by attempting evil, and by failing in that attempt, they have
curbed their own power and shortened their own horns, wherewith they and
their Bulls had thought to have pusht the glory of this Nation. And therefore
was their Judgment an effect of their own cause, and most justly inflicted on
them. For God does retort the evil purposes of men against the contriuers of
them, and they that make snares and traps to catch men, are oftentimes snared
in their own devises.

Eighthly, But yet those laws which they call severity, The mercy of the
queens Laws.
were mild and merciful, and not proportionable to the greatness of their
offense, neither like in cruelty to the bloody laws in the time of Queen
Mary's government, against the constant professors of the Protestant Religion;
the purpose of these Statutes being to secure the Queen, The purpose of the
Statutes.
and to continue her subjects in their dutiful obedience, not reaching to the
life of any of the Queens Subjects, for their opinion of Religion only;
insomuch as the most resolute Papist, were he assured in the duty of his
allegiance, A large demonstration of the queens mercy.
and not guilty of any treasonable practice, was not urged by torture or
extremities to abjure his opinion and Faith of Religion, but might continue
himself in safety under the assured protection of the Q. and her merciful
laws, it being the purpose of the Q. and state to reclaim the disobedience of
her subjects (in respect of Religion) by fair, and not by forcible means, and
to effect that by the gracious means of mercy, which the Pope and others less
merciful, have attempted by the violent means of Blood, fire and Persecution.

Ninthly, The slanders of evil and malicious men.
It is therefore malice and a very slander to the Q. princely name, that Gods
enemies and hers do report her a persecutor of Gods Saints, and that her laws
were bloody and tyrannous, and that many of that Religion whom they call
Saints, have in this kingdom suffered Martyrdom for the witness of their
conscience only, None have have suffered in England for their conscience only.
their being no one particular person (I think) in all the Q time that can
truly be said thus to suffer death, but either as actors or abettors of
Treason, the laws having no authority to judge them otherwise; For though by
the law they were rebellious, and disobedient Subjects that would not conform
themselves, to the reformed Religion then established: and though by the Law
they endured some easy punishment, to make a difference between the dutiful
and undutiful Subjects, yet there was no Law so strict as to give the sentence
of death to any offending only in Recusancie, The mercy of the Law.
neither was there any law (before this occasion of the Popes Bull) to make any
the professors of that Religion, The Popes Bull the occasion of more strict
Laws.
traitors unless they were actors or abettors of conspiracy or treason in
which cases the Protestants themselves were judged with like severity.

Tenthly, And unless the providence of the state would have slept and been
regardlesse of the Q. the state, and state of Religion, there could not have
been less done the^ was done for the security of al, The purpose of the state
the purpose of the state being only to prevent, and not to revenge the
injuries of the Pope and his adherents.

Eleuenthly, It is wonder then, the Papist should condemn that in our state
for severity, The difference in the practice of these states.
which in their own states is a mercy never practiced; for with them the least
suspicion to favor or affect the Protestant Religion is persecuted, with much
severity, and let a man (in other respects) be never so deserving, or his place
and birth never so eminent, if once he be convict to be a Protestant, it is
assured death: it is strange then they judge us persecutors, Our justice more
merciful then their mercy.
when our justice has less severity then their mercy, we but easily
correcting that offense, which they punish with death, and they severely
punishing that which we most easily pardon.

Twelfthly, The pollitique regard of this severity in the Romish State
For how many with us dare, and do favor those dangerous instruments of
state, and how commonly dare men discover their superstitious affections in
common conference, and often with earnest reasonings, defending and damning
according to their appetites, whereas with them every little circumstance is
quarrelsome, and presumptions many times are most severely punished.

13. And this severity in them, is assuredly very considerable for their
Pollitique State of Religion, being one maine prop whereupon they repose their
greatness, for it is very necessary for them to use all their forceable
violence, to suppress that truth, which in despite of violence (like the
palm) will sprout and prosper under their grievous oppressions. And
considering how the Protestant Religion (notwithstanding their oppressing it)
has spread it self into very spacious limits, Religion flourishes under
^ppression.
they may well understand, how much more it should have flourished if by their
violent hindrances, it had not been let in his prosperous growth. This
Policy not answerable to piety nor holy example.
But this bloody policy of theirs was not answerable to piety and holy
reason, for so could the wise Gamaliell teach them, who withstood the bloody
counsel of the Jews, Act. 5. 34.
who would have persecuted the holy Apostles withal severity, with this
persuasion, that if their cause were not good, that then GOD would be enemy
unto it, and so of it self it would fall, and if it were good, it would be in
vain to resist it; because GOD would support it against all resistance.

14. The mercy of our English Laws then (in matters concerning Religion
only) is an assured demonstration, The mercy of English Laws concerning
Religion.
that our Prince our State, and our Religion is merciful, and these
demonstrations of mercy, are no weak proofs that our Religion is most
Catholic and Christian, most Catholic because of conformity to the Primitive
Church, and most Christian, because the exercise of mercy is the best
imitation of Christ himself, Christ the true example of Christians.
the Lord and true pattern of the Catholic and true Christian believer. And
therefore the Queen and the Parliament were both merciful and provident in
concluding these statutes the which by no other cause but by the Papists
themselves were occasioned.

15. The purpose of the Statutes was this principally, The principal purpose
of the statutes.
first to prohibit the bringing over of Bulls or interdictions from the Pope.
Secondly, to restrain the Runnawaies, and Travelers beyond the Seas without
license, and to prohibit Jesuits and reconsiled Papists from returning into the
Queens Dominions, unless upon their return, they would submit to such as by
the State were authorized to that purpose. Now how needful it was for the
Church and State of England, The necessity of these Statutes.
to have this providence for their security and peace, I purpose in the next
Chapter very briefly to discover.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
Such are (only and always to be opposed as enemies to a Christian State, as
are so judged by the sentence of Gods Word. For seeing Christ (who is the Word
of his Father) is our General in all spiritual conflicts, we must only and
always fight his battles by his direction.

Secondly, Pollitique.
To restrain disorder and disobedience in subjects, the State does usually
resort to the wisdom of a Parliament; for though the King by his
Proclemations may command or restrain his Subjects, he being that one
particular in whose person the whole authority of the State consists: yet do
Parliament Statutes the rather satisfy because they proceed both from the
Kings authority, and from the general wisdom of the Kingdom.

Thirdly, Moral.
There is no man can live in that indifferency of favor withal, but that he
shall have cause to make distinction of friend and enemy, or if he be free
from all enmity; yet he shall find difference in his friends, and therefore he
must distinguish them.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of what importance the Statutes in the 13. of the Queen, were in respect of
the Church and State.
FIRST, In respect of the Church In respect of the Church.
were they most important for the which they were principally enacted: The
prosperity of the state depends on the prosperity of the Church.
they did also much import the State, because the prosperity of the
Commonwealth does by a necessary consequence depend upon the prosperity of
the Church, for in all true Christian Kingdoms the Church and the
Commonwealth, The Church and State Children of one Father.
are Children of one and the same Parent, and though the Church be the older
and of better inheritance; yet a Christian Commonwealth is a Child of the
same Father, and has a younger brothers portion, in the partage of Gods
blessings, the one inheriting felicity and eternity, the other felicity but not
eternal. And therefore whatsoever does concern the Church principally does
concern the Commonwealth likewise, in a subordinate degree, and those things
which advance a Christian State; cannot derogate from the honor of the Church.
Respect had to Policy and not to piety only.
And this is true and only true, in holy and Religious Common-VVealths, but
not in such States, where the Church is disinherited of Prioritie and
birthright; and where the chief respect is had to Policy only and not to
Piety.

Secondly, The importance of these statutes (in respect of the Church) may be
considered in this, The Popes quarrel.
that the Popes quarrel with the Q. and the State, was for Religion only,
because the Church of England had cast off that obedience, which formerly it
had unworthily given to the Popes, whereby the Popes greatness and reputation
in England, was not only weakened, but also his other private ends of
advantages and reuennewes were taken from him. And therefore considering the
quarrel was for the Religion professed in England, the defense of the quarrel
on the Churches behalf must needs very much concern it.

Thirdly, The particular branches of these Statutes.
Again, many of the particular branches of those statutes, had principal
respect to the benefit of the Church, and to remove all such evil means, as
might any way corrupt and abuse, the consciences of men in the case of
Religion; the Church having found much inconvenience, by the continual
intercourse of English, Romish passengers, Inconvenience by English Romish
travelers.
passing from England to Rome, and from Rome to England; whereby the English
Church lay open to all the Popes persuasions; and whereby the ignorant and
baser sort of people were withdrawn from their Christian belief, and from the
duty of their natural allegiance. And therefore to prevent this inconvenience
was a care most considerable for the Church, and which (directly) tended to the
advancement of true Religion.

Fourthly, There be also many other respects, which in these Statutes, directly
intend the benefit of the Church, all which may appear most evident to any
judgment that shall with impartial eyes peruse them.

Fifthly, Nothing can respect the state lawfully that respects not Religion
also.
And in truth there is nothing in a true Christian Commonwealth, that can
only direct it self to the benefit of State only; but that Religion must
withal be respected, the care of State being but the bye, and Religion the
maine of every Christian intendment. And therefore oftentimes even in those
things which seem most properly to concern the State, is Religion in them
most regarded; the care of State in respect of Religion, being like the care of
our bodies, A comparion
or which holy men care, but so only, as for the houses of their souls, and
because of communicating those necessary services, which necessarily depend of
each other. These Statutes then were of most importance for the Church: Of most
importance for the Church.
that being the most respected end, whereto they were principally directed.

Sixthly, In respect of the Commonwealth In respect of the Commonwealth.
also were these statutes very considerable and of special importance, and
namely in these particulars that the enemies of the State; The wisdom of state
having made dangerous attempts, to innouate, and alter the State, it behooued
them, to whose wisdoms the care of State was committed, to use the best
preuentions they could to hinder the like occasions; and therefore were these
statutes devised both to cut off the evil members already corrupted in the
Commonwealth, and also to prevent all such future occasions.

Seventhly, The dangerous inconvenience of Jesuits and Romish Priests.
Again, there is no Protestant State, in the world which has not found the
dangerous inconvenience, of Jesuits and Popish Priests nursed in Seminaries
beyond the Seas: these men (like so many evil spirits) conueighing their
treasonable temptations to silly men least able to resist; whereby many great
and dangerous Rebellions, have been occasioned, and whereby many damned and
most dangerous attempts have been made against the lives of Christian Princes.

Eighthly, And for this consideration were the Jesuits banished France The
Jesuits banished France.
for that memorable villainy of theirs attempted on the person of the French
King; memorable it may be for the horror of the deed, and for circumstance of
persons a Franciscan Friar acting, Franciscan Friar.
and a Christian Prince suffering it, and memorable for that a Pope in public
Orations, did allow the deed, and comme^d the doer, canonizing him for holy
and happy, whose fact (without repentance) was most wicked and damnable;
daring to do more then holy K David, King David.
to lay his murtherous hands upon the Lords Anointed.

Ninthly, A respect most needful for the English Nation.
And as this is a respect considerable in all States, so in no place more, then
in the English Nation, this Kingdom having had many like attempts, and having
many such attemptors, who have dared to enterprise such treasons, as all the
world, nor all the time in the world is not able to produce the like. And
therefore to prohibit these Runnagate Traitors, to return more dangerous
Traitors then they went; and to infect the whole with the Leprosy of their
ungodly positions, and doctrines, was a care which much regarded the peace and
the prosperous estate of this Kingdom. A provident car^.


Tenthly, By these statutes the Policy of the Romish Church was prevented. The
policy of the Romish Church prevented*
For it has ever been and yet is the Politic wisdom of that state, to send
out these their Intelligencers, Jesuits Intelligencers.
their Priests and Jesuits into all nations* who (by confessions, and other
secret workings) understand almost the secrets of all States, and then like
Bees to their Hiue, or Spirits to their hell) send or bring all the use of
their trauells to the Seat of Rome; whereby the Popes have ever had
understanding in the most secret affairs of State, almost in all Nations. And
this is so behouefull for his greatness, A great means of the Popes greatness.
as with this he may be said to move the body of his greatness, neither without
this could he support himself in such estimation as he is. For when the
practice of any Prince is working against him, The use of Seminary Priests and
Jesuits.
he has timely understanding of it, by these his careful Intelligencers, and
by that means he is the better able to work his own safety, and to prevent
the intendments of his adversaries.

Eleuenthly, And therefore was this of special consideration for the state, to
exclude them the Land, who are the betrayers of our State Secrets, to our
greatest enemies. There are these and many other respects, which make it most
behoouefull, for the peace and prosperous estate both of the Church and state
of England, to banish the land of these ungodly practisers, and to bring them
their aydors, abettors, and receivers, within the compass of treason; Treason.
because their practice is treason, and they themselves most dangerous
Traitors; dangerous to men, dangerous to the souls of men, dangerous to men's
estates, and dangerous to the States of Kingdoms and great States: in the
politic practice whereof they are much more learned, Wherein Jesuits are best
learned.
then in the judgment of Divinity and Christian Religion.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
Religion does not deny her special Ministers the Clergy the knowledge of the
very secrets of Policy, or rather the Church (in these times) has a necessity
that does require such knowledge: because there are many enemies, that present
themselves against the peace and prosperity of the Church, which could not be
resisted (with victory) but by more then common discretion; yet it is one
thing to know and prevent, and another to travel in unlawful Politic
designs.

Secondly, Pollitique.
The Roman State does support the body of her greatness upon this particular
Policy, that by her Priests and Jesuits she can discover all States. This (in
the discretion of State) is such a strength as that she might be thought
invincible, but that God does fight against her.

Thirdly, Moral.
he that intrudes himself into such business, wherein both his profession
and his particular cause would make him a stranger, is injurious to himself
and others, to himself, because he must neglect his own particular, to
others, because he does undertake that cause, wherein he is, or should be
ignorant.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of the Christian care Queen ELIZABETH had, to defend certain Christian
Princes and their STATES.
FIRST, Every man's care.
it is every ones care to provide for themselves, and to labor the
advancement of their own prosperous fortunes; but few there be who care for
other men, or that labor in the travel of other men's affairs. And among all
the sorts of men, these few are the best; for by this demonstration of Charity
they approve themselves to be good men and Christians; Charity does approve us
good men and Children of God.
good men by the Law of Nature, and good Christians by the Law of grace. This
Charitable communicating of gifts and benefits, being commanded and commended
before all earthly regards. And therefore, he that with true Christian respect
loves his neighbor keeps half the Law, and he that loves God keeps it
all; yet he that made this Law, could thus expound it, Love the fulfilling of
Gods Law.
that no man can observe all the Law, unless he first observe the half,
neither can any man give God his duty, who first will not give his Love to his
Neighbor, which is not given, unless we declare it in our exercise of such
charitable offices, as we have power to do, and as the necessities of our
Christian brethren may require them.

Secondly, The duty of every Christian.
and this is the duty of every Christian man, of what estate soever; it is
also the duty of every Christian kingdom, to support one another in their
just quarrels, and to communicate to each other their general commodities. The
care which ought to be regarded in all States.
And howsoever in many states (of Christian name) this strictness of
conscience is not regarded; yet in the best it is, and in all it ought to be,
for the purity of Christian Religion is of that excellent pureness, The
purity of Christian Religion.
that no stain can be in the use thereof without dishonorable imputation. And
we all know that in the practice of heathenish and barbarous Commonwealths,
The difference of Christian and heathenish State.
are many things very commendable which in a Christian State would appear most
odious, because in those States they respect greatness only, and there any
thing is allowable that may help them forward. But where goodness and
virtuous name is desired, there men neglect the offer of all evil occasions,
and embrace that only for lawful and good, which (in the judgment of good
conscience) is approved lawful and good.

Thirdly, And in these heavenly respects of Christian commiseration, we have
good cause, and so have many Princes in Christendom, Queen Elizabeth most
compassionate.
to remember Queen Elizabeth most merciful and compassionate; who did ever
entertain the extremities of distressed Christian Princes, Distressed
Christian Princes.
and whose hands were ever armed with valor, and victory, to support them in
their kingly reputations, and to defend them from the injuries of their
ambitious and powerful enemies. But because the number of her princely
deseruings in this kind were many, and to report them would require large
circumstance. I will therefore make choice only of some particulars of best
memory, and of most importance, such as being known may reduce to memory the
glory and greatness of the Queens actions. And the honor which the name of
England has got in being governed by a Lady of so matchless a reputation.

Fourthly, In respect of Scotland.
And as that nearest to us in respect of weighty consequence. I remember
Scotland first, a kingdom which before her time, never stood assured to the
favor of England, but what by reason of their natural discord, and because of
the combination between the kingdom of France and it; that nation has ever
been suspected of ours, and we of them; and therefore both of us have ever
commonly stood in the terms of lealousie, The wisdom of those times.
and both our Nations have had regardful eye to the proceeding of each other:
yet with such wisdom, could those times order their affairs of State, as
that these their disagreements were not hazerdous to the fortunes of either
kingdoms; but continued for respects of Policy insomuch as the Wars of
Scotland with us, were rather emulations than VVarres; and ours with them were
rather for manly exercise, Note.
than any desire to subvert or utterly overthrow the body of that State. And
in truth it cannot be imagined two Nations so near as they are (how ever made
friends by alliance or other friendly entertainements) could live without
giving of offense to one another, nor without many spiteful and hot
contentions, these two Kingdoms in one Isle being like two wives in one house,
These two Kingdoms in one Isle like two wives in one house.
under one and the same husband, ever being in civil displeasure for
superiority, neither could these displeasures be ever ended, but as God has
done it, making of these two Nations one Monarch: the which like one wife
without competitor, he has wedded to one husband the Kings Majesty that last
was, King James.
and to his posterity for ever, by whom the emulation and strife of these ever
disagreeing nations is for ever compounded.

Fifthly, The Queen has the glory of this deed.
In the glory of which deed Queen Elizabeth has a greater part than any
Prince in the world; because in her life time she did so much in that Kingdom,
for the safety of the King and that State, as might well declare both her
power and her princely care, for that Christian Prince and his Kingdom; The
Queen ever favorable to Scotland.
defending her Kingly Son, (our Kings Majesty) in the right of his Kingdom,
and in the truth of his Christian Religion, against all the enemies of his life
and State: and therefore has she the greater glory, in defending a Christian
King and his Nation in their best quarrel, and against their greatest enemies,
and yet has she better deserved, in leaving a Kingdom, better then that to
the King, and to his posterity for ever. The Queen defended that nation which
her predecessors had much offended.
Thus did the power of the Queen defend that Nation, which the power of her
predecessors had many times offended; she recompensing (at once) the injuries
and harms, which (they) the former Kings and Queens (of England) had many
times inflicted on that Kingdom. And therefore have they good cause to honor
her remembrance, and to give her name the best merit of all the raze of her
princely predecessors.

Sixthly, But she who was large in the use of her Christian mercy, could not
thus bound her virtues in the limits of an Island, neither could she content her
self that she had done well, but delights to continue her well-doing. And
therefore being invited by the necessity of the French Kings The French King.
occasion, Henry the Fourth, she reaches him her hand of favor to France,
and there she witnesses the greatness of her power, and the greatness of her
merciful regard; that notwithstanding that Nation had been the corriuall of
this, and had ever envied the prosperity of our many victories. And though the
Queen her self was lawfully interested into the title of that Crown, A
princely regard.
yet would she not take advantage of these opportunities, but so powerfully she
assisted the King; as that by her means, he might well say to have gained the
garland, which without the Queens assistance had either not been got, or not
so gainfully obtained.

Seventhly, Objection.
And if any one object, the Queen was improuident to confer her favors to a
nation, which had ever more envied and opposed the prosperity of her own
kingdom, and whereof she had no assurance, let them remember that the Queen
was never altogether ruled by the persuasion of State reason and that in this
particular, Answer.
The Queen never altogether ruled by the persuasion of State.
she deuiseth not how to enlarge her own kingdom, but how the kingdom of
God might by her be any way advanced. And because that then the French King did
declare himself to profess the Protestant Religion. she therefore thought it
the office of her high place to defend him in the cause of Religion, The
queens reason.
and to defend that christian faith, whereof she was made Defendresse; the
which she did so fortunately, that he obtained his kingdom, and she a name of
honor that will live for ever in all those places of the world, where the
virtues and honorable deeds of noble personages are recorded. And let the
Frenchmen for ever remember her name thankefully, The Frenchmen owe thanks to
the name of Queen Elizabeth.
as their noble Defendresse: let them remember also that as our english Kings
have ever been a terror to their nation, so this Q. of England was their
comfort, and she by whose favor they obtained that benefit, which presently
they enjoy in their King and in their peaceable State,

Eighthly, Another instance of the Queens favorable commiseration was the King
and kingdom of Portingall, The King and kingdom of portingall.
the poor King Anthony being executed by Philip King of Spain, a power that
(by much) did ouermatch Anthony, and therefore this Portingall made his resort
to implore the favor of Queen Elizabeth, who (after the Nature of her
gracious spirit) compassionates his great misery, and furnished him very
princely toward the reobtaining of his kingdom.

Ninthly, And though this business had not success answerable to hopeful
expectation; God otherwise disposing it, yet does not that diminish, the
Queens gracious merit, None can give victory at his pleasure.
for it is not in any earthly power to give victory at pleasure but to attempt
only, and to leave the success to the will of God. Again, we see that the
greatest earthly powers have often failed in the like attempts, because (as I
have said) no Prince can give victory at his pleasure, but must abide the
fortune of the day which is always uncertain. Gods judgment.
And who can tell but that God (in judgment to that people) would not suffer
the Queens good purpose to prevail, The doubt of Anthonies title.
neither do all men agree on the lawfulness of Anthonies title, many
approving the right of the King of Spain to the Crown of Portingall to be
more just than that of Anthonies: yet the Queen is not to be blamed for taking
part with Anthony against her professed enemy, the King of Spain then having
declared himself such an enemy to the Queen and her State, as made it
behoofull for the Queen to apprehend all occasions to weaken him.

Tenthly The Queen therefore had a double respect in this Portingall voyage:
The queens double respect in this voyage.
first, to repossesse the wronged king (for so she believed him:) secondly, to
disadvantage the great enemy of her State, whereby to make him the less able
to offend her. And therefore though she failed in finishing, yet was her
purpose good, and does merit to be ranked among her other honorable deeds, A
reason for the Queens excuse.
and because it was done principally in favor of a distressed Christian Prince
to relieve him in the extremities of his hard fortune; it deserves so much the
more of honorable remembrance, and to be reputed, as an effect caused by the
Queens most gracious disposition.

Eleuenthly, A fourth instance of the Queens gracious favor to foreign
Princes, is Belgica the States of the Low Countries The States of the
Low Countries.
where the Queen has done so much as has made her famous in all the world,
receiving those little petty States into her protection against the King of
Spain (at that time the greatest Prince in Christendom, the which quarrel
she did maintain with such advantage, as made the king fear her and the
world admire her.

Twelfthly, A dangerous Objection.
And howsoever there be that object, the Queen did injury to the Spanish King
to assist his rebellious subjects against him (for so they repute the States of
the Low Countries) yet do I verily believe otherwise. For though I will not
dispute the title of the king of Spain to these Countries, being impertinent
both to me, and to this History, The answer.
yet may it assuredly be concluded that the Queen a godly and religious Lady,
at that time ordered by as wise and honorable a Counsel as was in
Christendom, would not rashly have entered into any dishonorable quarrel, or
have done ought in the general view of the world, that stood not with the
reputation of her princely name. And this do they well understand, who best
understood the Queens nature, The queens nature.
who respected the honor of her princely name as much as any other Prince ever
did.

13. And though it be judged that the states were Rebels to the King of
Spain, A second reason of the Queens doings.
yet considering the full opposition of that time between England and Spain,
it may seem reasonable in the Queen to take this advantage offered by the
Low Countries, and to protect them for the security of her own peace, as well
because of their conformity in Religion, as also for the better disinabling of
her mortal enemy, who by all contriuement sought the detriment of her state.
Note.
And besides there is a great difference in them, who move Rebellion, and them,
who employ Rebels being moved to opportune purposes, especially considering
the enmity of him against whom they Rebel.

14. And this I write to answer the evil rumors of such men, who are most
ready to traduce the Queens most honorable deseruings. Evil men ready to
traduce the Queen.
For neither do I condemn the States for Rebels, neither do I acquit them of
that imputation, but only answer for the honor of Queen Elizabeth: The
offense between England and Spain a sufficient reason for these proceedings.
that howsoever the controversy stood between the Low Countries and Spain,
the offense was so great between us, and the Spaniard, as may seem to
justify the Queen in her proceedings. And therefore they who calumniate and
bite her name causeless; do like Dogs, who bark against the Sun, which in
despite of envy and them, will for ever shine upon the face of the earth, and
her virtuous name (like Virtue) will appear more glorious by the vicious
opposition of envy, Virtue the better for opposition.
and from the false slanders of evil men shall arise her commendation. The
Queen justifiable in this quarrel.


15. Therefore I dare boldly conclude, that in this particular of the Low
Countries the Queen did that was very justifiable, considering the circumstance
of the Spannish wars, and considering with what honor it has been done,
she has merited the highest honor, that victory and honorable arms can
deserve. The Spaniards and the States can both report the Queens victories.
And this truth (no doubt) the States themselves will witness with me, who
have often triumphed in the Conquest of her victories: and so will the
Spaniards too (whose experience has made them know her well) unless that
envy, and the remembrance of former quarrels prompt them with false
constructions.

16. In these, and in many other particulars, has the Queen declared her self
a most noble Defendress of the Catholic Faith, The queens cares ever servants
to the necessities of Christian princes.
whose cares were ever servants to the necessities of such Christian States, as
would desire them, whereby she has with much honorable applause) spent the
number of her fortunate days, and whereby she has most nobly defended the
professors, and the profession of the Catholic Faith: The honor of the
English Nation.
Whose kingdom little England has been a sanctuary for holy and religious
persons to fly to, from all places of trouble and persecution, and who has
ever been willing and able to offend the bad and defend the better sort of
people.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
To intend and prosecute our own good only, does not discharge the duty of a
Christian conscience; For Piety is like God who has a general reference to
all creatures.

Secondly, Pollitique.
A Prince that does support his distressed neighbor States in their righteous
quarrels, does a work both Religious and Pollitique. Religious because the
rules of conscience command such charitable supportations; and Pollitique,
because his own distress may challenge from them the like retribution.

Thirdly, Moral.
Whatsoever is in any man's estate or power, more than may suffice for the
wel-being of his own particular, he ought to confer that with charitable
benevolence upon common distresses, only he has liberty in the choice of his
particulars.

CHAP. XXIX.
A remembrance of some particulars, wherein God has defended this Defendresse
of the Faith Queen ELIZABETH.
FIRST, It is most true, that they who defend Gods quarrel, shall in their
just quarrels be defended by him, and they who deny him in any service, them
will he deny the favor of his protection. For as God is most Jealous of his
honor, and hates to be unregarded of his Creature, so is he wonderfully
contented in the faithful services of men, abhorring (in his divine Nature)
not to double the recompense of such reward. God the best recompencer of
deserts.
And therefore when God gives commandments, he gives them with promise to
reward the obseruers of them, God most assured in his promises.
whereby holy men have been ever comforted with this assurance, that God is
most assured in his promises, it being impossible to his divine Nature, to be
either forgetful or ungrateful. Na (rather) so delighted he is with
obedience, that (most carefully) he apprehends every little service of men,
Gods reward
to reward it with infinite of benefits.

Secondly, this truth is known both by holy examples, and by testimonies most
holy, In the queens particular.
it is known also in the Queens particular, whom God did wonderfully protect
against all the power of Hell and Earth. For I assuredly believe there was
never any Christian Prince in the world, against whom were so many practices,
Many practices against the Queen.
and devilish proiects attempted; her enemies continually working against her,
either by their power or by their Policy, either by foreign, or by civil
wars; either by open or by secret practices; The diverse sorts of practices.
sometimes by invasion, and sometimes by Rebellion; by poison often by
conspiracy more often; so that there was no weapon, which in the wisdom of
devilish art, Gods special providence for the Queens safety.
might destroy her, but it was brandished against her, yet did God stand
between her and danger, and bare off many times the blow of death, at the
instant when the destroyers arm was heaued against her; and such as have been
solemnly sworn to destroy her, and have vowed their resolution by taking the
Sacrament, and though the opportunities of time and place served them; yet in
the very act have they fainted, being daunted with the Majesty of her heavenly
presence. Daunted with her Majesty.
And though the greatest Princes and Potentates in Christendom, did combine
themselves against her, withal their power whereby there was continual
practice on foot to destroy her; yet did the hand of God lead her through all
those dangers, and made her travel an honorable length of days, and then
give up her soul in peace to his hands who had so wonderfully protected her.

Thirdly, It is in vain to resist the power of God.
It was therefore fruitles and vain to contriue against her whom God would
defend, and by whose mighty deliverance he had declared himself to favor her;
some of which particulars I will remember, the general being to large an
argument to discourse on.

Fourthly, Her trouble in her Sisters time.
The story of her heavy persecution, the time of her Sisters government is
common to every man's knowledge; and therefore I need not report the manner of
that, nor the manner of her Christian suffering it: yet this is worthy of
observation that (at that time) God did suffer her enemies to prevail far, Her
enemies could not prevail to her destruction.
but not to her destruction, and it may seem wonderful, that considering Q.
Marie did rule the State, and Stephen Gardener the Bishop of Winchester did
rule her, and that both of them did most perfectly hate Q Elizabeth: how the
Queen could possibly avoid their evil malice.

Fifthly, And though it be objected that because of Queen Elizabeth's
innocence, An objection.
Queen Mary and the Bishop could not have have their purpose, The answer.
it is otherwise: For the displeasure of a Prince disposed to Revenge, can in
the fairest life find foul occasions. And when authority hates the person of
any one, Note.
it is most easy to brand them with offenses. And this could Stephen Gardener
well understand, who had profited as much and more in the learning of policy
than in piety, and holy wisdom. And therefore though the Queens innocence
was a cause of her safety, The queens innocence was a cause, but not the
only cause of her safety.
yet was there a greater cause (the favor of God) which did defend her against
the power of Policy, which her innocence could not do.

Sixthly, After she was Queen.
after she was Queen, when the storm did seem to be past, did it then begin
again with greater fury, the Pope sending his turbulent spirits into this
Nation to set the kingdom in combustion, who by his interdictions and papal
curses, did ban the Queen from heaven, The practice of the Pope against her.
absoluing her subjects from their obedience: deposing the Queen, and
disposing of her Kingdoms, as he thought convenient. And this by reason of the
favor of Romish Religion, did some hurt in the State; the Earls of
Westmerland and Northumberland The two Earls, Westmerla^d and Northumberland.
by this encouragement, raise Rebellious Arms against the Queen and the State
of Religion. But God the great enemy of Traitors confounds this practice of
the Popes confounds his rebellious instruments the two Earls, Gods defense for
the queen
scatters their rebel troops, and gives the Queen and honorable victory.

Seventhly, The Pope finding these oppositions to weak, incites a more able
enemy against her, The Spanish King.
Philip King of Spain, who by reason of his Indian Wealth and his large
command of people, may be thought the most able Prince in Christendom, between
whom and the Queen the Wars were maintained with much resolution and valor;
yet by reason of the maine distance between their Kingdoms, they were less
fearful than otherwise they would have been, if these two, England and Spain
had been neighbor Nations. The common attempts on both sides.
And therefore the common attempts on both parties were to Roue at Sea, and make
prey of such Merchants and others, as had not power to resist them, whereof it
happened that both of them, both lost and won, according as good occasion,
and the fortune of War would favor them. The nature of our English Wars
with Spain.


Eighthly, And in these heates and prouocations did these wars continue
whereby both Nations became in the greatest hatred of one another that could
be. And the Spanyard naturally proud, and having got many victories in other
parts of the world, thought it much to his dishonor, that little England
should be able to resist his greatness, the rather he being aided by the Pope,
and England vnassisted by any other confederate save the Low Countries.
Therefore he made great preparation to invade this kingdom, The Spanish
preparation to invade England.
that by the Conquest thereof he might declare his greatness and (at once) end
that war, which had been continued (by Sea fights and other petty
grieuances) a long time. The invincible Navy, Anno. 1588.
And for this end was that huge Navy of Ships prouded by them; Christened the
invincible Navy, which anchoring near our English Coast, appeared like a
City of Ships, or like another England come to invade England; Their proud
confidence.
so confident were they in the trust of this victory, that before hand they
would dispose of Earledomes, Lordships, and large Possessions, bringing with
them whips and other instruments of torment, to afflict the victored English,
over whom they never were victors.

Ninthly, God hates pride in all Creatures.
But God who saw this their presumptuous pride and hated it in the Nature of
his Angels, would not flatter in the Nature of the Spaniards, and that men
might know that he only, His mighty deliverance.
and not the numbers of men can give victory, he in a trice dissolues this huge
Congregation of Ships; and by the wisdom and Policy of one little man
only, Sir Francis Drake.
did he utterly overthrow this mighty Goliath, this huge host by the Spaniards
reputed and reported to be invincible.

Tenthly, And thus did God give a gracious deliverance to his servant
Elizabeth; making her triumph in the spoil of her enemies, and to overthrow
that strength, which in judgment was thought invincible. And for the Queen
her self in these weighty affairs, How the Queen behaved her self in these
weighty affairs.
she never gave the least demonstration of fear, but in her own person and in
her greatest hazard, would she by orations animate and inflame the valor of
her people, showing the greatness of her noble Spirit, with such proofs of
Majesty, as the greatest courage in the world could not do more. By these
particulars out of many, may appear how much Queen Elizabeth was in Gods
favor, and how admirably he has defended this most noble Defendresse of the
Catholic Faith.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Queen ELIZABETH'S resolute continuing the defense of the Catholic FAITH.
FIRST, Before our end No man certainly known before his end.
we are not certainly known what we are, because of the many alterations and
turnings, whereto all Earthly things are subject; for we see that the
beginning, and the endings of many utterly disagree, and that many have a
hopeful beginning, whose ends are desperate; and a man may enterprise well
that cannot finish well. Therefore as every thing is judged by the event, so
every man is judged by his end, he being most properly said to be such a man,
as he shall declare himself in his last resolutions.

Secondly, The glory of our life is to continue in well doing.
It is then the glory of our life to continue in well doing, and that no
consideration move us to retire from the use of virtuous deeds, and to abandon
that whereby we have gotten a reputation of virtuous living.

Thirdly, The queens godly consta^cie.
And this godly constancy has well appeared in Queen Elizabeth who ever
continued her self most constant in her Religious Resolution. For as she was
ruled being under government, so she ruled when she had the government, and
so she left the rule when she left the government. she was borne in the Faith
of the Protestant Religion, she lived in that Faith, She was answerable to her
constant mot.
and in that Faith she died; her adversity in her Sisters time could not weary
her, nor her prosperity in her own time vary her, Semper eadem.
but in both times was she one without alteration. At her entering the State she
took upon her the Defense of the Catholic Faith; the which she attempted
noblely, continued constantly, and finished happily; for as she began, so she
continued, and as she continued so she ended.

Fourthly, Her constancy apparent.
This her Christian constancy is most apparent in the view of her government,
where her hands were ever working for the defense of Faith, defending it at
home, In the view of her government.
defending it abroad, for her self defending it, and defending it for others;
ever in travel for this holy business, the particulars whereof (if I should
report them,) I should ouercharge my poor ability with too much business,
and peradventure prevent the Labors of some other better able to report them.
The name of Queen Elizabeth cannot perish in England.
For it cannot be that the honorable name of this great Queen should ever dye,
or that the remembrance of her virtuous and Princely deeds should perish in
forgetfulness, because this Nation which she has so much honored, has many
generous and sufficient Learned men, whose honesty will never suffer, that
England lose the honor of her famous memory, by whose great Majesty England
it self, and the name of Englishman is (throughout the world) made very
famous.

Fifthly, And I heartily wish, that these my poor undertakings in this
honorable cause, may provoke (be it by envy or displeasure) some better
sufficiency to report her most Princely deseruings: and it justly does move
admiration in many, that among so much sufficient Learning as this Land has,
such a Queen, such a Patroness of Piety and Learning, A request to the
learned of this Land.
should not live in the written momuments of their best sufficiency, whose
name has got degrees above admiration, with Princes of the greatest command
in the World. And most excellent Prince (may it please your Grace I may report
the love I will ever owe the living name of this dead Queen, and the content I
have that my studies are, and have been employed in these honorable
arguments: For howsoever in all other things I am little in the favor of
Fortune. Yet in this I acknowledge her liberality, that this great Princess
(by Fortune) does live in the memory of my writings.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the last act of the Queens defense for the Catholic Faith.
FIRST, The last defense she made for the Catholic Faith.
the last act of the Queens defense for the Catholic Faith, was the care she
had at her death to surrender the charge of her high place, to a Prince
faithful and assured, and to such a one, whom (in her Princely judgment) she
had found fit to manage a matter of that consequence. A most Christian care.
And this was a care very Christian in the Queen, and which declared the truth
of her Religious affection. For they that love and desire the world only; A
worldly care.
and that have no hope in the favor of God or in the happiness of heaven;
never trouble themselves to care for that which may outliue their life,
imagining that when they die, the care of the world does perish with them,
neither have such any care to benefit posterity, To benefit posterity.
but content themselves with the prosperity of their own life. The care of
Christians.
But the holy care of Christians is otherwise, and does reach further than
life, even to the length of all posterity.

Secondly, for the Queen (in respect of civil life) might have thought it
sufficient for her honor, and for the discharge of her high place, that she
her self had finished her holy course, with so great a commendation: (but in
respect of Religious life) she has a further care, The queens persecution.
to care to prevent all evil means, which might any way ruin that frame which
she with so much painfulness had erected. And to this end the Queen has a
most Christian care, commending the cause of the Christian and Catholic Faith,
King James.
to the Faith and truth of the Kings Majesty our sovereign that was, whom by
her last will she interested, to the title of her Crown, and to whom she made
surrender of her office, to defend the quarrel of the Catholic Faith.

Thirdly, Objection.
and if any man object, that the Queens nominating the Kings Majesty at her
death to inherit her kingdoms, was of small merit in the Queen, and of no
furtherance to the Kings cause, because (of necessity) the inheritance must
have descended to the King, it being his Majesty's in Justice, and by the right
of Law. Answer.
I answer, that howsoever it is most true of the Kings inheritance, and that it
could not rightfully descend to any other: yet considering the reverence was
had to the person of the Queen, and the interest she had in the hearts of all
her subjects, it had been dangerous if she had nominated any other to succeed
her; and it was her special providence, that at that time she named the King
to this inheritance.

Fourthly, Another objection.
again, there are others who have blamed the Queen for not publishing this
her good purpose to the King in her life time, and have thought that the open
acknowledgement thereof, was necessary both to further the Kings peaceable
entrance, and to give satisfaction to the doubtful minds of the Queens
subjects, Reasons.
the ignorant unlearned people being the greater part of the body of this Land,
and seeing they could not themselves satisfy this doubt, it was needful they
should be instructed, in the Kings lawful title to the Crown, and that
public Proclamation should have been made (in the Queens life time) to that
end, lest the simplicity of the common people (when occasion might need them)
should be abused by false understanding, and drawn from their dutiful
service, which could not have been, if the Queen before hand, had declared the
King her Successor, and lawful heir.

Fifthly, The answer.
I answer, these reasons are weak and of little consideration, and that the
Queen and her Counsel, had many weighty reasons to diswade this public
proclaiming of the Kings right in the Queens time. And these reasons have
respect to the safety of the Queen and her state, and to the King and his
title. For by this means the King himself had care, not to discontent the
Queen but to continue his Grace in her favorable envy, and the danger of
conspiracies of such who have been named for competitors. Lastly, it was a
means to preserve the Queens reputation among her subjects, a Queen and
Crown, which might have proved dangerous to his person, and dangerous to the
state of these kingdoms. For great men and the great spirits of men being
entitled to much wealth and great dignities, have not many times the patience
to attend their lawful times, but prevent time and take it before hand, the
which though it was most false in the kings particular, yet was it needful the
wisdom of State should then regard it. And therefore did Queen Elizabeth
that which was most reasonable in it self, most considerable for the king and
the State of England, and most conscionable for the discharge of her princely
place, whose honorable deeds I shall ever most willingly report to whose name
I live a servant, and whose praise I would not thus niggardly scant, but that I
understand a man of much better ability in respect of all learned sufficiency;
has undertaken that task.

THis Phaenix Queen ELIZABETH is without Comparison.
OF THE NEXT DEFENDOR OF THE Faith, King JAMES, the Kings most excellent
Majesty that last was.
CHAP. XXXII.
FIRST, There is no wisdom in the world, either of men or Angels, that can
(certainly) foresee the truth of future events, or determine what shall be the
issue of those things which are held doubtful. For God has not given to the
nature of any Creature to know things before they be, None but God can foretell
the truth of future events.
that being proper to himself only, who at one instant of time is able to
comprehend the knowledge of all things, both past, present, and to come. For
before things were did God ordeine what should be, Gods decree.
and determine every circumsta^ce of every work of Nature, which in their
appointed times) were to follow. And these infinite number of varieties does he
direct by his hand of providence to those ends he has determined, His
providence.
shutting them up (in the mean time) in the closet of his secret counsel,
Council.
whereinto the understanding of any creature had never liberty to enter: and
when God shall please to bring them into act, they are the^ no more his
secrets, but common to the understandings of al men that desire to know them.
So that they come not to man's knowledge, When Gods secrets are known to men.
before they pass from the secret of Gods counsel into act, where before they
are not known, but only to such choice particulers to whom God shall please
to make them manifest: For as no man is able to declare the fortunes of to
morrow before the day be ended, so in every other work no creature is able
certainly to determine, All things are judged by their events and not
otherwise.
what will be before it be; all things (in respect of humane indgement) being
judged by their events and not otherwise.

Secondly, Astr^logie and calculating uncertain.
and therefore is calculating and the judgment of Astrology uncertain, and a
very mockery, having neither lawfulness nor Truth to give it authority. And
though the Diuiner sometime hit the truth, he does it not by any certain
direction, but by hap and at peradventure, and so the blind may hit the Butt,
and the reporter of many lies, may fortune to tell a truth.

Thirdly, False foreiudging.
and this false fore-iudging is of ordinary custom in the use of all worldly
affairs, every man (almost) aduenturing to Judge before hand of every
accident, and to determine how God shall determine of such and such occasions,
whereby they would tie God to a necessity, The foolish impudence of men.
and that needs he must do that, which in their weak judgment, they imagine
will be done. But God who is most absolute, and able to do whatsoever shall
please himself, deludeth the vain imaginations of men, (and out of the
greatest vnlikelihoods) can he frame that which is most desired and least
hoped neither is he as man to judge by appearance, God judges not as man by
appara^ce.
or by the consequence of humane reason, but out of death can he raise life,
out of misery, mercy, and in the greatest expectation of war, blood, and
persecution, can he give peace safety and preservation.

Fourthly, We have happy instance of this in the fortunes of the Kings
Majesty that last was: The Kings Majesty
King James our Sovereign, whom God most graciously (and beyond all
expectation) did protect, making him fortunate to the honor of his own name,
and for the happiness of these Nations, combining (by him) two ever
disagreeing nations in the nearest bonds of Love and Brotherhood. God has
exceeded our hopes.
And this did God make prosperous beyond our hopes, and beyound the evil
desires of them who loved us not. For if we remember the latter time of Queen
Elizabeth's reign, and the hard condition of those times, we shall then find
how much the mercy of God has exceeded our hopes, Men's expectations deceived.
and how much the general opinion was deceived in the construction of that
event, men generally expecting the misery of war, and civil strife, when
God did reach us his mercy, and the large demonstration of his love.

Fifthly, In respect of likelihood.
And (in truth) in respect of likely hood, both Nations England and Scotland
had reason to have feared more, and hoped less then happened, it being not
likely to succeed as it did, and that a people inueterate in quarrel and
warlike contention, should in such peaceable manner shake hands, and conspire
mutually one thing, which for many hundreds of years before did ever disagree,
and which is more in a matter so important, as was the uniting of both
kingdoms in the government of one absolute Sovereign* The practice of
foreign States our enemies.
Neither was it likely there wanted then the practice of foreign States,
especially of such as envied our prosperity and loved us not, which might
travel to hinder this happy conjunction, whereby our strength became double
so much as before, and therefore our enemies would covet rather to suppress
than to enlarge us, least we having the kingdom of Scotland to assist us,
which (before was commonly either enemy or newter) might prove irresistable in
the fortune of war, who before we had it, were so often Conquerours.

Sixthly, A matter very considerable.
And this assuredly was a matter very considerable for them to prevent, and
such as the Pollitique wisdom of States men would carefully apprehend. For in
the disoretion of State affairs, The discretion of State.
it is better and of less difficulty to prevent the augmentation of our
enemies power, then when it is augmented to scatter it. Note.
And those things in the opportunity of their times, are of easy reach, which
afterward in a time unfit prove inaccessable and not within our compass, and
this Judgment could not want in them who most carefully search the secrets of
all policy, and travel their wits to apprehend and contriue all advantages:
yet notwithstanding all these occasions, which in common judgment might have
let the Kings peaceable entrance into this Kingdom, Gods favor to the King.
did God bring him under the protection of his favor in security and peace,
and with general acclamation, binding the envy of all opposition, and making
his enemies show themselves his friendly entertainers, and the antie^t enemies
of this kingdom to congratulate his Kingly inheritance. The enemies of this
Kingdom.
And this did God with such admirable demonstration of his favor, as that his
Majesty and his Subjects of both kingdoms, have good cause to remember it for
ever most thankefully: whose life God did wonderfully preserve, and whose
fortunes he did highly advance, leading him through many difficulties and
dangers, What the King did inherit with England.
to a fair inheritance, to inherit the obedience and faithful service, of a
people faithful, fortunate, and assured: whom his predecessors the Kings of
Scotland did ever most fear, as their most able enemy, and whom his Majesty
ever found, his most trusty and assured Subjects: and this was done with such
prosperity and forward success, The Kings forward success.
that the report of the Q. death was scarce named in our neighbor kingdoms,
but this report of the kings peaceable entrance, was far off generally
known, the good news of the kings entering outstripping the evil news of the
Queens death, to the comfort of all good men, and to the admiration of all men.

Seventhly, The King at his entering had no use for weapon but to give honor.
neither was there need (as it was thought) that the King and his Subjects of
Scotland should for this cause have put themselves into the hazard of
uncertain war, whereby the Kings right might have endured wrong, and Truth
have stood at the discretion of war, which had been very dangerous, and that
which our enemies most hoped; The happy issue deceived the evil ezpectation.
but the happy issue was otherwise, for neither was there any to lift up his
daring hand to resist his Majesty, neither had the King any use for weapons,
but only wore them for ornament and to give names of honor to such men, whom
he thought did or might deserve them.

Eighthly, And thus did God give us life when we feared death, peace when we
feared war, Gods blessings to our Nation.
a king when we had none, a Prince, a Patron, and a most noble Defendor of the
Catholic Faith, under whose protection we enjoyed peace, plenty, and security.
And therefore happy were we in his gracious government, and happy was his
Majesty whom God found worthy, to succeed in the royal seat, and in the holy
cares of that most famous Defendress of the Faith, Queen Elizabeth.
Queen Elizabeth.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the Kings defending the Catholic Faith in Scotland, before he was King of
England.
FIRST, there is nothing of our own wherein we may justly glory, We ought to
glory in nothing but in well-doing.
but in well-doing, because when we do any work of Grace, the Spirit of God
moves in us, and provoke us to holy exercise. And therein (only) we may
worthily esteem of our selves, because we are accepted of God, and used as his
holy-instruments. Gods instrument.
And in this had the Kings Majesty much to glory, who so soon as ever he
could move, was moved by the Spirit of grace, to holy and good purposes. The
Kings care for Religion.
The best proof of this was his Princely care for Religion, wherein at all
times he approved himself both industrious and resolute, and wherein he
fortunately traveled with much prosperity and honor. The demonstration
whereof is now visible in the face of Scotland, The Kings reforming the state
of Scotland.
that kingdom being by his Majesty's happy government, reduced to the first
Christian Faith, and to a better form of Commonwealth than formerly it had.
The Church there being reformed and purged from popish Idolatry, which had
profaned both that and all other Christian Kingdoms.

Secondly, and in this the King deserved everlasting memory and praise, that he
was the first Christian King in that Kingdom, The first Protestant King in
this Kingdom.
whose care gave end to that misery, and by whom that Church had the truth of
the Catholic Faith practiced publicly, and with the warrant of lawful
authority professed. In which holy business the King was very fortunate, and
for which God did make him fortunate in the passage of his Princely life
assisting him in his lawful attempts, Gods assistance to the Kings good cause.
and confounding the wicked practices of bad men, who banded against his
Majesty to destroy him. And therefore before his Majesty had the title of
Defendor of the Catholic Faith did he faithfully defend it, The King defended
the quarrel of Faith before he had the title.
and advised and enjoined his Princely Son Prince Henry to defend it. And
thus did God prepare the Kings Majesty and the Prince for the purpose of this
holy business, and by exercising them for the defense of Faith in the kingdom
of Scotland, to fit them for the like care in England, wherein the King most
graciously begun his government and ended it, A gracious beginning and ending.
and wherein we trust that his Son our gracious Sovereign that now is, and
his royal seed for ever shall in these kingdoms defend the most true, most
ancient, and most Catholic Faith.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
it is in vain to endeavor things wherein God is opposite, for no power can
alter the purpose of his providence. This has instance in the Fortunes of
these two kingdoms, England and Scotland, who have ever labored their several
extremities to be united; the which when Pollitie and the wisdom of State
could not do. God (without these means) gave it success, and in an instant
bound these disagreeing nations in the bonds of inseperable concord.

Secondly, Pollitique.
the King by publishing (in print) his opinion of Religion and his directions
for Christian government, did thereby much confirm the hopes and hearts of
the better part of our English people. For it must needs be, that if the
contrary faction the Papist did not withstanding this declaration of his
Majesty's presume much upon favor at his entrance, this presumption would (in
all likelihood) have proved a practice, and therefore was this Public
satisfaction a Religious policy, that did both arm his friends, and disarme
his enemies.

Thirdly, Moral.
It is necessary many times to a man's Morrall reputation to maintain his
integrity by Apollogies and public protestations* For if the person be eminent
and of public Note, his good or evil name will be likewise general.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
In what particulers King JAMES our Sovereign that was, principally defended
the Faith.
FIRST, The alteration of a Prince, the alteration of State.
It is often true, that the alteration of the Prince is a cause that the State
is likewise altered, and that those things which formerly in the government
had great authority, become not only neglected but also punishable and in great
contempt. And this though it be not true in general instance, yet in every
change of a Prince, it is either hoped of the bad, or feared of the better sort
of people. We had particular witness of that in our happy alteration;
happy, because nothing but the very person of the Prince was altered) the
government remained in like degrees of happiness: Nothing but the person of the
Prince was altered.
wherein Queen Elizabeth (to her honorable renown nowne left it:) The evil
hopes of bad men.
yet then were there many evil and discontented persons who could hopefully
persuade themselves, that the opportunity was then offered which they expected,
and that the time served to reintegrate them into favor, and to bring their
cause under the safety of the kings protection, And though in respect of the
Kings particular, there was little or no ground for any such hope, his Majesty
having before hand declared himself in print, how (in the case of Religion) he
was resolved, yet was there a general hope in that contrary faction, The hope
of factious people.
whereby they imagined somewhat would be done if not to their absolute content,
yet to their great ease, and to the lightning the burden of their afflictions,
which in the Queens time they worthily endured.

Secondly, Note. That both the Papist and the puritan could conspire on hope
in one particular Prince.
But that which is more strange and worthy of note, that not only the Papists
had this hopeful imagination, but their opposites also (whom men commonly call
Puritans) had the like conceiving, they hoping their cause should find such
large allowance of favor with the King, that they and their opinion only,
should have the countenance and warrant of the Kings protection. And that both
the Papist and the regular Protestant should be judged unuseful and of
necessity to be excluded from the Catholic Church.

Thirdly, The success failed.
And howsoever the success of this came short of common expectation, yet was
this of much more likelihood then the other, both because their controversy
was not for the matter of Religion: but for order and for the manner of
Ceremony and circumstance only, and also because the government of the Church
of Scotland, Church of Scotland.
had near resemblance with that which they desired, whereby the King might the
better (or rather) be induced to give them and their request friendly
intertainment. The Kings resolute constancy.
Yet notwithstanding al these likelihoods, and the hopes of either party did
the King incline to neither, his Majesty finding the Church of England (as it
was established) to be the mean and virtue between these two extremities, and
that their desires were not for the peace and advancement of the Catholic
Faith, according as both of them pretended, and that these oppositions were
either to be reconciled, and so made friends, or else opposed as enemies.

Fourthly, And this may worthily seem strange that these two irreconcilable
opinions, that of the Papist and this of the Puritan, should both of them at
one time, expect supportation from one and the same Prince, and from such a
Prince as had before declared himself not to favor them, that these who never
consent in any little resemblance, should thus conspire and hope in one
particular person. The reason.
And the reason was the several perswations they had of the truth of their
cause, wherein the maintainers of both opinions, could receive special
satisfaction in themselves, and hopefully believe to work the King to that
acknowledgement of truth, wherein they themselves were resolved, and wherein
(they thought was sufficient reason to satisfy or persuade any man. Their
arguments of hope
Besides, they might peradventure frame special arguments of hope, to give
them encouragement in hopeful proceeding, both of them apprehending every
little circumstance of hope, either in the King himself his Nature or fortunes.

Fifthly, How God assisted the King in this important business.
But the mercy of God which had wonderfully protected the Kings Majesty in
safety and prosperous fortune against many dangerous practices did not now
leave him vnassisted, but in this business of most important consideration,
lead him to an end full of honorable merit, God giving him so much of the
wisdom of his Spirit, whereby he was able to judge and determine this maine
Controversy, and whereby he was able to judge between light and darkness,
Truth and falsehood, Order and disorder, Religion and Idolatry. And according
to this holy judgment did the King in his election) make particular choice,
The Kings choice.
confirming the doctrine of true Religion, and the commendable order which in
the Church he found established, and confuting (by the judgment of his own
mouth) both these and all the other enemies of Truth and order whatsoever. Thus
nobly prepared did his Majesty defend the Catholic Faith against these two
great enemies, enemies both of them; for the Papist he is enemy to the Faith,
The Papist and the Puritan both enemies to the Catholic Church.
and the Puritan is enenemie to the peace of the Catholic Church, enemies
both, yet not both alike enemies, yet both dangerous and of much conuenience to
be opposed by the Defendor of the Catholic Faith, the which his Majesty did
to his great commendation, and to the honor of Almighty God. The order of the
Kings proceeding against the Puritan.
For the Puritan first, the order of the Kings gracious proceeding in this
business is well known to the world, by what lenity and favorable means he
labored to accord their disagreements, and to unite them to the peace and
concord of the Church, from which they had divided themselves. For though by
the power of his high place, he might have forced their obedience and have used
the severity of correction and severe Justice, yet would he not knowing how
stiff and wilful they were in their opinion, and therefore to gain them his
Majesty was content to use any means to put off Majesty and the authority of
Greatness, The Kings most Christistian Care.
and in his own person to give their cause a favorable hearing, and himself
to moderate and judge their disputations; and therefore were they allowed to
make choice of the best able men among them to defend their opinion, against
whom were appointed of the Reverend Bishops of this Land, to answer and to
satisfy their arguments, in the hearing and determining, of which Controversy
his Majesty* His Majesty's religious Judgment.
did declare himself to understand as much in Religious Learning as the
greatest Doctor in that presence, he himself confuting and confounding all
pretended reason alleged against the convenient orders of the Church, whereby
at that time he declared how well able he was to defend the quarrel of Faith
and Religion against all the Learning in the world. The different nature of the
King, and these peevish people.
And thus did the King descend his Majesty to satisfy the peevish obstinacy
of the Puritan faction. And whereas it is objected that these proceedings
against the Puritans, Objection.
did animate and encourage the Papist an enemy of greater importance, and that
it was evil order to begin reformation with the Puritans and to let the Papist
pass as an enemy not regarded. Answer.
I answer, the order was good and most convenient, and answerable to the rule
of God himself For judgment begins at the house of God, and it is most
needful for him that would profitably reform others, first to reform
himself.

Sixthly, And the body of this kingdom, having the disease of disobedience in
the chief memebers thereof, A most orderly proceeding.
it was orderly and most necessary; first to respect this care at home* and
then to intend business further of, neither could the Papist be encouraged by
this, for they might well know that if the King favored not the less, An
argument.
he would not favor the greater enemy; and if he corrected the Puritan with
rods, he would whip them with scourges. And for the Papist howsoever the Kings
Majesty did use them, Papist.
with as much favorable regard as any Prince in the world, would his enemies*
yet was there a watchful eye had to their proceedings, The care of the State.
and so strict a hand was held over them as to distinguish them from friends;
the Governors of State being most careful to prevent whatsoever might be by
them attempted, not doing ought against them, which might any way provoke them
to any unlawful practice.

Seventhly, The reason.
and this was upon good consideration, because the Recusants in England, had
not yet attempted ought against the Kings person and State* and therefore was
it his Religious wisdom, not to punish before they had offended, nor with
strict severity to restrain them, before they had made some treasonable
attempt; whereby the proceedings against them, might be the more justifiable
before the whole face of Christendom. The Papists.
But they not content with much unless they might have all; conspire the most
damnable treason, The Gunpowder treason.
that ever by men or devils was invented; the report whereof (for the
rareness) is spread over all the world. For (at one blow) they purposed to
smite off the heads of all the honorable in this Nation; all the Heads because
all the Governors both principal and subordinate, and all the Honorable,
because almost all the wise and Reverend in the Kingdom, should at one Blow
have perished.

Eighthly, How this might have wrought revenge in the Kings desire.
now how this Treason might have offended, a King disposed to Revenge, let the
most patient minded in the world judge it; but how it did move the Kings
impatience, or how his Majesty revenged it, let the most envious Papist judge
it. For presently upon the discovery of this near effected Treason; The Kings
Proclemation.
the king by his Proclamations declared, that he had no purpose, to lay their
offense upon their general cause of Religion; His most religious mercy.
nor that his Justice should reach further then to the offenders themselves,
wherein he gave assurance of safety to all such Recusants, as in all other
respects save Religion were dutiful Subjects. And though for the better
security of the king and State, there were some Statutes enacted for the better
preventing of the like dangers; Statutes enacted.
yet were they very merciful, and far from the Nature of Revenge, tending
only to defend, and not to offend the quiet of any peaceable Subject.

Ninthly, The Oath of Allegiance.
And whereas the Oath of Allegiance is by many thought very grievous,
Blackwell the Archpriest.
it is strange, that any Christian judgment should so think, and that any man
should dare to condemn that which God so highly commends; and with some of
their best Learned both allow as lawful, and have advisedly taken, the which
because it is by others largely disputed, I pass over.

Tenthly, Now the king to add to all these Christian merits and to declare
himself with most direct testimonies, that his Princely care was principally
for the Service of God, and the advancement of the Catholic Religion; he the
Lord anointed undertakes the quarrel of GODS cause, concluding by invincible
arguments, that Truth which Antichrist the Arch-enemie of the Catholic Faith
had opposed. These his most Christian and most Princely labors, are diuulged
and laid open before the general face of the world, whereby that man of sin is
with evidence discovered, and all his painted Pollitique Religion, laid nakedly
open, in the true forms of his false worship; and whereby Christian Emperors,
Kings, and Potentates, are induced by the authorities of reason, and particular
example, to combine with God, and Gods Lieftenants (Christian Princes) against
all foreign confederacy whatsoever. These works of Religious Learning in
the King, as they were of marvelous import and strength to the Catholic
Cause, so also they made much for the Kings sacred honor, and will undoubtedly
remain to all posterity as ornaments of his princely worth, and inducements to
inflame with sacred zeal the affections of his princely Progeny, to honor
and enlarge the reputation of Religion and Learning. And howsoever his
malicious lying enemy Tortus (or the Cardinal his Master Bellarmine,) would
disgrace the Kings sufficiency, in this kind of learning, and would therefore
father his Majesty's work upon his Subject of less authority, yet are these
injuries both known and judged by many thousands, both of this and of other
Nations, that have had experience of his extraordinary indouments: the truth
whereof it is not possible his own Subjects can report, without suspicion of
flattery.

Eleuenthly, I conclude then that the Kings Majesty most noblely defended the
Catholic Faith against all the enemies, The two great enemies of our Church.
and principally against these two great ones, the Papist and the Puritan.

Observations Divine. Pollitique. Moral.

FIRST, Divine.
there was never any time wherein God had not some Patron to give the cause of
his Church Sanctuary: for though it be often in distress, it is never in
destruction.

Secondly, Pollitique.
the Kings proceeding against the Papists and the Puritans, did well
distinguish the quallities of their offense, and declare his own integrity,
for though he proceeded against both, yet with some distinction of favor. For
the Puritan was the less enemy, being enemy to the peace only, but the
Papist both to the peace and truth of the Catholic Faith.

Thirdly, Moral.
Men measure the dgrees of love, and hate, according to the quallity of the
cause that moves the passion. But in particular relations, the personal
respect does often prevail above the cause. For passion is much more strong
when it is united in one particular Subject, rather than when it is divided
unto a multitude.

CHAP. XXXV.
A remembrance of some particulers, wherein God wonderfully defended King JAMES.
FIRST, there was never any Prince in the world who had more cause to
acknowledge Gods favor then King James, The many dangers the King passed.
who traveled his Princely life (from his Cradle to his age through many
dangerous fortunes; whom God still supported against the most able, and the
most subtle practices of his enemies. For if we reduce to memory, In Scotland.
the many dangers of his life in Scotland, and how in that kingdom his enemies
did conspire against his life and State, there is in that time and place matter
enough of admiration. But if that were not, and that we remembered his fortunes
in England only; England.
in those few years of his* government here, we shall find matter of more
than admiration, and such conspiracy and damned practices, as would amaze and
(with horror) affright the hearts of tyrants and bloody practisers.

Secondly, and for Scotland first (to omit many of less note) I remember that
very dangerous conspiracy of the Gowries, The conspiracy of the Gowries.
only a practice brought to that ripeness as that the King might seem to be
fast in the snare his enemies had laid to betray him: yet did God in a trice
break their snare, His deliueuerance.
free the King, and destroy the Devilish deuisers of that project. This story
is well known, and therefore it need not my report, being already related by
such, who have had better cause to know the truth of every circumcumstance, and
yet in this place does it merit to be named both for the rareness of the
practice and for the greatness of Gods deliverance.

Thirdly, At the Queens death.
at the Queens death also did God wonderfully assist the King, and favor the
prosperity of his fortunes, for at that time, when the enemies of our State,
and the enemies of our Faith did hopefully believe that the enmity of these two
kingdoms England and Scotland, The Pope and Papist.
would upon this occasion have renewed their ancient quarrels, No disturbance
to let the Kings forward entrance.
and thereby have interrupted the Kings peaceable entrance into this kingdom;
yet was the event otherwise, no little disturbance letting his Majesty's
forward entering, whereby God did mock the expectation of his enemies, and
assuredly exceed the expectation of all men.

Fourthly, that never to be forgotten treason of blowing up with powder, The
treason of the blowing up the Parliament house.
a destruction meant to the King, the Queen, the Prince, the State, the house
of State, the Church, the Monuments of the Church, the bones, and Sepultures of
Princes, A destruction less merciful than the Flood.
a destruction less merciful then the general Flood; because more sudden,
and yet all most general too, the very naming whereof may serve for ever, to
provoke the people of this kingdom to acknowledge their dutiful thanks to
God, by whose hand only, this mighty deliverance was wrought.

Fifthly, By these particulers out of many, may appear how God did wonderfully
protect the person of that King; God wonderfully protected the King.
suffering him to enter so far into danger, as that he might have been said,
to have stood in the very gates of death, the match being readily prepared to
fire that powder, which if it had been fired, had committed the greatest
Slaughter that ever (at one instant of time) happened. May God therefore for
ever be praised, who prevented so great a destruction: and let his providence
be for ever admired, who has thus defended the Defendors of the Catholic
Faith.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the diversity of Religions.
FIRST, Religion deuideth the world.
the diversity of Religions, is one maine cause that deuideth the world into so
many disagreements, the maintainers of every several Sect, disclaiming and
persecuting al diversity, judging such for propha^e and out of Gods protection,
that conspire not with them, in their opinion of Religion. The names of
Christian and heathen odious to one another.
And heerehe^ce it is that the name of Jew or Turk is odious to a Christian,
and the name of Christian odious to them, they judging us, and we judging the^
Anathemates, and cursed people.

Secondly, The Christians among themselves and the heathen among themselves
divided.
neither is this contention only in these opposites of Christian and heathen;
but the heathen among themselves, and the Christians among themselves, are
divided into many bitter differences, the Turk against the Persian and both
against the Jew, and so in many other particulars of the barbarous people.
Among the Christians.
Among the Christians also the Papist against the Protestant, and the
Protestant against the Papist, and the Puritan against them both, besides many
other subdiuisions. So that the Christians in these times, have as many
several Religions as the old heathen and Pagans had Gods, Christians now have
as many Religions as the Pagans had Gods.
and that Idolatry which the people of the old world committed by having
multiplicity of Gods did the people of these times commit by their multiplicity
of Religions. For it is al one to deny God, and to deny his service, and
Idolatry is as well in false worship, as in no worship. For as God is one and
but one, One God, one Truth, one Religion.
so there is one Religion, and but one, whereto all creatures owe their
obedience. And that men might not preuaricate or alter the form of Gods
service, God has prescribed an order for his service.
has God himself prescribed us a precise form, how and in what form we
should serve him, damning all diversity to this his own order, wherewith he is
only pleased, and wherewith he is always pleased.

Thirdly, The reason why Religion is so divided.
the reason then why Religion is thus divided in the Christian world, is the
many several constructions of Gods Word, whereby it is both diversely and
doubtfully understood; every man adhering to that sense of Scripture, as to his
judgment does seem most reasonable. And from hence it is that these two maine
divisions of Religion, the Protestant and the Papist, subdeuide themselves
again into many differences, especially the Religion of Popery. For proof
whereof, we may remember that the Church of Rome has divided itself into so
many quarrel some disputations, that searce two Colleges conspire one truth
after one manner; The contradictions among the learned Papists.
Nay, and the best learned among them, contradict, and have damned the opinions
of one another, this has been well declared by many arguments of sufficient
proof: Doctor Morton.
in the Learned writings of a Reverend Doctor of this Church, and which is now
very lately declared by their own disagreements, concerning the lawfulness of
taking the Oath of Allegiance; Bellarmine and Blackwell.
in which Controversy the Pope and his great Cardinal Bellarmine, oppose
against their Archpriest Master Blackwell.

Fourthly, It is also worthy of memory, that diverse of them in Queen
Elizabeth's time being prisoners at Wisbitch, Wisbitch.
were divided with so much hatred, as might seem implacable, the quarrel being
for superiority between the Jesuits and Secular Priests, Jesuits and Secular
Priests.
began at Wisbitch, but sithence spread over all Christendom, neither do I
think, will ever peaceably be compounded, a matter rare that men professing
one Religion and one Faith, Note.
prisoners in one place, and being by the Law dead men, and only continued
there by the mercy of a gracious Prince, should thus bitterly contend about
priority and greatness of place. And therefore it is most evident, In the
Religion of popery much diversity.
that in that Religion of Popery wherein they so much boast of uniformity and
general consent, there are many Sects and many bitter disagreements.

Fifthly, The Protestant Religion divided.
and for the Protestant Religion (whereof I esteem most reverently) that also
is full of much diversity, the vain glorious spirits of men disturbing the
peace of that Church, which has flourished with much prosperity. And these
diversities like a civil war, (and therefore a dangerous war) have more
indammaged the cause of Religion, The hurts of divided Religion.
then all the other enemies in the world ever could do, which by reason of
singularity and strange doctrine, (with which the gross numbers of people are
wonderfully contented) they have got a false reputation in the world of
holiness, and thereby draw from the unity of the Church numbers of the basest
sort of people.

Sixthly, No means to reclaim these disobedient Christians.
It were needless to reckon up the several names of these Scismes, they are
to well known in this Nation, whose peevish obstinacy has been such, as that
neither Law, nor mercy never yet could reclaim. Objections of the Papists.
And whereas it is objected by the enemies of our Faith, that because of these
diversities, therefore our Religion is not good. Answer. Diversity in all
Religions.
I answer, the argument is senseless, because (as I have proved) this
diversity is in all Religions, and in theirs most who most object against us.
Diversity in the Jewish Church.
Again, we all know that the Church of the Jews was the true Church of God,
yet in that Church also was there much diversity, The doctrine of the Sadduces.
for the Sadduces did deny the resurrection, which is a fundamental point of
Religion, whereas our greatest differences are only for circumstance and
order. And therefore this their argument of diversity, does not conclude
against the truth of Religion, for the corn may be good, which lies mingled
with Chafe, and so must the Church of GOD lie until the day of Judgment;
when as Christ shall come with his Fan, and Seauer the good and bad, which in
the mean time must lie in one heap, in one Church, and in one profession or
name of Religion.

Seventhly, The Kings desert in this respect of unity.
in this respect of unity did the King most noblely defend the Catholic
Faith, disclaiming the enemies on both hands, the proud Papist and the peevish
Puritan: and like a most Christian Catholic King he directed himself to Jesus
Christ, placed as he was crucified, between these two Thieues, The true
Religion is like Christ between two Thieues.
who (like two extremities) Neighbor this most virtuous mean. And let it be
the prayers of every true Christian, that his Majesty's posterity for ever may
thus direct themselves to the Lord Jesus only, Christ the way, the truth, and
the life.
who only is the way, the truth, and life itself. And let never any Caesar of
this Empire, incline their favor to either of these crucified thieues, for
though they hang with Truth, yet are they not true. And that Religion, which is
but near the Truth of the Catholic Faith is not that Truth, He that is but
near truth is not true.
for as God is, so is Truth, and so is the faith of holy Religion, one and but
one with out all duplicity or difference.

The Conclusion.
THVS I have briefly, and but sparingly reported the honorable deeds of the
Defendors of the Catholic Faith, wherein if I had been just, and had related
at full the number of their Princely deseruings, in this kind, I should have
undertaken a business of infinite pains, and have made this volume larger
then the patience of these times allow to profitable writings. I have therefore
extract from the number of their deeds, such particulars only as may
abundantly serve to honor the memory of their names. And this travel most
Noble Prince I present to your Highness consideration, not because I presume
of any worth in my part of this business, but because the knowledge thereof
does principally concern the dignity of your High place, wherein will appear
to your Gracious presence, the view of your most Princely Predecessors, and how
far they traveled themselves for the advancement of holy Religion; defending
it with resolutions, constant and prosperous. And wherein your Highness may
behold, what care this Christian Kingdom has had for the Christian Faith, and
what care it does expect in the hope of your Majesty, and in your posterity for
ever, Amen.

FINIS.

