A meditacion upon the the lords prayer, made by Thomas Lever, at saint MAry
Woll church in London.

Anno. 1551.

To the christian reader.
PRopter laborem inopu^, et gemitum pauperum, nunc exurga^ dicit dominus. Psalm.
xij.
Surely even now in great scarsitee lack and dearth of meat, drink,
clothyng, and all other necessaries, the sorrowful sighs of the poor and
needy, must either sink into the rich men's hearts, and from them procure
releue and comfort, unto the needy members of Christ's body: or else directly
ascend unto the throne of Gods Justice, and from thence bring down
indignacion and vengeance, to destroy wicked worldlynges, which being the^
selfs in wealth and abundance, feel no grief of their brothers distress and
misery.

But if any man, every weke will be content, to spare one meal of him self,
and bestow the price of that meal in Charitable Almose to releue the poor,
and the time of the same in godly meditacion and Prayer, to dispose his own
mind devoutly: then shall all such feel and taste, both of poor men's
honger, and of Godly comfort in abstinence and prayer, yea, and many poor be
much releued, and no rich man any thing charged, and so thereby Gods
vengaunce avoided and Gods grace procured, when as fasting and prayer does
pluck out of men's hearts coueteousnes which is the root of all evil, and
the cause of all calamities that now do trouble, grieve, and danger all men:
This meditacion therefore of the Lords prayer, shall be good comfortable
spiritual fode, in that time of bodily abstinence.

A meditacion upon the Lords prayer.
OUR father which art in heaven. We (gloriously formed unto the Image of thy
divine Majesty, created by thy gracious goodness unto highest honor, howbeit,
by our own sinfulnes disfigured with vileness, deseruyng dampnacio^. and yet by
Christ's death restored unto grace, to be citezens with saints of the family
of God) now all together in Christen unity, as members of one body, with this
one voice, for the manyfolde miseries of every member, and worthy merits of
Christ our hedde, pray, desire, and trust, to obtain of thee our heavenly
father, according unto thy gracious goodness, mighty power, and faithefull
promise, unto us that ask abundance of thy grace.



Thy kingdom come and everlasting kingdom.

vanity, freely to delight and take pleasure in Godliness and virtue, so that we
with a comfortable courage, may find delight and pleasure to do thy
commandment and will, being men upon earth, as the glorious company of
Angels do which be in heaven.

Give us this day our morrow, our daily bread, our daily and necessary food
and releue, both bodily and ghostly and especially the Spiritual fode of
Christ's flesh and his blood, by daily Preaching of the Gospel, and
ministracion of the Sacraments, to replenishe, refreshe, and renew our hearts
and minds, with the comfortable remembrance of Christ's death and his passion
daily to be used for necessary and spiritual consolacion.

of our trespaces and fautes, which we have committed against thy divine
Majesty, so that we freely forgeuyng other that have offended us in any thing
what soever it be, may be sure that mercy spryngyng in thee, has proceeded
unto us, being graciously offered of thee has been thankfully received of us,
and being charitably used of us toward other, shall most certainly be
confirmed and enlarged of thee toward us, and so finally, by gracious mercy,
spryngyng and procedyng from thee, all fautes and trespasses shall be freely
forgeuen, even as those which other have committed against us, so likewise
those that we have done against thee.



Gospel, so that without danger of Deuelishe temptacion, driuyng unto
everlasting da^pnacion, we may serve thee in holiness and righteousness all
the days of our lives, with most certain and comfortable hope, of
everlasting life and salvation through Christ Jesus, in whom our hope and thy
promise is most certain, that is to say. Amen. So be it.

FINIS.
Thomas Lever.

Imprinted at London by Ihon Kyngston.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

And are to be sold at the West door of Poules, by Anthony Kyngston.




