THE Touchstone of Complexions. Generallye appliable, expedient and profitable
for all such, as be desirous and careful of their bodylye health. CONTAINING
MOST easy rules and ready tokens, where by every one may perfectly try, and
thoroughly know, as well the exact state, habit, disposition, and constitution,
of his own Body outwordly: as also the inclinations, affections, motions, and
desires of his mind inwardly.

First written in Latin, by Leuine Lemnie, and now englished by Thomas Newton.

Nosce teips um.

Imprinted at London, in Fleetesreete, by Thomas Marsh. Anno. 1576.

Cum Priuilegio.

TO THE RIGHT honorable, his singular good Lord, Sir William Brook Knighte,
Baron Cobham, and Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports: Thomas Newton, his humble
Orator, wishes long life, increase of honor, with prosperous health, and
eternal felicitye.
SVndrye times (right Honorable and my singular good Lord) debating with my
self the chief causes, why Arts and disciplines do (in these Alcyon days of
ours) so universally flourishe, although I know well enough that sundry
men can coigne sundry reasons, and allege manifold verdictes and probable
arguments therefore: yet in my simple judgment, nothing more effectually
whetteth the wits of the studious, nor more lustelye he awaketh the courages
of the learned, then does the favorable furtheraunce and cheereful
countenance, of the Prince and Nobility. For, honor, preferment, dignity, and
praise, feeds nourishes and mainteyneth, both Arts and virtues: and Glory
is a sharp spur, that vehementlye pricketh forward galla^t heads, and
pregnau^t natures, to attempt worthy enterprises. We see, that thing to be
greedely (and as it were, with a certain kind of Ambition) on al hands
sought for and pursued, whereunto the Prince and Peers are studiouslye
inclined. And therefore the less meruail is it, though in Royalmes and
Countries governed by barbarous Princes, and monstrous Tyrannes, learning be
utterly prouigated: and though the Muses taking their flight thence, do
abandon that soil, where they see themselves so slenderlye regarded, and so
churlishlie entertained. As contrariwise, where they be reverenced, cherished
maynteined and had in price, there do they endenizo^ themselves, and settle
their dwellings. And this surely (my L.) do I think to be one, or rather an
only cause, which in this old age and later cast of the world, rayseth up
among us, such a plentiful Harvest of ripe and excellent wits, conspicuous in
every faculty: because by special Privilege from the Almighty, and of his
great bounty and gracious goodness toward us, we have such a godly,
virtuous, and learned Princess, and such an honorable State of noble
Personages, themselves not only in every several Art singulerly skilled, but
also to the professors thereof (like terrene Gods) benign and bounteous. Of
whom, may be said that, which (though of unlike persons) Cicero reported of
Socrates, saying, that there were further and deeper matters to be conceived
and thought of Socrates, then in all Plato his Books, could be purported or
fully decyphered. Whose lenities and favorable inclinations, would not,
neither ought to be abused (as they are by some to much) with the Patronage
of every frivolous fa^cy and tryflyng toye, tending neither to profitable use
in the common wealth, nor to any available purpose, touching public
society. Whereas many of the^, if they could find in their hearts, otherwise
to tickle their pens with matters of better importance, and employe their
golden gifts to the aduaunceme^t of virtue and commoditye of their Country:
in steed of being fine Architectes and contriuers of matters offensive and
scandalous, they might eternize themselves (like good members and worthy
Ornaments of their Country, within the Beadrolle of Fame and perpetuity.
What opinion that invincible Prince Alexander of Macedonie, had of all vain
Arts, foolish baables, fantastical toys, and curious devises, well
appears by the reward, which he in presence of his Nobles, and Soldiers,
publicly gave unto a certain dapper fellow (one of his hoaste) who partlye
upon a bravery and ostentation of his cunninge, but chieflye in hope of some
magnificente reward, did before the Kings presence, cast or throw a kind of
small Pulse, called a Cichpease, through a Needles eye, being set a pretty
distau^ce of, and that many times without any missing. Which vayn trick, and
thriftlesse devise, (sauouringe altogether of a little foolish curiosity, and
nothing at al, of any expedient use or commodity) many of the beholders with
admiration commended, and deemed right worthy of recompense. In fine, because
the skillful Squier, should not loose the hoped fruicte, of that his practiced
knacke, and notable singularity: the King rewarded him only with a Bushel
of Cichpeaso^. A co^digne guerdon (doubtless) and very fit to counteruayle
such a peeuishe Practice and unnecessary Mataeotechnie.

A great folly therefore and forwardnes is it in man's nature, to bestow such
great study, pain, care, cost, and industry in attayning such needless and
frivolous tromperies: the having whereof, nozzeleth the hauer and Artist, in
loytering idleness, and breeds otherwise great inconvenience in the body of
the whole common wealth: Which deformity and abuse, many learned Clerks
bewaylinge, have in each of their several professions, by writing and otherwise
graphicallye depainted. And among many, this Author whom I now (upon
confidence of the generosity of your noble nature) presume to present and
exhibit unto your Lordshippe, goinge a nearer way to work then many others,
does not only) by artificial conte^plation) wade into the very Gulphe and
Camaryne of man's apparau^t wilfulness: but also rushing into the very
bowls of Nature, bewrays, and (as with a pensil) lively sets down the
affections, condicio^s, plyghtes, habites, and dispositions, of every several
Complexion. And, as one that well knew himself not to be borne only for
himself, has franckly, friendly, and learnedly bequeathed the Talent of his
knowledge to a public and universal commoditye. In readinge whereof, I am
persuaded, that none of indifferent judgment, shall think his oil and
labor lost, neither his time and travail misspent: at least wise, if it were
with like grace in any respect, delivered out in English, as he has done, and
left it in the Latin.

But surely I have done my best, trusting that others in recompense of my
trauail, will not, upon a Spleen, requite me with their worste, neither
misco^strue my meaning, which was in plain terms and vulgar phrase to go as
near to my Authors plotforme, as my adle head could well imagine.

And now being arrived to Land, after a pretty long voyage and pleasant
saylinge, in this his Philosophical Sea, I approach in most dutiful
humility, with such News and VVares, as I have heard, seen, read, and
gotten, unto your Honor, whom for many respects, I mistruste not, but will
honorably daigne to hear me. And now do I stand at the Bar of courtesy,
to hear your Lordshippes doom, concerning this my temerity. The comfortable
expectation whereof, puts me in no small hope, that all the better sort
(moved by your Lordshippes example will be the more easy and ready, to
dispense with my vnmellowed adolescencie. As for the frowarder and eluisher
Crew, which be so dainty mouthed, that nothing can please, and so squeymish
stomacked, that nothing can satisfy, let this poor Book (in Gods name)
take his chance among them, as it falls out: yea let it be as AEsope his
fyle, to grate and grynde their viperous teeth withal. Sure I am that their
severe and Critical ce^sures, can no more disquiet me hereafter, then the
Conscience of mine own imbecillitie has terrified and displeased me already.
Yet if things were to be obtained and compassed by wyshing, I would that
neither this Book, neither any other heretofore by me published, should
offend any, no not the very waywardest. But because my case may peradventure
now stand no better, then it did long agone, with the Philosopher Theodorus
Atheniensis, who complained of great discurtesy showed unto him, because those
things which he gave with the right hand, were snatched up and taken by his
Auditorye, with the left: meaning thereby his works and Lectures, which he
publishinge to good purpose, were wrested, and sundrely by captious carpers,
canuassed with sinister interpretations: therefore for refuge I flee into the
Sanctuary of your Lordships wonted clemency, with trust, thence not to be
shouldred out and rejected, but freely to be allowed the benefit of your
goodness, that I may lean upon the staff of your approved wisdom and
authority, and creep under the Targe of your favorable prorection, against
the currish bawling, and rancklinge tooth of barking Theon. In assured hope
whereof I rest: beseechinge God to endue and bless you, with the Right
honorable Lady Francis, your Lordships virtuous and loving wife, with the
rich gifts of his heavenly grace, and with continuance of prosperous health
both of soul and body, to his honor and glory, your own desires and comfortes,
and to the profit of this your native Country.

From Butley in Chesshyre, the 21. of September. 1576. Your good Lordships,
wholly to command Thomas Newton

FOR THE MAINTENAVNCE AND Preservation of Health (being the best and chiefest
thing that any man in this life can vvish or desire) it is most requisite to
have a perfect knowledge of our own bodies.
The first Chapter.
CICERO that worthy father of al learning and eloquence, Lib. 2. Offic.
says (and in my opinion right pithilre) that man his health is preserved,
by knowledge of his own body, and by using such things as are thereto either
beneficial or hurtful: finally in continency of life, ordrlye usage of
body, Mainteners of health.
and forbearing of pleasures, which in my judgment are not so hurtful to the
body, as they be pernicious to the mind. It behooves therefore and it stands
every man upon, perfectly and thoroughly to know the habit and constitution of
his own body, which consists in a temperament a mixture of four qualities,
hoate, moist, cold and dry. For by this means shall he be a great deal better
able to keep himself in health, and to wythstand sickness or recure diseases
whenever they happen.

And since natural health is nothing else but a right constitution and state
of the body and all parts thereof, Health.
whereby every several member discharges and orderly executes his proper
fu^ction, office, duty and action, without any manner of let or greeuaunce: and
sithence Sickness, as an affecte contrary to nature, Sickness.
either making worse or altogether hindering this action, molestinge and
payning nature, clean contrary to health and natural sou^dnesse: I cannot see
how any man conuenientlye can either keep himself in that present state of
good health wherein he is, or restore the same being empayred and discrased,
unless he have the knowledge of his own body, and be ripe and skillful in
the temperament thereof.

And albeit the Soul be far more excellent then the body, Soul.
and be the better part of man, for the furniture and garnishing whereof, I
would have the chiefest care and industry bestowed: yet notwythstanding, I
judge it right needful also to have a diligent eye and respect to the body,
least (otherwise) it should be a burden to the Soul, and hinder it from
matters of more wayght and worthiness. For the body being healthful, every
member does his office and duty, and is to the mind (at whose commandment
it stands) obeysaunt and serviceable. To this end is that worthy saying of
the Poet Iuuenal.

Most chiefly ought our prayers to be made,
For healthy mind within a body sound: Sat. 10.

Ask courage stout, and live in honest trade,
Fear not at all, of death the lethall vvound:
Pass forth thy days, use Natures gifts aright,
In pleasant sort with them thy self delight.
Acquaint thy self to labor, toil and drudge:
Shrink not a whit, rage not with svvellinge ire,
Have not to deal with trade of scraping snudge
Who never has enough to his desire:
To quiet life is no mo vvayes but one,
If thou vvilt know, it virtue is alone.
Which gifts of body and mind, True goods.
whosoever is endued wythall, unto him can no surer and stedfaster possession
happen: and against them preuayleth neither the instabilitie of fortune,
neither ca^the mutability of worldly ficklenes chale^g either right or
superiority. For great wealth, Health passes gold.
large possessions, sumptuous buildinges, huge revenues, ample patrimonyes,
glorious titles, and Honorable Styles in comparison of these are of none
account, neither serve they to any use, nor bring to man any co^tentacion.
Consider what the Poet does here say, and by these, consider of all the rest.

Not house nor land, not gold nor fee,
The Corpse can ease from crased plight,
Nor mind from cares: Hor. lib. 1 Epist.
sound must he be,
That gotten goods would use aright.
Wherefore sith health of body and health of mind are by good right to be
reckened among the chiefest goods and of all other the best: reason requires,
and expedient also is it for all men, in procuring and preserving ye same, to
bestow their chiefest care and whole diligence: and both for themselves and for
so many as depend upon them, earnestlye to desire these comfortable stays, and
cheerishmentes of life, the better and more commodiously to pass the race of
this transitory pilgrimage without dislykinge or greeuaunce. For if we will
credit Horace: What better thing can mother vvishe,
her tender Babe until,
Then vvysedome, Epist. ad Albium.
vttraunce, favor, fame,
with health and wealth at will?


He therefore that gladly would run his race and pleasau^tly pass forth his
whole days, must have special care to keep himself in perfect health: but
first and pri^cipally in the health of mind, and next of body, without whose
perfect state and soundnes, the mind it self is not rightly sustained,
vpholden nor comforted. For by the ignorance or not knowinge of our own
selves, and by negligente loking to the state of our own bodies and minds,
Nosce te ipsum.
we are haled, and (will we nill we) thrown into sondrye diseases and
innumerable affections, and (like a ship full fraighte with wares in tempestuous
and boisterous weather) carried and dashed upon the rocks of perturbation.
Whereby it comes to pass that many are by death cut of, even in their
lustyest time, which have no care, no orderly respect, nor choice, in
preservation and maintenance of their bodily health. To this very end and
effect, is that wholesome admonition of the wyseman: Take heed to thy self,
Eccles. 7
least thou die before thy time.

By which saying, he warns every one, so to order and dispose his life,
Death by ill diet many times hastened before his due time
that through riot and intemperate dealing, he hasten not his death before his
time, and before he have in a manner ru^ne half his race.

Now let every man consider with himself, how miserable and how wearysome also
it is to have a body never in health but altogether martyred with sickness and
soars, and (reason being mastered, banished and oppressed) to have the mind
defiled and utterly with inward vices polluted. How can life (I say) be unto
such a man pleasant or sweet, or how can the mind be quiet and well
stayed? For So Much therefore as nothing is better then health, let every man
diligently look to the same, and mark how much he has swarued and strayed
from moderate order and temperature.

This consideration with himself shall work in him much good effect, and
stand him in great steed, that in case his body be lusty and healthful,
he may in the same state still continue and cheerish it with helps and
preseruations thereto convenient. But if it be fallen into worse plight, and
not in so good case of soundnes as before it was, then to seek ways and
means how to recure and bring it again to his former state of healthines. For
as humors are easily changed one into another, and suffer mutual
transmutacion through moderate exercise, and such convenient meats and
nourishme^ts, as to natural heat are cherishable: So again the ill and
distempered state of body, through wholesome diet and order, is made lustier
and reformed into better. And even as we see members fractured, burste,
wrenched and dislocated, to be brought into their right places again: so may
health (being empayred) be restored and reduced into his former integrity.
For the minds and bodies of men be in a manner as it were young Sproutes and
trees, which being artificially handled, and cunninglye dealt wythall (yea
although before wield and unfruitful) yet as Virgill says.

If they be graft a nevve, and put
in other changed soil, Lib. 2. Georg.

From nature vvilde which erst they had,
They quight and clean recoyle,
And yield such fruit as best you like,
by force of handy toil.
Contrarywyse, if the husband be negligent and careless, his ground
becomes barrayne, rugged, ouergrowen with wredes and disabled from bearinge
any grain that is good or profitable. The like reason is to be yielded of the
minds of men. The mind.
For there be many excellent wits and very towardly natures, which by
unthrifty company and lewd education, do degenerate from their good inclination
of nature, and become altogether rebellious, wilful, lewd and barbarous. Some
again, whose nature is prove and inclinable to evil, yet by help of
learning and good education are reclaymed and won from their froward
disposition and become worthy members, stays and ornaments in their Country.
And therefore no man is to think or persuade himself, that an ill nature may
not be altered, sithe^ce rude wits, not yet trained to any discipline and
learning, may like soft wax, or as tractable and moist claye, be fashioned,
framed and made applyable to learn any knowledge, and virtue, any ciuilitye:
and by artificial instruction be trained to conceive Arts and behavior both
comely and commendable. Thus likewise in graffinge and planting (which is as
witty a devise and as proper a feate as any) we see wild trees to change
their old nature, and to bear fruit both wholesome and toothsome. Among wyeld
Beasts also, we see how the diligence, forecast, wit and policy of man
makes them tame and serviceable. An example hereof may we see in Mago, a
worthy Duke among the Carthaginia^s, who (as Pliny says) ib. 8. ca.
was the first among them that durst with his hand stroke and handle a tamed
Lion: 7.
for which Act, his Countreyfolks attaynted him, as one, whom they thought not
amiss to restrain from liberty and debar from authority, Mago made Lio^
tame.
for yt his wysedom and wise dealings seemed so excellent, yt they judged him a
man able to persuade any thing yt him listed, who had thus straungely trained
and tamed a wild Lion.

But that persons of Melancholique nature or of any other constitution
whatsoever, (so that the distemperature have not been of to long co^tinuaunce
and the party to far stricken in age) may be altered and brought to a better
state, there is no man that needs to doubt. For who does not plainly see,
that strong and very hoate wine, with cold water, or other milder licour, is
and may be alayed? Semblably again, wine that is small, myngled, and of watery
relice, yet being put to other licour that is stronger and of a better grape,
is quickened, and made both better and sharper. And so humors in a man being
either of themselves evil, or meeting with others of other quality, are through
their co^mixtion therewith, qualifyed and wax milder, and leauinge their own
natural quality are altered into an other, of stranger nature, effect, and
operation. Thus is the heat of Choler, by access and myxture of blood and
phlegm, mitigated. Thus is phlegm by admixtion of yelow Choler, heated, and
much ^bated from his own cold and moist quality, becoming thereby less
hurtful to the body. And in like sort may we conclude of all the rest.

Such nourishments and meats as engender good blood and juice are hereunto
very auayleable, out of which the humors and spyrits (which be the incensours
and stirrers forward of the mind) obtain and receive their nature. What
makes good digestion.
Now, there is nothing more effectual to make good and perfect digestion and
to stir up the Spirits, then sleep, exercise, and wine, so ye same be pure,
good, and moderatelye used, as the other also must be. For so does it stir
up and make sincere, lively and clear Spirits, from whence proceeds
cheerefulnes, joy, quicknes and mirth of the mind. For the meats and
nourishments (which by nature are labored into humors) being eaten and washed
down with good and wholesome wine, have freer passage into all the parts of the
body, and distribute their nourishment into them more effectually. There is
nothing therefore yt so much banisheth pha^syes and sorrow out of a man's mind,
Eccle. 31.
as pleasant merye company, and moderate use of wine. And of this, What
makes a man merry.
did that precise and stern natured Zeno, give a notable example: whose mind
was so much estraunged from all pleasant conceits and ordinarye courtesies
of common humanitye, that he was never at all moved with any affections, no
not such as be naturallye incidente and engraffed in every man. And yet when he
was a little whittled with wine, he began to change his copye, and to be as
merry and as bone a companion as who was best. And being on a time asked by one
of his merye mates, how it happened, that he being otherwise so wonderfully
severe and crabbed, yet at the wine was so pleasant and conceiptuous: he
merelye answered, that he was like to a kind of Pulse called Lupines. The
nature of Lupines.
Which kind of Pulse, although they be naturally bitter, and by their
bitterness, of force to kill worms, yet the same being steeped and soaked in
water, renounce and leave all bitterness and become both sweet and pleasant.
And this is naturally given to all men, that when the body is refreshed with
meat and drinck, al bitterness, sorrow and heaviness is expelled, and banished.
For the Spirits by moderate drinking of wine are styrred up, and the mind of
man, (which in them that be fasting and hungry is faint, weak and like unto
fire raked over with ashes, almost quenched) A dead man heavier the^ a living.
is reuyued. And this is the cause, why a dead body is heavier the^ a living,
because all his Spirits are vanished and departed out of him: and so likewise
is a fasting person heavier then one that has filled his belly: and one yt
slepeth waightier then one yt watches. And therefore my fashion is to advise
and counsel, Mela^cholique folks and sullen natured persons, to use
banqueting and good cheer among honest and merry company. For thus, after
Plato, writes the Poet.

Even old Dan Catoes stomach often, Hor lib. 3 Oda 21.

By wine was made to come aloft.
Which man (although churlish, stern and frowning) yet did wine so much drive
away his natural seueritye and grimme countenance, that among the other
guestes, he became a pleasant companion, and of manners very gentle and
familiar. For this worthy Gentleman, (although otherwise he was a very precise
comptroller, and of Stoicall gravity) perceived well enough, that ma^s nature
required some relaxatio^s and delights, and yt it may not long continue, without
some mirth and pleasant recreation. Let therefore every man take surueigh of
himself, and search out, what his nature most desitreth, in what state his body
stands, what thing it is that he feels himself to be helped, and what to
be offended wythall. And if he find the plighte and state of his body to be
in equability and perfect temperatenes, it shall be good to cheerishe and
preserve it with his like: but if it shrinck from his said temperate habit,
and decline to an inte^peratenes, then had it need to be helped and recured
with his contraryes.

Thus if a man through abundance of humors, Every man must search out his
own inclination and nature.
and stoare of blood and Spirits, feel himself prone to carnalitie and
fleshlye lust, let him by altering his order and diet, enjoin to himself a
more strict ordinary, and frame his dealings to a more stayed moderation. But
if he feel himself to be of nature somewhat sulleyne and stern, and given
somewhat to be wayward, whyning, testye, churlishe, and intractable then reason
wylleth, such a one to be reclaymed to an order and trade of life, gentler
and pleasaunter, insomuch it shall not be ill for such a one to frequent
dau^cing, It is some^ ^ time good to change nature.
singing, women's flatteryes, allureme^ts and embracings: provided always, that
all the same be not otherwise done nor meant, but in honestye and comelines,
within a reasonable measure, and also within the bounds of lawful wedlock. For
the state of Matrimony (as Columella aduoucheth out of Xenopho^s book of
Household) Lib. 12. Cap. 1.
is in such sort appointed by nature, that in it is contained not only the
pleasau^test, but also the profitablest societye of life. And least mankind in
process of time, Genes. 2.
should come to an utter ruin and decay, it pleased God by this lawful means
to join man and woman together, that of their inseparable combinacion, the
state of man should and might by mutual help one of an other, be eased and
comforted: and that (beside the love and desire that they have to bring forth
children) The commodity of matrimony.
they might be tied and bound together equally and indifferentlye to
participate all fortune whatsoever should betyde.

But for so much as approved and skillful me^ that have written books for the
mayntenaunce of men's health generally, do specially set down these three
principal things: To eat moderately, and leave somevvhat with an appetite:
Three most wholesome things.

To use convenient exercise:
And to live continently without vvastinge seed of generation.


I take it to be the best way, to reduce the whole substance of the matter
and mayntenau^ce of health to this prescribed rule and direction. For seeing
that measurable repaste and feeding (all surphet and glotony being banished)
makes a sound body: seeing (I say,) exercise by shaking of all drow tsinesse
and sloth, makes the body strong and lively: then no more, but harke^ what
a short lesson Virgill gives for the other.

No better way the strength of mind,
And powers thereof still to maintain: Georg. 3,

Then Venus play and Love so blind,
To shun and vvarely to refrain.
Of the nature and differences of Spirits, what they work in man's body, and
what affections they cause. The second Chapter.
Forasmuch as the Spirit is the original maintener and conueigher of
natural heat, whereunto moisture necessarilye adhereth: and that the Soul
(by the mynisterye and aid thereof) perfourmeth her powers and faculties, and
atchieueth all her actions: it is requisite here next to discourse upon it, and
upon all the differences thereof. For saying there be three especial things,
The body consists in three things.
in whose temperature and moderation, the health of man's body does pri^cipally
consist, vz. vital moisture, natural heat, and Spirit, which combineth all
things, and imparteth his force, virtue and nature, unto them: our present
purpose being considered, we cannot by order choose, but of necessity must
presently somewhat speak thereof. Vital moisture is the nourishmente and matter
of natural heat, Humor.
whereupon it woorketh, and by the benefit thereof is maintained and preserved.
With this Humor or vital moisture, is natural heat fed and cheerished, and
from the same receives continual mayntenaunce, Heat.
and from it participateth vital power, whereby all Creatures do live, are
nourished, increased, preserved and procreated. Spirit is the seat and caryer
of Heat, Spirit.
by whose help and mynisterye, it is conveyed and sent by the conduites and
passages of the Arteryes, to every several part of the body. Wherefore
worthyly is this Spirit thought to be the chief and principal Instrument,
that procures and executes every action.

These three do unseperably cleave together, and mutuallye help one an other,
and cannot be sundered, without present death of the party, and for this cause,
do we thus in one definition express, conclude and comprehend, their force
and nature within one definition. Natural heat is nothing else, but an
original humor, with vital spirit and heat totally moystened. But
forasmuch as Spirit conteyneth vital heat, and is of all the faculties,
ruler and directer, spredeth it self most swiftly throughoute the whole body,
caryeth and extends his powers into every part thereof universally, and
beside this, does manifestly change and alter the state both of body and
mind: therefore as the rest require great labor and diligence upon them to be
bestowed, so specially upon this is ye chiefest care to be taken, to restore,
mayntein, and cheerish it. For if it be sincere and pure, not mingled with any
strange or forrayne quality, it causes tranquillity of mind, frames manners
in good order and fashion, and finally qualifyeth and calmeth all affections.

The mind of man to honesty it frames,
And with the love of virtuous life enflames. Pers. Sat. ^.

But if it be any whitte infected, or with any vice soyled, then is the
quietness of the mind disturbed and stirred to many inconvenient enormities.
For, as great blustering wynds upon the Sea and Land, cause grievous,
terrible and raginge tempests, and much other harm to ensue: So likewise, if
the Spirits be disquieted and out of frame, they engender and procure diverse
sorts of affections in the mind, and carye the same (mauger all reason) like
a ship without guide and Rother, upon the rocks of sundry inconveniences.
Now the things wherewyth our inward Spirits are most dulled, Things hurt
full to the spirits of man.
quenched, and damnifyed, are these: fulsome Air, ouermuich carnal copulation,
unseasonable watching, excessive heat, chafing and labor, long fasting,
heaviness of the mind and sadness: According to that saying of the wise man:
A merry heart makes a lusty age, Prouer. 17
but a sorrowful Spirit dries up the bones. Heaviness brings old age
before the times, and carefulnes vveareth away a man's days. Eccle. 30.


But quiet and seasonable sleep, good, pure and well relished wine, Things
co^fortinge the Spirits.
meery company, moderate exercise, sweet sinelles and fragraunt savors,
refreshe the Spirits, quicken and revive them, yea being dulled and greatly
impaired. Which is evident to be seen in such as falling into trau^ces and
lying (for a time) as dead, yet by the smell of sweet savors are brought
again and recovered into their former state.

For saying that the Spirit is a certain vapor, effluence or expyratio^,
proceeding out of the humors, What Spirit is.
it stands us upon, to use the most exquiste diet that may be, to thend
that the meats and nourishme^ts being labored into good and wholesome juice,
may make the Spirits, pure, sincere and perfect. And thus, sweet air,
pleasant sentes, deuoyd of gross and fustie vapors, strykinge up into the
brain, do marvelously comfort and clarifye the instruments of the Senses, and
enable them to do and perform al their proper actions.

And although ye Heart in a man, be as the Well spring or fountain, The heart
is the fountain of life.
from whom the Spirits are derived, because the Arteryes come from it, even as
synewes from the Brain, and veins from the Liver: yet notwithstanding,
according to ye diuersitye and nature of the place, they are called by other
names, and have other powers appropriate unto them. Of these and al other
faculties reigning in man, the principal and oryginall beginning is at the
very principles and beginning of generation, to wit, generatiue seed and
femynine blood: which be afterward conserved and maynteyned by nourishmentes,
even as the flame is with oil: and out of these the Spirits proceed.

For ye better understanding of all which things, I will particularly set down
the procreation of the Spirits, with their nature, power, difference and
effects: beginning first at the powers and faculties natural. For by their
office is it brought to pass, that the meat we eat is concocted and turned
into the nourishment of the body. Also there be four virtues, whereby all
living Creatures with meat received, are nourisshed and increased: The first
attractiue, the second retentiue, Four natural powers.
the third digestive, and the fourth expulsive. To which virtues or powers,
appendant and belonging to all the parts of the body, the first and chief
original of the Spirits ought to be referred. For first, as soon as the
meat is mynced and chawed with the teeth, The office of digestio^.
it desce^deth into the stomach, being thither attracted, then digested, and
made substantial and turned to the proper nourishment and increase of the
member. And such part or portion thereof, as serves not to this use, it
refuses and rejects. Here therefore the Spirit has his first beginning.
And if nature be good and strong in this office of digestion, it happens
thereby that the Spirits be made pure, clear, and sincere: How affections
are caused.
but if concoction be hindered, or any other distemperatnes happen, the^ is the
meat altered and changed into vaporous belchinge, stinking fumes, and fulsome
breathing, which ascending up out of the stomach, disturb and hurt the brain
and mind, insomuche y^ such persons are easily and quicklye provoked to
brawlinge, chiding, strife and dissension. For when the Humors be not
sufficiently and enough concoted and attenuate, vnpure Spirits proceed out of
them, enforcing a manifest alteration of the state, as well of the body as of
the mind. Cruditie hurtful.
And therefore in any wise, cruditie is to be avoided, because it makes ill
humors and troubled Spirits, as well of meats of good juice, as of those y^
are bad: albeit the diseases engendered by want of concoction of meats
hurtful, be worse and of more danger. For they cause loathsome smelles and
fulsome belchings, and make the body to break out illfauourably in every
place with scabbes, botches, blaynes, and mangmesse.

For when there is abundance of humors in the body, Oppilation and
putrefaction, the original cause of diseases.
it cannot be chose^ but Agues must needs be engendered of that continual
obstruction and putrefaction: and stoare of diseases must needs spring out
thereof, unless those excrementes by continual labor and convenient exercise
be purged, and the humors reduced into good blood. For then a sweet pleasant
sent proceeding therout, comfort the head and tempereth and connenientlye
moysteneth the brain. Otherwise, if concoction be troubled, there do strike up
into the head, gross and fumie vapors, such as by example we see green wood
to make, that is smered and covered over with pitch and talowe. And hereupon it
happens that the mind sometime conceyueth strange and absurd imaginations,
yea sometimes falls into dotage, rauing, madness, frenzy, melancholy,
fury or some other distemperaunce.

But if the Stomach do his part and office thoroughly, if concoction be not
altogether hindered, and that the passages about the Liver, and the other
parts of the body, do give free passge to ye humors, then ye vaspours
asce^ding up into the head, are nothing so hurtful, neither do they greatly
disturb and trouble the inward mind: and yet is not a man altogether clear
and free from affections: but they be such (I say) as he has in his own
power, easily to qualifye, stay, and inhibite. Natural Spirit therefore
being made of the purest alimente in the Liver, is the beginning of the
residue. For by it is the vital spirit and the animal also nourished,
insomuch that the power or faculty animal, uses the spirit natural as an
instrument to these great affections and motions, whereunto (retecting and
little regarding right reason) we are many times provoked. For even as in a
civil tumulte and sedicious uproar among the common people, ye Magistrate has
much ado to appease and mollifye the wilful peoples rage and headiness: so
likewise reason is not able easily to subdue the lewd affections, and unbridled
motions, that grow by immoderate gurmandyze, surphet, and drunkenness. What
riott brings a man to.
For who is he, that being thoroughly whittled in drinck, does not beastly
rushe into venerous lust, and filthy desires? For when the body is bumbasted
with drink, and bellycheere, the priuities and secret parts do swel, and
have a marvelous desire to carnal coiture.

Hereof it comes, that such persons are delighted with unchaste Rhythmes,
and songs of rybaldry, odious to honest ears, and pernicious to the mind,
indecent hopping and dancing, unseemly clipping and kissing, and much other
filthy behavior. By this means that mynsing mynion, through her fine and
lascivious daunfynge, Matthew. 14 John Baptist beheaded.
caused the head of holy John Baptiste the forerunner of Christ, to be
chopped of: for the kingee mind was so enchaunted with her filthy and
pernicious love, that (clean aba^doning all reason and right judgment) he
granted to her the head of him, whose wholesome admonitions and counsel he was
wont before patiently to hear and well to like of. Which Euangelical example
is a warning to all Noble men, and as many as have the gouernmente of commonweals, that they cruelly rage not against the innocente neither tormente and
put to death, such as painefully and syncerely preach the truth, but rather by
all means to wythstande and root out such as be favorers of factions,
Disturbers of public peace ought to be rooted out.
and enter into any practices contrary to right and conscience, only to
disturb the public tranquillity, and to prejudice their Country.

The workmanship and frame of man's body consists of many parts, and
therein as in the state of a Common wealth be contained many orders and sundry
offices. The form of a common wealth.
In the Common wealth there be the poor Comminaltie, lowest in degree, in
which number are reckned drudges, Porters, Sailors, Cobblers, Tinkers, Carters,
Tipplers, handy Artyficers, filthy Bauds, Butchers, Cooks, Botchers and such
like: next in degree to them are Merchants and Trafiquers, among whom, some by
craft and subtlety, enueigle and deceive others of meaner calling and
ability: albeit, there be also of them, which practice their trade honestly and
commendablye, not by collusion and fraudule^t dealing, but by godly and
necessary means. After them, are the high Magistrates and Peers of the
Realm, who by due admynistration of the Laws and political ordinances,
keep the rude multitude in due order of obedience, and see public peace and
tra^quillity maynteyned. Last of all, are they whose office being of higher
authority, do instruct and train up the residue in the true knowledge of
Christian religion: and to plant in them an undoubted faith, of their salvation
at God the Fathers hand, through his son Christ. The like order,
comeliness and agreemente is in the body of man, wherein every part does
properly and orderly execute his peculiar office. And hereuppon S. Paul by
example of the harmonye and agreement of man's body, 1. Cor. 12.
and all the parts thereof, takes occasion to persuade and exhort every man to
do his office and duty, Members of man's body.
and carefullye to labor in his vocation. For all the members of the body be
so lyncked and knitte together, and such participacion and consent is between
them, that if one of the smallest toyntes, or the little toe be hurt or payned,
the whole body is distempered and out of quiet. And thus (as Chrysostom
says). if the foot or one of the fingers ends be pricked with a thorn or
other sharp thing, al ye other members are jointly grieved as well as they, in
so much that the head, which is the honourablest part of all other, stoupeth
to behold it, the eyes look down, the hands offer their diligent service to
pull out the prick, and to bind up the wound. So likewise there is no part
of the body, which in such case desires not to help his afflicted fellow
member.

Aptly therefore and very properly (as Liuius witnesses) did Menenius the
Orator for example, Li. 2. Dec. 1.
use this persuasion, at what time the common people in a civil broyle,
rebelliously disobeyed and stubbernelye maligned the Senators and Nobility:
likening this their iarring and discord, to the sedicious contencion and
falling out of the members of man's body among themselves.

By which witty devised fable, he persuaded the^ to forsake their mad
enterpryses, and to return every man in peace home to his own house. For as
in the body, so likewise in a common wealth, mutual sedition and civil
variaunce, tends to the spoil and overthrow of the whole: but contrarywyse,
Concord keeps and vpholdeth all things, and preserves as well the Common
wealth, as the body of man in perfect stay and order. How frendlye they all
do agree together, and how of so many parts, every member does perform his
office and duty, every man in himself by experience sees. No member in the
whole body, but it serves to some necessary use.
For there is no part nor member thereof (be it never so small) but it caryeth
with it not only a comely shape and proporcion, but also otherwise serves for
some necessary use and purpose, of the whole body and every part thereof.

And first to begin from the lowest to the highest. The Foundement, Entrails,
Stomach and procure the sustenaunce and health to the chief members, by
whose help and mynisterie, the meat being thoroughly digested, is
proportionably distributed by the veins, unto every several part of the whole
body. But if the Entrayles (appointed for the concoction of nourishmente) be
weak and feeble, or if any other impedimente or fault be in them, whereby the
meat concocted cannot have due recourse and passage to nourish the body, the^
does al go to wrack, and turn into corruption, mynistringe matter and occasion
to Agues, and all other kind of diseases. Signs whereby to know when a man is
not well at ease.
Which by certain tokens may partly be known and felt aforehand, that a man
in such case commonly loatheth his meat, has a puling stomach, and is
enclyned to gaping, vomit, stretching, and stiffenes in his body.

And because the Spirits exhaled by humors, do participate with other qualityes,
and thereby diste^per the brain, it commonly happens that such persons become
thereby wayward, testye, and very easily carried into sondrye other affections
of the mind. For natural Spirit being caused in the Liver, cannot be made
pure, neither attenuated into ayrie substance, unless that viscousnesse be
clearly purged and free from all affection. But vital spirit has his
original procreation and beginning of the natural, Vital spirit.
which is spread and diffused from the heart by Arteryes into all the body,
and frames in man diverse manners, according to that grossenes or subtilitie
which it receives partly of the nourishmente, and partly of the condition of
the Air, and state of the Regio^. So, they that dwell Northward and in cold
regions, Northern people.
by reason of gross blood and thick Spyrites, are seen to be bold and full
of venturous courage, rude, vnmanerlye, terrible, cruel, fierce, and such as
with very threatening countenance and manacinge words, make others to stand
in fear of them. As concerning any dangerous exploite, they are not a whitte
afraid to hazard their bodies in the adventure of any perilous extremity.
Which courage and disposition of nature, is not to be found among the people
of Asia: for they be but mere meycockes, and persons very effeminate,
shrynkinge at the least mishappe that happens, and with the smallest grief
and fear that can be, their hearts fail them, and they as white as a
kerchiefe. Which difference of mind and stomach, Lucane in the hurlyburlies
of the civil wars, in these Verses expressed and uttered.

Such as in The East and scorching Clymes
are bredde: by course of kind, Lib. 1.

And Countries influence, meycockes soft
By daily proof we find.
The North, that cold and frostie it,
Such vveaklings none both breed:
The folks there borne novvarres can daunt:
of death they have no dread.
In this their error happy they.,
whom greatest fear of all,
(Of death I mean) cannot affray,
nor courage once appall.
They recke not they, what brunts they bear,
they fear not enmyes blade,
These laddes dare venture life and lymme,
in manly Martial trade.
For whatsoever they be that have thick gross blood, Gross blud
have consequently corpulent and strong spirits, and herevppon it grows
that they will bear a grudge in memory a long time, and not easelye forgette
those motions and heddines that they once take: and hereuppon also it happens
yt many of them being wounded or hurt in fight, upon the sight of their own
blood, do run upon their enemy more fiercely and egrely, and bestow their
blows more vehemently, then before.

But they that have thin blood, have also slender spirits, Thin blood.
and such as soon pass away. Such are soon angry and at the first very
raging, but by and by their anger is assuaged and cooled, and as soon as they
have a wound or see their own blood, they are ready to faynte and fall down.

But to know how to qualifye, bridle, and subdue those great affections and
motions of the mind, that are engendered by great heat of the spirits: I
judge it not amiss for every man, to search out, by what kind of Spirit he
is most led, to what motions in dealinges he finds himself most
endaungexed, how feruente or how remiss the agitacions of his mind be. For by
this means, may those things that consist without mediocritie, be reduced and
brought to temperatenes and moderation. Now, this diversity of Spyrites, out
of which springs such and so great diversities of natures and manners,
conceive and take sundry alterations at the humors. Thus the Soul (although
it be singular, and as Cicero terms it, vnigena, yet brings forth sundry
and manifold actions, according to the nature of the Spirits, Whence the
diversity of natures comes.
and differences of the instruments. Hence comes such and so great variety
and diversity in the thoughts, desyers, affections, actions and perturbatio^s
in men's minds, insomuch that reason and discretition without a special
assistaunce of heavenly grace, can scarcely tame and repress the same.

For when the natural and vital faculty, together with the natural and
inward Spirits wax somewhat strong, Rebellion in the body.
and partlye by abundance, partly by the qualitye of meat and nourishment,
have attained strength and power: they reject and cast away the bridle of
reason, and draw the spirit animal also (for they be al deryued out of one
fountain) into their faction and disordered rebellion. Whereby it happens,
that when any lewd deuyse or wilful thought aryseth in the mind of man, he
is prone enough to run into dissolute riot, libidinous lust, filthy and
shameful pleasures: and if he fortune to espy any pretty we^ch or beautiful
damsel, Lewd thoughts.
that likes his fantasy, his mind is straight ways enflamed and set on
fire with unlawful desire of her person, for the satisfying of his unbridled
concupiscence: and by reason of the stoare of humors and co^course of Spyrites
resorting thither from every part of his body, his priuities vndece^tly swel,
and his member of generation becomes stiff, so yt many times it happens,
man's mind to be overcome and drowned in fleshly concupiscence, unless by the
special grace of Almighty God, and by meditating upon the wholesome precepts
expressed in his sacred Word, he stoutlye wythstande the Sommons of such
naughtye desires. This promptnes and inclination to evil, is naturally
ingraffed in man. The imaginations and thoughts of man's heart, Genesis 6. and 8.
(says Moses) are only evil and prone to wickedness, even from their youth
and first beginninges. But the blessed and most comfortable coming of CHRIST
took away this blemish, who by his precious death and glorious resurrection,
abolished the calamity, and cancelled the bonds of that myserye, whereto
Adams transgression had brought us.

The consideration whereof ought in is minds of all men to work thus much,
that because their spirits are prouokers and prickers forward both to vices
and virtues, every one should with more careful consideracion and heed,
attend and look to conserve and govern them orderly.

And although the Animal Spirit be more excellent the^ the other, Spirit
animal.
and before the rest in dignity, yet in order is it the later. For out of the
natural, which resembles vapor, and proceeds by virtue of the Liver, from
blood, it produces the vital, which is of Aerye nature, and mynistreth unto
it nourishment. And the vital does procreate the Animal, which by reason of
his thinness and subtility is ayrie. For it being labored, prepared and made
in the contexed net, celles and cornerie ventricles of the brain, is greatly
with sweet smelles nourished, and with fragrant things refreshed and
cherished. From it is fetched and deryued all the power and facultye which the
soul has, and from it do al actions issue and proceed, making the same
appliable to all functions. Well worthy therefore is this animal spirit
deemed the proper instrument of the soul to all the senses, for mayntenaunce
of mouinge and nimblenes, and for preservation of the strength, and firmitie of
the Muscles and Synewes: for it transporteth and diffuseth his virtues and
powers (as the workemaisters of actions) into the Synewes that have the power
of feeling and moving.

All the instruments therefore of the Senses, endued with this power and virtue
of the Spirit Animal, attain thereby stablenes, for the atchieuement of
their functions and charges: as for example, If the ways and passages whereby
this spirit ought to go and have passage, be stopped and affected, the
power of moving and feeling is taken away, as we evidently note and see to
happen in the Apoplexy, Palsy, Tetanus, and many diseases more. And this
spirit Animal is conueighed into the Synewes, even like the beams of the
Sun through a clear shyninge glass. And even as a fiery heat pearceth and
enters into a glowyng hoate iron, yt is very hard, insomuche that the some
therewyth becomes soft and tractable: so does the Spirit that is finest
and thuinest, slylte slide into the Synewes. All things therefore that need
feelinge, moving and agilitie, require the force, aid and power of the spyrite
Animal: As those that by nourishment are to be maynteyned, continued, and
kept, require the natural and vital faculties and spirits. He therefore
that would preserve his spirits vndemnifyed, and them make most sincere and
perfect, must endeavor at any hand to keep his body in right good plight and
order.

For as Galene witnesses: The keepinge of a good temperamente and order, 12.
Meth.
is a singular aid and help to conserve the natural faculties, and to
cheerishe the spirits. And as unkindly blastes and uncouth whyrlewyndes, do
sondrywyse affect our bodies, and not of men only, but also of Beasts, Corn
and Plants, either through their tomuch moystnes or tomuch dryness, or
finally by their nipping cold or parching heat: Even so the Spirits within
us, either through their abundance or quality, engender and bring forth
sundry affectes in us, and manifestly alter y^ state as well of body as of mind.
For where the Spirits be gross, thick and cold, it happens the mind to be
ouerclowded and (as the dymmed Sun) not to shine brighte out. And this is the
reason, that persons in this sort affected have duller wits, and blunter
capacities. For proof whereof, we are to see and consider, such as are borne
and bred near to the Pole Articke and ycie Sea, who (for the most part are
very huge and strong bodyed, but for wit and learning, mere doltes and
Asseheads: albeit this Nation through the great care and singular wisdom of
the most noble Prince Erick king of Sweden, Erick king of Sweden.
is now trained to more civil order, and have their minds with goodlye
qualityes right virtuously adourned.

But such as have their Spirits moderatelye cold, are persons constant, sted
fast, Germans
and faithful to deal wtal, and every thing which they ate^pte, is aduisedlye
and earnestly done, so that lightlye they will not start from their once
conceived opinion: but by reason of their coldness and fayntnes of heat
(except industrious education cause the contrary) commonly they be not very
quick witted nor of very precise judgment, neither yet craftye and deceitful,
nor such as by subtle driftes and wiliness, seek to suppla^te and undermine
their ennemie.

But they that have moist spirits (so that the Holla^ders
same be moderate) either by the nature of the region or quality of the air,
where they dwell, are quick and ready conceyuers of any thing, but not long
retayninge the same in memory, but forgetting as quicklye, as they conceive
speedelye. Even like to very moist and soft wax, that will not easily take
any printe or form. Hollanders forgetful and sleepie.
And therefore they be oblyuious, sleepie, unapt to learn Arts and
oecupations, dull witted and gross headed: and as they have bodies burlye,
big and moist, so is their memory ill and forgetful, which judgment is
also to be given of those bodies which be constituted in a vehemente dryness.

And hereuppon it comes, that old men by means of their dryness joined
with coldness, Old men and children, forgetful.
are obliuious, and so are Children likewise, by reason of their tomuche
moystnes. And these qualities make men also fearful, timorous and
faintharted, in repulsinge and sufferinge mishappes and adversity, which is a
thing peculiar to womenkinde.

Notwithstanding, education, institution and discipline, Education alters
nature.
alters the usual nature, and ordinary conditions of every Region: for we
see the common sort and multitude, in behavior and manners gross and
unnurtured whereas the Nobles and Gentlemen (altering their order and diet, and
digressing from the common fashion of their pezantly countreyme^) frame
themselves and theirs, to a very commendable order, and civil behavior.

But if this moystnes be with measurable heat somewhat warmed, as it is in them
which dwell in plain and open Countries, Zela^ders.
where few Trees grow, as in Zeland, where commonly in winter ye people be
grievously nipped with cold, and in So^mer scorched with parching heat, those
countreyme^ (I say) as they have bodies big, strong, toyling, painful and
laborious, burly limms, boisterous members and rough ski^nes: so likewise have
they mi^ds stubborn, churlish, testie, vncurieous, clubbish, and unmannerly:
Notwtstanding they be of judgment sharp and of industrious forecast: for
trade of marchan^dise very ready and skilful, The nature of such as be borne
and bred near the Sea.
and in their dealings right wary and cyrcumspecte. The rest of the Low
Cou^tryefolks, being better stored with Trees ouershadinge and defendinge them
from wynds, and which dwell in soyles of holesomer air, wherein is lack
neither of pleasant running ryuers, or delightful Springes of fresh water,
to fructifye the same, are of mylder nature, and not so blunte as the others,
but of them some be wyser and fitter to atchieue any weighty matter then other
some be. Flemyngs
So, the Flemynges for pythynesse in their speech and subtility of invention
are very excellent.

Brabanders setting aside all sternenes and severity, Brabanders.
with their dece^t meery natures and fre^dly curtesye, win the hartye good
wills of men: yea with a certain pleasant grace, facility of speech, and
allurementes of words, they ordinarily enterlard their gravity.

But if the breast and brain be endued with Italians.
a Spirit perfused with temperate moisture and heat, such as be of that
special constitution, are in their dealinges, watchful, sharp, industrious,
in forecast, quicknes of wit, industry of nature, excellency of learning,
notable vtteraunce, and flowinge eloqu^nce, surpassing other men. Italians will
covertly bear a secret grudge in mind a great while.
Finally such persons will bear in memory a long time things past, and will
not lightly suffer any grudge to grow out of remembrance. And if any wrong
be done unto them, they will reuyue the memory thereof after many years: yea
so destrous be they of revenge, that they will not forgette a private grudge
or offense even among themselves. Which affection I do ascribe unto heat,
which does so exceedinglye exulcerate and distemper their mynds with
indignacion, that, humor and moystnes, is not able to alay, quench and
qualefye it. So vnstayedlye for the more part be the minds of this people
carried with wilful motions, somewhyle inwardly and closely keepyng within their
own breasts their conceived devises, and somewhyle openly to the world,
bursting out in hoate terms of outrage.

With choler hoare, and raging fittes
their breasts so boil and swell:
Pers. Sat. 5
That pipkins full of purging drouges,
can neither quench ne quell.
Near approaching to them in quality (but yet somewhat differing) are
Englishmen: Englishmen.
who being of heat more weak and less boylinge, (as the which is well enter
meddled, overcome and qualefyed by moystnes) are of stature comely and
proportionable, and of body lusty and well complexioned, But to the studies of
humanity, not so greatly given, and in exquistie Arts not so well furnished.
But if they hold on their course as they begin, I mean, to apply their
minds to worthy and excellent matters, their dexterity for the attaynment of
any notable atchieuaunce surpasses, and their forwardnes to any Arts or
mysteries, is found to be right apt and inclynable. And because they have
somewhat thick spyrits, Englishmen and Scotts have great stomachs and angry.
sle^derly perfused with heat, they will stomach a matter vehemently, and a
long time lodge an inward grudge in their hearts, whereby it happens yt when
their rage is up, they will not easily be pacifyed, neither ca^ their high and
hauty stomachs lightly be conquered, otherwise then by submission, and yelding
to their mind and appetite.

But if the spyrite through heat of the heart and quality of the air or
region, Spaniard^
be very hoate, it likewise brings forth and causes hoate and quick
motions, yet such as by reason of their tenuitie and thinness by little and
little will be cooled. And this is the cause, that some of them when their blood
is up, will rashlye and unadvisedly attempt any thing, and not ear for any
perils so they may bring to pass, what their desire is to compass. Also when
they conceive in mind the doing of any thing, as they be at the beginning,
marvelous wilful and tooto heady with might and main to set forward their
purpose, hardly admitting any counsel to the contrary: so again, their minds
many times be wavering, unsteadfast and unquiet, except their inclinacions by
the reyne of reason be the better bridled.

Their fickle and vnstedie heads,
now this now that devise:
They flote in fancy to and fro, Vir. lib. 4. A Enei.

and vvrangle sundry wise.
Which thing is commonly incident to angry persons, and such as be desirous of
revenge, and to such also as have somewhere fixed their love inordinately,
whose minds flootinge and ballancinge up and down with variety of fantasies,
are easily and quickly carried hither and thither, by affection, neither
steadfast nor aduysedly resolving upon any certain resolution. But this
Country borne people, Spaniardes have good wits.
if they earnestly frame themselves to the attaynemente of any Arts (though
the same be never so hard and curious) yet do they profit in the same
wonderfully, and carry away great commendation.

Such as have thin spirits temperatelye hoate, have sharp and ready wits,
and prompt and flowing vtteraunce: Frenchmen.
upon whom also these gifts of nature are bestowed, that for deuyse and
invention they be very sharp and ingenious: for brave settinge out and
beautifyinge of a matter, Frenchmen prompt and ready witted.
plentyfull and copious: and such as for the explayning of their meaninges and
purposes have talk and tongue at will. And as touching the inward inclination
of their minds and manners, they be lively fellows, lusty, dapper, nimble,
lackinge no grace of pleasant gesture. Many of them which lack good
bringing up and have not been trained in learning and civility, are of
disposition, wavering, unconstant, captious, deceitful, falseharted, destrous
of alterations and tumultes, babblatiue, and full of much vain tattling: in
consultacion and counsel so subtle and crafty, that whatsoever they once
conceive in mind or purpose to do, without delay that do they judge best,
forthwith to be enterprysed, and out of hand to be achieved: and whereunto so
ever they addict their minds, therein prove they right excellent.

Seeing therefore, the diversity of spirits, and the differences of wits and
manners proceeds of the condition and nature of the Place, Air, Country and
nourishmente, let every man foresee in himself, which way he may best provide
for the maintenance of his health, and to shun all such things as may in
any wise harm, annoye, crushel, or empaire either his health or Spirits.

It is therefore most expediente to observe the best order of diet and life
that conveniently may be followed, Good diet, and wholesome Air.
and to live in the holesommest air. For these be the things that restore
health when it is decayed or empaired, and which make the Spirits most pure
and sincere. For if the body do abound and be full of ill humors, if the
Spirits be vnpure, and the brain stuffed full of thick fumes proceedinge of
humors, the body and Soul consequentlye cannot but suffer hurt, and be
thereby likewise damnifyed. Hence proceeds (as from the very cause) such
rauing dotage, and distraughtnes of right wits, hence issues blockishnes,
foolishnes, madness, and fury, in so much that they thinck sometimes to see
those things that are not before their senses to see, and to hear such
words as no man speaks. For imagination in them is marred, common sense
(which judges and discerns all things) is prejudiced, memory decayed,
sight dymmed, their eyes dazelled, and all the faculties of the Soul (that is
to say) all the natural powers, whereby it accomplisheth all his functio^s,
are enfeebled, and perform their offices, duties, and operations both faintly
and remissely.

But if the Spirit animal be perfectly pure and ayrie, (such as is the sent
of Blood exactlye labored) not only the sight of their eyes is clear and
good, but all the other Senses both external and internal are perfect, and
perform their functions and ministeries orderlye, duly, and conveniently.

Of the Spirit universal, generally inspired into the whole world, and all ye
parts thereof. Which being from God above, breathed and put into man, infuseth
and endueth his mind with special and peculiar gifts. And by the way also,
in this Chapter, is entreated of good and ill Angels, which being entermingled
with the humors and spirits, cause sundry chau^ges and mutations in men's
minds. The third Chapter.
THat power of the Spirit which is infused and breathed by God above, Spirit
of Nature.
into these lower bodies, is it, that disposes and moves this frame and mass
of the world, fostereth, stre^gtheneth and cheerisheth all that is within the
compass and coape of Heaven contained, stretchinge and extendinge his force
far and wide. For why, this governs and rules all things, makes all
things fruitful, and unto the same imparteth vital heat. Neither is there
any cause why a man should thinck or persuade himself, that there is any other
power able to do these things, then that Spirit, by whom from the very
beginning, The Spirit of the Lord.
the world and all such things as are visiblie seen with the eyes, and
sensibly perceived by the senses, were brought into so comely and beautiful
order. For by the Word of the Lord, Psalm. 33
were al things made, and by the breath of his mouth, all the comlynes, beauty
and furniture thereof. Genes. 1.
For he does maintain and stre^gthen al things, and gives power unto every
thing to increase and multiplye in their own kind, John. 1.
and to maintain and conserve themselves.

Thus the wonderful Creator of Nature, by his word and Spirit, put into all
things y^ were created, a power precreatorie, and the order of their
encreasinge and propagation, for continuance of their kind, posterity, and
succession: y^ is to wit: the Spirit of GOD being diffused into every
Creature, susteyneth and maynteyneth Plants and all living creatures as well
man as beasts, by whom they live and have their being. There is nothing
therefore in the whole world, but it feels the strong power of God, and is
satisfied with the plenteousnes and fullness thereof. For when Heau^e and Earth
were made, and the first Elements, (yt is, the first beginnings of things
constituted) The Spirit of God moved upon the waters: that is to say, made
moist and liquide matter (otherwise barreyne) to be fruitful.

The very meaning of which saying, Basil surnamed the Great, did very well
and liuelye expound in these words: The Spirit of GOD (says he) moved upon
the top or upper face of the water. Hexa. lib.
That is to say, did nourish and give a vital fruitfulnes and a quickeninge
Soul to the moist Element and to all other Creatures, in such sort, that all
things with the Spirit of God were moystened and warmed, even as a Bird or
Foul that sits upon her eggs, who gives vital power and heat, to that
whereupon she does sit and cover.

An example whereof we are to take at a Hen, Genesis 1.
which gives life unto her eggs, and brings out from thence the shape of a
perfect creature. Now, whereas the Spirit of God is said to swymme upon the
waters, or to rest upon a moist Element, this is to be understood of the
fecunditie, yt is infused and put into it. But whereas the universal nature of
things, and all Creatures that breath and have being, do enjoy this gift of
Divine spirit, and through the virtue thereof have their essence, yet namely
and above al others, Me^, by singular privilege and special prerogative are
fully endued with all things, and have their minds taken out of a portion of
Gods own spirit, as Cicero says, or rather according to the testimony of the
holy Scriptures, have received the breath of life, and an Image after the
similitude of God himself. The Poet Ovid had from the Hebrews a little spark
of understanding touching this opinion, and that did he utter in these Verses.

Gods Spirit within us works still, Lib. 3. de Art ama^di.

His motions in our hearts we find:
This sacred feed directes out will, Lib. 6. Fast.

And with his power enflames our mind.
Which sentence S. Paul being studied in a more heavenly kind of
Philosophy, went about to inculke into the minds of the Athenians, with intent
to draw the^, from their old rooted superstitions and inueterate errors, and
to persuade the^ in beholding the goodly frame and beautiful workema^ship of
the world with all the furniture and orname^t thereof (wherein Almighty God shows
out to al men a taste or proof piece of his divinity) thereby to acknowledge
his divine power, and by saying his works to agnyze his omnipotency. For in
this sort he preached unto them: God which made the world, Acts. 17.
and all that are in it, and is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in
Temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though
he needed any thing, seeing he himself gives life and breath to all men every
where. For in him we live, move, and have our being: as a certain of your
own Poets says: Aratus in Pheno.
for we are also (...) Generation.

Now, man at the hands of his Creator, being furnished with such excellent
gifts and garnishmentes of mind, as first to be endued with a natural and
internal spirit, and then to be moved and inspyred with a Divine spirit, has
also (notwithstanding) external spirits recoursing into his body and mind.
Men of old time called them by the name of Genij, Angels.
the books of the holy Bible terms them (in respect of their office and
mynisterye) Angels: which is as much to say as Messengers: because they bring
the co^mau^dmentes and will of God unto us. Hebr. 1.
S. Paul calls them, mynistring Spirits, appointed to certain offices and
purposes, and to mynister for their sakes which shall be heirs of Salvation.
Cicero and others that never knew God nor religion aright, calls them
familiar or domestical Gods, having under their protection the care of man's
life and safetye, and gives them the name of Lares, Lares.
or Penates, or Dij Tutelares. And of them they make two sorts, the good Angels
and the badde: Good Angels.
because the good pricketh a man forward, to grace, goodness, virtue and
honesty: ye other eggeth him to lewdnes, Ill Angels.
mischief, shame, villainy, and all kind of loose dishonestie. For this is
their only drift, and pretense specially, to plunge a man in as much mischeife
as they can, and draw him from God as far as may be.

Now, for so much as Spirits be without bodies, they slyly and secretly glyde
into the body of man, even much like as fulsome stenche, or as a noisome and
ill air, is inwardly drawn into the body: and these not only incense and
prick a man forward to mischief, but also like most pestilent Counselors,
promise to the party reward and impunitye. By this means the wily Serpente
enueigled Adam, Saying: You shall not die therefore, but ye shall be as Gods,
knovving good and evil. For the Devil (having his name hereof) is most
subtle and crafty, Daemo^, a sciendo.
and lacks not a thousand sleightes and policies to bring a man to
mischief. Yea, his fetch is slyly to insinuate himself into our minds,
cogitations, counselles and wills, 2. Para. 26
albeit it is not easy for him to bring his purpose about, for so much as
Eod alone knows the hearts of men, and unto him only be all our deuyses and
thoughts open and manifest. He is (says Paul) the discerner of the thoughts
and of the intentes of the heart: Hebr. 4.
neither is there any Creature, which is not manifest in the sight of him: but
all things are naked and open to his eyes. Psalm. 7.
Which thing also David declares: God (says he) is the tryer of the very
heart and Reins, That is to say, he perfectlye searches out and knows all
things, finds a way into the most secret corners, and innermost places. And
he brings in an example, taken from the intrayles that be fardest of. For
there is nothing in ma^s body, inwarder then the heart and Reins: in so much
that the concocted meat must be conueyghed by many crooked bywayes and
wyndings, before it can be brought thither. Furthermore he specially names
those parts, for yt, out of them chiefly the thoughts and cogitacions of the
mind, and all lycentious lusts and dissolute desyers, do proceed and
spring, which are not nor cannot lie hyd, or vnespyed of God.

For So Much therefore, as these deuilles be ayrie spyrits, and as well by long
use and practice, as also by policy of nature are of great experience and by
long trial know much: How the devil learneth the thoughts of me^.
even by conjectures and tokens which they espy in the eyes, countenance,
gesture and other motions of the body of man, they slily gather and guess the
inward dispositions and thoughts of the mind, which to a man of great
experience and wit, is no great hard matter to do. One man a devil to an
other.
And therefore even as lewd and deceitful marchaunts, practyse all ways and
means to spoil others, leauinge no occasion unattempted, to cyrcumuent and
catch them at unawares and unprovided: so likewise the deuilles lie in wait to
catch us at a vauntage, and the godlyer any one in conversation of life and
manners is, the busyer and earnester are they with their poison to stinge him.
In such sort, the devil was not awhit afraid by all manner of shifts to
tempte even Christ himself, thinking to have persuaded or inueigled him with
Ambition, Matthew. 4.
Gluttony, or desire of rule and Souereignty. Neither was he ashamed to
assault Paul also, partly carrying him into a boastinge and pride of mind
above measure, 2. Cor. 12.
and partlye by incensynge his adversaries with spightfull rage and cruelty
against him.

The holy man Job also was wonderfully shaken up, Job. 30.
and driven to suffer the violent brunts of his most terrible temptations: but
God who rewards and recompenceth all things, made an end of that conflict,
prescribing the Feend his limitts, how far he should extend his tyranny.
Whereby we are to learn and understand, that devils can nothing prevail
against us, How farr^ devils are able to hurt us.
neither do any further harm to us, the^ it pleases God to suffer and permit
them to do.

Now, albeit their use and fashion is, many and sundry ways to assault men
which way to hurt them, yet specially they seek and try all such means as
they can, to vanquishe and seduce them, with those inclynations and properties
that are peculiar, natural, and indifferente to all.

Thus, do they incite and egg those that abound with Blood, Humors give
occasion to vices.
and be sanguine complexioned, to riot, wa^tonnesse, drunke^nes, wastfulnes,
prodigality, flithy and detestable loves, horrible lusts, incest, and
buggerie. Them that be Choleric, to testines and anger, to brawling and
chydinge, contention, railing, quarellinge, fightinge, murder, robbery,
sedition, discord, and to put all these in proof and practice, they will
minister many allurements and sundry occasions. Them that be Mela^cholique,
unto envy, emulation, bitterness, hatred, spright, sorcery, fraud, subtlety,
deceipte, treason, sorrow, heaviness, desperation, distrust, and last of all
to a lamentable and shameful end. Them yt be phlegmatic, they help forward,
to sloth, drowsynesse, bitterness, sluggardy, slacknes, sleapines, rechlesse
vnhedynes, and to a despysinge of all virtuous and good exercyses.

And furthermore as pure subtyle air breaths into lyui^g Creatures and into
green herbs, a lively and wholesome spirit: so likewise the good Angels imparte
wholesome air, and with a pleasant sweet inspiratio^ refresh our inward minds.

Again as a pestilente wind induces sickness and infection: so do evil
Spirits exhale and breath out a pestiferous poison, and to the minds of men
bring mischief and destruction. Sapien. 1.
For by them came the first spot, ruin and destruction of mankind, so yt
there was no other way to bring him to his first excellency, dignity and
perfection, but only by that most wonderful restorer, Genesis 2.
Christ. And because the imbecillitye and weakness of ma^s nature is such, that
he is not able to withstand the subtle ambushes and devises of this his
most raginge ennemy Satan, Christ being ascended into Heaven, caused to be
sent down a Comforter, to hold us up, and give us invincible courage against
all the devils crafty suggestio^s. What the Holy Gh^^ works (...) us.
This is he that inspyreth into our mynds sundry good gifts, assuringe us of
the good will of God toward us, and shakinge away all distruste, brings us
by Christ unto the father. For he stirs up and comfort our minds, and
encourages us in such sort, that boldlye and with an assured trust, Gal. 4.
we dare to hope and ask all things of him, and cry unto him for help, by
the name of Father. Moreover y^ Spirit which God has inspyred into our hearts,
does certify and witness with our Spyrits, that we be his Sons, and Heirs,
Romans 8.
yea Coheyres with Christ. The spyrite of God therefore, confyrming our
minds, does engraffe in us faith, grounded upon the word of God, which faith
engenders an assured trust and confidence toward him, with an undoubted hope
to obtain his promises.

And forasmuch as these virtues be not idle, Faith brings forth works.
they do produce and bring forth most plentiful fruits of Charity, to the
perfourmaunce whereof, the holy Ghost the Comforter, with his strength armeth us,
and with his aid protecteth us in the truth, to continue and persevere
constant, steadfast and immutable, without being seduced and carried lightly into
erroneous opinions and superstition: which is nothing else (as Eusebius
witnesses) but a false and counterfeyte shadow of true Relligion, De
preparat. Eua^g. lib. 1.
grounded upon no sound doctrine or foundation of Scripture: In this sort
according to the saying of the Poet Horace. Superstition.


Most of v's Poets old and young,
Mistake for virtue, Art. Poet.
vice and wrong.
With cloak of virtue clad is vice,
deceyuing many one:
By bearing face and outvvarde shevve, Iuue^. Saty. 14,

of honesty alone.
Severity it counterfaictes,
in deed yet nothing less:
Behauour, counmaunce, raiment, gate,
All smelles of vertuousnes.
Yea borovved names of honesty,
and Virtue geeuen be,
To vices: as, the cancard Chuffe,
and Snudge with wealth and fee,
Is compted one that given is,
to thrift and husbandry.
And it oftentimes falls out (says Cicero) that many in seeking after the
best things, Tuscul. 3.
miss their purpose, and are deceived, not so much upon will, as by mystaking
their way, and vsinge a wrong course. Romans 10.
Thus does S. Paul deem the Jews not altogether forlorn, and estraunged
from godliness, but led with a certain feruentnes and zeal to Godward,
although not according to knowledge: so that they do not altogether err in
their affection toward Godlynes, Zeal without knowledge.
but rather upon ignorance and lack of better understanding: and because
they go blindlye to work and folter in their dealinges without any judgment,
they are destitute of the Spirit of God. Within the level and danger of this
vice, are al they, that obstinately either maintain or wilfully suffer any
old inueterate errors, and such as can abide nothing of all that to be
altered, which by little and little has crept into use, and by custom had some
continuance. Which me^ if they had within them this bounteous Spirit, no
doubt there would not be such diversity of opinions and doctrine in men's
minds as now there be. But let no man thinck these things to be
superfluously spoken, or clean beside the purpose, neither let him lay in my
dishe this saying of Horace.

A Flagon first began,
Why comes now out a pitcher small, In Art Poet.

or little pretty Can.
For the heavenly Spirit, is the guide and governor of the Spyrites of man's
body, which are then more qualefyed, quieted, and kept under better order,
when they be governed and led by the conducte and direction of this Spyrite.
For if they once begin tumultuously to ruffle and styre up sedition within the
body, This Spirit their fumishe fits restraynes, A Eneid. lib. 1.

And them to quiet order traynes.


Of the Elements of Human body, and of the first qualities of beginnings of
generation, where of man consists and is made. The fourth Chapter.
ALl the Complexion and temperamente of ma^s body proceeds from the powers
of the Elements, and not of the Humors: IIII. Eleme^tes.
and of them is the whole body tempered and compounded.

The Elements be in number four, Fire, Earth, Air, and Water, and unto them
are appendant so many qualytyes: Hoate, Cold, Moist, Dry: which of the Air
encompassyng us, and of our meats nourishinge us, do take and conceive either
profit or harm. For being either in excess or defecte, the qualityes are
depraved and corrupted, and through their corruption engender many and sundry
diseases.

But the things which dispose and affect our bodies, Tue^d. valet. lib. 1.
are (says Galen) of two sorts: the one, taking his beginning even at our
Nativity and birth, deryued and issuying from the very prynciples of Generation
as from a root, which possibly cannot be avoided: the other, such, as man
may declyne, as things estraunged from our bodies, not naturallye in us
engraffed, but externally happening, and yet (nathelesse) such, as are as apt
and ready to disquiet and annoy our bodies, as those that be naturally planted
in us. And these be, Meat and Air a like necessary.
Meat and Drink, wherewyth we restore all such ouerdrye or over moist
substance, as to the body is requysite. And these twain, if they be either
immoderately taken, or be corrupt and unwholesome, they do engender great
stoare of excrements and sundry diseases. Next unto these is the Air, that
compasses and on each side enuyroneth us, which being either extreemelye
hoate or dry, or overmuch moist or cold, causes and enforces a manifest
alteration in the state of the whole body.

But to come somewhat near and more aptlye to declare this matter: it is to be
understood, that the very beginninges of man's nature and principles of his
generation, is feminine Blood and Seed generatiue. The one as it were of
certain apt, convenient, and tractable matter, like moist claye or soft wax,
is ready to fashion out and proportion any thing that the workema^ employeth
it unto: And the Seed, is as it were ye workman himself. Both these things
consist and are made of the same general Elements, and conteyne within them
the qualityes above specifyed: but the difference among themselves is in the
order and measure of their temperame^t. For in the seed, The nature of seed
and blood.
there is more of fierye and ayrie substance, that is to say, it is pertaker of
ethereal Spirit. In the Blood, there is more of watery and earthy: albeit in
this last, the heat is above cold, and moist above dry. For we may not say
and affirm, that Blood is dry, like boanes, but to be moist. Now is Seed
dryer the^ Blood, and yet it is also moist, fluible and liquide. Thus on both
sides, the oryginall of man's generation proceeds of moist substance, and yet
so, yt thence is labored and made other parts of the body yt be dry, as
Synewes, Veins, Arteryes, Bones and Grystles. Now, that which in the womb is
conceived, and together of those principles fourmed, waxing dryer, takes (as
it were) ye first lineamentes and proportion of every member, and afterward
coming to perfect shape, takes further increase, and so grows to his just
bigness and decente quantitye. And when it has raught to his full growth and
bigness, (as when the boanes for want of nourishmente are no longer pliable)
then does a man cease from further growi^g, Cause of tallness.
and waxes neither taller nor broader. For comely tallness and length of
personage comes and is caused of the abundance of heat and moisture, where
the Spyrite is throughlye and fully perfused.

And if it happen that any, either old or young, through sickness or some other
affect, to fall into a cold and dry habit or disposition, their bodies become
and are lean, wrynckled, slender, illfauoured, thin and lancke, and their
lymmes weak and crooked. It fares by them, much like as it does by Horses,
Oxen, or such like beasts, that are skanted and nipped of their fodder and
feeding: or as it does by Trees and other green Herbs, that lack the juice
of the ground, and not conveniently watered.

Therefore a fashion that some Scholemasters and others that take the charge
upon them to teach and boorde young boys, is (me thinckes) both lewd and
unconscionable: who being at a plain bargain and certain stint of money,
reasonably agreed upon between them and the childrens friends, pinche their
poor pupills and borders by the belly, and allow them meat neither
sufficient nor yet wholesome, yea not only beastly, sluttishlye, and nippinglye
use they the seely children, but threatninglye enforce them to bear out the
labor of their studyes, ^^ildren ^^ulde not s^a^ted of e^r victu^.
with a slender allowance, and small pittaunce of unsavory resty flesh,
stinking fish, and hoary vinewed bread: which thing causes them to be ill
complexioned and colored, the shape, comlynes and beauty of their bodies to
degenerate and grow out of fashion, the quicknes, courage, lyuelynes and
sharpenes of their wit to decay, their spirits to be dulled, and al ye lively
virtues and towardnes of ye mind, which before was in them (either by the
benefit of Nature, or by ye industry of the parents, Naughty and unwholesome
meat spilleth nature.
or finally by the only and special gift of Almighty God) to be extinct and
utterly quenched: insomuch yt neither their mind is enflamed with desire to
attein and atchieue any worthy attempt, nether frame they themselves unto those
things, wheru^to they were inclinable, and by nature apt and towardly. As
touching ye outward case of their body, they commonly break out, and have
their bodies pinked full of scabs, and by reason of ill humors, ouerwhealed and
engrayled with loathsome blisters, blaines, Short stature how it comes.
byles and botches. Whereby it comes to pass, yt in growth they seldom come
to any personable stature, to ye use of their full powers, to perfect strength
and firmity of their members, or to any ha^dsom scature, or proper co^po^^io^
of bodily proportion: and the cause is, for yt in their tender and growyng age,
being kept under by famine, and skanted of convenient meat and drink, their
native moisture which requires continual cheerishing and mainteynau^ce, was
ska^ted and debarred of his due nourishment and co^petent allowance. Whereupon,
the vital juice being exhausted and spent, they arrive to old age sooner the^
otherwise they should do, and are snatched up by death long before their time.

Now, that affect and plight which brings the body into a cold and dry
disposition, Old age.
is called Old age, because it is the cause of corruption, decay and
destruction of all as well Creatures lyuinge, as Plants and herbs. Death, what
it is.
For death is nothing else, but the extinction of nature, that is to say, of
the natural Heat, and natural Humor. In which two things, life consists:
to which extinction and end many are brought sooner then they should be,
either through want and defect of nourishment, or through intemperate life, as
toomuche carnal company with women, unseasonable watchinge, heaviness of mind,
thought, and many other causes, which hasten old age, and bring death unlooked
for, before his time, contrary to the order of age and course of Nature. Do we
not see many old me^, Lustye old age whereof it comes.
lusty, merry and well complexioned, strong of limbs, good footeme^, and. in
their old days as fresh and active as many young me^ be: all which comes upon
no other cause, but that in their youthful days, they lived orderly and well,
and spent not their adolescencie in unruly riot and lechery. Again, there be
of youngme^ a great number, weak, worn to the bare stumps, feeble, lame,
fainte and impote^t, dry as a kixe, pale as ashes, and wa^ne colored, for that
they spent and exhausted all the pithe and strength of their youth and
adolescencye, in wanton sensuality, disordered riot, and immoderate use of
Venerous daliau^ce, co^suming therein the very flower and prime of their lusty
age. For even as pleasant and gay March flowers in ye Spring of the year,
with nipping weather and sharp Northernelye wynds, that ma^th young ^e weak.
do fade and wyther away again: so likewise, youth and flourishing age, by
using ill order and fashion, is dried up before his due time, and ere it come
to his full rypenes.

Therefore, to decline and shun such things as be hurtful, and to prolonge
life many years, and to bring to pass, that old age shall not be tedious,
cumbersome, and burdenous, but easy, pleasant, and delightful, it lies a man
in hand, to take that order and trade, whereby health may be maynteyned and
still preserved, or if it happen to be discrased and empayred, how it may
again be restored and bettered. What things are hurtful to health.
The things that hinder and crushe it, and which do weaken, alter and corrupt
the temperament that naturally is in us, are not few. For the Humors of the
body, receive and take sundry qualityes according to the faculties that be in
our nourishmente, and in the order of our usual diet. Whereunto are to be added,
Bathes, Heat, Exercise, Cold, Wearynes, Thyrst, Hunger, Sleep, Rest, the
state of ye Air, and affections of the mind: all which do sundry ways, alter
the habit and state of our bodies, and for the most part, makes them worse.
By this means, the body that was hoate and moist, is by little and little
brought to be cold and dry, or to some other ill qualitye. Also as years and
age steal on us, as times come and go, as the world frames with us, either
forward or backwarde, in prosperitye or adversity, in good fortune or bad,
many things happen unto a man which shake and shrewdly batter a ma^s good
health. Unto which effect, the Poet Horace, very aptly in my opynion writes
thus: While years be fres he and gallant is our age,
Full many joys and pleasures do we taste. Art. Poet.

But elder years those iolie joys does svvage,
And disaduauntage to us bring as fast.


Whereunto accords yt same sentence of holy Job, where he does lively
express and set out the frail, momentanie, vain, and tra^siory state of man's
life, and to how many discommodities, dangers and chaunges, the same is
subject and endaungered: A man (says he) that is borne of a woman has but
a short time to live and is full of myserie, he comes up and is cut down
like a goodlye flovver, Job. 14.
and vanishes away like a shadovv, and never continues still in one state.

For as years do pass and man's age does march forward, there still happen
chaunges and mutacions. For age is no other thing but the race or course of
life, or the time that we have to run from our Infancy till we come to
old age, in which time, the state and constitution of man's Body is altered,
and steppeth from one temperamente to an other, and at length (native heat
being extincte) by death is divorced and brought to final dissolution.

Thus has Infancy, Infancy.
(which of all others is the moystest) in it, great abundance of natural
heat, and in the fourth or seventh year suffers mutacion, and in those
years commonly we be in great danger.

Next after it, Childhod
is Childhoode, contynuinge till about the fiftenth year of our Age, and the
same subject to no few hazards and discommodities.

Pubertie, Pubertie.
is prone and subject to very many inconveniences, which takes his end at
the age of xviii. years.

As for wylfull and slypperye Adolescencie which ends at xxv. years,
Adolescencie.
is (as the others) subject to so^dry casualties and mutacions, as daily
experience shows.

Youth or flourishing Age, wherein the body and mind be in their chiefeste
prime and iolitye, Youth.
lasts till a man be xxxv. years old: during which Age, Blood bears
swaye aboundantlye, and Humors somewhat waste, whereby it happens that this
temperamente in continuance and process of time, begins to be taken for
Hoate and Dry, whereas Adolescencye is aboundantlye stoared both of moisture,
and heat.

Man's Age reaches to the fiftyeth year or somewhat further, Ma^s age.
in which time man is in his full rypenes, and leaving former pleasures and
delights, his mind aduysedlye, carefullye, and wisely deals in every thing
that he enterpryseth. But the Body stands at one stay, suffers no great
mutacion, till sixty three, or sixty five years of age: for then Age
hasteneth on apace, and draws toward his long home, and then begins the
body to be cold and dry, being the first enteraunce and step into
Oldeage, which is the next neighbor to decrepicie and dotage, that stands
at the pittes brincke, nearest unto death. Which as it is not rashlye to be
wyshed for, so neither is it among Chrystians at all to be feared, Death to
the faithful not to be feared.
considering that the Soul being by Faith assured of a better and sweeter
life, and having an undoubted hope of a Resurrection, ought in this point to
be thoroughly persuaded, and be full wylling cheerefullye to depart hence. In
the mean space, while he has to run his race in this world, every man
may so behave himself and qualefye his dealings, that through temperate
usage and orderlye moderation of life in youth, he may be furnished with
helps, and have in stoare some of his former strenghte, the better to pass
over his Old Age, and therein to feel the less tediousnes. For whereas
every other Age has his certain time and prescripte term how long it shall
last: only Old age, has no time to it appointed, but to live as long as he
may, and to wait for death and bid it welcome when soever it comes.

Pythagoras very properly applies the four quarters of the year, The times
of the year compared to the ages of man.
that is, Spring, So^mer, Autumn and Winter, (being times comprehended within
the two A Equinoctia and the two Solstitia) to the four ages of man: Whose
saying and opynion Ovid in Verses to this effect descrybeth.

Do we not see the year by course,
in quarters four divided: Metam. lib. 15.

How iumpe it aunsvveres to our age,
if well it be decided?
For sucking Babe and tender Impe,
the Spring resembles right,
Which into Summer glides apace,
like blade deuoyde of might.
When Spring is past, then marches on,
the Summer trick and gay,
Which likened is to lusty youth,
strong, dapper, lacking stay.
When youthful fancies mellovved be,
then Autumen steps in place,
Tvvixt young and old, of judgment ripe,
with medley hayres on face.
Old crookebackte Hyems last of all,
with trembling pace appears;
With furrovved face, clean bald, or else
All white and mylky hayres.
This chaungeable alteration, this conversion, mutabilitye, inconstancye, and
inclination of things from one to an other, in the whole course of nature,
does manifestlye argue and prove all things to be momentanie, vain,
transitory, brittle, ruinous and vanishinge, and as a flower of the field
quickly fading away.

Saying therefore the body continuallye slydeth into worse and worse case,
suffers many detrimentes, whereby our strength and powers be empaired, and
many ways both inwardlye and outwardlye enfeebled, it stands us upon, not
negligently, but carefully to look to the conservation thereof, and so
carefullye to provide for the same, that it may continue in state sound and
health full, so long as nature has limitation. Here is no need of any
examples, reasons or proofs, (since every man is therein thoroughly
experienced and persuaded) how unwilling al men in general be, to leave the
sweetenes of this life, with what great care, study and industrye every man will
strive to keep his body in health, and rid it from sicknesses and diseases,
which do not only for the time grievously assault, bruise, torment and afflict
the body with pain and doloure, but also set before our eyes a certain
representation or show of death it self.

I will not here speak of the disquietnes and trouble, wherein the mind
thereby is plunged, and of the manyfolde affections at such a time specially
oppressing the same. Who is he I pray you, that being in these so great and so
many calamities turmoyled, in these vexatio^s, miseries, grief and shortness of
life so charged and overwhelmed, would not gladly seek some remedy and
mitigation of his dolors, and provide for some helps to comfort and ease his
irksome labors? Which things who soever is desirous to seek and obtain,
must not think, that things momentany, Tra^quillity and quietness of mind
as wealth, richesse, honors, Lordshippes, great possessions, fair houses,
sumptuous and costly apparel after the brauest guyse and manner wrought and
devised, Temperament.
can help him thereto: but a quiet and well stayed mind, free and clear from
all perturbations: and next to that, a sound and healthful body, that is free
from sickness: which be the best and chiefest things that a man can ask and
have at the bountefull hands of God, so long as he has in this world to
continue his pylgrimage.

The fifth Chapter, describing what Crasis or Temperame^t is: wherein consists
the plighte, state, constitution, and complexion of every man's body.
CRasis or temperamente (for the order of our work requires the same by
definition to be declared) is an agreement, Temperament.
and conueniencie of the first qualities and Elements among themselves: Or,
and equal mixture or proportion of the qualityes of the Elements, wherein no
excess blameworthy or faultye is to be found. Contrarywyse, Inte^perature is
that, Intemperatures.
which is compact of the disagreeable and unlike powers of Elements and
qualities, and swarueth from moderation. And as in Musical Instruments there
is perceived a certain accord of times and a sweet agreeable harmony in
stryking the stringes, yt no vnpleasau^t discord or bu^gling jar, dislyke ye
curious ear of the hearer: so likewise in a temperate habit of the body,
there is an apt and convenient mixture and temperature of the Elements and
qualities, insomuch that no one qualitye can by it self be showed, but a
constante, absolute and perfect composition, and minglinge of the qualities and
Elements all together. And as in making Salades, Sauces, or medicines of many
and so^dry herbs, the Compounds be al mingled together, and every of the
ingredients become as one, insomuch yt no one thing appears or can by it
self be discerned or perceived: so likewise happens it in ye qualities of
the Elements, of whose mixture comes and is made at our creation and
nativity, ye first original of our substance. In which te^peratures and
mixtures, there be ix. several differences, whereof one is temperate, and in
each respect absolute, lac nothing that is thereto requisite, in the which no
one of the clementall qualityes exceeds or passes an other, but be in an
equal measure and even proportion, without any thing amysse or any diste^peraunce
at all. Eight be intemperate, whereof Four be simple, and Four compounde.

That temperature which is only hoate (wherein heat surmou^teth cold) is the
equality of moisture and dryness. Cold, wherein coldness bears dominton:
Moist, wherein moisture chiefly rules: And dry: where dryness is above
moisture, the rest being a like and equal, that is to say, tempered with
hoate, and cold.

The compound temperatures which be compou^d of two qualities together, are
these: hoate and moist, Hoate and dry: Cold and moist: Cold and dry: of whom
the constituion of the body (which the Greeks do call (...), and the common
sort, Complexion) among the Physicians is named and termed, of that which in
the myxture, bears chiefest swaye: For with them, that body is called hoate,
where is most stoare of heat. Dry, wherein drynes raygneth. And likewise of
the residue. So, the composition of medicynall drouges, wherein be so^dry
ingredientes, has his name of some such one of the same as is chiefest, and
more of force then the other: as Dianucum, Diacappar. Compound drouges named of
some one of the chiefest Ingredientes.
Hiera picra, Diaphenicum, Oleum Vulphinum. etc.

Now, because I would have this matter exactly understood (as a thing not
only to Physicians, but to all y^ destre to live in health) right wholesome and
auayleable, I will as far as I am able, and as diligently as I can, declare
and set out the reasons, order and effect of every one. And first will I begin
with the state of the Temperate nature, or at least, I will pourtraict and set
before your eyes, a pattern and image thereof, first conceived in mind or
imagination: not yt there is any such to be showed in the whole world, neither
can any such be found in deed (unless peradventure (as a man should say, that
God specially and originallye had privileged some such from heaven:) but I
will set it down, for y^ all yt other natures in me^ are and ought hither to be
referred, and by this rule to be tried: that every man may perfectly behold,
what in himself is to much and what too little. Neither let a man be ouerrash
and hasty in seeing a body that is of hoate habit, to judge heat in the same,
to be above moisture, or cold to prevail above dryness: unless he have a
very diligente and careful respect to this perfect temperature, and first
set it before his eyes as a mark whereunto to level and direct his dealing
and judgment.

Of a Complexion, perfectly and exactly temperate. The Sixth Chapter.
THe temperate state of body that is in each respect perfect and absolute,
requires very diligently to be handled, and throughlye to be discoursed, for
that I would have the whole mind thereunto to be directed, and all the rest of
the states or habites of the body to it applied and leuelled, as it were by
rule and line, y^ every man may note and observe in himself how far he is
of, from good and sound disposition, or integritye of temperature, and what way
he were best to take, to bring himself (as near as he can possibly) into his
former state again. For the farther from this, that any man is, in worse case
of health is he, and a great deal readier to fall into diseases of body, and
perturbatio^s of mind. A body yt is in each respect perfect and sound, may
most aptly be termed and called Polycletlabus Rule. Polycleti Regula.
Which proverb is appliable to al such things as are done most perfectly and
well, wherein there is nothing lacking nor amiss: so yt all other things ought
by it, as by a Touchstone to be tried. The Metaphore is taken of one Polycletus
an excellent and skilful Image maker, whose cunning and grace of workmanship
(as Fabius witnesses) Lib. 20. Cap. 10.
far surpassed al others. He in ihs art of Imagery so artificially handled
his work, and finished the same with such excellent perfection, that al other
Caruers and Statuaryes in proportioning and framynge their Images, set him
before them as an absolute Pattern for imitation. This Prouerbial figure or
phrase of speech, used Galen in his book De tue^d. valetud. Where he
describes and sets down the best state of body that may be as Polycletus
Rule, that is to say, so neately and comely set out, with such just congrue^t
Symmetry and proportionable commensuration, as to behold is right pleasant
and delyghtful. And therefore such things as are written of the best state of
body, worthily and by good reason ought to be referred to a thing y^ is most
perfect and absolute. Whereupon we here do describe and set out a state and
habyte of body after such a sort, as Cicero and Fabius do an Orator, whom
they would have to be ymitated, and after such sort as S. Chrysostom and
Erasmus do describe and furnish out a Preacher: De Sacerd. De ratione
conc^onandi.
to thend that such as study Eloquence or as are appointed to instruct and
preach to the ignorant, should frame themselves (as near as possibly they may)
after the example and pattern there set down before them. And although he do
not in all points thoroughly attain to yt perfection that he does conceive in
mind, yet ought he, and reason it is that he should go forward therein: and
although ye things which we study and seek for, be very hard and difficult,
yet ought we not to despair of ye obtaining our purpose, nor cowardly to
recoyle and faint in industry. Many me^ (says Cicero) De Oratore.
being in despair and out of hope ever to com to thend of their purpose, are
afraid to give any onset, or to put the matter in any trial and practice:
because (forsothe) they have no hope ever to win it. For the best things,
ought not upon dispairt to be given over, and in things yt be excellent, those
are to be accounted great, which are next and nearest to ye best.

Therefore have I thought good to set down and to shadow out the best state of
Body, that by the view and pattern thereof, diligently imprynted in mind, and
stedfastlye marked by eye, every man may imitate and express the same, or come
as near thereunto as possibly he may.

Such a body therefore, Notes or marks of a body perfectly te^perate.
whose pattern we do here exhibit and show, has all his Senses fresh and
perfect, every of ye faculties natural, duly doing his office and function
without stop, impediment or greeuau^ce. His memory is steadfast and holding
fast, for that, his brayn is neither too moist nor too dry: his mind quick,
sharp and industrious, wyselye and cyrcumspectly dealinge in every thing that
he takes in hand, his manners and conversation honest and virtuous, in none of
his doings and conversation, digressing or swaruing from comelynes, his wit
singular and excellent, of nature quiet, courteous, and subject to no ill
affections, abandoninge all rashness, and workinge all things by good judgment
and consideration, of notable and surpassing towardness, plenteouslye
garnished with many singular gyfes and commendable qualities, in life and
co^uersatio^, upright and unreprovable, in so much that he may well serve
for a notable pattern of virtue (that is to say) a most absolute perfection of
nature in every point. For in him plentifully appears and is evidently
descryed, humanity, gentleness, frugality, equitye, modesty, and a continent
moderation of all affections: in attemptinge and atchieuing his affairs and
busynes, neither rash and heady, neither slow and lingryng, as one that
forsloweth and delayeth his business from day to day: but in forcasting and
forscinge what may betyde, uses advise and counsel, and in bringing ye same
to effect and pass, adhibiteth convenient speed and quickenes: in the mutable
happes and sudden chances of fickle Fortune, he is not lightly dismayed, nor
brought into fear, and therefore neither puffed up with swellinge pride in
prosperitye, neither thrown down and utterly discouraged in aduersitye, but
suffers all the discommodityes of life with a mind stout, cheerful and
invincible, and such a one as will not at any hand be drawn away from his
co^stancy and settled determination. To which effect, this saying of the Poet
Horace aptly agrees: A man that's armde with Constancy,
and virtue has in price, Lib. 3. Ode. 3.

Cares not a rushe for frantique fits,
of peoples fond device.
Ne frovvning brovv of Tyrant dreads,
no chance can him dismay:
Though Heaven and Earth run all to vvracke,
he still is at one stay.


Unto which disposition S. Paul framed himself, Romans 8.
and requires the same affection in all them that are ingraffed in Christ,
and have consecrated themselves to embrace his truth and religion, that even as
he was for his part, so every man semblably should certainly and undoubtedly be
resolved and persuaded, that nothing (be it never so dreadful and terrible)
should be able to separate and pull us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus, to who^ we have addicted and surrendered our selves by profession.

Such a one therefore as we do here shadow out and describe, is in heart and
mind so well settled and perfectly stayed, that he is not to be drawn to
either party, or to waver and totter this way and y^ way, but perseuereth still
in one stay of stedfastnes and co^stancy, without any kind of alteration or
mutability. In him there are (in deed) affections, but yet such as be natural
and not disco^mendable, Affections natural.
as, love and zealous affection to his wife, Children and such as he wishes
well unto, whom as he does not fondly cocker and suffer to run at ra^don, or
to have the full scope of their own wanion wills: so again, is he not to the^
bitter, strait, rigorous, spightful, wayward nor stubborn, but so, that in
familiar communication and company with them, he uses a gentle mi^^es,
seasoned with an earnest and reverend gravity, without much prattling and
tatrli^g, without byring skoffes, and vpbrayding tauntes, ^^oural uncomely and
vnciull ies^^hinge, pleasauntlye conceyted, and meerye with honestye, not Using
therein any filthynes or rybauldrye: and as he is most far of from all
malapert scurrility and scenicall gesture, so is he again most far from
sulleyne stern severity, and from Stoycall indolency: for who will not judge
them boyde of all humanity, and without any sense of man's nature?

Whom gentle speech and language svveete, A Enei. 4.

no more can mollyfie.
Then if they Flint or Marble were,
that grows in Marpesie.
Likewise in manners and order of life he is altogether unlike both to
Democritus and also to Heraclitus: which two persons in nyppinge Satyr, were
by the Poet shaken up and set out in their co^lours. For To gygling laughter
geeuen was Iuuenal. Sat. 10. The nature of Democritus and Hetaclitus.

Democritus alvvay:
Contrariwise, Heraclitus
to vveping night and day.


And not only in the inward mind of man, do these ornaments and gifts of
nature appear and expresselye show out themselves, but even in the outward
show, shape and behavior of the body there is evidently descryed and
perceived a comely grace and portlye dignity. For in the countenance, which is
the Image of the mind, in the eyes, which are the bewrayers and tokentellers
of the inward conceiptes: in the color, lineamentes, proportion and feacture
of the whole body, there appears a kind of heroical grace and amyablenes,
insomuch that the very view and sight thereof, allureth and draws every one
by a certain secret sympathy or consent of Nature to love it, without any
hope of profit or commodity thereby to be reaped or received. The body is
decently made and featly framed, conteyninge an absolute construction and
comely frame of all the parts together. The head not aslope cornered, but round
and globewyse fashioned, the hair of fair aburne or chesten color: the
forhead smoth, cheerful and vnwrynckled, beautifyed with comely eyebrowes,
and greatly honored with a pair of amyable eyes, not holow, but delightfully
standinge out. The color fresh, sweet and pleasant. The cheeks and the
balls thereof steygned and dyed in a perfect hew of white and read, and that
naturally, specially in the lusty years of Adolescencie. The port and state
of the body bolt vprighte, the gate or goinge framed to comelynes, not nycely
affected nor curiously counterfaicted, as it were Players and disguysed
Masquers, Counterfaite gate.
who by a kind of vpstarte and stately gate, hops the rather to win
credit, estimation and authority, and to be made more account of, among the
common people. The tongue prompt and ready, distinctly and sensibly able to
pronounce and deliver out his meaning, in words of gallant vtteraunce.

There are beside these, certain other things, necessarily and according to
the condition of ma^s nature, requisite. For in eating and drinking he uses
moderacion, and through wholesome exercise, concocteth well his meat and
distributeth the same to the good nourishment of the body: for the better
perfourmaunce whereof, he either uses a liuelye and straynable voice, or else
convenient walkinge. Whereby it happens that in the body there is gathered
very small store of excrements, and sleep is the quieter and sounder, not
disturbed, not empeached, nor troubled with any absurd and troublesome dreams.
And if any shapes, fourmes or likeness of things do vissblye seem in dreams,
to appear and offer themselves to his mind, when the night is well spent, and
the co^coction of meats throughlye finished, such representations surely
happen not without some divination, that is to say, they import and signify
no vain, nor frivolous predictio^ or foreshewing of things to come, but
earyeth a presage that is well to be considered, and not lightlye to be
neglected.

But in this frail and transitory life of man, in this so great corruption and
inclination of nature, I do not see, to who^ these things ought more aptly to
be applied the^ to Christ himself, of whom David prophesied: calling him,
Psalm. 45.
Fayrer then the children of me^, full of grace and sweetenes of words, unto
who^ no man may be thought co^parable. For as he, above al others in all kinds
of virtues abounda^tly garnished, with integrity of life, mildnes of manners,
excellencye of doctrine, straungenes of miracles, and unspeakable divinity,
drew and allured ye greatest part of the World into an admyration and love of
him: so also he wanted nothing of all those things that can either be devised
or in mind conceived. Christ a pattern of perfection.
Who therefore doubts, but that he which had al gifts, had also a body most
beautiful and comely? And although his Divinity be rather to be respected and
considered, and the use and purpose for which he was sent and given unto us:
yet is there nothing to the contrary, but we may in mind suppose and judge
that there was in him such an excelling form of bodily shape, as for such a
dignitye and majesty was fit and worthy. For his outward port and heroical
stature was agreeable to his worthynes, and consonante to the Divinity and
inward gifts of his mind, Joan. 1.
which he bountefully powered out upon us. And therefore in descrybing an
exact constitution of the bodily state of man, we ought to chose no better
pattern, nor set any perfecter exemplar before our eyes, either for the body
or the mind, then him alone. For in him (as S. Paul says) Collos. 2.
are hid all the treasures of knowledge and wisdom, and in whom dwells
corporallye all fullness of Divinity. For no blemishe nor fault was in him,
Heb. 4.
to no sickness or sin was he prone and subject.

Now, whereas we read, that someiyme he was in speech very earneste and
hoate: in reproving vices, Joan. 11.
very vehement, and sharp: with tears and weepinge to have sorrowed and
lamented, and in angry mood to have testified how much he detested the
haynousnesse of some lewd fact: the same was a token and argument of his
singular gentleness, gracious favor and hartye goodwill that he bare to all
men. For, he being wonderfullye desirous of the Soul health of all mankind,
was angrye and sorye that many, (whose amendment and not destruction he so
earnestlye wyshed) did so wilfullye and stubbernelye persiste in their error,
Christ void of all ill affections.
refusinge and despysinge such a fit occasion to repent, and attain their
Salvation, there so freely and fitly to them offered.

Let this suffice, as touching the absolute state and perfect disposition of
man's body. Next whereunto is that age that is fresh, flourishing, and in his
chief prime: specially that, which from very infancy has bin well
instituted, and comme^dablye trained up, which (yet notwythstanding) does even
strayghtwayes fade, and in continuau^ce cannot but at length utterly faint and
pass away. For as in other things, so likewise in ma^s nature, all things
that had beginning, do dye and decay, and things that had increasing, wax also
old, and after a certain race of time here run, do hasten toward their
death, and vanish away to nothing. Which mutability and inconstancy is a good
warninge and lesson for every one of us, to despise these frail and transitory
things, which so soon pass away, and to lift up our hearts and mynds, to such
things as are parmanent and eternal.

Which thing S. Paul, goes earnestly about to beat into our heads, where he
says: If ye be risen again with Christ, Collos. 3.
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right
hand of God: Set your affections on heavenly things and not on earthly things.
Heb. 13.
For we have not here any abiding City or place of continual dwelling, but
we seek for one to come, whose builder and maker is God: Heb. 11.
Who ( as S. Peter says) has called us out of darckenes into his merueylous
light and appointed us to life everlasting. 1. Pet. 2.


Of a hoate Complexion. The vij. Chapter.
Among those that digress from a mean, and differ from temperatenes, the
hoate complexioned body is first to be spoken of. For as it is the first in
order, so for co^seruation of health, it is better then the rest. Hoate
complexion.
And he namely is to be thought and accounted hoate, in whom that quality of
heat abounds and excels the other that be moderately constituted, that
is, those that be tempered with moist and dry. Of which state and condition if
a man be disposed thoroughly to search out, and mark all the notes and
signs, he shall by proof find, that whosoever is of that Complexion and
constitution, is of stature comely and of shape and beauty agreeable and
consoua^te to manly dignitye: Tokens of a hoate Complexion.
of body not gross sat or corpulent, but reasonably and fast fleshed For
heat dissolueth and dissipateth all fat things: of conler red or (if blood
be too hoate and boiling, as in them that dwell in hoate regions and parching
countries) brown or tawnie. For there be in every body (according to the
condition of the air and region (sundry degrees of heat, Degrees of heat in
man.
and diverse considerations and differences, both of this and of the other
qualities also. The Indians, AEthiopians, Moors, Asians, Egyptians,
Palestines, Arabians, Greeks, Italians, Spanyatds, Polonians, Muscouites,
Germans, Frenchmen, Duchmen, etc. are of sundry and different Complexions,
and every one in his kind has of heat, several and sundry differences.

For even as fuel and matter combustible for Fire, is some hoater and more
burning then some other is, and as the fire pan or hearth wherein is burnt
either Seacoales, fattie turues of the nature of bitumen, the burning lyme of
chaulkye clay called Naphtha, oil, pitch, rosen, or (finally to speak of
wood,) Oak, Hornebeame, Larche, Byrch, Elm, Popler, Wyllow, the fire is
vehementer and the hearth is of heat sometime extreme, sometime more soft and
mylde: So likewise in every ma^s body according to the nature of the place, and
order of life and diet, this heat is increased or dyminished, and this is the
very cause that men be of so sundry colors, and of hayres so diverse and
different: for in every hoate Co^plexioned body mixed with moderate humor, the
ski^ne is rough and hayrie, the beard fayreand comely, but the hayres of the
head somewhat differ, and by reason of heat, are of other color. For hayres
being generated of a fuliginous and gross excremente of the third concoction,
Black haytes.
become black, when as (the vapor being aduste by force and power of heat)
the excrement is turned into an exact fuliginousnes.

Curled and crooked hayres proceed of a dryness of Complexio^, Curled hayres.
caused through immoderate heat: or else, by reason of the straictnes and
narrow issue of the pores, where ye roots of the hayres be fastened. For then
have they much ado to peep up and find any right way to appear out, whereby
it happens that they grow crooked, curled and frysled, and specially in
them, in who^ it so happens naturally, being not artyficially procured nor by
toto superfine curiostly frisled: as some nyce dames and Prickmedainties, which
curiously comb and bring their hayres into a curled fashion and crysped
locks, thereby ye more to set out their beauty, and to commend themselves (as
they thinck) after a more glorious show to the beholders.

Therefore all they yt dwell in hoate and dry regions, have hair black, and of
small growi^g, curled, crisp, and as the Egyptians, Spaniardes, AEthiopians,
Moors, and all other which in nature and condition, ars like unto them. For we
see many in every region, yea of them that dwell Northwarde toward the Pole
Arctick, which (if we consider their hayres, color, and co^plexio^ of their
whole body) seem rather like foreyners and strangers, then Con^trey borne
people. So among y^ Netherla^ders and low Duchme^ bordering upon ye Sea, many
be black and curle heyred, and tawnyski^ned, specially they which in So^mer are
much in ye heat of ye Su^ne, and use much labor: howbeit this variety of
bodies may be referred to sundry causes, Variety and diversity of body.
as either to the nature of the Country and Regio^, or to the power and
faculty of their meats and nourishment, or else finally to the hidden
ymaginatio^s of the woman or, mother. Which ymaginations are of so great force
and efficacy, Imagination.
that the things by her in mind earnestly ymagined in and at the very instant
time of her co^ceptio^, is deryued into the infant and child then begotten. For
this Sex being wanton, VVome^s intemperaunce.
toying, and steadfastly eying every thing yt is offered to sight, it happens
that the natural faculty being then in workinge and formyng of the child,
directs her cogitatio^s and inward co^ceiptes y^ way, and brings unto ye
Infa^t, an other foreign shape and form, in nature and co^ditio^ altogether
unlike ye right parents.

This even in our days and of late years has bin by experience found true:
A true report.
at what time ye Emperor Charles, ye si^t of yt name, coming out of Spain
into y^ low Countries, arrived there with a well appointed navy of royal
ships, having in his company a goodly train of noble Ge^tleme^ and yeome^.
Many women therabout, being the^ great with child, through much beholdi^g and well
eying those gala^t Spaniards, after ix months brought their Infantes and
children, having eyebrowes and hayres black and curled, and in all respects
colored like Spaniards. And this happened not among filthye Corteghians and
common brothelles (whom it might well be thought to have bin underlings and
hackeneyes to those hoate natured and lecherous Nation) but the same fell so
out also, among right honest and tried Matrones, (whose approved chastitye and
virtuous dispositio^s were so irreprooueable, that they were not to be once
charged with the lest suspicion of any such lewednes) and yet these affections
and impressions in their children took place accordingly.

In like manner, when y^ Emperor Maximilian (who was descended of the house of
Austrich) had also the government over the Low Countries, the women being much
in compaignie and sight of the Germaynes, brought forth their Children with
yelowe flexen hayres, and in each point like to Germaynes. For they and all
other as many as are borne and bred in cold and moyke Countries, have hayres
fine, straight and somewhat ruddie, and beardes of the color of brass: for yt
the hears are neither adusted by the Su^ne, nor yet by any inward heat: for
having moisture plentifully and issues out at the poores easy enough, the
abundance of the excrements, wherwyth they be nourished, makes the hayres
thick, and the adustion which causes the color to be black, it makes
weak. Black hair therefore comes of vapor by heat aduste, when the
excrement is wrought and turned into an exact fuliginousnes. Black hair
The cause that produces yellow hair, is when the vapor is not much adust
and heated, for that which is then impressed in the skin, Yelovv.
and seeks eruption, is the feculent excrement of yelow Choler, and not of
Melancholy. But white hair comes of Phlegm and of a humor cold and
moist. White.
Read hayres, as they be mean between yelow and white, Read.
so does the generation of it proceed of a certain nature, mean between
Phlegm and Choler.

Now, they that dwell in countries temperate and between these, have of hair
much stoare, strong, somewhat blackishe, meanly thick, and neither
altogether thick and gross, nor altogether straight and plain. Which
differences Galene applies to every several age. For as touching the color,
Lib. 2. de Temper.
he ascrybeth such hayres as young Infantes have, to the Germaynes: of such as
be in their best flourishynge years, to Spaniards and Mauritanians: and of
them that be Spryngalds or in the beginning of their Adolescencie, to such as
inhabit temperate Countries. In the natures also of bodies, the hair is of
form and color according to the difference and respect of Ages and Countries.

For tender age and Childhoode is bare without hayres on the body, Why
children h^^e no bea^des.
or else with very small, soft and mosye hair only, because either there be
n^ pores in their skins for the exhalatio^ to euaporate and grow to the
bigness of hayres, or else there wants effluxe and fuliginous excrement,
wherewithal the small threads of the hayres, are wont to be drawn and
produced out. But when they be come near about the age of xiiii. years,
they begin to bourgen and show forth, little and weak. Lustye and
flourishinge Age, has hayres stronger, fuller bushed and blackishe, for that,
the pores and passages then begin to open and be enlarged: and finally stoare
of fumous exhalation abounds in those parts of the body, which are apt to
generate and produce hair, as the Head, Chinne, Arm pittes, and Priuities.
For although the Breaste, Arms, and Thighs, in some that be of very hoate
complexion and abound with fuliginous vapoure, be seen to be rough and hayrie,
yet do those hayres grow, neither so copiouslye nor to any great length:
which thing (for example sake) in certain dry and musculious places of the
body, as the eyebrowes and eyelyddes may evidently be perceived.

Therefore the much stoare and thicknes of hair comes of aboundau^ce of
humors: Much store of hair how it comes.
and the color thereof is according as the heat is of greatness. Therefore all
those parts in man's body are most rough and hayrie, which abound in most
heat. For it attracteth the vaporous fumes that issue from humors, and
fashioneth the same into a hayrie nature. And for this cause, many Springhaldes
have not in that Age any heardes, neither any other parts of their bodies
hayrie.

My order is (to such as resort to me for advise and counsel, how they may
make their beardes to grow) to open and make wide their pores and passages, by
applying and geeuinge to them such things as stir up heat in those parts,
and bring out humors, altering and concocting the same into the use of hayres.
The Lintment that I customably make for this purpose is this. To make the
bearde grow.
R. of Reed or Cane roots, Brionie roots, Beete, Radish, Flower de lice,
Onions, of each alike, viz the quantity of four Ounces, six fat figs
bruised and stamped very small, Maydenheare, Sothernvvod, Dill, of each one
handful: seethe these all together in sweet and well relyced wine, then force
and wringe out the licoure and streine it through a strayner, then put to it
fresh butter never salted, pure honey, Ana. ii. oun mces, Oil of Almonds both
sweet and sower, Oil of Sesama about the quantity of i. ounce, Oximel
Scyllitic. half an oz. the powder or meal of Lineseede, Nigella, Fenugreke,
well sifted and thoroughly boulted in a fine boulter, one Pugil or small graspe,
of ye gu^me Labdanu^ one ounce. Let al these be set upon ye fire and stirred
with a stick til they be thick enough to make a Limment withal. To what part
of ye body soever this liniment is laid and applied, it makes hair to grow:
and if the Chinne or bare Cheeks be therewith anointed, the same will quickly
be hayrie and have a comely bearde.

For it opens and relaxeth the skin being thycke, and makes the passage
and and euaporacio^ for ye humors, of who^ through the help and operation of
heat, the first buddi^g out and generation of hayres proceeds. And if the
baldnes or bareness of hair proceed not either of eldershippe in years, or
else by reason of some sickness, or vicious humors as bodies infected with
some loathsome disease, or with French Pockes, commonly are (for the bodies of
such persons even in the secretest parts, become in each place pylde, and
sheedeth all their hair like unto Trees, whose leaves fall of, if in the root
reign any saltishnes or venomous licoure) this liniment is a present help
and remedy: but the body must first by Purgation be cle^sed from all ill and
filthy humors inwardly.

But to proceed in my purpose and matter: women by ye very same reason that
young Stryplings are, have no hair on their bodies, but be smothe and slicke
skinned, sauinge only their heads and crown where their hair grows in
marvelous great plentye, Women full of hayres on their head.
for that the vapors do very much and abundantly ascend upward. In their
other parts their skin is smothe and vnhayrye, because moisture is above
heat. Saving y^ in and about their secret pryuityes, Hayrie women, lecherous.
where also hayrinesse appears, such women as be greatly destrous of carnal
lust and copulacion, be very roughe and thick growenr with hair thereabout,
and the more lecherous, the more hayrie and fruictfull. And the cause why some
women (otherwise aboundinge with generatiue seed) do not conceive and bear
children, is nothing else but y^ want of heat. For even as a fenny and very wet
ground bears no corn but choketh it up, so likewise a womb that is
slypperie, Barenuesse inwome^ and unableness in men to get Children.
is not fit for conception. In like manner also, there be some young men, who
maryinge to soon, and ere they be fully ripe, are vnfruictfull and not able to
get any children, for that they lack manly strength, and their seed to cold
and thin. It is therefore by reason of heat, that men be hayrie and bolder
then women be. But if heat increase in man's body vnmeasurably and above a
mediocrity, and that through Choler ye blood be styrred and toomuch enflamed,
it oftentimes turns into mere desperate rage and fury. Heat causes
holdnes.
And hereof it comes, that many being angered and their blood either with
public or with pryuate iniuryes styrred, in their desperate mood, will
Bedlemlyke run upon their Enemies with minds enraged. The hoater of
complexion therefore y^ every man is, and further of from moderate temperature,
the hayryer is his body, and the fiercer is his courage. Which thing by
Iuuenal is right well expressed, where he says: A busshie Beard, and Arms
ouergrovven
with bristled hayres, Sat. 2. declare
In man, a savage cruel mind
deuoyde of any care.


For vehement heat makes men stout of courage, rage, fierce, testie, crafty,
subtle, industrious, politic, of which sort of men we find in writing,
some, that not only in their outward parts, but in their very Entrails and
inward parts, also have bin found rough and hayrie. Lib. 11, Cap. 37
Pliny makes mention of one Aristomenes Messenius, who by his subtyle
Stratagemes and warlicke shifts is said (being alone) to have put to flight,
whole Bands of men. Which thing is a plain Argument and toke^ as well of his
craftiness and suttletie, as also of his excellent and wonderful fortitude.
This man after he had slain CCC. Lacedaemonians, was by them once or twyse
taken captive and cast into pryso^, but escaped their hands by creepinge out
at a little narrow hoale in the prison as Foxes and Weesels do. The suttlety of
Aristomenes.
Being again taken he espied convenient time when his keepers and Iaylers
were well whittled with wine and fast ^ulled, and then crawled and rolled
himself to the fler, and there burninge a flonder the Cords and Gyues
wherewyth he was tied, together with y^ part of his body where they were
fastened, escaped again. Being taken the third time, the Lacedaemonians his
enemies, meaning to make sure work with him, and desyringe to see what was
within him, ripped his breast, and found his heart to be ouergrowen with hair.
Iudie. 15. and 16.
Hereby we are to conjecture and guess, what ma^ly heat and strength there was
in Sampson, who with the Iaw bone of an Ass slew a Thousand persons, and
pullinge up the Doares of the gate of the City, the two side poastes, with the
bars and all, laid them upon his shoulders and carried them up to the top
of an hill: Who breaking a sonder the coardes and bands wherewith he was tied,
boldly and without any fear set upon them yt lay in wait for him: and
pulling down the main pillars of the house, oppressed and slew a wonderful
multitude of his ennemies. No less notable and wonderful was the stout
valiaunce of David, 1. Reg. 17.
who flercelye flyinge upon a Lion, and likewise upon a Bear that came with
open mouth to have devoured his flock of Sheep, slew them both, and
afterward vanquishinge and foylinge that proud and despiteful Philistine
Goliath, cut of his head, and brought the same with him into the City as a
worthy Trophee and Monument of his noble Prowess and victory. For this cause
also is Sangar the son of Anath in Sacred Chronicles registered and enrolled,
Iud. 3.
who flew of the Philistines vi. hundred men with a Ploughe share, or (as some
do translate it) with an Ox goade. And although such men as these for the
most part be of strength and courage invincible, yet is it many times seen,
that a great sort of them are led and carried headlonge by wilful affection
and vnrulynesse of mind, to commit and attempt things neither honest nor
allowable. Whose inclination being such, that (if they would be guided by
virtue) they were able and of power to compass right worthy exployts, and
lack no means nor helps for the atchieuinge and furtheraunce thereof, yet do
they oftentimes take the worse way, giving themselves to notable vices, and by
craftines, subtilitye, coseninge, filching, murder, and bloudshedding, seek
to enriche themselves and to come by wealth, dominion, power and authority.
These men quighte abandoning the virtues, of Maguanimitie and Fortitude, desire
rather ye name of harebrayned boldness and cruelty, then of valiaunce and
stoutenes.

In the attempt and adventure of any danger, Bold rashness.
they show themselves courageous and hardy, but this their courage and
hardynesse tends not to any commodity or profit of their common wealth and
Country, but of a certain pryuate lust, affection, and disorderlye outrage in
themselves, to feed their own sensual phantasyes, and wylfulnes: and so they
may have their wills and their turns served, they make no great conscience,
how the common state of their Country fares.

Thus, many times by proof we see, young men of right good hope and
towardnes, through lewd compaignie of disordered Rakehelles, Virtues defaced
and marred by vices.
to degenerate from the virtuous inclynation of their own manners, into
lewdenes and villa^^^e and whereas by foldwing ye disposition of their own
virtuous nature, they might full well thryue, and be in great likelyhoode to
become right worthy and famous members of their Country, they seek to
compass and bring the same to effect, through ill Arts and discommendable
means, in the learning and practice whereof, they show themselves as
industrious and take as great pains, as would conducte and bring them to
matters of better excellency, and a great deal worthier renown.

And as dull spirited, heavy, slothful and sleapy persons, commonly do not
bring to pass nor atchieue any memorable act, either for goodness or harm
notorious, neither attempt any great feactes or noble enterpryses: So
contrariwise these persons are sit and apt to every thing, that they set their
minds unto, whether it be good or badde, virtue or vice: neither is any
thing so hard and cumbersome, but (if they bend thereto their mind and
industry, they will compass and overcome it, and therein attain to a notable
excellency. And therefore in my opinion Plato judged right wisely, Lib. 6. de
Rep.
in saying that, horrible wickedness, and graceless desperate villainy
proceeds not of a lowtishe and dull nature, but rather of a noble and
excellent mind, that is marred and corrupted by ill custom and lewd
education. And such persons as these, be of a hoate complexion and
disposition of body, which pricketh them forward to do and execute such
pranckes. For they that be cold (because they be fearful and dastardly) never
yet (as the proverb says) deserved tryu^ph for any worthy exploite done,
neither dare to give the onset and enterprise, to any thing wherein is any
great difficulty, danger, or odd singularity.

They therefore that have hoate bodies, are also of nature variable, and
chau^geable, readypro^pt, lively, lusty and applyable: of tongue, trowling,
perfect, and perswasiue: delyuering their words distinctly, plainlye and
pleasauntlye, with a voice thereto not squekinge and slender, but streynable,
comely and audible. Big voice.
The thing that makes the voice big, is partlye the wydenes of the breast
and vocal Artery, and partly the inward or internal heat, from whence
proceeds the earnest affections, vehemente motions, and fervent desyers of
the mind. But if civil and virtuous education be lacking, they many times
become cogging shifters, crafty cosoners, slye makeshiftes, nymble conueighers
and foystinge filchers, troublesome and seditiously natured, inconstant,
waueryng, fraudulent untrusty and factious.

Who takes joy and pleasure still,
In vvarres, AEnei. 1.
in shifts, and vices ill.
And for that their loins be very hoate, they are also for the most part
greatly geeuen to leacherie and whoorehunting, and thrall to all other
pleasures of the body. Unto which vice if they much yield and addicte
themselves, frequenting it excessiuely above measure, it happens y^ by reason
of overmuch profusion and wast of humor, they become bald and pilde on the
forparte of their head sooner then otherwise they should: their color also
fades away and decays, their eyes wax dim and bleared, their temples fall
down, their legs and buttocks wax thi^ne and wearish, their lustines
fails, their face is lanke and lean, and finally all the beautye and
comeliness of the body thereby decays and perysheth, beside a great many of
other discommodyties and inconveniences whereunto they be subject: As first,
to Consumptions and ill favored habites or lyking of the body, Feeuers
hecticke, which taking once hold in the inwardest parts, and throughlye
settling in the boanes and marowe, brings the body into apparante
consumption. But if men of this constitution and complexion do circumspectly
look to their health, and order their bodies and minds well and conuenientlye,
they are healthfuller and lustyer then any other men, and seldom happen to be
sick, or to gather any superfluous abundance of ill humors, which bring
putrefaction and corruption to the whole body. For the moderate substance of
natural heat, defends and makes them free from all sickenesses and
greeuaunces.

It is expediente therefore and behoouefull, to use a right orderlye diet and
good trade of life. And beside these, that serve to the constitution of Man's
body, there be Six things which being carefully looked unto, and diligently
observed, are able to keep us in good health, Things not natural.
so that we use and not abuse the same, otherwise then orderly and
conveniently. For the will of God the maker of all things, has put these
things to dispose at our own choice and election. Galene calls them, causes
conseruatorie, because they serve and are able to keep our bodies in good
state, Artis Medicae 85.
if they be orderlye and conuenientlye used. The Physicians of later time call
them by the name of things not natural: not for yt they be without nature:
but for y^ they be things that be not naturally within but without us: and for
that, by their use and effect and by the order of their qualitye and measure,
they do empaire and dainnyflte nature if they be not well and aptlye used. Of
the which sort are these: Air that enclooseth us, Meat and Drink, Exercise
and Rest, Sleep and Watch, Euacuation and retention, and the Affections of
the mind: all which, natural heat requires as things necessary and needful
to her conservation and healthful mayntenaunce.

First the Air does sometime slyly and closely, sometime manifestlye and
apparantlye, Air.
enter and breathe into ye body, where it either corrupts or else refreshes
the spyrites within, sometime with corrupt and stinking savor, and sometime with
wholesome and sweet afflation. Fulsome and pestilent air more hurtful then
pestilent meat
And this is to be noted, that unwholesome Air, and contagious or pestilent
sents, do more harm to sound health, then meat that is of veuemous qualitye.
For the meat may by vomit be cast up again, whereas the Air and all things
liquide, if they once catch possession in the vital parts, and enter into the
veins, they settle so surely and take such strong possession, that hardlye
it is to remedy and again thence to dispossess them. Seeing therefore, that the
Air encompassinge and containing us, does so diversely affecte our bodies (for
beside the pestilente exhalations that slily by it be conueighed into the
lappes of the lunges, it either heateth, dries, cools or moysteneth to much)
every man is to stand surely upon his own guard and diligently to look to
himself, that he be not thereby harmed. For as to temperate bodies, holesomest
air is fit and requisite: so to bodies lacking of temperatenes, that air is
to be accounted best, wherein contrary qualityes excel. Thus to a body that is
hot, cold air is to be applied: to moist, Contraryes are remedied by their
co^traryes.
dry best serves: for cold, hoate: and for dry, moist: and if the same may
not otherwise be had, it is expediente by Art to procure it. And therefore in
hoate and dry diseases, or in very soultery hoate weather, When schorching
Doggedayes extreme heat^:
With parching drought and sickness great, A Enei. 10

In scovvling Sky does rage and reign,
And putts poor seely vvightes to pain.


The better to qualefie and mitigate this hea^e, Doggedayes.
it shall be very good to sprinckle on the paueme^ is and cool the floores of
our houses or chambers with springing water, and then to strew them over with
Sedge, and to trim up our Parlours with green boughs, fresh herbs or vine
leaves: which thing although in the Low Country it be usually frequented, yet
no Nation more dece^tly, more trymmely, nor more sightly then they do in
England. For, not long agone traueylinge into that flourishinge Island,
England praised for clenly trim minge their houses.
partlye to see the fashions of that wealthy Country, with me^ of fame and
worthynesse so bruited and renowined, and partlye to visit William Lemnie, in
whose company and weldoing, I greatly rejoice (as a father can not but do) and
take singular co^tentatio^ inwardly, even at my first arryual at Dover, and so
alo^g my journey toward London, which I dispatched partly upon Horseback, and
partly by water, I saw and noted many things able to rauishe and allure any
man in the world, with desire to trauatle and see that so noble^ Country. For
being brought by D. Lemnie (a skillful Physician and w^l thought of there
for his knowledge and experience) into the company of honorable and
worshipful Personages, every Gentleman and other worthy Person showed unto
me (being a Stranger borne and one that never, had been there before) all
points of most fre^dly curtesye, and taking me first by the hand lovingly
embraced and badde me right heartily welcome.

For they be people very civil and well affected to men well stryken in years,
and to such as bear any countenance and estimation of learning, which thing
they that half suspect and have not had the full trial of the manners and
fashions of this country, will skarcely be persuaded to believe. Therefore,
Learned me and aged greatly reverenced in England.
francklye to utter what I think of the incredible courtesy, and frendlinesse
in speech and affability used in this famous Royalme, I must needs
confess, it does surmount and carye away the prick and price of al others.
And beside this, the neat cleanlines, the exquisite finenesse, the pleasant
and delightful furniture in every point for household, wonderfully rejoiced
me, their Chambers and Parlours strawed over with sweet herbs, refreshed
me, their Nosegayes finelye entermingled with sundry sorts of fragaunte
flowers in their bedcha^bers and privy rooms, with comfortable smell cheered
me up and entierlye delighted all my Senses And this do I thinck to be the
cause yt Englishmen, living by such wholesome and exquisite meat, and in so
wholesome and healthful air, be so fresh and clean colored: their faces,
eyes and countenance carrying with it, and representing a portly grace and
comeliness, gives out evident tokens of an honest mind: in language very
smoth and allectiue, but yet seasoned and tempered within the limits and bonds
of moderation, not bumbasted with any unseemly terms or infarced with any
clawing flatteries or allurementes. At their Tables although they be very
sumptuous, and love to have good fare, yet neither use they to ouercharge
themselves with excess of drink, neither thereto greatly provoke and urge
others, but suffer every man to drink, in such measure as best pleases
himself, which drinck (being either Ale or Beer) most pleasant in taste and
holesomely relyced, they fetch not from foreine places, but have it among
themselves brewed.

As touching their populous and great hau^ted Cities, ye fruictfulnes of their
ground and soil, their lively Springes and mighty Rivers, their great Herds
and flocks of cattle, their mysteries and Art of weauing and clothmaking,
their skilfulnes in shooti^g, it is needless here to discourse: seeing the
multitude of Marchaunts, exercysinge the traffic and Art of Marchaundize
among them, and Ambassadors also sense thither from foreign Princes, are
able abundantly to testify, that nothing needeful and expediente for man's use
and commodity lacks in that most noble Island.

But to fall into my matter again, from whence I have a little digressed: we
must be no less wary and precise in choice of the Air, wherein we live,
then of the meat and drink whereby we be fed, sustained and nourished.
Wherefore, to defend the body from being lightly and easelye attainted with
Sickness, Meat and drink.
or from being made subject and open to Agues, it stands us upon, to
acquaint and accustom our selves to the best meats, and such as increase or
engender no ill juice nor corrupt humors: the same meats to be taken at due
hours and seasonable times; and also in good order and moder^te quantity.

For (as Columella says) like as it is (...) the field or ground arable to be
weaker then the husbandman that tilleth and breaks it up, Lib. 1, Cap. 3.
least if the ground be stronger and p^euayle, the tyller or husband be crushed
or ouermaystered ^^^ likewise expedient and meet it is, that the meat be
weaker and under the powers and ^^aystrye of nature, both that the stomach be
not ouer^loyed and charged with superabundance or excess, and also for the
speedser concoctio^ and better digestion thereof. Which thing is hardly
brought to pass, (...) the stomach is too much pampered and (...), and the
meats either ill and unwholesome, (...) diverse and repugnaunt qualities among
themselves: or finallye when neither respect, order nor mean^ of (...),
custom, hours, age, nor (...) is observed.

These c^^cumstances also think I good to be prescribed in the Act of
carnal copulation, namely to young (...) folks, who upon their new ma^y^g^,
with vnaciable beastlynesse and frequ^^ci^ of coiture, think to overcome and
tire their wives, whereas they yet remain still unsatisfied, and the men
utterly spend and soked. In diet also and order of life this thing is to be
observed, specially where the body passes not the bounds of temperaunce and
moderation, that as near as is possible, nothing be eaten and used, but those
things that be like or as very agreeable to nature as conuentently may be: for
to feed upon contraryes is a thing right hurtful and dangerous, which
thing in each several age, time, country, and custom (which alters a man
from his own nature to an other) is greatly to be respected, wayghed and
considered.

Thus no children require moist nourishment, Moist nourishment fittest for
children.
and things that be very hoate and dry are not to be prescribed and given to
them, because ye same is a hinderaunce to there growth. For which cause Plato
and Galene do forbid Children ye drinkyng, Lib. 2 de leg lib 1. de tuend.
Valetud.
yea the^^stinge of Wine, because the drinkinge thereof sets their bodies in
heat, fills their heads wythfumes, and brings great annoyaunce to their
minds. Wine hurt full to children.
Yea they be of opinion, that for big Stryplings of full growth to drink
wine, is not allowable, except: it be very sparinglye and little ^^e cause it
caryeth them headlonge into anger, makes them prompte and ready to pursue
^centious lusts and inordinate affections, and also dulleth and troubles that
part of the mind which is rational. But they that be entryng into ma^s state
(because they then consyste and be in their best temperamente) require such
dyer and nourishmente as is wholesome and temperate. As for example, Veale,
Mutto^, Porke, Hen, Kydde, Eggs, fine Ma^thet bread of the best and cleanest
Wheat. For Youth and ma^s Age, because, they draw (...) ard heat and somewhat
to dryness: Qualefiers and al^yers of the heat of blood.
and for that their blood waxes hoate, specially in So^mer season: it is best
to alay and qualefie y^ same heat, with things that be moderately moist:
such as these, Buglosse, Orrage, Mallows, Spinach, ye herb Patience, Lactuce,
Purselane, Melons, Cucumbers, Cheeries, Corncile berryes, and of these many,
for hurtinge and annoyinge the stomach, may be boy^ed: or if we eat the^ raw
in Saletts, it shall be right good to myngle and put unto them, Rocket, Cresses,
Mynte, Watercresses and Garden Dragon worte, which now a days grows in a
manner in every Garden. By this means shall we bring to pass that heat
shall not too much prevail or get the vpperhand by ouermaystring natural
moisture. Therefore when a man of a hoate complexion, or of an other
constitution, begins to grow into distemperature, it shall be expediente for
him to alter nature to her contratyes: for by things like, (...)
are diseases procured, and by distemperaunce nourished.

Therefore at any time, when soever thou art disposed to alter y^ state of thy
body and to drive away sickness, enjoin to thy self a contrary order of Dret
and usage, but yet so, that nature be not in posthaste, but leysurely and by
little and ^^sle translated to an other custom. For as it is a wysemans part
(says ^ullye) by little and little to wy^d out himself and shyft of those
frendships which he greatly lyketh not: Li. 1. Off.
so likewise an old rooted custom may not be hastily and suddenly changed, but
softly, leysurely, and discretely. For sudden alteration and chaung brings
the body into danger, and is very prejudicial to health. But this is specially
meant of the body: for in the state of the mind, there ought to be neither stop
nor delay, but immediately and out of hand to abandon and banishe all lewd
manners and dishonest enormities.

Furthermore as in young men all things are to be reduced to the perfection and
syne of temperature, and every way to be attempted for the amendment of that
which in them is amysse, and for framyng of their bodies to a right proportion
or agreeableness: so in Aged persons nothing ought to be rashly taken in hand
or inconsiderately attempted: for that, it is a great deal better for that
Age, still to continue in such things as they have been trained up and
accustomed unto, Ill customs must by little and little be taken away.
(yea although they be somewhat butifull) then to begin any new alteration
in their diet and order of living. Contrary wise young men must strive and
assaye to alter, and bring themselves from those things yt be naught and
hurtful, although they have been used thereto even since they were children. For
their strength and powers are well enough able to suffer a moderate alteration:
and because they may live a longer while, it is to be hoped that they (by
chaunginge and framynge themselves to a better custom and order) may receive
thereby profit, and be otherwise beneficial to their country: Change in old
men, dangerous.
But an old man, if he go about to shake from him or to change that order
of life, which by long use and domestically he has frequented, does but loose
all his labor, and trauayleth therein all in vain. For although he proceed
somewhat forward therein, and seem to have won thereby some part of his
desire, yet shall he lack time and space to gleane and enjoy any fruit of his
wyshed estate.

He does herein much like to him that (being spent in years and even at the
pittes brincke, carefully and busely saves and purueigheth (the nearer yt he
comes to his iourneyes end and has less way to go) Cicero in Senect.
greater store and foyson of victual for his wayfaring expenses: a thing, in
the opinion and judgment of Cato so absurd, as nothing more. In which
doing he wastes all his labor and deals much like (says Galene) to ^ man
that in his old doting and decrepite days, Lib. 5. de tue^d. Val.
goes about to learn some Art or occupation: whereas more meet it were for
such a one to call to remembrance what a small time by course of nature he has
here to remain, and that his co^tinuaunce here cannot be long, but must be
packing away and depart to his long home.

Saying therefore old Age is to enjoy and take no commodity by chaunginge
usual diet and ordinary custom of living, it is better by every manner of way
to cheerishe and comfort it, and to heat and humect his cold and dry body
with nourishment conueinente, then doubtfully and by haphazard, and otherwise
then that age permits, to begin any new order: sythence old age is weak
and feeble, and not well able to bear out even the least disdiete that may
be: but if it fall thereinto, hardly and with very much ado can it escape and
recover it self out again.

But forasmuch as natural heat by moderate motion or exercise is increased
and stre^gthened, The profit that comes by exercise.
and the Body and mind of man (wearyed with troublesome business and cares) is
destrous with rest and quietness to be refreshed, and to have some reasonable
truce and relaxation: even as good heed and great regard hereof in every
several Complexion would be had (for according to every ma^s nature, is ye same
sonderly to be used) so in this hoate state and Complexion of body for the
better maintenance and conservation of health, it would be well looked unto and
cyrcumspectyle considered. Nothing is holesomer nor more auayleable for
health, then seasonable Exercise and convenient motion. For by it the quicknes
and vigor of the mind is reuyued, the faint drowsye Spyrites styrred up and
awaked, the soul and mind checred and exhilarated, all the parts of the body
and all the senses both within and without made nimble, active, perfect and ready
to do their proper functions: the color fayrer and fresher, appetite provoked
and sharpened, ye possages and pores opened, and ye co^ceptories of the Veins
enlarged and made bigger, (whereby humors have freer passage and way into
every several part of the body) excreme^ts commodiously purged, concoction
speedelyer finished, and the juice or humors (being well cococted) better
distributed to the sustenaunce and nourishmente of every member in the body:
last of all, when the mind is quiet and calm, then is sleep sound and quiet
also, and not interrupted nor broken with fantastical dreams and nightly
imaginations, yea then be al things duly, seasonably, and orderly used and
done, when the meat is thoroughly concocred and excrements by euacuation
purged: which by too vehement motion are drawn into the disposition or habit
of the body, and stop the streit and narrow, pores thereof.

When a man is disposed to exercise himself, Order of exercise.
it shall be good to prepare his body thereto by be^ding and bowing thereof, and
to stretch out his synewes and other parts of his body, which peradventure for
want of exercise are stiff, thereby to make the^ nymble and pliable. By this
means shall he with no greeuaunce or wearines use exercise, and so long is it
good for him to bestirre his body, til his lymmes begin somewhat to swel, and a
fresh ruddy color in his face and body, with sweating to appear: which so soon
as it happens and is plainly to be perceived, it behooves streightwayes to
ceas from exercise, and to chafe ye body no further: for if it be continued
longer and not stinted, by and by ye color vanishes away, and the body
becomes dry and lancke. And like as hot co^plexioned me^, if they use
vehement and swift motion, and with exercise heat and chafe themselves
thoroughly, they have thereby bodies slender and (by reason their natural
humor is spent) somewhat enclyning to dryness: so again, Slouthe and ease
hurtful.
if they live idly or give themselves to drawsynes, or to spending their time
in riot; distemperaunce, loytringe, sloth, wantonness, ease and nyce delytes,
they grow full of humors, and ware wouderous gross, fat and corpulent. I
may peradventure seem to the s^^emish and full stomacked Reader, to bestawe
herein ^o wo^^des then for such a matter are needeful, but le^ him understand
that our purpose herein te^deth to this only end, to admonish al men in
general and namely Students and men of honorable birth, Advertisement to the
s^^dious.
and such as further and favor goad Studies and virtuous Arts and disciplines,
not to meddle with painful and vehemente strong exercises (specially when they
be fasting or immediately after meals;) neither to sit at their Books at
unseasonable hours, wearing away themselves still within doors, and greatly
wassing their animal spirits and the faculties natural of their bodies. For
in both these sorts; I see measure or mean in them wantinge: whereof I
purpose more at large to speak, when I come to the discourse of the dry
Complexion. Furthermore forasmuch as there be sundry and diverse sorts of
Exeraise, and every sort not apt and decente for every Age: let every man
try and consider in himself whereto he is by nature most apt and inclinable.
Horace in Art Poet.


How much his shoulders carye may,
And what they can not well vpstaye.
As for Wrestling, Sorts of exercise.
Coytingo, Tennis, Bowlinge, Whorlehattinge, liftinge great waightes, pitching
the harre. Ryding, Running, Leapinge, shooting in Gunnes, swymming, tossing ye
Pyke, Tyltinge, Barryers and Tourney, are reckened among the exercises of
strong men: albeit some, of them (because they are violently and forciblye,
done, have of a merry beginning, a heavy and lamentable endinge: as of late
years it happened unto the French King Henry the second of that name, French
king killed in runninge at the Tylt. 1559.
and stout Prince and of courage muincible: who in a royal. Iusting or
running at the Tylt, for the more solemnization of a nuptial Pomp the^
prepared, received his deaths wound, with a splint or shyuer of a broken
spear, which pierced and got in at the sight hoales or beauer of his Helmet,
and stroke the king into the eye, and so to the brain, whereof he suddenly
fell into an Ague, and after a few days dyed.

There be other kinds of exercise not of so great travail as these, Gentler
exercises.
and less troublesome: as to be carried in wagons, or to be rowed in Boats:
so^drye sorts of frictions: walking either softly or apace, Singinge and
Musical melody, chaunted either with lively voice, Music chere^h and makes
meerie the mind of man.
or played upon sweet Instruments, to the ears and mind right pleasant and
delightful, dryuing away heauynes, and cheering and reuyunge the Spyrites,
when they are damped with thoughts, and careful pensiuenes. And if thereto be
used a clear and loud reading of big tuned sounds by stoppes and certain
Pauses, as our Comicall fellows now do, that measure Rhetoric by their peevish
Rhythmes, it will bring exceeding much good to the Breast and Muscles. No less
ease and profit likewise shall a man thereby find for the openyng of his
pypes, and expelling thence al obstructions, specially if he use himself a
little to hold in his breath, and pinching together his lyppes, with his
cheeks full blown, to let his breath gushe out with a full and sturdye
sound. De valet. lib. 5.
But this, in young men (says Galene) is to be moderated till they be at
consistente Age, and in mornings when the body is emptye and not infarced,
neither with the nightly exercise of venerous pastimes before, wearyed and
weakened.

This Exercise also of al others is most chiefly convenient and good for them
yt either by imperfection A fit exercise for crokebacked persons
of nature or by negligence of Nurses are crookebacked: For ye Muscles of their
bulk and breast, and the lappes or bellows of their Lo^ges being drawn
together and crooked toward, their backs, causes the^ to be shortwynded, which
by this means is greatly eased, and they thereby made to fetch their wynd a
great deal better and with more facility. Horses of good courage and breed^,
when they feel the Spur, with coursinge, tramplinge and f^tching the capre,
caryre, or curuetty, do ye very same thing naturally, with their snuffing
Nosethrils (a toke^ whereby to know and good coragious Horse) which men do, when
they hold in their breath, and stroute out their C. jeekes. This trick to make
the^ snuff, y^ Horscorsers use, by pinching them by the Noses: To try good
horses.
and if thereupon they forthwyth puff and blow, they take it for a certain
sign and sure token that the same horse is good, and has in him no hidden nor
secret fault. For if he pace not well, if he fling out with his heels and
kick, if he have a stiff leg or a blind eye, and such like outward
impediment, it is evident by sight and loking on to be perceived, and by other
outward tokens, ought and may easelye be found out and tried.

I could here repeat a great sort of other exercises more, Recreatio^s not
comme^dable.
as Dyce, Tables and Cards, but because they be the pastimes and recreations
of idle persons and to be done standing still or sittinge, and again, be not
in y^ number of commendable delights, and laudable solaces, I have spared in
this place to speak any thing of them. For men of good nature and
disposition, when they have any spare time from their other earneste business,
desire and frequente such solaces and sportes as are joined with honesty,
Husbandry praised.
such as are the pleasures of ye country and practice of husba^dry, which
bri^geth with it not only pleasure but profit and gain also, and ye plentifully
and without any dislyki^g toil. For the master or owner of the ground needs not
with his own hands, to moyle and toil, dig and delue, plough, and carte,
sow, harrowe, and break cloddes, to dig about his trees and cleanse away
the superfluous and hurtful earth, sithence he may take less pains, by
committing the doing thereof to his Hindes and meigniall Hyerlings whom he may
daily ouersee and by word of mouth, berke, or figne, appointe what he will have
to be done and taken in hand. Which thing is meant by Terence, where he
brings in one old man reproving an other, for drudging and moylinge in his
ground himself, saying thus: The toil and labor which thou take with
thine own hands, Heau. sce. 1. Act. 1.
if thou would bestovv the same in ouerseeinge thy folks, and setinge them
to their business, thou should have more work done by a great deal.

The owners foot makes a fruitful field, (says the Proverb) and the
Masters eye fatteth the horse. Now when we leave of from exercise and come to
our meat and drink, which restores strength, we must be very wary and
careful that we ouercharge not our stomachs with superabundaunce and saciety.
For as too much abstinence and hunger is oftentimes hurtful, Saciety or fulness
of Stomach to be eselievved.
so too much fulness and saciety is never profitable and wholesome: for there
with the Stomach is too-much stuffed and distempered with cruditye, engendring
oppilation and putrefaction, the very breeders and procurers of Agewes and al
other diseases. To maynteyne and preserve bodily health in perfect stay and
soundnes, all things are to be done in due order and by right choice of
judgment, so yt according to the precept of Hyppocrates, Epidi 6. Aphor. 5.
Labor or Exercise, Meat, Drynck, carnal Act, all must be used in measure,
and be done in their due time and order. Hereby we see, that by his opynion,
healthynes must take his beginning at Exercise, after which meat and drink
comes next, The harm of Venerie or Carnal Copulatio^.
then: Sleep and last of an carnal Act, meetest for them (says Galene) ^
usually have recourse thereto and feel sheve by least harm, and that is for
(...) Age: for so Old age and dry bodies it is exceedingly hurtful and most
pernicious.

Neither ^^it without danger and harm, to be freque^ted of those that be of
(...) Complexions, specially being used out of season or immoderately, or when
the weather is hot. In the Spring time it is more tolilerable and wholesome,
after that the body is with moderate (...) meat and brincke heated and
moystened, and being also before sleep. For by this means, the weariness
(...) doing, is by Sleep incontineutly (...) cased, and repaired.

Emptynesse and Repletion.
THis moderation is in other things also to be observed, as when the body
requires with meat and brincke to the refreshed, or being with humors app^ete,
defyreth (...) provided always that good consideration be had, what strength
the body is of, what nature is able to bear, and how far herein a man may
safely apuenture. Which thing also in well and cyrcumspectly to be waighed and
(...) of, in openyng of Veins, in prouokinge sweat, in procuring laskes, in
skowringe and purginge the Entrails, and prouokinge vomites: for in these,
regard and respect must be had both of time, age, custom, nature and
Country.

Neither ought any man of custom to use and try any of these experiences
rashly upon himself, except great cause thereunto move him, or that he be
troubled with much abundance of noisome humors, which require either by
purgation or else by euacuation to be expelled. Bloudletti^g not rashlye to be
enter pryled.
For in every Country almost there be some, which at all seaso^s of the year
use to be let blood, or else by scaryfyinge the skin to be cupped, to the no
small hindraunce danger and empechme^t of their health: for together with the
blood (which is the treasure of life) Blood and spirit the treasure of life.
there passes out no small deal of the vital Spirit; whereby the whole body
falls into great coldness, and nature weakened, and thereby made less hable to
perform her work and function. Not good for men in health to use medicine.
So likewise, others without any advise of the Physicians will swallowe Pylles
and drink Purgations, whereby they enfeeble their strength and hasten old age
before the time.

The same now and then happens to sundry in provoking vomit, Vomit seldom
to be provoked.
wha think it good and holesom once or twyse in a Month, to clear, and
emptye ye filthy sincke of their gorged. Carcasses this way: whereas it is at
no hand expedient and good for them that be in health, to haunt this beastlye
custom, neither to be ruled by any that should thereunto counsel them.

And whereas some take hold of a certain saying in Hippocrates, De ratione
vict. lib. 1.
whereby they ground the use hereof to be good, such men in my opynion do not
throughlye conceive and understand his full meaning in that place. For he
being daily co^uersaunt and practizinge Physic, among such a Nation and
people, whose fashion and ordinarye custom was to keep revel rexe, and use
all kind of ryotous and ingluuious guimandyze, did not prescrybe unto them any
laws or orders for vomitinge: but if they should fortune to ouercharge
themselves with excess and surphet, he judges it a better way for him that
has used himself to vomit every Month, to continue the same two days
together, that the second day may make clear ryddaunce of the remaynder of
the first day, rather then at the end of xv. days eftsoon to renew the
same. For by that means shall he expel and send out the humors that were
engendered of his former surphet and distemperaunce, and keep his body free from
future sickness. So that this reuerente and Aged Phistition in that place
exhorts no man to vomit, When to vomit.
for any holesomenes that is therein, but judges such manet of euacuation to
be expediente for them that with excess and immoderate feedinge have
surphetted or whose stomachs through crudity and corruption of the meat, and
drink before eaten, betch up sower stynkinge fumes, whereof y^ one commonly
happens in cold stomachs, and the other, in hoate. So the wise Hebrew,
Jesus the son of Syrach, in every place exhort^g to frugalitye and
moderation, Eccle. 31.
wills thee if thou feel thy self to have eaten too much and more then
thy health ca^ well brook, to arise and go thy ways and to cast it our of thy
stomach, least otherwise thou bring thy body in danger of Sickness, but he
would not have any man customably to use it. Let not him that desires to live
till he be old, To what persons vomyting is hurtful.
use vomytinge often, specially if he be long and round necked, either very
slender or very gross bodyed, or streict and narow breasts. But he yt
leads his lyre temperatelye, shall not need to seek any help at vomytinge
for conservation and mayntenaunce of his health.

Sleep and Watch.
Sleep and watch are after one like reason and way to be considered of,
which being moderatelye used, and within the bounds of mediocrity freque^ted,
are very auayleable to health, and bring with them most needful commodityes.

Sleep is nothing else but a restinge of the Animal faculty, and a Paws^ng
from the actions and busynes of the day, whereby the virtues of the bodies being
faint, and the powers thereof being resolved, are reuyued and made fresh
again, and all the weary members and Senses recomforted. For when the powers
natural be fresh and lusty, native heat gathering it self inward, is of more
force and strongly applies concoction, perfourming the same not only in the
Stomach, but also through the whole body beside, whose vapor and pleasant
sent moysteneth the brain, and brings asleep the Instruments of the
Senses. The commodities of sleep.
Nothing therefore after meat moderately taken, is to the body holsommer the^
seasonable Sleep: for it refreshes the wearyed powers of the body, styreth up
the Spirits, recreateth the mind, puts away sorrow, and brings a man into
good and quiet temper. Neither can health in any wise be continued and
maynteyned in any part of the body, without this amyable recourse and due
use of watch and Sleep: whereby we wythdraw our selves for the time, from our
earneste business, and at seasonable hours geeue recreation to our wearyed
Spyrits. And after sleep, fall again to our business and affairs, whether
they be to be done with labor of the body or industry of mind. For how could
man's mind continue still in his perfect vigor and strength, if these things
by turns be not used, if this varietye of life and quiet resting after labors
of the day, be not intermingled? These make the state of our life the less
yrksome and burdenous, and us to be thereof less wearye and cloyed. For as
Ovid does rightlye say, That thing that lackes alternal rest,
continue cannot long, Epist. 4.

It makes the powers of body fresh,
and vvearyed members, strong.
The Su^ne being once up, so^dry delightful sights appear, and innumerable
galant spectacles of the world and nature, present themselves unto us, to chase
and drive troublesome fa^cies, du^ps, and cogitacio^s, out of our careful and
p^e^siue minds. And look what commodity we reap by the days travail, that
does Sleep in ye night cou^teruayle and requite. The day appointed for labor,
and the night for rest.
For as the day serui^g for watch and dispatch of our needful business, does
exercise the body, and in hope of Sleep makes al things lighter and easyer:
so the night being appointed for rest, brings with it a forgetfulness of the
days toil, and a sweet end of ye labor thereof. Wherefore we may not be
negligent, remiss and slack in the due consideracion of these things, but
carefully beware ye they be not, either unseasonably, disorderly, or
vnmeasurably frequented. So that Sleep (which belongs to Eight hours for
Sleep.
ye night) may be continued near about the space of 8. hours, or (if Supper
were somewhat large and full) somewhat longer. Howbeit in some persons it is
not to be measured, so much by the number of hours, as by the soundnes and
profundity of Sleepi^g, as Porters, Whyrrime^, vehement Laborers, Sound
Sleepers.
Caryers, Sailors etc. For these and such like (for that, their brains are
very moist) do sleep marvelous soundlye and cannot be awaked but with much
ado: because their natural virtue being resolved with overmuch exercise,
desires by Sleep, to be refreshed, and with the humydity yt descends from the
brain, to be repaired and restored: whereby it happens that yt virtue
Animal, and Instruments of the Senses, being lulled in ease and fast
deteyned, Sleep most soundly seazeth upon them. And yt thing which weariness
causes in great laborers and such as use much exercise, Why children and
Dronkerdes be sleepye.
ye same does moisture and refrigeration in children and dronken folks: for in
both of them, heat recuyling to the heart, (which is the welspring of ye
vitalfaculty) and the head likewise stuffed with tumosities, sleep happens and
steals upon them.

But they y^ have the nookes and celles of their brain sle^derly moist, Who be
soon awaked out of sleep.
are ready to awake at every little styri^g or waggi^g, for yt the thin vapor
and small fume which possesses ye head, being nothing thick, does quickly
vanish and pass away. For I have known mauy, worn in a manner to ye stumpes,
partly by overmuch study, partly by Agues and Uenerie, who in their sleep,
plainly and perfectly understood every word spoken by the sta^ders by,
insomuch yt being awaked with the least noise y^ might be, they could reco^pt
and rechearse ye most part of those things which had bin there spoken and
uttered. Not after the guise and fashion of some, which of set purpose at
ba^quets will cou^terfaite themselves dronken and a sleep. Wily winkers.
For these good fellows under color of being cupshot and heavy headed, do
slily undermine, epsy and mark what every man says at y^ board, specially
of such words, inte^tes and meanings, as me^ being heated and well whytteled in
wine, do then report, and unadvisedly utter. This trick not they only, but
promoting Catchpoles, Catchpoles.
and crafty Scoutes, that raung about the country, to espy how men live and
what they do, noti^g the dealings and narrowly sifting the life, behavior,
and manners of other men, whereby they gleane to themselves no small gain and
commoditye. For the fourth part of the goods, for their catchpollinge,
falls to them, for their lot and share: which thing makes them to be very
prying, double diligent, and inquisitiue, where to have a purchase, and by
other men's losses to enrich and greaze themselves. The Poet Iuuenal (a very
precise and notable reprehender of vices, and one that would never go behind
the door to tell men their faults) shows that this was a custom usual and
ordinary among Baudes and Cuckolds (nay rather wyttoldes) which for hyre would
be contented to let out their wives to open prostitution, or when they had any
persons in suspicion and iealousye. And to the intent the Adulterous Lecherers
might the more freely and licentiouslye have the use of their wives bodies,
these fellows as though they had been busyed in other matters, and looking
an other way, or as though their minds, eyes, and facultyes animal had bin
earnestlye fixed and bente upon other cogitations, tooted and gazed into the
top of the house and vewed some trim feelings, or Images and pictures,
lively painted and set out in their Parlours and Chambers. For thus does the
Poet depaynt and set forth in his colors, one of this generation: and by this
one, gives a light to lead and dyrect our conjectures to judge of the rest.

To his own wife, a Baude and Pandar vile,
A vvittold, Iuuen. Sat. 1.
feigning sleep and vvynking many a vvyle,
Who can his lyrypoope, and gaze full manerly
For birds nestes in the roof, while others syckerly,
Dubbes him an horned knight, and that right vvorthily.
The very same thing also sets down Ovid, and to the same purpose, albeit
by other occasion taken.

If that the goodman have an heavy noll, Lib. 1. Amor.

Or else a Bordeaux hammer beating in his head,
Both time and place shall us direct and toll,
Till with his wife, our purpose we have spedd.
But now again to fall into my byas, and leauinge this digression to return
to my purpose: I say, nothing does so much conserve, renew, revive and cheerish
the powers of body and mind as Sleep in the night, taken about an hour and a
half after Supper. The manner how to lie in bed.
At which time it is best, first to lie on the right side, that the meat may
descend and approach better to the Liver, and be the easelyer digested.
Howbeit it is not altogether amysse nor unwholesome for them that have feeble
digestions, to lie somewhat groueling and prostrate on their bealyes, specially
if their Stomach be charged with any superfluity. The commoditye whereof, to
them whose bellyes be somewhat swelled and styffe, is right profitable, both
for the digestio^ of the meat, and asswaging of all inflation and pain of the
Stomach, Lying upon the back very unwholesome and dangerous.
and casing of ache and gryping in the bowelles. Lying flat upon the back is
most hurtful and dangerous: for so many as sleep after y^ sort, lie with
their mouths open, their eyes staryng, their eyelyddes unclosed, sleeping very
unquietly, and without any refreshing or ease, by reason that the Muskles of
their breast and neck be drawn hard together. And beside diverse other
discommodityes, they be oftentimes troubled with the night Mare, and falling
sickness, and are also subject to Palseys, Crampes and Apoplexies: which
diseases also are incide^t to them that sleep at Noone, or mydday upon their
beds.

Let no man therefore of custom use himself to sleep in the day time,
Sleeping in the day hurtful.
unless he be thereto driven by weariness and lassitude gotten through heat
or labor, or when he has ouerwatched himself the night before. For in such
case, a nap at noone may without harm be allowed and borne wtall. And even as
Sleep vnseasonablye or immeasurably taken either by day or night makes me^
dull, The harms of ouerwatching.
obliuious, lazye, faint, heavy, blockishe, and marreth both wtt and memory: so
again, watching being not within medtocrytie and measure used, dries the
brain, affects the senses, empayreth memory, dymmeth eyesighte, marreth the
Spirits, wastes natural humor, hyndereth concoction, and finallye consumes
all the grace, beauty, comelynes and state of the whole body.

The Perturbations and affections of the mind.
What harm and inconvenience the mind suffers through perturbations and
unruly affections bearing sway in the same, as Hatred, Anger, Wrath, Envy,
Fear, Sadness, immoderate joy, anguish, pensive cares and thoughts, with many
other troublesome motions, repugnaunt and greatly squaring from reason, there
is no man but he has either in himself by experience tried, or by observation
in others sufficiently noted. For what man in this so great imbecility and
frowardnes of nature, is not with some of these tempted and assailed? All me^
subject to affections.
And although some be better able then other some, either to withstand or to
qualefie and subdue his affections, yet is there no man so perfect yt is not to
some of them thrall and subject. How violent and unruly these affections be
in some, which yield their natures whollye to the impatencie thereof, and how
greatly they disturb and bring out of frame both the mind and body, by
manifest examples is daily seen For many have procured to themselves present
death and destruction through rage, The great hurts of affections.
anger, shame and immoderate joy: by reason, that the heart being left
destitute of blood and vital Spirit faints, shrynketh, and is dissolved.
Which felfe same thing (albeit by an other and diverse reason) oftentimes
happens also in fear, sorrow and sudden frightes, at which times the heart
is oppressed with too much abundaunce of blood, and the vital Spirit choak^d
and stopped. Anger (which is a passion so like to fury and madness, Anger.
as nothing in ye world more) what force it has, and how much it alters the
state and outward show of the body, appears chiefly by countenance, color,
grymme visage, cruel and fierye eyes, puffinge and wrynkled nosethrilles,
biting lyppes, enraged mouth, trembling and shakinge lymmes, vnsteadye gate,
stammerynge and fearful voice. This affection or rather perturbation of the
mind, when it once rejects the rule of reason, and grows into disordered
outrage, is offensive and troublous to others, but chieflye and specially, the
party himself (therewt affected) throws himself into peril of death, or at
least into diseases very dangerous. The mind therefore must be reyned by
reason, and curbed by temperaunce, that it yield not to affections, but procure
to it self quietness and tranquillity, Tuscul. 5.
which (as Tullye witnesses) is the chiefeste point that helps us in this
life to live well and happily. Tranquillity of mind.
Which none can have, saving he, that can subdue and master his affections,
and shake of the tyrannous yoke of lewd vices: and this is by no other means
to be brought to pass, but by a fyrme and assured trust and belief in God
only, and the same to be steadfastly grounded upon his holy Word and
Heavenly Spyrite: by whose direction a man shall not fail to have the gift of
Te^peperaunce, to qualefye all his wilful affections, Tempera^ce.
and to withdraw and keep him back from all licentious lust, Gods holy
spirit subdueth and qualy fieth outragyous affections.
Insolency, immoderate joy, excessive mirth, hatred, anger, desire of
revenge, greedye scrapyng, covetousness, and all other victous affections
whatsoever. And by this means both the parts of man, that is to say, both
Soul and Body, (which by a certain Sympathy or mutual consent and
conspyracie agree together) shall be in perfect state and soundnes without
being with any Sickness, or grievous malady distempered.

Of a cold Complexion. The viij. Chapter.
BEcause the cold Complexion is clean contrary and opposite to the hoate
Constitution: and for that, this is the worst of al others, and furthest from
yt state which is perfectest and best: I will address my next speech to
discourse upon it, to the^d (if it be possible) it may be amended and brought
to a better case. For since life does consist in a temperature of hoate and
moist, whereby bodies increase to their growth, and attain to manlye strength
and stature: worthelye and by good reason, may this be accounted of al others
ye worst, for that, in every point and respect (that tends to the
furtheraunce of strength and mayntenaunce of health) it helps no whit,
neither geeueth any increase thereto at all. For consideringe that in it there
lacks heat, and all the powers and faculties natural, it is not able for
the weakness of the Instruments and Organes, to attracte and digest that
nourishment y^ is moist, nor to make it like and consubstantial witht he body
and members. Heat the stayer and maintener of life.
And even as natural heat of all the faculties in the body is strongest to
do his functions: so, Cold is clean contrary unto it, and fit for no
function, specially concerning the Act of Nature in the alteration of
nourishment. Cold the decay and spoil of life.
For in it, is no manner of utility or help touchi^g the conservation and
maintenance of the body, either in the office of concoction and digestion, or
in any of the other virtues or powers of Nature. But yet, Cold coupled with
heat.
in this quality (although it want of integritye and temperature) there is
always some heat, but the same is very fainte, weak, and through cold,
blunte and feeble. For if heat should totallye fail, or be utterly
extinguished, life could not continue. Therefore in this body, heat is not
altogether consumed and wasted, but cold is above it and overcomes it, and in
the mixture of ye other qualityes, In cold bodies heat does not altogether
lack.
is more in quantity and stronger then any other, and thereuppon has it his
name to be termed, Cold. And therefore so long as life remains in man, and
any portion of vital heat in the body, it is good and expedient by all ways
and means to stir up and cheerishe natural heat with nourishment and
exercise convenient, that it be not through cold, oppressed and trodden down.
For there is no greater enemies thereto, then Sloth, ydlenes and cold meats:
as hereafter shall be more at large declared. Some (I think) do marvel how
men of this constitution and complexion can continue and live, since their
blood being cold, their virtues Animal and Spirable be decayed and dead.
Creatures in touching cold.
But let every man note, that there be many Creatures of most cold nature, as
the Salamandet, the Fire worm, the Torpedo of the Sea, and many fishes more,
whereof some be of nature so extreme cold and chillinge, that if they touch
fire, they streightwayes quench it, as it were ice: and some do so astonne the
lymmes of them, that touch them, that they have no feelinge nor sense in their
hands or lymmes a good while after. The blood of Fishes is cold.


There is no kind of Fyshes (which by mine own experience I am able to
aduouch and testifye) that has warm blood, saving Whorlepooles, Porpeses and
Seals, or Sea Calves, which have hayrie ski^nes, Tonyes, Dolphines, and as
many as are rough skinned or thick leatherye hyded, such as (among those that
live as well upon land as in water) are the Beuer and the Otter. What sorts of
fishes being taken out of the water live longest.
These have warm blood, but all others have cold. And for this cause Monsters
of the Sea being taken out of the Water, do by reason of their inward heat
and store of warm blood, live long: whereas other sorts of fishes as well of
the Sea, as of fresh waters, as soon as they be taken out of the Water, or
cast on shore geeue but certain gaspes and die immediately: which is an
undoubted argument and certain token, that in them is very much cold and
congealed humor, and of heat very little. For which reason, they be not able
to be kept long, but will soon putresse, if they be not streightwayes
salted, Eating of fish hurtful to them that are given to be solytarie.
or put in pickle.

By this may easy contecture be made, of what plight and bodily state, those
persons be, which still eat fyshe, and live a solytarye life, without keeping
company with others, and being forbidden flesh (which the Father of Nature
has created and appointed with thankesgeeuinge of all men Genes. 1. Act. 10.
to be eaten) do commonly feed upon rotten stinking Saltfysh. 1. Tim. 4.
Which kind of people (for many of that stamp and disposition have for many
years used may advise in Physic) I am wont to persuade and counsel, that
they should drink after them, good, strong and pure wine, and abandoning
all idleness and sloth, use continual Exercise.

I have known sundry of them that through gross and claminie glewysh
phlegm, have gotten the Letharge or drowsse evil, the Apoplexy, the Crampe,
Solytary lyuers subject to the Apoplexy.
Polsey and W^ye mouths. There is none of these persons, but he abounds and
is replete with much Phlegm, and Phlegmatic excrementes, which makes them
lumpish, and sleapie, forgetful, ^low of body and mind, and pale colored,
except some time at the coming of some of their especial friends they be
heated with wine, and thereby have dumpes driven out of their minds. For by
this means their color is made fresher, and all heavy drowsynesse banished
and chased out of their minds.

If therefore thou desire to have a pattern of a cold complexioned person,
ryghtlye pourtrayed out unto thee, set before thine eyes, men that by
profession of life, live in this order, and by their former wonted trade of
diet, are brought unto this habit, yea although aforetime they were of a
disposition and manner of life clean contrary.

These men do live, A Snayles life.
but their life is like the Periwinkle or Snaile, whose substance consisting
of a congealed licour, and concrete moisture, is liquefied and resolved into
the same. Which thing is to be tried and proved by castinge upon them Salt, or
glass, or Alume: for therewith they presently resolve and consume into a
liquide substance.

And as men and mute Creatures, so also sundry Plants and great stemmed
herbs, Venomous Herbs.
are endued with this quality: which by reason of their deletory coldness bring
destruction unto Creatures, as ^e^bane, Ma^drake, Napellus, Solanum Mortiferum,
Aconitum, the juice of black Popie called Opium, which although in respect of
their temperament and clementary quality, they be cold in the fourth and
higheste degree, yet by the benefit of vital heat dissusing it self from
celestial things into these lower bodies, they do live and flourish in a
fresh verdure. For in every nature, and especially humayne, there is a
certain celestial or divine virtue, over and beside that which is constituted
of feed and of the feminine blood. For ye warm and calefactiue Spyrit, which
a little before we said was infused into the whole world, and into all the
particular parts thereof, labors upon the Elements, and geeueth life to
all things, and finally woorketh in them that virtue and efficacy, whereby
through propagation they increase, and procreate kinds like to themselves,
and produce a Creature of the same nature they themselves be. For the first
procreation of living creatures being produced and made of Elementall
concretion and of the Parents Seed, which is a portion or part of the purest
and best concocted blood, then does nature, (whose skilful workma^ship no hand
nor curious craftesma^ is able by imitation to rese^ble or reach unto) having
her original, divine and supernal, applies the work she has in framynge,
brings her things to perfect pass, conueigheth the powers animal, with the
Spyrites vital, and virtues effectual into the matter she has in hand, by
whose mynistery she perfectly finisheth all the lymmes, proportioneth all the
lineaments, fitteth them to the rest of the members of the body, and gives
such shape and proportion to the things animated, as daily we see represe^ted
and set before our eyes. This wonderful force of nature which we elsewhere have
showed to issue and flow from the most abundant fountain of Divinity, being
diffused into each part of ye whole body, moves and slyrreth the mass
thereof, directs and governs the mind and understanding, and makes the
same applyable to sundry actions: by whose benefit and help eue^ those things
do live and have their being, which are stiff and nummed with cold, although
heat in the^ be faint and feeble: which (least it should altogether droupe and
be utterly exti^guished, and least you cold quality, whereto ye dry is of
affinity should toomuch prevail and increase) must be styrred up and excyted
with hoate fomentatio^s. For when natural moisture is all wasted and inward heat
extinct, the^ death approaches and the whole frame of the body te^deth to
dissolution and ruin. It comes the^ to pass eue^ as Salomo^ by an elega^t
and apt similitude describes, Eccle. 12.
yt when the composition and knittinge together of the body is lewsed a sonder
and strength decayed and gone, the^ shall man be turned again into dust, from
whence he was taken and made, and the Spirit shall return into his
everlasting dwellinge, and to God which made it. But to theud every man may
perfectlye know the nature and condition of this complexion and constitucion. I
will compendiously as it were by the way, set down certain marks and tokens
whereby it shall easily be known. Tokens of a cold Complexion.
A cold Complexio^ if it be compared to a hoate, has al properties contrary.
For eue^ as heat being diffused into each part of ye body imparteth his quality
unto ye humors and makes ye body, and y^ parts thereof to be of color ruddie:
so cold imperteth his quality unto ye members and humors, and makes ye body
of color pale and unsightly.

But if we be disposed particulerly to mark and observe all the notes and
tokens thereto incident, we shall find in the cold complexioned body, all
things contrary and diverse from the hoate. For the body is pilde and smoth,
the hair loose and soft, of color partakinge with read and white, and
quickly shedding. The skin in touching, cold, Idleness makes the body fat and
cold.
and under it, some store of fatnes. For when heat in ma^s body is fai^t and
dull, fatnes enge^dreth: which, as it much happens to ye feminine Sex, so
also breeds it in many others that live idle and at ease, without labor or
exercise. And for this cause through immoderate coldness ye body waxes gross,
fat, and corpulent: again, by immoderate heat, (which melts away and
dissolueth fat) the body is made lean and dry.

For there be many things not coming to man by nature, or from his
natiuitye and beginning, but accidentally and otherwise procured: as either by
chaunginge of the ordinary custom of life, or by alteration of diet, or by
heat, labor, sloth, solitariness, lumpishnes, fear, sorrow, care and
sundry others: many ways chaunginge the state of the body: making it sometime
slender and lean, sometime fat and corpulent. Which things also to the making
of the color of ye face and body fair or foul, good or badde, are of no
less force, and efficacy. Heat makes good color.
For what things soever do excite and stir up native heat, as Laughter,
myrthe, exercise, wine etc. do make the face pleasauntlye and freshlye
colored: but such things as be cold, and suppress heat, Cold wastes and
takes away color.
as cold air and nypping wynd, toomuch drynkinge of water, immoderate sleep,
overmuch eatinge of cold meats, fear, sadness, carefulnes, and such like,
make the body to be white colored.

Thus, they that be of cold Complexions, are white colored, unless this
quality grow and surmount to an excess and great intension. For then it
declyneth to aswart and leaden color, Wanne color.
such as we see in men in the cold Winter, the wind being at North, whose
cheeks, Noses, lyppes, fyngers and ears are swart and wanne, with stiff cold
benumbed. But yet this commodity they have by cold, that it makes them very
hungry and greedye of meat, and not easily satisfied, albeit they do not well
digeste nor concocte it. And if the tunicles of their Stomach together with the
cold, have in them any sowrish or sharp humor, they are in eating insaciable
and very ravenous feeders: The hungry Sickness.
which affecte is called Canina appete^tia, the Dogs appetite, or ye hungry
Sickness: which is qualefyed and taken away by drynking the purest and stro^gest
Wine. To prove yt appetite is sharpened with cold, Cold things stir up
appetite.
may well appear by Salades and sundry other sower and tarte Condimentes,
which we use in Summer season to provoke appetite wythal. And as native heat
makes men nymble and actyue, Cold persons drowsy and unwieldy.
so cold causes them to be slothful, loytering, sluggishe, drowsy and unapt
to any labor or exercise: because they lack the Instruments wherwyth to do
any such functions.

Such persons have foltering tongues, and nothing ready in vtterau^ce, a nyce,
soft, and woma^nish voice, weak and feeble faculties of Nature, ill memory,
blockish wit, doltish mind, courage (for lack of heat and slendernes of vital
spyrit) fearful and tymorous, and at the wagginge of every straw afraid.
These and such like defects and wa^ts of Nature, The help and cure of a cold
body.
must we to y^ uttermost of our power study to amend, by using a wholesome
diete and exquisite trade of living, which consists in a te^perament of hoate
and moist.

In this body especially it is expedient to excite and cheerishe native heat
with exercise, and wine yt is pure and good, and with meats yt be calefactiue:
of which sort are such Byrds as bestyrre and much exercise themselves with
flying, Fowls hard of digestion
as Sparrowes, Lynets, Chaffinches, Culuers, Partriches, Phesauntes,
Blackbyrdes, Thrushes, Figgebyrds and (among those that be homish and tame)
Capons and Cocks: for Duckes, Swa^nes, Geese, Cootes, Gulles, Hearneshoes and
other Water fowls, require a very strong stomach to digest them. Of four
footed beasts fittest for this nature, are Veale, Meats fit for cold persons.
Mutton, Pigge, and Conye. Among fruicts and such as the earth by tillage and
industrye of man brings forth, ye best are these, Almonds sweet and sower,
Peachkernelles, Dates, dry Figs, Reysons y^ kernels being taken out,
Coraunts, Pyne apples.

And because the increase of our Gardens le^deth us many helps to this use
and purpose, I think it good also not to omit them, for yt they be easy
every where to be had and neither costly nor chargeable: Gardeine store.
of which sort is Parseley, certain kinds of Carrets, Seahollie, Skirwyke
roots, Thystle, Artichoke, Nauew, radish, Chichpease, Cresses, Rocket, Mynte,
Wormewodde gentle, and such as in Winter serve for Co^diments and sauce,
Onyons, Garlic, Leekes, steeped in water to take away their rank savor and
strong smell: or else for them yt cannot well abide the strong air and sent of
these, may put into their meat outlandish and foreign spyces, as the
Germans and English Nation commonly use: as Ginger, Saffron, Peper, Graynes,
Cassia Cynamome, Nutmigges. And persons of meaner calling and smaller
ability, and such as are not well able to bear out the cost of these things,
may take out of their own hoomish gardens and ground, such things as in
stre^gh and operation counteruayle these aforesaid, yt is to wit, Rosemarie,
Basil, sauerie, Organie, Maiorame, Dill, Hot Condimentes.
Sage, Baulme etc. For with these and many others of like sort, may the defects
of Nature be beaten down, and ye faults thereof of overcome, and thereby ye body
by little and little, may be to a better and quieter state reduced. For if
dryness or Siccity should li^ck in and join with this quality, the^ truly life
(which consists in hot and moist) cannot long continue: but needs must out
of hand, come to final end: whereof in the Chapter following I purpose somewhat
more at large to discourse.

Of a Dry Complexion. The ix. Chapter.
Forasmuch as that disposition and habit of body which is dry, is much
like to that state and complexio^ which is cold, yea next unto it: I will
briefly declare, what I think thereof, and by what means it may be expunged
and bettered. These ii. qualityes be in a manner alike distant from perfect
and good temperatenes, in what age soever they happen: howbeit in Oldeage this
dry distemperaunce, can hardelyer and with much more ado be qualefyed and
vanquished then in Youth, when the same ill habit comes through Sickness or
incontinencie of life. For as Oldmen by reason of their age and long
continuance of years have bodies dry, barreyne and forworne: So likewise
Yongmen by dissolute living, unseasonable watching, and immoderate Venerye,
bring their bodies before their due time to a cold and dry distemperaunce:
and hastening their own deaths by wasting their vital humor, arryue to
their last ends, and dye by natural death as well as Oldme^ do, although in
deed sooner then otherwise they might do.

And it is called natural, because it is common to all men alike, and not able
by any means to be declyned. For Oldage or the last cast of man, is not to
be accounted natural, in such sort as increasing and nourishing be, which are
the works of nature, and whereby the natural facultye continues and
maynteyneth it self: but because it so falls out necessarily and by the due
course and right order of Nature. For this is natures decreed order, that all
things having beginning, must also have endyng, and arryue to their final
decay: for otherwise death should vnproperlye and unaptly be termed Natural,
consideringe it is rather against Nature, and a professed enemy to our life.

For if Sickness (which I account as a step or as a Summer to death) be an
habit and state contrary to Nature, If men be loath to be sick, it follows
that they be loath to die.
either deprauing or at least hindering the actio^ thereof: how much more is
Death to be deemed a thing contrary to Nature, which quight abolysheth and
utterly despoyleth life?

For nothing is more repugnau^t to the laws of Nature, then to dye, and to be
depryued of this most pleasant light and breath. Which thing every man may
try, and in himself find most true, when soever he calls to mind, and
deeply with himself falls into any cogitacion of the same: Death dreadful.
for it dryueth a certain fearefulnes, terror and dread into his mind, that
(were not his mind armed and strengthened with an undoubted hope and
expectation of an other better life hereafter) there could nothing be more
miserable nor in worse case, then man's life is. For what thing could deliver us
out of fear, carfulness, desperation and distruste, sauinge only a firm
trust in Gods mercy, that our Souls after this corporal dissolution, shall be
tra^sported to a place of eternal joy and felicity? As for death, it was not
brought into the world by Nature: for y^ vglye face of Sin, Sin the cause
of sickness and death
and the wilful transgression of Gods precepts at the beginning of the world
gave unto us this deadly wound, and wrapped us in: all this mysery. Therefore
death is called Natural, not in respect of Nature, but of the consequence:
because it hangs indifferently over all men's heads, Sap. 2.
as common indifferently to all, and sparing none: yea all things be within
the compass and reach thereof.

Now forasmuch as there be two sorts of death, the one Violente and the other
Natural: 2. Kinds of death.
that kind of death is of Philosophers and Physicians called natural, which
happens unto Oldemen and such as are in that bodily state that Oldemen be:
that is to say Cold and Dry, without sense or feeling of any pain: for in
them, their languishinge and forspent body forsakes their Soul, and not the
Soul their body. Insomuch that they dye in a manner as though they fell softly
asleep, whereas others (dyinge by means of casualty, ruin, fire, sword,
Squinste, Pleurysse, Infla^matio^s of the Lunges or other diseases happening to
a man in his fullness of humors) dye a violent death, struggling painfully,
and long languishing in extreme agonies before they give by the Ghost. So that
the Soul is perforce compelled to abando^ and forsake the body, like a Ghest
that fleethout of a ruynous house, that is weatherbeaten and much shaken with
force of tempest, only to avoid further danger. And hereupon does Cicero very
notablye write, De Senect.
that Yongmen and such as be in their flourishinge and lustye Age and full of
humors, do dye and take their end much like as when a great flaming fire is
sodeinlye quenched with great stoare of Water: Again, he says that Oldmen
decease like fire, that of it own accord quenches and without any other
violence goes out. What a deal of smoke, what soote, what sparkles do we see
fly up into ye air? what crackling and noise does the great nu^bre of sparks
make, when we assay to quench a light burninge flame? or with pouring great
abundaunce of water, to slecke a great heap of wood laid al upon one fire?
Whereby we may coniecte, what vehement and painful struggling, what sharp
conflicte, what raginge stir and stryuing is in a Young body: when as
through violence of Sickness or other destenie, the lustynesse of his Nature
(being not yet spent) and his warm heat, and lively Spyrites be oppressed and
stifled.

To this end, is that elegante and apt comparison of Cicero: For (says he)
as raw and unripe apples are not plucked from the Tree but by violence and
force: but being ripe, fall down of their own accord, or with little
touching: So likewise the life of Young men is taken away with force, but of
Oldmen, by maturitie and rypenes.

This thought I good here to enterlace, as a thing not greatly beside my
purpose, diligently aduertyzing all men even from their infancy and childhoode
to shun and declyne all such things as are prejudicial to their bodies and
harmeful to their health, whether the same proceed of outward or of inward
causes.

Whosoever therefore is desirous to keep himself from being toosoone Old, To
be long lived.
and to prolonge his life as long as may be, must very diligently take heed
of many lettes and hinderaunces that damuifye and lie in wait to prejudice his
life, but namely and specially let him have a careful eye to keep himself
from this Dry plight and state of body. And by what men's he may so do, after
certain ^^tes first geeuen, whereby to know what person is of this
Complexion, I will briefly and compendiously geeue plain instructions: asking
to all Students and persons politic, (doubtless) right (...) me, profitable
and expedi^^t to be know^^.

All they therefore that either of the Nature of their own bodily state and
Complexion, Notes of a dry Complexion.
or by any defect in their Parents at their birth and procreation, or finally
by any accidental myssehappe or custom of living, as by want of food,
thought, watch, heauynes of mind, or immoderate labor, have commonly bodies
slender and thin: and their shinne (where dryness is great) skuruye, rugged,
unseemly and lancke, like unto hungerstarued horses, that lack meat and
attendaunce: of color ill favored, swarte, and yelowe as a Kites foot, and
at the last grymme visaged, sower cou^tenaunced, faced like death, fylthy,
loothsome, and lean as a Rake: to conclude, in all respects resembling the
Physsognomy and shape of Envy, described by Ovid.

A face like Ashes pale and vvanne,
a body skraggie lean,
A learning look, and teeth all furde
with dross and fylth unclean: Lib. 2. Metam.

Her Stomach greenish is with Gall,
her Tongue with venime fraught,
And never laughes, but when missehappe
or harm has others caught.
No vvink of Sleep comes in her eyes,
and rest she can none take,
For fretting carke and cancred care,
her vvatchfull still does make.
Full sore against her will it is,
that any man should thryue
Or prosper in his business:
For that does her depryue
Of all her rest and quietness,
thereat the hellish Elfe,
Does stamp and stare, does fret and fume,
and pynes away herself.
And to her self a torment is,
for seeking to annoye
The wealth and state of other folks,
herself she does destroy.
And because dryness feeds upon, and wastes all their humor, Baldnes
comes for lack of humor.
they be thin hayred and wax soon bald, crook nailed, their voice feeble
and slender, and sometime squeakinge, (by means that drynes exasperateth their
vocal artery) their pulses beati^g faintly, slow gate, holow eyed, pale
lypped, shrunken temples, hanging cheeks, cold and cru^pled ears, of stature
not greatly tal, and of sleep (which is a most sweet refuge, release, and
truce from labors and cares) through distemperature of the brain, very
little. And if their brain be altogether dry and hoate, Dry brain causes ill
Memory.
then is their Memory naught and in a manner none at all: then be they very
oblyuious, blockeheaded and heavy spyrited. For sythens the Spyrits fail and
be defective, which (as clear and sincere vapoure) proceed out of purest
blood by ye benefit of heat and have great force and virtue in directing and
moui^g forward actions: it is not possible yt the faculties and powers natural
being destitute of their forces, should perform and rightly discharge their
due and peculiar functions. But if the virtue or power Animal be perfect and
vigorous, and the brain not altogether destitute of heat, the^ is ye memory
steadfast, firm and retentiue, for as immoderat moystnes causes forgetfulness
and doltish folishnes, as in young Children and dronkards appears: so moderate
dryness with the help of measurable heat, makes a good and faithful Memory,
Good Me^morye.
and highlye furthereth toward the attainment of Prudence and Wisdom. For a
dry brightness, induces a mind full fraught with wisdom: and the more store
of moystnes that is therein, the less is the wit: which thing we do also note
and see to come to pass by the air, when ye weather is skowling and not
clear. For the Stars shine not bright out, when the air is with clouds and
foggye mystes ouercast and darckened.

Now the cause why many in their Oldage, doat and become very forgetful
(albeit this Age be said to be most dry) yet ye same happens not by reason of
drynes, but of coldness: which manifestly preiudiceth and hinders all the
virtues and offices of ye mind. For out of it spryngeth madness, loss of
right wits, amazednes, rauing, dotage, and want of the right use of the
Senses, whereby the virtues of Nature be so oppressed and ouercharged, ye they
be thereby either altogether disabled from perfourming their functions, or at
least, do the same very faintly and feeblie.

Therefore when Memory is perished or affected, it proceeds of some cold
diste^perature, Restoring^ of the memory.
which must with things moderately hoate* be removed and expugned. For to
humect or to arefie, is not the best way. But if coldness be joined with moystnes,
then to use arefactio^: and if it be lynked with dryness, then to use
humectacion. Now, if this quality be not thoroughly settled and rooted, these
signs and tokens aforesaid, do not exactly answer to this description: but
as the diste^perau^ce by little and little grows and increases, so do they
appear and show forth themselves every day more and more.

Which happens namely to them that be affected with this habit, not
naturally but casuallye and accidentally, or by some sickness of the body, or
by some vexation of mind. For Temperamentes are subject to many and sondrye
alterations: In some, heat wasting and spending up moisture, induces a dry
distemperaunce, and many times too much stoare of moisture quight quenches
heat: and many there are, unto whom vehement coldness brings dryness: which
is the worst distemperuance of all others, and to Nature most hurtful: for
that it hastenethe Oldeage and brings a man to death long before his time.

The body of every one is then inwardly dry, Galen lib. 5. de tuen. Val.
when it is neither able to attract and draw nourishment into the Veins,
neither sufficiently able to digest and enjoy the benefit thereof: whereby it
happens, that the pryncipall parts and Entrails (appointed for concoction
of the meats) be dried up, and the resitdue (seruinge to purge excrementes) do
abound with Phleginatick humors. Which thing has made many to stumble and
ouershoote themselves, who have thought Old men to be moist of Complexion,
whereas me solid parts, the Arteryes, Panicles, skins synewes and muskles
are not moist, but the capacities, receptoryes and pores which stand the body
in steed, to expel superfluityes, are endued with some moisture: and hereupon
the body (by reason of weak and feeble heat) ceasseth to be nourished, and
is finally brought into an exteme dryness. And therefore not without good
reason does Galene thinck that this is the worst plight Lib. 6. de tuend. val.
and state that the body can be in. For the same thing that happens to men
aged and stryken in years, happens to many Yongme^ even from their first
beginning. And therefore it is needeful to humect and warm them with moderate
exercise, moist and hoate nourishment, but specially with hoate and sweetish
wine: for sower and hard wynes be hurtful to this Complexion, Hard wynes or
of the second sort.
and namely to Old men, except they be well sweetened with Sugar or honey.
This thing also ought to be observed in the eating of Milk, Milk.
which is made for them a great deal better and holesomer, if it be well
seasoned with these or such like condimentes. For by this means, shall no
obstructions by eating thereof be engendered, neither needs the Stone and
grauel in the reins thereby to be feared: And for doubt of being at any time
with the same troubled, (because it comes and is bredde of gross toughe
humor and meat of hard digestion) such things should be prescribed unto them,
as open obstructio^s and provoke Uryne, Herbs having virtue to make one to
piss,
of which sort these Herbs, Gardensmallage, Sperage, Alkake^gie, Cheruyle,
Saxifrage, Christa marina, Betonie, Maydenheare, Rosemarie flowers: and (if the
bealy be bound or costiue) Mercurye Fumitorie, bastard Saffron with a Prysane,
Sea colewortes boiled in broth with fat flesh, Malowes, Arrage, Elite, all
sorts of Dockes, Nettles, Hoppes, young Elderbuds, specially in the Spring time
of the year, or such other as be in their chiefest virtue in Summer and
Autumn, as Cheries, Plummes, Figs, and Mulberyes being eaten at beginning of
Meals. For whereas Horace in a learned and elegante Verse comme^deth unto us
Mulberies, thinking the same best to be eaten last and at the lat^er end of
dinner, he did it not by way of any Physic or holsomnes y^ is therein (being
so taken,) but for that, the common use and custom, was so to eat them. His
Verses be to this effect: At end of Dinner, Mulberies,
who uses still to eat,
Each morning earlye gathered, Lib. 2. Sat. 4.

himself in Summers heat
Shall safely keep in wholesome plight,
deuoyd of Sickness all,
Whereby no kind of malady,
attach his body shall.


For these and also Grapes, Peaches, Corneilbearies and such as will not be
kept long in So^mer, ought to be eaten before other meats, for if they be
otherwise preposterously taken or out of order, they putrefie and corrupt the
body and fill the bealy full of wynd. In Winter season also there are many
things yt make the bealy soluble and skowre ye Gutts and Entrails: as Must,
dry Figs, and great Reysons, Damask prunes, either stewed or steeped in some
licoure, puttinge thereunto a good quantity of Sugar or honey. Whereunto are to
be added, these that have an expedient virtue in medicines, Seen, Polipodie,
Manna, Epythyme, Cassia, Rhabarbe, and the infusion of Hebene or Lignum
Indicum, Mirobalanes, Thamar or Dates of India, and all these to be geeuen
either in Whaye, or in the broth of a Hen.

And forasmuch as for preservation of health, and dryuing away diseases not
only in Oldme^ but in all others that be subject to any sickly affection,
there cannot be any holesomer thing then Turpentine, Turpentine wholesome.
it deserves also to be reckened in ye number of these aforesaid. For it not
only mollyfyeth and loses the healy without all harm and danger, but also
purges and skowreth all the Entrails, and inward parts, as the Liver,
Mylte, Reins, Lunges and Lights: but it must be of ye best sort and clear
shyning through, not counterfecte nor paltered withal.

And ye best is that, which issues out of ye Larch, the Pyne, or the Fur
tree. I have proved this to be of most effectual and sovereign force to
provoke Vryne in them that could not well pysse, to break the stone and
gravel: in the Strangurie: and in the filthy and vlcerous dropping or
effluxion of ye Vryne, called of the Duchmen Den Druyper: in the Gout as well
of the hands as feet: in curing the loathsome botches, and contagious
pollutions of the Priuye members and secret parts, gotten by having carnal
knowledge with common Brothelles and Pocky harlots: in curi^g and helping al
inward grieves and infections acco^panying the same disease: whereof many
settle so deeply wtin the boanes, yt the pellicles, rymmes, Synewes, Muskles,
Te^dons or Chords through outrage of humors are shrunke^, crumpled, spoiled,
and haled a sonder. And albeit Galenes use was, Lib. 3. de tuen. Val. lib. 5.
tue^. val.
to mynister the same in the bigness and quantity of a Fylberd Nutte, sometime
of two and sometime three: yet my custom is (because I would that it should
the better penetrate and search into all the Veins and parts of the body) to
make it after the manner of a Potion, myngling with it some distilled water, or
else some wine. For it will become liquide without any fire, and through
continual chasing it will easily be brought to a notable whiteness, and that
is this sort to be done:

First I take an ounce or two of right and perfect Turpentine (wherein is
neither fraud nor legter du main used) Prepari^g of Turpe^tine.
it do I bruyse and dissolve with a Pestil in a Mortar, and add thereto a
little of the Yolke of an Egg: then do I myngle and put to it two or three
ounces of the water of Alkakengie or Smallage, To make Turpentine liquide and
potable.
or some other licour, accordingly as the Nature of the disease, or state of
the person seems to require: All these do I beat together, till they be well
myxt and incorporate: the myxture will be of such a pleasant mylkye whytenes as
though it were Cream: yea my pacientes are persuaded that it is so in deed,
and none other thing which I give them to drink. I also use to make it into
little round Pills, and rouling it in fine unleavened wafer Past, to give it
them to swallow down, or else in y^ soft pappe of a Quince, but first must the
Turpe^tine be well washed in Rose water, or Fenel water, to take away his
resinie tallage.

And because nothing to this Complexion which we here describe, Sleep.
is holesomer then sound and quiet Sleep, (for therewith all the members are
generally moystened, and with convenient warmth refreshed) it shall be good for a
person thus complexioned, to take his full ease and sleep in a soft bed,
largely and somewhat plentifully: For Sleep in the night is the refreshing and
making lusty again both of the body and mind.

The inward peace of mind, is Sleep.
To vvearyed body; ease it brings.
By it, themselves men lusty keep,
And fresh to do their needful things.
And when Sleep is shaken of, it shall be right commodious to use rubbing or
friction, neither soft nor hard, Friction.
but mean between both, the profit whereof to them that use it is almost
incredible: For it styreth up vital strength, it calefyeth moderately, and
makes distribution of the nourishment into the body easyer, and readier,
specially if it be done with the wette hand, or with a moist and course cloth.
For who does not perceive yt the hands, cheeks, arms, neck and cares, being
rubbed, will wax ruddie, and with heat gather blood into those parts.

And although the use of rubbing and annoynting, among us now a days be
clean grown out of custom, yet in tholde time men used it very often, as a
mean to keep themselves in perfect health, and to strengthen their bodily
powers. So Augustus Caesar on a certain time espyinge his old compaignion
Pollio, being above an hundredth years old, demanded of him what order he
used in conseruinge himself in such perfect sound strength, and in so lustye
and green old age: unto whom his answer was, that he came to it, by using,
within, Wine: without, Oil,

Men in tholde time did not riottouslye abuse oyntmentes and Oils, to satisfye
their effeminate delicatenes and nyce wantonness, but for safeguard and
preservation of health, thereby the better to keep themselves from Sickness.
For unctions and Frictions orderlye and duelye used (for there by many sorts
thereof as Galene witnesses) either indense the body, Lib. 2. de tuen. Val.
that the Air and wyndes should not batter and damnyfie it: or else rarefie it,
that it be not stopped and inwardly pestered, which abu^daunce of fullginous
humors and oppilacions. Six sorts of Frictions.
Hard Rubbing does snarle together and condense the body: Sost, lewseth and
resolves it: Much, does extenuate and dimynishe: Mean, has a power to make
it increase and fill: Rough draws out humors to the utter parts: Gentle and
smooth takes away nothing, but reteyneth his force and power in the parts.
Among these sorts of frictions, that which is in a mediocritie, is most
behoouefull for those persons yt be old and lean. For as hard and
styffeleathered boots yt have lain long unoccupied, by being suppled in Oil
are made soft: So likewise ye bodies of Fol and Dry persons, being stroaked
over and humected inwardly with Wine, and outwardlye with Oil, lay aside al
severity, z look with a cheerful and lively countenance.

To prove that this use of unctions in the old time was of diverse sorts, beside
the testimony of sacred Scriptures, Lucae. 7.
beside ye report of Solinus, and Pliny. Strabo in his description of the
manners and fashions of the Indians does sufficientlye testifye. Lib. 15.
Physic (says he) among them consists in meats, not in medicines: and
of Medicines, they best allow of vnctio^s and Cataplasmes: al other being (as
they thinck) not void of harm and annoyaunce. Therewt they customablye
propulse sickness, mitigate heat, drive away lassitude and weariness, revive
their wearyed powers and feeble Spyrites, refreshing themselves therewith, even
as we by sweet smelles do recreate our inward soul, and restore the faint
faculties of naure.

No less commodious and profitable to this body, Artificial Bath.
is a warm Bathe of sweet water: for it does humect and calefie, it
dissolueth lassitude, it mollyfyeth hard and stiff parts, it disperseth by
euaporation the abundaunce of humors, it resolves wyn^yn^sse, and procures
Sleep: for yt it humecteth the brain with a pleasant vaporous and deawye
moisture. But the natural Bathes, Natural Bathes.
which have all their virtues of Alume, Iron, Lyme, Ockre, Brymstone,
Saltpeter, Bitumen, Lead, Brass, Copper etc. are not so wholesome for this
Complexion and Nature, unless ye party do first ask advise of some fkilfull
and trusty Physician, openymge unto him the whole state of his body, whereby he
may upon the conssideration thereof, geeue judgment whether it be good and
expedient for him to adventure into the same.

Carnal lust and Venerous Act, Carnal dealing with women very hurtful to dry
and cold complexio^s
as it is an utter enemy to all dry Natures, so especially to it most
hurtful to them that beside dryness are also cold. No less hurtful is over
much exercise, weariness, watch, carefunesse and thought, long abstynence
from meat and drink, heauynes of mind and anger, wherewyth such
complexioned men's minds are seldom styrred: but when they be thoroughly chafed
and angered, hardly will they be pacifyed and quieted again.

And because unseasonable Study is a thing that greatly wearyeth and wears
Students, Studying by night and Candlelight hurtful,
making, when lean, and exhausting their bodies: a measure and mean also
would be therein used. For we se^ many great and painful Students, still
sitting at their Books, without taking any regard to their bodily health (by
the help whereof the good state of the mind is holden up and mainteyned) to
look with wearyshe faces, pale and without blood, nothing almost on their
bodies, but skin and boane, the ventricle and stomach feeble and unable to
digest their meat their strength and powers clean worn out and exhausted.

For by wearying themselves with late watchi^g, and sittinge at their study
till far in the night, their Animal Spyrites through toomuch inte^sion be
resolved, and their native humyditie dried up. Wherefore it is requisite to use
therein a moderacion, and narowlye to look to the preservation of health,
Bodily health.
least otherwise through continual poring and study* the body chance to pyne
away and fall into some Consumption. For as Plutarch says: Of all the good
things that learning brings to man, De tue^d. Valet.
nothing more excellent can be given to the body, then to be in perfect
health, and without impedimente, either for the attaynmente of the knowledge of
Virtue, or for the necessary use of life. For if sickness or gyddynesse of
the head hyppe^, streightwayes the mind being destitute of the help of the
body, drowpeth, Body and mind sick and well together*
quayleth, and is neither lustye nor actyue in doing his ordinary functions:
but together with his Companion and fellow of all his labors the body, is
mutuallye affected and alyke distempered. For which cause Pla^o his counsel is
right commendable, aduysing us neither to exercise the body without the mind,
nor the mind without the body: but to keep as it were an equal poyze of
matrymoniall consent and agreemente together between them, as it were between
man and wife.

Forasmuch therefore as the inward and native heat by exercise and motion, is
increased and strengthened, and the mind reuyued and made lustyer: it stands
all Students upon, and as many as be sickly and of wearish or quaysie health,
to use themselves thereunto, and namelye to such kind of exercise as brings
with it no wearyso^nes or lassitude, but which is stayed wtin y^ bounds of
mediocrity: of which sort is a dece^t straynable and clear voice, and reading
or declaming with a loud and big sound, which is as expedient and as
profitable a thing as any, to open ye breast, to stir up the Spyrites, and to
clear the heart from all gross and fulsome vapors. A wholesome exercise for
students.


Notwythstandyng, this must by the way diligently be observed, that they may
not streyne their voice to speak ouerbigge and loud, when they be either
thoroughly harneysed with wine, or full gorged with meat. For the Spyrit and
breath ouerreaching and streyning it self with toomuch and too violent braying
out, exasperateth the vocal Artery, and many times causes either inflammation
in the throat, or else by breaking some of the small veins, makes them to
spit blood.

There be other sorts of recreations, wherewyth men of this calling and
vocation, may well refresh themselves, taking (for ye time) reasonable truce
with their other appointed studyes and business: Moderate banqueting not
discomme^dable.
as moderate banqueting and making merry among honest and pleasant conceipted
company, such (I mean) as know how to use themselves in each respect, and can
frame their talk, and place their words according to time, Recreation of the
mind
age, person present, and to some profitable purpose of Iyfe: in earnest and
grave matter using grave speech, Comelye mirth at the Table.
and in sporting mirth, merye deuyses and pleasant co^fere^ces: having in
their mouths no kind of lavish talk, but only such as to the hearer may be
both pleasant and profitable. In which point, many digress from comeliness,
and do not greatly delighte their Audience, for that their table talk neither
serves for the time, neither is to the hearers either pleasant or commodious.
For whe^anye wayghty and perplexed matters be in question, or among them
debated, these busy ta^glers be ever buzzinge. Thus, many even in their
Wagons, at the Myll, in the open streates and cross ways, in their Wheries
and Boats, yea even upon their Alebenches, will take upon them to reason of
the holy Scriptures, and to dispute of Religion. But how? forsooth, even after
such a sort as men, whose bellyes be full paunched, and bumbasted as much as
the skin will hold, do argue and reason of frugalitie and thryft. Which
kind of people, right aptly and worthily (although in a matter of less
account) the Poet Persius in his time quipped and rahated, where he says:
Each Peazante now with pamperd paunch,
on Alebench and at wine,
Sat. 1.
Dare chaunt and prate of Sacred lore,
and Mysteries Divine.


But let them rather yield to the wholesome admonition of Horace, writing thus:
Discuss not matters mystical,
when stoare of Bellycheere,
And dainty fare, the Tables gay
Lib. Ser.
does furnishe every where.
2. Sat. 2.
Learn (Friends) but yet in due time learn,
not with the Stomach full,
When belching fumes of surphetting,
your eyesight makes dull.
When mind that's prone to wickedness,
and follovving of will,
Rejects Virtue stubbornely,
and vice frequenteth still.
Come sober, and not ouerchardge
with gurmandize I say,
When so ye ever mean of search,
the true and perfect way.
And why? forsooth I will you tell
(at least wise if I can:)
A brybed Judge, that gapes for gain,
the truth to^ yft and skanne
Is far vnmeere and eke unlike,
to judge tvvixt man and man.


Hereuppon it comes, that many utterly ignorant and mere blind in the Holy
Scriptures and matters touching the state of their Souls, suffer themselves so
wilfullye and headlongly to be faryed away by their own sensual affections:
for that, they busye themselves where they should not, Curiosity in searching
to high miste-ries.
and leauell not at that mark whereunto their mind ought principally to direct
it self, entermedlyng and troubling their brains with scrupulous quiddities
and diffuse questions, having such spyced consciences, that sometime they are
myered and sland in doubt of things most plain and manifest: and lodging once
wtin their hearts any erroneous doctrine or superstitious opynio^, waver n
Faith, and doubt in conscience, and myssyng the right Haven and sure
Ankerholde, whereunto they should only trust, run upon the rocks of
human tradicions, and throw themselves wilfully upon the dangerous Shelues
of men's fantastical traditions and invented trumperyes. And therefore
because, the mind of man is ever busye and diversely iarring and unsettled
within it self, and neither in word, deed, opynio^, nor in the whole order of
life so firm and constant as is to be wyshed: I would advise and counsel
every one, that desires to live in tranquillity of conscience and quietness of
mind, to dispose all his actions, purposes, deuyses and meaninges, into times
and oportunityes thereto convenient, doing every thing in his due order, and
apoyncting to each function his proper turn, and tempestiuitye: and not
confusely to shuffle up and myngle one thing with an other in disorder, nor to
wrap and entangle himself in many matters at once: which thing is meant by
these sayings of the Preacher, Eccle. 3.
where he appoynteth conueniente seassons and orderlye times for each
functions of this life, and assigns to every thing his proper and due office:
so that the night which is a time appointed for rest (banishyng all
phantasyes) is to be passed and spente in Sleep, and not to be entermedled
with those busynesses and cares which belong to the day. The time to eat his
meat, the time to relaxe and sport his body, the time to refresh his powers
and reuyue his Spyrites, let him so precysely and orderly observe: that laying
aside (for the time) all other cares and cogitations, he only attend to his
meat, Each thing ought to be done in his due time and right order.
meerilye and decently cheerishyng his body, not suffering himself to be
interrupted, or otherwise disquieted during the time fo his ordinary repaste,
and usual meals.

Thus, when we resort to the places of public prayer, to hear godly Sermons,
when we pray, and offer up unto God our devout meditations, al such things as
may in any wise hinder our devotion, ought then to be secluded and laid aside
from us, that our mynds may only erect it self upward to Godward, and to
think on nothing but heavenly things. This also both in public and pryuate
matters, in common Pleas and domestical Affairs, in the traffic and trade of
Marchaundize, when a man has dealings with himself or bargaining with other
men, ought circu^spectly to be observed: for by using this ordinarye custom
and trade of life, he shall reap great commodity and feel great ease in
himself, all the days of this his earthly Pylgrimage.

Of a Moist Complexion. The X. Chapter.
BEcause radical or original humor is the maynteiner and feeder of natural
heat, and the thing that preserves and maynteyneth life, even as Oil does
nourish the flame in the Candlewieke: therefore the Complexion that is thereof
constituted is not ill, neither to be myslyked. For both Physicians and
Philosophers commend ye temperature which is moist, as not altogether
disagreeing and strange from natural disposition. And although in young years
it be not all of the best: Moist Complexion.
Yet when further age and heat be joined to it, it becomes much better and
perfecter. For moystnes will quickly conceive and take heat, and is both ready
and plyaunte to be wrought and framed which way a man will, even like moist clay
that will take any manner of print or form. It helps therefore wonderfullye
to nourishment, and is of very great force and efficacy touching ye height,
talnes and growth of man.

For albeit moystnes hinders the other functio^s, and of it self helps them
in executing their actions nothing at all, but is rather altogether weak, and
ineffectual, (because it is neither fit to attract, neither to reteyne,
neither to expel:) yet being joined and perfused with heat, it helps and
brings something to pass, and furthereth the other qualitye in the
alteracion of those things which be conioygned among themselves.

For as water being no less cold then moist, through heat of fire, boyleth
things that be raw: making the same wholesome food for man's body: Or, as Oil
in the fryinge pan, through the heat of fire and burning coals, Heat in
man likened to the Su^ne, and moisture to the Moon.
becomes most skaldynge, and boyleth and fryeth fishes fit and meet for
the sustenaunce and meat of man: So likewise moystnes in a ma^s body joined
with natural heat, works many effects in the body, even as the Moon does
in y^ Earth, through the light that she boroweth at the Beams and shyninge
rays of the Sun. The influe^ce and force of the Moon.
For as this Planet in her monthly course refreshes woods and fields, geeuing
to all earthly things growth and increase, causing ye Sea to observe his tides
in Creekes, Havens, Roades and Shoares, and to ebb and flow according to her
course and motion, and as she is nearer or further of, sometime with swellynge
floudes filling them, sometime with low ebbes emptying them, as she also does
Oysters and all shelfish beside: So lysewyse this wholesome vital humor,
moystening each member in the body, makes the same full of juice and moisture:
and therefore they that be of this nature and complexion, are long livers, if
they keep themselves within moderation, and that the moystnes for want of
heat, grow not toomuch out of square and beyond measure. For as toomuch
abundaunce of water quight quench fire: so too much stoare of moisture
oppresses natural heat.

But if these ii. qualities, concur and meet together in a moderate
temperatenes, and that neither moisture be too abundaunt, neither heat too
remiss and faint, the^ (certes) all the offices of nature are most exactly
performed. For when heat has moystnes plyant, ready and obedient, it
attracteth the meat, and very well concocteth the same: and being reduced
and brought into the likeness or fashion of deawe, distributeth and
disperseth the same into the very innermost and secretest parts of the whole
body, geeuinge nourishment to the members, whereunto it is made like and
consubstantiall.

Moystnes therefore through the help and furtheraunce of heat is of
wonderful force in geeuing nourishmente to the body, causinge it to increase
and grow up, in other functions being weak and feeble. For in it, is
neither virtue attractiue, concoctiue, alteratiue nor digestive, but yet it is
of some force as touching the virtue expulsive, by reason of the slyppery
nature which is in it.

For we commonly see that those persons which be gross, corpulent and moist
of body, are for the most part loose bealted and soluble, by reason that their
power retentiue is not fyrme and strong, and because their pores and passages
are made open and wide, for the humors to pass out.

In Bodies which be hoate and dry, al things happen contrary, because in them
the power retentiue is strong, but the expulsyue (by means of dryness, and
for that, the passages be empayred and decayed) is faint and weak: whereby it
happens that in their avoiding of excrements, going to the stool and
skowringe their Entrails, they strain themselves sometime all in vain with
Coughing, hawkinge and vomytinge, and yet be not able by euacuation to ease
themselves.

Thus the moist Complexion being adversary to the dry, has all things and
propertyes in a manner from it contrary, even as the case stands between
Children and Old folk. For in Childhoode, heat by little and little
increases, and having more store of moystnesse, grows more and more, til
they come to full age and man's strength. But in Old age, this heat by little and
little decays, and when moisture is all wasted a man falls into a cold and
dry distemperaunce, and finally thereby brought to his death. The condition of
which qualities, as we have a little before described, so in this place the
order of our present matter now in hand, craves to have some certain
arguments and tokens showed, how and whereby to know a moist Complexion.
He that is of this Constitution and temperature, The tokens of a moist body.
(clean contrary to the dry disposition) has a body soft, not rugged and
roughe, white skinned, and without hair, the veins and joints not standinge
out nor greatly appearinge, heir plain and flat, and for the most part
thick withal, which in women evidently appears. For young damselles and
Maidens, being any thing growe^ in lusty age, have their heads thick heyred,
and longer then Yongmen have.

Albeit many times it happens to this body, as it does to plashie wet
ground, wherein by reason of overmuch moystnes and wette, no young trees, no
Shrubbes, nor grass grows, as it also falls out in very dry and hungry
ground, where no moisture is at all. For where toomuch wette is, there the
hayres grow thin, because heat wants power and lacks strength, to bring
out the pores and work the humor under the skin into hair: and for this
same cause, happens it also that the heirs be of color White, bright,
Yealow or Read, which in continuance of time and space of years (as heat
more increases) begin a little to incline to black color: their
countenance and foreheade pleasant and cheerful, Graye eyes.
their eyes Greye and bright, standing out forward, lively and quick, and by
reason of the pureness of their Crystalline humor, clear, brighte, amyable and
smylinge: all which be tokens and signs of a good nature and virtuous
disposition, a quiet mind, plain, simple and vprighte dealinge, and finallye
of such good towardnes as geeueth an undoubted and certain proof of curtesye
and humenity.

For in them is no gallie bitterness, as is in Choleric persons, Moist
complexio^s not given to be malicious and spightful.
whose malignaunt humors incite and prick them forward into sundry
inconvenient affections: whereas they that be of moist complexions are not so
lightly angered, nor so fumysh and desirous of revenge. And forasmuch as heat
does not incende and set on fire moisture, Moist natures not fumish and testy.
the mind of these me^ is nothing so easily heated and chafed, but rather is
far more quiet, calm and myelde.

Now, as touching the shape, feacture, proporcion and form of their bodies:
Tokens of a moist complexioned body.
it is to be be noted that these complexioned persons be of stature mean,
big set, rather then tall, graunde paunched, and stroutingly bellyed, which
comes partly by nature, and partly by the custom and order of living, by
idleness and ease, want of exercise, bolling, swilling, long sleep, and
many ways beside, whereby the body grows and becomes burly, fat and
corpulent.

I could here recite all the other tokens of each several part of man's body,
that is of this moist constitution and complexion, as ye Nose in a manner
camoysed and flat, with the grystlie end blu^t and big, swollen and blown
Cheeks, round Chinne, and many signs more: but they do show the several
nature and quality of each singular part by it self, and not of the whole
body in general: Every part of the body is by it self severally to be
considered and has his proper temperature.
so that we may not by one small part give judgment of the whole body, but of
every proper in^ber, special consideration must be taken: albeit for the most
part, they resemble and participate in nature and temperament with their
chief and principal Entraile, that is to say, the Heart and Lyeuer.

Concerning the inward notes and tokens of the mind: Men of this Complexion,
as their mind is nothing quick, The state of the mind in moist co^plexions.
so neither is their tongue (being the interpreter of ye same) prompt, ready
or quick, because it is so drowned in overmuch moisture, that it is not well
able to advance and set out it self in good and clean vtteraunce: their wit
neither sharp nor fine, their courage base and nothing haultie, not
atte^ptinge any high enterpryses, nor caryng for any glorious and difficult
adventures: and the cause is, for y^, heat which is the thing that pricketh
forward and emboldeneth to take in hand worthy attempts, is in them very weak
and small: for this cause, are me^ quicker witted, Why men be wyser then women.
deeper searchers out of matters, and more diligente and ripe of judgment
then women: for a woman compasses and does al things after a worse sort, and
in going about affairs and making bargeins, has not the like dexterity and
seemelynesse that a man has. And unto this end apperteyneth and may be
referred that saying of the wise man. Eccl. 42
It is better to be with an ill Man, the^ with a friendly VVoma^. etc. Which
is by reason and effect of heat, which whosoever lacks, or else have feeble
and faint, are for the most part persons effeminate, nyce, te^dor, without
courage and spyrite, sleepie, slothful, weakelings, meycockes, and not apt
nor able to beget any Children, because their Sperme is too thin and moist,
and thereby unable to piece and join together with the woman's seed generatiue.
For albeit the desire of carnal knowledge and venerous acts for the most
part proceeds of a slypperie and moist disposition of body, and is to
persons of this temperature less hurtful then to others: yet forasmuch as
this moystnes and humor is slowly forced forward by heat, and the members of
generation not filled with swelling spyrit, it follows yt they be unto carnal
coiture fu^bling, slow, and not greatly thereto addicted, neither therein take
any great delectacion or pleasure. And hereupon it happens, yt fat women
and corpulente, have greater desire to fleshly concupiscence and bodily lust
in Summer, Carnal lust in Summer to me^ hurtful.
then in Winter: because in So^mer, heat enkindleth moisture and styrreth up
Venus, but in men (co^trarily) it quenches it: for manly strength, by
immoderat heat, is resolved and enfeeblished.

Likewise these herbs, Rue provoke lust in women, but takes it utterly
away in men.
Thyme, Rue, and many others that be very hot and dry, quench and take away in
men all desire of carnal lust, because they wast the generatiue humor,
whereas women thereby are much provoked, and stirred to venerie, by enforcing
heat into their secret parts and pryuities. And for this cause, when y^
Genitoryes or members of generation begin once to grow into coldness, and yt ye
generatiue humor is not forced nor calefyed by natural heat, then are such
things good to be mynistred to the parties, as are of power able to stir up
the loins and with a certain tickling co^cupisce^ce to provoke the genital
seed with desire to be expelled. Now, how such persons may keep the^ selves in
bodily health, clear and free from sickness, here mean I briefly to decy^hre.

First, Diet meet for a moist Co^plexio^.
because health consists in a te^perame^t of hot and moist, this
co^stitutio^ ought to use a moist diet, yt is to say, such nourishment and
food as is thereunto famyliar and much of affmity: and such whert in is
reasonable good store of heat, of which sort is sweet wine, Milk, Rye
bread, Rere eggs, Veale, Porke, Pigge, big la^bes waterfoules, beans,
Chestnuts, Chitchpease, Dates, Reyss, Figs, Almonds, Pyne apple kernels,
ha^ginge and sweet grapes, such as Muskadell grapes are, Sea fish, Brains.
Among garden or pot herbs: Lettice, Arrage, Rape, Parseips, Carets, Melons,
Cucumbers, but good heed must be taken y^ he use not to eat to^much of any of
these, for fear of making the body excede to much in moystnes. For by overmuch
moist diet and fare, Phlegm and cold ^a^my humors, causing sundry dangerous
diseases be engendered, to wit, y^ Apoplexy, Cra^pe (through fulness or, else
abundante of Phlegm) browsy evil, Palsy, falli^g Sickness, Astonme^t and
insensiblenes, of the lymmes, when as the power Animal is so venummed and
depryued of his function, that all sense of feelynge and moouinge is taken
away, Diet over moist, hurtful.
and a man suddenly thereby (as it were by some present reueng sent to him by
Gods great wrath) is styfled. This body therefore must be conserved within the
bounds and rules of healthynesse and temperaunce, using expedient exercise,
and shaking away al sloth and ydlenes: specially, it shall behooue him to have
good regard orderly to euacuate and purge his bodily excrements, to go to the
Stool, to pysse, to arise betymes in the morning, and frequente some
convenient exercise, and by using a somewhat vehemente motion or walkinge, to
styre up his inward or natural heat.

As concerning Sleep, in this body it ought to be moderately used, Moderate
sleep good for moist persons.
not exceedinge the space of vi. hours at the furthest. For it is better to
Sleep little and somewhat with watching to soke away humous, then immoderatly
to bolne, Moist folks must sleep but very little.
swell and therewyth thoroughly to be cloyed. As for example, we see those which
geeue themselves too much to bellycheere and Sleep, to become therwyth so
gross and corpulent, yt their Chinne hangs down danglinge, and joins to
their breast, and as the Poet Persius says: Their paunch and gullet with fat
bears out, Sat. 1.

A good foot and half, of assise about.


Whereby it happens that such persons are oftentimes even upon the sudden
cast into diseases. For their veins and arteryes being slender and streict,
and also void of blood and Spyrite, their natural heat is quickly and for
every light cause oppressed and styfeled, which thing is meant by Hyppocrates
where he says: Lib. 2. Aphor. 44.
They that be by nature very porzy and gross, live as long as they that be
slender bodyed: because their pores be wide, and their conceptacles of blood
large, so that lightlye no outward or inward causes can greatly hurt them.
Which persons although with dainty fare, idle life and much Sleep, they bring
themselves many times to this porzynes and corpulencie, yet they be not so
daungerously sick, when any discrasie happens, as they that be of ye same
constitution and state from their first begi^ning. For although some which in
their youth were slender and lean, happen afterward to be fat, gross, and
fleshie: yet their veins, Arteryes and other passages and cunduites of their
bodies remain still large and wide: which thing plainlye appears, whenever
they (feeling themselves not well at ease) have any occasion to be let blood.
For in this accidental habit of body, although the party be fat and
forgrowen, yet the veins lie not hid and vnappearing, as in them that
naturally be gross: but swel out and plainlye appear to the eye, offering
themselves to the Lau^ce, by incisio^ ha^somly to be cut. Therefore although
this moist Complexion, being cherished by heat, be laudable and good, for that
it prolongeth life, differreth and keeps away Oldage, and suffers not the
body to grow into dryness: yet if it exceed toofarre, or stand in the point
of extremity, it is dangerous. For when by reason of the veins being full,
the body ceasseth to be nourished, and the faculties of nature (which
distribute nourishmente) intermit their office and cannot work, in this case
needs must the body go to wrack and incur inconvenience, so that either
sudden death thereupon ensues, or else (al least) some rupture of y^ Vessels
and veins happens.

These things being considered, it shall be good, speedely and in time to forsee
and break this habit and disposition, and by y^ means of moderate
euacuation, abstynence, and watchinge to preuente further danger: using such a
prescripte diet and ordinary, as best serves to reduce the body into a safer
and less dangerous Constitution. For this is genera lie to be noted, yt a
body is not to be accounted and reckened moist, Moystare feeds and
nourishes heat.
in respect of abundaunce of excrements and humors, but of a temperate
moystnes of all the parts and of the whole, proportionably together: with which
te^perate moisture, natural heat is fed and nouryshed, and life thereby many
years prolonged.

Finis Libri Primi.
THE SECOND BOOK, WHERE IN AS IN A GLASS is plainly and liuelye described the
perfect state and express Image of every particular Nature: By the which
every man may most readily find out the very right Constitution, plight,
condition, affect and disposition of his own Body.
Of a Compounde Complexion. The first Chapter.
COmpounde Complexions, consistinge of two qualities a piece, are in number
four, like as y^ simple be: vz, hot and Moist: Hot and Dry: Cold and Moist:
Cold and Dry: unto whom there belong and are appendant so many Humors,
diffused into every part of the whole body: Blood, Phlegm, Choler and
Mela^cholie. According to the nourishment that a man is fed withal, humors
either encrese or diminish.
These, according to ye nature of nourishment received, are increased or
diminished: and suffering chau^g and alteration are easelye one into an other
transmuted. And albeit these humors (being of great force diverse ways, and
sondryly affecting the body, yea the with fulsome, and unpleasant
exhalations and sentes is oftentimes greatly annoyed and encu^bred, even as ill
and naughtye wine brings to the brain affects both hurtful and dangerous)
The gross exhalacion of humors hurtful to the mind: as dead and fulsome
wine, is to the body.
may not be accounted Elements, neither are able to constitute any Complexion:
yet are they endued with Elementall qualitye and virtue, and help much to the
conservation and keeping of the whole body in good plight and order.

For as we see the fire to be fed with matter combustible: and Torches,
Lynkes, Candles and such like nouryshed with Oil or some other rosennye and
fattie substance: so likewise the elementall qualities and all the powers and
faculties of nature derpued into ye vital and spermaticke seed of our Parents,
do stand in continual need of nourishment. For if the body should not be
sustained with nourishment, or if the humors (which moyste^ every particular
member) should lack the preseruatyues and fomentations wherewyth they be
maynteyned, the whole frame of man's body must of necessity decay, and be
utterly dissolved, and every part thereof vanishe away into his like, whereof
it was generated, or into that; whose nature it conteyneth within it self,
whether it do participate with Fire, Apre, Earth, Concord and harmony in man's
body.
Water, or draw near in nature and be famylier to any of them. They depend
mutually one of an other, and are steadfastly maynteyned by the help and stay
one of an other. Neither is there any part in man's body so small, so vile or
so abject, that has not respect to the comeliness and conservation of the
whole body, and does orderly discharge his due office and proper function
whereunto it was created. And this I would not have to be only spoken and meant
of y^ use and vtility of every of the members and parts severally, but also of
the humors, which by the help of nourishment, do meynteine, supporte and
underprop the temperamente and complexion of each body: and by the help of
natural heat, do geeue increase and growth to all the members generally.

For which cause Hippocrates and Galene, De Natu* humana.
not without good reason apoint the four natural humors (being perfect and
pure) the Elements of Creatures endued with blood: Humors after a sort are the
elements of man.
for out of them comes a secundarie oryginall of our procreation. For they
mynister matter plentifully, and help highly in the breedinge and shaping of
the Infant or yonglinge, specially if the body be well ballassed with good
wholesome meats, and now and then heated with a draught of good wine: for
without these, Venus games are performed but faintly and sorilie: which thing
seems to be meant by the young Strypling Chremes in Terence, who being sober
began to abhor and loath his harlot and Concubine: but being well whittled
in wine, to take therein great delight and pleasure, and not scarce able to
qualefie himself from committinge further folly with her, as in this
Prouerbiall sentence he flatly professed.

Take meat and drink and wine away. Eunuch. Act. 4. Scaen. 5.

Small is the lust to Venus play.
For the Testicles, Genitories and members of generation draw unto them from
the principal members and convert into Seed, the best and most exquistielye
concocted humors. Which seed, having (...) great store of effectuous and
profitable Spyrit is the worker of heat and of all the other faculties, and in
the begetting and procreation of Children is the chief parent and causer. Into
it, is a wonderful virtue and divine power (by Gods good will and appoyntmente)
infused, for the shaping and fashioning of the young Creature, The force, and
virtue of Seed.
within the mothers womb: for it produces a fruict of seemly and most
beautiful workmanship, rightly shapen and in each point perfectly
proporcioned, if the Seed (whereof it was begotten) do issue from a sound and
wholesome body: for otherwise, if the seed be of a diseased, corrupt and
infected body, Sound parents beget sound Children.
the issue and ofspringe cannot choose but be monstrous and deformed.

Somewhat therefore to recreate the Reader and to make this argument more
plausible, delightful and populer, I will depaint and set down y^ nature and
condition of the Humors that rule and bear sway in man's body, because they
produce and bring forth their like qualities. For Blood is partaker of Hot
and moist: Choler of hot and Dry: Phlegm of Cold and moist: and Melancholy
of Cold and dry. Therefore that Temperament which is Hoate and moist, may very
well be referred to a Sanguine man: Hot and dry, to a Cholerique: and so forth
of the rest: but yet so, that we confess the Complexion and temperament of
man not to grow or proceed elsewhere, then of the Elemental qualities, for of
the^ have they their names and not of y^ Humors.

First therefore there be iiii. Elements, Fire, Eleme^tes 4. Qualities 4.
Humors 4.
Air, Earth and Water, which of al things made, are the original beginnings.
Next are the Qualities, that is to say, the myxture of Hot, Cold, May and
Dry: of who^, proceed the differences of Complexions. Last of all, the four
Humors, whose force and Nature, ye seed comprehends and conteyneth within
it: unto whom (beside the qualities which are to it in steed of an Instrumente
and not of a woorker) the chief cause next under God, of the fourmyng and
creation of al ye parts is truly to be attributed. These wholesome humors, to
the conservation of health and mayntenaunce of life are right necessary and
profitable. For of them do consist and of them are nourished the entyer parts
of all Creatures, and for this cause, so long as a man lives, he can never
want these without great detrime^t and danger of his health. Notwythstanding
according to the course of time and season of the year, according to the
quality of ye air enclosing us, according to ye condition of the place where
we dwell, and according to the nature of each age, they are increased or
dimynished.

For Blood being the best of all the humors and endued with heat and
moisture, The nature of blood.
is in his chief pryme and force in the Spring season: namely peculier and
proper to lustye flourishinge age, which commonly is of a sanguine and ruddie
color, which nevertheless wants not also in the other Natures.

Phlegm, Phlegm
being like unto water, is of nature cold and moist, and takes his increase
in winter, and engenders diseases like unto it self.

Choler, Choler.
being of quality hoate and dry, resembles tyer, and has his most force in
Summer, which although in sight and touching, it appear moist, and of color
yelowish, like Maluesey, yet in operacion, power and effect, it is hot and of
ardent nature.

Melancholy, Mela^cholie.
not unlike to Earth, cold and dry, increases and takes force in Autumn,
this is the dryer and grosser part of blood, and the dreggie refuse thereof.

All these differences of humors, when a vein is opened (for it is not all
pure blood that gussheth thereout) In blood all the other humous are mixed.
is plainly of all men to be perceived. First, before it be cold, it does show
and represent to the eye, an ayrie and fomy Spirit, which by and by vanishes
away: then an exact and pure licour of most perfect and excellent ruddynesse,
y^ which is pure and right blood: When a vein is opened, all the humors are
ocularly to be seen.
in which there swymmeth Choler, and sometime toughe clammye Phlegm, sometime
liquide and thin, according to the nature, condition and state of man: Last
of all, if you turn up the whole mass or lump, you shall find Melancholy,
altogether of color black. And thus every humor abundinge in the body,
bewrays it self by his own proper color: insomuch that sometime y^ blood
that issues out of the veins, liquefyeth and is dissolved into Choler or
Phlegm, or clottereth and thickeneth into Mela^cholie, and reteyneth either no
color or very little of blood. And if a man were disposed by taste to have
further knowledge in these humors, Humors have both color and taste.
he may with his tongue and palate as well judge and discern the relyce and
tallage thereof, as he does their color by his eye. For Blood is sweet and in
a manner of the relyshe and taste of milk, because it is much like and of kin
unto it: Choler is bitter, of the nature of Gall: Phlegm, unsavory as water,
and without all qualitye, so long as it is not rotten, nor myxt with other
humors, for then is it either salt or sowrishe. Melancholy, is sharp, eigre^
tarte. These tastes and relyshes there is no man that perceyueth and feels
not, when as in voanyting and perbraking he casts up any of them: yea in
sweat and even in the spettle, these tastes are manyfestlye descryed and
perceived: Spettle and Sweat, have their force and power of humors.
for of these h^^mours they have and participate their powers and facultyes,
and with their qualityes are they endned.

Of a Hoate and moist Complexion: and by the way: of the disposition and nature
of a Sanguine man. The ij. Chapter.
Having heretofore set down the description of simple Complexions and
temperatures, which be so termed, for that they consiste of one only quality,
bearyng swaye and dominion more the^ any of y^ rest: by course of my purposed
work, I am next to entreat of them that are compou^d.

For in the very beginning and first entrau^ce of this work, my promise and
full intent was to set down and describe such a Complexion and state of body,
as was in every point perfect and absolute: and to repulfe and keep away al
such harms and inconveniences as in any wise might empayre, health, or
bring the body from his good state into worse case and taking. I have
therefore thought it good here in this place first to inserte the temperament
that is hot and moist: because it is n^ereste and lykest to the best. For no
state of body (saving only the best and chiefeste) is better or more
commendable then this, nor any that longer prolongeth life, and keeps back
Didage, so that the same consist and be within y^ limittes and compass of
temperatnes, that is, of hoate and moist. Therefore since this state among all that be compound, is accounted chiefeste: we must stand upon the discourse
thereof the more narowly and precysely, and the rather because sundry Physitio^s
make no mo but sour differences, grounding their reasons (and not altogether
painly) yt it is not possible (as Galene wytnesseth^) that any temperature or
distemperature Tue^d. Val Lib. 6. De Te^p. 1
can long continue alone and simple: For so much as necessarilye it adopteth and
takes to it an other. For y^ Hoate (consumynge and wastinge moisture)
engenders and brings dryness: Temperatures subject to chasige.
Cold, consuming and wasting nothing, after a sort increases humor.
Semblably, the Dry quality in those ages that a Creature grows and
increases, makes it hoater: but when it decreaseth and draws toward decay,
it makes cold and dries the solid parts of the body: but the Receyuers and
conceptacles of the humors it fills with excrements, which thing in Oldmen
is plainly to be discerned and perceived, who abou^de and are full of Phlegm,
Old men by nature dry: but in condition moist.
spitting and spatteringe a^ their mouth, with their Noses ever dropping and
sneuillye.

Which thing later Physicians (eue^ of our time) as yet observing, rejecting
simple temperatures (which notwythstanding may not well be so shak^ of and
forgotten) appoint only four, to wit, them that be co^pound: unto who^ they
have geeuen names (not of their qualities but (somewhat unaptly) of those
commonly termed and known humors, y^ is to say Sa^guine, Cholerique.
Phlegmatique, and Mela^cholique: by y^ squire and leauel of who^, they would
have these 4. differences of co^plexio^ or te^perature, to be reduced and
tried. Which deali^g and reasoni^g of theirs, as it sauoreth of populer
judgment and learning to the common sort, very plaussble: so stands it not
with the precise opynion and censure of them that would have each thing skanned
and measured in his right nature and kind.

In the mean season, Dissensio^ and diversity of opinions, dangerous
I as one desirous to reco^cyle Physicians thus factiously iarrynge in opynion
(and would God this vniformitye and atonement were also brought to pass in
matters of Religion, for the better quieting of many men's Consciences) both
parties shall suffer the chief place to be assigned and geeuen to ye hoate and
moist Complexion (excepting always as I said before, the temperatest of all,
whereunto as at a marcke we must direct our mind and leauel our whole matter,
that by it every man may try his own nature) which so long as it is in his
perfect strength, vigor and quality, produces and brings forth a Sanguine
man.

And thus, there is in a manner no difference, neither prejudicial to any
party, either to call it by the name of a hoate and moist Complexion, or else
by the term of a Sanguine man: who by the benefit of this wholesome humor,
conteyneth and has within him these qualities; albeit Blood it self (for we
will keep all things within their prescripte limittes) does not engender and
cause heat and moystnes, but rather heat and moisture produces Blood.

Now, Blood of all iuyces and humors, is ye best, and to man's life an alimente
and maintener chiefly appropriat, famylier and domestical: for through the
force and The profit of blood.
furtheraunce of vital Spirit (which is the preserver, and se^der of natural
heat into every part of the body, Blood is conueighed by the cunduytes and
Vessels of ye Arteryes and Veins, and so both nourishes, mainteyneth and
preserves the whole body.

And for that, this pure, clear, defecate, loouely and amyable Juice, is the
special thing yt conserueth every lyuinge Creature in his being, and wherein
also consists the life and vigor of every nature that lives by breath:
therefore the Hebrew Lawmaker Moses, Leuit. 17. The cause why Moses forbad the
eating of Bloud^
by the direction and appointmente of God himself, forbadde all manner of blood
to be eaten, because ye life of al Creatures consists in blood, and is
therwyth nourished and mainteyned even as the flame of a Candle is with the
Oily week: as it plainly appears, by a man that bleedeth very much, whose
body is then in every part cold, wanne and (for want thereof) fayntinge, and
in a manner ready to geeue up the Ghost. I have known many, Blood not rashlye
nor unadvisedly to be let.
whose vital spyrite bleedinge out and yssuinge together with their blood,
have been thereby brought into great danger of their lives. And therefore this
treasure of Life, must most carefullye be conserved, because it is of all
Humors the most excellent and wholesome.

Now, Whence the Arteries and Veins spring.
as the Arteries (which abound more with vital spyrite then with blood)
spring from the heart: so, the Veins (which conteyne more blood then ayrie
spyrite,) proceed and spryng from the Lyeuer, and are dispersed abroad in
brauches and fibers into every, yea the very furtheste places of the body.
The Liver, the shop of Blood.
For the Liver is the shop and chief workemaster of gross and thick
blood, although the first oryginall thereof be ascribed to the Heart, The
heart, fountain of blood.
by whose power and faculty the blood is made and thoroughly wrought: and being
endued with vital spyrite, conueigheth natural heat to each part of the body.

Blood and vital Spyrite are in their chiefest Pryme and most abound in lusty
and flourishing years, The color shows what humors be in the body.
albeit there is no age yt lacks the same: although in old worn age, blood
begins to draw to a coldness, and the vital spyrit, then neither so hoate,
neither so strong and effectuous: which thing as it is in them well to be
observed and perceived by their frequente gestures and often moving of the
body and the parts thereof: yet specially may it be seen and noted by their
color, which in a young lusty Stryplyng and youthful body of good
constitution is ruddy and fresh: but in them that be further stryken in years,
or further of from this temperamente, is not so pure, so beautiful, nor so
pleasant to behold, for that, all their comeliness and beauty is either faded
away, or through some evil humors, and hidden imperfection or blemishe
appears in them worse then in the younger sort.

So, many being affected or diste^pered in their Spleen, womb, Liver,
ventricle and Lunges, are commonly either pale, yelow, tawnie, dunne, duskie,
or of some other ill favored color.

There is no surer way (says Galene) certainly to know the humors and juice
in a Creature, Tuend. val. lib. 4.
then by the color and outward complexion. If the body look very white, it is
a token yt phlegm in that body, chiefly reigns and most abounds. If it be
pale or yelow, Affectes of the mind chaung the color of the face and body.
it argues the humor to be greatly Melancholique and Cholerique, and the
blood to be fresh and reddye: if it be blackish, it betokens black adust
Choler, specially if no outward accidental occasion happen, as great heat or
chafing, labor or weariness: or if the mind be not intoxicate, and
perplexed with affectes and passions, as Anger, Joy, Sorrow, Care, pensiveness:
for these make the humors sometime to resort unto the skin and utter parts,
and sometime to hyde and conueyghe themselves far inwardly: and for this
cause, we see men y^ are fumish and testy to be in a marvelous heat,
proceeding not of any sticknesse or discrasse but of *the motion and stirring
of the humors: again, them that be affrighted and in mind amazed, to be
pale. Some to look as wanne as Lead, some white and swartie, sometime blewyshe,
sometime of sondrye colors: all which betoken crude humors and raw juice to
bear rule and swaye in the body, either of phlegm, glasselyke and toughe, or
of some other sort, or else many rotten humors clamped up in y^ body, which by
outward tokens and signs bewray and show themselves what they be, and what
they signify.

They therefore that be of a hoate and moist constitution, and have great
store of blood within them, are of a purple and reddie color, soft, warm
and smooth skinned: comely of stature, and of reasonable feacture, fleshye
bodyed, and a little roughe, aburne heyred, read or yealow bearded, and comely
bushed: of which feac^ure, plight and bodily shape the Scripture witnesses
that David was: 1. Reg. 16.
who being (after that Saul was cast of and rejected) appointed King, and
onnoy^ted by Samuel, was of a brownish Complex^o^, excellent beauty, well
favored in sight, and (...) ^^tenau^ce very cheerful and amyable. Such a
comety grace and Princelye shape, was to be scene in the most victorious
Prince Philip King of Spain, Philip king of Spain.
and sovereign Ruler of all the low Countries, his Grace being here with us
the last year at Zickzey outwardly arguyng in him a most myld nature and a
mind most virtuously disp^sed.

There be yet many other notes, marks, and tokens appertayning to this
Constitucion, which a man may not always safely trust unto as infallible,
because they suffer alteration and change by age, and years, yea almost in
every momente of time: but yet so, that by them appears always certain and
undoubted tokens, that the state of the same body aforetime has been and was
in this right good case, plight and constitution, albeit now altered or perhaps
clean decayed. For as great, huige and sumptuous houses, being fallen down
and decayed, show evidently by the ruynes and delapidations thereof, of what
hugeness and magnificence they erst were, how curious and busye the frame
was, how skilful and industrious the Architecte and workman was: so in a
laudable state, Constitution and habit of body, which is decayed and faded
from his former disposition, there appear certain relics, notes, and tokens
of the good temperament that aforetime was in the same. Albeit sometime through
grievous sickness or by some great mysfortune and outward calamity, man's nature
is so frushed and damped, that all the vigor of the body, all the beauty,
comelynes and shape thereof is nypped and clean abolyshed, like a goodly fair
buildyng that is either by tempeste shaken and battered, or by mysfortune of
fire utterly burnte and wasted. Thus, fear, astonment, sudden a^frighting,
the dread of dangers or death suddenly threatened, do so wast and destroy the
powers, form, shape and beauty, and so clean alters some me^ from that they
were before, as though they had never been the same.

Whereof there happened in our time a notable and strange example in a young
Gentleman A strange example of a yongman, suddenly become graye headed.
of noble birth and Parentage. Who in the Court of the late Emperor Charles
they far ouershooting himself, without regard of duty, remorse, or
reverence of the place, had carnallye defloured a certain young Gentlewoman,
whom he loved exceedingly: which fac^ to be perpetrated upon the bodies of
young Ladies, and noble virgins, is accounted a thing most heinous, and
punishable by death, yea although no force be offered to the damsel: and
although by secret consent and apparent likelyhoodes she greatly seem not to
ret^^t an amorous suite to her, in such sort tendered. This Gentleman therefore
was committed to prison, lookynge the next day folowinge to be executed and put
to death. For this is narowly looked unto, y^ no^e presumyng or daring to commit
any such villainy, or to distein the Honor of the Princes Court with such lewd
and filthy pollution, shall escape scotfree or go away unpunished, according to
the greatness of those his wilful and libidinous demerites. Languishyng all y^
night in great perplexitye, grief, agony and sorrow, and all the while
conceyuyng inwardly in mind, the terror and dread of death so near
approchi^g, he was so altered and changed, that at his arreignment the next
day, none of his own famyliar acquaintance, neither yet the Emperor himself
could know him. So much had the horror of death and the despair of any
pardon win few hours pallifyed his color, and altered the state of his
former co^stitution. All his beauty, comely shape and fresh complexion was (as
it were) so faded and exiled, his face so incrediblie dis^nowledged, his color
(of fresh and clear) turned into wan, swartye, and deathlike, his countenance
to behold, loathsome and ugly, his head covered over (with graye heirs, (far
unmeet for those years) his beard sluttish, dryueling and filthy, with
spattering sneuel deformed. The Emperor earnestly fixing his eye upon him and
suspecting him not to be the self same man which had committed the fact, One
suddenly gray headed.
mistrusted that some other person had been put in his place: whereupon he
commanded present search to be made, and y^ matter to be thoroughly boulted
out, whether it were the self same party or no, and whether his hoare heirs
and gray beard, were counterfeited by some confectioned ointments,
(artificially for the nonce colored) or no. But the matter being found true
and plain, and no deceipte nor colored collusion therein used: his Majesty
was at the sight thereof so astonned: that his former resolution and purpose to
have the said Gentleman punished, was now turned into compassion over his
pytifull case, and judging him to have already suffered punishment suffycient,
pardoned him his life and remitted his offense.

The honorable, Nicholas Mychault of Indeuelda, a Gentleman in great favor
with high Princes, and of all Noblemen worthylie esteemed, demanding of me on
a time, sitting at the table, the cause of this so strange and sudden
change: I answered, that ye very cause thereof proceeded of nothing else then
of his extreme fear, and vehement thinking upon that danger wherewyth he saw
himself distressed: the remembrance and cogitation whereof searched the very
innermost Senses in his body. For that trouble and affection so nearly touched
him and so grievously perplexed his mind, y^ al vital heat and spyrit was in him
in a manner utterly extincte, whereby each part of the body, streightwayes
altered and changed from the fresh and comely color which they had before,
into an ugly and unsightly habit: insomuch that the roots of the hayres
(which he y^ vaporous humyditie that lies within the skin be nourished and
preserved fresh in color) Why some men even suddenly are changed in Complex
i^n and color.
when the same humydity fails, and in place thereof a cold and dry quality
reigns, do dry up and clean lose their former ^atyue Complexio^ and color:
even as grass, that wantinge the moystnes of the earth to comfort it, ca^nnot
but wyther and patch away. For even as the Leaves of Trees, and the branches
of green (Vynes serving to defend y^ grapes from the injury of weather) are by
extremyty of heat, hayle, rain, and Northren blastes, (which sometime
blusterouslye blow in the So^mer season) altered from a pleasant green
verdure into a yealowysh tawnie color: So likewise the natural Complexion,
Iustynesse, and shape of the body, drowpeth and decays, and the hayres (which
of themselves are no part of y^ body, but an appentise, superfluitye and
ornamente to the body) lackinge the strength and humyditye ye nourishes them,
become hoarye and graye long before their due time: which thing we see
commonly happen to all those that spend their time in the wars or in
dangerous traueyles on the Sea, or which be much troubled and visited with
sickness, wherein is a certain ymagination of very death in their minds.
For they remember and look for nothing else, they thinck upon nothing so much
when they stand in battle array, ready at the sound of the Trompet to join
with the Enemy, and to try it out by dent of sword, but even there presently
either to slay or be slain, making account thence never to escape alive:
unless peradventure they be such, as with long custom have so hardened and
enured their minds in many like dangerous bruntes, that they neither fear
death nor care for danger. Of which sort we see sundry old beaten Soldiers,
and such as have been long and thoroughly experienced in many a sharp storm
upon the raging Sea.

Of such force is a thoroughly settled ymagination (as by many Arguments
elsewhere I have declared) Imagination.
that a woman at the time of her conception, steadfastly fixing her ymagination
upon any thing, deryueth and enduceth certain marks and tokens thereof into
the Infant: which thing is well enough known to happen also unto me^, that
ardentlye and earnestly fix their imaginatio^s and thoughts upon any thing.
And thus, did the co^templation of Christ, nailed on the Cross, imprinte
certain strakes, stampes, and marks, upon the hands and feet of S.
Frauncis, if (at leastwise his religious sectaryes, fautours, and followers
deserve herein any credit:) for ye Images and Pictures in his name and
resemblaunce made and enthronyzed in Churches, holding his hands stretched out
and open, are carved of such fashion, and show him to have been such a one.

In what perplexity, distress, agony and fear our Savior Christ was, even
by this to every man evidently appears, that, he fixing his mind upon the
instant danger wherein he presently stood, Luke. 22.
and as it were before his eyes beholding his death now imminent and at hand,
the sweat trickeled down his body to ye ground like drops of blood. Fear of
death more terrible the^ death it self.
For the terror and fear of death, deeply sinking into a ma^s imagination,
is far more grievous and terrible then death it self: for many have their
Senses so astonnyed and benumbed, y^ death happens unto them without any
feeling of pain at all, Who dye in manner with out pain.
as they y^ dye of ye Apoplexy, or drowsy Evil, or such as fall into
traunces, whom the beholders cannot perceive to feel any manner of pain, but
to synck down, falling (as it were) into a sleep or slumber.

And thus, in dangerous adue^tures and perilles hazarded by Sea and land
(which to the eyes and mind represent a very Image of death) there is no man
but feels in himself motions of fear, The cause of fearefulnes when a man
is in danger
and looks pale upon the matter, for y^, his blood at the sight of such
dreadful extremytie, recuyleth and flees into the innermost parts of his
body. For when as all the parts of the body be forsaken of their vital juice,
there is none of them that throughlye and well executes his right function
and office: the feet stagger and stumble, the eyes dazzel, the lustynesse of
the mind drowpeth and is dulled, the cheeks seem flaggie and hanging down,
the tongue stammering and the teeth gnashing and whetting.

His hayres for fear stand staring up, Lib. 3. Aeneid.

his tongue is tied fast.
There is no man (be he never of so constant and stout a heart) but is at one
sudden chance or other appaulled, A wyseman sometime is put in* fear.
and therewith shrinketh in courage: but yet so, that straight ways abandoning
fear, and ankoring his firm trust upon God, he eftsoon recouereth his
courage, and banyshing dastardly fear, remains constant and vnterryfyed: And
if ye case so stand those imminent dangers be not conveniently to be avoided,
courageously and stcutly obiecteth himself to the push of any hazards, with
vnappaulled stomach going through stitch with his purpose.

Therefore, there is no creature lyuinge by breath, unto whom death is not
dreadful and terrible, Astonnishme^t of mind takes away the feeling of pain.
because it brings destruction and utter dissolution unto all: unless only
to such whose minds be stupefyed and their Senses blunted and imperfect:
as, old decrepite persons, young Infantes, fools, Madmen and Rauers, which
have no remembrance or cogitatio^ of any thing that is fearful and
formidable, neither feel any pain and grief, as others, whose brain is
firm and sound, and their Anymall faculty perfect do: but specially (as I
said before) they that are oppressed with the Lethargy, Apoplexy or in
Traunces and sownings with do as it were by little and little cloase their eyes,
and seem as though they fell into a gentle slumber without feeling any pain
at all.

The effect of this my ouerlong discourse tends to this end, that although
there be in the body of man many goodlye furnitures, and in the mind sundry
excellent ornaments, yet notwithstanding, the life of man is subject every
where and in all places to innumerable casualties, myssehapps and
inconveniences, and is on each side beset and torn in pieces with such a
number of myseryes and byrecknyngs, as every way weaken and appayre the
perfect vigoure and lustye state thereof. But if no myschaunce or harm
assault the same, it may in good case and temper many years continue: as by
frugality, wholesome diet, and orderly qualification of all affections:
insomuche that even till the years of decrepicie, there do appear the tokens
and marks, of a right good Constitucion and habit: which thing is
manifestlye to be seen by some that in Oldage are as lusty, and have their
wits as fresh and youthlyke, and their bodies not so barreine, inactive and
fruitless, as many Young men have.

Now, forasmuch as the lustly and full grown age of Adolescencie, does
consiste in a temperament of hoate and moist, continuyng in a manner for the
most part in a moderate mean of equability, and perfourming all his actions
throughlye and inculpablye, so also as touching the manner and order of Sleep,
it keeps such stinte and measure as is not greatly to be mysliked. For their
Sleep is quiet and nothing troublesome, nor disturbed with any distemperaunce
or nightlye vanities. For the brain is moystened and refreshed with a sweet
pleasant vapor, so that the mind thereby is not troubled with any manner of
absurd annoyaunces, but only the labors, exercyses and deuyses of the day,
and the needful cares for the dailye mayntenaunce of this life: the
perfourmaunce whereof rests and apperteyneth for the day to accomplish.

These does the mind and imaginatiue part of man deuyse and study upon,
toward morning, after a man has slept his dead or sound sleep: which is so
quietly done, that therein is no pha^tasticall dreamyng. And if the mind and
spyrite do then reuolue and debate in dream any other strange or
unaccustomed thing, then only such as falls out for the day to consider
upon, the same (certes) signifies abundaunce of ill Humors to be pestered
within the body, causinge the troubled spyrites to send many confused
ymaginations and vain foolish visions up into the chief Castle of the mind:
and of such sonde dreams to interpret, or prognosticate any event or hap of
future things to depend, or rashlye to gather any signification or meaning,
is childishe, vain, wicked, and superstitious, as the Scripture plainly and
flatly witnesses. Notwtsta^ding, Leuit. 19.
sometimes dreams (such I mean as are sent heavenly suggestion) happen not
without some divination and infallible presage or foresight of things to come.
Deuteronomy. 13.
For our heavenly father uses now and then to admonish and awake our drowsy
minds and retchlesse natures, Dreams sometime sent from God.
laying before us in visions and dreams somewhile good and wholesome, sometime
ill and lamentable happes, thereby to try, whether yet at length we will be
obeysaunt to his admonitions or shryncke aside and refuse the lore of his
prescriptions and commaundme^ts. For many being hoodwinked and bewitched with
the tryfling doctrine and frivolous traditions of man's invention, reiecte and
forsake the pure and clear founteyne that perpetually yeldeth most abou^dant
store of the everlasting water of life, and seek after ryuers that are dried
up (and as Hieremie terms it) Cap. 2.
dig to themselves Cesternes and broken pitts that can hold no licour or
drop of wholesome dotryne. That worthy constante, and throughlye tried Soldier
Job, Cap. 7.
bemoaneth his own case, offirming that in the night season he was sore
disquieted with troublesome dreams and dreadful vysions. To what use and
purpose sleep serves.
For the nature and office of Sleep, being nothing else then a mitigation of
labors and a quiet surceassing (for the time) from toil, and a refreshinge of
the body, with the busy cares and dealings of the day before wearied: from
these cares and troubles, did not his Sleep in the night disburden and ease
him, but rather increased and doubled the same: that his mind still remaining
terryfied with dreadful dreams and apparitio^s. For thus does he reason with
himself, and these complaints does he utter in that his worthy dialogue or
rather Tragicomicall discourse: If I think to my self, that my bed d^ shall
comfort me and mitigate my grief, and that I shall have some ease and
refreshing upon my Couch, then troublest thou me with dreams and make me
afraid through visions, insomuch that I vvishe for death, to come and make an
end of al my sorrows.

As touching the inward notes of this complexioned The virtue and force of
blood as touching the framinge of the inward disposition and manners of the
mind.
body and his inclination of mind (for a man ought in each point and respect
throughlye to be viewed and considered) a hoate and moist quality incident to
blood, produces in men diverse natures, and according to the more or less
mixture of other humors, frames in them sundry manners and diverse
dispositions. They that be mere Sanguine, Persons mere Sanguine, for the most
part starcke fools.
and have none or very little Melancholy or Choler mixed therwyth (as most
neerelye approchinge to the nature and Sense of brute beasts) are commonly
doltes and fools, or at least, not greatly cumbred with much wit. For
sythe^s (as Galene says) sharpnes and finenes of wit comes of Choler,
Consta^cy and stedfastnes of Melancholy, Comme^t 1. de not human
and Phlegm to the framynge and disposinge of the manners, helps nothing,
neither stands in any steed: it remains then, that simplicity and
foolishnes proceeds of Blood. Thus are young Cattle (which in comparyson of
the elder ones, have great stoare of Blood) for the most part (as we see)
foolish, sotlike and bettleheaded: as Kyddes, Calves, young Sheep, Lambs,
young wyeld Kidds or Roebuckes, young Kyttons, and the young of all other dumme
Creatures beside: and among Men, the nearer that any one approaches to the
nature of brute Beasts, the more like unto them in manners and conditions is
he. Which thing any yt is but meanly skilled in Natures works, may easily
judge and discern, even by certain significations of their eyes and
countenance: each of which is as a glass wherein to behold, and whereby to
discover the inward affections of the mind.

In many men there is a great resemblance and affynitie in nature with other
Beasts, and the further that these digress from the purity of te^perament,
the less sway in them bears Reason, Judgment, Understanding, willingness to
do good, Wisdom, and discretion: to be short, they are partakers of all
those things that are common to Beasts.

And thus, there be many which either for lack of good educatio^, or through
this deprauatio^ of Nature, degenerate into Beasts, and in all their actions
in one point or other, resemble them in conditions. Man a Wolf.
Many, like Wolves are bloudsuckers, extortioners and raueners: Many like
^^erce, Mic. ca. 7.
cruel, outrageous and terrible, lyinge in wait to sheede blood, Man a Lion
and hunting their brother to death. As the Prince vvil, so says the Judge.
Likewise says Ezechiel: Cap. 19.
Iehoakim is become a Lyo^, which has learned to spoil and devour folk to
make widow, Man an Ape.
destroy their houses, and make their Cities desert. Some be as foyinge,
gesturous, and counterfe^cting of any thing by ymitacion as Apes. Man a Fox
Some Forlyke, are subtle, wily, deceiptfull, and crafty to entrappe and
catch the innocent at advantage. And in like sort, there be others, which
resemblyng the nature and conditions of other beasts, and degeneratinge from
their integrity and excellency human, either degenerate quite into Beasts,
or at least become much like unto them. Children* quick, stir^^nge and playing,
and the cause why.
As for Children and young Stryplinges about 14. or 15. years of age or
under, by reason that their blood is pure and full of swelling spyrit, are
still styrring, quick, nymble, active, wanton, immodest, malapert, saucie,
proud, without wit, and much given to toying and playinge: for we see them
as wanton as Calves, that is to say, in mowyng with their mouths, in voice,
gesture, becks, clapping of hands, light songs, vain ioyfulnes, where there
is no cause, immoderate mirth, disordered fysking Up and down, and uncertain
motion and gate: all which do signify a shuttle waueryng nature, and a mind
subject to great mutability and vnco^stancy, procedyng and caused of the
boiling of their blood within them, which boyleth up, and as it were seetheth
in their V^ynes, Boylinge of blood in youth, like to spurging of new wine in
the Tun.
even as new Wine, Ale, or Beer spurgeth and works in the Tun.

Hereuppon the Netherlanders and Low Duchmen, have devised certain prouerbial
terms, wherewyth they are wont commonly to quippe those young princockes and
lustye gallantes whom they see ouerioyed or toofarre gone in wanton iolity,
making themselves as ridiculous and iestyng stocks to the whole company.
Neither are they incited to these immoderate pleasures through reason or auy
well stayed discretion, but by impotencie of mind and wylfull affection,
digressing and swaruyng from modestye, temperaunce and moderacion: y^ lack
whereof googleth their unstayed heads, and caryeth them into many inordinate
pranckes of childishe insolency. Playig with the head what it signifies.
They also bewraye their own inconstancy and unstayed mynds by much shaking
of their heads, and continual playing and toying with their hands and feet,
insomuch that some account them no better then stark mad, or persons distract
of their right wits. Neither do they sind themselves occupied in any earnest
matter that is to any good purpose, neither show they forth either in words
or deeds any piece of wisdom, but vndece^tly for their age, and
lasciuiouslye return unto their boyishnes again, whereas meeter it were in
respect of their time passed, now to fall to some thryft, and to frame their
life after the prescription of some good order.

Hereuppon do we use a Prouerbiall similitude taken of the nature and
conditions of young Calves, which in the Spring time of the year (in ye
green pastures, when their bellyes be full) skippe and leap up and down,
wantonlye and toyingly fysking and iumpynge, now this way, now that way,
now round about, one while raising themselves upon the forefeete, an
otherwhyle upon the hinder Legs: whose manners and fashyo^s, such yo^g youths
as in their daily order of life do imitate and resemble, are said in latin
vitulari, which is, to be as wanton and toying as a young Calfe: or not to
have shed all their Calves teeth: or that their Jaws ytche with Caluishe
wantonness:

The Book of Wisdom (fathered and asscrybed unto Solomon says: Sapien. 4.
Spuria vitulamina no^ agent radices altas, nec stabile fundamentum
collocabunt: Bastard Slippes shall take no deep roots nor lay any fast
foundation.

By these Phrases of speech, we mean that wilful and unruly age, which
lacks rypenes and discretion, and (as we say) has not sowed all their
wyeld Oats, but as yet remain without either forcast or consideration of any
thing that may afterward turn them to benefit, play the wanton yonkers, and
wilful Careawayes. Seeing therefore yt Adolescencie and youthful age consists
in a constitucion of Hot and moist, and is fuller of blood then any other: it
is to this place therefore namely and specially to be referred. Neither can any
plighte or Complexion of the body more aptly be applied unto it, then this: for
all the qualityes, fashions and marks of this Age and State, agree thereunto.
Which thing I see was well observed by Horace in his description of the Nature
and inclination of youthful Age, where he says: A youthful beardlesse
Strypling, void
and free from Tutours check, In Art. Poet.

With Horse and Hound does raunge the fields,
and brave himself does deck.
To vice he pliant is as wax:
to them that vvishe him well
And vvarne him for his own avail,
rough, churlish, sharp and fell.
A slender Husband for himself,
a vvaster of his gold,
High minded, rash, presumptuous,
in love soon hot, soon cold.


And if they happen to lyncke themselves in company with any lewd
Counselors Lewd and ill disposed Cou^sellours do youth mutch harm
(as in this slypperie and dangerous age commonly is seen) their fickle
heads, and flingbrayned wits be easelye allured and drawn into follye, and to
pursue that way which is worste. For being now in their most wilful age, and
standing upon the most doubtful and dangerous point of al, between virtue
and vice, lacking experience, and void of all good advise and counsel, and
misseled by the peevish allurements of their associats, they run for the most
part headlong unto that which they see the common multitude embrace, and are
ready to slide into that trade of life which of all other is worst and most
pernicious.

Green heads in greatest danger are,
in doubtful choice they stand, Pers. Sa. 5

And hang in Ballaunce of deuyse
what trade to take in hand.
But if (in lieu of these) they harken and geeue good care to the wholesome
admonitions of some faithful and virtuous Tutour, Good counsel and virtuous
education brings youth to goodness.
and by his prescription frame the order of their life and conversation in
their tender years (for in this Age is Stuff, matter, and towardnes, both
good and excellent, if good education do polishe, and a skillful workman have
it in handling) no doubt they are to be brought to much goodness. For such is
the force and power of blood in man's body, specially when through access of
age it grows to heat, and dailye more and more increases in vital spyrite,
that it causes a promptnes of mind, Blood uses the help of other humors in
framing the manners.
quickness in deuyse, and sharpness in practyze, which by dailye use and
exercise atteyneth in thend to wisdom, knowledge and experience of many
things. And thus by the benefit of nature and good bringinge up, it is
brought to pass that they be garnished with many excellent gifts of the
mind, and through a ready vtteraunce in the discourse of matters, be to
their Country a great stay and ornament.

And although hoate and dry natured men (which are the Cholerique) be right
well furnished and skillful in perfect vtteraunce, Difference between
Sang^ine and Choleric.
vehemence of speech and readynesse of tongue: yet is there not in them such
waighte of words and pythynesse of Sentences, neither can they so well rule
their own affections, because in their reasonynges and discourses they be very
earnest and hastye. And this in such persons is not only by the pronunciation
of their words, but also by their swyft gate and hastye pace, easy to be
perceived.

This difference also is between them, that the Cholerique are bitter
taunters, Choleric persons great flouters.
dry bobbers, nyppinge gybers and skornefull mockers of others, but the
Sanguine nothing given that way, Sa^guine courteous and myld natured.
meddle not at all with such dog eloquence, neither use to hit men over the
thummes with any such figuratyue flowtes, whereat many men are commonly as
heynouslye offended, and take the matter in as great snuff, as they would, to
be Crowned with a Pyssebolle: but they be pleasant and courteous natured,
meerye without scurrility, and civil without fylthy rybauldrye, behauinge
themselves orderlye in all companyes, cumbersome and odious to none, but
delightful and welcome to all.

But if it happen that Blood be alayed or myngled with other Humors, and by
course of Age to become hoate, as namely if it be mixed with yelowe Choler,
wherewyth the Humors are stirred up, or to participate with any other Humor
whatsoever: Inciination of nature.
It is seen, that as the mixture is, so the manners, disposition, delighte,
trade, and inclination of man, falls out accordinglye. As thus, suppose a
Body c^ieflye to consiste of these three, Best proportion and measure of blod
to other humors.
Blood, Choler, and Melancholye, whereof two parts to be Blood, and the
other third part to be Choler and Melancholye equallye proportioned: Of
these three, thus mixed together, proceeds such a Complexion and bodily
habit. as produces sundry motions, affections, and inclinations of the mind,
and which does inwardlye dispose, fashion and frame their Natures and
dispositions (yea before they break out into words) enhablinge them fit
and meet to discharge and execute the part of any person, that we either
of our selves take in hand, or which by nature and public function is to us
assigned.

First Nature frames us apt and meet,
To every kind of chance:
Sometimes she helps, Horat. in Art, Poet.
sometimes with ire,
our hearts does vvound and lance.
Sometimes with thought to throvv us down,
with grief and dule amayne:
Then, afterward the tongue declares,
the mynds deuyses plain.
And as we see, Nature in producing herbs and flowers, and paintyng them out
in brave attire and colors, to show forth a most excellent and inimitable
workema^ship, and right gallantly to set the same out to the gazing view of
each greedy eye, clad with many, and the same most pleasurable differences of
goodly verdure, some light and entermedled with whytishe, some of a sad or
dark green, some watrishe, blunkette, gray, grassie, hoarie, and Lecke
colored, whereof every one has their proper virtues, and peculier effects:
So likewise, Blood being myngled with humors of other quality, conceyueth
other force and other color and yet (nathelesse) not quite bereft and depryued
of a Bloody of Sanguine color: insomuch that it pearceth into the very
innermost corners of the mind, incensing to sundry actions. And although the
Planetts and Stars, stretch out their influence, and extend their force
mightily upon these lower bodies: yet is it the Humors and Elemental
qualityes which do constitute the complexion of humayne body, and cause diverse
sorts and sundry differences of Natures and manners. Humors of more force then
the pl^nets.
And in this sort, does this constitution whereof we now speak, breed and
bring forth into the Theater of this world, some that be stout Braggers and
shameless praters, some Parasites and clawbackes, some Dolts and cockscombes,
some self pleasers, which think more of themselves, then all the rest of the
Town beside does, some Mynstrelles and Pypers, some graceless Ruffians and
Spendalls, ryotously wastyng and consumyng their Patrimony: Some Dycers and
Gamsters, some Tre^cher friends and Coseners: some Counterfaiters, Skoffers,
Tumblers and Gesturers, some Iugglers, and Legier du maine players, with a
great rablemente of other lewd Lubbers of other sorts beside.

A rabling route of idle loutes,
consuming grain and corn,
Deuoyde of thryft, Hor. lib. 1 Epist. 2.
ciphers to fill
up room and tale, forlorn:
Right vvoers of Penelope,
stark verlettes, flattringe mates,
And Bellygoddes, addict toomuch
to cheer and dainty cates.
Who love to snort in bed till none,
and hear the mynstrelles play
On vvarbling Harpes to banish dumpes
and chase all care away.
For slthens they neither observe stay, nor moderation in their lives and
conversation, neither frame to live in any good and laudable order, but loyter
and haunte the company of wilful and lewdly disposed persons, Blood eggeth a
man to riot and wilfuines.
it comes to pass that in manners they prove stark naught and graceless
and by means of the heat and abundaunce of blood, prone and prompte to
pursue the inticements of all sensual lusts and unbridled affections,
reputinge the chiefest felicitye to consist in pleasure. And of this sort are
al Riotours, all Banqueters and dissolute lecherers, whose whole care, industry
and delight, night and day, is to drown themselves in the gulf of Sensuality
and bellycheere. They live (as the Proverb is) a Minstrelles life, that is to
say, nycely, ydly, and altogether in a manner upon other men's cost: and for
that they keep neither ho, nor measure in their affections, but wholly addicte
themselves to ingluuions excess, unseasonable watchinge, and immoderate lust
of carnal venerie, therefore their bodies lie open to al such diseases and
Sickness, as consist in ye fulness of humors: namely, the Squinzye, and
swellinge of the Jaws, Inflammations of the kernels of y^ mouth, and the
Uuula, swelling of the fundeme^t, Pyles, Hemorrhoydes, bleeding at the Nose,
Pleurysie, Stitches, Inflammation of the Lunges, and many other: for all these,
it shall be most expedient to be let blood. To this number is also to be added
the Ague Ephemera, or Diaria, so named because commonly it is of no longer the^
one days continuance, Ephemera, or Diaria
albeit sometime it lasts till the fourth day: and hereunto is to be
referred the Sweating Sickness (which because it began first in England, is
called the English Sweat) the Accident of which disease is sowning and
greenous pame at the heart, joined with a bytinge at the Stomach, The English
Sweat a kind of the Ague Ephemera.
whereby a man is no less payned then if the heart if self (being the
fountcyne of life) should through any contagious air, be infected and
oppressed: As by proof it fell out in the Month of September 1529. at what
time all the Low Countries were in a manner generally visited with this
contagious Sweat, When the Sweatinge sickness first began in Belgie.
and pestilent Ephemera, proceedinge of corruption of the Air, wherewith so
many as were infected, were brought into great terror, tremblinge and sowning
through feeblenes of mind and pantinge: their heart laboring and beating
within them extremely. During which infectious time of vistacion, there
happened an other mischief and inconvenience which made the matter a great
deal more lamentable: For certain ignorante Empyrykes contrary to the Rules
of Art, Blind Byards.
and without taking any regard or consideration to ye strength and powers of
nature, violentlye kept their Patients, sweating the space of xii. hours:
whereby many by extreme heat, overcome, were with their bolsters and many
bedclothes styfled up.

Seeing now that corruption of the Air is the cause of this grievous maladye or
Ephemerall Ague, and that the Symptoma or Accide^t thereof (which even attends
and wayteth upon it, like as the shadow on ye body) is grievous pain at the
heart and sownyng, so is the Sweat it self the Crysis thereof, whereby Nature
being strong, dispelleth and sends out moist fulsome fumes and sty king
Humors, and consequentlye banisheth the disease: In what sort ^o sweat and how
long.
it must therefore at any hand be moderate, and not above the space of iiii. or
vi. hours at the most, according to the imbecillitye and strength of nature.
For toomuche, clean throws down all the strength, and utterly destroys
the vital spyrites.

Now, why this disease is termed by ye name of the English Sweat, I suppose
grew hereuppon, for that the people of that Country be often therewith
attached, partly through their curious and dainty fare and great abundance of
meats, wherewyth they cramme themselves very ingluuiously, even as the
Germaynes and Netherla^ders do with drink: and partly (which I noted at my
late being in that Realm, about the time of Mydsommer) by reason that the air
with them is troubled, cloudy and many times with foggie dampes ouercast,
whereby is engendered the cause and original both inwardlye and outwardlye of
this disease: Englishmen subject above other Countries to the swearinge
sickness.
the veheme^cy whereof, brings the^ into a bloody sweating, wherwt they must
wrestle and strive as with a most fierce and strong ennemy, and which they must
endeavor with al might to supplant: hereupon happen Traunces and sownynges
through feebleness of body and mind, faynting and drowpyng of the spyrites,
decay of powers, stopping of the pypes and voice, and life almost thereby
clean yielded up, and the party brought even unto deaths door.

For this Country people (not able to abide any great travail and labor, as
being persons cockering themselves in much tender nicetye and effeminate life,
are very procliue and apt to be thrown thereby into the languishyng
extremity of this perilous disease. It is expediente for them therefore to be
recomforted, cheryshed, revived and refreshed with sweet odours, and with the
drynkinge of pure good Wine. And hereupon comes it that this Nation
peculiarly and almost daily uses to drink Maluesay or Secke, to comfort and
restore their Stomachs when they be quaysie or surcharged with excess of
sundry curious dishes: which thing I find to have been used and put in ure by
men of elder time, to help such discrasyes: whose order was with this wine, to
drive away, pain at the heart, Stitches, Sowning or Trau^ces, Cholick, fretting
of the guts, and bellye ache. Thus, the Poet luuenal trumpeth a certain
miserable Chuffe and niggardlye Pinchpenie, for that, he denied to geeue a
little wine to one of his friends that fell into a sown or trance, through
feeblenes and toomuch sweating 'being in great danger of his life.

He stoares and drincks old wine, long kept:
Even since the cyuile strife
When garboyles and dissension Iuuen. Sat. 5.

in Common wealth were ryfe.
Who Snudgelike to his friend (whose heart
was paynd with stitch and grief)
Not one poor draught thereof would send,
to ease him with relief.
They that be of this constitution (over and beside these before rehearsed
greeuaunces and discommodities) are subject to other Agues no less dangerous:
whereof one proceeds of putrefyed and rotten blood, the other without any
note or sign of putrefaction is caused of inflammation of blood. Both these
sorts of Agewes ye Greeks comprehend in this word Synochus, and the Latinistes
Continuum, because it is continual, without geeuing to the Pattent any truce
or intermission: for when the fit comes, it leaves not of, Hot and moist
Complexio^s subject to putre faction.
but continues for many days together. And that Age which is hoate and moist
is more subject to these kinds of Agues then any other, for it quickly
conceyueth and takes putrefaction through oppilation, specially in the Spryng
time of the year, when as Humors freshly increase: and much the sooner if
they use any distemperan^ce or lead on idle and restfull life without
ordinary exercise. For when the Pores and spyrame^ts whereout blood is wont to
have difflation and vaporous expulsion be stopped, the party cannot choose,
but grow into putrefaction and ye vital parts with fulsome corruption to be
infected.

For even as close houses whereinto the wind, has no manner of access: and as
Garments, fetherbeds and Mattresses, Cushions, Sheets and Blankets, Carpets
and Counterpoynts become mustie and ill sented, unless they be now and then
shaken and hanged out in the open Air: so likewise does the body of man become
putrefyed, corrupt, stinkinge and rotten, if it accustom not it self to
exercise and agitation. For by that order and mean, are excrementes euacuated,
and al fulsome fumes and exhalations proceeding out of them, dissipated.

To keep themselves therefore the better from Sickness, and to be the less
open and subject to Agewes, it shall behoue the^, to use seasonable exercise,
(aba^doning al sloth and drowsynes) duly observing a moderation in meat and
drinck, sleep, watch, and carnal conjunction. And in the beginning of the
Spring, it shall be good for them to be let blood, or by fcarysycation to be
cupped. But if they be loath or unwilling after that way to be emptyed,
Receiptes Laxatiue and soluble.
to prevent future dangers, let them take some such purgative medicines, as
make the bealy soluble, namely Cassia fistula, Syrup. Ros. Laxat: Diaprunum
simplex, Syrup. de Epythymo, and Fumitorie, Polypodie, Mercury, Manna, or
honnie of the Air, and Whaye.

And in using of exercise this must diligently be taken heed of, How
exercise is to be used.
that it be not frequented and used, either when ye parties be replete with
humors and excrements, after meat, or when their Stomachs be full. For being
in either of these sorts used, The head takes hurt by the disorder of the in
feriour members.
it fills the head full of fumes and vapors, (which chief Member being
distempered and diseased, all the inferior members likewise suffer grief and
participate discrasie with it) it bredeth Rhewmes, Catarrhes and distillations,
it makes heavy, and brings oppilation to the Lyeuer. Oppilation of the
liver from whence it comes.
For violent motion dryueth the meats being vnco^cocted into ye narrow streits
of ye veins, where they stop the passage of the Humors, and make an open way
and occasion unto putrefaction.

When any such inconvenience happens, our parts be, forth with to seek
remedy for the same, by applying thereto such things as are of force to take
away and dispatch all those annoyaunces that stick in the way, and hinder them
from having their right courses. Tuend. Val. 6.
Of which sort (says Galene) are, the infusion of Wormewoode gentle, stieped
in Wine, or Wormwood wine, called Absynthytes, Succorye and Endyue, Doder,
Egrymonie, Wormwod wholesome for the liver. Things puttinge away oppilation.
Rhabarbe, the seeds of Anyse and Fenel, Peache kernelles, bitter Almonds,
great Reysons with the kernelles taken out, Oximell sympl. each of these to be
geeuen before meat, when concoction is perfectly made.

The same regard and consideration is also to be observed and kept in doing
the carnal Act of Generation: Harms of Venetie and carnal copulation.
for toomuch use thereof enfeebleth the powers, and through infla^macion
arysing thereof, engenders Gout and pain in the Joints. For there be some
so wylful, that without respect at all of concoction or cruditie, without any
consyderation and difference of night or day (quight neglecting the opportunity
thereto belonging,) do greedily desire, and inordinately hasten (for this
tickling lust can brook no delay) to satisfye and staunche their fleshly
motions in this kind of pleasure: and in the use thereof be so insaciable and
so far pass ye bounds of moderacion and qualification thereof, that they
waste and destroy the pyth and synewes of their whole bodies. For carnal Act
takes away and exhausteth that power of the body which serves to concoct the
meat and to convert the same into Blood: which if it be not accordingly
accomplished nor syncerely wroughte, then falls it out, that very great
store and abundance of excrementes and superfluous humors be engendered, which
breed and cause innumerable diseases. Albeit to many, Commodity of Venery.
this v^^ of Carnalitie (unless it be out of all measure) brings no hurt at
all: for seasonable and tempestiuious coiture riddeth away great store of
Phlegm, and skowreth away other Humors, which being engendered wtin a man,
damnyfye and annoye the body and mind.

And this thing is to be observed and marked in young lustye Damselles and
Virgins, which remain long unmarried, or which by profession of chastitye are
wayned and debarred from Wedlock. For beside their unruly motions of tickeling
lust, Seed being corrupt, is cause of much inco^^enience.
beside their secret flames and burning affections they be ill colored, and
nothing pleasauntly complexioned, their minds vnstedy and out of quiet frame,
by means of a naughty vapor that ascends upward and disturbeth their
brain. And hereuppon it is, that sometime in Imagynation, thinking themselves
to lie with me^ by beholding or touching of them, they be troubled in their
sleep with the night Mare, and the effluxio^s of seed, wherwt they pollute
themselves in the night season: Hereuppon comes trembling and quaking of the
heart, by reason of gross fumes, which invade the pannicle or coffyn of the
heart, called Pericardion, and lie heauelye upon the body pressinge it down
as though they were night Hegges, or Hobbegobblins.

Them that be married, which lawfullye may use this carnal knowledge with their
own wives, and they that dissolutely lead a leacherous life, and run riot
on whorehuntinge, are to be aduysed and counseled, not to yield themselves
too much thereunto, Moderation of Carnal dealinges.
least afterward they bewail their lamenes and lack of strength, when as all
their vital juice shall be clean gone and exhausted: whereof the wise Solomon
geeueth to every man a right wholesome exhortation and advertisement, that a man
should not geeue over or enthrall his credit and honor to harlottes, Prou. 8.
nor to spend and consume his lustye years in hauntinge the company of
Whores, who greedilye gape to defeat and spoil him both of his wealth and
strength, as they, that will never be satisfied and glutted, neither with
Venus games and coiture, neither with rewards and expenses, but remain still
insaciable, Whores in lecherous lust never satisfied, nor in rewards.
and ever crauinge more. Let each man therefore take herein good heed to
himself, leasse in the end when he is clean wyped from all his wealth and
bodily strength, he mourn, and with syghes bewail his former wylfulnes, and
the decay of his forspent and wearish body.

Therefore to escape clear without takings any harm by immoderatly using
this venerous act, Art. Modic. 86.
so much space of time (by Galene his prescription) ought to be used
between, that neither any resolution be thereby perceived and felt, neither
lassitude: And again, that a man may feel himself lighter and lustyer, and
having disourdened and disbalassed himself of his prouocatiue supersluous
Sperme, to fetch his breath the better. Also a convenient and fit time ought
to be taken, to wit, when the body is meanelye constituted, neither too
full nor too empty: of which matter elsewhere we are to speak more at large.

But if any Sanguine complexioned person, (the better to serve God) be
delighted in leading a single and unmarried life, by profession of chastytie:
him do I counsel and advise very cyrcumspectlye and precysely to consider his
own state, disposition and nature, whether he be well able to qualefy and keep
under, this disordered and unruly affection or no. For in such a waightye case
a man must cyrcumspectly look about him, and very aduysedly forsee, that he
do not inconsyderately tie himself to any profession without judgment,
choice, and discretion, least his foolish rashness bring him afterward to
repentance, when he shall feel himself surcharged, and unable to weild the
burden which he has taken upon him to bear. Sperme or Seed.
For the Sperme or Seed of Generation, being a redounding excremente and
superfluous Humor (residue and remayninge of the last alimente, and coming
from the vessels of y^ Testicles, where it is exactlye fourmed, and thoroughly
labored) is employed to begette issue: yea ye natural power and faculty, is
desirous to have this collection of Humor to be purged, and by the euacuatinge
thereof to be eased of a troublesome and intolerable caryage, even as ye other
parts of the body (for their parts) desire to be disburdened of their
superfluous excreme^ts: to wit, vryne, ordure, spettle, sweat, sneuel,
spattling and Phlegm.

Right good and wholesome therefore have Ieuer deemed that worthy admonition and
Counsel of CHRIST in the Gospel, Matthew. 19 1. Cor. 7.
and of the Apostle likewise, that they which can comprehend this matter, and
are able to perform and keep it, should remain chaste, and joyfully embrace
the same as a heavenly gift: assuryng themselves that Gods Divine assistaunce
in so godly a purpose, will not fail them: without which all that man
purposes or takes in hand is frustrate and vain, as beside S. Paul,
Sapient. 8
the wise King Solomon witnesses. For it is not to be doubted but a man may
subdue and vanquish this slyppery affection, (although very hardly) and by
living a continent life, may perform his determinate resolution and vow, so
it be done and taken in hand, only upon zeal and devotion, the better
thereby to entend Gods service, Continency and Chastity a special gift of God.
and geeue himself to heavenly conte^placions. For they that be wrapped in
many cares, and (shaki^g away from them all sloth and idleness) do mortify
themselves and spend their time in watchinge, hunger, sparefeeding, earnest
study, fasting and prayer, continual meditation of holy Scripture, and painful
preaching night and day, (whereby this kind of Devils is cast out,) Matthew. 17
they I say) feel not themselves greatly moved in desire to this thing: For
why? these that I mean, do willinglye and voluntarily, not forcibly and
superstitiouslye betake themselves to this kind of life: the better thereby to
apply their euangelical function, and more freely to intend the sacred study
of Divinity.

Of a cold and moist Complexion: which sets out and declares the
condition, state and nature of persons Phlegmatic. The iij. Chapter.
NExt after the Hoate and moist Constitution, order requires to describe and
set out the Cold and moist Temperature, wherein reigns and abounds
Phlegm: whereof (after blood) no small portion is diffused into every part of
the body. And this Humor draws somewhat near to the nature of Blood, and
is in affinitye with it, both in respect of essence, and society of their
conceptoryes. For it is (as it were) a certain Blood vnconcoct, Phlegm the
matter of Blood.
or a rudimente and first beginning of Blood yet imperfect, and not exactly
labored: a rese^blaunce, show, or pattern whereof, we may well behold in Must
or new Wine, while it is yet hoate, and newly taken and wringed out of the
Press. The myxture of the Humors compared to wine.
For (as Galene right learnedly notes) the subtyle and ayrte part of the Wine
(which is ye some or spurging thereof) boyleth up to the top, and underneath,
is an unsavory Humor, in relyce like to ye nature of sweetishe water, which
being excocte, settled, cleansed and fined from the dregs, obteyneth and is
brought to the nature of pure and good Wine. And albeit Phlegm be whytishe,
and have no redness in it at all, yet being excoct, and the coldness thereof
taken away and subdued by the force and efficacy of heat, it is reduced and
brought into a ruddie and fresh colored licour. And eue^ as natural Phlegm
(which participateth with a certain sweetenes) is through heat converted and
wrought into Blood and read color: so likewise Blood in the Dugges or Teates,
Milk of Blood.
partly of the nature of the place where it rests, and partly of the heat of
the heart (near unto whom the Pappes are placed) is brought and turned into
Milk, white and gaye colored. For this cause, some (as superstitious and
Phylosophicall as Pythagoras) abstayned, not only from eating of flesh, The
cause why Pytha goras Scholars would eat no Milk.
but also from Eggs and Mylk, because they reckened and accounted the same no
other then liquide flesh, because the on^ being a certain space covered and
kept warm by the natural heat of the Hen sitting thereuppon, will within
few days bring forth a Chicken: and the other (if the color were changed)
they accounted even very blood.

But this seems to many a thing very strau^g and prodigious, Milk in the
breasts of young Children.
that young: Children newlye borne (yea of the Male kind) have Milk in the
Nypples of their Dugges, runninge out either of it own accord, or easily with
the fingers (...) sed and pressed out: which thing I my self upon a certain
time fynding by experience and trial true, aduysed the parties at certain
times to (...) and force it out, least otherwise it should clotter, congele and
curd together into an hard substance. For this Mylkie licour in children, is
engendered of the great and abundaunte alimente, which at those ^ssues, nypples
and spoutes, by nature of the place, and help of the Heart (which is the
founteyne and Welspryng of heat) is converted into Milk. Now, the Mammiles or
dugges (which be the Receptacles of Milk) being spongie and hollow, and the
glandulous or kernellie flesh within them, Kernellie flesh as in the dugges.
bloudlesse and white, do transmute and alter yt blood which they receive, into
Milk: for every part of the body, alters and changes his nourishment,
making it in color, similare, like, and familiar to it self.

And thus, the generation of Mylk and Sperme is made of blood throughlye and
exactly concocted: Every part of the body has his several virtue
and of the nature of those parts wherein they be labored, become in color (as
we see) white and mylkie.

Thus also the Lyeuer being of substance (as it were) coagulate blood,
engenders a raddy liquide substance: the Lunges causes a fomie and froathie
licour: the commissures or setting together of the Joints, a glewish humor:
ye tongue, spettle: the holow bones produce and bring forth white marowe, as
the Ridge bone of the back and the brain do, where als things are exactlye
labored. For in Lambs and other young cattle, the marow is not white but
bloody. Every part therefore of the body works his humor like to it self,
and transmuteth it into the nature, whereof it self is.

No man therefore ought to think it absurdly spoken in saying and affyrminge
Phlegm by the force and faculty of the Lyeuer to be altered and changed into
Blood. And this liquide and thin humor in the bodies of all Creatures is to
purpose and use, no less profitable then necessary. For being conueighed every
way into the Veins, The use and effect of Phlegm.
it qualefyeth and alayeth the heat of Blood and Choler: finally it makes the
Joints nymble and styrringe, kepinge them from being stiff and lumpish
through dryness: and last of al it nourishes all Phlegmatic members, and
them continues in lusty state.

And although there be commonly no certain place assigned where Phlegne
rests, The place where Phlegm, is.
yet the greatest part is still in the Stomach or ventricle, wherein the meat
is first boiled and altered into a thin juice or liquide substance. For we
see men that have surcharged their Stomachs, in vomyting and perbraking,
sometimes to cast up great abundance of loathsome, clammie and tough Phlegm,
or to scowre and euacuate the same through the guts: those I mean that have
excessiuelye and ingluuiouslye surphetted either in eating or drinking. Whose
heads (consequently) being filled with moystysh vapors, those fumosities
strykinge upward as in a Stillatorie, grow into a thick, fylthy, and
sneuillie phlegm, whereby through^ coldness of the brain, the parties
becomes subject and open to sundry diseases, as the Poze, Diseases
proocedinge of Phlegm.
Murre, Hoarsenes, Coughe, and many others, of which sort is the Rheum or
distillation of humors from the head, wherewith in the Low Countries of
Belgia both rich and poor, high and low, in Winter season are much troubled
and find by experience to be true, and yet they be people commonly healthy,
and as sound as a Bell.

In perfect Health, and thoroughly sound, Hora. lib. 1. Epist. 1.

But when that Phlegm does much abound.
Insomuch that I sometimes am driven into a wonder, to consider how such
abundance of filthy humors should rest in the head, which nature one while
at the mouth, an other while at ye Nose and Throat expels and purges.

The head therefore and the Stomach (namely and much more then any of the other
parts) are pestered with the excrement of Phlegm, The he^d and Stomach, the
engendrers and co^ceptacles of Phlegm.
specially if a man use to eat such meats as be cold and moist, and
discontinue exercise, whereby it happens that this humor being too crude is
very hardly to be concocted, and brought into an wholesome juice, profitable and
auayleable for the body.

For it is a certain vliginous moystishnes and superfluous excrement, which
ought rather to be sent out and purged that way which nature specially
allows, and whereby most conuenientlye she is wont to exonerate herself.
For as the original of this inconvenience begins first at the Stomach and
afterward infesteth the head (as we may plainly perceive and observe by Wine
copiouslye quaffed and swilled, which although it descend down into the
Stomach, yet does it assail and distemper the head) it stands us therefore
upon, carefully to foresee y^ in those parts, as little of this Phlegmatic
excrement as may be, be engendered: because the harm and inconvenience
redoundeth to the general harm and detrimente of the whole body.

And as it fares in a Realm or Kingdom, The harms of a body, and of a
Realm first begin at the head.
in a Common wealth, in a Cruile Policy or Corporation, in any Honorable
householde or worshipful Famylie: so likewise in the Body of man, that disease
of all others is most dangerous and ill, which takes his oryginall beginning
at the head and principal members. For the harm diffuseth and spreads it
self into all the inferior parts of the body, and them greatly damnifyeth.
As (for more plainness) let every man take an example at any house which he
enjoys and has in occupation. For even as those houses that will hold out
neither wind nor weather, be very unwholesome to dwell in, and a great
backfrend to health: or when the Ridges or Roofes thereof be ill tymbred and
(for want of good lookinge too) runs in ruin, and takes water as often as
any rain falls: So likewise, as long as the head is distempered and
affected with this baggage Phlegm, and distilling Humor, both it and the rest
of the body can never be in perfect health. For being it self of a cold and
moist nature, it quickly drinks up vapors out of a watrish stomach, and
being thereby replete with humiditye, moysteneth likewise, Prou. 19. and 17.
those parts that be under it: yea this distilling Phlegm is as noisome and
grievous to it as a brawling and scoulding wife is to a quiet man. A brawling
wife is like the top of a house where through it is ever dropping.


For out of the head continually do Humors distill and (like soote out of a
Chymney) fall down into the Throat, Ears, Nose, Eyes, Breast and Lunges:
whereupon happen tumors and swelling of the eyes, Bleyreyednesse, dryness of
sight, whyzzing and running in the ears, hardness of hearing, and sometime
behind the ears Impostumes, Diseases proceedinge of Rewmes and Catarthes.
botches and wexekernelles, beside many sorts more: for the Instruments of the
tongue be affected, the voice hindered, yea sometime stopped that a man is not
able to utter out a plain word. The Syn^wes, Pellicles, Muscles, Wesantpype,
and Veins of ye throat, called Iugulares, and the parts that serve to frame
y^ voice, being surcharged with toomuch Humor (as in dronke^ perso^sis
manifestly to be seen) make the tongue imperfect, foltering and stammering,
and all the members to reele and staggar, their words double and not
intelligible, insomuch that at sometimes they be not able to speak one plain
word, nor in se^sible terms to declare their own meaning. Dro^ken me^
stammer and double in their speech
And thereby being by nature otherwise vnreadye and in vtteraunce staggering,
and now also thoroughly whitteled and soaked in Wine, their tongue doubleth,
slammereth and foltereth a great deal more: insomuche that they bring out
their words by stoppes and pauses, like the^ that have the hicket: and such
persons cannot speak softly and stilly, because their voice commonly is
stopped and kept back, which makes them to force out their words ye louder.
They must therefore earnestlye strive and accustom themselves roundly and
distinctly to deliver out their words, Stammere^^ cannot speak softly.
for otherwise their tongue through defaulte and imbecillitye, and lacking
stablenesse fails them, and furthereth them nothing in their pronunciation:
but chatter and babble so obscurely, that no man can understand any thing of
that they say: For we see them to be scarce able to utter even a few words
with one streynable tenor and treatable uniformity, but sometime slowly and
dreamingly drawyng them out: and sometime powryng out by lumpes the same, as
fast as the tongue can roll.

The self same thing which superfluitye and distemperaunce of drink,
brings unto the haunters thereof, does the dystillation of Humors and
defluxion of Phlegm, bring to them that be troubled with ye Catarrhe, which
(beside these) is acco^panyed also with sundry other inco^ueniences, to every
one of sharp judgment well known and easelye perceived. For who so is
disposed exactlye to syfte and search out the very marks and tokens of a
Cold and moist Complexion, Nature of persons Phlegmatike.
shall find them (through abundaunce of that Humor and qualitye) to be
sleepie, lazye, slouthful, drowsy, heavy, lumpish and nothing quick at
their business: as they commonly be, which mind nothing else then
gurmandyze and bellycheere, and use seldom exercise.

We see also among Beasts, Fowls, and other Creatures both wyeld and tame,
What Beasts, fowls, and fishes be holesomest to eat.
that such as use little or no exercise, but lurk still in hoales and Caves,
and be pe^t up, and franked cowpes, are neither so wholesome, neither so sit for
man to eat, as others, that are greatly exercysed and use much styrryng. Such
wax (in deed) very fat, and grow bigger bodyed (I cannot deny) but the
nourishmente which they geeue to the body, is somewhat unwholesome and
excrementall: as among fyshes, Ecles and other slippery fyshes that lie still
myeringe themselves in mudde, using no exercise, styring or agitation of body.

And this is the cause why Eeeles being dead (contrary to the nature of all
other fyshes) floate not above water, A dead E^le floateth not above water, and
why.
by reason that they feed upon muddie and standing water.

But that every man may thoroughly and perfectly know the state and condition
of this Body, it must be painted out in his right colors, and is to be
descrybed by his own proper indications, marks, Notes of a cold and moist body
and tokens. All they therefore that are of this habit (if their Constitution
be natural and not accidentallye happeninge) are gross, pursie and fat
bodyed: their stature not so tall as big set, and stronglye pitched, their
skin soft, white, and vnhayrie, their Muscles and Ueynes not appearing but
lying inwardlye, insomuch that when occasion serves to be let Blood, the
same Ueynes do not apparauntlye show out themselves. The hayres of their head
be either white or duskie black, or else of the color of Barley straw, which
will not fall of, nor become balde, till after a long time, (...) but they
soon wax hoarye for want of heat, and imbecility of the member, which is
not of ability to excoct the nutriment, into the use and comelynes of Hayres.

For hoarynesse is (as it were) a certain refuse vinewed baggage, of Phlegm
putrefyed, Whereof hoarie hayres come.
or a fustie dank^shnesse under the skin, whereof (through w^nte of heat)
proceeds hoarynesse and whytenesse of the H^yres. Such a like hoarie Down,
or vinewed mouldynesse, we see to be in Loaves of Bread and Pyes, that be
somewhat long kept vnspente, and also in Vaultes, Hoaryne^^e in meats.
Arche Roofes, Syelynges, hoales and Cellers under the ground, and other
musty, fulsome, dark, fylthy, and stinking places. Their Pysse and Uryne white
and very little or rather nothing at all ruddie. Their Excrementes; and
Ordure, thin and liquide: their Sleep very sound, and longer then health
requires, not without stoare of sundry Dreams, whereby (and not vainly or
deceitfully) may be nearly coniectured and found out, Dreams show and
bewray the disposition, state and Complexion of the body.
of what disposition the body is, and what Humors therein chiefly reign. For
the causes and original beginninges of these things proceed out of the body:
which although they be referrible to outward causes, or to the actions and
deuyses, which the mind earnestly conceyueth, deliberateth and forecasteth in
the day time: yet is it easy enough for the learned and skillful Physician
to discuss the meaninges, and expound the euentes thereunto incident.

For, as concerning Dreams by Divine motion sent into the mind of man,
Natural Dreams interpretable.
and not depending upon natural causes) none is able to yield any certain
interpretation, without a special pryuiledge of Heavenly inspyration. Thus,
Divine Dreams.
they that be of Cold and moist Complexio^, in Dreams imagine and think
themselves dyuinge over head and ears in Water, Dreams of the Phlegmatic.
or to be in Bathes and Baynes: which straight ways argues great stoare of
Phl^gme to fall out of the head, into the nape of their neck, Jaws, vocal
Arterye and Lunges. Semblably, if they dream of Hayle, Snow, Yse, storm and
Rain, it betokens abundance of Phlegm, sometime thick and gross, sometime
thin and liquide.

If a man in his Dream think himself to be styfeled and strangled, or his
voice stopped and taken from him, it argues him to be subject and like enough
shortly to be troubled with ye Squi^zie, privation of speech, murre, or
finallye either the Drowsye sickness, or the Apoplexy.

In this sort (as Galene witnesses) there was a certain man, which dreamed
that one of his Legs was turned into a Stone: which man within a while after,
through a cold Humor that fell down into it, was taken with the Palsy.

Now, although too scrupulous and curious observation of Dreams be
prohibited, yet is there no charge geeuen to the contrary, but that we may
lawfullye search out the meaninges of all such as consiste within the compass
and reason of things natural, the Author and conseruer whereof is God
himself: Leuit. 19. Deuteronomy. 13.
so that we do ye same without any superstitious vanity of Divination,
neither therein fixinge any assured hope and trust, neither terrifyed with any
fear of the euentes thereof.

Whenever therefore natural Dreams do happen wherein be neither mockeryes
nor illusions of mind (for all these are banished and put to flight by
reposing a firm and constant trust in God) they admonish and put every man
in remembrance to look well to his health, and to amooue and decline all such
occasions and inconveniences, as may either empayre and damnifye health, We
may not rashlye credit all Dreams.
or enforce any perturbatio^s of Dreams. For the Imaginations and phantasyes
which in Sleep be offered, and seen appara^tly in Dreams by night when a man
is at rest to occur and busye his mind, are caused and styrred by vapors
and fumes proceeding out of the humors and agitation of the Spyrite Animal:
in some of which Dreams and Imaginations, the mind renueth the memory and
thinks upon some business and actions that fall for the day, some plainly
signifye the abundaunce of Humors, or else some earnest and greedy desire to
compass somewhat, which we would very feign bring to pass.

Hereupon they that are thyrstie, glut themselves and swill up drink
abundantly, they that be hungry devour meat greedily and insaciablye. Thus
likewise, they whose Genitoryes and privy parts be swelled with stoare of
excrementall Seed and spermatike Humor, or in the day time did earnestly
fix their eyes and mind upon any beautiful and fair young Woman,
Pollution and effluxion of Seed, how it happens.
do in their Sleep thinck themselves to enjoy their desired purpose, and
through imaginatiue dealinge with her, defyle themselves with nightlye
pollutions. For the Soul (when the body is in sound Sleep, and all the
outward senses at rest) wythdrawinge it self into the innermoste parts of
the body, perceyueth, understands, and beholds those actions which y^ body
is to do by day, and look what things the body desires and longs after, the
same does the Soul enjoy as present by Imagination. Hereupon, I think were
these Proverbs first devised: Canis pane^ somnians.
The Dog dreameth of bread, of rau^ging in the Fields, and of hunting. For
what things soever, a man earnestly and exceedingly desires, or has his mind
still running on, ye same (being a Sleep) he thinks and dreameth upon in
the night.

Whereunto it is like enough that Esaias the Prophet alluded, where he shows
that the counsayles and deuyses of the wicked shall come to naught, and
vanishe away like smoke and as Dreams seen by night: Cap. 29.
Even as (says he) a hungrye man Dreameth that he is eatinge, and when he
avvaketh is yet hungrye and empty: And as a thristy man Dreameth that he is
drinkinge, and when he avvaketh, is yet faynte and thirsty: Even so fares
it with them that gape and seek after innocente Blood to glutte their
cruelty therevvith, A place of Esaias expo^ded.
for they shall miss their purpose like them that Dream, and not obtain the
things which they earnestly desire or think themselves sure to compass and
bring about.

Now, Tokens of a cold and moist complexion.
to satisfye them that are desirous to know the inward notes and tokens of a
Cold and moist Complexion, and Phlegmatic persons: I will here by the way
set down the same, and declare of what Nature, condition, manners, conversation
and order of life they be: how beit, there is no cause, why any man should
hope to find in them of this constitution and plight, any stoare of excellent,
singular, and rare gifts, sith in them appears small quicknes of wit, small
worthynesse or excellency of mind, small sharpenes of judgment and learning,
small knowledge or skill in atchieuing and compassing matters: for that, the
same with prudence and wisdom cannot conveniently be brought about. For those
that are numbered and referred into the order of this Complexion, are persons of
no very sharp and exact judgment or (as the Proverb by interpretation
sou^deth) Emu^ctae naris, Reason yielded how these Proverbs, Emu^cte naris,
and Obesae naris first began.
fine witted: as (co^trariwyse) they whose noses be stuffed with Phlegm and
sneuil, are likewise by ye Proverb termed Obesae naris, gross witted,
applying by Translation, the fault from the body to the mind. For as both
their tallage, taste, smelling, and other obiectes of their Senses, be blunte
and gross: so are they likewise in mind and wit dol^ish and dull,
slothful and lumpish: finally neither by nature neither by use, forecasteful,
sharp witted, nor crafty: by reason their natural heat is languishyng and
feeble, and drowned in moist quality and cold Humor: and therefore also their
memory is very fayleable, oblyuious, and nothing at all (in a manner)
retentiue: Their speech (as likewise their pulses and manner of gate) slow and
soft.

But this in them specially deserves comme^dation, that they be gentle and
quiet of nature, not greatly addicted to venerous daliaunce, Praise of a
Phlegmatike person.
not fumishe, testy or soon angered, being such as (although they be thereto
provoked) will not lightly chafe and fret: and to be short, not geeuen to fraud
and subtilty, cogging and foysting, craft and cousonage, wrangling and
quarelling, as the Choleric are. And because commonly they be assailed with
many and sundry diseases, for that they be geeuen to sit still, loving their
ease and ydlenes, first they are to be enjoined and prescribed a Diet that is
hot, Phlegmatik persons must use exercise
whereof in the Discourse of the Cold Complexion and also of the Moist, has
been spoken abundantly: and next, they are to be persuaded and pricked forward
to use themselves to exercise. Lib. 1.
For sluggishnes and sloth (as witnesses Celsus) dulleth the body, but labor
and exercise makes it firm and lustye: the one brings Oldage before the
time, the other makes Adolescencie and youth to last long. And therefore
stronger motions and exercyses are for these persons more requisite, least
(otherwise) the humor toomuch increase, and heat quayle and be enfeebled.

Let them therefore use in ye mornyngs to walk abroad, and namely up hills
and s^^epe places, when they be yet fasting and their stomachs empty: yea it
shall not be amysse to use the same after meat, but these stirrings and
bodily agitations must be done with a very soft pace: and those ye be about
mydday, swyfter and faster, (which precept is expedient for them that be hoate
and moist to observe) but yet (as Galene says) not so fast and vehemente as
they use, Tuend. Val. lib. 5.
when by occasion of some earneste business they be driven to make speed and
have. It shall be good also for them, to continue long fasting, and to use
sparing suppers. For as all they yt be in perfect health, may and ought at
Supper to feed somewhat largely and (except custom be to the contrary) be
allowed to eat more fully and liberally: so again, to them that be of this
Complexion, The Phlegmatik must use light suppers.
a spareful and light supper is most fit and agreeable: because ye brain shall
thereby be the less encumbred and disquieted with fumes and exhalacio^s, in
the night ascending and proceedinge out of the Stomach. For these be they,
that engender distillations and Catarrhes, out of whom spryngeth swarms of
many diseases. And that the same may the better be avoided and declyned, I will
breefely set down the differences of this Phlegmatique Humor, what effect is
thereby wroughte, and what diseases ensue and grow thereuppon.

OF Phlegm there be four sorts of differences or kinds: Four kinds and
effects of Phlegm
Sweet, or (if it be crude) unsavory, making me^ drowsy and heavy, desyring
to Sleep more then nature requires: by reason that the Brain which is a
principal member, and the oryginal of all Senses, is moystned and made cold.

Sower, makes hungry: For the mouth of the Ventricle or Stomach, Gal. de.
Plenit.
endued with this Humor, is styrred up to an appetite and desire of meat:
Saltish, makes thyrstye and nippeth the Stomach. Glassie, in toughnes and
coldness passinge all the others, brings loathsomnes and abhorryng of meat.

The myeldest and least hurtful of all these, Sweet Phlegm.
is the Sweet: which (after that concoction is once dispatched) is bettered
and turned into the nature of Blood: which yet (notwithstanding) wants not
his poison and malignaunt nature, except all the inconvenience thereof be
thoroughly by heat excocted. For it makes loose, soft, and rising tumors or
blysters, white whythoute any redness, and other whealie breakinge out of
Phlegm beside, in the utter part of the skin, as mattrye, skabbes, wheales,
pushes, and pymples in Women and young folks, which sometime break out and
are full of matter and fylthy corruption: but it causes not great ytch nor
heat, as the skabbednes which comes of salt Phlegm or abundaunce of Choler
does, which is endued with a sharp biting and brynyshe saltnes.

Sower Phlegm (in quality and effect resembling and like unto Melancholyke
juice in co^tinua^ce of time gathered into ye stomach) Sower Phlegm.
is less cold then the Glassye, and more cold then the Sweet Phlegm. This
does prick and byte the Stomach, and with mordication annoyeth it: for being
endued with a sense most exquisite, it is offended with that Humor which is of
sharpest quality: For the sauoure and relyce thereof is so tarte, eigre and
bitter, that if it chance to be perbraked and cast up by vomit (as in Winter
and Autumn seasons happens) it astonneth and brings out of taste, ye
tongue, the roof of the mouth, ye Chawes, and sets the teeth on edge, no
less then Veriuyce, or the juice of unripe and sharp grapes, called of the
fyner sort of Physitio^s Omphacion, and of the common sort Agresta: in so much
that the relyce and tallage thereof will remain and be hardlye qualefyed,
alayed or taken away. This kind of Phlegm settled in the mouth of the
Stomach or ventricle, and impertinge unto it, some portion of his sowrnes and
sharpenes, engenders an insaciable lustinge to meat and (as we say) a
doggish appetite, incident commonly to women with chyeld, Doggishe appetite.
about iii. months after their conception, specially if they be with child
with a gyrle: who being in heat feeble, and of strength faint and quaisie, it
chances that their natures be not well able to co^cocte those Phlegmatic
humors: and thereuppon it is, that they have such puelinge and squemishe
stomachs, and be so much troubled with wambling and belching. For their chief
desire and special longing, being for sharp and sower things: they greatly
thereby annoy their ventricle, and gather together many ill humors.

Not women only, but men also be subject hereunto: for whom the best way is,
to use to eat meats of heating nature, and to drink wine of the purest and
best sort. For if this Humor should chance to putrefie within the body, it
then engenders the Ague Epiala (so called, Epiala.
because they that have the same, be in body inwardlye of great heat and
outwardlye stiff with extreme Cold:) for this Humor being enkindled and
set on heat, may well be lykened to green flame or as wet wood, which
sends out nothing but stoare of thick moist smoke, by reason yt moystnes
lets and hinders the heat, yt it cannot break out: and they that have
this impediment for the most part have not only alteration and change in
their Complexion and color, but annoyaunce and inconuenie^ce also in their
mynds.

Salt Phlegm (which has some affynitie with Choler) is engendered of the
commixtion of Choler, Salt Phlegm.
or of a saltishe or Whayie humiditye: or else of Phlegm putrefyed: the
sharpenes whereof being once enkindled, brings not styffenes and cold, but
a shyueringe and shakinge to the whole body. And among all ye kinds of Phlegm
none is worse nor more hurtful then is this. Harms of salt Phlegm
For in what part of the body soever it settleth, it breeds and engenders
great dolours and painful gryeues, and through the biting force that is in it,
affects the members of the body with vlcerous lassitudes, it defourmeth and
vglyfyeth the skin with dry, skuruye, skalie, mangie, and filthy eruptions
or breaking out, as Tettars, and Ringwormes, Leprosy, skurfe, ytche,
skabbednes etc. But if it be myxed with Melancholy and other naughty Humors,
it brings the skuruie Elephantiasis (which is the Hebrews Lepry) ye
vlcerous Herpes, running Cankers, French Pockes and many diseases more, which
pitifully pearce and eat the flesh, even unto the hard boane.

Glassie Phlegm (so called, Glassie or clammie Phlegm.
for that it resembbleth and is like to molte^ Glass) is of al others the
coldest, wherefore it is very hardly to be concocted or brought into any
holesom, familier and domestical humor. It occupyeth and besieges for the
most part, the Head, stomach, and Entrails, payning them with very grievous
and troublesome discrasyes. For it pricketh, wounds, teareth a pieces and
torme^teth: What parts of the body be subject to Phlegm
And this Phlegm being glewyshe and clammye like Byrdlyme, or such as the
stuff is, whereof drinkinge Glasses be made, is so tough and lymie, that
skantly will it be parted asu^der: yea it cleaves so fast to those narow
conceptacles where it rests, that nature stryuing and bickering with such a
strange and uncouth Humor, is driven to suffer grievous pain and tormente,
before she can be able clean to banish away and rid herself from it. Great
is the inconuenie^ce, and sundry and intolerable be the diseases and greeues
caused thereby: as namely ye Cholicke, wrynging of the Guts, pain and
gryeping of the Bowelles: difficulty and excoriation in avoiding natural
ordure: great lust and desire often to go to the stool, without being able to
euacuate or avoid any thing at al, unless peradventure a small quantity of
glassy Phlegm, and fylthy baggage, and that not without great labor and
enforcement of nature.

For remedy and ease of which affects and all other greeues and gryepinge of
like sort, my custom and use is to amend and recure with nothing better then
outwardly with fomentes, and inwardly by inections and Clysters, Use of
Clysters.
which skowreth and clean washes away al Phlegm before engrossed, clamped
and gathered together. Herewyth are all those distemperaunces and annoyaunces
of health in the lowest parts, without danger of any Agew, qualifyed and
helped: unless the pain be too outrageous and vehement: for that, therein is
neither putrefaction nor infla^matio^, and also for the ignobility of the
member. But if this kind of Phlegm should assault any chief and pryncipall
member, and beside putrefaction, grow into inflammation, it brings the Agues
called Lipyrias: and in this case the Patiente feels in the innermost parts
of his Bowelles, Cold, Heat dissolueth moisture, even as the Su^ne does yse.
and in his utter parts, Heat. For even as ye heat of the Sun melts and
dissolueth yse, snow and hayle, and turns the same into fluible and liquide
water: so likewise does the fits of an Agew cut asunder and liqueste gross and
clottered Phlegm: and thus it is seen, yt in one and ye same body there is
both heat and cold felt and perceived, at one and the self same time: like as
appears in the^ yt sit by a fire, having wet and moist cloths upon their
backs, or in them that handle snow or ice with their hands, whose members at
one self same time and instant, feel both heat and cold.

But for that, All men in danger to phlegm.
the most part of me^ be in Winter, specially troubled with one kind or other
of Phlegm, it stands them upon diligently and by all means they can, to
accustom themselves to hoate meats, and of the same to make exact and
perfect digestion. For through cruditye and lack of perfect concoction in
the Stomach, is engendered great abu^daunce of naughty baggage and hurtufll
Phlegm, Crudlty engenders Phlegm.
endaungeringe and evidently damnifying (as much as any thing in the world else)
health and welfare. Therefore all such things as be very Cold and Moist, must
in any wise be eschued, as Sothernely wyndes, plain and smooth fyshes,
Wyeldings, Crabbs: and of herbs, Lactuce, Purselaine, Cucumbers, Melons,
Gourds, Mushromes: or if any of these come in place to be eaten, let them be
used with hoate sauces and condiments, and convenient exercise, and such also
as be of nature able to cut and attenuate gross and clammie Humors, to
dispell wyndinesse, and suffer little or no Phlegmatic excrementall Humor at
all to rest wtin the body: for by these not only the body, but the mind also
is carried away, and by affections shrewdlye mysseledde.

Preservatives and helps for the Memory: with means and ways to remove and
take away all inconveniences, harms and hindraunces thereof. The iiij. Chapter.
FOrasmuch as both ye distemperature that is Cold and Moist, and that also
which is Cold and Dry, growing into excess and drawinge into extremity,
oppresses and deadly wounds the Memory: I have thought good into this work
to inserte and enterlace some such notes as may serve to the furtheraunce
thereof and preservation of it from all such myssehappes, harms and
disco^modities as in any wise threaten thereunto annoyaunce. And how the same
is to be done and brought to pass, I purpose compendiouslye by the way to
declare: sythens not to Students only, but to al sorts of men in general, it
shall be a thing right expedient and profitable. For all the actions and
dealinges either public or private, which a man takes in hand, and
enterpryseth: all his affairs, cogitations, deuyses, meditations, cares,
purposes and studyes, and all labor and industry ye is taken for doing and
speaking, wherein is any exercise at all of ye mind, All things done by memory.
cannot be brought about and accomplished without the help of Memory. For
in this Treasure, the speciallest and chiefest part of reason, understanding
and judgment rests: and out of it, as out of a most rich and plentiful
Storehouse is fetched and taken a co^plete furniture of most hidden and far
fetched matters. Which power and virtue of Memory, if it further and help us
not, as a faithful maintener and keeper of the things which we devise,
ymagine and learn: all (be it never so precious and excellent) goes to wrack
and is raked up in oblivion.

The proper and peculiar place, assigned and allotted for Memory, is the
Brain, the mansion and dwelling house of wit and all the Senses: which being
affected or by any diste^perature discrased, Memory rests in the Brain.
all the functions and offices of nature are semblably passioned: insomuch that
wit, reason, understanding and judgment being once empayred, and diminished:
there steppeth in place, Sottage, forgetfulness, amazedness, dotage, folishnes,
lack of right wits, doltishnes and idiocie. Which affects and imperfections
may happen to me^ many ways, as by some blow or wound in the head, by some
rupture or cracking of the Skull, by some fall or co^tuston, by pestilent
diseases and maladies, which (of the contagion of Air on each side enclosinge
us) inspyreth infection into our bodies: and beside external accidents, which
sometime cannot well be avoided, there be some harms which through our own
wilfulnes and disorder, we heap upon our selves, incurring thereby much
inconvenience: and these be, Surphettes, Drunkenness, Gluttony, unseasonable
watchinge, Things hurtful to the Memory.
meats cold and Phelgmaticke, immoderate use of Venery, and carnal company
with Women, thereby the quicknes of wit is blunted and waxes dull, Carnal
knowledge of women is a weakening to the body
Reason, Understanding and Judgment dymmed, and the strength of nature in
many, so weakened and enfeebled, that in three days space or more after, uneath
is it able to recover ye vigor and lusty plight wherein it was before.

And not this discommodity alone, but certain other sickly and foul
affections insurge thereupon, no less pernicious to the mind, then dangerous
to the body, utterly ouerthrowinge, oppressing and ruinating the power
Memoratyue. For even as toomuch drynes of the brain (gotten through excessive
surphet, lack of expediente food, A dry brain has little remembrance
and Venerie) is very hurtful to Memory, because that quality is nothing apt
to take any impressions, or fourmes of things (for drynes and hardness takes
no printes nor Images) so also toomuch moisture (proceeding of ydlenes, sloth,
immoderat sleep and moist meats) quight destroy and drown Memory Moisture (in
deed) is more A moist brain unable to remember.
capable, and will sooner take ye print and forms of things, but by reason of
softnes, the same taryeth not, but passes away again: even as sta^pes or
Seals, being affixed and imprinted into substance or matter that is toomoyst,
liquide and fluible, makes therein no stamp, form or print, but such, as
presently fleeteth and immediately vanishes away again.

Forasmuch therefore as the virtue and power Memoratiue, consists in a sure,
faithful, and steadfast keeping and conservation of Images, it follows, that
the same in Children and in as many others as have moist Brains, is weak and
nothing retentiue. Old folk, and young Children have ill memories, but the
reason of the one is contrary to the other.
Old folks also have the same imbecility and forgetfulness, and the reason is,
because their brains be so cold and dry, that nothing is able to enter or
fyrmelye to be imprynted therein: and for these causes, both sorts of them be
obliuious and nothing Memoratyue. For of this (as also of all the inward
senses) the power and faculty is according to the temperature of the Brain.
For out of the gross substance of that part, Temperature of the brain, the
maintenance of Memory.
or when the Spyrits and Humors therein be gross, thick and with many
vapors pestered, proceeds Oblivion, slownes to understand, and hardness to
conceive. Again, of a moist Brain, that is too liquide, comes forth a dull
or blunt sense, and a Memory nothing retentyue but son forgetting. And a dry
Constitution of the Brain makes a very weak and ill memory: by reason, that
it will not easily admit any impression (even like unto a piece of Lead, Iron
or Steel, which will not easelye suffer the point of any engrauinge Tool to
enter and pearce into it.

A good steadfast and fryme Memory therefore is to be referred unto the
disposition and temperature of the Brain: and this power of the mind, is
ascribed to the benefit of Nature: but yet so, that it may be helped and
maynteyned in his perfect state by Art, Memory, the gift of Nature, and is by
Art helped and made better.
and if perhaps it decay or take harm, yet through care and industry, it may
again be restored. And therefore special care must be employed, and great
diligence taken, that the body may in perfect health and sound constitution be
preserved: that moderation both in life and diet be used: always within the
compass of temperau^ce and frugality: that y^ meat be exactly concocted: that
the mind be in peaceable tranquillitye, and free from troublesome affections:
that no myssehappe betyde to disturb and dim the same: for lustynesse of
body and mind, holesomnes of Air, temperature of the Brain, perfect
Constitution of all ye Se^ses, the Spyrits, both Animal and Vital (which
proceed of y^ Humors) being clear and sincere, be great helpers and most
auayleable preseruatyues for the maintenance of Memory.

For by these it happens that all the faculties of the Soul (among which
Memory is chief) be fresh and perfect, that nothing of all that which we either
by view of eye, cogitation, wit, learning or meditation conceive, slippeth
out of our remembrance. Yea, many things that were thought to be clean
forgotten, and cancelled with oblivion, be revived as fresh in Memory and seem
to the eye as plainly, as things but newly done: in so much, that although
sometimes we forgette what we did but yesterday, yet perfectlye can we
remember things done many years ago, when we were Children. The reason
whereof I take to be this, The reason why children ca^ remember things long
before done.
for that, tender age and Childhode, gredily, attentyuely and with great
admyration fyxeth things in mind, and is apt, ready, willinge and full of
courage to co^ceyue what is put unto them. For whyse the mind is yet free from
carking cares of the world, and not ouercharged or busyed with weighty matters
and dealings, it retayneth suerer and keeps faster in Memory those things
which are instilled into it in childishe years, their minds being yet free
from al other cu^bersome disquietations.

Now, although Memory and Remembrance of things, be conceived in the forepart
of ye head, where the common wits or Senses specially rests, yet those
things y^ are by the benefyte thereof attained, be kept and fostered in the
hinder part. And therefore they do very well, which keep their Nucha and nape of
their necks warm, The Nucha and nape of the neck must be kept warm.
and fense themselves safe from the danger of cold, and iniurye of wyndes: For
these parts being distempered or affected, bring a man in danger of the
fallinge Sickness, the Drowsye evil, Astonment, Palsy, Crampe, and Oblyuion.

Wherefore it shall be right good and expedient to remove and take away all such
hindraunce and discommodities as prejudice and hurt Memory. And because many and
sundry things settle in man's mind and Memory, A man would be glad to forget
some things.
even against his will: such things (I mean) as he would not gladlye remember,
but rather would be willing to forget and commit to oblyuion, as some lewd and
loose pranckes, dishonestly aforetyme perpetrated, are: and again, many good
and wholesome things, which are expedient and needful to be remembered, slyppe
out of mind and be forgotten: a man is in these points to take diligente heed
and regard that he do not (as ye Common sort use) without any choice and
difference either neglect, or retchlessely forslowe the due orders of both
these things, indifferently. Those things therefore which a man would gladlye
remember, it shall be good for him to think upon, and many times with
himself in mind to meditate and reuolue: and such as he would feign shake of
and forget, as hurtful and pernicious to his mind, let him with reason and
judgment stoutly resist and strive against. For as by the corruption of our
nature (which is fallen away, Man's corrupt nature more, prone to ill the^ to
good.
from his first integritye) we be a great deal readyer and apt to that which
is naught, then to that which is good: and far more proclyue to conceive and
learn the same, then things of better importance and purpose: so also those
that be ill, stick faster in memory, and not easelye to be shaken of or
abolyshed, without great ado and difficulty. Which thing caused Themistocles
to demand of one which professed to teach him the Art of Memory:
Themistocles wyshed to learn the art of forget fulness.
Whether there were any Science yt could rather teach him the Art of
Oblivion: for (said he) I can well enough remember what I lust, but I cannot so
easily forget such things as are settled in my mind unwillingly and otherwise
then I would desire.

For some things we would be gladder to forgette then to remember, for so much
as many men be of such nature that they cannot abide to have old soars
rypped up, Old grudges are to be forgotten.
and stale grudges (long agone stille and pacifyed) by new rehearsalls reuyued
and brought fresh again into question. To which end apperteyneth this
Proverb. A mischief well quieted and brought a sleep, would not be stirred
anew, nor rubbed up a fresh.

Now, whereas there be many helps and sundry furtheraunces devised by
Rhetoricians to preserve and corroborate Memory: I have thought it good here
not to stand tediouslye in particular recytall thereof: and the rather because
many of them be very curious, and without marvelous precyse carefulnes
scarcelye able to be observed: for the sharpenes of wit and understanding with
such a rabble of precepts, is ouercloyed, and the native virtue of Memory
overwhelmed. But among al other helps and preseruatyues of Memory, this
namelye is to be considered, that ye body may in perfect health be maynteyned,
Health the strength of the Memory.
without being endaungered to Sicknesses, specially such as may disturb and
damnifye the head.

Sleep must be moderatelye used, not lyinge upon the back, but on the one
side: the mind quiet and calm, free from all busynes and troublesome
garboyles. Crudity and surphet the spoylers of Memory.


Now, for so much as this faculty of the Soul is brittle, tender and delicate,
there is nothing that woorketh more harm thereunto, then Cruditie, Riot,
Intemperaunce, Surphet and dronkennes.

In the mean season, for the preseruinge and cheerishinge of the Memory, all
helps must be used and all furtheraunces, which any way may co^duce to ye
mainteyna^ce and increase of the same must be put in ure and practice: among
which, is: continual use and exercise of writing and speaking: adhibiting
therein order, reason and measure, and not patteringe the same over rashlye,
confuselye or without aduysement. There is nothing in the world more refreshed,
maynteyned and strengthened, through care, study, industry, diligence, regard
and heed, then Memory: Again, nothing in the world through negligence,
sloth, securitye and carefulnes, so soon marred and defaced.

And even as it is a mere vanity and foolish braggrie (as one says) in this
Myraculous gift of Memory, Ad Here^ Lib. 3. tit. 7.
to boast of Art rather then of Nature: so again, I deem him a right wise
man, that bestows care and diligence to make the gifts of Nature and
qualityes of his mind, flouryshing, pregnaunt and fruictful: even as the good
and thryftie Husbandman by manuraunce does unto his ground, to make it rank
and fertile.

And now, Memory greatly helped and preserved by light Suppers.
that I may here set down precepts of Physic, to keep this fyelde from
growing? barreyne, first of all I am to advise such as be desirous to preserve
and keep this goodlye and necessary Virtue perfect and steadfast, to use light
Suppers, or if he happen to make full and larger suppers, to walk after it: to
be meery and pleasau^tly conceipted: to lay aside (for the time) earnest cares:
and not to perplexe his brain with troublesome thoughts, nor his mind with
scrupulosities. And after he has in this sort after Supper, spent an hour and
a half, let him go to bed and take his natural rest, lyinge upon the right
side: and arysing early in the morning, let him exonerate nature by all those
official members that serve for euacuation and auoydinge of bodily
excrementes: First, let him rub his tongue, and comb his head gently with
an Yuorye Comb, let him use to have his head polled, specially if the season
of the year, the Country and Custom require or permit it: for to use it in
Winter, or where the weather is extreme Cold, it is no less hurtful and
unwholesome, then foolish and ridiculous. For they bereeue, take away and
disapoynte themselves of those helps and defenses of Nature, which propulse
cold and other outward iniuryes, and in steed thereof keep their heads
warm with other devised couertures.

But when the weather is myelde and calm, and the Country temperate, I
myslike not (as touching healthynesse of body) shauinge of the crown of the
head. For thereby gross vapors which hurt the Memory, have more scope and
liberty to euaporate and fume out. And therefore some in my opynion, take a
wholesome way for healthynesse (so they do it without any manner of superstition
otherwise) which go pollshorne and have their heads shaven to the hard scalpe.
In some, shauinge of the head is a helpinge to Memory, and in other some a
hindraunce.
For by this means all they that are encombred with Rhewmes, Catarrhes, and
headache, find much ease, and so do all they that have their eyesighte (through
abundaunce of Humors) dymme, and their hearing thick, and their smelling
stopped: insomuch that for the redress of certain diseases of the head,
Shauinge of the Bearde helps Memory.
loss of right wits, feeblenes of brain, dottrye, frenzy, Bedlem madness,
Melancholicke affections, fury and frantic fitts, Physicians deem it the
best way to have the hair clean shaven of. Which in my judgment is not to
be taken as a vain or absurd fable, for that both experience and reason
persuades and enforces some credit thereto: for so much as every man after his
beard has been trimmed or clean shaven of, feels himself a great deal
meryer, and less wayward and overthwart then he was before.

Furthermore my ordenarye custom is to advise them that have defectyue and
dymme eyes, and that be thick of hearing, or subject to the poze, to have
their heads rubbed, and their Beardes shaven or some such order and fashion,
as may most commodiouslye serve for those parts: And accordinglye as every
Country has his peculier guyse, to use the Barbers help in trymmynge and
handling ye same: for after ye same, every man looks both smugger and fayrer,
and is also of mind more myeld and tractable, so that his outward courage
seems to rejoice and to be pleasant and lustye: his Memory made more
perfect and clear: his Spirits (which are they ye move us to do this and
that) reuyued and styrred up: and all the Senses (a little before dulled and
brought as it were a sleep) show forth themselves in their most bravery and
perfection.

And if he use now and the^ to rynse and wash his mouth, Jaws and palate: to
rub his teeth, to wype and cleanse his Nose, to pick his ears and mundify
them from al baggage and fylthynesse, still to dilate and to open his breaste
with Coughinge, hawking, neesing and popping or smacking with the mouth, to
exonerate his lower parts, as the Ventricle, Mylte, Liver, Bowelles, Bealie
and Bladder of their ordinary Excrements: not only the Memory, but also all
the Organes of the mind beside, and every several faculty of the Soul shall be
well enhabled throughlye and without stop or let, to discharge and do their
proper functions and offices.

And because for the most part, the Cold and Moist quality is most hurtful
to Memory and oppresses it, therefore the same by his contraries is to be
subdued and maystered: by such (I mean) as have virtue, power, and efficacy,
to wast and dispatche superfluous Humors, and to strengthen and comfort the
Brain: of which sort are these: Things good for the Memory.
Nuttmigges, specially those that are not clean dry, rotten, and without
juice, Rosemarye flowers, and the stemmes thereof and all confectio^s made with
the same: sweet Maioram, Baulme, Stychas of both sorts, Pionie roots, and
the young bearies thereof, mystleden, Hyssope, and Sauoury, Herbs that sharpen
the wit.
which being boiled with meats, yeldeth forth a pleasant smell and savor,
for it flourishes green in Winter and wythereth not: and in the number of
these, add Betonie, Cowslips, Maron, Restoratiues and remedies for the Memory
being empayred or decayed through coldness and moisture.
or common Organie or welde Maioram, Basil, roots of flower Delyce of both
sorts, Enula Ca^pana, Radishe which is a root vsuallye echwhere eaten at
meals in Summer to provoke an appetite: and among forreyne and outla^dish
Spices, Zedoaria, Cloves, Macis, which is the rynde that covers ye Nutmigge,
Gynger, specially green and condite in Honey, right Glade^, Cassia, Cynamome,
Cubebes, Myrobalanes condite or preserved in honey.

The more part of all these may either be reduced into Syrupes, or stamped
into powder or Condiments: or else the decoction or infusion of them may be
taken, specially of such as dwell in Cold and Moist places, and be of nature
very Phlegmatic. To restoare a Memory seemig past all recovery.
For they that be stryken in years and their Humors dried up and exhausted,
had need to have as well their bodies as the Instruments of their Senses
moystened, and with nourishinge alimentes of sweet and pleasant quality to be
humected, as the Ryndes of Citron, that is, of Pomegranades condite, Lyquirice,
water Lilly commonly named Nenuphar, Buglosse, Borage, Reysons (the stones
being taken out) Coraunts and all such as do moderately calefie and humecte. Of
which sort are these, Honey, Sugar, Wine that is swetish, Butter and new laid
Eggs, Pyneapplekernelles, sweet Almonds that be not fustie, vinued nor old,
Onyons ill both for the eyes and Memory.
Nutts called Pistacia, Chestnutts meanelye parched, and fylberds: for Walnutts
be hurtful to the Memory, and so are Onyons, because they annoy the eyes with a
dazeling dymnes, through a hoate vapor, Lactuce dimmeth the sight. Rapes very
beneficial and restoratiue* for the eyes.
even as Lactuce does with cold, through a somniferous virtue and power in it.

But Rapes and Turneppes either sodde or boiled, do wonderfully clarefye the
eyes, and are very beneficial for the sight, and they that be disposed to try,
shall find it by experience very true: by reason of their great stoare of hot
and moist flatuousnes, whereby they also increase generatiue Seed, and stir
up Venus, specially being co^dite with Gynger.

As touching what kinds of small Brains be best for this purpose, What sorts of
Brains be best for Memory.
this is first to be understood, that there cannot be any thing of more
virtue and strength to comfort Memory and keep it in a right sound
perfection, then ye Brains of Partridges, next of Sparrowes, and all such
Byrds as be naturally much styrring, and exercise themselves still in
flickering and flying, whereof in an other place we shall speak more at large.

Washing of ye head, although many greatly mislyke not, Washing of the head.
yet do I counsel none to use it. For it weakeneth the skull and Brain pan,
and makes it at every small cold and blast of wynd, subject to distillations
and Catarrhes. But to wash ye feet in a decoction of Baye leaves, Rosemary and
Fenel, I greatly disalow not: for it turns away from the head vapors and
fumes dimming and ouercasting the mind.

Now the better to repress fumes and propulfe vapors from the Brain, it
shall be excellent good after Supper, to chaw with the teeth (ye mouth being shut)
a few graynes of Coriander first stieped in veneiger, Coriander.
wherein Maiora^ has bin decocted, and the^ thinnly crusted or covered over with
Sugar. It is scarce credible what a special commodity this bri^geth to ye
memory. No less virtuous and soueraign is the co^fection of Quinces called
Diacidonion, Conserve of Quinces.
if a pretty quantity thereof be likewise taken after meat. For it disperseth
fumes, and suffers not vapors to strike upward, and ye fame effect also have
certain graynes of Mastix swalowed.

Also it is right excellent and comfortable now and then to smell to such
things as yield a sweet and odoriferous savor, Sweet smells comfortable to the
spirits.
namely such as be of nature pearsing and calefactiue, as Lignu^ Aloes,
Clofegelofres Rosemary flowers, Basil, Nigella, Ambregryce, Syuet, red Roses,
Honey suckle flowers, French spyknard, and many other y^ yield forth a strong
smell, but the seem right pleasant, comfortable, and delightful. All these
refresh the Spirits, and with their soote savors wonderfullye comfort the
Brain.

If a man or woman seem (to outward judgment) in a manner past recovery, The
confectio^ of Anacardus good for the Memory.
and be brought to extreme oblivion, as they be yt have y^ disease called
Lethargus or the drowsye evil: it shall be right good for them to annoint ye
outsyde of their Nucha and nape of their necks with the Oil of Castor, To
restoare speech.
Nigella, Euphorbe, Costus, Rocket, and inwardly to take a little of the
confection of Anacardus, or else therewyth to rub the tongue. For is
dissolueth Phlegm that is extremelye cold, moist, and viscous: Insomuch that
it restores speech to them that be stricken with ye Apoplexy, and recureth the
staggeringe and stayinge of the tongue, bringinge it again to his right use:
Which thing may also be done and brought to pass with Oximel Scillit. and
Aqua vite, wherein a few graynes of Rocket have been stieped.

Unto these helps, To restoare the right use of the tongue to them that have
the Apoplexy.
in dangerous and desperate discrasies (when nothing else will help) we flee
for refuge and succor: but in distemperau^ces and grieves that be myelder, and
not of such extremity, others now rehearsed may serve, as Syrup de Stichade.
Dia Anthos dulcis, Aur^a Alexandrina, The virtue of Lignum Aloes.
Dia castorium, Pliris cum Musco, Triacle and Mythridatum.

By experience and daily proof it is found true, that Agalochus (commonly
called Lignum Aloes) being either used in perfume, or smelled unto with the
Nose, has a marvelous virtue to corroborate the Brain and refresh the
Senses: insomuch that being stamped, A Cock to crow continnally without
ceassing.
puluerized, and myngled with some Cloves and the boane of a Ravens heart, and
then all mixed with Oil of Nigella, has such sovereign virtue in
strengthening and comfortinge y^ Brain, that if the head of a Cock be
therewith anointed, he will crow continually without any ceassing.

Of the state and disposition of a hoate and dry body: with a Discourse of the
nature, condition, manners, and inclination of a Choleric person. The v.
Chapter.
For So Much as among the outward things of Nature, All things subject to
change.
there is nothing of any long continuance and stability, neither that long
keeps it self at any certain state and vigor, but all subject to decay,
alteration, and case worse and worse: truly the state of mankind does
specially and more then any other, suffer sundry alterations, and is subject
to great change and mutability. Thus, is a Hoate and Moist Complexion, in
process and tract of time, brought into a state Hot and Dry, For, Heat by
little and little both slyly and closely wast and consume natural Humor, and
brings all the body into dryness: which quality for prolongation and
lengtheninge of life, is the greatest ennemy that can be. For as the flame in
a Torche or Taper feeds upon the combustible matter thereof, and is therewith
nourished, which being all wasted and consumed, the same flame also quenches
and no longer burns: so likewise native heat by little and little wears
away, and diminishes the juice and moisture, wherewith it is nourished, and
finally brings the cause of destruction both to it self, and to the whole
body beside.

Now, that constitution of body, which consists of a hoate and dry qualitye
and thereof has his name, A Choleric man.
having warm Humor through these qualities increased, makes and
constituteth a Choleric man, by reason of the great stoare of Choler which
is in him: Choler natural and beside nature.
of which Humor there be two sorts and differences: the one natural, the
other beside nature. Natural Choler is the excrement of blood concoct, bitter
in savor, and in color and effect fyerie. When the heat of the Liver is
moderate, then is it yealow and shyninge: but when this viscositye is overmuch
enkindled, then does Choler also boil with heat, and is of color darcke,
Yelowish, like unto Pruse Bier, called in Dutche Iopen Bier, or like unto Oil
or melted Butter, when it is burned, and with much frying becomes blackishe
of color: whereby it comes to pass that the color before Yelowe, changes
and is turned into a sad black: which sometime apparauntly utters and
shows it self in the utter part of the skin, whenever this Cholerique
Humor diffuseth and disperseth it self into the same skin.

Choler has in the body two offices: for part of it being mixed with the
blood, The office of Choler.
passes into the Veins, to make the same more conuenientlye to penetrate into
every one of the narow passages, and to be conueighed to such members as
require and have need of the nourishment of Choler. The other part, is sent
to the bladder of the Gall, annexed and tied to the nether end of the Liver,
wherein the wonderful providence of Gods Almighty handyworke well appears, in
y^, he has appointed the same Entraile, whereunto he has geeuen an admyrable
virtue to attract and help digestion, to be also a receyuer and Receptorye of
superfluous and unprofitable Humor: to thentent no harm or inconvenience
should thereby in any wise happen to the other members.

For Choler is of that nature y^ yeldeth out a fiery force, whose motion (as it
were a fire brande) stirs up and ince^seth our minds to hasty moodes and
furious rages. Anger what it is.
And for this cause Anger is defined to be a heat and certain boylinge of the
Blood about the Heart, wherewith the Brain also being excyted by Choler, is
set in a heat and testines, desirous of reueng, whenever any injury is
offered. And to the lower parts provoke and irrite the Guts and Bowelles to
avoid superfluous excrementes: For which purpose, Natures providence has
devised and framed sundry passages needeful for y^ purginge, conueighaunce and
euacuation of all such superfluous Humors: to wit, the Kidneyes and the
Vryne Pypes, the empty or fasting Gutte called Intestinum Ieiunum (which
through ye sowrenes of Choler flowinge into it, continuallye dryueth out the
Excrements, By what parts of the body Choler is purged.
) the Bladder, Ears, and Pores, appointed for the auoydaunce and expulsion of
sweat. And in the most part of these, if obstructions should happen, all the
whole fylthy mass of noisome Humor, is thereby kept within the body, and then
geeueth violente assault to some of the principal parts. So when the bag
or Bladder of the Gall or Receptacle of Choler, is not able to exonerate it
self of that baggage, dross and superfluity, which it drew from the Liver:
it emptyeth and casts it either into the Uentricle, or else into the
holownesse of the Liver. And thus it comes to pass, that Choler being
diffused and spread over all the body, imperteth both his qualitye and color to
the Blood.

Hereof comes the Iaundice (named Morbus Regius, Iaundice.
for y^, it requires a most exquisite dict, and Princelike fare) which makes
all the body Yelowe as a Kytes foot, and colored like Saffron or as Silver,
that is stroaked over with Gold.

And if the small and slender Gutts be therewith teinted, it puts a man to
intolerable torment and pain. Wringynge of the small Gutts.
This passion is called Iliaca Passio, the wrynginge of the Gutts, and also
Conuoluulum, for that, the Guts do seem to puckar and cru^ple together like
the string of an Harp, or any other Instrument.

This disease comes either of an inflammation, or of costyuenes, when the
ordure is dry and hard parched, and no sufficient stoare of Cholerique Humor
to expel and scowre away the Excrements. So if the upper part of the Gutt be
affected, the meat is cast up: if the neither, ordure auoydeth at the mouth:
by reason that the Tuell or foundment is so closely shut, that not so much as a
poor fyest can pass or get out thence. Many affects beside, does Choler
engender, as Tertian and burning Agues, when as it putrefyeth without the
Veins, which because they be largely and diligently set out in sundry Books
of Physic, by many and sundry learned Physicians published, I think it best
here to surceasse from any further recital and declaration thereof.

But I purpose now briefly by the way to show the nature and conditions of a
Hot and dry Complexion, and then of a Choleric person, Notes whereby to know
a hoate and dry Complexion.
and finallye by what marks and tokens they are to be perceived, discerned,
found out and known. And first to speak of the outward signs: A body of
this Constitution is hot, slender, lean musculous, of dece^t bigness and
mean stature: and although some be of growth and talnes but small and little:
yet are they lively, daper, quick, ^ymble, and as little Bees, ever stirrynge
and whyskinge about, And Within that little Corpse of theirs, Virg. li. 4 Georg.

right noble Stomachs have.


Of color they be brownish, aburne or somewhat ruddie, specially when their
angry mood is up, or their bodies chaufed and set in heat with exercise: and
some be pale or yelowish. Their skin rough: their arteries and Veins big
and apparaunt, and not lying hidden under the flesh: their Vryne read, saffron
colored, or bright yelowe according to the proportion of Choler and heat:
Their Pulse quick and swyft, as also their gate and manner of going is. Their
tongue rolling at pleasure, ready and flowing in vtteraunce: their hair
black: and in some, curled and naturallye fryzeled: when as the heat and
dryness is very great and vehement: Neither will the same till after long
time wax hoarie and gray, but yet by reason of dryness soon wax bald. Their
Nose crooked like a Hawks bill: and in many, especially Germaynes, Polonians,
Hungarians and Dutchmen, Yealow hair.
read beardes, and bright yealowye hair, which comes of glitteringe clear
shynynge Choler, that is not adusted with feruente heat. Read beards.
In the Low Countries, those that be read hayred (are of the vulgar sort)
noted, as men subject to some naughtye disposition and lewd conditions,
secretly harboroughing within their minds.

For as Themistocles his Tutour gave iudgmente of no mean thing, Nature of
Themistos cles.
like to prove and come to pass in his said Scholar, but that he would be
either a singular stay and ornamente to his Country, or else some notable
plague and detrimente to the same: so also the Belgiana, by a common and usual
by word among them, say, that at the hands of such persons, either things
most excellent, or else most villainous, are to be expected and hoped for.
Furthermore in their daily speech they use this as a common Proverb among
them, Rooden baert seldom goedt often van goeden aerdt, Which is as much to say,
y^ Read bearded men are seldom of any good disposition: for that, in the
whole course of their life, manners, conversation, dealinges, byinge, selling,
and bartering, they seek to undermine and ouereach others with slye shifts and
craftye bargaynes, evidently arguyng, what cunning dealing lurketh wtin them to
entrappe and deceive other me^.

Which disposition and inclination, as I can not deny but is found true in
very many of that Constitution, for want of virtuous bringinge up, Red beard^
argues not always an ill disposed person.
and laudable institution: So again, do I know many, having such colored
Beards, whose commendable qualities, and rare virtues have advanced them to
Honorable roumes and dignityes. For even in Princes Courts, in Asse^blies of
Nobles, Peers, and Magistrates, among honest substantial Trafiquers, and
namely of those that dwell Northernely, we see very many of tried Virtue, and
singular wisdom, right worthily with integritye and vprightnes admynistringe
their Public charges and functions wherein they be placed.

Now, whereas some haskerdly Peizaunts, and rascal persons, having such
colored beards, be pratlers and praters, in keeping counsel, as close as a
Syeue, settinge all upon six and seven, without any regard or consideration
of any thing, Dingthryftes and Spendalles, the same do I impute to lewd
education, which draws the procliuity of their Nature to untoward and pieuish
manners. For hereof it comes, that such persons be found to be unconstant,
Wily Foxes.
crafty, deceitful, subtle, wily, cogginge, turning the cat in the pan,
full of leigier de main, and so fickle of word and deed, that a man may not
well and safely deal with them nor trust them, as persons in whom there is no
more hold then is of a wet Eele by y^ ^ayle, and in any bargayne or dealing
be it never so intricate and cumbersome, can find means to slyp the collar
and wyende themselves out of danger. Whereunto if other imperfections and
defectes of the body be added, they argue yet a worse Nature and more geeuen
to mischief: whervppon the Poet Martial very aptly says: Black hayrde,
short footed, purblynde eke
and Beard all over read: Lib. 6.

Take such a one in doing good,
and strike me of his heed.


Which disposition is rooted in them, partlye through the influence of the
Planetes, viz. of the Sun and Mercury, and partly (which I rather take to be
the chief and special cause) through thynnes of Cholerique Humor and of
unclean Spyrits, which being enduedwith a subtle heat, pricketh a styrreth
them forward to put in practyse such kind of pranckes and Pageauntes.
Furthermore among these kind of persons, there be some diversely disposed, and
of sundry conditions, wranglers, busye medlers in other men's matters, yallers,
hot as a toast, Choplogicks, and pratlers, with tongue at will, and are as
Iuuenall fotlie says: Of dapper wit and desperate bold,
fine phrasde with galant grace, Sat. 3.

More eloquent then Isaeus,
for every time and case.
Each person can they aptly play,
at each Art can they ame,
At Grammar, Rhetricke Geometry,
Paynting, and for the game.
At soothsaying, and cunningly
upon a Roape to dance,
At Physic, Magic, ripe are they,
and free of every Haunce,


Such commonly are Dizardes, Gesturers, Stage players, Iugglers, Tumblers and
Rogish pedlers, ydly raunging about the Country, Iangling pratlers, Fortuile
tellers, mynstreis and such other like busye bragginge Counterfeictes, looking
big upon the matter, and in their manner of gate, hands, countenance, eyes
and speech, full of gestures, impudently presumyng to shuffle themselves into
every company and place of assembly, having an Oar in every man's Boat, and
entermedling in other men's matters, wherein they have nothing to deal. In
Sleep, very unquiet, leaping sometime out of their bedds, because their
Spyrits be very hot, which incyte and awake the^ up (even being a sleep) to
motion and walking about. For Choler frames and fashioneth the mynds of men
many ways, producing and causynge in them diverse manners, phansyes, delights
and inclynations. And hereuppon it happens that whosoever is of a hoate and
dry Constitution, and reckened in the number of Choleric men, is naturally
fierce, arrogante, imperious, stately intractable and unruly: Quick, Horat. in
Art. Poet.
testy, not entreatable.
of stomach very stout:
Not thinking Laws were for them made,
but fight and blade it out.
This is my will, this is my hest,
thus shall it be, I say, Iuuen. Sat. 6.

Thus I command, my will in steed
of reason bears sway.


But as he is by Nature very testye and soon angry, so is his Cholerique
mood soon alayed and pacifyed.

Now, sythens beside yealowe Choler which only is called Natural, there be
diverse other differences thereof also, we must orderlye entreat as occasion
falls out, of every one particulerly.

First of Yelowe Choler is engendered Pale, Pale or Citrine Choler
or of the color of a Pomecytron, mean between green and yelowyshe. It
bears chief swaye at the beginning of the Spring, in young men and bodies
not yet come to their full growth, when as fresh Blood newlye sprowteth in
their Bodies. Whereupon, that Age specially at this time of the year is
much subject to Tertian Agewes, Tertian Agues.
namelye if this Humor through obstruction do putrefye, and being scattered
without the Veins, happen to be enflamed. Much like whereunto is the
Bastard Tertian: so called, for that, it is engendered not altogether of Yelowe
Choler, but has some part of Phlegm also joined with it. Bur^ing Age^es.
For Burning Agewes do proceed and be enkindled of read Choler, putrefyinge
and rotting within the Veins, which bring a man into idle talk, Phrenste and
rauing. For they that be herewith affected conceive in their minds certain
fond and absurd imaginations, thinking themselves to see some tertible
apparitio^s and sights, whereby in the nights they be greatly troubled in their
sleeps and sore affrighted.

Tossed and turmoylde with dreadful dreams,
and grysly griepes by night, Lucan. lib. 7.

Vexed with vain terrors in their Sleep,
appearing to their sight.
They dream of fire and burning of houses and Towns, and think all the
world to be in an uproar and hurly burlye, Choleric folks have many dread
full and terrible Dreams.
killinge and sleying one an other: and some of these fantastical
imaginations sometime happen to a man without any Agewe, when as the fumosity
of Choler stryketh up into the Brain. Which if they happen of any long
continuance to disturb the body and mind, it shall be most expedient to take
an other order of diet, and foorthwyth to purge Choler by vomyte, sweat, and
euacuation by Siege, which may be conveniently done with Radix Pontica, and
such things as provoke Vryne, as these Herbs: Alkakengie, Sperage, Gardeyne
Parslye, Anyse seed, How to purge Choler.
and Fenell seed: forbearyng all hoate, fat and sweet meats, which are very
apt to be turned into Choler, excepting only Reysons and Liquirice: and
only to eat such things as are of virtue to qualefye and alay the heat of
Blood.

And specially Sleep must be provoked with Lactuce and other salet herbs,
Sleep whole some and good for Choleric folk.
that do humecte and refresh the Brain and all other parts of the body. For
albeit to hot and dry complexions, and all Choleric persons many things be
both hurtful and pernicious, yet is nothing more noisome and prejudicial then
unseasonable labor, watch, long forbearing of victuals, fumish anger and
testynesse, Venus and immoderate company of Women. For every of these does
waste and consume the strength and powers of Nature: neither may any thing be
conveniently taken from them that be dry and lean may marye, they had rather
need to be franked and tenderlye fed with delicate fare and deinty cheer, to
restoare and mayneteyne them: then either to be skanted, or to take that which
wastes nature. For es Cattle best lyketh in ra^ke pasture wherein is good
grass and water enough: so do they of this Complexion require exquisite fare.
And even as those Trees and Sprayes that do not burgen and ramifye, would not
be lopped nor cut: so likewise wearish weakened bodies (lacking many things
in respect of a firm habit of bodily constitution) ought not in any part to
be weakened, neither can well spare any thing to be taken away from them.

But there is an other kind of Choler, swaruing and degenerating from Natural
order and mean, Yolkie Choler.
called of Physicians Yolkie Choler, borowing his name of the yolke of an Egg,
whose color and consistencie, it does neerelye resemble. For by means of his
excessive heat it is thickishe, and of color f^ery, and very yelowe: which
if it should happen to putrefye and be enflamed, it breeds Agues most
ardente and burning. Therefore for so much as this kind of Choler is shrunk and
gone from mediocritye, it shall be expedient to frame a clean contrary diet, and
to ensue an other manner of order, for the subduing and dryuing away of this
straung quality. For if a man should still cheerish and tender it with his like
nourishmentes, he should do nothing else but exasperate the distemperaunce, and
increase the tyranny thereof, and make it more vehement.

There is also an other kind of Choler, called Leekish, Leekish or grieve
Choler.
so named because it is as grene as a Leeke, which is bred and engendered in the
Stomach, through naughty and corrupt juice, and of certain gross potherbes:
of which sort, are Garlic, Leekes, Onyons, Cresses, Rocket, Colewortes,
Betes, Cheruyle. For when as Nature is not able to subdue and master these and
such like nourishme^ts, they be turned into a Leekish or green Choler, which
being sometime parbraked and cast up by vomyte, leave in the tongue and Chawes,
a certain bitter relice and sharp savor, insomuch that with other sweet
licour it is hard to be gotten away and abolished. Also this noisome Humor
sometime is engendered in the Liver and Veins, by means of some grievous
sickness, when as yolkie colored Choler is adust with vehement inflammation of
strange heat, which to vomyte up by perbraking, Lib. 2. praedict. ca. 39
Hippocrates affirms to be most dangerous.

Out of this proceeds yet an other excreme^t, worse then any of the rest,
Rustie or Brassie Choler.
called (of a likeness that it has with rusty brass) Rusty or Brassie Choler,
which is engendered of Leekish or green Choler vehemently adust. For when the
humidity is with intensed heat excocted, it becomes dry and resembles the
rust of Brass: which thing we may plainly perceive by hot glowing things,
extremely burnt in the fire, whereunto the nature of Choler may very aptly be
compared. For the force and virtue of fire, changes the wood, first into
burning coals, then into black coals, and last of all, when the fire has
quite consumed all, and heat is slaked, into Ashes. So likewise in the body of
mankind, Choler is first of saffro^ color, then (as heat increases)
Leekishe, somewhat contrary to nature: next Brassie or rustie, and last of al,
bluish or sky color, like unto Wadde an Herb that Fullers and Dyers use in
coloring and dying their clothes, which last of all is turned into perfect
black Choler or Mela^choly.

All these sorts of Choler, endued with virulent and poisonous qualityes,
infecte the mind with lewd conditions, and the body with loathsome diseases,
whereof many be of such malignaunt nature, that hardly will be cured: as eating
Cankers, corrodinge ulcers, runninge pockes, loathsome tettars or ryngwormes in
the face, Morphew, the Carbuncle, wyeld fire or S. Antonies fire, Herpes, the
eating and devouring Ulcer called Estiomenus, The Wolf (...), disease.
and of Courtiers (who commonly more then others are thereto subject) named the
Wolf: for it exulcerateth the skin, and eats the flesh to the very
boanes, rottinge and putrefyinge the same, depryuing the member of life, and
from feeling of any pain, beside many other loathsome and co^tagious diseases,
proceeding and sprynging out of the common syncke and concurrencye of these
Humors, in so much that a man in this case caryeth about with him nothing else,
but a stinkinge rotten and corrupt Carcass: And loathsome lymms, replete with
mattry fylth. Virg. AEneid. 1.


Of a cold and dry Complexion: wherein the Nature and condition of a
Melancholique person (because he is of this temperature and subject to Choler)
is at large declared: with remedies how to qualefie and subdue the same, fullye
decyphered The vi. Chapter.
THose bodies of all others are in worst case and habit, which consiste and be
constituted of ye combination and composition of Cold and Dry. For considering
that the mayntenaunce and conservation of life consists in Hot and Moist:
who is he that can rightlye commend or allow that quality and constitution of
body, which wears away and wastes these fomentations or cheerishmentes of
life, being the chief and only (...) of health and welfare? For we see in the
whole course of Nature, and in all things within the universal World,
Plants, Herbs, all Creatuers endued with life, Men and all that live by
breath, when they be once depryued, or lack heat and moisture, quickly to
decay, and grow unto destruction.

For none other thing is Death, neither can any fitter definition be devised
for it, then to say, Death.
that it is an abolishment and destruction of life and Nature spirable, and an
extinctio^ of the first qualities, whereof the Humors have their being and
mayntenaunce. Man subject to many casualties.
Whenever therefore a man arryueth and is brought into these qualityes,
either by Sickness, Nature, or by Age and course of years, let him make his
full reckning that Death is not far of. For as touching uncertain, haps and
sudden casualties which every minute of an hour hauge over all our heads
generallye, I think not meet hitherto to be referred, nor in this place to
be reckened: for y^ they happen violently and against Nature, making an end of
life sooner then by course of nature else should be. Which happes and chances
as they ought not to terrifye and dismaye any man, either iourneying or
Seafaring (forasmuch as every Christian ought to commend and refer the
success and event of his whole affairs and busynes, into the hands of God his
Divine providence and pleasure, and unto him only with firm Faith to lean:
So also in this plight and disposition of body, (threatened with death and
extreme dissolution) there is no cause why a man should quayle in courage, or
retchelessely (by all convenient means he may) neglect to tender and cheerish
his body: but so long as any spark of life lasts, never to cease to use
all such helps and foments, as may serve to the prolongation of his days. For
God of his bounteous liberality, has graciously geeuen and appointed many
things, whereby the same may well and fully be brought about.

For as fruictlesse trees, by pruning and industry are made fruictfull: and as
barrayne ground, (wearyed with long tyllage) with dunging and composting, is
again restoared to fertility: so likewise bodies that be dry, are with
nourishment fit for the restoration of Nature, comforted, and brought even unto
the full appointed and prefixed term that by Nature is limited, as it were
into the Haven that we long wished. Which hope of prolongation and
lengtheninge of life, no man of reasonable and indifferente judgment in
consyderation of Human things can disalow, so that, every man herein
(submitting his will and mind unto his Maker and Creator in whom all things
have their being and consistence) refer his dealings and desires, What
limitation our prayers and wyshes ought to have.
unto his godly dispensation and appointment, acknowledginge all things
(whatsoever they be) to be governed and directed by the decree of his
omnipotente pleasure.

But because Melancholy is subject unto a cold and dry quality, neither can
any plighte or state of body (proceedinge hence) be worse then it, nor more
incommodious to health: therefore it seems needeful, to make some further
discourse of the condition, nature, effect, strength and differences thereof,
and how greatly it affects both the body and the mind of man.

For all me^ for the most part at the beginning of the Spring and Downfall of
the Leaf (at which season of the year this Humor does most ryfely abound)
are subject to Mela^cholicke affections, No man but is subject to Mela^choly.
namely those that be Magistrates and Officers in the Commonwealth, or
Students which at unseasonable times sit at their Books and Studies. For
through overmuch agitatio^ of ye mind, Students much troubled with Mela^choly.
natural heat is extinguished, and ye Spyrits as well Animal as Vital,
attenuated and vanish away: whereby it comes to pass, that after their
vital juice is exhausted, they fall into a Cold and Dry constitution.

And of this Melancholic Humor there be two differences, Two sorts of
Mela^choly.
the one Natural, the other beside Nature. That Melancholy which is natural
and familiar to a man, is mylder and less hurtful then the other. For being
carried and conueyghed into the Veins together with the Blood, it nourishes
the members that be of like Nature and condition to it self, and unto them
mynistreth nourishmente, as the Boanes, Grystles, Ligaments and Synewes.

For this Humor is not unlike unto Beasts feet when they be sodde^ and
brought into a Iellie, which in eatinge, Whereto Mela^choly is like.
cleave to the fyngers and lyppes, as tough as Brydlyme: whereby it causes
Blood to have a good power retentyue, and to be thicker: because when it is
joined with perfect Blood, and with the sweetenes thereof tempered and alayed,
as a sower grape with Honey or Sugar, it thereuppon becomes in taste and relyce
not altogether sower or bitter, as those things that exasperate the Jaws and
Palate, but somewhat tart and sowrysh, and as it is commonly termed, The taste
and relyce of Mela^choly.
Ponticke: such a relyce I mean, as is in a grape (out of which new Must is
pressed) being not as yet come to his perfect rypenes and maturytie, such as in
the latter end of Autumn is brought out of Germany and France into the Low
Countries, to slaunche and sill the glutting desire and greedynesse of some:
which being very sower in taste, (insomuch yt it seems to take away the upper
skin of the tongue,) their use is to condite with honey and honey combs: to
make it (for them that have quaysye stomachs) better relyced, and pleasaunter
in taste. And as ye dreggs, mother, or settlinges of Oil, reteyne a tallage of
the Oil: and as the Lees of Wine keep a certain taste, relyce and smell of
the Nature of Wine: Even so Mela^cholicke juice which proceeded from Blood,
reteyneth the spettle and taste thereof. Wherefore this Humor may seem
somewhat improperly to be called Atra bilis, sythens there is in it no
adustion, De locis affect. lib. 3. cap. 5.
but (as Galene says) a blood or Melancholic juice, which is nothing else
then the dryer and thicker part of blood, altogether like unto dregs and
Lees, yt settleth in the bottom of the vessel, and conserueth the strength and
vigor of the Wine, and suffers it not to wast and vanish. And as the Lees or
Dregs of Wine called in Dutch Droesen or Moeder, serve to good use and
purpose, for the making of Aqua vite wythall: Even so Melancholicke juice which
(it I may so plainly term it) is y^ settling and refuse of Blood, has in it an
holesom use and commodity. For one part goes into the Veins, and helps
blood: the other part (much like to the former) is drawn by the Liver into
the Spleen or Mylt: The use and Nature of the Mylt.
and having thence afterward issue into the Stomach, (on the left side whereof
it lies) styrreth up appetite to meat, through the sharpness and sowrenes
that is in it. This viscous substance being soft thin, fungous, and like
unto a Spu^ge, is the Chamber of Mela^cholie, and a Receptory appointed by
nature, to draw out unto it, the dregs of Blood: and sometimes so much
swelled with abounda^ce of excrements, as though it would oppress and kill a
man: according whereunto the Cappadocian Baude in Plautus bewayleth his own
case in these words: My health decreaseth day by day, In curcul. Act. 2.

My pain increases on as fast:
My svvagging Mylt does every way,
like gyrdle, round begyrde my vvast.
A man would judge that I did bear,
within my Beally, Children tvvayne:
Wretch that I am, I greatly fear,
least burste I shall in middle, plain.


Which part of ye body because it is a great hinlet to nymblenes and agilitye,
The Mylte hinders agility and quicknes of body.
and a foul cu^bersome load to Runners, Posts, Currours and speedy
Messengers, the ignorant common people sometime thought and were persuaded,
that the best way was, cythe: to have this viscous substance quight taken
out, or else to be cauteryzed. Mylt cannot be taken away.
But in very deed it is not without great danger and hazard of life to be
taken out, no more then the Testicles or Stones can from the Castor: which is
a kind of Beast that lives both in water and on land: whom hu^ters
(reporting a flymflam tale of Robinhoode) do absurdely affirm, that with their
own teeth they byte away their own Stones, and for sauegarde of their lives
throw the same at those, which pursue and chase them. Yet notwithstanding this
viscousnes, if it swel and bolne overmuch, may be qualefyed, kept down and
repressed by using Roman and common Wormwood, ^etrach, Polipodie, Seen,
Epythyme, Rosemary, Capers, Doder, Fumitory, Hartstongue, bitter Almonds, Peach
kernels, Tamarixe and sweet Broom: For ye more yt it increases and waxes
bigger, the more the body pyneth away, and becomes leaner: The Spleen
lykened to a Princes Exchequer or Treasury
so yt very aptly did Traiane the Emperor compare and lyken a Princes
Exchequer to the Spleen. For as when a Princes Coffers be full stuffed, and his
Treasuries enriched, yt common people be wringed, pinched and empouerished: so,
when the Spleen waxes big and increases, the body is pyned away and wasted
with leanness. For so much therefore as God his careful providence has made and
ordained this member to purefie y^ Liver, and to purge and skum away the
gross and feculent part of the Blood: it stands every man in hand, by all
means possible, carefully to forsee, y^ it incur not any inor take any
harm. For if the Spleen or Mylte should suffer obstruction, or fall into
imbecillitye and weakness: the Mela^cholike juice disperseth it self into
every part of the body, making the skin to be of a sootie and dunne color:
and further disquieteth the mind, with sundry straung apparitions, and
fantastical imaginations.

But if it throughlye perform the office, The Mylte causes a man to laugh
and be merry.
for which it was ordained, and do exactly drink up y^ drossie feculencie of
Blood, it makes a man thervppon wonderful meerye and iocunde. For when the
Blood is syncerely purefyed, and from all grossenes and feculencie purged, the
Spyrits consequently are made pure, brighte and clear shyninge: Whose purity
and clearenes causes ye mind to rejoice, and among meery companio^s to
laughe and delight in pretty deuyses, merry co^ceiptes and wa^ton phansies.
Which thing likewise commonly happens to them, that moysten and whittle
themselves well with wine: who (although otherwise in dealinges they be
naturallye stern and surly, Wine cheereth the hearts of them that be severe
and makes them as merye as a Pie.
and outwardlye in countenance and manner of gate, pretendinge a kind of
severity:) Yet being somewhat heated with Wine, and lighting in the company of
amorous and beautiful Damosells, they set cock on hoope, and shake away from
them al their former grimnes, and wayward manners, and become as meery as the
meryest.

And thus have I my self known some, and that of no mean calling, who
(either through inclynation of their Nature or custom of life) clean geeuen
from all company, lookinge with face and countenance grim^^e and severe, with
brows knyt together and frowninge, with eyes sullen, stern, terrible,
glauncing aside and eska^ted, What time Melancholic persons be out of measure
merry.
enough to make such as meet them afraid to look upon them: who
(notwythsta^ding) when they have been in company with young pleasant Maidens
and meery Gentlewomen, have (for the while) forgone and laid aside their
seueritye and Stoycal precysenes, and in Dauncinge have shaken their legs,
and footed it as roundly as the best: But the meery convocation being
dissolved, and the solemn myrthe fynished, have eftsoon returned to their
Old Nature, wanted manners, and accustomed gravity.

My advise and counsel to them in this case is, Best for grim and severe
folks to use merry company.
to exhort them to use such merry compaignyes: and often to frequent such
pleasant conferences: thereby to acquainte themselves with curtesye and
familiar humanitye, discontinuinge and abandoning that their former
counterfeite and disguysed severity: and to dispose their minds to the well
lyking of Nuptial society.

To them therefore that be Splenetique and sick of the Mylte, and to as many
more, as are of Nature, sorrowful, lumpish and sow^^measurable drynking of Wine,
exercise of body, company and meery fellowship brings both a sound health, and
a pleasau^tnes of life. For by framyng themselves this way, natural heat is
strengthened, and (like fire with often styrring and rakinge) begi^neth to
shine, glitter and sparckle: the wearyed and la^guishing spyrits (when this
synke of Mela^cholie is once exhausted and al fuliginousnes banished) are
revived, and with their shyning brightness clarifye and illuminate all ye senses,
whose mynisterie the mind uses, making them ready and apt throughlye to
atchieue and execute their due offices, actions and charges. And therefore this
old Verse (although not curiouslye penned and fyled) which is common almost
in every man's mouth, seems to me not altogether absurd: neither much
swaruinge from truth.

Men's sapit, and Pulmo loquitur, Fell suscitat iras,
Spen ridere facit, cogit amare iecut.
In English thus: VVitte from the Mind, Speech from the Lu^ges,
From Gall proceeds Ire:
From Mylte is caused Laughter: from
The Liver, Loves desire.


From the functions of which Entrails, The souereigntye of the heart.
the Heart which is the founteyne of life and natural heat, and the oryginall
of vital spyrite, is not excluded: as in whom, rests the chiefest and most
pryncipal power and faculty, in the exployting of any thing incident to
Nature. Of it, such famous men as excel, and be renowned for wisdom and
experience, are called Cordati: and they that want, Cordati.
and are further of, from the same, are termed by names, taken of the
impotencie and imperfection of the mind in that behalf, and of such
affections as differ most from Temperaunce and moderation. Herevppon are they
that nosle themselves in Sloth, idleness, negligence, lazynesse and ease
(neither addicting themselves to any profitable study, tendinge to the Glory
of God, neither to their own avail and furtheraunce in dyrectinge them to
any virtuous lyuinge, Socordes.
are called Socordes. And an other sort worse then these (called Vecordes) be
they, Vecordes
which ymagine and devise in their mind nothing but fraud, collusion, deceit,
murder, treachery, burninge, treason, spoil of their fellow cytizens,
destruction to their native Country: and finally in their minds lay the
Platform and weaue the toil, of most villainous myschyeues.

Which inward vices, and graceless outrages of the mind, evidently and
apparau^tly descry and show out themselves in the eyes, face, countenance,
forehead, eyebrowes, and in all the outward shape and habit of the body
beside: and if it so happen that they be therein taken tardye, they frette and
fume, they slampe and stare, they stand mute and speachlesse, they stagger and
solter, they cogge and dissemble, they wrangle and face out the matter, they
flatly deny the deed, or else aunsweare so doubtfullye and perplexedlye, y^ a
man cannot tell* where to have them finally either they will lay the fault in
an other man's neck, as did Adam: Genes. 3.
or else coigne odd shyftes to clear themselves. And if we be desirous to have
a pattern of such a one, Catiline.
let us behold Catiline, a factious yonker, (as Salust reports) and armed
with the brandes of sedition against his friends and Conntrey: whose color
(through the conscience of his ungracious deeds, and disquietnes of mind) was
pale as ashes, and without any blood, his eyes terrible and grymme, his pace
and gate somewhile quick, and somewhyle slow, and in whose face and
countenance a very harebrained and raging madness appeared.

With the like fury and outrage was king Saul incensed, to commit murders
and many other detestable enormyties. 1. Reg. 20
Cayn also stynged with the same furyes and remorse of mind for killinge his
brother, fell into desperation and utterly mystrusted any forgeeuenes or mercy.
For when as the Lord God examyned him of ye murder which he had committed,
Genes. 4.
and charged him with the heinous cruelty thereof, Cain as though he had been
guyltlesse in the matter, flatly aunsweared, that he could neither tell what
was become of his brother, Cain a pattern of desperation.
neither where he was, nor how he fared, nor what he did, but impude^tly
auerred himself utterly ignorant of al dealings touching the same.

Of the defectes of the heart and infirmity of ye mind and reasonable part,
are they termed Excordes, in whom is restaunte some part of Melancholy, but
the same brutishe: for they be void of reason, foolish, blockeheaded, doltishe,
dull and doting, whom some plain writers call insensate. S. Paul, reproving
the Galathians of foolishnes, Gal. 3.
calls them (...), that is to say, grossewitted, dullards, blocks, fools
and not of capacity able to conceive things good and wholesome, but starters
back from the profession and doctrine wherein he had instructed them.

And therefore the Brain or principalitye of Reason, Agreement between the
Heart and the Brain.
conspyreth and agrees with the strength and power of the heart, and these
twain do mutually aid one an other: so that they (in whom reigns wit,
reason, judgment and understanding) are very aptly called Cordati, discrete
and wise. For by the means of those helps and furtheraunces, they stoutly
attempt and courageously compass great and waightye matters, and what soever
the mind conceyueth, they by direction and guyding of wisdom, bring to pass
and execute.

The other before rehearsed Entrails, The Gall is the fou^teina of Anger.
have also their proper force and efficacy, as the Gal ministers cause and
occasion to Anger, brawlinge, contention, The Liver causes lust and carnal
desire.
chydinge and quarellinge. The Liver abounding with Blood, and heated with Wine,
incyteth the Reins to ye desire of amorous embracements, fleshly
concupiscence, lecherous lust, riot and lasciuiousnes. The heart, by help of
the Lu^ges, the vocal Artery and tongue (which serves for vtteraunce of
words and internal devises) expresses and utters the cogitatio^s and
meanings of the mind. The Spleen or Mylt (if it be not otherwise empeached)
makes a man exceedingly to delight in iestinge, The Mylte being in right case,
cause of myrthe and cherefulnes
laughter, mirth, pastime and wa^tonnes, mynding no earnest matters, but
letting the world slide, geeueth himself to pass the time merilye.
Contrariwyse if it be surcharged and overwhelmed with toomuch co^fluxe of
filthy Humor, and be debarred or disappoynted of the ordinarye help and aid
of the Liver, either through imbecility or obstruction, then brings it many
discommodities and annoyaunces, no less hurtful and prejudicial to the mind
then to the body, The Mylte affected, makes the mind heavy and sad,
as Heaviness, sorrow, sadness, fear, and dread of myssehappe to come,
carfulness, thought, desperation and distrust, yt* is to say, clean out of
hope of any better Fortune. Which affections and perplexities cast a man into
exceeding grief, Perturbations of mind
torment, vexation and martyrdom, wearing away his beauty, and wasting his
bodily comeliness, and making him to look like silver al fustyed with chimney
soote, or as bright and handsome things in a reekie house that are besmered,
dusked and smoked.

For when the dregs and refuse of Humors have recourse thither in greater
abundaunce then the heat and natural power of the member is able to wield and
qualefye, ye greater is the decay thereof, and much more daungerously is it
oppressed. For as a Porter or labouringe man which caryeth burdens, heavier
then his strength will allow, cannot but fall down under the weight, thereby
many times hurtinge both himself, and spoiling his carriage: So when greater
stoare of Melancholique juice is conueighed and deryued into this viscous
member, then it is either able to bear or by concoctio^ to overcome, it is
thereby sundry wise distempered and brought into many diseases.

For when the Spleen is affected, the Stomach consequently suffers cruditie,
Diseases of the Spleen.
loathing of meat, and is much infested with breakinge of sower wind upward:
the Hypochondrion or wast, and the heart strings inflated and swollen, ye body
becomes slender and thin, the gummes vlcered with mattry wheales, the teeth
wa^n colored, rustie, loose, hoarish and rotten, their mouth stinking, their
Chawes rammishe, And throat vpbelching fulsome breathes. Pers. Sa. 4.


Into the number of these sickly distemperau^ces and affects of the Mylt, I
recke^ also the diseases, yt of old writers were named Stomaracce and
Scelotyrbe, in Dutch, namely of the Phryselanders (of whom many in the Spring
and Autumn be there with troubled) vulgarly called Schoirbuick, and of some
Barbarous writers, Scarrificatio^ of ye belly. It comes and is engendered of
much corrupt baggage, and filthye ^yncke of naughtye Humors, which shyfting
out of the Mylte into the Stomach, beerayeth the teeth and gummes with a
certain loathsome and contagious infection: and for that, a part thereof
falls down into the feet, it is presently seen that the Legs and Knees
shrincke together and wax weak, ye joints lewse and enfeebled, the color
alonge the Thighs and Hammes, even to the soale of the foot, of sundry hewes,
and ugly to behold. The nature and curatio^ of which disease, because it is
exactly discoursed and learnedly handled already in a several book by it
self, by D. Guil. Lemnie, I deem superfluous and needless here ^n this place
any further to prosecute.

But all these discommodities and inconveniences of the Mylt might the better
be borne wtal, so that the lowest members and the abject and ignoble parts,
were only subject to the harms and annoyaunces thereof, (and yet are these
no less necessary in a body, then Pryuies and Synks in a house which serve to
scour and carry out al fylty Sullage) but when the principal members, and
Organes of wit and Reason, chance with semblable harm to be attached, and
with sundry affections be diste^pered, ye case requires, greater diligence and
care to be employed, for the packinge away of such backfrendes and enemies.
For the fulsome vapors (which as it were out of a dampishe Marshe or stinkinge
Camerine,) stryke upward, do annoy ye Brain with grievous and odious fumes, and
distemper the Spirits Animal with a strange and foreign quality. Hereof
comes disquietnes of mind and alienation of right wits, Signs of a
deste^pered Brain.
absurd cogitations, troublesome Dreams, gyddinesse of the head, ringing of
the ears, dazeling of eyes, mournefall sighs, trembling and beating of heart,
a mind sorrowful, co^fortlesse, perplexed, pensive and fearful: insomuch that
they which be in this sort affected, distrust, and be afraid as well of their
friends as of their enemies, looking about them for fear of danger every
mynute of an hour, trembling at every small noise and wagging of a leaf,
Torments of an unquiet mind.
and ready for fear to run into a mouse hoale, although there be no cause
of any such fear at all: and if they be demanded y^ cause why they so pine
away themselves, with needelesse care and bootelesse sorrow, either they will
make no aunsweare at all: or if they do, very unwillingly and with much ado.
Insomuch that thereupon they will desire to shift and conueighe themselves out
of all company, not abiding any fellowship nor conference with friends, but
peaking in dark corners and secret solitary places, Timon a hater of all men.
like Timon (syrnamed (...), because he hated all men) and Belleropho^, who (as
Homere reports) assayed to shake of his careful thoughts and pensive
dolours by bestowing himself in some waste wilderness or solytary corner.

For he poor soul, in queachie vvoods did stalk,
Abroad in Fields, Iliad. 3.
and vvaylesse soyles aloane:
No sight of men, no company, no talk,
Could he abide: but fret his heart with moan.
By many and sundry ways do men fall into this ill case and habiting, who
before were clear and free enough from it. Causes of Mela^choly affections.
Some by the stayinge of their Hemorrhoides, and stopping of their natural
Purgations or Flowers, or by the restraynt of some ordinary and accustomed
issue. Some be brought into it, through long sorrow and heaviness for the
death of their Parents, or some great loss of worldly wealth, or finally by
myssing and being disappointed of some great desire and expectation, which they
hoped and had, of some thing to come to pass.

Yea there be some that have fallen into this Melancholic habit by watchinge
in the night at their Study at unseasonable hours, by leading a peakish and
solitary life, by hunger, penury and streict fare, or else by using and
accustoming some kinds of nourishments, whereby they brought themselves into a
cold and dry distemperaunce. Many through the conscience of their former
myssedeedes, and remorse of their wicked and abominable life aforetime led:
have plu^ged into these Mela^cholike affects, dryuing themselves many times
into such great inco^uenie^ces, Torment of an unquiet and guiltye conscience.
that what with blindness, furi^, madness and wa^te of right mind, they
become weary of their lives, and suffer many horrible and bitter torments. For
as Iuuenal right aptly says: Aye lasting sorrow, thought, and pyning care,
Surpryseth their distressed mynds full sore: Saty. (...)

It slaketh not at meals and daily fare,
But day by day increases more and more.
In night when Sleep should vvearyed limms restore
And fresh again to wonted labors make,
Their guilt vvil not permit them rest to take.
Streightvvayes repayres into remembrance than
Their Sacryledge, and sin against their God:
Each flash of lyghtning makes them pale and won:
They sweat for fear: they look for vvreckful rod
Of Divine Justice: who amysse have trod
Their steps on earth: one thunder clap vvil make,
Their hearts like Aspen leaf, to pant and quake.


Behold here (gentle Reader) the panges, vexations, fears and torments of a
wicked mind and of an afflicted Conscience, Remo^^^ Consci^^ for wi^^ deeds
denounced by God to light upon so many as forsake his laws, and
rebelliously contemn his commau^dements: inso much y^ (as the Prophet says)
he sends upon them, Esaias (...)
the Spyrit of dizzenesse or gyddynesse, and makes them to err in every good
work, eue^ as a Drunken man staggereth in his vomyte, so that by reason of
their blyndnesse of Heart, and contempt of God, and his Word, in any
distress or calamitye, yea in the horror of Death, they have nothing
wherewithal to comfort their weakness, Despysinge of Gods word, avenged and
punished.
or to salve their troubled consciences wtal: but have al their wits, deuyses
and thoughts perplexed and confused: because they lean to a broken wall, that
is, to a thing without strength, not able to relieve them, but rather sit to
hurt them: Esaias. 36 Leaning to a broken reed.
and as Esaias says, They put their trust, in a broken staff of Reed: Whereby
he means, that they repose their hope and confidence in that, which is so
far from being able to help and stay them, 4. Reg. 18.
that it rather hurts so many as lean unto it, Ezech. 29.
and (as Ezechel says) bruiseth and renteth their hands.

There are beside these, many other Examples whereby God puts the wicked in
fear, and threateneth plagues to such as despise and forsake his word and
Commandment. If thou (says he) refuse to harken to the voice of the Lord thy
God, Deuteronomy. 28.
he vvil smite thee with madness and blyndnesse, and geeue thee an unquiet
heart, and dasing eyes and sorrow of mind: and thy life shall hang in doubt
before thee: and thou shall fear both day and night, and shall have no
assurau^ce in thy life. In the morning thou shall say, would God it were
night: and at night thou shall say, would God it were Morninge, for fear
wherein thy heart shall be, and for those sightes and visions which thine eyes
shall see. Again in another place, he shows what plagues, disenses and
vexations he will send upon them. I will (says the Lord) and that quickly,
Leuit. 26.
visit you, with cold, hunger, and extreme heates: you shall flee when as no
man follovveth you, and the noise of a shakinge leaf shall make you afraid:
and when ye flee the svveard, you shall fall, no man following upon you, and
your soul shall pyne away in your unrighteousness, and myssedeedes. No whitte
better happes does Jeremy the Prophet thu^der out upon the^ y^ shrink from
God and resist his word, seeking to oppress ye worshippers thereof in truth,
Saying: Be thou not terrible unto me O Lord, Iere. (...)
for thou art my ^ope, in the day of my tribulation and affliction: Let my
persecutours be confounded, but not me: Let them be afraid, and not me.
Bring upon them the time of their plague, and bruyse them with double
contrition. For when a man is both tormented in mind, and afflicted with the
loss of worldly wealth, Double c^^trition.
and also distempered and out of good frame in body, that man is with double
contrition plagued.

For So Much therefore as these Melancholic furyes and perturbations proceed of
sundry and diverse causes, it is expediente first of all, to take away the
headspryng of the whole mischief, and to pluck up by the roots that
inconvenience which diste^pereth the mind. The next is, to cheerishe and
tender the body with all convenient and behoouefull attendaunce: and by all
means possible to assay, somewhat to ease and mitigate those great
distemperaunces that infest as well their bodies, as their minds. For surely
the case of these kind of persons is to be pytied, insomuch that none (except
such as make non account of honesty and humanity) either will or ought to
flowte or mock at them, but rather will lament and be sorry to see them
brought into such pytiful taking, and to be so lamentably fallen from the
judgment of right wit and reason.

S. Paul has a worthy saylinge, which also may well ve applied to these
persons. Let him (says he) that thinks himself to stand, 1. Cor. 10.
take heed lest he fall: Whereby he aduyseth and admonishes every man (in the
whole course of this life) not to be too proud of any prosperity and welfare,
neither (in putting toomuch trust therein) to promise unto himself security. For
it may com to pass, yt by some mysfortune or outward accidente he may be taken
tardie, and fall himself into worse diseases both of body and mind, and
greater the^ they, whom a little before he so much skorned and mocked.

But because every one may readily understand and know the notes and tokens of
a cold and dry Complexion, Notes of a cold and dry Complexio^.
I will here by the way describe and show as well the evident marks of the
bodily shape outwardlye, as those of ye mind inwardly, which in words, deeds
and conversation, show out them selves apparently: and finally what effect
Melancholy works. And because Melancholic nature is subject to this
Constitution, the same signs and tokens are also hither to be referred. For
whosoever is disposed to have full trial of a cold and dry complexioned body,
and throughlye eyeth them that be Melancholicke, shall at ye first sight,
plainly perceive them in all points to agree together. For these complexioned
persons are of body ill favored, lean, dry, lank, pylde skinned, and without
hair, crokenayled, which through dryness or siccitie become and grow
crooked, eue^ like horn or leather that crumpleth together: specially when
this habit is throughlye by continuance settled, and with increase of
qualities has taken deep roots, as appears in them y^ be worn with
sickness and Oldage.

And because all the parts of the body do fade, drowpe, Persons Ph^^gmatick
(...) colored.
and be no longer nourished, it happens that the hairs wax thin, and by
little and little fall of, and the face becomes pale, yelowyshe and swarty.
For in all them that be Splenetique, ye color fades and decays, the feet
swel, ye Stomach is with crudity distempered, and by reason of ill humors
having influence into it, is many times troubled and subject to belking and
sower vomitting, y^ breaking out whereof, does greatly ease them. As touching ye
notes and marks of their minds, they are churlish, whyning, wayward and ill to
please, stubborn, intractable, obstinate, greedy of worldly goods, and
covetous of money, pinching and sparing, when they have got it, and not daringe
to spend or bestow upon themselves such things, as the necessity of ma^s life
for use requires. A man may also know the^ by their kind of gate: for they use
a certain slow pace and soft nyce gate, holdinge down their heads, with
countenance and look so grim and frowninge, as though they were lately come
out of Trophonius den, Trophonius Den. S. Patrickes Purgatory.
or out of some Cave under the ground (such as the fabulous yawning of the
earth in Irelande, commonly termed S. Patrickes den or Purgatory) is. To
conclude, the grimme and surlye Planet of Saturn, together with Melancholy so
disposes them, yt (as though they were bound by vow to silence and
taciturnity) a man shall scantly get a word out of their mouths. These
therefore and many other like, are incident unto that complexion and habit,
which is cold and dry: and do ordinarily accompanye that kind of natural
Melancholy, which is somewhat is digressed from his right state and purity.

But yt, which is in ye body beside and contrary to nature, is far worse and
more pernicious: Three sorts of unnatural Mela^choly.
and it is aptly termed black Melancholy, whereof there be three sorts or
differences. One is of Melancholic juice, turned either by putrefaction or
combustion of strange and forreyne heat into Ashes, like Wood, or other
combustible substance burnt, and with the force of fire brought into Cinders.
That which is putrefyed has a sower, sharp and tart quality. That which
proceeds of heat, does adure or burn, and with his sharp and biting Nature
does much infes^e and disquiet the body, differing from Melancholic juice as
Lees burnt, do from Lees and feces not burnt: For these feces and Lees which
were never adusted and burnt, are a great deal myelder then those whereof Aqua
vite or Aqua Composita is made. The second which is worst of all, is compact
and made of yealowe or yolkie Choler aduste, whereby it comes to pass that
it is black, like pytch, and shyneth like to Ieate, Bitumen, Colophonia, and
as certain resynie stuff, intermyngled and perfused with a Yelowyshe and
black shyning, by reason of the fierye consistence of the parts, in that
thick and compact matter. It is therefore black of color when it is not
much aduste, burned and enflamed like unto Walworte, or Elder berryes, Pryuet,
Peonie beries, or the Kernelles of black Cheryes and black Grapes: the juice
whereof dies and colors a man's hands, with a black or bloody color. And
if it happen to be enflamed and set in extreme heat, The col^^ of Mela^^
choly en^^^med.
then is it of color entermingled with a purple shyning, like glowyng hot
Gold, newly burnt in the fire. If it be immoderatelye and toomuch enflamed, it
brings the mind into furious fitts, phrenticke rages, and brainsicke
madness: Contrarylye, when all things consiste within mediocritye, it causes
and brings forth sharpness of wit, excellency of learning, subtility of
invention, eloquence of tongue and right skilful vtteraunce, with knowledge how
to speak. The last kind of Melancholy, is engendered of ye adustion o^ Phlegm.

Forasmuch therefore as there be so many sorts of Mela^cholie, and because
Melancholique persons be of so sundry conditions, manners, natures,
inclinatio^s, bodily proportions, complexio^s and colors, therefore every one
must be found out and known by the proper marks and tokens, peculiar,
incident and appertayning to them. Signs of such as be subject to
Mela^choly.
For they that be brought into this case and habit by Choler or blood adust,
have big swollen veins: for they swell with wyndynes, their bodies tawnie
colored, and very rough withal, thick hatred and bushie, by reason of
thabundaunce of heat, swelling and big lips, by reason of the concourse of
Humor and flatuous spyrite, into the higher parts, wheruppon it also happens
yt their eyes sometime be eminent and bearing out: Again, sometime (when
Humors decrease) hollow and standing inward: sometime swyft moving and
twynckling, sometimes staying, immovable and not at all quiuering: the tongue
(which is interpreter of all secreets of the mind) somewhile quick and ready,
somewhile stammering, foltering and unable to deliver out a plain word: which
distemperaunce and affecte, Sta^meringe of tongue.
may many times happen by occasion of the time of the year, Age, Country,
weather foggie and dim, or fair and clear, and finallye by the quality of
meat and drink, and hereuppon may it be endu^ed with some cold Humor.

This Humor is manyfolde and of sundry sorts, wonderfullye framinge in the
bodies and mynds of men diverse dispositions, and in them constituting sundry
habites, manners and conditions. For it may after a sort be resembled unto Iron.
Seacoales or Charcoales, which being flered, appear glowing hoate, shyning
like burnished Gold, and burninge the members of the touchers: but being
quenched, they look black, cankered and rustie. Even so Melancholy, albeit
it be cold and dry, and in color drawinge somewhat unto blacknes, yet
reteyneth it some heat of the faculty and nature of that, Melancholy has some
heat in it.
from whence it came, that is to say, Choler or Blood. For so the Dregs or
mother of Oil, the feees or vinegar of Wine, Embers and Coals, retain and
have a certain smacke or nature of the Brandes when they smoaked and were on
fler. Therefore Melancholy is not altogether without heat, but reteyneth some
deal of that quality in it. For although it be a long while ere it will be
enflamed and thoroughly heated, like Iron which must both be mollifyed and
tempered with force of most ardent and bituminous coals, and also with the
help of blowing Bellows, for ye making of ye same malleable and apt to the
Forge and Anuile: yet being once thoroughly heated, has such an excessive
glowing ardentnes, y^ there cannot be any thing more adustiue. And hereupon,
in a manner all at one instant and without any time betwixt, do we see them
sodeinly changed from laughter and mirth, into sorrow and pe^stuenes. For when
this Humor is once heated (because from it proceed and come bright and sincere
Spirits) these Melancholic persons are exceedingly set upon their mercy pin,
and (past al godsforbod) iocund, and pleasurably geeuen to singing, dau^cing
skippi^g and spo^rting, and (contrary to their accustomed to eueryone courteous,
affable, liberal and friendly, yea altogether pleasauntlye disposed and not
squemish to offer a kind kiss and embraceme^t unto any lusty wench: and
nothing then so much desyring as marriage, thereby to enjoy the hoped fruict of
Children, and to have their name in remembrance to posterity: very earnestlye
bewaylinge their loss of former time, repenting that they had not long agone
tied themselves to the World, and married. Melancholic persons fickle headed
and unconstant.
But when this great heat is cold, and the earnest panges of this newfa^gled
mind settled, when their Blood waxes cold, and their spyrites at rest, they
go back from all former resolutions, and are ready to vnsaye all that ever they
said before. They condemn and deteste yesterdayes deeds, and are much
ashamed of their own ouerslight and foolishnes.

Whenever therefore Melancholy grows into much coldness, Affectes of
Melancholy, cold.
it takes away from a man his sharpenes of wit and understanding, his
assured hope and confidence, and all his manlye strength and courage, so that
he hardly either attempteth or archieueth any matter of excellency and
worthynes: for such be doltish, dull, slow, and lu^pishe, unapt to atteyne,
learn and conceive any good disciplines or commendable Arts: and this
happens in that kind of Mela^cholie, which is mixed with great stoare of
cold, Doltishe or Asselike Melancholy.
and toughe Phlegm. Whereby it comes to pass, that such kind of men (like
Asses or other brute beasts) be blockish, unapt, dull and forgetful.

But they, whose Melancholy is with moderate heat qualefyed, The force of
Melancholy much increased.
and with Blood and other sincere Humors humected and alayed, have excelle^te
good wits and sharp judgments, and seem to do many things so notablye as
though they were furthered and inspyred by some Divine instincte or motion.
Probl. sect. 30. Quest. 13.
And for this cause does Aristotle not unaptly lyken and compare this Humor
unto Wine. For as Wine produces and causes sundry, and the same very
ridiculous fashions according to the several nature of every man, and
according to the effect and operation of the Wine it self, (for one force and
effect has Spanishe wine, an other French, an other, Maluesye, an other
Corsycke, and an other Rhenish) so Melancholy causes diverse manners and sundry
constitutions. And hereuppo^ in the Dutch phrase of speech, Sundry conditions
of Drouken folks.
there are reckened up certain conditions and delights of Drunken men. Some
being cupshot, are contentious and brawling: Some still, and never a word but
mumme: Some very babblatiue and keeping a foul coil: some weeping, howling
and heavy couraged. Yea some of this beastly Crew we see to be threatners,
cruel, bitter, fierce, spightful, arrogant, selfwilled, vainglorious, proud,
wanton, lascivious, toying, full of foolish gesture, unquiet, unstable, geeuen
to carnal Lust, and loves desire, but as Iuuenall says: Which have great
lust to Venus game,
Yet in the Act, Sat. 10.
vveake, faint and lame.


For drunkards and Melancholic persons are very lecherous and desirous of
women's company, Melancholyke folks lecherous.
by reason that their genitall members swell and be with inflations distended:
but all their courage is streightwayes laid, and al venerous lustynesse soon
quayled, Drunkards in the act of generation, very weak and feeble.
insomuch that their wives many times, be defeacted of their hope, and think
themselves with child, when they be not so in deed, by reason that their
bellyes be swelled and inflated with wind, rather then with Seed.

Melancholye therefore and Drunkenness, are in condition alike. For Drunkards
are led with many affections and phanstes, gybing and gesturing as though
they were Stage Players. For as Horace very aptly writes: What thing dares
not a dro^ken nolle adventure?
All secrets of the heart it does unfold: Lib. 1. Epist. 5.

It vvarranteth our hopes as by Indenture:
A man vnarmde to fight it makes hold:
From pensive cares and troubles manyfold
It ryds the mind: it Arts does teach with grace:
VVho^ has not Cups well fraught made eloque^t?
Whose tongue has not thereafter trould apace?
This pleasant juice to them such force has le^t.
What poor so pi^cht, that does not quight forget.
His ruful state, when wine and he have met.


Things no less ridiculous and foolish are likewise to be seen in persons
Melancholic: for many in their daily dealings, show very apishe and fond
fashions, and (although their wits be nothing at all empayred or alyenated)
yet do they occupy themselves in matters light, tryflinge, vain and
frivolous. For they be distempered in their right Wit, feedinge their own
fantasies, and doatinge not earnestlye and in deed, but after a pleasant
sort, as persons dwelling in a delightful and pleasurable madness: insomuch
that there be some of them which think themselves ill apayde, and be right
sorry that they have recovered the right state of their wits and come well home
again: sharply expostulating with their welwilling friends, which friendly
labored and took pains for their recure: and blaming them as men that had
rather done them harm then good. One of this plighte, a Grecian borne, and of
no base house and pedagrew, does Horace depaint and set out unto us thus: Who
thought himself brave melody to hear,
And galaunt Bloods on Stage their parts to play, Lib. 2. Epist. 2.

Such pleasure he conceived in this gear:
That on the Stage which empty was all day,
He sat and fed his fancye every way,
With sight of that which was not so in deed,
Yet seemde to him as true, as was his Creed.
At length when he by means of vvealthy friends,
And diligent attendaunce at any ynch,
By drougs and dri^cks (which help and succor le^ds)
Recured was from that his grievous pynch,
And ryd from that his Melancholy vvrynch:
In faith (que he) my friends, you have my spoiled
And kylde me clean: by you I am thus foiled.
Sure, unto me you have done great displeasure,
To make from me (perforce) this doting treasure
which fed my mind with joy vvithoute^ measure.


So since the time that I first began to profess Physic, many have bin
brought unto me, whose mynds ran upon absurd imaginations and fond
Pha^tastes. Certain historyes of Melancholic persons
There was one which thought himself to have a Nose so big, and of such a
prodigious length, that he thought he carried about with him the Snoute or
Mussell of an Oliphant, and that the same in every thing that he went about,
hindered him: insomuch that sometime (as he thought) it lay in the dishe
wherein his meat was. The Physician was sense for, who suspecting (as truth
was) ye same to be nothing else then a Mela^cholike affectio, ha^dsomly,
closely, and cleanly co^ueighed a long Pudding unto his Nose: that done, he
took hold of a piece of the very typpe of the flesh thereof, and with a
Barbers rasure finely cut away ye Nose which in Imagination y^ party before
thought himself to have: and immediately thereupon bringing his Pacient a sleep
with a kind of confected drinck, and prescribing unto him a wholesome diet
otherwise, banished and took quight away from him, all ye fear of harm and
inconvenience, which before enconbred him.

An other Hypochondriake person, that is to say, one, whose Hartstrynges were
embolned and swollen with Melancholy Humor and inflammatio^s, was verily
persuaded, ye he had frogs and Toades in his bealie, which gnawed and eat
asunder his Entrails: neither could he by any man be persuaded to think the
contrary: The Physician to make him more obedient and wylling (for Melancholic
folks will hardly be dissuaded or brought from their opynions, that they once
lodge within their own co^ceipts) soothed his sayings, and plainlye affyrmed
that of certaynty there were such things within him in deed as he reported.

Hereuppon after the party had taken a Purgation, and used the help of a
Clyster, there was a mean found to put some such crawlynge vermyne into the
basen of his close Stool. Now, when the Purgation had wroughte his nature and
effect, he made many Syeges and the same very abundantlye: and after view of
his excrements taken, and seeing therein what kind of creatures swymmed, he
rested satisfied in mind, and dismissed from him that foolish and vain
opynion before conceived.

An other there was which thought his Buttocks were made of glass, insomuch
that he durst not do any thing but standing, for fear least if he should
sit, he should break his rum^e, and the Glass fly into pieces. These and
such like kinds of Dotage and foolery, which either provoke others or
themselves to laughter and gladness, are quieter (as Hippocrates says) and
nothing fierce and outrageous. But those which proceed of a certain study
and careful meditation are worse, as they that be accompanied with a certain
furious temerity and rashness, suddenly and unlooked for, damnyflyng and
preiudycinge both themselves and others.

After this like sort even within our Memory, a certain Gentleman fell into
such an agony, and fools paradise, that he thought himself dead, and was in
himself persuaded to be departed out of this life, and hereuppon when his
friends and acquaintance with all kind of fair speeches, A notable story and
report of a certain Melancholic man.
flattering terms and chyding words had assayed to restoare him to his former
strength and powers now decayed: he turned the deaf ear to all that they
said, and refused all that they to him offered, affyrminge himself to be
dead, and that a man in his case^needed no sustenaunce or nourishment. So long
continued he in this fond Humor, till he was ready to sterue for hunger. When
the seventh day was now at hand (longer then which day, Such as he sterued up
with famine elye upon the seventh day.
sterued and famished persons cannot live) they began to deuyse with
themselves which way to heal this absurd passion and distemperau^ce of their
friend. They used therefore this policy: They caused certain counterfeit
persons lapped in their shrowdinge sheets, and tied after ye manner of dead
Corses that be laid upon Coffyns, and carried to burial, to be brought into
a dark Parlour: where these disguysed persons sitting down at the Table, which
was well furnished with choice of sundry dishes, tell to their victuals
lustely. The Passioned partly beholding these fellows, demanded of them
whereabout they went, and what kind of people they were: They aunsweared, ye
they were dead men. What? (quoth he) do dead men ear and drink? Yea (said
they) and that shall thou prove true, if thou will come and sit with us.
Streightwayes skipped this Pacient out of his Bed, and with the other
counterfect dead men, fed very well and largelye: and after Supper was he
broughtt into a Sleep by a drink of purpose made for that intent. For they
that be distraught of their right wits, Sleep eases the ydlenes of the brain
or rauing.
must be handled artyficially, and by no way so soon recured and brought into
order, as by Sleep. So by Sybilla as Virgill writes, was tamed, That Hellish
Curre, enradge with hungry crop,
That Cerberus with throats vvyde open three, Aneid. 6.

Was luld and brought a sleep with charmed sop
Which up he slapt with fangs full merely,
As gub that hurled was to him for fee,
With druggs and honey made full svvete to be.


It rests now, to show by what means and order Melancholic affections many
be expugned or at least mitigated. How to expunge and beat down Mela^choly.
First we must search out how and whereupon this disease took his beginning,
and in what part if consists. For seeing there be iii. differences of
Melancholy, one principally affecting the Brain: Three sorts of Mela^cholye.
and other, the whole body: the third Hypocondriacall or flatuous, which
coming of crudity and ill Humors, distempereth the Brain by consent: these
do require to be by sundry and several ways recured. If the whole body
therefore be opplete and filled with Melancholy juice, it shall be best to
begin the cure with letting the party Blood: When to let Melancholic persons
blood.
in the rest, this remedy is thought unprofitable, and to no purpose, except
overmuch abundau^ce of Blood seem to require the same. Thus also, for the
Stitch, and swelling of the Spleen, or for a Quartaine Ague, it is right
excellent and good to be let blood in ye Vein called Splenetica, in the inside
of the left Arm.

Furthermore forasmuch as these kinds of me^ be for the most part costyue, it
shall be very profitable and requisite, Good for Melancholic persons to be
laxatiue and soluble.
gently to make them soluble and laxatyue with Aloe, Epithyme and small fearne.
For when the Entrails be slipperye, and that the excrements may conveniently
scowre away and be avoided, less vapors and fumosyties do ascend and stryke
up ward: wherefore Hippocrates is of opynion, Lib. 6. Aph. 48.
that it is right wholesome for persons Splenetique and Melancholicke, to be
laxatiue: Finallye yt the Hemerrhoydes, swellinge of the Ueynes with Mela^cholyke
blood, swellinge of the tuell, and the Pyles to breed and swell in the
Fundemente and neither parts, Spirits shuffle themselves in, among the humors
is for them that be frantique and out of the right course of their wits,
very good. And although evil Spyrites dommixe themselves with humors, making y^
same a great deal fiercer and vehementer, yet the chiefeste cause and
founteine of all this mischief and inconvenience is to be imputed to the
outrage and domination of Humors. For when noysom Humors be purged and gross
fumosities dispersed, the fury is well calmed, and the mind brought again
into his former state and perfection.

Therefore it shall be most for their ease and profit, to procure euacuatio^ to
ye whole body, namely by ye part, whereby nature most allows to be purged:
Melancholy folks must keep them selves soluble.
and that, leysurably and by conueniente order of times: for it is not good to
stir such coals as these, with any strong medicines and purgations: then
must they have prescrybed unto them, a right good and precise diet, and eschew
all such things as enge^der thick blood: as Beef and Bulls flesh, Bacon, and
such as has been long bryned, or hanged in the smoke and hardened, wheru^to
are to be added Brawn and Bears flesh, and Venyson ofred Dear, which
commonly is brought in, for a service at Noble men's tables: and Hares flesh,
which commonly is used for a festival dish, to furnish out the Table, when
friends meet to make meerye. Insomuch, that I cannot but marvel at the usual
fashion of Dutchmen and Netherlanders, among whom this flesh is. as highly
esteemed and desired as any: neither think they any banquet sumptuous and
festival enough, Hare geeueth Mela^cholike nourishment.
unless one dish thereof be Hare: whereas no flesh in y^ world is nearer of
nature unto Melacholie then it. For it is cold and dry, unless the seely beast
be first well coursed and hunted, Hare the holeso^^er (...) ^^g^hly hunted
for that is the way to make it somewhat more hot, toothsome, and wholesome.

Every part of this beast, is of a drying force and virtue, Ahore good for
many purposes in Physic.
and is endued with an astringent facultye, both the hayres, the skin, the
blood, the Mawe and the flesh. For the Mawe of a Hare myngled with red Wine and
dronck, stops the bloody Flixe y^ comes of the excoriation and gnawi^g of
the bowelles: it also stays women's terms: the hairs being burnt or chopped
small, are a present and right sovereign thing to stay any great flux of
blood in a wound. The Brain wastes the superfluous moisture and dryuelinge
of the mouth, and makes the teeth to grow: y^ Huckle boane, the commissures
and ligaments thereof, are good to break the stone. The flesh also of an Hare,
if it be much eaten and used, cures the rewine that falls out of the head,
and helps y^ Epilepsie or falling Sickness, which is a disease engendered of
gross and clammie Phlegm: so that each one of these does sufficientlye prove,
this Beast to be dry, and Melancholic, as the whole condition and nature
thereof, plainly shows: namely the flesh which in color enclyneth to a
blackness.

Now, whereas some both of old and later time, have been and yet be persuaded,
that the eating of Hares flesh, makes men pleasant and merrily disposed: and
not that only, but also in bodily shape and countenance to be fair, galant,
and beautiful: I do not think, neither am I of opynio^, ye any such thing can
happen through eating ye flesh of such a fearful and timorous seely Creature:
but ye rather hereuppon it had his beginning: because when meery Compaignions
are disposed to make good cheer, they commonly use to inuit call into their
compaignies some beautiful Damosells, and pleasant Peates to pass away the
time more merrily: whereas they that be of small accoumpt and hard favored to
the eye, are never requested unto any such pleasurable assembly, but be suffered
to sit still at home, being reputed in comparison, but as gross Stuff and of
the second sort, and such as never (according to ye proverb) tasted or eat of
an Hare. Which thing ye Poet Martial in a certain pleasant Epigra^me does
intimate unto his Lady and Mistress, in words to this effect.

O Gellia, Lady mine, thou say,
when Hare thou sendste to me:
Days seven (Mark) thou shall be fair,
and beautiful of glee.
If these thy words (svveete heart) be true,
and roue not out of square:
Then surely, Gellia, thou thy self
not yet have eaten Hare.
Which opynion of ancient and long time agone in many men's heads settled, To
eat a Hare, a Proverb.
I suppose hereuppon took his first beginning (for hither to of none has it
been expounded) that he which had been at any solemn and festiual banquet, (
such I means wherein Hare is one service) appears for ye next seven days,
courteous, pleasant, iocund and full of merry conceits. For when a man has been
in pleasant company and at good cheer, where all things have but meerilye
discoursed, and the tyms ioyously passed, there appear for the space of
certain days after in his face and countenance, forehead, brows, lips,
eyes and beckes (for all these are be wrayers and tellers of the mind
inwardly) great tokens of mirth and alacrytie, Moderate myrthe and ba^quetting
stirs up a pleasant color and reuiueth the Spirits.
and many arguments do outwardly testify the chereful dispositien of the
internal Spyrits. For the body being heated with laughing and ioyinge, with
kissing and dalying, with dauncinge, Wine, and singing, is made fresher and
better colored, for that the Blood is diffused into the utter part and habit
of the body. These are therefore the causes, why the eating of an Hare dryueth
away and dispelleth the Cloudy cares of the mind, makes the countenance
clear and delectable, and the face ruddie, fair, and wall complexioned,

For as they that be angrye, or perplexed with fear, The outvvard countenance
of a man, bewrays the inward affections of his mind
are commonly seen to be of a troubled and disquiet mind, and by many
outward signs to bewray the affections of their afflicted conscience: even so
they that have the world at will, and their hearts far from all careful
affections and troublesome perturbations, show forth sure and certain tokens
thereof in the body outwardly: yea the very countenance, color, face,
forhead, eyes, mouth and generallye all the other fashions and gestures
thereof, do pretend and witness a certain securitye of mind that is at peace
and quietness within it self.

Now, Diet for Melancholicke persons.
as touching Diet: Let them that be of this cold and dry Constitution, and
they that be Mela^cholike, accustom themselves to such meats as be of good
and laudable juice, and to drink that wine which is of the best sort and
purest: let them lie in very soft beds and sleep well and long, let them
eschew and forbear all things that be salt and sower: and above all things,
let them take heed of crudity, let the^ use moderate exercise and styrring of
themselves. For as maryshes and standing waters become dampish and stynking: so
likewise the body lacking exercise, gathers fulsoments and pestilent savors.
If violent motion and exercise be unto them painful and laborious, they may
recreat and exercise themselves with pleasant singing, Musical instruments and
delectable and walkinges.

Let them banish away all affections of the mind, heaviness, sorrow, thought,
hatred, anger, indignation, envy, etc. Neither let them suffer any such to
lodge within their hearts: let them also avoid solitariness, long abstinence,
and lassitude: and let them use at possible means to restore their right
powers, Liquide meats do quickly non rish.
first with meats and nourishments that be liquide (for they do quicklyest
nourish, and encomber not the Stomach greatly in concoction) but when their
powers be increased, let them acquainte themselves, and use meats that be
solid and substantial. Let their bread be of the fynest wheat, Such as be
subject to sickness and quaisie, must eat but little bread.
and let them eat thereof but measurablye and sparinglye: for it is hardlye
concocted, and taryeth long in the stomach: and therefore to Laborers,
Caryers, Maryners, Carters and such like, it brings strength, and engenders
flesh durable and fast. Now, they that in time of perfect and sound health, The
cause that bri^geth a strong breath.
do use to eat little bread: have strong breaths and stinking mouths. This
proporcio^ therefore is requisite, there in to be used, to eat twyse as much in
bread as in victual or other cates.

As concerning the order that they are to keep for Dinner and supper, unless
custom be to the contrary, or that they be troubled with distillations of the
head, let their Supper be larger and more in quantitye then dinner: foreseen,
that immoderate faciety and surphet be always eschued.

To be short, and to knit up this matter with an wholesome advise and counsel:
let all such things as be prejudicial to health, Wholesome exhortation.
and hasten oldage before his time, be put away and banished. Chiefly and
especially maynteining and keeping wything our selves tranquillity and
constancy of mind, Quietness and tranquillity of mind makes all in good order
and frame.
which gift we are most humbly and earnestly to crave at his hands, which most
bountefully bestows and powers out his blessed gifts and lyberalitye upon
us, who is God our heavenly Father, and his dear and eternal Son Christ
our only Savior. For beside y^ o^utward gifts and things transitorye, which
at his bountiful hands, for our use and commodity we most abunda^tly taste
and enjoy, he also directs our minds with his holy Spyrite, and moves our
cogitations and wills every minute, to ensue that is good and godly. He urges
and pricketh us forward continually, so that we feel the motions of his
mighty power working in our hearts, by stre^gthning and confyrming our Faith,
that we thereby constantly leaning to the promyses of God, may rest in a sure
trust and undoubted hope, to be afterward made partakers of his Heavenly joy
in everlasting felicity. Amen.

Thomas Newtonus, Cestreshyrius.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
ADolescencie. 29. Aduertisemente to Students. 52 Affections natural. 35
Affections how and whereof they come. 9. proceeding of surphet and
dronke^nesse. 10. and 59. Affections of the mind alter the color, and
complexion of the face and body. 90. Affections common to al men. 59. harms
thereof. ibid. Ague called Ephemera. 102. Ague called Epiala. 107. Agues
tertian. 132 Agues burning. ibid. Agreement between the heart and the brain.
141 Anacardus good for the memory. 126 Angels good and evil. 22. and 24
Angels entermingle and shuffle in, themselves among our humors. 153 Anger. 58.
128. 141 Apoplexy. 126 Aristomenes his subtle shifting 43 Arteries. 89
Astonishment. 94
B
Baldness how it comes. 69 Banqueting fit for persons melancolique. 5
moderately used commendable. 76 Bathes Artificial. 74 Bathes natural. ibid.
Beard how to make it grow. 42 Beard read, not alvvayes a token of ill
nature. 130. Best things and excellent, must not upon despair be geeuen
over. 34 Blood has all the other humors mixed in it. 86 87. 89. Blood
forbidden by Moses law to be eaten, and why. 89. Blood of great force in
framing the disposition and manners. 96. 99 Blood boyleth in young persons like
spurginge of new wine in the tun. 98 Blood provoke to vvilfulnes. 101
Bloudletting not rashly to be enterprised. 55. 89 Blood and spirit the
treasure of life. ibid et 86 Blood of fishes cold. 61 Blind byardes. 102 Body
full of sickness makes life vnpleasau^t. 3 Body consists of three things. 7
Body cold and dry how it looks. 27 Body and mind, whole and sick
together. 75 Bold rashness. 44 Brabanders. 17 Braggers. 101 Brain dry,
causes il memory. 69. 120 Brain moist, nothing retentiue nor memoratiue.
120 Brain temperate, the mayntenaunce of memory, ibid Brains best to be
eaten for the helping of memory. 125 Brains distempered, by what signs we
may know them. 143 Bread. 156 Brothes, and liquid meats, soonest nourish and
are quickliest digested. ibide^.
C
Cayne, a pattern of desperation. 140 Caloes. 99 Canis panem somnians, a
proverb. 114 Catchpoles. 58 Carnal act, hurtful to dry and cold
complexions. 74. hurtful in Summer. 81. vveakeneth the body. 120. and 133.
dulleth the wit and memory. ibid. harms thereof. 105. commodities thereof.
ibid. moderation. ibid. very hurtful to old men and al dry persons. 55 Cause
of fearefulnes in dangers. 93 Cause why many die in lustiest age. 3 Charles
the V. 91 Chaste living. 7. 107 Change in old men dangerous. 51 Children
forgetful and why. 16. must not be skanted of reasonable victualles. 27.
without beardes why. 41. sleepie. 58. stirring and quick why. 97.
remembering things done long ago 121. Childehoode. 29 Choler. 86. of two
sorts. 127. the office and property thereof 128 Choler by what parts of the
body it is purged. 128. 133. Choler pale or citrine. 132 Choler yolkie. 133.
Leekish or green. ibid. Rustie or Brassye. 134 Choleric folks dream many
dreadful dreams. 132 Choleric persons, great flouters. 99 Christ for bodily
shape, a patcine of perfection. 37. void of al ill affections. 38 Clysters.
118 Cock how to make him crovv continually with out ceassing. 127 Cold, the
decay of life. 60. vvasteth color. 65 Cold bodies not altogether without
heat. 60 Cold persons drovvsie and vnvveldie. 65 Cold things stir up
appetite. ibide^. Comparison between a common wealth and a body human. 11
Co^pou^d medicines named of some of the chief ingredientes. 32 Compound
complexions four. 84 Complexion moist. 78 Complexion dry. 65 Complexion cold,
60 Complexion hoate. 38 Complexion temperate and perfect. 33 Complexion hoate
and moist. 87. subject to putrefaction. 103 Complexion cold and moist. 107
Complexion hoate and dry, or choleric, 127 Complexion cold and dry, or
melancholicke. 135. Concord in a Realm. 12 Concord in man's body. 84
Co^tine^cie and chastity a special gift of God. 107 Contempt of God and his
word punished. 144 Contrition. 145 Convenient exercise wholesome. 7 Coriander.
126 Countenance outvvard bevvrayeth the affection of the mind invvardely. 156
Countenance, the image of the mind. 36 Counterfeit gate. 36 Color shows
the complexion. 89 Cou^sellours levvdly disposed do much harm to youth. 98
Counsel good, profitable to youth. 99 Coughe. 109 Creatures most cold in
touching. 61 Crasis. 32 Crisis. 102 Cruditie hurtful. 9. 118 Custom that is
il, must by little and little be altered. 50 Curiosity in searching high
mysteries. 77
D
David slevve a Lion, a Bear, and Goliath. 44 Death what it is. 135. and 28.
Death either violent or natural. 67 Death by ill diet and surphet, hastened
before his time. 3 Death, of it self dreadful. 67 Death to the faithful not
terrible nor dreadful. 30 Death without any pain. 93 Dead persons heavier
then living, and why. 5 Degrees of heat in man. 34 Democritus nature alvvayes
laughing. 36 Description of a body perfectly temperate. 34 Devil a crafty and
slye spirit. 22. how he learneth the thoughts of man 23. his long experyence
in mischief. ibid. his temptations ibide^. how far he is able to hurt.
ibidem. Diet for cold persons. 65 Difference betvveene sanguine and choleric
folk. 99 Dynner. 156 Diseases proceeding of phlegm. 109. of Catarrhes, and
Rheumes. 110 Diseases of the Spleen or Milt. 142 Discord and dissension in a
country, what mischief it brings. 12 Disturbers of public tranquillity
must be rooted out. 11 Diversity in natures. 14 Diversity in opinions 88
Doggish appetite. 116 Dogdayes. 47 Doltes. 101 Dreams after perfect concoction
in the night, happen not in vain. 37. 95 Dreams show the disposition and
complexion of the body. 112 Dreams natural are interpretable. ibid Dreams
divine. ibid. Dreams peculier to phlegmatik persons, ibid. Dreams not rashly
to be credited. 113 Dronkardes sleepy, and why. 58 Dronkardes stammer and
dovvble in their speech. 111. their sundry conditions. 149. in the act of
generation, vveake, lumpishe and feeble ibidem. Dycers. 101
E
EAsterlye people fearful, and timorous. 13 Education alters nature. 16. 99
Eele, being dead floateth not above the water. 111. Eyes. 80 Elements of
man's body. 25. 86 Elements four. 26 Emptines. 55 Englishmen. 18. well
colored. 48. sumptuous at their table. ibid. England for cleanlynesse and
neatnes, praised. 47 Englismen more subject to the Sweat, then other
nations. 102 English Sweat when and where it began. ibid. Erick king of
Sweden. 16 Every man must search out his own inclination 6 Every member in
the body serves to some necessary use. 12 Every part of the body has his
several office and virtue. 108 Evils must be cured by their contraries. 47
Exercise conuenientlye used very wholesome. 7. what profit comes thereof.
51. order thereof. 52. sorts thereof. 53. when to be used. 104. Exercise fit
for crookebacked persons. 53.
F.
Faith brings forth good works. 24 Fasting person, heavier the^ one that
has eaten meat. 5 Famished persons dye the seventh day. 151 Fear of death,
worse then death it self. 93 Fishes having vvarme blood. 61 Fishes living
long after they be taken out of the water. ibid. Fish, ill for surly and
solitary persons. 61 Flemminges. 17 Food holsommest to eat. 111
Forgetfulness of some things is best. 121 Form of a common wealth 11 Fowls
hard of digestion. 65 Four natural powers or Virtues. 9 Frenchmen. 18.
prompt and ready vvitted. 19 French king killed at the Tylt. 54 Friction 73.
Six sorts thereof. ibid. Fullness of stomach hurtful. 54
G.
Gall, the fountain and vvelspring of anger. 148 Garden herbs good for cold
bodies. 66 Generation of milk. 108 Generation of sperme. ibid. Germans. 16
Good diet. 19 Good for every man thoroughly to know his own complexion. 1
Gross blood. 13
H.
Heart, the fountayn of life. 9, 89 Hare makes melancholicke nourishment, 133.
being hunted and chased is much holso^mer. ibid. good for many purposes in
physic. ibidem. Harm to a Realm and to a body, first proceeds from the
head. 110 Harm of venerye and carnal copulation with women. Vide carnal
act. Hair black. 39. and 41. Curled, 39. Yealovve, 41. 129. White, ibid.
Red, ibid. Aburne, ibid. Hayres hoare. 112 Head harmed by the disorder of the
lovver members. 104 Head and stomach engendrers and receptacles of phlegm.
109 Heat likened to the Su^ne, and moisture to the Moon. 78 Heat causes
boldness. 43 makes good color. 64. Health what it is. 1. passes gold or
treasure. 2 Health asvvell of mind as of body to be cared for, because the one
cannot well be without the other. 2 Health sundry vvayes assaulted, crushed
and altered. 29 Heraclitus nature alvvayes vveping. 36 Herbs that are
venomous. 62 Herbs provoking urine. 71 Herbs good for the memory. 125 Herbs
hot, good for cold bodies. 66 Hoate complexion. 38. Tokens thereof. 39
Hoarinesse in meats. 112 Hoarcenesse. 109 Hollanders. 16. forgetful and
sleepie. ibid. Wholesome air. 19. as necessary for bodyly health as wholesome
meat and drink. 26 Wholesome exhortation. 156 Holy ghost, what he works in
us. 24 Humors are changed one into another. 3 Humors ministre occasion unto
each several complexion, to ensue several vices. 23 Humors gross, as
hurtful to the mind, as dead wine to the body. 84 Humors after a sort, are
the elements of man. 85. 86. Humors of more force then the Planets. 10 Hungry
sickness. 65 Husbandry praised. 54
I
IAundise. 128 Idleness. 64. makes the body fat and cold ibid. Imagination
of man, evil from his birthe. 14. and 19. Imaginacion of women at the time of
their co^ception. 40. 93 Infancy. 29 Intemperature what it is. 34 Influence
and force of the Moon. 78 Inclinacion of nature. 100 Ihon Baptist beheaded. 10
Italians. 17. their nature. ibid. Iugglers. 101
K.
KErnellie flesh in the dugges. 108. alterethe blood into milk. ibid.
Knowledge of the case o four own bodies, very expedient. 2
L
LEaning to a broken reed. 144 Learned and aged me^, reuere^ced in England. 48
Lettice, ill for the eyesight. 125 Lewd thoughts. 14 Liver, the Shop of
blood. 89 Liver provoke and eggeth to carnal Just. 141 Lignum Aloes. 126
Limitation for our prayers and vvishes. 136 Lyquide meats sonest and
quickliest nourish. 156 Long life, how it may be orderly procured. 68 Lupines
a kind of pulse, the nature and operation thereof. 5 Lying in bed on the right
side, best. 58 Lying upright upon the back, dangerous. 58
M
MAgo tamed a Lion. 4 Maluesey. 103 Mainteyners of health. 1 Many good vvittes
by ill education and lewd company marred. 4 Man's age. 30 Man a Wolf, 96.
An ape. 97. A Lion, A Fox etc. ibid. Mammiles or dugges, the receptacles of
Milk. 108 Manns corrupt nature, more prone to ill then to good. 122 Man,
daily subject to casualties. 135 Matrimony pleasant and profitable, and the
cause why it was first by God instituted. 6 Measurable feeding most wholesome.
7 Meats fit for cold persons. 65 Melancholy. 86 Melancholy may be altered.
4 Melancholy incide^t to al me^, especially to Students. 136 Melancholy of
two sorts. ibid. whereunto it is like. ibide^. Melancholy what relish and
taste it has. 137 Melancholy unnatural of 3. sorts. 146. 152 Melancholy
enflamed, what color it has. 147. Melancholy has in it some heat. 148
Melancholy cold, what affectes it causes. 148 Melancholy, doltish or
asselike. ibid. Melancholy well tempered brings forth excellent vvitts, and
sharp judgment. 149 Melancholy how it may be qualified and expugned. 152
Melancholik persons, sometimes out of measure merry. 139 Melancholic affections
how they come. 143 Melancholic persons, fickle headed and inconstant. 148
Melancholic persons lecherous. 149 Melancholicke passions, and certain
histories of sundry persons of that Complexion. 150 Melancholic person, fully
persuaded that he had Frogs and Toades in his belly. ibid Melancholic
persons imagination of a long nose. ibid. Melancholic person that thought his
buttocks were made of glass. 151 Melancholicke person that thought himself to
be dead. ibid. Melancolick persons are best to be laxatiue and soluble. 152
Mela^cholick persons, when to be let blood, ibid. Melancholic persons diet.
156 Members of the body how they agree, and be lincked together. 11. Memory
good. 69. how it may be restored. 70 Memory where it rests. 119. what
things be thereto hurtful. 120. is maintained and preserved in a temperate
brain. ibid. ill in old folks and children, and why. ibid. Memory the gift of
nature, but by Art preserved and helped. 121 Memory by healthynes strengthened,
by crudity and surphet spoiled. 122. by light suppers preserved, and bettered.
123 Menenius a wise orator, by telling a fine devised Fable of the members of
man's body, dissvvaded the Nobles and Commons from civil uproar and discord.
12 Men vviser then Women, why. 81 Morphevv. 134 Moist nourishment fittest for
children. 49 Moist complexion. 78. not given to be malicious, spightfull,
fumishe and testy. 80. their diet 82. their stint of sleep. ibid. Moistnes. 79
Moisture feeds and nourishes heat. 83 Murre. 109 Music cheareth the
mind. 53 Milk 71 Milk is white blood. 108. never eaten by Pythagoras, and
why. ibid. Milk in the breasts and dugges of young Infantes, as well male as
female. ibid. where it is generated and made. ibid. Mind in moist
complections. 91 Minstrells. 101 Milt, and the use thereof. 137. Hinders
agilitye of the body. ibid. cannot be taken away. 138. likened to a princes
Exchequer. ibide^. provoke laughter. ibid. being well and in good case, and
plight, causes mirth and chearefulnes. 141 being distempered, affected, or out
of right course, causes a heavy mind. ibid. Mirth how it is caused. 5 Mirth
at the table. 76 Mirth and pleasant company profitable for Melancholicke
persons. 5. 139. Mirth moderately used, and banqueting, reuiueth ye Spirits
and makes a man fresh colored. 154 Mixture of humors compared to wine. 107
N
Natural heat. 8. 60. Nature of Spermaticke seed, and feminine Blood. 26
Nature of persons phlegmatic. 111 Northren people. 13. 16 Nosce teipsum. 3
Notorious villains proceed not from loutis he natures, but from excellent
minds, corrupted and by lewd education marred. 45 Notes of a dry complexion.
68 Notes to know a Phlegmatic person, and his nature. 112 Notes vvherby to
know a Choleric complexion. 129 Notes of a Melancholicke Complexion. 145
Notes and nature of a Sanguine person. 101 Nucha or the nape of the neck must
be kept vvarme. 121
O
Oldage. 28. has no certain number of years appointed, how long it lasts,
as each other age has. 20. Old men forgetful and why. 16. sometimes as lusty
as youngmen, and why. 28 Oldmen by nature dry, but in condition moist 88.
much harmed by vsinge carnal copulation and venerie. 55. Old grudges. 122
Onyons ill for the eyes, and memory. 125 Oppilation of the Liver, how it
comes. 104. how to be avoided. ibid. Oppilation and putrefaction, the
original cause of all diseases. 10
P
PArasites. 101 Parts of the body subject to Phlegm. 117 Patrickes purgatory.
146 Persons mere sa^guine, commonly stark fools. 96 Persons Apoplectique.
129. how to restore the^ to the right use of their tongue. ibid. Perturbations
of the mind. 59. 141 Philip king of Spain. 90 Phlegm, the matter of blood.
107. the use and effect thereof. 109. what place of the body it is in. ibid.
Diseases growing through it. ibid. Phlegm. 86 Phlegm of 4. sorts. 115
Phlegm svveete. 116 Phlegm sour. ibid. Phlegm salt. 117. harms thereof.
ibide^. Phlegm glassie. ibid. Phlegm common to al men. 118 Phlegmatique
persons il colored. 146 Phlegmatique persons praised. 115 Phlegmatique persons
must eat light suppers. 115. Phlegmatique persons must use exercise. ibid.
Playing with the head what it signifies. 98 Pockes. 134 Polycletus rule. 33
Power attractiue. 9 Power retentiue. ibid. Power digestive. ibid. Power
expulsive. ibid. Poze. 109 Proportion of blood to other humors. 100 Proverbs,
emunctae naris, and obesae naris, expounded. 114 Pubertie. 29 Putrefaction. 10
Pypers. 101 Pythagoras. 30. his comparing of the ages of man's life, to the four
quarters of the year. ibid.
Q
QVaysie stomachs. 156 Qualefiers of the heat of blood. 50 Qualities. 86
Quinces conserved. 126 Quietness and tranquillity of mind. 156
R
RApes good for the eyesight. 125 Rebellion in the body, 14 Receiptes
laxatiue. 104 Recreations discommendable. 54. 76 Remorse of conscience for
wicked deeds. 144 Repletion. 55 Restoratiues for the memory. 125
Ringvvormes. 134 Riot and bellicheare. 10 Rue provoke lust in women,
extinguisheth it in men. 81
S
SAmpson. 43. his great strength. ibid. Sangar. 44. with a plough share
slevve. 600. Philistines ibid. Sanguine persons courteous, and mild natured.
Vide Blood. 99. Scotts. 18 Scoffers. 101 Secke. 102 Seed. 85. 105. 106.
pollution and effluxio^ thereof how it happens. 113 Shauing of the beard
helps memory. 124 Shauing of the head. ibid. Short stature. vvherof it
comes. 27 Sickness what it is. 12 Signs of sickness approaching. ibid.
Sickly persons must eat little bread. 156 Signs of a brain distempered. 143
Signs of such as be subject to melancholy. 147. Sin cause of sickness
and death. 67 Sleep and the commodities thereof. 57. and 73. time and space
thereof. 57. to what use it serves. 95. good for Choleric persons. 133
Sleepers soundly. 57. Small and unquiet sleepers. 58. Sleep by day, ill and
unwholesome. 58. good for rauing or Idleness of the brain. 152 Sleeping person
heavier then a watching. 5 Sloth and ease. 52 Sound Parents beeget sound
children. 85 Solitary persons subject to the Apoplexy. 61 Snailes life. 62
Soul. 12 Sounding. 133 Sovereignty of the heart. 109 Spaniardes. 18 Spettle.
87 Speech how to be restored. 126 Spirit. 7 what it is 8. requires great
care. ibid. being in good case and te^per causes tranquillity of mind. ibid.
being diste^pered it works sundry motions and brings disquietnes. ibid
what things be thereto most hurtful, and what most comfortable. ibid. 19.
and 20. greatly comforted with svvete smelles. 126 Spirit animal and
theffects thereof. 15 Spirit vital. ibid Spirit of nature. 20 Stammers, 111.
cannot speak softlye. ibide^. and 147. Stitches. 103 Stinking breath how it
comes. 156 Stomach and head engendrers and keepers of Phlegm. 109 Store of
hair how it comes. 41 Strong breath and stinking mouths. 156 Study by
candlelight hurtful. 74 Students exercises. 75 Superstition. 24 Supper. 156
Sweat. 87
T
Tallness of personage. 27 Temperance. 60 Temperature, what it is. 32. nine
differences thereof. ibid. subject to change. 88 Testicles. 85 Tettars. 134
Text of Esaias expounded. 114 Themistocles wished to learn the Art of
forgetfulness. 122. his nature and disposition, while he was young. 130
Things making good digestion and spirits. 5 Things good for the memory. 125
Things not natural, six. 46 Thin blood. 13 Three most wholesome things for
health. 7 Timon, a deadly hater of al men, and al company. 143 Time for every
matter. 77 Tokens of a cold complexion. 64 Tokens of a moist body. 80 Tokens of
the disposition of phlegmatic persons. 114 Tokens of sanguine persons. 99
Torments of an unquiet mind, and guilty conscience. 143 Tranquillity of
mind. 31. 59 Trance. 103 Trial of good horses. 54 Trophonius Den. 146 True
goods. 2 Tumblers. 101 Turpentine. 72 Turpentine, how to prepare it. ibid. to
make it liquide and potable. ibid,
V
VEnerie, Vide Carnal act. Vein opened, shows oculerly, each of the four
humors, 86 Veins from whence they spring. 89 Virtues defaced and marred by
vices. 44 Vital moisture. 7 Vital spirit. 12 Ulcers. 134 Unwholesome meats
spilleth nature. 27 Unableness in some to beget children. 43 Vomit must be
seeldome provoked. 55 when to vomit. ibide^. to what persons it is most
hurtful. 56 Voice. 45
VV
WAnne color. 65 VVasshing of the head. 126 Watching overmuch hurtful. 58
VVavvvard persons. 12 Whores. 106 Wolf, a disease. 134 Women full of hair
on their heads. 42 Women hayrie lecherous. ibid. cause of barrennes in women.
43 VVormevvood wholesome for the Liver. 104 Wringing in the small Guts. 129
Wife bravvlinge, and skoldinge, likened to a dropping house. 110 VVylie Foxes
130 VVylie vvinckers. 58 Wine, hurtful to children. 49. makes the heart merry.
138. Wise Men sometime fearful. 94
Y.
You^gmen sometimes vveake, vvearish, and feeble, and why. 28 Youngman suddenly
gray headed. 91 Youth. 29
Z
Zeal vvithour knowledge. 25 Zelanders. 17 Zeno. 5
T N.

FINIS.
Printed at London, in Fleetstreete by Thomas Marsh. 1576.

Cum Priuilegio.


