The laboryouse Journey and search of Johan Leylande, for Englandes
Antiquitees, given of him as a new years gift to king Henry the viij. in
the. xxxvij. year of his Reygne, with declaracyons enlarged: by Johan Bale.

iii. Macha. ij. He that begins to write a storye, for the fy^^^e, must
with his vnderrstand^^^ ^^ther the matter together, (...) words in order, and
dylygently ^eke out on every part.

To be sold in Fletestrete at the sign of the Croune next unto the white
Fryears gate.

To the most virtuous, mighty, and excellent Prince, Edward the. vi. by the
grace of God king of England, France, and Irelande, Defender of the faith,
and in earth under Christ, of the Churches of the said England, and Irelande
the supreme head, your most humble subject Johan Bale wysheth all honor
health and felycyte.
AM^^ge all the nations* in whom I have wandered, for the knoweledge of
things (most benygne soueraygne) I have found noise so negligent and
untoward, as I have found England in the due search of their ancient hystoryes,
to the syngulare fame and bewtye thereof. This have I (as it were) with a
woefulness of heart, sens my tender youth bewailed, and so much the more, for
that I have not, according to the natural zele which I bear to my contreye,
ben able to redress it for vng^^ till pouerte. A much forther plage has
fallen of late years Idolorouslye lamente so great an ouersyghte in the most
lawful overthrow of the sodometrouse Abbeyes and Fryeryes, when the most
worthy monumentes of this realm, so myserably peryshed in the spoil. Oh, that
men of learning and of perfyght love to there nacyon, were not the^ appointed
to the search of their lybraryes, for the conser^^cio^ of those most noble
Antiquitees. Covetousness was at that time so busy about pryuate commodite,
that publyque wealth in that most necessary and godly respect, was not any
where regarded. If your most noble father of excellent memory, King Henry the
viij. had not of a godly zele, by special commyssyon, dyrected maystre Johan
Leylande, to ouerse^^ nombre of their said libraries, we had lost infynyte
treasure of knowledge, by the spoil, which anon after followed of their due
suppression.

By that means we are yet in hope of somewhat to come forewarde, to the
inestymable glory of the land, namely his worthy worckes, de Antiquitate
Britannica, and de illustribus uiris, with his Epigra^mes and Epicedes, which
a great nombre of godly men most fervently despereth. This treatise following,
of his laboriouse progress, have I with all meekness, dedycated to your
magnificent Majesty, as a just possession to the right inherytour. For first
was it given of the Author, to your most noble father of famous memory in
stead of a lowly new years gift, now do I restore it t^ your worthy
highness, his natural son and only true successor in kingely dygnyte, as
your own propre good, with all submission decent. I shall not now neade to
recite to your learned majesty, what profit aryseth by continual readinge of
books, specially of aunceyent hystories, after the necessayre search of the
Bible scryptures, for the treatise here folowinge will ^lenteously declare it.
They treat what is in ych co^mo^welth to be followed, and what to be chefely
eschewed. What causes a realm to floryshe, and what does dyminish the estate
thereof, with a thousand of like matters. They much deceive Christen Princes,
that dissuade them from virtuous study of the sacred scryptures, and
Chronicles, as the vprulent papystes have done up al practyses possible to make
the^ the images of their beastin father of Rome, Apoc. xiij.

Most of all it becomes a king, to know the laws of the Lord, for he here
in earth by power represents his eternal majesty. Be learned (says David)
ye kings that judge the world embrace good instruccyons, least he in his anger
do justly abhor you. Psalm. ij. The honor of a king (says Solomon.)
stands not in strength, and riches, but in the search of wholesome doctrine,
to dyuide the dross from the silver, and to follow Gods holy
commandments, Prouer. xxii. A saying it was a thousand, a hundred, and. xxx
years ago, such time as Paulus Orosius was here a writer, that the doctrine
of Christ was cause of the decay of the common wealth of the Romans. Against
them that so blasphemously babled, the said Orosius wrote. vij. noble books,
as a confutacion of that pernycyouse error: yet is that most unhappy and
deuylyshe opinion, now raised up again from hell, and brought hither into
England, by a great no^bre of obstynate Papystes, and desperate lybertynes (it
is to be feared) to the dreadful dampnacyon of many. If any plage or
ponishement for sin do chance upon us, by the ryghtful hand of God, then is
the Gospel or message of salvation, wrongfully accused and noysed abroad, to
be the chief cause, and sturrer up thereof, and not their own fornycacyon and
brybery with a thousand myschieues more, which calls to God for daily
vengeance.

We had never good world (say they) sens this new learning came in, neither
are we like to have, till it be clearly bannyshed again. O voice more aparaunt
to come from deuylles then from me^ christened. The son of the lyuinge God
Jesus Christ shows us the plain cause, why these wicked persons so
obstynatlye dwell in the hate of his heavenly word. Every one (says he) that
works wickedness does abhor that light, because they will not their
myschieues thereby to be known. For that light manyfesteth to the world,
their foul naughty doings, and shameful oppressions to rebuke. John. iij.
These seek but to reign here in a fleshelye lyberte, over other men's wives
and goods, for the time of their cursed lives, which the scriptures will not
permyt them. And therefore they fret at the very heart, and would have them
bannyshed the country, that they so might live here without check. These
with such other most detestable abuses, whose due reformacyon chiefly
belongs to a king, may as in a clear mirror, be seane in ye said scryptures
and chronycles. It may also in them be perceived, whereof they arise, and how
they may well by good order be abolyshed. And therefore I reckon the contynual
search of them, to a Christen Gouernoure most necessary.

We find Exodi. i. that the mighty Magistrate under God Moses, among his
other most worthy acts, drove the deuouryng locustes, which had in Egypt
destroyed all that was grieve upon the earth, into the read sea, and there
drowned the^ so, that they were no more seen. The like wrought your highnesses
most noble father of excellent memory King Henry the. viij. though it were in
an other kind, such time as he dyscharged this his realm of Antichrists
noyful cattle, Monks, Chanons, Frires, Nonnes, Heremites, Perdoners, and soul
syngers, with other execrable sects of perdicion. Nevertheless our
Egypcyanes both of the clergy, and layte, have sought ever sens, and yet
seeks to this day, to lead your Majesty's people in a palpable kind of
darkness up their masses, and other sorcerouse witchcraftes, as lately apered
in the last commocyon of Cornewale and Deuenshyre, to reduce them again to the
old obedyence of the great Pharao of Rome, in ye stynkyng kyngedome of
ydolatry. But your noble counsel, to withstand this vyolence, has hitherto
most worthelye wrought, in the myghtie word of the Lord, and in the strong
power of your regal rod, to drive this horrible plage of darkness from the
face of this earth, and our good hope is, that they will gracyously so still
continue.

Solomon is commended of Jesus ye son of Syrach, Eccle. xlvij. for that the
Lord had him replenyshed with all wisdom, and for his sake had dryue^ the
enemies away far of, that he might build an house in his name, and prepare
unto him a sanctuary for ever, which al to this day we behold in your
kyngelye person fulfilled, prayeng unto God that it may so still endure. As in
your pryncelye begynnynges ye apere unto as a very Josias both in your tender
youth and virtuous educacyon, so our specyal hope is, that in your daily
procedinges we will still persevere the same. The lykelyhodes in deed are very
aparaunte, Gods name be praised for it. For by your gracious commandment,
has been taken away the abhomynacyons of the ungodly. Which is a plain
toke^, that ye have dyrected your noble heart to the living Lord, intending
to set up his true worshyppynges again. That we delivered (as Zacharias the
married pressed says, Luce. i.) out of the cruel hands of our enemies, may
serve him from hens fourth without fear, all the days of our life. These
most godly pryncyples refreshes your christen subjects, and so greatly
delyteth their obedyent hearts, that the only remembrance of your majesty's
name, is to them now more plesaunt, sweet, and delycyouse, than is any other
pleasure wordly, like as was ye name of the first Josias to the people of that
age. Eccle. xlix. The eternal living God prospere your highness in all
kinds of learning and virtue, and preserve you in long life upon earth, to
ye glory of his holy name and conforte of your loving subjects. Amen.

Ioha^ Bale to the Reader.
IN what estymacion Antyquytees have been had among men of grave wits and
judgments, Antiquitees.
the hystoryes which are, as testyfyeth Cicero, the mastresses of life and
exposytours of times, have not omytted to declare. The most ancient and
authorysable Antiquytees are those, which Moses left to the Hebrews, and
Berosus to the Caldeanes, as most precyouse treasure, and lyuelye memoryalles
in wrytinge, that both the Jews and the Gentyles, peoples
and in them all nacyons of the world might thereby know their orygynall
begynnynges. What has been done besides in the partycular Kyngedomes abroad
by their antique writers, it is known to them which have of long time been
exercysed in the readyng of their most auncye^t chronycles. Though Gyldas
Badonicus do report on the one side, in his first treatise de excidio
Britanniae, that all the old monumentes of the Brytaynes had peryshed before
his time, and were partlye burnt by the enemies, and partlye conveyed into
other lands by them that fled from hens. And although that Bedas Girminus
also on ye other side, Bedas.
in setting fourth the hystorye of the English Saxons, does omyt the
Antiquytees of the said Brytaynes their predecessors, partly of hate, as it is
supposed, and partly for want of their old wrytynges. Yet remained there of
late years in serten lybraryes of this realm (I have seane part of them) the
most worthy monumentes, Lybraryes.
concerning Antiquite, of Ninianus, Patricius, Ambrosius Merlinus, Gildas
Albanius, Merlinus Syluester, Thelesinus, Melkinus, Kentigernus, Nennius,
Samuel, and other like, writers
of whom the more part wrote long before them.

But this is hyghly to be lamented, of all them that has a natural love to
their country, Love.
either yet to learned Antiquyte, which is a most syngular bewty to the same.
That in turnynge over of ye superstycyouse monasteryes, so little respect was
had to their lybraryes for the sauegarde of those noble and precyouse
monume^tes. I do not deny it, but the monks, Monks.
chanons, and fryres, were wicked both ways, as the oyled Bishops and
prestes for the more part are yet still. First for so much as they were the
professed souldyours of Antichrist, and next to that, for so much as they were
most execrable lyuers. For these causes, I must confess them most justly
suppressed. Yet this would I have wyshed (and I scarsely utter it without
tears) that the profitable corn had not so unadvisedly and ungodly peryshed
with the unprofitable chafe, abbeyes
nor the wholesome herbs with the unwholesome wedes, I mean the worthy works
of men godly minded, and lyuelye memoryalles of our nacyon, with those laysy
lubbers and popyshe bellygoddes. lubbers
But diverse were the workers of this desolacyon, like as the things
dyssypated were diverse. The veryte and promise of our eternal God, made an
end of the popes dysguysed rabble, as it will do of his remnaunt, which are
well known by their fruits. All plants (says Christ) which my heavenly
father has not planted, Masmo^gers.
shall be plucked up by the roots, least any longar the blind leaders
should lead the blind multitude. Math. xi.

Auaryce was the other dyspatcher, which has made an end both of our
lybraryes and books without respect like as of other most honest commodytees,
couetyse
to no small decay of the commen welthe. Cyrus the King of Perseanes (as
testifyeth Esdras) had a noble lybrary in Babylon, Cyrus.
for the conseruacyon both of the lands Antiquytees and also of the princes
acts, laws, and commandments, that when necessyte should require it, the
certentie of things might there be sought and found out. i. Esdre. vi.
Nehemias the Nehemias.
Prophet made a lybrarye also, and gathered into it books from all contreyes,
specially the books of the prophets and of David, the epystles and acts of
the kings, with serte^ annotacyons and writings, Judas Machabeus adding
diverse vyctoryes to the same. ij. Ma^ha. ij. Thus are buylders of lybraryes
commended in the scriptures, than must their destroyers have of the same,
Destroyers.
their justly deserved infamyes, namelye when covetousness is found the most
busy doar, whose works are always to be detested. Wherefore Solomon says: A
dyscrete and just rular much profyteth a land, where a couetouse rauenour
destroys it again, Prouer. xxix. O most wicked auaryce, Auaryce
Saint Paul calls the a worshyppynge of ydolles, which is a taking away
of all godly honor, Collos. iij. He says, thou art such a temptacyon and
snare of the devil, as brings all to perdycyon. Yea, he reports the to be
the root of all my schefe. i. Timot. vi. Nothing upon earth (says Jesus
Syrach) is so evil, as a couetouse man. Eccle. x.

Never had we been offended for the loss of our lybraryes, Lybraryes.
being so many in nombre, and in so desolate places for the more part, if the
chief monumentes and most notable works of our excellent writers, had been
reserved. If there had been in every shyre of England, but one sole^pne
lybrary, to the preseruacyon of those noble works, and preferrement of good
lernynges in our posteryte, it had been yet sumwhat. But to destroy all
without consyderacyon, Destruccyon.
is and will be unto England for ever, a most horrible infamy among the
grave senyours of other nacyons. A great nombre of the^ which purchased those
superstycyouse mansyons, reserved of those lybrarye books, some to serve their
inkes, some to scour their candelstyckes, and some to rub their boots. Some
they sold to the grossers and soap sellers, grossers
and some they sent over see to ye bokebynders, not in small nombre, but at
times whole ships full, to the wonderynge of the foren nacyons. Yea, the
vnyuersytees of this realm, are not all clear in this detestable fact. But
cursed is that bellye, which seeks to be fed with such ungodly gaynes, and
so depelye shameth his natural co^treye. I know a merchaunt man, A Merchaunt.
which shall at this time be namelesse, that boughte the co^tentes of two noble
lybraryes for. xl. shyllynges price, a shame it is to be spoken. This stuff
has he occupied in the stead of graye paper by the space of more than these.
x. years, and yet he has store enough for as many years to come. A
prodygyuose example is this, An example.
and to be abhorred of all men which love their nacyon as they should do.

O cities of England, whose glory stands more in bellye chere, than in the
search of wisdom godly. How comes it, that neither you, nor yet your ydell
masmo^gers, norwich
have regarded this most worthy commodyte of your country? I mean the
conseruacyon of your Antiquytees, and of the worthy labors of your learned men:
I think the renown of such a notable act, would have much longar endured,
tha^ of all your belly ba^kettes and table tryu^phes, either yet of your newely
purchased hawles to keep s. Georges feast in. Gylde hawles.
What else made ye ancient Greeks and Romans, famous to the world, but such
virtuous and necessary prouysyo^s in their commen welthes? What else has made
the Jews now an obscure nacyon, but the decay of their kyngedome and
continual destruccyons besides. Yea, what may bring our realm to more shame
and rebuke, England
than to have it noysed abroad, that we are despysers of learning? I judge
this to be true, and utter it with heaviness, that neither ^he Brytaynes under
the Romans and Saxons, nor yet the English people ^ndre the Danes and
Norma^nes, had ^uer such damage of their learned mo^ume^tes, damage
as we have seane in our time. Our posteryte may well curse this ^ycked fact
of our age, this vnreaso^able spole of Englandes most noble ^ntiquytees,
unless they be stayed in me, and by the art of pryntynge be ^ought into a
no^bre of coppyes. The ^ukes kept the^ under duste, the idle headed prestes
regarded the^ not, Prestes.
their lattre owners have most shamefullye abused the^ and the couetouse
merchau^tes have sold the^ away into fore^ nations for money. Step you
fourth now last of all, ye noble men and women (as there are in these days a
great no^bre of you most nobyllye learned, nobylite
praise be to God for it) and show your natural noble hearts to your nacyon.
Tread under your fete the unworthy examples of these Herostrates or
abhomynable destroyars. And bring you into the light, that they kept long in
the darkness, or else in these days seeks utterly to destroy. As ye find a
notable Antyquyte, Antiquitees.
such as are the hystoryes of Gildas and Ne^nius among the Brytaynes,
Stephanides and Asserius among the English Saxons, let them anon be
imprented, and so bring them into a nombre of coppyes, both to their and your
own perpetual fame. For a more notable point of nobylyte can ye not show,
tha^ in such sort to bewtyfie your country, Co^treye
and so to restore us to such a truth in hystories, as we have long wanted.
We have the fable of Dioclecyane and his. xxxiij. Daughters, Fables.
and how this realm was called Albion ab albis rupibus, with lie and all, but
the veryte as yet we have not, how this land was first inhabyted. If we find
them mixed with superstycyons, we shall measure them by the scriptures, and
sumwhat bear with the corrupcyon of their times. Corrupcyon.
Unknown is it not unto you, but that the most noble conquerours of the
world, have evermore had in much price the Antiquytees of stories, and have
learned of them the thing which has most incresed their worthy fame.

Now come we to the author of this present treatise, which plenteouslye has
declared the abundaunce of a noble heart to his contreye. This was Johan
Leylande, Leyla^de
an excellent orator and poet, moreover a man learned in many sondrye
languages, as Greek, Latyne, French, Italion, Spanyshe, Brittyshe, Saxonyshe,
Walshe, English, and Scottyshe. A most fervent favorer was this man, and a
most dylygent sercher of the Antiquytees of this our English or Bryttyshe
nacyon, Antiquarius.
as will apere not only by this treatise following, but also by many other
notable works which he has lernedly compyled. Because I will not stand
alone in the praise of him and his worthy acts, I will now bring fourth an
other witness, A witness.
a man learned and loving his country also, which wrote unto me. iij. years
ago, dolourouslye lamenting his soden fall. Maistre Leyande (says he) whose
prynted works I have sent you, is in such a frenesy at this present, that
little hope I have of his recover, whereby he might fynyshe such things as he
began, and would have ended, if life, health, and right reason had served him
thereunto. There be diverse which (by report of his enemies, Oblocutours.
as Polydore Vergyle and others) say, that he would never have set fourth
such things as he promised, affirmynge him to be a vaynegloryouse person,
which would promise more, than ever he was able or intended to perform.

I much do fear it that he was vaynegloryouse, and that he had a poetycall
wytt, which I lament, Lamentable.
for I judge it one of the chefest things that caused him to fall besides his
right dyscernynges. But this dare I be hold to say, as one that knows it
(for I saw and read of them in his stody, diverse and many times) that he
never promised to set fourth so many works as he had dygested in an order,
works
and had in a forward redynesse to have set fourth. And surely in such a
sort he handeled the matters by him treated of, that (by my simple judgment)
if he had so fynyshed them and set them fourth according as he than intended
and would have done. Truly I suppose no less, but it would have been a wondre
(yea, A wondre.
a miracle to the world) to have read them. And that all other authors,
which have written of us and of ours in times paste, concerning things
memorable, to be chronycled, either yet put in writynge, should have been
counted but as shadows, or of small estymacyon in respect of him. So
lernedlye, lyuelye, euydently, and groundedlye, and with such authorytees (Yea,
Autorytees.
and as it were with a serten majesty) would he have fullye and whollye
painted, described, or set fourth this our realm and all things therein, with
all the domynyons thereof, and with all such things as have from time to time
been done in them.

I was as famylyarlye acquaynted with him, Acquainted.
as with whom I am best acquaynted, and do know certenlye, that he from his
youth was so ernestly studyouse and desperouse of our Antiquytees, that always
his whole studyes were dyrected to that end. And for the true and full
attaynynge thereunto, he not only applied him self to the knowledge of the
Greek and Latyne tongues, wherein he was (I might say) excellentlye learned.
But also to ye stodye of the Bryttyshe, Saxonyshe, and Walshe tongues, Tongues
and so much profyted therein, that he most perfitelye understood them. And yet
not herwyth all content, he did fully and whollye both labor and travail in
his own person, through this our realm and certain of the dominions thereof,
because he would have the perfyte and full knoweledge of al things that
might be gathered or learned, both for things memorable, and for the
sytuacyon of the same. And as for all authors of Greek, Authors
Latyne, French, Italian, Spanyshe, Bryttyshe, Saxonyshe, Walshe English, or
Scottyshe, towching in any wise the understanding of our Antiquitees, he had
so fully read and applied them, that they were in a manner grassed in him as
of nature. So that he might well call him self Antiquarius.

Surely my frynde, I can not therefore but lament this his estate, boldelye
affirminge, Doloously.
that England never saw (nor as I believe, shall se, except God say Amen
thereto) a man to him herin in all things to be compared. For undoubted he was
in these matters wonderful and peerlesse, so that as concerning them,
England had yet never a greater loss. But what shall we say? It has pleased
god that he should thus be depryued of his wits, that lord knows best what
he has to do, his name for evermore blessed. (...)
But this shall be my prayer still, that if the Lord will not give him his
right understanding again, that it may yet pleased his goodness, to put in
the minds of some that best may, to do it. That not only such things as
maistre Leylande intended to have set fourth of his own, Old writers.
but also such old authors as he has gathered together into his lybraryes
(and as yet not prynted) may (and that with speed) be set fourth in prynte, for
the necessary knowledge of all men touching Antiquitees. But after such rate
and forte as Maystre Leylande him self (if his right reason had served him,
would have set them fourth, for that do I never look. But hereof ones to make
an end as Terence feately says, Terencius.
ut quimus, quando ut uolumus non licet. We must do as we may, when we can not
do as we would, All these are the testymonies of my frynde.

Thus am I not alone in opinion concerning Johan Leylande and such other for
Antiquitees sake, but have so many more with their good wills to assiste me
as naturallye favors England. Not alone.
By this worthy propertye (says Cassiodorus) is a noble citezen known. He
seeks the co^modite, praise and advancement of his countreye. Sweet is the
remembrance of a man's natural land, to him that is absent. The birds that
fly abroad, do love their own nestes. The beasts that run astraye,
Creatures.
seeks their accustomed cowches. And the fyshes within the water, resorteth to
their hollow de^nes. Right notably was it alleged of Plato, that we are not
borne only to our own commoditees. But we ought to have respect both to our
country and kyndred. Of our natural country we have our pare^tes, our fode,
our norishme^t, friendship, frindes, acquayntau^ce house, wife, children, with
such like. The fathers in the old law, Fathers
had such an inward love to their natyue soil, that they would no where else
be buried. Though Christ our most loving maystre said it. That a Prophet is
not without honor but in his own country and kindred. Matthew. xiij. Yet
bewtifyed it he above al nacyons, both with his doctrine and miracles,
alledgynge many of their noble Antiquitees in Noe, Loath, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
David, Solomon, Elias, Eliseus, and other to confirm the^ in the true faith.
He that naturallye loves his land, obeys therwyth the commandments of
God concerning the love of his neyber, and the faithful obedyence of kings.
Which I instau^tly desire al godly subjects to follow, to the praise of him
which gave those necessary commandments.

So be it.
The laboriouse Journey and search of Johan Leylande, for Englandes
Antiquitees, given of him as a new years gift to King Henry the. viij. in
the xxxvij. year of his raygne, with declaracyons enlarged by Johan Bale.
NO man (I think) there is which bears goood affection to England, or that
nombreth the love of his natural contreye among comlye and necessary virtues,
Country love.
but will commend the honest affecte, stodye, labor, and diligence of the
author of this present treatise. And not only that, but upon the same he will
him self endeuer: yea, yche man to his talente, to follow the like in effect.
Johan Leylande in this and many other works, which he has in his time
compyled, have not showed him self a barreyne and unfruitful clodde of earth
within his own nacyon, Clodde.
suckynge the moisture, A clodde
and not renderynge fruit to the commodite thereof as many does, the more is
the pyty. But he has much fructyfyed in bringing many things to clear
knowledge, which have long remained in horrible darkness. He is here unto
us in England, in these his fruitful labors, as was Ioannes Annius to the
Italianes, and as were both Conradus Celtes and Franciscus Irenicus to the
Germans, Sim^les.
which brought many most wonderful Antiquitees of theirs to light. His
labors in collectynge the same to the syngular commodyte of our nacyon, will
apere here after abundaunt, to them that shall dylygentlye peruse this small
treatise, which he gave to King Henry, the. viij. as a new years gift, The
title
in the year of our Lord a M. D. XLVI. The which as I have received of a
special frynde, so do I again fryndelye commuycate it, to the fryndely lovers
of my countreye. And thus it begins:

Johan Leylande. Where as it pleased your highness upon very just
consyderacyons, to encorage me, by the authoryte of your most gracious
commyssion, in the. xxxv. year of your prosperouse reygne, Studium
antiquitatis in, principe.
to peruse and dylygentlye to search all the lybraryes of Monasteryes and
collegies of this your noble realm, to the intent that the monumentes of
ancient writers, as well of other nacyons as of your own prouynce, might be
brought out of deadly darkness to lyuelye light, and to receive like thanks
of their posteryte, as they hoped for at such time, as they employed their
long and great studyes to the publyque wealth.


Johan Bale. Se here the wisdom of this worthy and noble Prince, King Henry
the. viij. how prudentlye he dysposeth matters. According to the Pryncely
admynystracyon, Princely
of God to him committed, he has here co^syderacio^s diverse respectinge as
well the dysposycyons of his subjects, as those things also, which might
seem to be profitable in a Christian commen wealth. Not only marked he the
natural inclinacyon of this Leylande, but also provoked him to follow it in
effect, to the conseruacion of the lands Antiquitees which are a most
syngulare bewtye in every nacyon. Antiquite.
He gave him out his autorite and commission, in the year of our Lord a M.
D. xxxiij. to search and peruse the Libraries of his realm in monasteries,
couentes, and colleges, before their utter destruccyon, which God then
appointed for their wyckednesses sake. The rular (says S. Paul) bears not
the sword in vain, A king.
but is the minister of God, to take vengeance on them that do evil, Roma.
xiij. And his noble purpose was this, to save the precyouse monume^tes of
ancient writers, which is a most worthy work, and so to bring them from
darkness to a lively light, to the notable fame and ornature of this la^d.
Thus was there in this king, besides that is spoken before, a stodye of things
memorable, Studoouse.
and a regarding of noble Antiquite, which both are to be commended hyghly.


Johan Leylande. Yea, and furthermore, that the holy scripture of God might
both be syncerely taught and learned, all manner of superstycyon, and crafty
colored doctrine of a rowte of Romayne Bishops, Cura religionis in Principe.
totally expelled out of this your most catholyque realm. I think it now no
less, than my very duty, breuely to declare to your Majesty, what fruit
have spronge of my laboriouse journey and costly enterprise, both roted upon
your infynyte goodness and lyberalyte, qualytees right highly to be esteemed in
all Princes, and most specially in you, as naturally your own well known
proprietes.


Johan Bale. An other cause Johan Leylande brings fourth here, of this search
of lybraries, which is, that the scriptures of God might thereby be more purely
taught then before in the Romish popes time. Moreover, ye truth.
that al kinds of wicked superstycyons, and of the sophystycall doctrynes
might be removed hens, to the amendment or else more clear aperaunce of the
true Christen faith. For though the more part of writers, were wholly given to
serve Antichrists affectes in the parelouse ages of the church. Apo. ix. Yet
were there some among them, Su^good
which refusing ye office, sought the only glory of their Lord God. In the
midst of al darkness, have some men by all ages, had the living sprete of
Gods children, what though they have in some things erred. Gal. iiij. Never
yet were the spelunkes of Abdias without the true Prophets of God, what
though that wicked Iezabel, Iesabel.
the Romyshe church most cruelly sought their blood. iij. Re. xviij. The
worthy works of these, this noble king sought to save by this Leylande, before
the suppressinge of the mo^kyshe monasteryes, which comme^deth in him (as good
reason gives it) both the care of Christen relygyon, and also the disanullynge
of most deuylysh idolatry. Such a discrete and circumspect king does the wise
man call, A king
a welfare of the world, and an vpholdynge of the people. Sapi. vi. The fruits
sprynginge of Leylandes laboriouse journey now follows in effect.


Johan Leylande. First I have conserved many good authors, Examplariaueteru^
authorum co^seruata
the which otherwise had been like to have peryshed, to ^o small inco^modyte of
good letters, Of ye which part remain in the most magnificent libraryes of
your royal palaces. Part also remain in my custody, Auctae Bibliothecae
palatinae
whereby I trust right shortly, so to describe your most noble realm, and to
publyshe the Majesty of the excellent acts of your progenytours, hitherto
sore obscured, both for lack of empryntynge of such works as say secretly
in corners.


Johan Bale. If he be worthy praise, which seeks to profit a common wealth
Johan Leyland is not to be neglected here, for this his laboryouse journey and
costuouse enterprise. Journey
For thereby he has sau^d the profitable works of many excellent writers,
which else had been lost, to no small decay of that wholesome veryte, which is
both to be sought in the scriptures of the Bible, and also in the most old
and autentyck Chronycles of our prouynce. Heded well to commyt certain of those
worthy works to the kings noble Libraries to their conseruacyon, Libraryes.
and also in reserving a certain of them to himself, at that time minding to
have polyshed our Chronycles, by fabulouse writers sore blemyshed. But a most
noble act should he do, that would clearly redeem them from dust and
byrdfylynges, or pryuate use to no profit, and so bring them fourth to a
comme^wealth of godly knowledge and learning, Good books.
to the worthy fame of England, and increace of virtue. No godly man lyghteth a
candle to put it under a bushel, but to set it a broad to the confort of many.
Luce. xi. To lock up the gates of the true knowledge, from them that
affectuously seeks it to the glory of God, is a property belonging only to
the hypocryiysh Pharisees, and false lawers. Mat. xxiij. A more sign of
ignobylyte can not be seen, Ignobilite.
then to hyde such noble monumentes, neither can grow a more famous report,
than to send them fourth a broad among men. And for that purpose (I think)
God has in this age given the noble art of prentynge.


Johan Leylande. And also because men of eloquence has not enterprised, to set
them fourth in a floryshynge style, Stylus aegrestis ueterum scriptorum.
in some times past not commenly used in England of writers, otherwise well
learned, and now in such estymacyon, that except truth be delycately clothed
in purpure her written verytees can scant find a reader. That all the world
that euydently perceive, that no particular region, may justly be more
extolled, tha^ yours for true nobylyte and virtues at all points reuoumed.


Johan Bale. Much have the excellent and lyuelye acts of Kings been
obscured, (as is written before) for so much as these noble Antyquytees have
not been ere this time reveled, Antiquitees.
but tied up in cheanes, and hydden under dust in the monks and fryres
libraryes. The great want of them has caused our latter Chronicles, specially
Johan Hardynge, Wyllyam Caxton, Robert Fabiane, and now last of al Polydor
Vergyll, so depely to err, as they have done in many points. And. ij. things
chefely have caused them (Leylande says) so long to be witholden from us. ij.
things
The one is the slackenesse of empryntynge, that no studiouse person, minding
the veritees preferrement, has labored their setting out, to the common
profit. An other is the want of ornature, that they have not been changed into
a more eloquent style, to the full satisfyenge of delycate ears and wits. The
first I would wyshe to be followed, eloquence
as a thing very necessary to our Englysh commen wealth. The other for the
first time, might well be spared. For undoubtedly, authoryte it would add
unto them, to apere first of all in their own simplycyte or native colors
without beauty of speech. The scriptures are not to be rejected, Scriptures.
though they for the more part, want that same plesaunt order, which is
commenly sought among profane writers. God has chosen (S. Paul says) the
folyshe and weak things of the world, to confound the wise and mighty i.
Cor. i.


Johan Leylande. Farther more part of the exemplaries, curyously sought by me,
and fortunately found in sundry places of this your dominion, Exemplaria
praelisco^missa
has b^ne emprynted in Germany, and now be in the presses chefely of
Frobentus, that not alonly the Germans, but also the Italianes themself, that
count as the Greeks ded full arrogantly, all other nacyons to be barbarouse
and unlettered, sauinge their own, shall have a direct occasyon, openly of
force to say. That Britannia prima fuit parens, altrix (addo hoc etiam, and
iure quidem optimo) conseruatrix eum uirorum magnorum, tum maxim, ingeniorum.


Johan Bale. Here shows Leylande, how the third or latter part of his
colleccions out of the English lybraryes, was bestowed to profit. But where
as he makes report here, Of books.
a serten of them to have been emprynted in Germany. I suppose he partlye
speaks it for the work of Josephus Deuonius, which he wrote in
paraphrasticall verses, upon the treatise of Dares Phrygius concerning the
destruccyon of Troy, and in. vi. books dedicated it to Baldewine tha^
archebyshop of Canterbury: which work (says he in Syllabo antiquarum
dictionum) was prynted in Germany, Lela^dus.
but very corruptly under the title of Cornelius Nepos a Roman. Whereof
Guilhelmus Fastregicus in his first book de Originibus rerum makes also
mencyon. Of the books which should be in the hands of Hieronymus Frobenius,
can I nothing hear. Yet have I made thydre most instaunt suit and labor by
diverse honest men, at the least to have had but their tytles, but I never
could obtain them. Conjecture.
Which makes me to think, that either they have peryshed by the way, or else
that they are thrown a side in some corner, and so forgotten. Yet Conradus
Gesnerus sumwhat conforteth me again, which in the second part of his
universal Biblyotheke, fol. clvij. confesses serten old Brittyshe
hystorianes yet to remain. For so little estemynge our true Antiquytees, the
proud Italyanes have always holde^ us for a Barbarouse nacyon. Look Johan
Boccatius in his sixth book de genealogia Deorum, Cap. lvij. where as he
treats of Syluius posthumus and of our Brute, Negligence.
besides their hystoryans. Where as, if we had by all ages set them abroad,
they had been justly occasyoned, to have named Brytayne, a mother, a nource,
and a mayntener, not only of worthy men, but also of most excellent wits.


Johan Leylande. And that profit has risen by the aforsayd iourneye, in
bringing full many things to light, as concerning the usurped autoryte of
the Bishop of Rome and his complyces, Antiphilarchia repellens ambitiosu^ To.
Epi. Imperiu^.
to the manifest and vyolent derogacyon of kyngely dygnyte, I refer my self
most humbly to your most prudent, learned, and high judgment, to dyscerne my
dylygence in the long volume, wherein I have made answer for the defense of
your supreme dygnyte, alonly leuynge to the strong pyllour of holy scripture
against the whole college of the Romanystes, clokynge their crafty assercyons
and arguments, under the name of one poor Pighius of Vltraiecte in Germany,
Albertus Pighius.
and standing to them as to their only anchor hold against te^pestes that
they know will arise, if truth may be by lycens let in, to have a voice in
the general counsel.


Johan Bale. By the hystoryes of Antiquyte, are the natures of all ages of the
world manyfested from time to time, and also both the prophecyes of Daniel and
of S. Iohans reuelacyon more easily of their readers understood. Prophecyes.
For he that marketh not by the search of ernest chronycles, the dysposycyon of
times, shall never behold those godly prophecyes fulfilled in effect. And
therefore says Leylande here, that this profit among other has risen of his
studyouse labor. Antichrist and his mynysters are like to be the better
known, Antichrist.
and their tyrannouse vsurpacyons perceived, how shamefullye they have abused
the dygnyte of kings. Whose power S. Paul declares, not to be of the proud
Romysh popet, as they have been persuaded by his false prophets in every
nacyo^, but immedyatly from the omnypotent God of heaven. Roma. xiij. In all
ages have there been some godly writers in England, writers.
which have both smelled out, and also by their writings detected the
blasphemouse frauds of this Antichrist. Diverse, of those christen works ded
Leylande find, and was by them occasyoned to write a great book, called
Antiphilarchia, against the ambycyouse empire of the Romysh bishop. And in this
he chefely withstode the subtyle assercyo^s and sophystycall reasonynges of an
ydell brayned papyste, a papyst
called Albertus Pighius, sumtyme a catty stayled cano^ in ye great cathedral
mynster of vtrecht in Hollande. Wherein he wylleth that the veryte may ones
find ge^tyll hearers, against those wicked enemies.


Johan Leylande. Yet herin only I have not pytched the supreme work of my
labor, whereunto your grace most like a kyngelye patron of all good learning
ded anymate me. Affectus autoris erga patriam.
But also considering and expendynge with my self, how great a number of
excellent godly wits and writers, learned with the best, as the times
served, has been in this your regyon. Not only at such times as the Roman
emprours had recourse to it, but also in those days that the Saxons prevailed
of the Brytaynes, and the Norma^nes of the Saxons, could not but with a
fervent zele and an honest courage, commend them to memory. Else alas, like to
have been perpetually obscured, or to have been lyghtelye remembered, as
uncertain shadows.


Johan Bale. Not only ded Johan Leylande collect these fruitful auncye^t
authors together, that men mgyhte by them inueye against the false doctrine of
papystes, doctrine
corruptynge both the scriptures of God and the chronycles of this realm, by
execrable lies and fables but also that their wyttye works might come to
light and be spredde abroad to the whorthye fame of the land. For by them may
it well apere, the times always considered, that we are no Barbarouse nacyon,
as contemptuouslye the Italyane writers does call us. Yet Cornelius Tacitus a
noble Roman, Conelius Tacitus
in the life of Julius Agricola, commends the bringing up of noble mennys
children in the lyberall scyences among the Brytaynes, and prefers the
pregnauncy of their wits before the laboryouse stody of the Galls, whom we
now call French men. Moreover before that, he reports the said Brytaynes,
britayne
to be famously remembered of many worthy writers, which is no note of
obscuryte or barberousnesse. And this noble nacyon had afterward most wyttie
writers and men of grounded learning, under the Saxons, Danes, and Norma^nes
so well as they had before time under the Roman Emprours. A fylthy bastard is
he to England, and a most cruel enemy to all good lernyng, that will now
obscure their names and destroy their works, to the lands perpetual
dyscommodyte. Bastardes.
As some unnatural children have done now of late, to serve their pryuate
affeccyons more than the commen welthe. God shorten their unprofitable lives,
if they cease not of that myschefe in time.


Johan Leylande. Wherefore I knowing by infynyte varyete of books, and
assyduouse reading of them, Libri quatour de uiris illustribus, sieve
descriptoribus Britannicis.
who has been learned and who has written from time to time in this realm,
have digested into iiij. books, the names of the^ with their lives and
monumentes of learning. And to them added this little, De uiris illustribus,
following the profitable example of Hierome, Gennadie, Cassiodore, Seueryane,
and Trittemie a late writer. But always so handlynge the matter, that I have
more exspacyated in this camp, than they ded, as in a thing that desired to
be sumwhat at large, and to have ornature. The first book beginning at the
Druides, is deducted unto the time of the coming of S. Augustyne into
England. The second is from the time of Augustyne, unto the aduente of the
Normanes.


Johan Bale. In this ded Johan Leylande declare a noble kind of stody and a
natural heart to his country. The Lord of heaven send England more of such
lovers, More fryndes
and take away those unprofitable cloddes, which seeks not else but them
selves in the destruccyon of things memorable and necessary. The book of S.
Hierome de uiris illustribus, is judged of them that be godly, wise, and
learned, to be a work very excellent, and much profitable to the Christen
commen use. For it shows what writers there were in the prymatyue church,
Church
and what fruit spronge of their doctrine. If any learned man had showed
this order in the Brittyshe church, which continued from the Apostles time by
Joseph of Arymathie, and other godly mynysters, till the coming of
Augustyne, we had known of their christianyte much more than we now do. Bedas
in the Englysh church, wrote De scriptoribus Ecclesiae, which had clerelye
peryshed Gesnerus says) if one Honorius Augustudimensis had not into his book
of the same title, Honorius
conuayed a certain of them. Other collectors of the names and works of learned
writers, had we none here in England, that I ever heard of, saving one
Bostonus of Bury, which was very copyouse in that matter. Now comes Johan
Leylande with his. iiij. books de uiris illustribus, and he so abundauntlye
will satisfye the hungry expectacyon of many, may his work come ones to
light, Leyla^d.
that much more is not therein to be desired. Blessed be that man, which shall
set that worthy work abroad. And contrary wise, cursed be he for ever and
ever, that shall in sphyght of his nacyon, seek thereof the destruccyon.


Johan Leylande. The third from the Normans, to the end of the most
honorable reign of the myghtie, famous, and prudent Prince, Henry. the. vij.
your father. The fourth begins with the name of your majesty, whose glory
in learning is to the world so clearly known, that though emonge the lives
of other learned men I have accuratelye celebrated the names of Bladudus,
Principes eruditi.
Molinutius, Constantinus magnus, Sigebertus, Alfridus, Alfridus magnus,
Athelstanus, and Henry the first, Kings and your progenytours. And also
Ethelwarde, second son to Alfride the great, Hunfryde Duke of Gloucester,
and Tipetote earl of worcestre, yet conferred with your grace, they seem as
small lyghtes (if I may freely say my judgment, your high modesty not
offended) in respect of the day star.


Johan Bale. Of many ydell wytted braggers, which judge them selves learned and
are nothing less, is the title of this work, the title
de uiris illustribus, contempned and ill spoken of. But what wise men do
think of them that so frantycklye on their ale benches do prattle, it is easy
to conjecture. Saint Hierome, Gennadius, Cassiodorus, Seuerianus and Tritemius,
whom Leylande here names for example, thought not the argument light, when
they wrote works of that title. No more ded Suidas Grecus, Isidorus,
Hildefonsus, Prosper, Sigebertus, Honorius, Trissa, Bostonus, Bostius,
Bergomas, and a great sort more, Authors.
in doing the same. The order of Leylandes work into. iiij books divided,
beginning at the Druides, and endyng in the lattre years of King Henry the.
viij. as he has herin uttered, is very commendable. Sumwhat more is it tha^ a
year past, sens I put fourth a work of the same argument, entytled de
scrpitoribus Britannicis, Scriptores.
containing. v. books with serten addycyons which I gathered together being
out of the realm. Sens I returned again thereunto, by the search of diverse
most ruynouslye spoiled, broaken up, and dyspersed lybraryes, I have collected
by no small labor and dylygence, so much as will make so many books more,
besides the necessary recognycyon and fruitful augmentacyon of the said first
work. This lattre work intend I to set fourth also, Aliud opus.
to the commodyte of my country, as it is ones fynyshed, if pouerte withstand
me not, as it is my most doubt. Yet would I have no man to judge my rude
labors, to Leyla^des five workema^shyp in any point equal but at all times to
give place unto it.


Johan Leylande. Now farther to insynuate to your grace, of what matters the
writers, whose lives I have congested into. iiij books, has treated of.
Ingenia scriptoru^ Britannicoru^ omni genere eruditionis exercitata.
I may right boldly say, that beside the cognycio^ of the. iiij. tungues,
in the which part of them has excelled, that there is no kind of lyberall
science, or any feate concerning learning, in the which they have not showed
certain arguments of great felycyte of wit. Yea and concerning the
interpretacyon of holy scripture, both after the ancient form, and sens the
scholastycall trade they have reigned as in a certain excellencye.


Johan Bale. In this parcel Leyla^de expresses, the most excellent wits, ye
knowledge of tungues, and the manyfolde lyterature of his English writers,
Lyterature.
whose lives he utters in his. iiij. former books at large. Many of them (he
says) were excellent in the three pryncypall languages, Hebrew, Greek, and
Latyne. As concerning the Hebrew, Hebrews
it is to be thought, that many were therein well learned in the days of King
Athelstane. For at the instaunt request of his prelates, he caused the
scriptures out of that tungue to be by certain doctors translated into the
Saxonysh or English speech, as in the chronycles is mencyoned. Robert
Grosthede of Sothfolke, a famous learned man, and sumtyme bishop of Lyncolne,
extracted many things out of the Hebrews commentaryes, specially, he
translated the Testament of the Patryarkes, and out of the Greek certain works
of Aristotle, Greeks.
Dionyse, and Suidas, besides that Helena the mother of great Constantyne ded
in her time. Gildas Cambrius, Claudia Rufina, Constantinus magnus, Maildulphus
Scotus, Aldelmus Bladunius, Thobias Cantianus, Bedas Girwinus, Daniel Wentanus,
Flaccus Albinus, Ioa^nes Erigena, Odo Seuerus, Josephus Denouius, and a great
sort more, in the Greek tungue were very notable. The nu^bre of good Latyne
autours within this realm, Latins
were to long at this time to be rehearced, besides the infynyterable of the
barbarouse and brawlyng sentencyoners. These he for his part, and I for my
part, have most plenteously descrybed, with the dyuersyte of matters in their
works comprehended.


Johan Leylande. And as touching hystorycall knowledge, Ingens numerus
scriptoru^ reru^ Brita^nicaru^.
there has been to the nombre of a full hundredth or mo, that from time to time
has with great dylyge^ce, and no less, faith, would to God with like
eloquence, perscribed the acts of your most noble predecessors, and the
fortunes of this your realm, so incredyblye great, that he that has not seane
and throughlye read their works, can little pronounce in this part.


Johan Bale. Now comes he in with the talk of hystoryanes and chronyclers of
England, Chronyclers.
which has by all ages most plenteously described the noble acts and
fortunes of the same. The nombre of them after his reckenynge, comes to more
than a full hundredth, great pytie it is, that we have not abroad those worthy
and ancient monumentes of our predecessors. Let no man find fault with
this their nombre, for though it be great, and at the first show apereth
incredyble to them which have not trauayled in that kind of stodye, yet I
perfyghtly know it to be true, and also reported here with ye least.
Hystorianes.
If we lose ye treasure of these authors herin contained, by the malice or else
flouthfull negligence of this wicked age, which is much given to the
destruccyon of things memorable, we may well lamente and say with the noble
clarke Erasmus of Roterdame. Erasmus
With much pain I absteyne from weeping (says he in a certain Epistle) so often
as I in reading the Cataloges of old writers, do behold what profyghtes,
yea, what pusaunce, aid, and confort we have lost. My grefe is also augmented,
so often times as I call to remembrance, what ill stuff we have instead of
their good writings. We find for true hystoryes, most fryuolouse fables and
lies, Fables.
that we might the sonner by the deuyls suggestion, fall into most deep
errors, and so be lost, for not beleuynge the truth. ij. Tessa. ij.


Johan Leylande. Wherefore, after that I had perpended the honest and profitable
studyes of these hystoryographers, I was totallye enflamed with a love, to se
throughlye all those parts of this your opulent and ample realm, Peragratio
laboriosa totius Britaniae primae.
that I had read of in the aforsayd writers. In so much that all my other
occupacyons intermytted, I have so traueled in your domynions both by the sea
coasts and the myddle parts, sparynge neither labor nor costs by the space
of these. vi. years past, that there is almost neither cape nor baye, haven,
creke or pere, river or confluence of ryuers, breches, washes, lakes, meres,
fenny waters, mountains, valleys, mores, hethes, forestes, woods, cities,
burges, castles, pryncypall manor places, monasteryes, and colleges, but I have
seane them, and noted in so doing a whole world of things very memorable.


Johan Bale. Se what worthy travail, this learned man has taken here* for the
many fold commodytees of his natural country, as a natural frynde to the
same. A frynd
First he perused the profitable monumentes of this great nombre of old
writers, and by the search of them, his studyouse heart was enflamed to proceed
yet farther. For after he had read them over, he took upon him a very
laboryouse journey, over all the realm every way, both by see, and by land,
by the space of. vi. years that he might know the costs thereof, vi. year^.
as well by practyse as by speculacyon, and thereby give instruccions to other.
Mark herin his laboriouse and fruteful doings, and ye shall find him no less
profitable to us, in the descrypcion of this particular nacyon, that were
Strabo, Pliny, Ptholome, and other Geographers to their perusers, Geography.
in the pycturinge out of the universal world. No small dyscommodyte were it
now to this land, if these his worthy labors should after any ill sort
perish. For out of them might me^ of sundry occupienges, fatch most wonderful
knowledge, for their necessary affairs every where. Consydre a multitude of
things here named, if all their specialtees were brought fourth ones into
light, as he has collected them together, it would apere one of the greatest
wonders, wonders.
that ever yet was seane in this regyon. The heavenly father grant the
conseruacyon of them.


Johan Leylande. Thus instructed, I trust shortly to se the time, Desriptio
totius Brita^niae primae in quadrata argenti tabula.
that like as Carolus Magnus had among his treasures three large and notable
tables of silver, rychely enameled, one of the fyte and descripcion of
Constantynople, an other of the site and figure of the magnificent city of
Rome, and the third of the descripcion of the world. So shall your Majesty
have this your world and impery of England so set fourth in a quadrate
table of silver, if God send me life to accomplish my beginning, that your
grace shall have ready knowledge at the first sight of many right delectable,
fruteful, and necessary pleasures, by contemplacion thereof, as often as
occasyon shall move you to the syghte of it.


Johan Bale. Folowinge the example of Charles the great, which had not only the
chief cities of the Greek and Latyne Empires, but also the whole world in
silver tables artificially ingraued, Carolus
this Leyland after long dyscourse, set forth in portiture a right descripcion
of this noble ylande, according to that he has seane. But whether he
performed his former promise to King Henry the viij. (to whom he dedicated
this present treatise) which was to have done it in a. iiij. square table of
silver, or other wise, that ca^ I not groundedly tell. For why, the next year
after, both the king deceaced, He^rus
and Leylande also by a most pytiefull occasion fell besides his wits, and is
not yet fully amended, the heavenly father restore him again, to this lands
most singular commodite. In that he calls England an empire he does not
otherwise than ded both Josephus and Egesippus, with other notable
Historianes. For Josephus in lib. ij. cap. xxvi. de bello Iudaico, Josephus
says in the oracyon of King Agrippa. The Romans sought an other world
beyond the great Occeane, sending their mighty power and host in to Britayne,
who^ they could never before those days atteyne. The Romans by strength
(says Egesippus) obtained and other world beyond the Occeane sea, in
Brytayne far from them, Britain
li ij. de excidio Heiroso lymae. The empire thereof is manifest in king
Brennus, in great Constantyne, in Arthure, and in Edward the third. This
bring I in here, that men should not disdaynously scorn, that they are yet
ignorant of.


Johan Leylande. And because that it may be more permanent, and farther known,
then to have it engraued in silver or brass. Liber de Topographia Brita^niae
primae.
I entend by the leave of God, within the space of. xij. months following, such
a descripcion to make of your realm in wryttinge, that it shall be no mastery
after, for the grauer of painter to make the like by a perfect example.


Johan Bale. Not only have this notable writer and special frynde to England,
collected the monumentes of learning and hystorical knowledge, as is before
rehearced, Diuesite
but also has searched out by his syx years labor, al haue^s, crekes,
ryuers, mountains, hethes, valleys, woods cities, towns, holds, with such
other like, after a most wonderful sort. And to make unto us an orderly
rehearsal of the same, he consequently gave him self to the compylinge of a
book, whom in the margende he thus entitled, Liber de Topographia Brita^niae
primae, Topography.
a book concerning the description of ye first Britayne. If this work were
not yet fully accomplished (as the matter is now in doubt) by reason of his
troublous disease, great pytie it were but his labors should come to some
learned man's hand, that he might laudably finish it to the comme^ use. And
although it were not so exactly followed as he has begun it, yet should he
be worthy perpetual memory in this noble nation, memory
for his good will and diligence. Many noble works we read of, that were left
vnperfyght, as their first authors were prevented of death, yet for their
vtilite they have been fynished by other good me^. As now in our time, the
Epitome of Chronicles begun by Thomas Lanquet, A Chronycle.
was laboriously followed and profytably ended by Thomas Couper a man worthy of
continual praise for so studiouse labors. The like also may be said of him,
that brought to light the great work of Edward Halle. The Lord daily prosper
so profitable affairs.


Johan Leylande. Yea, and to wade further in this matter, where as now almost
no man can well guess at the shadow of the ancient names of havens, Restituta
uetera locorum in Britannia nomina.
ryuers, promontories, hills, woods, cities, towns, castelles, and varyete
of kinds of people, that Caesar, Liui, Strabo Diodorus, Fabius Pictor,
Pomponius Mela, Plinius, Cornelius Tacitus Ptolomeus, Sextus Rufus, Ammianus,
Marcellinus, Solinus, Antoninus, and diverse other make mencyon of. I trust so
to open this wyndow, that the light shall be seane, so long, yt is to say, by ye
space of a whole thousand years stopped up, and the old glory of your renoumed
Britain to reflorish through the world.


Johan Bale. Folowinge his most profitable process, for the syngular bewtye of
England, he calls again to lively memory, the ancient names of cities
towns, Cytyes.
castelles, hills, havens, ryuers, and such like, which have been long
buried in oblivion, and had utterly perished, had not those noble writers,
whom he here recyteth, reserved them in their worthy works to our behoue.
Much more are we bound in that point, to these foren authors, than to al our
own Hystorianes, sens the worlds beginning. And whether we may justly
ascrybe that to the negligence of our forefathers, Negligence.
either else to the churlyshenesse of them, which has unnaturally witholden
them so long time from us, I leave it to be judged of them that shall read
this treatise. In this kind of writing, have Leylande plenteously done his
part in Commentario Cygneae cantionis, Old names.
in Elencho antiquorum nominum, and in Syllabo dictionum ueterum, besides his
other labors, which we most desierously look for, at the hands of some worthy
man, that will show his natural heart therein to his country. Greatly is this
unwont manner of stodie, ac^epted now a days among me^ of knowledge, and much
was used of S. Hierome and Lactantius, and is so well exemplyfyed in the sacred
scriptures, Scryptures.
as in the profane hystories of the nations. For Moses calls Bethlehe^,
Ephrata, Ge. xxxv. so does David, and Micheas. Psalm. cxxxi. Mic. v. Because
that old name should never grow out of knowledge. The cyty that Matthew
calls Cesarea Philippi, Mat. xvi. is named in the old law Lesen, and Laisa,
Iosue. xix. and Esa. x. Constantynople of old writers is called Bizantium,
Roma Latium, and London Trenouantum. London.
At this will the Papists and sectaryes laugh scornefully, which neither
delight in king, nor country, but only seek by subtyltees to uphold their own
fylthy flesh in the wicked kyngedome of Antichrist.


Johan Leylande. This done, I have matter at plenty, already prepared to this
purpose, that is to say, to write an history, to the which I entende to
adscribe this title de Antiquitate Britannica, or else ^iuilis historia. De
Antiquitate Brita^nica sieve de Civilly historia, libri quinquaginta.
And this work I entende to dyuyde into so many books, as there be shires in
England, and shyres and great dominions in wales. So that I esterne that this
volume will enclude a fyfty books, whereof each one severally shall conteyne the
beginninges, increases, and memorable acts of the chief towns, and castelles
of the province allotted to it.


Johan Bale. By this fulfilleth he his former promise, which is to clarifye
those things that our negligent predecessors, by more then a thousand years
space, had dyuersely darkened. He has prepared to our use, a most noble
Chronicle of the Antiquitees of Brytaine, A Chronycle,
called the Cyuile history, and conteyninge fyfty books. Therein has every
shire both of England and wales, his particulare book, comprehendyng their
orygynalles and contynuall successes both of their peoples and governors. In
the^ may every Englysh man, and walshe man as in a clear mirror severally
behold, the memorable acts, prouysio^s, For all men,
commodytees and buyldynges of his own natyue shyre in it self. All the
Chronicles of this noble realm, which has been made before this age, what
though their authors for the more part were men pythely learned, yet at the
syghte hereof will apere, but mistes and shadows. Shadows.
For neither observed they this most decent order, nor yet declared in so ample
manner, matters so necessary, and so many in nombre. Let us therefore most
ernestly pray unto God the most plenteouse geuer of all good gytfes, that
this noble work be not cast away by some cruel caterpiller or papyst which
disdayneth to further his own nation, neither yet that it be destroyed by an
ignorant keeper or an ydel possessor. But that it may fortunably light into
the hands of such a good stuarde of his, A frynd
as is learned and loving to his nation, that our natural brethren and
country men may ones taste of the swetnesse of so precyouse a fruit, and not
thereof be depryued, to their inestymable discommodyte.


Johan Leylande. Then I entende to dystrybute in to syx books, Libri sex de
insulis Brita^niae adjacent bus.
such matter as I have already collected, concerning the Isles adjacent to
your noble realm, and under your subieccion. Whereof. iij. shall be of these
Isles, Vecta, Mona, and Menauia, sometime kingedomes.


Johan Bale. Consequently has he herin stretched fourth his hand to the foren
Isles parteynynge to this nacyon, the yles
for these two natural purposes. First that his natural country men, might
know the sytuacion and hystorycall commoditees of them, and afterward that
all men dwelling under the worthy dominion of England, might of his
studyouse labors take profit. No reasonable creature can justly reprehende a
love extendinge so far in well doing, but rather with gentylnesse of
humanyte, commend it. If all men had remembered this brotherly office, Amyte
England had never been so wretchedly spoiled of so many noble monumentes of
Antiquite, by a meny of unnatural children, yea, rather curyshe bastardes,
nothing else sekinge, but their bellyes. And as concerning the Isles, he has
not done amys in descrybynge them, for as the scriptures mencyoneth, Scryptures.
the Lord has always had unto them a respect. For as the kind of man
ouerspredde the whole world, by the natural offspring of Noah, in the hundredth
year after the dyluuy or general floude, Gene. ix. the Isles of the Gentyles
were anon after, to a serten of them dyuyded, every man sorted in his kindred,
speech, and nacio^ Gene. x. Gloryfie God in doctrynes. (says Esaias) you that do
dwell in the Isles of the sea, Esaias.
and magnyfie the name of the Lord God of Israel. Esa. xxiiij. And in an other
place. The Isles far of (says almighty God) which have not heard me spoken
of, neither yet have seane my glory spredde, shall declare my praise largely,
among the Gentyles, Esa. lxvi.


Johan Leylande. And to superadde a work as an ornament and a right comely
garlande, to the enterpryses before said, I have selected stuff to be
distributed into three books, the which I purpose thus to entytle, De nobilitate
Britannica. De nobilitate Brita^nica libritres.
Whereof the first shall declare the names of kings and queen's with their
children, dukes, earls, lords, capitaynes, and rulers in this realm to the
coming of the Saxons and their conquest. The second shall be of the Saxons and
Danes, to the vyctorye of King Willyam the great. The third from the
Normannes to the reygne of your most noble grace, descendynge lyneally of the
Brytayne, Saxon, and Norma^ kings, So that all noble men shall clearly perceive
their syneal parentele.


Johan Bale. Se what order he observes here, in the end of this matter. After
long discourse of his laboryouse process, concerning the search of libraries,
description of the land, edycyon of books, Summ^
and declaracyon of their necessary arguments, he concludes with nobilite
commendyng it as an ornature of beauty of all the other. And in his three books
of that title, that is to say, of the nobility of Brytayne, he comprehends
the whole succession of kings with the true dyssent of all noble kynredes
under them, for the time of the reigns of the Brytaynes, nobylyte
Saxons, and Norma^s, which only here continued. So that every noble man
within this regyon, having that worthy work, might clearly behold as in a
pure glass, his parentage and success in blood, with their falls and raises,
as the variete of times heue given it. Which were a wonderful matter, and unto
them for diverse causes much commodiouse. A noble heart surely had this present
author, Noble heart.
and a most loving mind to his country, employenge his manifold labors to so
diverse and needful matters concerning the same. Consydre ye noble men, the
worthiness of this noble work, what profyt might thereby arise not only to
you, but also to the^, which delyght in the reading of hystoryes: and as ye
bear noble hearts to your country and kinredes, do that lies in you, yt it
perysh not. Make labor that it may frutefully come abroad, Help it
as it is frutefully of him collected, yt both you, the realm and ye author may
have honor thereof.


Johan Leylande. Now if it shall be the pleasure of almighty God, that I may
live to perform these things that be already begone, and in a great
forwardness, Conclusio a delectabili and utili.
I trust that this your realm shall so well be known, ones painted with his
natyue colors, that the renoume thereof shall give place to the glory of no
other regyon. And my great labors and costs, procedinge from the most
habundaunt fountain of your infinite goodness toward me your pore scholar
and most humble servant, shall be euydently seane, to have not only pleased,
but also profyted the studyouse, ge^til, and equal reders. This is the brief
declaracyon of my laboriouse journey, taken by mocyon of your hygnesse, so much
studyeng at all hours, about the fruitful preferrement of good letters and
ancient virtues.


Johan Bale. Many other works has he written, Prynted
of whom some are emprinted, as the assercyon of king Arthure, the birth of
Prince Edward, the song of the swa^ne, the decease of sir Thomas wiet, the
winning of Bullein, and the co^mendacion of peace. Some are not yet printed,
as his colleccions of the Bishops of Brytayne, of the vniuersytees of the
same, of the orygynall and increase of good learnynges there, of his Epigrammes
and Epitaphes, Vnpryntedr
and the life of king Sygebert, with many other more. Now in the conclusion,
he promised the full perfourmau^ce of of all his works to the profit and
pleasure of this noble nacyon. God lendyng him life and health conuenyent. And
his hope was as mine is, and as is the truth of the matter, that these things
ones done, England which has of the Italianes, and French men be reckened a
barbarouse nacyon, Obscure
their Monumentes before time not known, will apere from thens fourth, equal
with the prowdest of them, in prowess, wisdom, eloquence, polycyes, and in
all kinds of learning. Though the stody and labor were Leylandes, in
collectynge these noble Antiquitees, yet was ye first prouocacyo^ thereunto
King Henryes, King Henry.
with the payment of all his charges. And so well ought the one as the other to
be thereupon perpetually famed. If learned men were thus set a work, every one
in his vocacyon, of them which are men of power, nobylyte would shine more
bryghte, and doctrine apere more pure. But alas pryuate cares dystayneth
nobylyte, and beggary blemysheth learning.


Johan Leylande. Christ continue your most royal estate, and the prosperyte,
Co^munenotum.
with succession in kyngely dygnyte, of your dear and worthylye beloved son
prince Edward, granting you a number of pryncely sons, by the most
gracious, benygne, and modest lady your queen Cataryne.

Ioannes Leylandus Antiquarius.


Johan Bale. With S. Paul here in the end of his brief declaracyon,
concerning his laboryouse journey, Leylande prays for the King, Prayer.
taking Christ as an only medyatour in that behalf, thinking it also an
acceptable office before God, so to do i. Timoth. ij. But now that this noble
governor is departed and gone to God, it is mete that we from hens fourth
return to ye son, that in those days was due to the father. That is to
say, to desire that Lord almighty through Jesus Christ, Herytag
to maynteyne in all virtue, his most royal estate. For that which by the
scripture was due to the father by his life time, is now by the same, the
sons right inherytaunce, he being dead and gone. Let us therefore in our
daily prayers, most affectuously desire, that our most redoubted sovereign,
King Edward the sixte, may have a prosperouse and long contynuaunce upon
this earth, with fruitful succession in kyngelye dygnyte, when time and age
shall require it. Obedyence.
Also for our parts, let us endeuer our selves to obey both him and his
magistrates in the true fear of God, as those men that of him has authoryte
and power, to repress malefactors, and to aid all virtuous doers, i. Pet.
ii. If we be bound to do this to Ethnyckes and Idolaters, for the publyque
office sake, much more let us do it to them that be of our christen
professyo^, and do daily seek with all dylygence possible, the manyfeste glory
of his most holy name. The eternal father confirm both them and us in the
puryte of his word, Pray, pray.
and grant that we fashyon our lives thereafter in all meekness of sprete,
through Jesus Christ his son and the holy Ghost.


So be it.
Ioannes Balaeus.

The conclusyon.
Mark sens ye worlds beginning, how studyouse and dylyge^t men have always
been, for the conseruacyon of noble Antiquytees, Antiquytees.
Yea, before any kinds of letters were yet in use. For the children of Seth (as
testyfieth Josephus) admonyshed by Adam of the destruccyon that should follow
by water and fire, engraued in. ij. pyllours the necessary memoryals of their
age. And consydre again the wickedness of our time, how ungracious and
untoward we are in the mids of floryshynge lyterature, to exercise ourselves
in that most worthy office. Their labor was to hold things in
remembrance, Auncetours.
which otherwise had most wretchedly peryshed. Our practyses now are, to do so
much as in us lies, to destroy their fruitful fou^dacyons. They were not so
ready in setting up for their times, but we in these days are as prompte to
pluck down (I mean the monumentes of learning) as though the world were now
in his lattre dottynge age, nygh drawing to an end. The Hebrews, Greeks, and
Romans, Examples.
were never so toward in this noble vein of workynge, but we have been by all
ages as untoward. Notwithstanding some worthy doars we have had, whose noble
works we much less esteem in these days, than ded the popysh monks and
prestes for their idle times. For they at the least permytted them a dwelling
place in their lybraryes, though it were among worms and dust. We will not
suffer them to abide within our land, Ignomeny.
but either we give them leave to rotte in vile corners, or drown them in our
iakes, or else we send them over the sea, never to return again. Alas I am
heavy to tell this tale, yet the natural love of my country most strongely
compels me to say sumwhat therein.

We send to other nacyons to have their commodytees, and all is to little to
feade our filthy flesh. But the syngular commodytees within our own realm,
Commodytees.
we abhor and throw fourth as most vile noisome matter. Auydyously we drink
the wynes of other lands, we bye up their fruits and spyces, yea, we consume
in aparell their sylkes and their veluettes. But alas our own noble monumentes
and precyouse Antiquytees, which are the great beauty of our land, we as
little regard as ye parings of our nails, Antiochus, Herod, and
Dyoclecyane, are wonderfully yet spotted in the most authorysed chronycles, and
have upon their heads a double note of tyranny, Tyrauntes.
for cruellye destroyenge the monumentes of nacyons, specially of christen
relygyon. The most spyghtfull act of the said Dioclecyane, Gyldas Badonicus
much lamenteth in his work of the destruccyon of Brytayne, declarynge how he
in the open streets there, brent all the scriptures and godly writings that
might any where be found. Eutropius shows in the sixth book of his Roman
hystory, Eutropius.
that Achillas a duke seeking to do myschefe against his emprour, fyered a
lybrary of forty thousand books, a syngular monument of study and of
dylygence among the Greeks, which with exceeding labor and layser had
gathered so wurthye works of so noble wits in so great nombre together.
Jack Straw and watte Tyler. ij. rebellyouse captains of the commens in the
time of King Richard the second, Jack Straw.
brent all the lawers books, regesters, and writings within the city of
London, as testifyeth Johan Mayor and Fabyane in their chronycles.

The Anabaptystes in our time, Anabaptists.
an vnquyetouse kind of men, arrogaunt without measure, capcyose and unlearned,
do leave non old works vnbre^t, that they may easily come by, as apered by
the lybraryes at Mynster in the land of Westphaly, whom they most furyously
destroyed. An able witness of this their wicked custom, is Petrus Plateanus
among many others in his treatise against their dogged doings. Libros omnes
exurunt (inquit) indignantes se ab alio, quam ab ipso suo spiritu doctos uideri
Miserum est cernere Bibliothecas non ignobiles ab execranda secta hoc modo
aboleri. Lybraryes.
The Anabaptists burn all books (says he) without respect, thinking scorn
of any other sprete to seem learned, than of their own fanatycall brains. A
wretched thing it is to behold, the noble lybraryes so to be destroyed of
that execrable sect. Antonius Coruinus says also in his book against them.
Coruinus
Anabaptistarum furor, optimos quosque autores, ac^ictustissima uenerande
Antiquitatis exemplaria absumpserunt in Bibliotheca Osnaburgensi. The fury or
frantycke madness of the Anabaptists, has consumed away the most excellent
writers and the most noble exemplaryes of honorable Antiquyte, in the worthy
lybrary of Osnaburg. I could bring out a great nombre of like testimonies,
Learned men.
from Oecolampadius, Zuinglius Bullinger, Caluyne, and Philyppe Melanchton,
with other of the most notable writers of our age, concerning this ungracious
vyolence of these chymney prechers and benche bablers, but let these two
rehearced at this time suffyse.

I wyshe all natural noble hearts, and fryndely men to their country, as well
worldelye occupyers as men of blood ryall, to consydre those myscheuouse
examples of these cruel tyrauntes and wicked Anabaptists, Examples.
that they might so abhor them, and with all endeavor possible avoid the
like. And that they may gather an erneste occasyon so to do, I bring them in
here most worthy examples of their forefathers in this land, to contrary and
blemysh their frantycke and furyouse factes. Nennius Helius that noble
Brytayne, Ne^nius primus.
brother to Cassibellanus and Luddus, is reported the first that ever collected
the famous acts of the Britaynes. And thereto (some men say) he was first
moved, by that he had heard of Reutha the King of Scotts, which sumwhat
before his time had done the like concerning that regyon. An other sort
applies it unto the contencyon, which was betwyn King Luddus his brother and
him, Opynions.
such time as he transposed the city of Troynouaunt now called London. For in
the transposynge thereof, he changed the name, and from thens fourth called it
Luddes town, which as a frynde to Antiquyte, he greuouslye took, for so much
as the noble name of Troy, should by that means come to utter oblyuyon
within the land. Those colleccyons Nennius the Provost of Bannochor, Ne^nius
alter
not far from Westchestre, a man christenlye learned for his time, more than.
vi. hundred years after translated into Latyne out of the Brittyshe language,
as it is reported of the old Brityshe writers.

Huldricus Mutius rehearceth in the. viij. book of his chronycle of the
Germans, that Charles the great so much regarded Antiquytees, Charles
that he intermytted no day, but at one time or other he always therein read
either some ancient hystorye or else the sacred scriptures. Alcuinus the
Deacon, an English man, which was in those days his chief instructour, in a
serten epistle that he writes to the universal church of England, he much
commends a Biblyotheke or lybrary in York, builded by the archebyshoppe
Egbert, Alcuinus
for the noble monumentes that were conserved therein.

Date mihi (inquit) eruditionis libellos, quales in patriae mea Anglia, per
industiam magisti mei Egberti habui, and remittam uobis aliquos ex pueris
nostris, ut excipiant inde necessaria, and reuehant in Francia^ flores
Britanniae. Et non sit tantum in Eboraco hortus conclusus, sed etiam in Turonia
emissiones paradisi. Permyt me to coppie out (says he) such learned volumes or
books of erudycyon, Bobes.
as I sometime had rule of, in my natyue contreye England, by the appointment
of my mastre Egbert. And I shall send of our young men thydre to coppye out
things necessary, and so to bring into France the sweet smelling flowers
of Britayne. Let not the well kept garden be so reserved in York, but that
we may also taste in Turon the fruits of that sweet paradyse. Dylygence.
Se how studyouse and laboryouse men were in those days, not only for the
conseruacyon of their learned mennyes labors, but also that other nacyons
should have profit of them. Much altered are we from that golden world,
nowadayes.

Like stories do we read, of King Sigebert and King Alphrede here in
England, Kings
which not only sought out the best learned men of their times to instruct
their own persons and famylyes, but also they appointed certain hours every
day, for their own pryuate studyes. In the end, for increase of all kinds
of learning, they reared up the. ij. vnyuersytees or general studyes of
Cambridge and Oxforde, bringing thydre all monumentes of doctrine, as a most
necessary mayntenaunce and ornature to the same, which are in our days full
myserablye decayed to our realms no small dishonor. decayed
But the cause thereof may easily be coniectured. In these lattre days, wherein
Christ has given to his tyered congregacyon, the silence of half an hour, or
peace for a time without persecucyon of tyrauntes furyouse, Apoca. viij. God
has given to us here in England wythall, that he sumtyme gave to his chosen
people the Hebrews in the foren prouynces. He has changed the heart of the
lion into the hate of our mortal enemy, Edward
utterly to destroy him and all such as consent to his myschefes, Hester in
the. xiiij. cap. The heart of our noble King is clerelye auerted from the
cruel Haman of Rome, and from his dysgysed tormentours that so gredyly sought
the innocent blood of his people. Whereupon that rabble of papystes cares not
now what becomes of this realm. They much rejoice when the honor thereof
turns to destruccyon, as in this decay of lybraryes. papists
So long as Antichrist reigned, they were both writers and speakers, but sens
Christ came abroad either grace and learning has failed the^, or else they
mind to bestow non upon him. Yet some in corners has been folebolde, as has
well apered by that wytlesse monstre which made the last will of heresye,
and forte of most open Idolatrye, with such other dottynge dastardes.

Now to turn again to the worthy examples, of them that had respect to the
honor of their country. That noble and valiant captain sir Johan
Oldecastell, called also the Lord Cobham, Johan Cobha^.
perceiving the outrage of the Romyshe popes clergy in his time against the
good doctrine of Johan Wicleue, caused all his works to be coppyed out by
most fair writers, at his own great cost and charge, and so connayed them
into the land of Berne, that they might be there preserved from destruccyon.
Some parauenture will not allow this fact, wicleue
for so much as their pope has condemned Johan Wicleue for an heretyke. But
let such lewd papystes dwell still in their accustomed frenzy, we know by
his doctrine that he was a true Apostle of Christ. Humfrey the good Duke of
Glocestre, Hu^frey.
for the fauer he bare to good letters, purchased a wonderful nombre of books
in all scyences, whereof he freely gave to a lybrary in Oxforde, a hundred and.
xxix. fair volumes. Thomas Gascoigne reports in his book of the floudes of
Babylon, that the kings here in England, were wont to hold a great nombre
of good writers within the monasteryes of their foundacyons, to non other end,
but only to coppie out the memorable works of old writers specially of the
hystoryanes and chronyclers, that they might in their lybraryes perpetually
remain, appoyntynge them great stypendes. And this worthy example they had
from time to time of their fathers and predecessors. writers.
But alas (says he) they now peryshe and come in great nombre to naught for
want of renuynge. What might this good man have said in our time, if he had
seane this pyteouse desolacyon that we now behold?

A few of us there be, that would gladly save the most necessary monumentes
of their dyspersed remnaunt. But wretched pouerte will not permyt us, Pouerte
to show to our country such a natural and necessary benefyte. Neither will
they permyt us their old coppyes, which have them in possessyon, but rather
they suffer them to rotte under their hands. When Bedas of Iaru wrote the
chronycles of the English Saxons, he had all the help that might be of the
bishops and learned men here. Helpers
Cymbertus wrote unto him all that was done in the prouynce of Lyndesay, now
called lyncolne shiere. Nothelmus sent to him also all that he had gathered
together in Sussex, Sothray, and Ke^te. Alcuinus gave him his labors and
colleccyons for the prouynce of York. Daniel of wynchestre made him penny of
all that was done among the West saxons. And from all other quarters of the
land, were letters, scroules, and wrytinges, dyrected by massengers unto him,
to aid that godly enterprise of his. As it was ones noysed abroad in our
time, that Conradus Gesnerus a great learned man of Tygur in Germany, Gesnerus
was minded to put fourth his universal Bibliotheke of all kinds of writers,
a nombre of learned men in Germany, France, and Italy, serched out the names
of many strange authors, with ye tytles of their works, and sent their good
labors unto him to amplify the same. So ded the printers also the cataloges
and regestres of their printed works, to the furtheraunce of good learning
and honest report of their names, Helpers
as undoubted they all for so doing are worthy. I would to our lord that we
had within this land a nombre of learned men of the same honest zele to
letters. So should our noble Antiquitees and monumentes of learning be known
to our posteryte, and our people be replenished with all kinds of good
knowledge.

In all ages of the church (says Baptista Mantuanus in Apologetico) had we
men of eloquence and learning, Mantuanus.
so well when it was in the Apostles time planted, as when it was in the days
of the Martyrs watered, and under the ancient fathers and doctors noryshed
and refreshed. Which sentence might as well be found true in this our
Bryttyshe nacyon, as either in Asia, Palestyne, or Rome, in Joseph of Arimathy
and his companyo^s which first taught us the Christen faith here, in Lucius the
king, teachers
Amphibalus, Aaron and Julius. And last of all in Ninianus, Patricius, Elcutus,
Dubrice David, Congellus, Kentingerne, Asaph Gildas, and a great sort more,
if we had not in place of our true Antiquitees, most deuylyshe fables and
lies. When the book of Gods law, which Moses wrote, was found in the chest
of the Leuytes, good king Josias with the congregacyon of the Lord, Josias
very much lamented the blindness and ignorance of their fathers, for the
want thereof, and their own mysfortune (as they than thought it) that they had been so long without it. ij. Parali. xxxiiij. A notable manner had the Profane
or Ethnyck Princes and Magistrates, in reseruyng the excellent fruits of
profounde and rare wits for their posteryte, as are the noble works of
Socrates, Plato, Cicero, Virgyl, Arystotle, and Pliny. The nature of the
ignoble and curryshe generacyon of Antichrist, Antichrist.
has always ben busied, seking contrary wise to obscure all things, that
contained any veryte necessary. So come all sciences for the time of his
reygne, barbarysed, darkened and perverted, by the Sophysters and subtyle
Summistes, besides their fylthie handelynges of the sacred scryptures.

Christ conde^pned the pharisees, not for professynge the knowledge of the
law, but for hydinge and corruptinge the right understanding thereof, and for
holding the people in a very wicked blyndnesse, Math. xxiij. Pharsees.
And contrary wise he most amyably persuaded his dear dyscyples and fryndes,
that they should in no wise hyde or conuaye under a bushel, the light which
he had appointed to be showed fourth abroad. Luce. xi. If we that by a name of
Christianyte, profess his relygon in baptym, be not with him, we are utterly
against him, and so procure to oureselues. Helpers
Mathe. xij. Let one noble man therefore, now that the scryptures are
ple^teously spredde, bring fourth one noble author, and an other emprinte an
other, to the co^seruacion of Englandes Antiquitees. In like case let one
rich merchaunte bring one worthy work of an ancient writer to light, and
an other put fourth an other, to the beauty of our nacyon. Besides the
Bryttyshe authors, whom I often named before, let one bring fourth Bedas ge
gestis Anglorum, Bedas
an other Willyam of Malmesbery de gestis Pontificum and Regum. Let an other
bring fourth Simeon of Durham with Richard and Johan of Haugustalde, an other
Aldrede, and Wyllyam of Rieuall with Marianus the Scott. An other Giraldus
Cambrensis, an other Henry of Huntyngto^, an other Alphrede of Beuerlay, an
other Florence of Worcestre, and an other Walter of Excestre An other Roger
Houede^, an other Matthew Paris, on other Johan Beuer, an other Radulphus Niger,
Writers
an other Radulphus de Diceto, an other William Newburg of Bridlington, an
other Johan of Oxforde, An other Scala temporum, an other Flores historiarum,
Asserius, Obseruus, Geruasius, Stephanides, and Richardus Diuisiensis of
winchestre, with a wonderful nombre besides.

As much, yea, rather more, is vnfrutefully consumed at one belly ba^ket than
would pay the charges of three of these famous works. Let all noble hearts
consydre the vanyte thereof, Consider
and what honest fame might arise by these doings, as well to their own
persons as to their maturall country. Plinius (as I remember) has this very
notable sentence, that one to help an other, is a most comeliness in the
mortal kind of man. The Philosopher says also, the more commen to man's use,
and good thing is made, the more profitable and precyouse it is. Mark it
So well is he worthy of perpetual fame that brings a good work to light,
as is he that first ded make it, and ought always to be reckened the second
father thereof. For as Vlpianus reports in his Pa^dectes, it is all one, a
thing not to be, and not to apere to the commen use. No edyfyenges on the
earth, are to be compared to this, if we have respect to durable fame and
renoume. All the Pantheo^s, Palaces, Amphitheaters, Castles, Capitols, and
other monstruouse buyldinges of the world, buildinges.
are not to us so notable, as is yet the name of one Theophilus a citiezen of
Antioche, to whom S. Luke in his time only dedicated his Gospel and Acts. No,
neither the Labyrinth of Dedalus, nor yet the great pyllers of Hercules,
neither yet here in England the Stonheng of Salysbury plain, which) they say)
was brought thydre from Irelande, by Merlyne ye Prophet of Wales. Merline
What else has reduced the name of sir Johan Bourchier the lord Barners to a
fame immortal, but his translacyon of frossardes Chronycle from French into
English.

O that we had now the floryshyng works of Gildas, Gildas.
surnamed Cambrius, that most noble Poet and Historyane of the Britains,
which wrote in the time of king Aruiragus, when S. Peter yet preached to the
dispersed brethren. The Venecyans more than lxxxviij. years ago for their
co^modite could fatche them out of Irelande, and have them yet commen both at
Venys and Rome, accountynge them a very specyal treasure. We neither seek the^,
couete them, nor regard them, though they be of our land the most precyouse
Antiquitees and excellent memoryalles of learning, antiquite
as testyfyeth both Lilius Gyraldus in uitis poetarum, and also Pontius
Virunnius in historia Britannica. I pray God we may ones rightly way our own
slouthful neglyge^ce in things which might be greatly to our honor. Then
should we sone perceive, what a point it were of ignobylyte, to suffer such
works to perysh as we daily with our eyes behold. I have heard it among
strangers reported, Strangers.
that Englysh men are fryndely in things which lasts not, as in bankettes
and late suppers. But let this be veryfyed of the vain and inconsta^t
Papists of our nacyon, and not of us Christianes, which ought to be of a
far other disposycyo^. Let us apply our studyes, to give to our fore^
Christian fryndes, things lastyng and durable, durable.
as they have full learnedly done unto us in most ample manner. Such may be
most of all the noble and worthy monumentes of our land here, truly gathered,
to the manyfolde praise of our eternal living God, which has in these
lattre days, visited both the^, and us with innumerable gifts of his heavenly
grace. To whom be glory without end. Amen.

Thus ends the laboriouse journey and search of Johan Leyland, for Englandes
Antiquitees, with declaracyons enlarged by Johan Bale. Anno, M.D.XLIX.
Have love to your natural country, as had Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph,
Moses, Iosue, Gedeon, Mathathias, and other noble capitaynes to the land of
Israel. Seek the confort and honor thereof, as ded these worthy fathers, and not
the cruel desolacyon as ded Ismael, Esau Ouan, Nabal, Achitofel, Antiochus,
Alchimus, Triphon, the Prestes of Bahal, and other notatable traitors.
A wise man which applies his mind to understand Gods law, will busy him
self to seek wisdom out from all Antiquite, and exercise his wits in ye
prophets. He observes the sayenges, of famous men, and labors to perceive
dark sentences, of wisdom. Ecclesiast. xxxix.
As I had fynyshed this present Treatise, a frind of Johan Leylande brought me
these verses of his, to emprint them with the work, least any thing should
perysh that came from him. And I was as glad to perform it, as he was to
desire it. I would I might so well give unto my readers the most noble work
of his Epigrammes, as these few verses following.

MOlliter hic tumulus Thomae legit ossa Milonis,
Cui ter quinque Deus lustra uidere dedit.
Sic uitam instituit sanctam, moresque pudicos,
Illius ut cuncti fa^ta suprema gemant,
Sic ornamentis sacra hanc decorauit and aede^
Se dibus ut niteant aurea quaeque suis.
Ergo s^meritis pateat locus ullus, amoenum
Inter coelicolas possidet ille locum.
De calumniante Croco,
Me fatuum Curuus, fatuorum maximus ille
Imperio quodam praedicat esse suo.
Vt sim, me Furiae non torquent, illius urge^t
Clade Mathematicum nocte dieque caput.
A Regystre of the names of Englysh Writers, whom the second part of my
work, de Scriptoribus Britannicis, shall comprehe^d as it comes fourth.
Johan Bale to the readers.
AN occasyo^ (me thinks) is offered me here, to exhybit some part of my
studious labors to the use of my brethren, I would I were as able to give them
the whole contents thereof, as I could find in my heart to do it out of hand
freely. Sens I returned home again from Germany, where as I both collected, and
emprented my simple work, de Scriptoribus Britannicis I have for the full
correccyon and further augmentacyon of the same, perused many libraries both in
Cambridge and Oxforde. In the famous city of London, is but one known
library, so far as I can learn, which also by fauer I have seane over. But
alas for pytie, that it should be reported of so noble a city, to have but
one lybrary, and that to be so slendre a thing as it is The time has been,
when it has had a great nombre of the noblest libraries in all Christendom,
their destenecyon at this day, of men godly minded, is much to be lamented.
Though the act were most commendable, to suppress ye dysgysed sects of the
Romyshe Antichrist, and so to bannyshe them hens, yet can not the sufferaunce
of this so heavy a ruin of Englandes noble monumentes, be so judged of men
wise and learned, but alas, far otherwise.

Their temples for the more part, (...) their other buyldynges, remain yet
still, unbroken, Alac why might not their libraries as well have remained to
the commen wealth of learning, undestroyed? Among the stacyoners and book
bynders, I found many notable Antiquitees, of whom I wrote out the tytles,
times, and begynnynges, that we might at the least show the names of them,
though we have not as now, their whole works to show. If the bishop of Romes
laws, decrees decretals, extrauagantes, cleme^tines and other such dregs of
the devil, yea if Heytesburyes ^^phlsmes, Porphyryes universals, Aristotle's
old so gyckes and Dunse and dyuynyte, with such other lowsy legerdemaynes, and
fruits of the bottomless pytte, had leaped out of our libraries, and so
become^ couerynges for books coming from the fore^ nacyons, we might well
have been therewith contented. But to put our ancient Chronicles, our noble
hystoryes, our learned co^mentaryes and homelyes upon ye scriptures, to so
homely an office of subieccyon and utter conte^pte we have both greatly
dishonored our nacyon, and also showed our selves very wicked to our posteryte.

Now let me return to my laboriouse search for old and new writers. I have
been also at Norwyche, our second city of name, and there all the library
monume^tes, and turned to the use of their grossers, candelmakers soap sellers,
and other worldly occupyers, so studyouse have we ben there for a common
wealth, and so careful of good lernyng, o negligence most vnfryndly to our
nation. I would have been sorry to have uttered so obscure a fact, had not the
vngentilnesse of the thing required it, to the warnyng of them which shall
come after, for doing the like to the hinderau^ce of the realm. As much have I
saved both there and in certain other places of Northfolke and Southfolke
concerning the authors names and tytles of their works, as I could, and as
much would I have done through our ye whole realm, if I had been able to have
borne the charges, as I am not. Wherefore my dear co^^rey men, such as are
zelouse to their nation and desirouse of good knowledge, in ye residue shall
accept at this time, my good will for my fact. These are the notable writers,
whose names I have gathered, and whose manifold fruits of doctrine I am ready to
show, if ye lord make me of power to perform it besides ye dilligent
recognicio^ and increacementes of my first labors.

The names.
ADalbertus spaldinge^sis Adamus Cartusiensis. Adamus abbas dore^sis. Adamus
anglicus Cisterciensis. Adamus abbas Rieuallis. Adamus Saxlyngham. Adamus
Hemlynghton. Adamus Eston Cardinalis. Adamus Salthus. Adamus de Nidzarde.
Adamus Mirymouth. Adelardus Bathomensis. Achardus Anglicus. Aegidius de foeno.
Albertus episcopus Lincolnie. Albanus somniator. Allexander de S. Albano.
Alexander Carpentarius. Alexander Barkeley. Alfricus Archiepiscopus. Alphredus
Capellanus. Alienora Regina. Andreas Horn. Andreas Ammonius. Anglicus
Ceriptor. Antonius fizherberde. Antonius Cook. Antonius Gylby. Arnoldus Ciuis
Londinensis. Arnulphus Abbas. Astulphus Monachus. Arturius Kelton. Atroclius,
et Isanus.
Baldewinus Cantuariensis. Bartholomeus Dunelmensis. Bartholomeus de Culey.
Bartholomeus Exoniensis. Benedictus Anglicus. Bernardus Syluester. Bernardus
Morlanensis. Bylyngham Philosophus. Brito Monachus Nordouicensis. Bridferthus
Ramesiensis. Bridlyngtonus quidam. Brenkyll Monorita. Bocfastus Philosophus.
Boedanus Anglus. Bostonus Buryensis.
Canonicus Regularis. Caratocus Nancaruan. Castertonus Monachus. Christophorus
Nolhamsensis. Christophorus Seyn Iermayn. Clemens Lanthoniensis. Cornelius
Hibernus. Chronica Anonymorum. Commentatores Merlini. Cowtonus Archiepiscopus.
Cuthbertus de Iaru. Cuthwinus Wiremuthensis.
Daniel Ceretus. Daniel Church. David Taualegus. David Lyndesey. Dionysius
Holkam. Dynley Carmelita. Downeham Theologus.
Eadmundus de Abendon. Eadmundus Dudley. Eadmundus Alen. Eboracensis Episcopus.
Edwardus Foxus. Edwardus Walshe. Edwardus. vi. Anglorum Rex. Elbodus Cpiscopus.
Eremita quidam.
Franciscanus Historicus. Franciscus Bygot. Frater Perscrutator. Fridegodus
Anglus. Frisyngfelde Grammaticus. Foluyle Minorita. Fuldebertus Persorensis.
Galfridus de Hyngham. Galfridus Vinesauf. Galfridus Lynge. Gawinus Douglas.
Georgius folberius. Georgius Lilius. Gerardus Puella. Geraldus Cornubiensis.
Geruasius Tilberius. Geruasius de Partho. Gilbertus Westmonasteriensis.
Gilbertus Buckenham. Gilbertus de Legle. Gilbertinus Anglicus. Gisla et
Richtruda. Glaundenyle Iurista. Godfridus Wintoniensis. Godfridus Cornubiensis.
Godfridus Eglyn. Godwinus Sarisburiensis. Gregorius de Cairguent. Gregorius de
Huntyngdon. Gregor^us Bridlyngtonensis. Gualtherus Archiepiscopus. Gualtherus
Mapes. Gualtherus Euesham. Gualtherus de Hibernia. Gualtherus Bokedene.
Gualtherus Heston. Gualtherus Gysborne. Gualtherus Wymborne. Gualtherus
Tiryngton. Gualtherus Excestre. Gualtherus Mogolanensis. Gualtherus Catchepoll.
Gualtherus de Hylton. Gualtherus de Landu. Gualtherus Britte. Gualtherus
Parker. Guido de Marchis. Guilhelmus Gemeticensis. Guilhelmus Hanaberg.
Guilhelmus Myluerley. Guilhelmus Heythisbury. Guilhelmus de Pagula. ij.
Guilhelmus Notyngham. Guilhelmus Radynges. Guilhelmus Sudbury. Guilhelmus de
Kyngesham. Guilhelmus Encourt. Guilhelmus Lyncolne. Guilhelmus Conches.
Guilhelmus Brunyarde. Guilhelmus Northfelde. Guilhelmus Lubbenham. Guilhelmus
Massiliensis. Guilhelmus de Burgo. Guilhelmus de Rubrouke. Guilhelmus de sancta
fide. Guilhelmus Wigorniensis. Guilhelmus Norton. Guilhelmus de Dalton.
Guilhelmus Sternefelde. Guilhelmus Briton. Guilhelmus Suthflet. Guilhelmus
Haruy. Guilhelmus Beanfu. Guilhelmus de sancto Albano. Guilhelmus Leycestre, de
montibus. Guilhelmus de Ramesey. Guilhelmus Harsick. Guilhelmus Wyckham.
Guilhelmus Bongeuilla. Guilhelmus Salisbury. Guilhelmus Beckle. Guilhelmus
Rimyston. Guilhelmus Iue. Guilhelmus Seyton. Guilhelmus Stapylhart. Guilhelmus
Galyon. Guilhelmus Copynger. Guilhelmus Whetley. Guilhelmus Grene. Guilhelmus
Chireburg. Guilhelmus Lyssy. Guilhelmus Docreda. Guilhelmus Anglicus.
Guilhelmus Southampton. Guilhelmus Sutton. Guilhelmus Excestre. Guilhelmus
Butler. Guilhelmus Rowell. Guilhelmus Paris. Guilhelmus Byntre. Guilhelmus de
Nangis. Guilhelmus de Risshang. Guilhelmus Botoner. Guilhelmus Shubbis.
Guilhelmus Horman. Guilhelmus Grocinus. Guilhelmus Latimerus. Guilhelmus
Melton. Guilhelmus Roye. Guilhelmus Barlowe. Guilhelmus Thynne. Guilhelmus
Parfeius.
Henricus de Esseburne. Henricus Crixstede. Henricus Salteriensis. Henricus
Costesay. Henricus Bracton. Henricus Harkeley. Henricus Swmesius. Henricus La
vile. Henricus Parker. Henricus Bradsha. Henricus Bulle^us. Henricus
Brinkelowe. Henricus Howerde comes. Helizabetha filia Regis. Herebertus
Nordouicensis episcopus. Hibernicus quidam. Huggonus Pseudo propheta. Hugo de
Euesham. Hugo de sancto Neoto. Hugo de Nouo caltro. Hugo Sotouagina. Hugo
Legate. Hugo de Hibernia. Hugo de Snexeth. Hugo de Matiscon.
Ioannes Chilmarke. Ioannes Tartais. Ioannes Rocheforth. Ioannes Anglicus.
Ioannes Bampton. Ioannes Langdene. Ioannes Wyckam. Ioannes Lutterell. Ioannes
Oxrach. Ioannes Bloxham Carmelita. Ioannes Bloxham Mertonensis. Ioannes de
Beuerlaco. Ioannes Somerset. Ioannes Athou vel Acton. Ioannes Repyngale.
Ioannes Ridenaus. Ioannes Sharp. Ioannes Hylton. Ioannes Wylton. Ioannes de
sancto Eadmundo. Ioannes Dumbleton. Ioannes Seuerle. Ioannes Fordeham. Ioannes
Cornubiensis. Ioannes Clippeston. Ioannes Rodyngton. Ioannes Somerton. Ioannes
Alyngton. Ioannes Seguarde. Ioannes Elyn. Ioannes Driton. Ioannes Goodwyck.
Ioannes Amundysham. Ioannes Withamstede. Ioannes Multon. Ioannes Wellys
monachus. Ioannes Palmer. Ioannes Wychyngham. Ioannes Manduyt. Ioannes Louey.
Ioannes Sloley. Ioannes de Tynmouth. Ioannes de Burgo. Ioannes Lathbury.
Ioannes Latimerus. Ioannes Holbroke. Ioannes de Mare. Ioannes Dewros. Ioannes
Bury. Ioannes botrell. Ioannes Felton. Ioannes Flete. Ioannes Dalton. Ioannes
Stukey. Ioannes Langton. Ioannes de Musca. Ioannes Kylyngworth. Ioannes de
Merisco. Ioann^s brydlyngton. Ioannes Ouynhell. Ioannes Blak^n^y. Ioannes
Gower. Ioannes Eboracensis Cardi. Ioannes Basyngstoke. Ioannes Colley. Ioannes
Garlande. Ioannes Lelandus senior. Ioannes Aldar. Ioannes Euerisden. Ioannes
Kenyngale. Ioannes Estby. Ioannes Kent. Ioannes Maylart. Ioannes Roxburgensis.
Ioannes Stambrigius. Ioannes Spyne. Ioannes Claymundus. Ioannes Constable.
Ioannes Skeleton. Ioannes Batmanson. Ioannes Soul. Ioannes Basset. Ioannes
Rixe. Ioannes Skuysh. Ioannes Freas. Ioannes Gwynneth. Ioannes Dedecus. Ioannes
Houghton. Ioannes Bird. Ioannes Heliar. Ioannes Mylis. Ioannes Longlonde.
Ioannes Robyns. Ioannes Powelus. Ioannes Field. Ioannes baretus. Ioannes
Rhesus. Ioannes Aldristus. Ioannes Marbeck. Ioannes Hales. Ioannes Heron.
Ioannes Veron. Ioannes Old. Ioannes Foxus. Iocelinus de Brakelonde. Isanus et
Atroclius. Iuliana barnes. Iulianus Britannus. Iunetus Anglus.
Kilyngtonus Decanus Pauli. Karewe Oxoniensis.
Laurentius Dunelmensis. Laurentius Cunde. Laurentius de Somercote. Laurentius
Russius. Lachbertus Abbas. Lenthwardinus Theologus. Leonardus Coxus. Libri
Anonymorum. Liuinus Archiepiscopus. Lucas Bosden. Lucas Sheparde. Ludouicus
Cairleon. Ludouicus Sharleton. Ludouicus wager.
Machutes Britannus. Martinus de Clyuo. Martinus Sculthorpe. Mattheus
Vtudocinensis. Michael Cornubiensis. Minorita Herefordensis. Monachus de
Euesham.
Nicolas Brekendale. Nicolaus Mamacutius. Nicolaus Fakynham. Nicolaus
Botlesham. Nicolaus Bungey. Nicolaus Bollare. Nicolaus Astone. Nicolaus
Ratclyff. Nicolaus Cartusianus. Nicolaus Hostresham. Nicolaus Grimoaldus.
Nicolaus Brigan. Nicolaus Lesseus. Nigellus de Werekere. Nigellus Eligensis.
Ocleff Anglus. Odo de Ceritonia. Oliuerus Britannus. Osbertus de Clara.
Paulus Middelburge. Petrus Londinensis canonicus. Petrus Babyon. Petrus de
quesnell. Petrus Rugiensis. Petrus Kenyngale. Petrus wattes. Philippus Nycols.
Prior Trinitatis Londini. Pupwell Sophista.
Radulphus Niger. Radulphus de Diceto. Radulphus Archiepiscopus. Radulphus
Spaldynge. Radulphus Strodus. Radulphus Westmonasteriensis. Radulphus de Longo
campo. Radulphus de Coggeshale. Radulphus bockynge. Radulphus Acton. Radulphus
de Marham. Radulphus Ratclyff. Radulphus Skynner. Reginaldus Cantuariensis.
Reginaldus Langham. Reginaldus de Piperno. Reginaldus Mohun. Reginaldus Polus.
Ricardus Diuisiensis. Ricardus prior Eligensis. Ricardus Medicus. Ricardus
Belgraue. Ricardus walyngforth. Ricardus Hagustaldensis. Ricardus
Crolandiensis. Ricardus blyton. Ricardus Wetheringsete. Ricardus Folsham.
Ricardus Londini Decanus Ricardus Depedale. Ricardus Remyngton. Ricardus
Snedysham. Ricardus Porlonde. Ricardus Tenet. Ricardus Flemmynge. Ricardus le
Ruys. Ricardus Conyngton. Ricardus Wichyngham. Ricardus Feribrydge. Ricardus
Langlande. Ricardus Premonstratensis, Ricardus Ryce. Rhithmi Plures. Robertus
Crickladensis. Robertus dux Glocestrie. Robertus Veyse. Robertus Dodeforde.
Robertus Tuyforde. Robertus Alyngton. Robertus Oxforde. Robertus Curson.
Robertus Ormeskirke. Robertus Balsac. Robertus de monte Michaelis. Robertus
Pullus seu Polenius. Robertus Fynyngham. Robertus Mascall. Robertus Strodus.
Robertus Scriba de bridlyngton. Robertus de Leycestria. Robertus Bale scriba
Londinensis. Robertus Bale Burnehamensis. Robertus Shyngleton. Robertus
Whyttyngton. Robertus Record. Robertus Crowley. Rogerus whelpedale. Rogerus
Computista. Rogerus Cestriensis. Rogerus Swynesheade. Rogerus de Wyndore.
Rogerus Herefordensis. Rogerus Dymmocke. Rogerus blake Monachus. Rogerus de
Waltham. Rogerus Glacton. Rogerus Ascam. Rolandus Harryson.
Samson Demeta. Scotici Scriptores. Serlon Anglus. Seruanus et Teruanus. Simon
de Fraxino. Simon de Tunstede. Simon de Gurnay. Simon de Feuersham. Simon
Alcock. Simon de Langton. Simon de Doreston. Simon de Henton vel Horneton.
Simon de bredon. Simon Burneston. Simon Fish. Specula Nonnulla. Stanfordiensis
Preceptor. Stephanus Hawis.
Teruanus and Seruanus. Theobaldus Stampensis. Thinredus Doueriensis. Thomas
Eboracensis. Thomas de Wynchecombe. Thomas Ismaelita. Thomas de Hibernia.
Thomas New Market. Thomas Peuerell. Thomas Walsyngham. Thomas Langle. Thomas
Wylton. Thomas Hasylwode, Thomas Stacy. Thomas Gascoigne. Thomas Dando. Thomas
Merke. Thomas Palmer. Thomas Esseby. Thomas Sta^shaue Thomas Dockinge Thomas
Baiocensis. Thomas de Hanneya. Thomas Brinton. Thomas Bungey. Thomas Phaier.
Thomas de Stureia Thomas Sarisburiensis. Thomas Monumetensis. Thomas Rudborne
Monachus. Thomas Eboral. Thomas Lupsetus. Thomas Spenser. Thomas Artour. Thomas
Philomelus. Thomas Solimount. Thomas Lanquet. Thomas Serneholde. Thomas
Swynnerton. Thomas Cowper. Tipitotus Wygorniensis.
Vignalocus Britannus. Vince^tius Minorita. Visiones queda^. Vite quorundam.
Vtredus monachus Waldewinus Wigorniensis. Waruerus Westmonasteriensis.
Watertonus Buriensis. Whetley Anglicus. Wigmore Concionator.
THus have I mynystred here, a taste of my labors, to the^ that be fryndely
hearted to their country and favorable to good letters, doing the^ thereby to
know, that I would do gretter things to their honest commodyte, if I were of
power. I have given them a great nombre of the names of their famous and
notable workeme^ which wrote in this nacyon from age to age, some well some
ill, according to the diverse nature of their times, like as the holy Ghost
foreiudged of their doings in S. Iohans reuelacion. If ye had with the seid
names, their acts, their ages, and the tytles of their books, which I have
now in a readiness to show, ye might parauenture se many unknown wonders. But
if ye had their whole works in deed, as they were in substance and fashyon,
which now for the more part are peryshed, ye should have seane most wonders
of all. Their ages are as necessary to be known as their doctrynes, and the
tytles of their books so well as their manifest acts, to the^ that will
thoroughly judge things as they are, and not be deceived by colors

For what thing more clearly tries the doctrynes of me^, what they are, tha^
do their ages or times? Either yet, what more proueably manifests the
goodness or euylnesse of their acts, than do the tytles, or arguments of
their works? He that will thus try Dominick and Frances, the founders of two
new relygyons, which with their shulders vndrepropped the great temple of
Laterane, or stowte synagoge of Rome, tha^ falling downewardes, as pope
Innocent the third beheld ones (they say) in S. Peter's church in a vision,
shall find the one a murderer of the body the other a murderer of the
soul, the one an Hypocryte before God, the other before the world. The other
two sects of begging frires, to apere of an highar perfeccyon, ded fatche
their fou^dacio^s much farther of, that is to say, from Helias, Mary, and
Augustyn, yet could they never precede them in Hypocresy to dascll the eyes of
the world for lucre. The book of Dominickes docrine, no fire (they say) was
able to burn, yet now wha^ his virtue should be tried thereby, it is not upon the
earth to be seane. The doctrine of Fraunces is apparu^t to this day, both in
his rule and testament to be a blasphemouse professyo^ of hypocresy in the
ydolatrouse kingedome of Antichrist.

If these men be proved hypocrites and soul murderers, by their execrable
doctrines and examples, as they are conferred with the noble rules of the pure
scriptures, what shall we judge of all their ydel folowers, either yet of their
frantyck fruits, of vows, constytucyons, ceremonies, and their other
fryuolouse obseruacio^s? Yea, what shall we report of those vpholders of
Sodomebe they doctors, lawers, justices, ge^tylmen, or men of other sort, that
will yet vngentylly contend by sophystycall arguments void of all veryte,
those Gomorreal rules and vows to be so indispensable, that they can give no
place to Gods fre institucyo^ of marryage? I say as I think, and as I will
write, when I come ones to the tryeng out of the worthy truth from their
execrable poison, yt they are neither learned, wise, nor noble, but vnsauerly
smell of their beggarly bags, whose lowsy wallettes they shake. As the saying
is, such lyppes, such letuce, such harp such melody, bot now to conclude.
The vi. viij. ix. and xi. chapters of S. Ioha^s Apocal. are as a perfighte and
sure towch stone, whereby all ages, doctrines, acts and tytles are from time to
time tried, of what estymacyon and value they apere in Gods sight, to make us
godly wise in receyuynge them.

In the supplecyo^s of my. v. hundred of Brytysh and Englysh writers (of who^ I
have not. vi. persons here named) to some one have I added more tha^. lx.
works with their beginnings, to some. xl. to some. xx. to some more, to some
less, as I have them collected of the libraryes. Wherein men may behold the
diligence of our forefathers in the time of supersticion, and the untoward
negligence of us now a days in the mids of learning and sight. If any men
loving the learned fame of their nacyon, do know of more learned writers than I
have here, and in thy other book named (as it is not in my power to travail in
all quarters, if ^hey in season send me the names, times, tytles, nombres, and
beginninges of their works. I will registre the^, as I have done those. The
same will I do also, for the^ which ar now living, or of late years have
deceased, if I may obtain the like at their hands, to the famous co^modyte
of England in so many noble fruits. Moreover if any honest godly man, English
Brityshe, Scottysh or Irysh, have any Antiquite notable, concerning hystory
(which otherwise might peryshe and be lost) if he for this good purpose
vouchesafe to lend his copy, he shall not only have books for it, but also in
ye end, the said copy again. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be
evermore to them assistent, that love his heavenly truth without superstycyon
unfeignedly. Amen.

Emprented at London by Johan Bale, Anno. M.D.XLIX.


