MANIPVLVS VOCABOLVRVM.

A Dictionarie of English and Latin words, set forth in such order, as none
heretofore has been, the English going before the Latin, necessary not only
for Scholars that want variety of words, but also for such as use to write in
English Meetre.

Gathered and set forth by P. Leuins. ANNO 1570.

For the better understanding of the order of this present Dictionarie, read
over the Preface to the Reader, and the Epistle Dedicatorie, and thou shall
find it easy and plain, and further thereof thou shall gather great profit.

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, for John Waley.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
SO many Dictionaries of Latin and English (gentle Reader) have now been of
late by diverse sundry writers set forth, that except some kind of Novelty
should bring delight to the peruser, and some present profit also give hope and
courage to the same, it should be but a vain thing, and counted but as lost
labor, in so common a kind, and in so familiar a matter, to reasume again,
and to begin a new, ye thing so often prevented. Wherefore I thought it good
and expedient, at the beginning briefly to let thee know and understand what
and how many commodities, besides other dictionaries, seem to be contained in
the compendious compass of this little book, that thy hope may be certain.
Considering therefore, that whereas he that writes, means ever to pleasure
some body, or to profit many: and yet so that he may satisfy the best, and
help them that have most need, and seeing that the same thing then also
comes commonly to pass, when in the least charges and pains, most profit
and pleasure redoundeth to the perusers, therefore two things be here to be
considered: first that the quantity is small, so that the price being little
the poorer sort may be able to bie it: the other, that in the quality and
form of the little quantity, as it is devised, be more commodities, (than in
the common sort be found) to be received: as for the quantity, than see
what it is, certainly (as I call it) Manipulum, so it is but an handful: but
as for the quality wherein the virtue is contained, mo peradventure than thou
would easly think to be in so little a book that is hid from thee: what
(say thou) and how many? surely these. First yt for the pleasantness of the
meter, delectable and pleasant to read (as it is in other tongs) both the wits
be delited and comforted, and the memory also is nouryshed and confirmed, so
that a learned friend, being consulted concerning the edition hereof, said that
it would not only help them that were willing to learn, but also which is
most necessary in the negligent and unwilling youth, it would excitate and
stir them up, so that they would be willing to read and to learn of them
selves. Secondly whereas it follows the alphabet of the order of the last
sillible (for there is an alphabet well nigh as easy to be followed of the last
syllable as of the first) it comes to pass, that when all the simple and
vncompou^ded words be recited, and so many also of the compounds and
Deriuatiues as we think necessary and convenient, all the other, whether they
be of Substantives and Adiectines out of Verbes, or they be of Substa^tiues and
Aduerbes out of Adjectives, or they be of Adjectives out of Substantives, or
finally of Substantives out of Substantives, and of Adjectives out of
Adjectives, and so forth of the rest, all the same I say by the rule of the
Termination, in which the Art of Deriuing and Compounding for the most part
both consist, wherein also the chief points of our Grammar, where unto the
amplification and variation of our tongue does also properly belong, be here in
many diverse precepts, as their places require, set forth and considered.
Thirdly, it is necessary for makers of meeter, so that it seems not only to
ready him that makes, but also to give him the way to learn the art of the
same. Fourthly, whereas the chief grace and facility of our English tongue,
does chiefly consist in long syllable and short, and in the true pronouncing
and writing of the same, and namely in the end of words, whereunto we have most
respect in this little work, hereof it comes to pass, that as well children
and ruder schoolers, as also the Barbarous countries and ruder writers, may not
a little (if they will enjoy the offered occasion) well and easily correct and
amend, both their pen and speech. Finally, whereas in the Pollisillables, by
diversity of pronunciation, and voice of great accent, oftentimes one word
may have diverse significations, as, differ, differ, id est, prolongare: and
differ, differ, id est, discrepare, and such other, we have commonly set the
accent, which is only acute, in that place, and over that vowell, where the
syllable must go up and be long. And so in conclusion, whatsoever belongs to
the three chief points of Grammar, or Orthographie, Etimologie, and Prosodie,
there is little here omitted, that in such a work can be required: wherefore
if thou be minded to peruse this little book, in consideration of these
commodities that we have described: then for thy better instruction in the
order and use of the same, peruse first these articles and notes following, and
so proceed to thy pleasure and profit. Amen.

Notes for the use of the book.
First note that this Book is divided into.ix. parts, according to the.ix.
vowels, which come before the consonant in the last syllable: of the which
vowels these five be simple, a.e.i o. and u. and these four, ay. ea. oy. and
ou. be Dipthonges: Note also that the Diptho^gs be always long, and that the
other be always short, except that after a single Cosonant, this letter, e. be
the last letter of a word, for then the letter (e) is not the vowel of the
syllable, but it is only added at the end, to make the syllable before it to be
long: as in these abe. ebe. ibe obe. ube. (e) is only put to make the other
vowels long with (b) which else should be short if (e) were away, as these ab.
eb. ib. ob. ub. etc. which also be short, if it be a double consonant though
(e) do follow as. abbe. ebb. ibbe. obbe. ubbe, and, ab. eb. ib ob. and ub. be
all one. Note thirdly, that first we set the short sillables and then the long,
yet with this difference in both places, that first all the monasillables be by
themselves: yea and in either of these first all Substantives by them selves,
afterward all Verbes by them selves, and finally all the adjectives and other
od parts of speech, each kind by them selves. Fourthly note, that whereas some
Terminations have two or mo consonantes in the syllable after the vowell, thou
must follow the vowell, and the first consonant after it, as in these, au,
auce, auche, aude, auge, augue. etc. follow the alphabet of A, Ante N. and
thou shall not miss him in his place. Fifthly note, that when as some words
here contained be either barbarous, strange, or fallen out of use, we have not
much put them in as imitable, but rather that the rude may reform their tongue,
and that the Readers of such books, may here learn what the words mean,
and for that end we have interpreted such words, as kirk, church, myrke,
dark, ken, know, and such other. Sixthly, if any word be in diverse clause, the
same is witingly done, in respect of diverse kinds of writing, both which are
in use, and likewise when one word has diverse significations we have by adding
some word to both in English and Latin, Distincted and expounded the same: as
the Gout in the hands Chiragra, the Gout in the feet Podagra, a Pike for the
ears teeth. etc. scalprum, a Pike prick, stimulus a Pike fyshe, Lupus
sluuialis.

Finally whereas the declenson, gender, or conjugation is sometimes hard to
know, we have in the Nownes expressed the genetiue case, increasing long with
this circumflex (o) signifiing to be declined with hc, except an other article
be expressed: and the geuetiue ease increasing short with this accent called
grave (o) signifying to be declined with hic, except an other article be
expressed: all other that have neither of these do not increase, and be
declined with hc: except they end in, er, or us, (for then they be hic) or in
um, and, e, (for then they be hoc) or have some other article expressed. And to
know the coniugations: we have set over (e) the infinitive mood of the second
coniugations, this circumflex (e) as doeere, merere, and over (e) the
infinitive mood of the third, this accent grave (e) as agere, finally if any
Verb end not in ari, eri, nor eri, but only in (^) as frui, it is the
infinitive mood of the third conjugation of some Verb in (or).

To the right worshipful M. Stanley Treasurer of the Queen her Majesty's Mynt
P.L. wishes health, and all true felicity.
IT is the manner of some writers (right worshipful) when they will set forth
some piece of work, that they have compyled or made, to excuse the rashenesse
of the edition thereof, as being by their friends counsel, or for some other
cause, now moved to commend and commit that to the use or judgment of many,
which at first they thought should be but a private exercise to them selves, or
some privy pleasure to a few. This thing whether they all do in simplicity of
heart and sincerity, or some of them for some other cause, I cannot judge, but
I do excuse my self that I do not follow the low steps of such humility,
because the truth is in deed, that at the beginning, when I first began to
collect this book, which I have now at last after a long time, and with much
more labor and pains, than ye can possibly think, co^triued and brought to
some perfection (for the gathering of our English words, and dividing of the
same into this alphabet order of the last sillabls, being a trade not of any
man before attempted, or by the other Dictionaries any thing to reckon up helped
and furthered, must needs be a long travail) I thought and did always entend,
with so much speed as I could, to publishe and set abroad the same, as well
for the commodities in the preface to the reader contained, as also for
conscience sake, thinking that where I have been long conversant in the
schools, and have from time to time lamented to see the youth of our Cuntry
(in the study of the Latin tongue) lack such little instruments, as this fit
and needful for their exercises, and saw no man set his hand to the same, I
was bound for the portion of my small talent to do somewhat therein, though I
know that I should for my labor, ieoperd one of these two displeasures:
either if I did it not well, (for the world is now fine and disdainefull) to be
counted rude and ignorante, or else if I did never so well (being hard to
escape evil tongs) to be esteemed a fool, as one that for such a trifling
thing as this, with less profyt and more pains, would forsake a better and
more worthy study, with less travail and more gaynes. Yea and some will say
more over, that it is a superfluous and unnecessary labor, to set forth this
Dictionarie, for so much as Master Howlet, has set forth so worthy a
work of the same kind already. But I answer, that though it be a worthy
work in deed, as it is most worthy, and be also of the same kind in
general, and yet it is neither of the same kind in special, nor to the same
purpose devised in many things, for his is great and costly, this is little and
of light price, his is for greter students, and them yt are richable to have
it, this is for beginners, and them that are pooreable to have no better, his
is full of phrases and sentences fit for them ye use oration and oratorie, this
is only stuffed full of words, and the use thereof fit for the^ that are not
yet come to better exercises, who if they should have no Dictionarie at all to
help them forward, til such time as they were able to have one to use, the
other, and there be no more to be had but half ones that be to no good purpose,
what time should be lost? what years should be spent? surely not a little: like
as if no man should work in the Mint, but such as brought with them golden
hammers, ye should have little work done, whilst p^ore men, that for need
would labor, could not have such tools to work withal, and the rich which
peradventure could have them, yet for their accustomed ease and idle
occupations, would take little pains therewith. Neither can they well say, yt
though every scholar may not privately, have this great Dictionarie, and enjoy
her privately to him self: yet every school has or may have one of them in
common, which may serve for them al, for neither will all parents so agree to
have one for all: and if they would, yet it should be such a like thing, as if
ye had but one tool to work with in the mynt, which whilst one workman did
occupy, all the other should be idle, and so the work go little forward, and
surely by copy of Dictionaries, are copy of words coined in our schools.
But I need not much centend in this matter being plain inoughe of it self,
nether do I so much care for any of the things aforesaid, either profit or
pain, tauntes or disdain, foolishness or finenesse, or for any of other such
like vanities, as I do (let the^ say what they will) for my duty toward the
youth of my Country, if perchance I might do them some pleasure herein:
beseching your Maistership in like manner, that your worship will for the same
causes (for ye have ever been a lover and helper of good studies) neither be
ashamed, nor displeased, to let so little and rude a thing proceed in the
commendation of your good name to the same end, seeing that here we seek not
for praise or profit, but for the prosperous good proceeding of our poor youth
in good learning and knowledge, which thing if your goodness and patience will
do, ye shall both bind and encourage me at all times, to my power to labor
and endeavor my self, beth to further our schools with such points of my
pains, and to gratify your worship with a better work an other day, and also
ye shall deserve to be the best benefactor in this business, and to be
partaker of all their prayers, that may take profit hereby, to God for your
Mastership, in health and prosperity, with increase of much worship long to
continue. Amen.

Gentle Reader amend these fautes escaped.
In the preface.
Read differ, defer, id est prolongare, and differ, differ, id est
discrepare. pagina. 2. lin 27. Read we have not so much. pagin. 3. lib 28.
Read mereri. page 4. lin. 17.
In the epistle dedicatorie.
Read reckon upon. pa. 1. li. 24. Read general, yet it is. page 2. lib. 8.
Read to have or use the other, (and there be. etc.) pa. 2. li. 16. Blach, not a
blache, in ache. A lake, lacus, us, in ache. Read lacinia, and laciniare in ag.
Read quale, coturmx, icis, haec, in ale. To vaunt, gloriari, in ant. labelled,
infulatus, a. In ed. To need, Egere. In eede. To reverence, reuereri In e^ce.
A daughter, nata, ae. In er. A mowyer, oenis^^^^^, hic. In er. A liver, h^par,
^tis, hoc. In er. A meuer, sys^e, (...) In er. nersle, n^^ mers^, proximus. In
e^^^e. A press for books. prol^. in esse Scarlet, coccus, i, In et. sleete,
not heete, gelu, u. A magget, terms, etis, hc. In et. To skewe, limis oculis
spectare. In ew. ye residew, residuum, i, In ew. A kewle, pastomis, idis, in
eule A legacy, legatio, In cie. A penny, denarius, i, In ny. bryberie,
ambitus, us, In ry.
In the note of ry, read thus.
Examples declare, these contrary signify either. etc.
In the note of ilde, read thus.
Participles in iled. etc. stinche, foetor, not foeter, In inche.
In the note of ing read thus.
Adjectives possessiues. etc.
In the note of ship, read thus.
Baylyship, villicatus, us. mire, finais, i, In ire. A plyshe, pustula,, in
ishe.
In the note of isme, read thus.
Do end in isme, and are deryued of latin and greek words in isma and in
ismus. ye itch, prurigo, inis, hc. in itch A stitche in sowyng, ^^cus, us, In
itche. pische, pix, icis, hc In itche. A rigwith, dorsuale, is, hoc. In ith. A
nocke, crena, ae, In ocke. A carocke, herb, eruca, ae, In ocke. A bloome,
germen, inis, hoc, In come. A glutton, heluo, onis, In on. treason, Maiestatis
reatus. In on. young, iuuenis, is, in ong. hope, spes, ei, haec, In open. ye
pope, papa,, hic. In open. for prpos. pro, propter. In or To smoore, supprimere
In oore an aglot, Bracteolum, i. In ot. tallow, aruina,, In owe. falow land,
aruum, i. In ow. to falow land, arare. In ow. A muffle, fiscella, In uffle. ye
suck of a plowe, vomer, eris, hic. In uck. ye huckle bone, coxendix. In uckle.
Put these in umpe, after them in, umble.
a frumpe, floute, sanna,. a lump, massa,, haec. ye pumpe of a ship, sentina,,
A rumpe, oropigium, i, hoc. A stumpe, stipes, itis, hic. to frumpe, subsannare.
flayne, excoriatus, a, In ayn. a fair, nundinum. In air. to stayre,
contemplari, in air. a wayse, circus, i, in ayse. To wait on one, Famulari.
In ayte. A reach, porrectio, In each. A bead, not dead, bacca,, In ead. An
head, caput, it is, hoc. In ead Fearne, silix, icis, haec, In earne. A wreath,
circus, i, In eath. A troughbote, linter, tris, hic.
In the note of oulde. read in arium, for in arum.
A goose, ansercula, ae, hc, in oose. A manor, prdium. In our. To louse,
captat pediculos, In ouse. venomous, venenosus, a, In ouse.
A ante B.
In A. ALleluia. Laudate dominu^. Coloquintida, Coloquintida, ae, an herb. ye
Fistula, disease Fistula, ae. Serrha, Heus, io. Ha, ha, laugh, Ha, ha, ha. In
ab. A blab Garrula, lae. linguax, acis. A crab, fruit, malum siluestre,
arbutum, ti. A crab, tree, malus siluestris, arbutus, ti. haec A crab, fish,
cancer, cri, hic. A drab, filth, sordida, dae, A drab, whore, scortu^, i,
meretrix, icis, haec. A scab scabies, ei, haec. ye scab pruritus, us, scabredo,
inis, haec. ye scab of sheep mentigo, inis, haec to blab garrire, multiloqui.
to gab, bourd, iocari, scommari. to gab, lie, mentiri, co^minisci. to stab,
prick. pungere, stimulare. In abe. A babe, child, Infa^s, a^tis, hic, haec, A
babe, puppie, pupus, pi, pupa, ae. In able. A babble, pegma, atis, hoc, A table,
rope, rudens, entis, haec. A cable, horse, caballus, i, A caple, idem, A fable,
tale. fabula, ae, narratio A fable, lie, commentum, i, A gable, beam, delicia,
ae, A rabble, rewe, series, ei, haec A stable, stabulum, i A table, painted,
tabula, ae, A table for meat. mensa, ae, able, compos, otis: potens. stable,
stabilis, le. to babble garire. to brable idem. multiloqui. to fable, talk.
consabulari. to fable, lie, mentiri, co^minisci. A Syllable, sillaba, ae. A
Constable, constabularius, i. Ethnarca ae hic. ye Constable of an hundred.
centurio, onis. hic. A Parable, parabola. ae. unstable, instabilis, ae. unable
inualidus, a. impote^s durable, durabilis, e. mutable mutabilis, e. tuneable
symphonicus, a sayleable, nauigabilis, e. pledable, dicibilis, e. shedable
fusilis, e. semblable consimilis, e. tractable tractabilis, e. teachable
docilis, e. serchable scrutabilis, e, peaceable tranquillus, a. pleasable
placabilis, e. speakable effabilis, e. breakable fragilis, e. healeable
sanabilis, e. sealeable signabilis, e weanable, ablactabilis, e cheapable
estimabilis, e reapable messibilis, e earable arabilis, e heatable
calefactibilis, e There be many other in Able, derived of English verbes,
almost as many as there be verbs, which are only formed by putting too Able at
the end of the English term, as these that follow, and such other, whose
latin is in bilis, and do signify, that a thing is convenient, mete fit, apt,
worthy or able to be done, as, Eatable, comestibilis, bile. meet or fit to be
eaten. Treatable, worthy, or able to be treated upon. fyneable mulctibilis,
bile myneable fossilis, le rostable assatilis, le tostable tostilis, le
loueable amabilis, bile prooueable probabilis, bile grudgeable murmurabilis,
bile iudgeable estimabilis, bile shunnable deuitabilis, bile doutable
dubitabilis, bile bowable flexilis, le lowable comprobabilis, bile plowable
arabilis, le rowable remigabilis, bile defamable defamabilis, le inflamable
inflamabilis, bile comparable comparabilis, bile agreeable concors, ordis
amiable amabilis, bile amicable amicabilis, bile charitable pius, pia,
delectable delectabilis, le ineffable ineffabilis, bile excusable excusabilis,
bile euitable deuitabilis, bile exorable exorabilis, rabile expiable
expiabilis, abile explicable explicabilis, bile expugnable expugnabilis, le
impugnable impugabilis, abile hospitable hospitabilis, le innumerable
innumerabilis, le satiable satiabilis, le tractable tractabilis, bile violable
violabilis, le lamentable lamentabilis, le mariable nubilis, le measurable
mensurabilis, le merciable misericors, cordis miserable miser, ra personable
personabilis, le profitable vtilis, le seruisable seruilis, le sufferable
tolerabilis, le variable varius, a venerable venerandus, da changeable
mutabilis, le customable consuetus, ta incurable incurabilis, bile vnhouable
impertinens, entis vnloueable inamicabilis, le immovable immobilis, bile
vnpalpable impalpabilis, bile vnportable importabilis, bile profitable vtilis,
le reasonable rationalis, le reduceable reducibilis, bile refusable
recusabilis, bile remediable recuperabilis, bile recuperable idem remouable
mobilis, le reparable reparabilis, bile satiable saturabilis, bile saturable
satiablis, le vnsaylable innauigabilis, le unspeakable ineffabilis, le
seperable seperabilis, le temperable temperabilis, le tolerable tolerabilis,
le intractable intractabilis, le untreatable idem vntymeable intempestiuus, ua
inexcusable inexcusabilis, le inevitable ineuitabilis, le inexorable
inexorabilis, le ine^piable inexpiabilis, e ingenderable ingenerabilis, e
inhospitable inhospitabilis, le innumerable innumerabilis, le insatiable
insatiabilis, le inviolable inuiolabilis, le vnagreable incongruns, a vnamiable
inamicabilis, bile incomparable incomparabilis, le vncustomable inconsuetus, a
unprofitable inutilis, le unreasonable irrationabilis, le, unreasonable
irrationalis, e irrecuparable irrecuperabilis, le vnremediable idem vnremouable
immobilis, le irreparable irreparabilis, le insatiable insatiabilis, le
intolerable intolerabilis, le unvariable inuariabilis, le These may also be
written in abill, as, Laudable, or Laudabill, etc. Look in (ill) They be
derived of Verbes, and have their latin in, lis. use, ble, not bill. A ante C.
In acke. A Back, dorsum, i lack inopia, ae An hack, mattock. bidens, entis A
jack, armor stigium, i ye smacke of taste sapor oris, hic ye smack of a kiss
suauium, i ye snacke of a dog morsus, us A pack sarcina, ae A rack for a
crosbowe harpax harpacis hic. A rack for fodder presepe, is, hoc A sack
saculum, i A stacke strues is, haec black niger, gra slack lassus, a to cacke
cacare to clacke clangitare to crack crepitare to lack car^ere to smacke,
taste. sapere. to smacke, kiss, suauiare. to snacke, byte, morsitare. to pack
sarcinare. to rack tortare. to slack relaxare. to thwacke fustigare. to
vnpacke esarcinare. nutcracke nucifrangium, i. setrack, herb, lepidium, i. In
ache. A Blache, atrame^tum sutoru^ A brache, canicula, ae. ye ache dolor, oris,
hic. A crache, crib presepium, i. A lache lacus, i. A scache grallus, i. to
ache dolere. to wache, vigilare. Spinache, herb. blitum, i. In acle. A
Barnacle, bird, chelonalops, idis. barnacles, bo^ds, pastomis, idis, haec. a
miracle, miraculu^, i. porte^tu^. a pinnacle, pinnaculum, i. obstacle,
pertinax, acis. obstinatus, ta. a shackle, co^pes, edis, hic, haec. a tackle,
capulum, i. In act. A fact, Factum, i An act actum, i. An abstract
abstractum, i A tracte, semita, callis, is, hic A contract, contractus, us. A
distract, distractum, i. An extracte extractum, i. A retracte. retractatio. to
contract, contrahere to detracte detrectare. to distract distrahere. to extract
extrahere. to retract retractare. to exact exigere. to protract protrahere In
ace. An ace Vnitas, atis, haec. A brace of Dear, duo damae. A brace of dogs,
bini canes. A Dace, a little fish aphia, ae. A face, facies, ei, haec. grace
gracia, ae. A lace, fibula, ae. mace, scepter, sceptrum, i. mace, spice. macer,
acis, hic. A pace. passus, us. A place, locus, i. A race cursus, us. A space
spacium. A trace for drawi^g traha, ae. ye trace of a foot. vestigium, i. to
brace amplecti. to chase, fugare. to face, gestire. to lace, confibulare. to
pace gradi. to place, locare. to race, radere. to trace inuestigare. Dissyllaba
substant. Balace, Saburra, ae. furnace, fornax, acis. A Bullace, tree,
pruneolus, i, haec. A bullace, fruit, pruneolum, i. A preface. prefacio.
prologus. solace solatium, i. to deface dehonestare. to embrace, amplecti.
balace, saburrare. to manace minari. to solace solari, iocundari. efficace,
adiect. efficax, acis. percase. forte Hypocrace vinum myrrhatu^. inefficace
inefficax, acis. to enterlace complicare. A, ante D.
Dad Pater, abba. a gad of steel, Massa chalybis. a gad or goade, partica
stimulaeta, a ladde puer, eri, puellus, i. a padde, saddle, penulatum, i. a
padde, tode, buso, onis, bufu^culus, i a shadde, a fish. acon, onis, hic.
alosa. Bad malus, a, vilis, e. glad, laetus, a, hilaris, e. drad, metuendus,
formidandus, da. mad, amens, demes, entis radde, agilis, e. pro^ptus, a.
sad, tristis, e. wadde or woad. glastrum, i. Verba. to Add, addere,
apponere. to gadde abroad vagari. to glad exhilarare, letificare. to be mad,
deme^tire, bacchari. bestad well, or satisfactus, been well bestad. placitus.
bestad evil, or evil bestad. destitutus, maletras ctatus, a. a shelpad.
testudo, inis. haec. In adge. A ^adge, Signu^, i. insigne, is. Madge for
Margerie, Garbadge for garbage. In addle. A saddle, Ephippium, i. to addle,
lucrari, mercri. to maddle, delirare, disapere. to saddle an horse. equum
ephippio, vel equo ephippium instrare. In ade. ye blade of a sword Ferrum
ensis. ye blade of an herb talia, ae. a cade, sheep louse pediculus ouis. a
glade, sinus, us. a Jade equila, equilus a lade, onus, eris, hoc. a spade
bipalium, i. a slade, valley, vallis, is, haec. a trade of teching methodus, i,
haec. made, partic. factus, a. to fade. deflorere, deficere. to trade. tradere,
co^suesacere to wade. vadare. a balade canticum, i. a drunslade. tympanum, i. a
pauade. pugio onis, hic. an emorade smaragdus, i. an ambassade legatus, i an
ambassade for peace caduceus, i Ambassad for war fecialis, is, hic marmalad.
spice. melaplacus, i to disgrade deponere de gradu to dissuade dissuadere to
defade deficere to invade inuadere to persuade persuadere A ladle rubicula, ae
A cradle cunabula, orum to swadle fasciare A cadle. potiuncula ouacea. cuaceum,
i. A, ante F.
In affe. Chafe, palea, ae draffe excrementa, orum A graffe, planta, ae ye
naffe of a wheel vmbo, onis. ce^trum A naffe, a bird. vria, ae A staff
baculus, i ye draftes of wine floces, cium. to basse, as a dog latrare. to
graffe plantare to quaffe ebibere A distaffe colus, i, haec a typstaffe lictor,
oris, hic rifraffe. vulgus rerum In aft. A Craft, ars, facultas, atis A fla^te
carmentum, i an haft manubrium, capulu^ ye shaft of a tool capulum, i a shaft
to shoot. calamus, i dafte, doltishe, stupidus, a witchcraft prestigium, i. In
affle. to faffle, balbutire to maffle idem. rudere a snaffle camus, i to
snaffle. rudere In afe. Safe saluus, a safe, sure. tutus, ta to chafe with
fingers, or hands. terere. mollire to chafe, fret. fremere. A, ante G.
In agge. a Brag, tacta^tia, ae. oste^tatio a bag mantica, ae a crag, rock
rupes is, haec a dag tormentiolum, i a drag, net. tragula, ae a flagge, banner.
signum quadratum. a iagge lacuna, ae a nagge equulus, i a ragge panniculus,
scrutum a stagge ceruus, i a shragge sarmentum, i ye tag of a myter infula, ae
to brag iactitare, gloriari to clag herere vt lutum to drag extrahere a flag, a
weed. vlua, ae. ye tag of a point ferretum, i ye tag of a purse. appendix,
icis. haec to fag deficere to iag lacinare to lag fatigare. fatiscere to thrag
putare arbores to wag mouere. motare. to maggle mactare. excarnificare. In
aght. to fraught a ship Nauem implere raught tactus, cta taught doctus, a
straught distractus, a ye fraught money. naulum, i tatterraggs. panniculi,
orum. In age. Age Aetas. aetatis. haec a cage, cauea. argustulum a gage pignus,
oris, hoc a page assecla, ae to gage pignorare to rage surere to swage mitigare
to fage adulari. fingere to wage, byre. conducere to wage battle. bellum
indicere. to plague affligere a plague. plaga, ae baggage Fex, ecis, haec
bondage scruitudo, inis, haec burrage Buglossa, ae courage animus, i a cottage
tugurium, i carriage vectura, rae a cabage, bed. stega, gae damage damnum, ni
a galage, a shoe. solea. sandalium ye garbage aluus, intestina, oru^ a language
loquela. lingua a cabage, herb. caules capitati. costage sumptus, us hostage
obses, idis, hic Louage, herb. leuisticus, i, hic lastage saburra, rae a lynage
cognatio, tribus, a message legatio, nuntium, ij a morgage pignus, oris, nonage
anni pupillares outrage luxus, us, hic a passage exitus, us. aditus, us pynnage
inclusionis multa, ae to assuage mitigare to cabage mactare to damage nocere to
forage ye country depopulare to forage cattle euiscerare to garbage pabulare
to language loqui. colloqu^ to morgage pignorare to outrage luxuriare advantage
lucrum, cri an heritage haereditas, tatis, haec an image imago, inis, haec an
embassage legatio, onis, haec a parentage parentela, patrimoniu^ a patronage
patrociniu^, i a pilgramage peregrinatio, is, haec to discourage exanimare to
endamage damnum infer to encourage animos addere. A, ante K.
Quaere monosyllaba, in, ack, vt supra. In ache. A Brake frangibilu^, mactra, ae
a brake, fern. filix, cis, haec. a cake collyridum, i a drake, bird, anas,
atis, hic. a flake matta lignea. a lake, lacus, us, hic. a rake, rastrum, i. a
iake, forica, ae. a drake, dragon, draco, onis, hic. a snake anguis, is, hic a
stake palus, i, to bake, pinsere, coquere to make facere to quake quatere,
tremere to rake rastrare to shake quassare to slake mitigare to take capere to
whake trepidare Mandrake, herb mandragora, ae. a pancake, colyrida, ae. a
stomach stomachus, i. a thornbacke, fish, achantia, ae. sweepestake totum simul
ye Zodiake. Zodiacus, i, hic to awake expergefacere to betake, tradere to
forsake deserere to stomach stomachare to undertake. suscipere A ante L.
A Ball, pila, ae. a fall, casus, us, hic. ye gall, fell, fellis, hoc. an hall,
aula, ae. a mall, malleus, i. a stall stabulum, i. a pall, pallium, i. a wall
murus, i, hic. to baull, as cry vociferare to call vocare to fall cadere to
wall murum facere all omnis, cunctus, a small paruus, a tall procerus, ae
thrall obnoxious, a Coral coralium, i ye offall of things. reliquiae, arum
metal. metallum, i a pitfall, decipula, ae a portall ante pagmentum, i ye
rascal vulgus, i, hic a spyall arbiter, tri, hic. a trial experimentum a
vial phiola, ae vital penu, victus, us. to befall contingere to forestall
intercipere dismal sinister, infoelix ye dismal, devil diabolus, i. equal
aequus, a. carnal carnalis, e fatal fatalis, e fynall finalis, e loyal,
liege, legalis, subditus, a moral moralis, e. mortal, mortalis, e paschall
paschalis, e penal puniendus, penalis, e plural. pluralis, e. real realis, e
regal regalis, e royal regalis, heroicus, a. verbal verbale, is. a brydall
nuptiae, arum a dyall horologium, i a fyall phiala, ae ye hedstall capital,
alis, hoc a cymball cymbalum, i a mar^ball architriclinus, i an ^e whall virio,
onis, hic vital. vitalis, le Angelical Angelicus, a animal animalis, le
artificial artificialis, le autenticall autenticus, a cathedral cathedralis,
le celestial coelestis, e arithmeticall arithmeticus, a a buryall exequiae,
funerale, is ceremonial ceremonialis, e colericall cholericus, a condicionall
conditionalis, e continual continuus, a cardinal cardineus, a a Cardinal
cardinalis, is, hic comicall comicus, a corporal corporalis, le despowsall
desponsalis, e disloyal illegitimus, a, perfidus doctrinall doctrinalis, e
domestical domesticus, a effectual effectualis, le. equinoctial
equinoctialis, e especial praecipuus, a extemporall extemporalis, e
fantastical phantasticus, a festuall festiuus, a festival festiuus, a
funeral funebris, e, funeralis genitall genitalis, le geometrical
geometricus, a heroical heroicus, a hospital hospitalis, le an hospital
hospitium, ij immortal immortalis, e impersonall impersonalis, e infernal
infernalis, e intellectual intellectualis, e a iournall itinerarium, i
judicial iudicialis, e liberal liberalis, e magical magicus, ca manual
manualis, e material materialis, e matrimonial matrimonialis, e memorial
memorialis, e musical musicus, ca mutual mutuus, a natural naturalis, e
nominall nominalis, e numerall numeralis, e occidentall occidentalis, e
oriental orientalis, e official officialis, e original originalis, e
partial partialis, e philosophical philosophicus, a poetical poeticus, a
political politicus, a pontifical portificalis, e principal principalis, e
prodigal prodigus, a prouerbiall prouerbialis, e provincial prouincialis, e a
refusal repudium, i a rehersall catalogu^ rethoricall rethoricus, a rusticall
rusticus, a sacramental sacramentalis, e sensual sensualis, e symonicall
symoniacus, a sophistical sophisticus, a special specialis, e spiritual
spiritualis, e substantial substantialis, e temporal temporalis, e
testimonial testimonialis, e textuall textualis, e tropicall tropicus, a
venial venialis, e virginal cymbala, orum unequal inaequalis, e vnhospitall
inhospitus, a universal vniuersalis, e vnliberall illiberalis, e unnatural
innaturalis, e an vrinall matula, e veneriall venereus, a geometrical
geometricus, a mathematical mathematicus, a supernatural supernaturalis, e
metaphisicall metaphysicus, a. In alde. A gambalde, saltus, us an berald for
war fecialis, is, hic. an herald for peace caduceator, oris hic A springald.
adolesce^s, entis, hic hac In alfe. A calfe, vitulus, ye half. medium, i. In
alke. a balke trabs, abis, haec. chalk creta, ae, haec a stalk caulis is,
hic, calamus mi talk colloquium, i a walk ambulacrum, i to stalk venari to
talk co^fabulari, colloqui to walk ambulare. In alme. Balm balsamum, i ye
calm sudum, i, serenita^ A psalm, psalmus, i, hic a shalme tibia, ae a palm
tree palma, ae ye palm of a hand palmus, i a talme temo, ^nis, hic calm
serenus, a calm to make sedare, mulcere ve^^ to balm balsamo, perungere In
alte. A falte culpa, crimen, inis A galte, pig. verres, is, hio malte brasium,
i a palt calua, ae salt sal, alis, hic a valte camera, ae, arcus, us to falte,
blame culpare to falte, offend. offendere, de linque re to halte claudicare to
salt sallere, condire to valte arcum ducere false falsus, a a defalt defectus,
us to exalte exaltare In Ale. ale ceruisia, ae bale, sorrow dolor, tristitiae
cale olus, eris, ius, iuris a dale vallis is, haec a gale bird virio, onis, hic
a gale of wind flatus, us, flamen a male mantica, ae yt male kind mas, aris,
hic a pale palus, i a sale ve^ditatio, exauctio a skale squamma, ae a shale
testa, ae, putamen a spale, chip assula, ae, a tale fabula, ae a vale vallis,
is, haec a whale, bird. virio, onis, hic to gale for cold algere to wale,
weep. lugere, plangere a whale, fish. coete, is, hoc a bridale spo^salia oru^,
nuptiae galingale herb acorus, i galingale spice galanga, ae ye intrayles
intestina, viscera a Nightingale luscinia, ae Portingale Lusitania portsale
exauctio verdingale limus, i, hemicyclu^, i A, ante M.
In ame. Blame culpa, ae a dame magistra, ae fame fama, ae a flame flamma, ae a
frame framea, ae a game ludus, i a name nomen, inis shame contumelia. ae ye
hame of a horse halcium, i. to blame culpare to flame flammare to frame
fabricare to game ludere to lame mutilare to name nominare to shame erubescere
to tame domare lame claudus, a ye same idem this same hic ipse that same ille
ipse tame. cicur, uris a byname epitheton madame domina, ae a stepdame nouerca,
ae a surname cognomen, inis, hoc an ingrame ignarus, a to declame declamare to
defame defamare to exclame exclamare to inflame inflammare to proclaim
proclamare to reclame reclamare to surname cognominare a grandame auia, ae In
am, or in amme. a damme, mother genitrix, icis, haec a damme, weere cataracta,
ae ye hamme poples, it is, hic a dram sextula, ae In Ambe. a lamb agnus, ni
a rambe aries, it is, hic In amble. A bramble, vepres, etis, hae^ ye shamble
macellum, i to a mble, tolutare In ample. an ensample exemplum, i an example.
exemplum, i In ampe. to rampe rapere to trampe strepitare to stamp, knock.
tundere to stamp we the feet calcare A, ante N.
In ane. A blane macula, pupula, ae A cane reed conax, ais, haec A drane be,
fucus, i, hic A lane platea, viculus, i ye mane of a horse iuba, ae A pane of
cloth panniculus, cento A prane, fish. carides, is, tingus, i twane duo, ae to
gane, yane. oscitare to spane, weane. oblacture, depellere to wane idem to
yane. oscitare Menbane, apolinaris, is, hic Gentian, herb. gentiana, a A
lourdane dominus danus (ignominiose) nebulo A marchpane panis dulciarius ye sea
oceane oceanus, i A publicane publicanus, i Purstane, peplis, itis, hic A
ruffian, ganeo onis, hic Valeriane, herb pheu valerianae villane verna, ae
humane humanus, a mundane mundanus, a orphane orphanus, orbus, ae vrbane
vrbanus, a A ciuiliane ciuilis, politicus A rusticane rusticus, ae A Grecian
Graecus, a an Italian Italus, i an Hebretians Haebreicus, a an alyane alienus,
extraneus, ae There be also many names of artificer^ and other Iearned
professers, in ane. as, an Astrologian, astrologus, a an arithmetrician
arithmeticus, a A musitiane musicus, a A logitiane logicus, a Names also of
Countries, as, an Italyane Italus, i A Germane Germanus, i A Brytane, Britanus,
i Names also of cities and towns, as, A Roman, Romanus, a an Oxoniane.
Oxoniensis A Canterburiane Cantuariensis. Secke all the other in their
primatiues, as Rethoriane, in rethor: Londonian, in London: and make their
latin end in one of those three terminations, anus, ensis, or icus, as the
examples declare. In an. Bran furfur, uris, hoe A Can, vessel catharus, i A
fan vannus, flabellum A Man homo, vir A pan cacabus, i A span palma, e, us, i A
swan cygnus, i to ban, curse. maledicere to can posse, valere to fan vannare
to tan coria condire to vanne vannare than tunc, tum wan pallidus, liuidus, a
to span palmare A belman preco ferialis A blockman spiculator, oris A bondsman
seruus, i A boteman cimbarius, i A chapman institor, trix an Alderman senior,
senator A footman pedes, itis, hic haec A gentleman procer, eris, aeques an
hagman carnisex, icis hic an headman, primas, atis, hic A chief man idem a
kinsman cognatus, a an organ organum, i A tympan tympanum A ptysan ptisana, ae
tutsan, herb. vitex, icis, hic A workman opisex, icis, com. A watchman vigil,
ilis com. A woman mulier, eris haec A yoman libertus, i Many other there be
that end in an, being compounded with this word man: and signify either
some occupation, as, A shipman, Nauta ae, slaughterman, Lanius, i, or else to
be of some Country, as, Frenchman Gallus, i Dutchman Teutonicus, a Scotcheman
Scotus, a etc. In ance. A chance, casus, us, eue^tus, us A dance, tripudium, i
A rance of ginger zinziber, eris, hoc France, Gallia, ae a glance, transitus,
us a lance lancea, secula, ae a lance staff hasta, ae a trance extasis, is,
haec to chance contingere to dance tripudiare to glaunce transire to lance
resecare to praunce. exultare affiance affinitas alliance idem affirmance
affirmatio allegiance obedientia, ae allowance assignatum, i arrogance
arrogans, antis ye balance bilanx, ancis, haec a countenance vultus, us, hic
coustance constantia, ae daliance allusio, onis defyance defensio, onis a
deliverance traditio, onis a dimilaunce aeques, itis furtherance expedimentum
governance regimen, inis hynderance impedimentum importance magna res
inconstance inconstantia ignorance ignorantia, ae inhet itance haereditas
intemperance intemperantia, ae mayntenance suffragium, i miscreance infidelit
as, atis a mischance infortunium mumchance oude gry noyance nocumentum
obeisance obedientia, ae obscruance obseruantia, ae ordynance institutio, onis
penance penitentia, ae perseverance perseuerantia, ae a pittance refectiuncula,
ae ye purtenance pertinentia, ae purueyance prouisio, onis remembrance memoria,
ae repentance penitentia, ae repugnance repugnantia, ae sufferance tolerantia,
ae sustinance sustinentia, ae substance substantia, ae ^emperance temperantia,
ae variance discordia, ae vigilance vigilantia, ae vengeance vindicta, vltio,
onis auoydance euacuatio, onis vttera^ce of spech elocutio, onis, haec
vttera^ce of sale expeditio, onis mischance male contingere enhance exaltare,
subleuare to advance idem recognisance. recognitio, onis hae^ In anche. A
branche frons, dis, germen ye banch of a beast. clunis lumbus, i a panche
aluus, i, ve nter, tris to blanch deglubcre, decorticare to banche, snatch
arripere to lanch into ye sea. in altum ducere to la^ch over a book percurrere
to panche euiscerare to stanche mitigare, sistere In ande. A band vinculum, i
a brande torris, is, hic an hand manus, us, haec a land terra, regio, onis ye
sand arena, ae, haec a strande statio, onis, haec a wande virga, ae and and,
ac, atque to land ad portu^ appellere to stand stare, consistere a demand
rogatio, rogatus, us an errande negocium, nuntium England Anglia, ae a garland
sertum, i a gyande gigas, antis, hic a gadwande partica, ae Holland hollandia,
ae an Husband coniux, maritus Ierland Hyberniae a rybaude Zona, nae, fasciae,
ae Scotland Scotia, ae a seruand seruus i, serua, ae a thousand mill, millia,
um a trewande cessator, disculus, i a weysand gula, ae a stailand admissarius,
equus to understand intelligere to withstand resistere to gainestand repugnare
at hand prope ad manum In andle. to handle tractare to dandle indulgere an
handle manubrium, i a candle light lucerna, ae a candle not light candela, ae
In ange. a change mutatio, onis to change mutare strange rarus, a an exchange
commutatio to exchange commutare to enterchange idem In angue. a bangue fustis,
is, hic a fangue dens exertus a pangue ago^, onis, dolor, oris a thwangue
lorum, i a stangue vectis, is, hic a gamarstangue oblongula, ae to bangue
sustigare to fangue comprehendere to twangue resonare In angle. an angle
Angulus, i to angle hamo piscari to iangle garrire to mangle mactare to
strangle stra^gulare, aerctare to wrangle calu^niari, cauillari to entangle
implicare, irretire a quaorangle quadrangulus, i a triangle triangulus, i
newfangle nouaru^ reru^ cupidus In ank^. A bank of excha^ge argentaria, ae ye
bank of an hill procliuitas, atis ye bank of a river ripa, littus, oris, hoc
ye flank inguen, inis, hoc A planke asser, eris, hic, A rank of things turba,
caterua, ae thank gratia, ae to frank cattle saginare, alere. to planke
coassare, co^tignare. to pranke exultare, gestire to thank gratias agere,
habere rank, thycke de^sus, stipatus, a rank smell. magnus odor, olidus, a
frank, free. liberalis, e A pickthanke assentator, trix ye ankle talus, i, hic
to rankle putrescere a readshanke haemocopedus, i In ante. an Ant Formica, ae a
plant planta, ae a taunt argutia, redarguti^ a want talpa, ae a want, lack,
carentia, defectus a sanct sanctus, coelites, is to chant cantillare to grant
concedere, fateri to hant frequentare to pant futis^ere to plant plantare to
taunt arguere to vaunt gloriare to want carere, egere brant, steep cliuus
procliuis, e scant rarus, carus, a fant fatigatus, fessus, a A fesant
phasianus, i, hic A giant gigas, antis, hic an infant infans, infantulus, a a
merchant mercator, oris, hic a miscreant infidelis, i^credulus, a an olyphant
elephantus, i a pageant scena, theatrum, i a pesant verna, seruus, i a recreant
perfidus, da a remnant residuum, i a servant seruus, samulus, i Squinant. herb.
iuncus odoratus a tyrant tyrannus, i a warrant publicafides ye wenyant in malam
crucem an adamant adamas, antis a covenant pactum, cti a cognisant insigne,
signum, i a lieutenant praetor prouincialis a complaynant quaerelus, i to
enchant fascinare, incantare to instant instare to recant recantare to supplant
supplantare to warant securum facere. distant distans, antis arrant grandis,
magnus gallant nitidus, superbus instant instans, antis pendant pendens,
pensilis pleasant iucundus, amoenus pregnant pregnans, foecu^dus vacant vacans,
vacuus, ae abundant abundans, antis apparent apparens, entis elegant elegans,
antis aunciant antiquus, grauis, e plyant obsequens, entis concordant concors,
co^gruus, ae discordant discors. dissentiens displeasant inamoenus, a ignorant
ignarus, a incessant incessabilis, e inelegant inelegans, antis inhabitant
inhabita^s, incola, a inuigilant inuigilans, solers malignant malignans, antis
puissant potens, fortis, e repentant penitens, entis valyant validus, fortis, e
vigilant vigilans, antis unconstant inco^sta^s, instabilis e vnelegant
inelegans antis unpleasant inamoenus, a In antle. A cantle portio, partitio A
mantle bracca, pallium A, ante P.
an Ape, Simius, ij, a, ae A Grape racemus, vua, ae A iape, bourde iocus, i,
sco^ma, atis A rape raptura, rapina, ae A rape root rapa, pae A shape forma,
figura, ae a skape euatio, aufugium a chape ferretum, i to gape hiare, oscitare
to grape p^lpare to tape, bourd. ^^cari, scommari to rape rapere to shape
plasnare, formare to snape redarguere herbesagape ferula, ae to escape
aufugere, euadere In appe. a cappe pil^us, i, birrus, i a crape mica, granum, i
a flappe flabelium, i a gappe, vacuu^, interuallu^, a map mapp^, pae a nappe
dormitatiuncula, ae hap fortuna, ae a knappe apex, verruca, ae a lap ora,
gremium, i a pappe mamma, ae, vber pappe pappa, ae a rappe pultatio, onis a
snappe idem ye sap suber, succus, i a shappe forma, sigura, ae a suappe
correptio onis, haec a swappe percussio, excisio a tappe fistula, epistomium a
trappe tra^s^n^, decipula, to clappe hands plaudere to slappe flabellare to
nappe dor^^^are to rappe pultare to hap, chance contingere to hap, cover.
tegere, velare to lap lingere to lap up reuoluere to suappe pultare to tappe
fistulam addere to trappe irretire, decipere to wappe motare, agi^are to wrappe
inu^luere goldsmap, herb sysimbrium a mishappe infortunium ij a pantap
callopodium i ye wyndlappe lingula, ae perhappe forte, fortasse to betrappe
irretire, circu^uenire to iutrappe idem to missehap male vertere In aple. an
Apple pomum i an Apple tree pomus i, haec a maple tree acer er is, h ye staple
of a door capulum i ye graple of a ship harpago inis, haec In apt. Apt aptus
a, idoneus ae Apt, is also the sign of verballes in bilis, and participials in
dus. apt to be taught docilis e, apt to be red legibilis e There be also many
other that end in apt, by turninged, into te^as, capte, for capped pilcatus, a
hapte for happed tectus a, velatus a A, ante R.
care cura ae, cogitatio an hare lepus oris, hic a mare equa ae A share. dealt.
diuisio, portio onis a pare par aris, hoc a snare laqueus i to bare denudare
are sumus, estis, sunt. to care curare to dare audere to fare valere to pare
minuere to snare illaqueare to spare parcere to square quadrare to stare
inspicere bare nudus a rare rarus ra square quadratus a a stare sturnus ni
tares eruum, orobum i ware cautus, prudens an altar altar, is, ara a primare
horarium rij a vicare vicarius ria to declare exponere to prepare praeparare
unware incautus, a a mortare mortarium mortare coementum i A fildfare turdus di
A cellare cellaria r^e a collare collare ris, hoc a sollare solarium rij a
bladdare vesica cae a fulmare martes it is, haec a heckfare bucula, iuuenca a
lazare laeprosus sa a lollare scismaticus ca poplare populus i, haec sugare
saccarum i peculiare peculiaris e regulare regularis e seculare secularis e
singular singularis e debonare morigorus a In arre. A bar vectis, pessulus A
carre currus us ye door harre cardo, vertigo a parre par aris, hoc a scarre
cicatrix icis, haec a sparre asser eris, hic a star stella ae, sydus tar
pix icis, haec war bellum i to bar obdere to jar dissonare to mar
corrumpere to narre ringere to sparre, as cocks do confligere to war
belligerare far procul, long In arbe. Rubarbe Rhabarbum i In arble. A
barble, fish. barbo onis, hic marble, stone. marmor oris, hoc In arche. an
arche arcus us, hic march, a month Marcius i, hic to parche incrustare In arde.
A card charta ae a guard of men comitatus us, hic a guard of a garment
fimbriale is, haec larde lardum i A sharde testa, rudus eris, hoc a ward,
pupil pupillus i a ward, prison custodia ae to card woll carminare, pectere
to guard communire to ward tutare, protegere hard durus a an awarde
arbitramentum i a bastard spurius a a standarde signum, vexillum i a boggarde
spectrum i a bustard buteo, picus i a cowarde cohardus, timidus a a dastarde
idem a disarde pantomimus, sannio a dullarde hebes etis, tardus a backward
retrorsum forward antrorsum downewarde deorsum upward sursum sydewarde
lateraliter a bazelarde ensis, gladiolus a custarde artogala ae a gurnarde,
fish. capo onis, hic an haskarde proletarius, ignobilis ye hazard play alearum
ludus an hopyarde lupuletum i a lybarde leopardu^ a a lysarde lacertus a a
Lumbarde longobardus a malarde anas atis, hic mustarde sinapium i a niggard^
parcus i an orcharde pomarium a pilcharde gerres is, halecula ae a potcharde
testa ae, rudus, eris ye rerewarde post, principia a regard resp^^^us, us a
reward munus eris, donu^, hoc a sauegarde securitas, tutame^tu^ a scabarde
vagina ae a sheparde opilio, oustos, odis a sluggard d^ses adis, so^nulentus
sp^^^euarde asarum, spica ae a steward procurator, oeconomus a tabarde timpanum
a taultarde amphora, catharus i a wysarde augur uris, hic haec to awaarde
arbitrari, adiudicare to ioparde peri^litari to reward remunerare to regard
curare, aestimare froward prauus a toward ingenuus a inward intrins^cus a
outward extrins^^us a unhard mollis ^ hytherward huc thytherward illuc
whitherwarde? quorsum? a fardle sarcinula ae a hardle crates, caula ae a dwarf
nanus, homuncio a quarfe portus us, hic darfe, stubborn. pertinax, obduratus In
arge. a barge cimba ae, remulcus i a charge cura, mandatum large largus,
amplus, a to charge mandare a discharge inhibitio, absolutio ye letharge let
hargus i to discharge inhibere, absoluere to e^large ampliare In argle. ye
gargle gurgulio onis, hic to gargle gargarizare In arc. an Arc archa ae ye
bark of a tree cortex icis, hic carke, care. cura, cogitatio A clarke clericus
i A lark alauda ae, galarita ae A mark signum, scopus i A park damariu^,
viuariu^ A spark scintilla ae, mica warke, ache dolor, oris hic dark
obscurus, caliginosus to bark latrare to bark a tree decorticare to carke,
care, cogitare, accurare to mark signare, notare to mark, heed auscultare to
hark audire, auscultare stark, stiff. robustus a a monarke monarca ae, hic a
patriarch. patriarcha ae, hic In arkle. A sparkle scintilla, mica ae to
sparkle. scintillare, micare In arle. A carle rusticus a marle marga ae to
harle trahere to snarle contrahere In arm. an arm brachium ^ barme flos
ceruisiae a charm incantatio onis a farm beneficium i barme iniur^a,
nocumentu^ a swarm examen inis, hoc to arm armare to charm in^antare to
barme nocere to swarm confluere to warm calefacere warm calidus, tepidus In
arne. A barn horreum i ye harne cerebrum i a tarne, meare stagnum i yarne
filum, pensa orum to warn monere to forewarne praemonere In arpe. A carpe
carpio, ^urbarus i an harp lyra, psalterium ye warpe of a web stamen inis, hoc
to carpe, talk colioqui, co^subulari to barpe lyrare, citharizare to sharp
a^nere to warp an egg ouum ponere to warp, as wodde muertere sharp acutus a A
woodwarpe. remorarius Iu arse. an arse pod^x, anus i a barse, fish ^^^cha ae A
garse or gashe. incisura, vulnus to disparse dispergere, dissipare to infarse
infercire, intrudere In art. an art ars artis, scientia ae A darte spiculum i
A carte currus us a far cre pitus, merda ae an heart cor ordis, ho^ an heart,
a beast ceruus i a mart bos saginatus a part pars, partis, haee a tarte
chanona ae a warte verru^a ae ye smart of a wou^d aestus us to darte sagi^tare,
iaculari to farte pedere to heart animare to part partire to smarte aestuare,
dolere to starte dissilire a dullarte haebeo, tardus a ye foreparte pars
anterior an halbarte falx al^^s, haec a molwart talpa pae A tabarte tympanum ni
A Redstart ruticilla, ae A wagstarte mot^^illa lae A wodwarte saltuarius ^ia to
^eparte decedere to ouerthwarte obliquare ouerthwa^te obliquus a aparte
seorsim, clanculum. In arthe. A garth, orchard pomarium i ye ^arth of a sire
secarium i A churchgarth. coemiteruim i ye woogarth lingarium i There be dyures
other ending in arth, names of places, where things grovve, or be kept, as
these solovving, and such other. an Applegarthe pomarium i ye caulgarthe
herbarium, i, ye herbegarth idem, olerarium i ye leekegarth porretum i ye
Lilygarth lilietum i etc. Whose latin as the examples doclate, does end in
arium, in etum, or in, ^le, as. ye sh^pgarth ouile is, hoc ye cowgarth bouile
is, hoc In arue. to carue wood insculpere to swerve aberrare to starve
interire, algere A, ante S.
an Ass asinus i brass aes aeris, hoc glass vitrum i a glass speculum i
grass gram^n inis, hoc a mass massa ae ye mass missa ae ye fasse of a purse
appendix icis, haec to ^^sse, kiss basiare, exosculari to pass praet^^e to
quasse ingurg^tare as, vt, (...) ^c was, cram, (...), c^at A compass
circ^itu^^^ ^o^sgrasse alis^on^, (...) ri^grasse (...) ^ wy^^lasse tra^^oriu^
(...) to compass circuire, co^prehe^dere to ouerpasse praeterire to trespass
offendere blaynegrasse trifolium, i In ash. an ash fraxinus i, haec a dashe
labes, asthersio onis a gashe incisio, vulnus eris to dashe asthergere to gashe
incidere to gnashe stridere to mashe miscere to wash lauare rash temerarius a
to abashe stupesacere In ask. to ask rogare, quaerere to task taxare to
mask vicarias personas induere an ask, efte asthis idis, hic a laske fluxus
us a mask ludus laruatus, a task taxatio onis, haec a task to do pensa ae,
um i damask dalmaticu^ sericum to raskle pandiculari In ass. an hasse corylus
i, haec a tasse virga pastoris In aspe. a claspe fibula ae an haspe vertibulum
i a waspe vestha ae to claspe co^fibulare, claudere to halpe obserare to gasp
hiscere, hiare In ast. a blast flamen, flatus us a fast iciuuium i mast glans
andis, haec to fast iciunare to last durare last vltimus a fast cito at last
demum, denique bypast pr^teritus a handfast desthonsatus a shamefast
rubicu^dus, pudicus soothfast fidelis, fidus a sledfast stabilis e unshamefast
impudicus a vnsoothfast infidelis e unsteadfast instabilis e to forecast
prouidere to ouercaste obumbrare an outcast abiectus a to handfast desponsare
aghast stupefactus a Some of them that are written in ast, are pronounced as if
they were written in aaste, as these that follow and other. haste fest inatio
onis, hic paast gluten inis, hoc ye taste gustus us waste consumptio onis to
baste linire to chaste castigare to paaste conglutinae to taste gustare to
waste consumere unchaste incentinens Moreover those Participles that end pro
prely in aced, or ased, may in meter end in ast, as pleast, pleased, placatus,
east, for cased, remissus, ssa. etc. In ase. ye base part basis, solum i ye
case of a vow casa ae, theca e a case, cause causa, materia a chase fugatio,
fuga ae a vlase flamma ae a phrase phrasis is, haec a raze stadium, cursus us a
wase circus i Pase, Easter pascha atis, hoc to chase fugare to blase esslammare
to glase inuitriare a carcass corpus, cadauer a pincase acicularium to purchase
potiri, acquirere A, ante T.
In at. A Batte baculus i A bratte panniculus i a Catte feles is, cattus a
fat or a vat, orcula ae a gnatte pulex i^is, hic an hatte galerus i a matte
matta ae a plat of ground portio terrae a ratte sorex etis, haec a tratte anus
us, haec a watte lepus oris, hic fat pinguis e^crassus flat planus a, equus
a platte, plain, idem, planus a to batte, beat fustigare, tundere to bratte
panniculis circu^da^re to fat saginare, scratte soabere to chatte garrire at
ad, apud that vt, cause. that quod, cause. that qui, quae, quod, rela. what? quid
a Parat psuacus a a polcatte martes is haec a rabbatte cuniculus i rokat, herb.
eruca ae an hurlebatte adides is, haec a rackat reticulum i somewhat nonnihil,
aliquid. Somevvhat is al so the sign of diminutiue adjectives etc. somewhat
read rubellus, rubicundus somewhat better mel^us^ulus, a somewhat tender
ten^llus a somewhat scle^der idem fere somewhat reddish rubellus a so^ewhat
whitish albidus da Somevvhat salush, look diminitiues how their latin ends
for the most part in ellus, vsculus, vlus. etc. In atche a batche fermentum i
an hatche portella ae a latche vertibulum i a match lichmus i a match
co^^^ualis e a natche m^^sura ae a patche cento onis, parti^ula a watch
^^g^^ia ae ye hatches of a ship fori orum to catch capere, co^prehe^dere to
hatch eggs oua excludere to match adaequare to natche incidere to patche
sarcire, reparare to scratche scabere, s^alpere to thatche tegere to watch e
vigilare to dispatche expedire to ouermatche superare to ouercatche assequi
vnmatche inequalis e In attle. A rattle tonitrum i A wattle, rod vibex icis,
hie ye wattle of a hog neuus i to battle clothes excutere to battle commons
sumere to chattle garrire to prattle idem to tattle idem to wattle a house
gratire to rattle concutere, tonitare In atth. A batth balneum, thermae A patth
callis is, semita ae A latth asser eris, hic A watthe, foorde vadum i to batth
balneare In athe. scathe, hurt nocumentu^, da^num wrath ira, ae, indignatio a
swathe fascia, ae to skath, hurt nocere, ledere to swathe fusciare Inate. A
bate dactilus i A state status us, conditio A gate porta ae, ianua ae A grate
crates, is, hac A mate socius, sodalis is A pate caput itis, hoc A scate,
fish. batis, raia ae A slate, tyle. tegula ae, later eris A spate torrens
entis, hic A tate fibra ae late serus a, tardus a to hate odisse, inuidere to
prate garrire to rate estimare, taxare In athe. to scathe nocere seathe
nocumentum wrath ira ae, ir acundia A climate clima atis, hoc A de^ate lis
itis, iurgium, i an abbate abbas atis, hic an euate status us, dignit as A
legate legatus i A prelate prelatus i, the senate senatus us A duckate ducatus
us to abate subducere, remittere to debate discutere to dilate dilatare,
ampliare to inflate inflare to quadrate quadrare to probate probare inflate
inflatus a ornate ornatus a private priuatus a prostrate prostratus a renate
renatus a frustrate frustratus a hoggates, how? quomodo? howgates idem. sogate,
thus. sic ita, isto modo delicate delicatus, mollis a magistrate magistratus us
a potentate potens, magnas. A primate primas atis, hic a runagate apostata ae,
hic to dedicate dedicare to diuulgate diuulgare to deriuate deriuare to
alternate alternare to derogate derogare to educate educare to emulate emulari
to execrate execrari to erplicate explicare to abdicate abdicare to abrogate
abrogare to adumbrate adumbrare to affectate affecture to altercate altercari
to apostate apostatare to berate expostulare to breuiate abbreuiare to
celebrate celebrare to coniugate coniungare to cruciate cruciare to erogate
erogare to estimate aestimare to fatigate fatigare to imitate imituri to
impetrate impetrare to nominate nominare to moderate moderare ri to increpate
increpare to incrustate incrustare to inculcate inculcare to instigate
instigare to iterate iterare to innouate innouare to invoke inuocare to
mediate madiari to meditate meditari to mitigate mitigare to oppilate oppilare
to ordinate ordinare to penetrate penetrare to perpetrate perpetrate to
perturbate perturbare to populate populari to predicate predicare to procreate
procreare to profligate prosligare to prouocate prouocare to propagate
propagare to recreate recreare to replicate replicare to reputate aestimare to
reuocate reuocare to satiate saturare to saturate idem, placare to separate
seperare delicate mollis is effeminate effoeminatus a fortunate fortunatus a
mediate mediatus a moderate moderatus a increate increatus a indurate induratus
a fortunate fortunatus a ordinate ordinatus a temperate temperatus a timorate
timoratus mediate mediatus a meditate meditatus a obstinate pertinax acis
ordinate ordinatus, regularis to abbreuiate abbreuiare to abhominate abhominari
to accelerate accelerare to accommodate accommodare to contaminate contaminare
to denominate denominare to degenerate degenerare to dilapidate dilapidare to
exasperate exasperare to excogitate excogitare to excruciate excruciare to
exonerate exonerare to exosculate exosculari to extenuate extenuare to
exterminate exterminare to imaginate imaginari to incorporate incorporare to
inebriate inebriare to ingurgitate ingurgitare to insinuate insinuare to
insimulate insimulare to instimulate inuinstimulare to inuestigate inuestigare
to inuigilate inuigilare to occasionate occasionare to participate participare
to precipitate praecipitare to predestinate praedestinare to proporcionate
proportionare to regenerate regenerare to reiterate reiterare to reduplicate
reduplicare to repudiate repudiare to reuerberate reuerberare immediate
immediatus ta immaculate immaculatus ta immoderate immoderatus ta importunate
importunus ta unfortunate infortunatus a inordinate inordinatus a intemperate
intemperatus ta inuiolate inuiolatus ta opportunate opportunus na Many other
may be ended in ate, as, efflagitare, efflagitatus, ta. A ante, V.
In aue. a cave cauea ae, antru^ tri a knave nebulo, scurra ae, hic a slave
verna, mancipiu^ ij a traue numelli, numellae, traues idem, numelli, oru^ to
crave rogitare to grave sculpere to have habere to paue sternere, pauime^tu^ to
rave dementire to save saluare seruare to shave radere to wave mouere brave
splendidus da^ grave grauis, grandis laue eared plaudus da to ingraue
insculpere. Note that in these before going in, aue, the letter, vv, cannot be
put for v, neither can the letter v, be put for vv, in those that end, i^
awe: neither can the one of them at any time be put for the other so often as a
vovvell solovveth the^ because they both have diverse significarions, and also
require contrary voice in pronuntiatio^, as in these six following for example.
saving of save saluans, saluatio rouing of roue predatio loving of love amans,
amatio. But sawing of saw seminatio rowing of row remigatio lowing of low
boatio. But when soever in the same word the nexted letter following is a
consonante, then may ye indifferently vviyte v, or vv, as daube or davvbe:
laud, or lavvde stout, or stovvt, leude or l^vvde, etc. But yet by cause this
is the first place we describe all such words by these that end in au,
having a consonant next letter as follows. In aube or in awbe to dawbe
oblinire to daube idem. In aude or in awde. a baude meretrix, leno a gaude, toy
scomma, nuga gae laud laus, laudis, haec to gaude scoff soommari, nugari to
laud laudare to defraude defraudare a cosbaude inirgizona ae In aule or awle.
a aule Subula ae ye caul of ye belly omentum ti a caul, pen. caula lae a
caul of the head capitale, capillare ris, hoc a naule idem quod aule. ye scaule
scabies ei, haec a scaule rixosa mulier to baule vociferare to braule rixari,
velitari to craule repere, serpere to scaule rixari thraule obnoxious, subditu^
In aulme. ye caulme sudum, cauma, atis calm serenus, tra^quillus, a In aulte.
a vault arcus cus, fornix to vault arcuari In aune or own. a bawne balneum
brawne caro callata aprina, callum. a flaune custard galatyrium a faune
hinnulus li a lawne synodon onis, haec a pawn pignus oris, hoc ye spaune of
fish fatus us, auxumae. In aune. to faune adulari to own vendicare to paune
pignorare to spaune oua gignere. In auke, or in awke. an Hawk accipiter, tris,
hic to hawk aucupari A Sparhauke nisus, i an hobyhauke alandarius i a
marlynhauke alietus i A goshauke falco onis, hic dauke, weed zizania, a In
ause or awse. A cause causa, res, ei A clause clausula, lae ye chawes fauces,
cium, hae a pause pausa, ae sause comdimentum i to cause causare, facere to
pause pausare to sause condire Iacksause ganeo impudens In aught. caught captus
a raught prehensus, a taught doctus a untaught indoctus i mistaught immorigerus
ra In augh. daughe fermentum ti to laugh ridere haute. elatus a and si qua alia
sunt huiusmodi. These following in awe, cannot for the causes aforesaid in
the note of aue, be written in, aue, for in all these, vv, has a vovvel after
it, by which vovvel deriuations be made, vv, being still unchanged, as of
chavv, chavved, chavving, chavver, etc. A clawe vnguis, falx cis haec A dawe
cornix icis, haec daw or daugh ferina fermentata an hawe morus sentis ye
chawebone falx, mandibulum A law lex egis, haec ye mawe ventriculus li A straw
calamus, arista ae straw stramen inis, hoc to awe debere to clawe scabere to
chawe mandere, molere to draw trahere to mawe fuccidere to saw corn seminare
to saw wood sarrare, discindere to straw sternere to tawe leather alutam
operari to thrawe, cast iactare, mittere to thraw or turn tornare to wawe as a
cat lallare raw crudus a A iackdaw cornicule ae an outlawe exul, ulis bawwawe,
spoken of one that talks to no purpose. to outlawe exterminare, proscribere
to withdraw detrahere Note, that when a co^sonant follows, vv, as davvb,
lavvde and such other: ye must seek them in a, ante v, as daube, laud etc.
And write whether ye will. A, a nte X.
An Axe securis is, haec flax linum i A laxe fluxus ventris wax caera ae to
wax crescere

In E desinentia.
In ee. A Be, apes is, haec A fee allowed, emolumentum ti an eye, oculus i a
flee, musca ae glee, mirth gaudium i he ille, is she illa, ea A tree arbor
oris, haec we nos ye vos to be esse to dree, last durare to flee volare,
fugere to glee lippire to see videre, cernere to slay, flea necare, intersicere
free liber era slay astutus a, calidus a three tres a, trium an axtree axis is,
hic A decree decretum ^i A degree gradus us an haw tree sentis is, hic to agree
conuenire to decree decernere to foresee prouidere to misgree dissentire to
ouersee superintendere to ouersee omittere E ante B.
In ebb. A nebbe, beak rostrum i A web tela ae to ebb refluere a copwebbe
tela, aranea. In eble. Feeble imbecillis e A pebble, stone calculus ti E ante C.
In ecke. A beck nutus us, hie A pecke satum i A specke cento onis, hic
blecke, bleche atramentum ti to beck nuere, annuere to blecke, bletch nigrare
In eckle. A peckle, macula e a freckle ne^us i A speckle macula ae an heckle
pecten inis, hoc to peckle macular^ to speckle idem to heckle pectere Look mo
in E ante K.
In ecte. A sect secta ae an affect, affection affectus us an essect, end
effectus us an abject abiectus a a defecte defectus us a prospect prospectus us
a respect respectus us a suspect suspitio onis a subject subditus subiectus a
to correct corrigere to direct dirigere to elect eligere to detecte detegere
to effect efficere to neglecte negligere to object obijcere to prospecte
prospicere to protect protigere to refect reficere to reject reijcere to
respect respicere to suspect suspicari to erecte erigere to af^ect aff^^cere
circumspect circu^spectus, cautus imper^ect imperfectus, a subject subditus ta
imperfect imperfectus a In eece. a niece neptis it is haec a fleece vellus eris;
hoc a greece gradus dus, hic a piece pars partis, haec a piece massa ssae to
piece sarcire, superaddere In each. a bech tree fagus gi, haec a breech
lumbare, femurale a leche, surgeon chirurgus gi a leche sanguisuga ae to bleche
albicare each omnis, quilibe^ E ante D.
In edde. a bed lectus, cubile is, hoc a sledde traha hae a wedde pignus
noris, hoc to shed effundere to shred minuere to wedde ducere vxorem to yedde,
chide iurgare bredde genitus, ortus ta cledde vestitus ta led ductus cta
read ruber bra read lectus, a shed fusus, effusus sa shred comminutus ta
sprede stratus, pansus sa a kynred cognatio, tribus, us a hundred centum aged
annosus, senex nis waged conductus ta bagged grauida dae ragged centosus sa
barbed phaleratus ta barded idem cankred ferruginasus a ca^kred, froward prauus
a copped cristatus ta heded with iron prapilatus ta crabbed froward prauus,
iratus cracked rimosus, ruptus ta curled crispus pa lettred literatus ta mouled
mucidus da naked nudus a slaked remissus a speckled maculosus penned in
inclusus a penned, writ conscriptus a rugged pilosus a vgged foedus a tagged
laciniatus, infulatus ragged pannosus guarded, cote laciniatus a guarded
communitus larded lardo adipatus warded munitus, stipatus lopped tonsus a
wretched miser, a saused conditus a frymmed unnatural alienus a shrewd prauus,
malignus assured certus, securus a deformed deformis e flur^^pped labiosus a
indebted are alieno, oppressas indemned indemnis e labelled infulatus a
outkneed varus a outeyed strabus a, strabo outbrested pectorosus a outbelied
viscerosus a outlipped labiosus a outbrowed superciliosus a visored laruatus a
unadvised inconsultus a vnabashed imperculsus a vnbearded imberbus bis, e
vnblamed inculpatus a beheaded capite truncatus a vnclipped intonsus a uncoined
rudis e vncomed incomptus a vncommended illaudatus a vncompanied incomitatus a
vndecked incultus a undefiled inuiolatus a uncured insanatus a vndyed non
tinctus a vndyned impransus a vnfethered implumis e vngranted inconcessus a
vnhorned incornis e unlearned indoctus a unlettered illiteratus a unleavened
infermentaceus a unmarried coelebs ibis unmingled immixtus a vnordred
inordinatus a vnpacifyed implacatus a vnple ased idem unpolished impolitus a
vnpraysed illaudatus a unprepared imparatus a vnprobated improbatus unprovided
improuisus a unpunished impunitus a unremoved immotus a vnrenowned incelebris e
vnrepared irreparatus a vnreuoked irreuocabilis e vnsoked insopitus a unsown
insutilis e vnspeckled immaculatus a unspotted immaculatus a vnlterred immotus
a unstopped inconsertus a vnsupped incenatus a untamed indomitns untasted
illibatus a vntested intestatus a vnthatched intectus a untilled incultus a
vntraded insolens entis untried improbatus a untrimmed inconcinnus a untroubled
imperturbatus a untrussed incompactus unweaponed inermus is, e vnwatred
immaceratus ae vnwembed immaculatus a vnwyued inuxoratus, coelebs vnuaried
inuariatus a vnuewed inaestimatus a vnuowed inuotiuus a unused inusitatus a
vnwowed impetitus a vnwrapped infasciatus a untouched intactus a There be also
many other that end in ed, but namely of two sorts, the one is of all
pretertenses of verbes, both active and passive: as have loved amaui, isti, it
had read legeram as, at been blamed culpatus fui was tamed domabar etc. The
other is of Participles of the pretertenses, which for the most part end in ed,
as loved amatus, dilectus proved probatus a To these also may we add certain
perticiples, which being formed of Substantives, end in ed, like
participles, as, headed of head capitatus a eyed, of eye oculatus a capped of
cappe piliatus a coted of cote. tunicatus The latin of these for the most
part do end in atus as the ex^mples declare In edge. ye edge acies ei, haec
an hedge sepes is, haec A pledge obses idis, hic, haec A wedge clauus i to edge
acuere to hedge sepire, to pledge oppignorare to wedge figere, firmare a sledge
fistuca ae a college collegium i a privilege priuilegium i knowledge scientia
ae foreknowledge praescientia to allege allegare to acknowledge agnoscere In
ede, or eed. a deed factum, actum, dread metus us, timor heed animanduersio a
read arundo inis, haec seed semen inis, hoc speed expedimentum a steed
sonipes, equus a threede filum i a weed herba ae meede meritum ti need opus,
necessitus. to breed gignere to bleed sanguinare to dreede ^imere, metuere.
to feed alere, pas^ere. to heed aduer^ere to meede egere to reed legere to
shede effunelere to speed expedire, maturare to threede acum filo inducere to
weed. aberuncare. chickweede anagallis idis, hic. bloodweede polygonon ni, hoc
a misdeede malefactum cti to proceed procedere to succeed succedere ye breadth
latitudo dinis A B^dle. lictor oris, hic. E ante F.
In efte. An efte aspis idis, hic. An heft manubrium ij theft furtum ti wefte,
wofte. stamen inis, hoc. lelte relictus cta refte raptus ta sefte cribratus ta
A shefte remedium dij clefte scissus ssa In efe, or eefe. Beef bouina ae,
bouilla ae A grief morbus, dolor A seefe cribrum bri A thief sur uris, hic,
haec. brief breuis e thief precipuus a a mischief flagitium ij a rel^fe
re^rigerium ij to mischief des^ruere to relief refrigerare. E ante G.
In egg. an egg ouum, i a clegge, slay. solipunga ae a leg tibia ae a pegge
clauus i a tegge damula ae a steggander Anser, eris hic a wynd egg ouum vrinum
ye dregs faex aecis, haec to beg mendicare to egg irritare. In eight. ye
height altitudo, summitas a slight vafrities ei, haec. a weight pondus, eris
hoc eight octo slight, smooth. politus ae straight rectus ae to straight
dirigere to feight pugnare. In egle. an Egle aquila lae a begle canickla ae
treacle theriaca cae. In ege. a sege obsideo onis haec sacrilege sacrilegium i
A college collegium to besege obsidere E ante K.
In ecke. A check argutia ae an heck, hatch portella ae A neck ceruix icis, hic
ye wreck of ye sea naufragium i to check arguere to deck ornare to flock
flectere to wreck vindicare. Look more in E ante C.
In eke, or eeke. A beke rostrum i A cheke bucca ae A creke, crick. fissura ae
A leeke porrum i A reke of hay strues is ye reek of fire fumus i ye teke of a
bed teca culcitariae A week hebdomada ae an eke additamentum eke etiam, etque
meek humilis ae seek, sick aegrotus a to eke addere, augmentare to seek
quaerere fengreek, herb. foenum grecuns A rebeke fidicula ae houseleke, herb.
sedum i braynseke phreneticus a dropsyseke hydropicus a frenseke freneticus a
loungseke ptysicus, pulmonicus spleneseke spleneticus a. Yet these ought rather
to end in sick. E ante L.
A bell campana, nola ae hell barathrum, infernus A hell mons ontis, hic ye
fell of a sheep pellis is, haec A shell testa ae A well fons ontis, hic A yel,
cry. vociferatio an ell vlna ae A smell odor oris, hic to fell deijcere to quel
pessundare to sell vendere to smell olfacere to spel syllabam coponere to swel
turgescere, tumere to tell dicere, narrare. to dwell habitare to well iron
conflare to yel vociferare fell, bitter. acerbus a well been A bundel fasciculus
i A bushel modius i A buttel meta ae, terminus i A camel camelus i canel,
spire. cinamomum i a canel of dogs. canile is, hoc a canel, gutter. canalis is,
hic. a cantel pars, portio a castle castellum i a corbel, post. mutulus, i
cattle boues, inmenta oru^ a chapel capella ae^sacellum. a channcel sacrarium,
sacehu^ an hancel prima pecuniae acceptio, primus dies f^uctus a chesel cellis
is, haec a cobbel, dullard haebes, bardus. an hobbel idem a cockrel paluster
tri, hic a cocknel acersa ae, delicatus, a an hogrel bidens entis, haec a
corstrel mirgizo onis, hic a bottel obba bae a dottel delinus ra a dumel
stupidus da a funnel fundibulum a dummel mutus a a fardel sarcina nae an hardel
^rates lignea fenel feniculus li fuel combustile is, hoc yt gospel cuangelium
ij an hostel hospicium ij grewel ius uris, hoc greneswel erigeron, pappus i. a
grunsel hypotheron i, hoc a spanyel odorisequus canis an hingel cardo inis,
hic. a lingel lingula lae an hanuel duaru^ literaru^ homo an horrel libidinosus
a an houel mandra drae an hewell, bird. vireo onis, hic ye iowels of a columnae
arum bridge a jewel iocale, monile is ye howelles of a viscera rum belly. a
kernel nucleus i a kydgel fustis is a label insulu lae a flabel fiabellum i a
layuel libramen inis, hoc laurel laurus ri, haec a libel libellus i a lorel
nebulo, scurra ae a sorel lapathus i a macrel scombrus i a minstrel musicus,
aulaedus a mixel stercorarium a mungrel spurius a a morsel buccella ae, bolus i
a meusel fiscella ae a caudel potio onis an ote caudel auenaceum i an egg
caudle ouaceum i a payrel putamen inis, hoc a paytrel antilena ae a panel
penula ae a pantel pedica ae a parsel particulae ae a pestel pilum, pistillum a
pewtrel antilena ae a pickrel lupellus i a pincel penicillum li a pomel polus i
a puddel palus udis, haec a quarrel calumnia ae, a rebel rebellis is, hic revel
luxus us a rowel rotula lae a roundel teretrum, circus i rubbel rudus eris, hoc
a scorel sciurus i sorel lapathus i a shouel pala, sarculum. a squirrel sciurus
i a stoppel obstructorium a tarsel appendix icis, hic. a timbrel tympanum ni
tynsell intertextus tus A towell mantile lis, hoc A trowell rotula le travel
labor oris, hic A truell thrulla lae A tuncell aduolutorium A vowell vocalis
lis, haec A handbell tintinnabulum li A rakehell malus, tetricus a iussell,
meat. minutal alis, hoc apparel apparatus tus enamell encaustrum muscadell
mulsum apianum oximell acetum mulsum pimpernel bipenella ae supposell opinio
onis, haec. Many other end in ell, derived of Substantives, and be
diminutiues. Look there. to excel excellere to expel expellere to fare well
beneualere to kydgell fustigare to leyuel librare to moosel os obstruere to
quarrel calumniari to rebel rebellare to repel repellere to revel luxuriare
to travel laborare to enamell. encaustrare There be diverse other that end in
ell, namely Substa^tiues diminutiues: as a kernel nucleolus i hogrel of hog
bidens entis, cockrell of cock galliculus li sorel of sore damula lae Whose
Latin does commonly end in, ulus, ellus. etc. In elche. A belche ructus us to
belche ructare In elde. to gelde castrare selde raro In elfe. pelf scruta orum
an else satyrus, faunus n^ a shelfe cortinale is, hoc I my self egoipse,
egomet thou thy self tute, tuipse. he himself ille ipse we our self nos
ipsi, nosmet ye your self vosipsi, vosmet they themself illi ips^. In elk. a
whelk, push. papula lae a welk fish turbo onis, hic. In elm. an elm vlmus
mi, haec. an elne vlna ne. In elpe. help auxilium i a shelp, fish. tenia ae a
whelp catulus i, catellus i to help auxiliare. In elte. A belt, girdle.
cingulum, baltheu^. A peit pellis, is, hac A felt galerus i A smelt, fish.
halecula ae A welte fimbria ae to belt, gird. cingere to melt liquefacere to
spelt corn tundere, eglumare to swelt, dye. expirare to welt. actine. euertere
to welt. neuter. decidere In elth. ye twelfth duodecimus wealth abundantiarerum
health salus utis, haec stelth surtum i In elue. to belue potitare, deglutire.
twelve duodecim to delue fodere. In ele, or eele. A beele spelunca ae a deele
portio, pars. an eele anguilla lae an heel calx cis, hic A meele coena nae A
peele pala, scalmus i A reele alabrum i steel chalybs ybis, hic. A we will nassa
ssae A wheel rota tae zeele zelus li to feel sentire to kneel genua ponere
to peele deglubere to reele nutare, vacillare. to cele caelare to zele zelare
In elde. a feeld ager gri to reeld dedere a sequel sequela le. In em. an hemme
fimbria ae ye stem or stalk stemma stemmaetis, of a thing, hoc. hemp canabis
is, haec. a kemp, hair. grandebala, ae A wemb macula lae A temple templum to
hemme fimbriare to stem tutubare to kembe comere to tempt tentare to semble
simulare to tremble tremere to assemble adunare to dissemble dissimulare to
resemble adsimulare, prae se far In eme. A reame of paper 20. libri A teeme
temo onis, hic. breeme densus, sensibilis. queeme aequus, compar. to deem
aestimare to fleeme fugare to seem videri A diadeeme diadema atis, hoc.
extreme extremus a to blaspheme blasphemare to esteem aestimare to redeem
redimere to exempt eximere. E ante N.
In en. a den Antrum, spelu^ca ae a fenne palus udis, haec an hen gallina
nae men homines number a pen to write calamus, penna a pen, or coup. caula a a
wenne neuus i a wrenne regulus to kenne, know. noscere tenns december an alien
alienus na a borwen cumulus i a burden onus cris, hoc a burgen germen inis,
hoc. a chesten castanea a a cheuen laccia ae a chicken pullus li ditten, herb
tondris is a freken neuus ui a garden hortus ti a guarden custos odis, hic a
warden volemum i a griffen grips ipis, hic an haven portus us a raven coruus i
an irchen histrix icis, haec a kytchen culina nae a dosein duodeni ae latten
aurichalcum i A patten prototypon i, hoc A pehen paua uae rosen resina nae a
seochen tholos i, hic. a token arrae, signu^, symbolu^ veruen, herb. verbena ae
a sexten aedituus i a shyppen bouile is, hoc a slouen sordidus da a sludden
pedisequus, sanguisecus, canis to burden onerare to burgen germinare to happen
contingere to harden obdurare to harken auscultare to lessen minuere to leven
fermentare to lighten leuigare to meeken humiliare to quicken viuificare to
reckon ratiocinari to nighten aduesperascere to open patefacere, operire. to
shorten abbreuiare to soften mollire, linire to sleken extinguere to storken
congelari to strengthen corroborare to threaten minari to unburden exonorar to
disburden idem to examen examinare miscelden viscus cum i parmazen parmensis
caseus unshaken inconcussus a vnstriken impecercussus a vnstriden horss
inconsensus a vnsweapen informis me untrodden non calcatus vnwoken non laneus a
unwritten non scriptus a worm eaten vermicatus a unbidden iniussus a unbroken
infractus a A citizen ^^is is hic, haec barren sterilis ^ broken fractus a
certain certus ta drunken ebrius a brosten ruptus a flaxen lineus a frosen
^ongelatus a golden aureus a brazen aeneus a gotten nactus a graven sculptilis
le heaven coelum li known cognitus ta moulten liquidus dae northen bor^alis le
oken querceus ae open apertus, patens riuen scissus, fissus a risen ortus a
rotten putridus dae sawen satus a seven septem shaken percussus a shaven rasus
a sodden lixus ae solen solennis n^ swolen ^^gidus, tumidus. taken captus ta
wheaten frumentaceus a wouen textus ta written scriptus ta mylken lacteus a
sylken sericus a, by ssinus ^ clothen panneus a earthon terreus a 1 There be
also many other in en, of three kynds, the first i^ of materials, that is to
say, of such words as signify the substance vvherof a thing is made, as.
lynnen lineus a leaden plumbeus a woollen laneus a leatherne pelliceus a etc.
The latin of these do end in ens, as the examples declare. 2 The second
kind is of pretertenses of verbes, actiues, and passiues, and of participles,
as, have beaten slagellaui bin beaten flagellatus fui beaten flagellatus a
eaten ^sus a. etc. 3 The third kind is of certain plucall numbers of nounes,
as treen for trees, atbores. Stonen for stones, lapi des, housen for houses,
aedes, iu^. etc. In ence. a fence desensio, vallum (...) to fence munire hence
hinc pence denarij sense a quo, vnde tense tempus oris, hoc. A defense
desensio, vallum, A defense apologia ae expense sumptus, expensum dispense
dispendium ij essence essentia ae insence insensum si A license licentia ae an
offense offensio, offensa ae A science scientia, ae A pretense praetextus us A
presence praesentia ae prudence prudentia ae A sentence sententia ae silence
silentia ae audience audientia ae cenfidence confidentia ae congruence
congruentia ae conscience conscientia ae continence continentia ae eloquence
eloquentia ae evidence euidentia ae experience experientia ae influence
influentia ae innocence innocentia ae magnificence magnificentia negligence
negligentia ae obedience obedientia ae patience patienti^^ ae pestilence
pestilentia ae preeminence praeeminentia prescience praescientia ae recompense
redditio, retributio residence residentia ae resistance resistentia ae
reverence reuerentia ae sapience sapientia ae violence violentia ae vnpatience
impatientia ae to recompense rependere to reverence reuerere frankincense
themiama it is, hoc If there be any more, that end in ence they be substantives
deneminatiues formed of participles, and adjectives in ens as. sufficience
sufficientia ae intelligeuce intelligentia. Of sufficiens, entis, and of
intelligens, entis. which rule is to be followed in all the other. In enche. A
bench scamnum ni an enche. vncia ae, latus polle^ A tench fish tincha, ae A
trench vallum i A wench puella ae to quench extinguere to trench vallare. In
end. an end finis, terminus. A friend amicus a to bend flectere to blend,
mixed. miscere to lend mutuare to mend emendare to send mittere to shend
perdere, confundere to spend sumere to tend tendere, pertinere ye kalends
kalendae arum prouende pabalum i a stipende stipendium i reverend reuerendus a
to amend emendare to ascend ascendere to defend defendere to depend dependere
to expend expendere to extend extendere to dispende dispendere to entend
intendere to descend descendere to offend offendere to pertende pertendere to
portend portendere to pretend praetexere to suspende suspendere to unbend a
bow remittere to apprehend apprehendere to condescende consentire to commend
commendare to recommend resalutare to cemprchende comprchendere to reprehend
reprehendere. In endle. ye trendle of a bed rotula lae ye trendle of a mil
molucrum i to trendle rotare In enge. A frenge lacinia ae, fimbriale an orange
malum punicum to avenge vlcisci to revenge idem, vindicare to calenge vendicare
A callenge vendicatie In engthe. the length longitudo inis, haec strength vis
robur oris, hoc In ens. innocens int orens entis sapience sopi^^tia ae All
those that see^e like th^se to end in ens trust be written in, ^^ce, and do
belong to the terminacion, ence, that is aforesaid. In ent. bent, sinal rushes
lun^^us i A rent redditus us A tent turunda ae A vent meatus us porus i A meant,
lane. viculus, angiportus. A tent tentorium, castru^. to hent, snach eripere,
arripere. to rent laniare, lacerare. bent tensus sa brent combustus stae gent,
gentle. mitis tae lent mutuatus a meant propositus a rent lacer ra rum sent
missus a spent consumptus a to vent aperire, euacuare shent perditus a A
casement transenna, senestrae A clyent cliens entis an intent intentio,
institutu^ an accent accentus us A seffement possessio onis, haec A fragment
fragmentum A foundment colos l^, anus ni a garment vestimentum ti indgement
iuditium ij a margent margo inis, haec a moment momentum an ^ynctment vnguentum
ti a payment solutio onis, haec parchement membrana ae A parent parens entis ye
pauement pauimentum i raiment vestitus us a serpent serpens entis a talent
talentum ye tala^t of an hauk vngula lae a torment torme^tu^, cruciat' i a
vestment vestimentum ti cement caementum i to absent absentare to accent
accinere to acquent adsciscere to dissent dissentire to frequent frequentare to
invent inuenire lament lamentari to present praesentare to prevent deferbere to
relent praeuenire to repent poenitere to wayme^t, lament plangere absent absens
entis decent decorus a accident accidens entis clement clemens entis fervent
feruidus a frequent frequens entis prudent prudens entis sylent taciturnus a
vnkent, untaught incorrectus a unspent inconsumptus a urgent instans, vrgens an
agreement concordia a an aduisement deliberatio ye battilments minae arum a
building antae arum ye element elementum emolument emolumentum enoyntment
vnctio onis an enrolement inscriptio onis entycement tentatio onis an
expediment expedimentum a diuident diuidentia ae ye firmament firmamentum ye
embattlements pinnae, antemnae. an imbushment insidiae arum an impediment
impedimentum an inchauntment incantatio an increment incrementum an inforcement
coactio an instrument instrumentum A mercement multa ae A meriment iocus i ye
occident occidens entis, hic ye ponent idem ye orient oriens entis, hic A
norishement nutrimentum an ornameut ornamentum A punnishment poena nae a
rablement series rerum A rauishmente rapina ae A preferment promotio onis a
remanent residuum i a presentment presentatio onis a sacrament sacramentum A
president praeses idis A tenement beneficium, ij A tournament hastae ludus A
parliament senatus consultus veriment veritas atis There be also many
Substantives verbals besides these ending in ent, whose latin commonly ends
in amen amentum, en entium: as those that follow and such other. A testament
testamentum i A document documentum i A government regimen inis, hoc A
fragment fragmen inis, hoc aunciente antiquus a congruent congruus a beneuolent
beneuolus a diligent diligens, solers discontent displicitus a disobedient
inobediens eloquent eloquens entis eminent imminens entis equivalent
aequiualens entis evident euidens entis excellent excellens entis fraudulent
fraudulentus a imminent imminens entis impatient impatiens entis impudent
impudicus a imprudente imprudens entis incident incidens entis incontinent
incontinens entis inconvenient incongruus a indifferent indifferens entis
magnificent magnificus a negligent negligens entis obedient obediens entis
omnipotent omnipotens entis patient patiens entis penitent poenitens entis
permanent permanens entis pestilent pestilens entis prceminente praeeminens
entis provident prouidus a resident residens entis reverent reuerendus a
convenient conuenie^s, aptus a sapiente sapiens entis inconvenient absurdus a
vndiligent incurius a vneloquent ineloquens entis vneuident ineuidens entis. In
enth. ye leuenthe vndecimus a ye seventh septimus a ye tenth decimus a ye
thirteenth decimus tertius ye fourtenth decimus quartus, ye fiuetenth decimus
quintus ye sixtenth decimus sextus ye seuententh decimus septimus ye eightenth
decimus octauus ye nineteenth. decimus nonus In ene, or eene A Queen Regina
nae A screene scrinium ij trne cura, moeror to ween, suppose. opinari green
viridis e keen feruidus da sheene clarus a besene visus a between inter
nynetene nouendecim seventeen septendecim thirtene tresdecim unseen ignarus a
selfegreene semper viuum fourteen quatuordecim fyueteene quindecim sixteen
sexdecim eyghteene octodecim E ante P.
In eppe. A step gradus us, passus us A skeppe, a measure of corn. neppe,
herb. nepeta ae to step gradi, gressus ponere In eepe or epe. A sheep ouis
is, haec sleep somnus ni to cheepe pipilare to creep repere to keep seruare
to peep inspicere to sleep dormire to steep macerare to sweep scopare to
weep flere deep altus a, profu^dus a In ept. to accept acceptare to except
excipere a keslep, renet bag coaegulum i A precept praeceptum to intercept
intercipere except ni, nisi. In eple. A steeple campanile, is, hoc ye people
populus i, plebs. E ante R.
In err. a sterre stella ae her illa, illius ner propior us to err errare an
aker iugerum ri a baker pistor oris an alder tree alnus i, hic amber ambra ae,
electrum, an anchor anchora rae an ancher anachorita ae A brasier aerarius a a
glasier hyalargus i anger ira ae an archer sagitarius, arquites a bacheler
coelebs, agamus. a bacheler of arts artium, ca^didatus. a badger grumus i a
banner signum, vexillum. a manner mos, modus di a beuer, beast. meles itis, hic
a beuer, drinck. potatiuncula ae a bilder, horse. equulus, equila a bitter,
bird. busio onis, hic a blader vesica cae a ladder scala ae a blister pusula
ae, vlcus mister egestas, inopia ae a butcher lanius i, carnifex Amoucher
manduco onis, hic A bolster ceruical alis, hoc A broker proxeneta ae, pararius
A brother frater tris, hic A mother matter, tris, haec A butler clipeus, parma
butter butyrum i, A gutter canalis is, hic the canker cangrena ae, the canker
on iron ferrugo inis, haec A carter auriga ae, A martyr martyr yris, A kater
opsonator trix, A slater tector oris, A Ceder tree cedrus i, haec the center
centrum i, chaffer merces is, haec an haifer iuuencula e, A chamber cubiculum
i, A chapter capitulum i, A charger lanx ancis, haec A charter diploma atis,
hoc chafter (herb) vitex icis, hic A chanceler cancellarius i, A chanter
cantor oris, hic choler, humor. cholera ae, A collar collare is, hoc A cipher
circulus i, A styfer stater eris, hic A clapper lingua campanae, A flapper
flabellum, i cissers forfeculae arum, cliuers, herb. rubea minor A clister
clyster eris, hic A cloister claustrum i, an oyster ostrea ae, a cluster of
graps botrus i, a cluster of nuts cumulus i, a cobbler sartor oris, hic a coffer
cistella s^rinium a colier carbonarius i, a conger congrus er, i, hunger fames
is, haec copper cuprum i, ye hopper of a mil insimdibulum a cropper postilena
ae, a corner angulus i, a crowner coronator, questor, paricidius, a coulter
culter i, hic a courser equus admissarius, a courtier aulicus a, a dagger sica,
pugio onis, a bragger gloriosus iactator, danger periculum i, a maunger
presepium i, a dinner prandium i, a pynner claustrinus i, a daughter filia,
naua ae, a draper vestiarius i Easter pascha atis, hoc an elder tree alnus i,
haec an ewer imbrex icis, haec an adder coluber i, madder rubea tinctorium an
amner clemosinarius i, an answer responsum i, a gransier auus i, a beggex
mendicus i, a birder auceps upis, hic a border terminus, finis order ordo inis,
hic A bracher brachiale is, hoc A racer scalprum i campher, herb. camphora ae
an hamper calathus i A skynner pellio onis hic A letter littera ae A fetter
compes edis, hic A setter positor oris A tetter petigo inis haec A scholar
scholaris is, hic A toller telon onis, hic A roller cylindrus i A soller
solarium i A corier coriarius i A dresser, tbale. mensa culinaria A presser
pressorium i A farmar beneficiarius i A charmer incantator A father pater tris,
hic A fether pluma mae a fester festuca, penna nae a tester canopus i a fever
febris is, haec a lever vectis is, haec fire ignis is, hic a squire armiger i
hyer merces edis, haec myer limus i, lutum a shyer comitatus us a syer senior,
pater. a wire filum aereum a finger digitus i a singer cantor oris a fluter
auloedus i a luter citharedus i a flounder pectunculus a bounder terminator a
bower conclaue is, hoc a flower flos oris, hic an hour hora ae, power virtus,
potestas, a shower nymbus i, imber is a tower turris is, haec a wower procus i
fodder pabulum li a modder pupa, puella a rodder anquiromagus a fosper
vestigium i a foster saltuarius i an hostler caupo, stabularius a fudder
plaustrum oneratum a rudder rutabulum an vdder vber eris hoc a fuller fullo
onis hic a gayler custos, carcerarius a rayler rabula lae a tailor vestiarius i
a gander anser eris, hic a lander lotrix icis haec a sclander scandalum li a
chandler sebator, ca^delarius a garner granarium, frumentarium. a garter
subligar aris a quarter quarta ae a gylder pedica ae gynger zynziber, hoc a
sister soror oris, haec a glyster clyster eris, hic grammar grammatica ae an
hammer malleus i a rammer fistuca ae a grater tritorium i a water aqua ae a
gripper harpax agis a slipper calopodium ij crepida ae a grosser aromacopola ae
groser idem, polypola ae an halter capistrum i a psalter psalterium i a salter
salarius i an heyer haeres edis hic a mayre mayor, praetor a prayer oration
preces a hookster caupo onis, hic an hooper victor oris a kercher peplum, tenia
a pylcher, fish. mena ae a keuer operculum i a larder carnarium ij a lauer
lauacrum, imbrex hauer auena ae a lawyer iurisconsultus i a mawer seuiseca ae a
tawer alutarius a laughter risus us slaughter caedes is, haec lether aluta ae,
corium a pedder circuitor oris ye wether aura ae, tempestas a lymmer hybrida ae
a liver hepar aris, hoc a lopster gammarus a lubber mediastinus, tardus. a
rubber tritorium luker lucrum, quaestus us a mazer patera ae a lazer leprosus
ae a razer nouacula ae a masker laruatus a a tasker taxator oris a plaster
pharmacum i a master magister, deminus a taster gustator oris a matter
materies res causa a water aqua ae a medlar, aple. mepilum i a peddler circuitor
ye embers fauilla ae a member membrum i a mercer mercator trix a meuer, fish.
mena e a miser miser a ye gizer of a bird ingluuies ei a byter mordicus a,
mordax a myter mitra ae a writer scriptor scriba ae A monster monstrum i a
muffter focale is hoc a ruffier elatus a lasciuus murder homicidium i a number
multitudo inis haec a slumber sopor oris, hic ocker vsura ei foenus oker ochra
e an otter lutra e a potter figulus i a palmer in schole ferula ae a palmer,
stranger. peregrinus i a panter panthera ae a pantrer panarius paper charta ae
a taper caereus i a parker saltuarius i a partner particeps is, hic haec pepper
piper eris, hoc a pillor columna nae pincer forpeculae arum a plaster for a
sore emplasticum a pismer formica ae a pitcher vrceus i a plaster for walling
camentum a wayster fustis, baculus i a plouer vpupa ae a cover operculum a
porter ostiarius ij a potter figulus i powder puluis eris poulder idem a
shoulder humerus ri a poulter auiarius i moulter emolumeutum i a quauer octaua
pars me^surae terminus musicus a quiver pharetra ae a river riuulus, fluuius a
rafter tigillum i a ramper remex icis, hic a rapier ensis is, haec a roper
restio, onis, hic ye rother of a ship gubernaculum a roder anquiromagus i a
saucer patena ae sauder ferrumen inis, hic a scoler scholaris is, hic a
sclander scandalum slaughter caedes is, haec a scraper scralprum i a sculler
scapharius i myster, need. carentia ae, opus a lifter, forke. suscina nae a
shiuer of a broken thing fragmentum silver argentum ti a synder scoria ae
slydder pruina nae slubber limus i summer aestas atis, haec a sumpter sarema
ae, bulga. a sowter suitor calcearius a spyder araneus i a strayner cola, colum
li a stranger peregrinus ni a stutter balbus ba a supper coena nae a tapster
promus mi a tatter panniculus li ye thunder tonitruus i a wonder miraculum a
tiger tygris idis timber meremium, tignu^. tynder incendium i a tynker sartor
aerarius a tinkler idem trappers phalarae arum a tuter tutor oris, hic a fluter
aulaedus i a twinter bidens entis a printer chalcographus i a winter hyems emis
haec a viner vinitor oris, hic a vintner oenopola, viniuedus a viper vipera ae
a voyder lanx ancis, haec an usher ostiarius, hypodida scalus a waffer placenta
ae a wager pignus oris, hoc a wicker vimen inis, hoc ye wether aura ae to
danger periclitari to differ differ, prolongare to defer differ,
discrepare to enter intrare to venture periclitari to bicker velitare to
chatter, prate garrire to scatter dispergere to clatter prate balbutire to
flatter adulari to batter walls demo^iri muros to water ground irrigare to
water fish macerare to water an horse potare, adaquare to number numerare to
cumber interturbare to houer eminere to cover operire, velare to dadder
trepidare to father patrem nominare to gather colligere to fether plumare to
fire incendere, acce^dere to hyre conducere to tire fatigare to flou^der,
stu^ble. cespitare to pounder tritumare to flower florere to power fundere to
fodder pabulari to foster pascere to further expedire to murder intersi^ere to
garter hose succingere caliga to martyr martyrem sacere to glister splendere to
mister, lack egere to hinder impedire to hunger esurire to heuer operire to
sheuer minutine s^indere to linger languere to loyter lang^ere, tardare to
lower caperare frontem to luker lucrari to master superare, subigere to
plaster a sore phar macu^ adhibere to mutter mussitare to plaiffer a wall
gypsare, caeme^tare to butter butyrare, butyrum addere to utter proferre,
pronu^ciare to offer offerre to proffer idem. to pamper indulgere to hamper
fustigare to penter ponderare, librare to powder condire, sallere to prosper
prosperare to quauer a note vibrare to quiver trepidare to have liefer malle to
render reddere, recensere to sauer conferruminare to sclander scandalizare to
wander vagari, errare to sever seperare, seiungere to snapper titubare,
cespitare. to stagger titubare, vacillare to stamber titubare to sturter
titubare to suffer pati, sufferre to sunder seperare, seiungere to thunder
tonitare to wonder mirari to temper temperare to tender zelare, suffragari to
totter mutare, vacillare to whysper mussitare to winter hybernare an aduouterer
adulter A bargander vulpancer eris ye belwether veruex sectarius A calender
kalendarium ij A carpenter faber lignarius A cellerer pincerna, promus i A
chanceler cancellarius i A clopsterer claustrarius i A cordweiner calcearius i
December Decembis ris, hic A demeaner gestus us A flaxener linarius i A
falconer accipitrarius i A forainer extraneus a ye forefinger index icis, hie A
forefather protopater tris, hic A gardener hortulanus ni A gelofer garrophyllus
i A gourmander ma^duco, beluo onis A gormander idem, edax acis A grandfather
auus i A grandmother auia a gunpouder puluus factitius an harbager hospitator
trix an householder paterfamilias an inholder hospes, caupo onis an imbroderer
acupictor oris A juniper tree iuniperus i, haec lauander nardus i, haec
lauander cotte^ sautonicum i A limiter limitator oris manslaughter homicidium i
A maryner nauta ae, hic, nauita, a, miniuer armiliu^ i A messanger nuncius ij A
milhopper infundibulum i A minister minister i October October bris, hic an
officer officialis an oysier coix icis, vime^ inis A pomander diapasma atis,
hoc A potanger patella ae A prologer prologus i A prisoner captiuus, argastulus
prouender pabulum i A querister chorusca ae, hic quicksiluer argentum viuum A
rauener rapax, heluo onis A reteyner cliens entis A ringpigger potator, bibax
acis A ringleader praesultor, dux September Septembris is, hic A sepulcher
sepulchrum i synoper minium i A soiorner accola, inquilinus (...) A sophister
sophista ae, hic A sorcerer praestigiator A stationer stationarius i A
stepfather vitricus i A stepmother nouerca ae A stepdaughter priuigna ae A
tauerner oenopola ae, caupo A treasorer thesaurarius i A treageter proditor
oris a trumpeter tubicina nae a villager villicus i a waghalter furcifer,
perditus. a warrier miles itis, hic warreyner viuarius i alabaster alabastrum i
an astronomer astronomus i a commissioner missus, legatus. an extortioner
exactor oris coriander coriandrum i an haberdasher minutarius i a
historiographer historiographus a nicromancer magus, praestigiator A
gallowclapper furcifer a philosopher philosophus i In erbe an herb herba ae a
verb verbum by In erche. a perch ames itis, hic a search scrutinium i In erd. a
berd barba ae a herd, keeper, pastor oris an herd of cattle grex egis, hic a
swerd gladius i a globerd lampyris idis, hic a sheperd opilio onis, hic a
asseherd asinarius i aserd timidus a In erke. a clerk clericus i a ierk verber
eris, hoc a sperke scintilla a to herke auscultare In earl. an Earl comes it
is, hic a wherle spondilus i. In erne. a cherne fidelia ae fern filix icis,
haec an herne ardea ae ye kerne of a nut nucleus i a wherne molatrina ae ye
stern of a ship gubernaculum i stern, fierce. ferus a to gerne ringere ye
gisern or giser of a bird ingluuies ei to erne moereri, lucrari to learn
discere systerne sorores rum a cesterne cisterna ae a gyterne fidicula ae a
lantern laterna ae a pasterne talus i a pattern prototypon i, hoc a tavern
taberna nae to decerne decernere to discern discernere to sowerne accscere
eastern orientalis e western occidentalis e northern borialis e southern
australis e Seuern a river sabina ae In erse. an hearse monumentum i A verse
versus us A serse scrutinium i to perse penetrare perverse peruersus a diverse
diuersus a to disperse dispergere to rehearse recensere In erste. erste ante,
prius merste proximus a In erte. to convert conuertere to divert diuertere to
peruerte peruertere to subuerte subuertere to transuerte transuertere to
depart decedere expert expertus a A dyzert, player histrio onis, hic A desert
desertum ti A philbert tree corylus i, hic A filberte, nutte, auellana ae
malapert impudes, audaculus inexpert inexpertus In earth. derth caritas atis ye
herth of a fire focarium i A gerth cingulum i In erue. A wherue spondilus li to
kerue, grave sculpere to kerue meat resecare, struere to serve seruire to
sterue active. cibum subducere to sterue neuter. perire, interire to conserve
conseruare to deserve demereri to preserve preseruare to reserve reseruare to
deliver liberare to deliver to one tradere to dismember deartuare to embroder
acupingere to encounter se apponere to encomber interturbare to engender
ingignere to gurmander abligurire to persevere perseuerare to recover recuperare
to regester inscribere to sequester sequestrare to surrender resignare to
wyther arescere, deflorere propre proprius a familier familiaris e synister
sinister a improper improprius a unsure incertus ta. There be many other in er,
the which we omit for breuities sake, namely of three kinds. The first kind
is of the comparatiue degree as harder, durior, of hard, durus: softer,
mollior, of soft mollis: vvhiter albior, of white albus: blacker, nigrior, of
black niger. etc. The second kind is of noune substa^ tiues verbals,
aunsvvering to the latins in tor and trix: as of make facio, maker factor: of
bake pinsere, baker, pistor: of hear, audio, hearer, auditor of read, lego,
reder, lector, etc. The third kind is of them that answer to the latins,
called gentiles: as of London, Lo^doner. Londinensis of Louan, Louaner,
Louaniensis. of Bristow, bristoner, Bristoniensis. of Preston, Prestoner,
Praestonensis of Britayn, Britaner, Britannus. of Rome, Romaner, Romanus. etc.
Where note that this last kind is both of country is and cities, and their
latin in ensis, and anus, as the examples declare. In ere. bear potus
lupinatus rere recens entis there ibi, istic where vbi here hic sincere
syncerus ra nowhere nullubi, nusquam somwhere alicubi euerywhere vbiquam E ante
S.
In esse. ye chesse tesserarius ludus a guess coniectura ae a press for wine
torcular aris hoc a stresse taken pignoratio a stresse, endenor conatus us
cresse nasturtium i a press for cloths pressorium i a press for backs
praelium lij to bless bear, benedicere to dress cloth concinnare to dress
meat parare, coquere to dress ye hair ornare, comere to guess conjecture to
dress a wound curare to press praemere to stresse stringere yes i^^, etiam,
sic est less minor us an alms eleemosyna nae balesse saburra ae A cadesse,
bird. monedula ae A burgess municeps ipis, hic A buttresse fulcimentum
coppresse chulcantum i A diocese diocesis esios, haec A distress pignoris
captio distractio an empress imperatrix tricis an excess excessus us, hic an
access accessus us an abbess abbatissa ae, haec canmesse canabis is, haec
canuesse idem. cannabu^, i A countess comes itis, haec A fortress vallum i A
haggesse tucetum i harness arma orum, haec largess largitas atis, haec
lawless illex icis, com. A lioness leena, ae, haec maistresse domina,
magistra mattresse culcitra ae, haec A mortresse cumphus i, hic A mortesse
ide^, incastratura ae A portesse portiforiu^ breuiariu^ A portcullesse
cataracta ae a porpesse phoca ae a process processus us a progress progressus
us a prophetess prophetissa ae sickness aegritudo, morbus i success
successus us tyrlesse^ cancelli orum a lattesse idem. lettesse lactuca ae a
wilderness solitudo inis a witness test is is, hic haec wodwesse glastum i a
redress reformatio onis to digress digredi, diuerti to distress distrahere
to express exprimere Look for mo words of E ante S, and E ante T, after E
ante V. E ante T.
In ette. a iet or toy gestus us, iocus i a let impedimentum i a net rete
is, hoc a set planta ae spet or spetting sputum i a tette papilla ae, vber to
fet, or fetch adferre to flete plicare to get issue gignere to get goods
acquirere to get or obtein nancisci, consequi to iette gestire to let
impedire to mete or mesure metiri to set ponere, statuere to set plants
plantare to spette spuere to whette acuere, vibrare. to yette metal fundere,
liquefacere hette calefactus a set positus a set plantatus a yet tamen,
attamen. a bonette birrus i, pileus i a bracelet brachiale is, hoc an aglette
bracteolum i, a bouget scriniolum i a bucket, beam tollo onis, hic a bucket,
vessel. mergus oris, hoc bragget, drink. promulsis idis, haec a bragget, post
mutulus i a fagget fascis is, hic a carpet tapes etis, hic a cornet, pipe
meluina tabia a flasket li^teariu^ viminaceu^ a casket scriniolum i a closet
conclaue is, hoc a couerlet stragulum i chamblet, cloth. sericum vndulatu^ an
hatchet securis is, haec a basket cophinus i, sporta ae ye renet for chese
coagulum i benet, herb. garyophyllata ae a genet of Spain astur equus a linnet
bird acanthis idis, haec a billet cala ae a phillet, band. vitta ae, tenia ae a
phillet of flesh musculus i a byrlet, tyring calantica ae a ferret furo onis,
viuerra garrettes proiecta, orum A parret psitacus i an helinette cassis idis,
haec a triuette tripes, edis, hic a reuette clauus i a partlet strophium i a
mullet mullus, i, trigla. a pullet pullus i a pellet glans, globulus velvet
scricum villosum a planet planeta ae a plummet plumbetum a rundlet semicadus i
a poet poeta ae a poppet pupa, pupus a puppet idem a pocket sacculum i a rochet
rubellio onis, hic a postnet vrceolus i a posset ceruisia lacte calefacta a
pricket subulo onis a wysket sportula ae a thicket dumetum i a wicket portella
ae proset vtilitas atis a pursnet funda ae, haec quiet quies etis, haec riet
intemperantia ae respet respectus us scarlet coctus i a varlet verna nae suet
liquamen inis, hoc a puet phalaris idis, hic a signet, seal. sigillum i a
Cignet cignus i a strumpet scortum i a surfeit crapula ae a tablet bulla ae a
chaplet corona ae a typpet stola ae a trippet tripus odis, hic a banquet
conuiuium i a blanket lodix lanea a basnet cassida ae a doublet diplois idis,
hic a creket salamandra ae an egret asterias adis, hic an emmet formica ae an
euet lacertus ti a gannet, bird. penelops opis, a skyllet patella ae burnet,
herb. prunella ae a reuet clauus i a gobbet bolus i a goblet cyrnea, phiala a
gorget torques is, hic, haec a gantlet manica firrea a frontlet frontale is,
hoc ye gullet lingula, gula (...) a pullet pullus i an hulet or oule vlula ae A
iacket tunica ae A racket reticulum A tacket clauulus a iunkets bellaria orum A
latchet corrigia ae a ratchet superpelliceum A lyueret lepusculus i A mallet
tudes etis, haec a wallet mantica ae In etche. bletche atramentum i a vetche
mos, consuetudo. A fetch idem. A wretch miser ae to fetch afferre to reche
distendi to stretch distrahere In eth. ye twenteth vigesimus ye thirteth
trigesimus a ye forteth quadragesimus a ye sifteth quinquagesimus a ye sixteth
sexagesimus a ye seuenteth septuagesimus a ye eighteth octogesimus a ye ninteth
nonagesimus a ye hundredth centesimus a benethe infra underneath infra, inferius
Note also that all the third persons of the present tenses of verbs actiues and
of verbs neuters, do end in eth as, he loves amat he redeth legit he teaches
docet In ete, or eete. A beat beta ae A blete blitum i ye feet pedes greet
sabulum, i A sheet lodix linea hete gelu u to fleet superferri to greet,
weep. lachrymari to greet one salutare to meet obuiare to wet humectare A
sheet of paper i^tegra, lata chartae sweet dulcis e weete humidus da Mahumet
mahumetes is, hic to replete replere to repete repetere discrete discretus,
prudens explete expletus a complete completus a replete repletus a secret
secretus a A secret secretum i meet aptus a, idoneus ae Where note that mete
is also the sign of some vrebals in bilis, and of paticipials in dus as mete
to beloved, amabilis e. meet to be red, legendus a. And so forth of others. In
eth. to sees. active. bullire to seethe. neuter lixare, coquere to teethe
decimare eth facilis e uneath difficliis e teeth dentes ium beneth infra, subtus
E ante V.
grieve dolor, moleste A reeue villicus i A sleeue manica ae leave venia a,
lice^tia ae believe fides ei, haec to cleue scindere, findere to gene dare,
confer. to grieve molestare to believe credere to forgive dimitiere,
ignoscere to releue reficere, re^^uare These can not be written in, two,
look the nore of a^^. Here follow certain words omitted before of E ante S,
and E ante T. to harness arm^re to oppress opprimere to possess possidere to
profess profiteri to redress reformare to repress reprimere to suppress
supprimere to transgress transgredi to witness contestari There be also many
other that end in nesse, derived of adjectives, called of gra^ma^ians
substantives denominatiues, and must besought in the place of adiect^iues in
the order of me^^e if ye will: as of bay, baynesse: of gay, gayness: of glad
gladness: of bad, badnesse. etc. Where it is to be noted, that though many
write this termination in, nes, as goodness, blacknes shortness, etc. yet it is
better to write them in nesse, as goodness, blackness, shortenesse. etc. Yea
else some would read gredines, for gredinesse, law lines, for law linesse.
etc. two sillables for three, the latin of these end in tas, tudo, cies, cia,
ies, ^a^ es, is also a termination conmonly of the plural number of
substantives, and be so many plural as there be substa^tiues singular, as
stone, stones bone, bones, way, vvayes, day, days etc. There be moreover many
words that end in less, and be adjectives, signifying lack of that which
the substantive signifies, as in these that follovv. heardlesse imberbis a
care esse incurius a endless infinitus ae harmless innocuus ae har borlesse
inhospitus ae lawless illex ^^is mercylesse immisericors ordis fatherless
orbus patre motherlesse idem, orphanus a. paynlesse indolens entis partlesse
expers ertis recklesse negligens entis shameless impudicus a strengthlesse
infirmus ae toothlesse edentulus ae tonguelesse elinguis e witless demens
entis nevertheless nihilominus The Latin of these be compounded with in, e,
de, ex, as in the examples: or else may be rendered by the preposition sine, or
absque, as headless sine absque capite footelesse sine absque pede eyelesse
sine oculo heerlesse sine capillo In eshe ^leshe caro arnis, ha^^ A resh inn^us
i weshe l^tium i to thresh triturare fresh, new. recens entis fresh, unsalted.
insulsus a neshe tener a to refre he recreare, refrigerare In este. A breast
pectus oris, hoc A chest cista ae A crest crista ae A guest hospes it is, hic,
haec an hest, promise promissio onis A nest nidus i A quest inquisitio onis
haec rest requies ei, haec ye west occidens entis, haec ye wrest of ye hand
metacarpion i A wrest for an instrument plectrum to nest nidulari to rest
requiescere to wreste torquere best optimus a blessed beatus a pressed paratus a
lest ne, ne forte A behest promissio A bequest logatum i A conquest acquisitio
onis A forest nemus oris, hoc harvest messis is, haec interest possessio onis A
redbrest, bird. erithacus i A request rogatus us A tempest procella ae to
bequest legare to behest promittere to conquest potiri acquirere to digest
digerere to dishonest dehonestare to fyest pedere to honest honestare to
inhonest in vel dehonestare to manifest manifestare to molest molestare to
protest protestari to suggest suggerere dishonest inhonestus a dishonest idem,
improbus eldest maximus natu earnest serius a, feruidus ae fewest paucissimi ae
furthest vltimus a honest honestus, probus ae inmost intimus a manifest
manifest us a modest modestius, pudicus vndigest inconcoctus a immodest
immodestus. Est is also the terminacion of the second persons singular of the
present tenses of all verbes actiues and neuters as. thou love amas thou
read legis thou playest ludis thou prayest or as, etc. This must be
considered in metring and in coniugating verbes of the actine and neuter
signification. Est is also the sign of the superlatiue degree: as of fair,
fairest, foul, foulest, etc. For the Latin look thy Grammar. In eese. ^^
eese caseus i fleese vellus eris, hoc geese anscres, rum. Vide reliqua in ece.
E ante T.
manchet panis siligneus A sallet acetarium i a pallet culcitra ae a maggette
terms etis, hic marmalet melaphacus i A martlet apedes is, haec a trumpet tuba
ae A turbet fish. rhombus i A turret turricula^lae sucket, spice. succus i to
discoms^te deuincere to disquiet inquietare to forfet perdere to forget
obliuisci to parget crustare to profet proficere to respet respicere to surfeit
crapulari to buffet colophizar. to underset suffulcire to banquet conuiuari
quiet quietus a secret secretus a scarlet coccineus a russet aquilus a wachet
scutulatus a violet violaceus a If any more end in ette, they be substantives
diminutiues which may be formed thus as a caponet, of capo^ capunculus i a
laneret of laner hieraculus i a pricket of prick damunculus i a tuicket of
thick dumetum i. that is to say a little capon. the little or less laner. etc.
their latin ends commonly in ulus or ellus. etc. E ante W.
ye Dew ros roris, hic A clewe glomus i, hic A crewe caterua ae glewe gluten
inis, hoc A Jew Iudeus i A mews motio, ames it is, hi^ news noua orum A rewe
series ei, hic rewe, herb. ruta ae A shrew prauus ae A view tree taxus i haec A
stewe hypocaustum i A view of things aestimatio to brewe potum coquere to glewe
conglutinare to hew dolare to mew an hawk mouere, transennare to rewe
penitere to sewe suere to show ostendere to skewe linis oculis spectare to
spewe spuere, vomere to sew one to the law in ius vocare to tewe ledder pelles
condire to vewe aestimare blewe ceruleus a dew debitus a few paucus a new
nouus a true verus ra a fitche we martes is, haec fetherfew, herb parthenium i
an Hebrew Haebraeus a issew proles, haec a ^erlewe cicon^^ a meldewe melligo
inis, haec ye menstrew menstruum i a nephew nepos otis, hic a ped grew
generatio, gencalogia ragmanrew scries e^, haec A resk^w receptus us, recup^
ratio ye residew esiduum i A reuenew reditus, proue^tus u A synewe artus us,
arteria ae A nauew, root napus i ye value valor, aestimatio ve^ tue virtus
utis, haec to entew induere to eschew effugere to beshrew imprecari male to
continue perseuerare to discontinew desuescere to issew exire to pursew
rersequi to resl ew recuperare to renew renouare to sub^ ^w subligere to balew
aestimare to wynewe ever tilare (...) sk^we limus a untrue non verus adewe
vale aneue denuo. Where note that none of these ending in evv, can ba written
in eve, because a vovv^l follows it, concerning which rule look the note it
aue as is aforesaid. In ewce. a sleuce emissorium i a trewce, league. f^^dus
eris, hoc. In ewge. hewge vastus a, horribilis In ewle. a kewle postonis idis,
haec a rewle regula ae to kewle an horse os obstruere to rewle regere,
gubernare miuewle excessus, luxus us In ewme. the flewme phlegma atis, ho^ ye
rewme rheuma atis hoc a fleume, lance. phlebotomum i In ew^h. rewth dolor
tristitia ae ^^ewth veritas atis, haec untruth error oris, hic

In Er, or Bie desinentia. By, ny^h. iuxta prope By, through per to bye emere,
mercare A bebie pupus, pupa an ^obie, hawk. alandarius whereby quo, quare
herebye hie in proximo thereby. illo medo In eye, or cie. A confederacy
comuratio onis ye supremacye prima^us us gramercye habco gratias a l gacyr
legitio onis piracye piratica ars a prel^cie praelatus us essencie essentia ae
adolescencie adolescentia ae ve^emencie vehementia ae infancy ^^funt^a ae
mercy mis^ricordia ae policye politia ae A prophecy proph^tia ae A monar^hie
monarch^a ae A duchy ducatus us to amercie multare to prophecy prophetare In
dye, or die. to dye, death. mortor ri, obire mor te to dye cloth. t^gere,
imbuere A dye alea ae ^n eye oculus i A ma^adie mor bus i A Ladre domina ae A
cemedy comoedia ae A remecie remedium i A tragedy ^ragedia ae A bedy cor^us
oris, hoc Polypody polipoduem i A custody custodia ae melody melodia ae A
noddy morio onis, hic A st^dy studium ^ A stidye fabrica a to study siudire to
remedy redintegrare, remederi hawdye turpis e blondie ^r^entus a br^udie
foe^undus a ^l^udy nubtius, ^^mbosus ae f^rr^re vadosus a m^uldie mucidus a
fool^^ardy temerarius auda^ a ieopardie periculum e bardy audax bedi^ effroenis
e leadie plumbosus a wealdy firmus, robustus a vnwealdy insirmus, imbecillis
^yddie vertiginosus a greedy cupidus auidus a reedie indignus, ^^ops ready
promptus, paratus sp^dy expeditus a tydye agilis e mutdy l^nosus, luteus a
ruddie rubicundus a woddie syluosus a sandy arenosus a wyndie ventosus a
vn^loudie incruentus a vnredie ^mparatus a sturdye per^icax ye st^rdy vertigo
inis hae^ sturdye sick vertiginosus In fie, or fie. fre hern, vah Cosmography
c^smographia ae orthegraphie orthogrophia ae philosophy philosophia ae to
exemplisye assimulare to amplifye amplificare to bewtifie decorare to cr^ucifye
crucifigere to faisifie falsificare to fortifye fortificare to gratifye
gratificari to iusrifie iustificare to magnifye magnificare to mollifye molline
to mortify mortificare to notify notificare to pacifye pacare to purifye
purificare to putrifye putrifacere to ratifye ratum facere to sanctify
sanctificare to satisfye satisfacere to signify significare to verify
verificare to vnbeautifie dedecorare There be many that end in fie derived of
verbs, compound with facio. In gye, or gie. to gye obliquare ye clergy
claerus ri an apology apologia ae ye lethergic lethargia ae claggye lubricus a
In hye, or hie. hye, or high alt^^s a to hye, have festinare thy, or thine tuus
a why, wherefore cur, quare. worthy dignus na Note also that this word
worthy is the sign of many verbaells in bilis, and of participials in dus, as
in these following. worthy to be loved, amabilis e worthy to be herd audiendus
a In kye, ork ie. kye, or kyne. vaccae arum A lackie pedisequa ae A munkye
caebus i Turkey Tartaria ae hookie hamosus a huskye siliquosus a buskye dumosus
a luckye fanstus a muckye simosus a unlucky infaustus us rocky saxosus a In
lie, or lie. lie for washing lixiuium i to lie, rest. iacere, cumbere to lie,
say false mentiri to fly as a bird volare, volitare. to fly, run away sugere
to glye lippire to plye, apply incumbere to plye, bend flectere sti^, nimble
agilis le slye, crafty astutus a A vellye venture, aluus i A family familia ae
A farlye miraculum li sollie stultitia ae A fyllie equila ae gellie coagulum i
A gallye pha^ellus i A gorbelye hel^uo onis, hic an holy, tree. ilex i^is,
haec an homily homilia ae an hurlyburly commotio onis, haec Italy I^^^a a
Iulic, month Iu^ius i A Lyllie L^lium i Parcelye apium ij A pullie orbiculum i
A rowgalye phacellas i to daily illudere to gellie congelare to mulliplie
mult^plicare to replye replicare beastly bestialis e bodylye corporalis e
cleaulie mundus da comelye decorus a costly sumptuosus a courtlye basilicus a
daily quotidianus a deadlye mortalis le disrulie irregularis e satherly
paternus na motherly maternus na brotherly fiaternus na sisterly sororius a
fleshly carnalis le forcedlye inuitus ta friendly a^icus ca ghostly spiritualis
le grysely horribilis le heavenly coelestis ste holy sanctus cta hougly
horridus da jolly iocundus da kyndly benignus a kingly regalis ^, regius lively
viuus a, vigorosu^ lordely imper^os^s sa lowly humilis le manly vicilis le
manerly ciuilis le misruly enormis me mully pulu^rulentus a nighhtly noclurnus
na only solus la partly part^m pree^tly sacerdotalis le princely principalis le
sylly miserandus da semely decorus ra seely imperiosus sa sightly visibilis le
slonenly sordidus da southly australis ae stately clatus a vgely horridus da
ungodly impius a godly pius a unmannerly inciuilis le unruly irregularis e
unseemly indecorus ra unwisely imprudens unwillingly inuitus ta rightly just
utterly prorsus, omnino weetingly s^iens and prudens wylye subdolus, astutus a
worhemanly artificiosus a worl^ip mu^danus, secularis yeercly a^ nuatim,
qu^ta^nis Partly is also the sign of diminutiues as ad^ectiues: as, partly
read rubicundus a partly fair pulchrellus a. The^e be derived of adjectives,
and have then latin in ellus, ulus, usculus. etc. meetly, mediocriter, is used
also in the same sense that partly: as, m^tly ^ayre, pul^hrellus. etc. There be
also many other ending in ly, perteyning to this place which we omit for
brevity sake, but namely of quality, as these that follow, and such other.
gladly of glad laete, lubenter madly of mad stulie barely of bare nude, iter
rarely of rare raro The english of all which is alvvayes thus ^ourmed by
putting to lie: and the latin is formed of the adiect^^e by turning us into e
as durus dur^ or by putting ter to the first case in ^as duri, dunter etc.
neither does this rule only hold in the positrue degree, but also in the
comparati^e and ^uperlatiue degrees: As of durior, du^ius, hardlyer or more
hardly, of durissimus durissi^^, hardliest, or most hardly. etc. In my. my or
mine meus a an army exercitus us astronomy astronomia ae blasphemy
blasphemia ae an enemy inimicus, hostis a phisonomie effigies ei, haec an
infamy infamia ae clammye tenax, viscosus ae fomye spumosus fumye fumosus
lymye, clam. viscosus ae s^ymye limosus a storm^e procellosus ae wormye
vermicosus a In nigh or nigh. nigh, or nigh prope, tuxtae m^ we^nigh fire, prope
to nie as an horse hinnire armonye armonia ae monye pecunia ae brionie, herb.
bryonia ae a ceremony ceremonia ae a company comitatus ^s company commercium
ij a connye cuniculus, li egryinonye eupatorium destenie fatum i felony furtum
i gluttony gastrimergia ae honye mel, lis, hoc. matrimony coniugiu^ ij,
matrimonium a meany multitudo dinis a patrimony patrimonium a pennye denarium
ij pionie paeonia ae a progenye progenies ei, haec rauenie rapina ae symonye
symonia ae ye styonie sycosis tos, haec a testimony testimonium i tyranny
tyrannis idis, hic Atu^^y fish Thunnus i villainy violentia ae wodpenie
betonica pauli Any vll^s la many multus a bonye scitus, sacetus a fenny
palustris e fernye s^h^osus sa momentany momentancus a raynye pluuiosus ae
raynye pluu^alis le sunny aprocus ae stony saxosus a bony osseus a taunye
baticus a thornye spinosus a wynie vinosus sa In pie, or pie. A pie, bird. pica
ae A pie, meat. arto^rea ae A spy arbiter i, speculator to spy spectare,
obseruare copy copia ae A canopie canopus i popie papaeuer eris, hoc to espy
speculari to occupye occupare happy foelix icis sappie succusus a slepy
somnulentus a A copy exemplar aris, hoc In rye, or rye. rye, corn. rinca ae,
siligo inis, A cry clamor oris, hic A cry, proclamation diuulgatio to cry
clamare, vocifirar. to cry, proclaim proclamare dry aridus a, siccus a ^n
try frigere, ^xi ^o gry obliqu^re oculos ^n p^^e obseruare, inspicere ^o try,
prove probare, tentare (...), fine. desaecare A barbery tree oxo^hanta ae Au
almerie scriniu^, almariolu^. An ^^nnrie armarium i Ari^^larie arma, apparatus
bell licus adu^u^rie adulteriu^ i Ba^^ry lenocinium i beggerie mendicitas atis
(...) carnarium i brothelrie ^enocinium i buggery paederastia ae A h^tt^rie
promptuarium centorie centaurum i Act ery sree cerasus i, haec A chery cerasum
i chiualry militia ae cycorie ambubeia ae, intybu^ Clarye, herb. heraclia ae A
comentarie commentarium i A contributarie contributor A country patria ae,
rus, uris Coelt^rie coquinaria ae Costmary piperitis uidis, hic A dietarie
dictarium i drapery voluta ae A Dr^medarie Dromedarius i an entry additus us,
vestibulu^ an adversary adu^ sarius i an accessarie accessarius a bravery
superbia vestitus A breuiarie breuiarium i bribery ambitus ta A cunnerye
leporarium i dowrye dos otis, haec drabbery meretricium ij drudgerie scruilitas
atis, haec A drumbledarie Dromedarius ij A fayrye faunus i February Februarius
A ferry bote cymba bae A ferie feria ae flatterye adulatio onis A fryerye
monasterium ij fumitorye capnion, fumariae ae A furye furia ae A galerye
porticus us, haec A granarie granarium i geometry geometria ae ye glarye of an
eg albumen in is, hoc glory gloria ae A gooseberrie vua crispa harborie
hospitium ij harlotrie meretricium i an hyndbury rubus idaeus A history
historia ae A hostrye hospitium i A hurtlebery morum ri A mulbery tree morus ri
husbandrye agricultura a huswyuerye lana and tela January Ianuarius ij Jury
Iudaea ae A jury inquisitio duodenaria industry industria ae injury iniuria
ae an introductorie introduxio onis an inventory inuentorium i an itinerarye
itinerium i iuerye ebur oris, hoc A lauatorie lauacrum i A lazarye lepra ae
lecherye libido inis, haec A leprye lepra ae A lybrarye librarium i A lottery
sortilicium i Mercurye mercurialis is, haec ye maistrye victoria ae Mahumetry
ritus mahumeticus ye memory memoria ae midwisery obstetricium i A ministry
ministerium ij misery miseria ae A mysterye mysterium ij A monastery
monasterium ij mockerye ludibriu^, irrisio A mulbery morum ri An oratorie
oratorium i A outlawrye exilium i palmestrie chiromantia ae A pantrie panarium
i. A pastrye pistorium i pellitorie pyretrum tri A pentionarie pensionarius i
penury penuria ae peritorie astericum i perjury periurium i A pillarie
patibulum li poetry poema atis, hoc an apotecarye aromacopola ae poultrie
auiarium ij A prebendary canonicus a A promontorie promontorium A propitiatory
propitiatorium purgatory purgatorium i A quarry latonia ae A repositorie
repositorium rybaudry lenocinium i robberye rapina, praedatio A rosarie
rosarium i rosmary rosamarina nae sauerye cimilago inis, haec A secundarie
secundarius i a sectarie sectarius i a signorie signatorium i a sentuarie
sanctuarium rij a secretary secrarius i a sextry sacrarium i stouenrie
sordities ei, haec soldicurie militia ae sorcerye nicromantia ae a stipendarie
stipe^diarus, mercenarius a story. historia ae a strawbery fragrum gri a
straubery, herb. fragraria ae a sudarie sudarium i a summarie summarium i
surgery chirurgia ae succoury, herb. cichoria ae tapstrye tapetum ti a
territory territorium i a testamentarie testamentarius ij theeuery furtum ti
traytorie proditio onis treachery idem. A tresorie thesaurarium i a tributarie
tributarius i trumperie scruta oru^, obex icis vencrie Venus eris, haec vestrie
vest tarium i victory victoria ae usury vsurae ae, fo^nus eris a whyrry,
boat ponto onis, hic to curry an horse pec^ere to carry portare, vehere to
fary aedere suem to harry depopulari to mary matrimoniu^ co^trahere to vary
variare to tarry operiri, morari to wary, curse execrari, maledicere to miscary
deficere, iierire to fery fertari to bury sepclire to glory gloriari to
injury iniuriari. angrye iracundus a contrary contrarius a defensory
defensorius a accessarie acessarius a cheyrye parcus ca heyry pilosus a dreary
moestus sta fyerye igneus a flowrye floridus da hungry familicus ca every
omnis, quilibet merry hilaris re myerie lubricus a necessary necessarius a
primary primarius a propitiatory propitiatorius a satisfactory satisfactorius a
sauory sapidus a slyppery lubricus a slubbrie idem solitary solitarius a sorry
tristis e, miser a sundry diuersi ae, a ta^rye piceus a transitory
transitorius a varye varius a very verus a unsavory imsipidus a vnvoluntariee
inuitus a voluntary voluntarius waterie aquosus a weary fessus a There be
also diverse other that end in rye here omitted for breu^ties lake, which may
be called a kind of denominatiues, but much differing from the nature of them
in tie or, in nesle, for two causes: first that vvher as those are d^^ued of
adjectives, and formed of the same, as, of grauis, e, heavy. are formed
heaviness or gravity: and of bonus, a, good are formed goodness, or bounty,
for bounty is written for bonity: these contrary in rye are formed of
substantives: as of armor armorie, of draper draperie of slave flauerie, and
such other: secondly by cause that where as the other do signify for the
most part some quality, as the foresaid examples declare, signify either
some place as of harbor harbou rye, hospitman. of coney conyrie, leporarium:
or else some office as of baud baudrye, lenocinium, of beggar beggar beggerie
mendicitas, or else some instrument, as of diet dyetarie, dietarium: of brief
breuiare, breuiarium etc. finally though these be the chief naturs of our
english words in ^^e, yet have we not excluded certain other which come of
adjectives and of verbs, as of brave, bravery, splendour, of flatter flatterye,
adul^tio. But because these be so sevv that they require no rule, we leave them
to be observed, noting this finally that the other in rye, which come of
substantives, have their latin commonly in arium, as the examples declare. In
sie, or sye. a controversy controuersia ae ye droysy hydrops opis, haec the
farsy petimen inis, haec ye fransey mama ae fansy pha^tasma atis, hoc ye frensy
phrenesis, esios, haec heresy haeresis eos, haec hypocrisy hypocrisis ^os,
haec gelosie zelotypia ae a pleu^isie pleuritis, idis, haec a poesre satyra rae
ye swtnsie eynanche es, haeo to fancy admirari, amare busy satagens, intenius
a corsye corpulentus ae horsy raucus a easy facilis le greasye squallidus a
dissye vertiginosus spiffy, massy. spissus a drowste deses idis lousy peau
ulosus a glassy vitreus a grassy graminosus a mosy puber, eris rossy roseus, a.
mossy muscosus, a. p^^sy cardiacus, a. sausy impudens, entis. uneasy
difficiles, e, In tie, or tie. to tie ligare, sigere A stye, for swyne,
porcile, is, hoc A fly musca ae, to fly, as a bird volare to fly, avoid
fugere Amity ami^itia, ae. auncientie antiquitas, atis. antiquity vetustas,
atis. barbaritie barbarics, ei. bewtye pulchritudo inis, bounty bonitas atis.
calamity calamitas atis capacity capacitas atis carnalitie carnalitas atis
chastity castitas atis A cirie ciuitas, atis, haec commodity commoditas, atis
a countye, earl, comes, it is, hic a county, shiere comitatus, us debili. ye
debilitas atis a deyntye delitia arum plenrye copia ae, abunda^tia a deputy
deputatus vicari^^ a duty ossicium, i dewtie debitum i dexterity dexteritas
atis a dignity dignitas atis ebrietie ebrietas atis equity equit as atis a
dittie of a song argumentum, materia eyghtie oclogenta eternity eternititas
atis chieftie primat us us a faculty facultas atis facilitye faculitas atis
fealty fidelitas atis felicity filicitas atis fertility fertilitas atis
fidel^^ie fidelitas atis fraternity fraternitas atis frugalitie fingalitas
atis frumentye frumentum i fumositie fumositas atis gentilitie gentilitas atis
ability sacultas, pote^tia ae humiditie humiditas atis impiety impietas atis
importunity importunitas atis imbecillitie imbecillitas atis infirmity
infirmitas atis iniquity iniquitas atis integrity integritas atis entreaty
persuasio onis i^litie iocunditas atis liberty libertas atis liberality
liberalitas atis le yaltie fid^^tas atis magnenimitie magn^nimitas ti^ ma^estie
ma^estas atis minority minoritas atis ^e essitie necessitas atis nobility
nobilitas atis perpetuity perpetuitas atis possibility possibilitas atis a
pasty pastillum li pos^ie potestas atis pity pietas atis a city vrbs, vrbis,
haec poverty paupertas atis principality praeeminentia ae priuitie consilium
arcanum probitie probitas atis profunditie profunditas, atis prolixitie
prolixitas atis propretie proprietas atis propinquitie propinquitas atis
prosperity prosperitas atis purity puritas atis quantity quantitas atis
quality qualitas atis sacietie satietas atis sagacitie sagacitas atis
severity seueritas atis a suertie vas adis, hic simplicity simplicitas atis
sobriety sobrietas atis superfluity superfluitas atis superiority
superioritas atis tranquillity tranquillitas atis treaty exhortamentum i A
trinity trinitas atis virginity virginitas an university academia ae
vrbanitie vrbanitas atis vanity vanitas atis verytie veritas atis A ^oo^y,
pray praeda dae to empty euacuare to pity miserescere, misereri dirtie
lutule^tus a weighty grauis e, po^derosus sleyghtie callidus da empty vacuus a
deinlie delicatus ae plenty copiosus a bootye particeps cipis sooty
fuliginosus a crusty crustulentus a dustie puluerulentus mustie mucidus da
lusty validus da rusty rubiginosus a trusty fidelis le doughty fortis e boughty
intricatus a boughy ramosus a noughty malus la, vilis le faltie reus a,
culpahilis fif^y quinquaginta shifty astutus, prouidus a clifty fertilis le
thrifty frugi, frugalis le unthrifty infrugi vnshifty improuidus da filthy
foedus, a, turpis e healthy incolumis me pi^hye efficax acis teastie iracundus
da flighty velox, locis mighty p^tens entis sighty visibilis le fortye
quadraginta frothy spumosus a foystye insipidus da frosty pruinosus a goutie
podagricus ca beartie cordatus a hasty, festinus, temerarius a lofty elatus a,
sublimis mystie, mist nebulosus a mysty, mystery mysticus a thrifty sitibundus
da wartie verrucosus sa listy libens entis nynetie nonaginta seventy
septuaginta twenty viginti thirty triginta forty quadraginta sixty
sexaginta nitty culicosus wytty ingeniosus sa petie secundarius a pretty scitus
a, facetus a snotty purulentus a spottie maculosus sa totty vacilla^s, ebriolus
a sweatie desudans antis worthy dignus a unworthy indignus a guilty reus a,
conscius a There be also many other in ^ye, here for breuite sake omitted,
which thou may form when thou vvilt, of this termination, tas, being one
kind of denominatiues, whose english also ends in nesse, of which we have
said in this place before: neither do they differ any thing in sense or
signification, but only in the end or terminacion as these that follow. of
foelicitas, felicity, or happiness of dignitas, dignity, or worthynesse. For
dignity and vvorthynesse be all one: and felicity and happiness be all one:
and soforth in others. Finally in this they only differ, that those in tie are
formed of the latin word, and the other in nesse, are formed of the english
word. In vie, or vye. envy inuidia ae A navy nauigium i a repleuie
repignoratio obloquie obloquium ij to en^ie inuidere to repleuie repignorare
heavy grauis e privy secretus a There be also many other that end in ie, or
ye, formed of substantives, and they be adjectives signifying plenty of that
thing, which the substantives betoken, and they answer to the adjectives in
osus, and in entus, as these that follow. of stone, lapis, stony, lapidosus a.
of bone, os, bony comes ossosus a. of blood, cruor, bloody, cruentus a. of
flood, fluctus, floudy, fluctuosus, a. and they be expounded by the word full,
as saxosus, a, stony, or full of stones, sanguinulentus, a, bloody or full of
blood, etc. These be common to all terminacions in ie, or in ye. I ante B.
In ibbe. A cribbe prasepe is, hoe A ribbe costa ae to bibbe potitare to dibbe,
dip. intingere to libbe, gelde. castrare sybbe ^ognatus a In ibble. A dibble
pastiuum i A kibble baculus li ribbie, river riblia ae to bibble biblere to
nibble with gesticulari the fingers In ibe. A bribe largitio onis, haec A cribe
cribrum i A kybe pernto onis, hic A tribe tribus us, haec to bribe largari,
munerare to cribe cribrare A scribe scriba ae, hic to ascri^e adscribere to
describe describere to inscribe inscribere to prescribe praescribere to
proscribe proscribere to subscribe subscribere. In ible. a Bible Biblion i, hoc
a twyble bipennis is, haec flexible flexilis le horrible horridus da possible
possibilis le impossible impossibilis le credible credibilis le incredible
incredibilis le diuisible diuisibilis le indivisible indiuisibilis le sensible
sensibilis le insensible insensibilis e vendible vendibilis le terrible
terribilis le There are also many of this kind beside these, which are of the
same signification, that those which end in able, but they differ in fo^^^ng.
For those in able, are formed of the english theme: as speakable, effabilis,
eatable, comestilis, le, treatable, tractabilis le: of speak, eat and treat:
but these in ible are formed of the latin theme: as legible legibilis,
e^audible, audibilis le, se^sible, sensibilis le: of lego audio, sentio. etc.
Yet in this they agree, that both of them are derived of verbs: and that they
have both one verb answering to their signification in latin: for both
readable, and legible, signify legibilis le, derived of Lego. And feeleable
and sensible, signify sensibilis of Sentio. etc. In ick quaere in I, ante K.
In ice or ice. ye dice or dies aleae arum Ice glacies ei, haec lyce pediculi
orum mice mures ium, hij a price precium ij rice ^riza ae sice sex a slyce
minutal alis, hoc spice species aromatum a vice player histrio, sannio a vice,
sin vitium a price on the sea praeda a to dice aleas mittere to price
appreciare, aestimare to slyce dissecare to spice condire to rise surgere to
tyce allicere nyce mollis le avarice auaritia ae a chalice calix icis, hic a
benefice beneficium ij a sacrifice sacrificium i a cockatrice basiliscu^ i an
enterprice incoeptum ti a justice iudex i^is Justice iustitia ae malice malitia
ae a marrice palus udis ye matrice matrix i^is an office officium ij Paradise
Paradisus i, haec a practice praxis eos, haec prejudice praeiuditium i service
seruitium i injustice iniustitia ae to despice desthicere to enterprice
attentare to enfranchice manumittere to malice infestare to practice exercere
to prejudice praeiudicare to sacrifice sacrificare to do service seruire In
iche. Ciche cicer eris, hoc A piche corbiculus li A wiche opulus i, haec rich
dives, diuitis to much suffurari an Ostrich Struthio onis, hic to enriche
ditare In ict. to addict addicere to afflict affligere to addict addictus a to
afflict afflictus a In ickle. an article articulus li A particle particula lae
A versicle versiculus li I, ante D.
In idde A kydde hoedus dis, haec ye mid of a thing medium dij to bid iubere
to rid expedire haterid inuidia ae A potlid operculum i ye midridde
diaphragma atis, to forbid interdicere lyquide liquidus da vnkydde incognitus
ta In iddle. A fiddle fidicula lae hydles latebrae arum ye middle medium i A
riddle, fieue cribrum i A riddle, question. problema atis, hoc to fyddle facere
fidicula^ resonare to riddle cribrare to stridle varicaerire In idle. A bridle
fraenum ni to bridle refraenare idle ociosus sa In idge. A bridge pons ontis,
hic A midge muscella ae ye ridge bone spina nae ye ridge of a house culmen a
ridge of ground lira rae to abridge abbreuiare In i would. A bride sponsa ae,
nympha ae A gyde dux ucis, hic, haec an hyde tergus oris, hoc ye ides idus
iduum, hae pride superbia ae A shyde byllet. cala ae A side latus eris, hoc ye
tide accessus maris to bide morari, manner. to chyde obiurgare to gyde deducere
to glyde up ascendere to glyde down descendere to glyde forward prolabi to
hyde abscondore to slide labi to ride equitare side as a long talaris e, longus
a. garment wide amplus a an homicide homicida ae shraftyde caput ieiunij to
betide contingere to divide diuidere to abide operiri, morari. to deryde
deridere to foreryde praecurrere beside, near. propinquus a beside, nigh.
iuxta, prope. hyside, except praeter a side lateraliter I ante F.
In ife. A clif, rock. rupes is, haec A gliffe respectus us to clyffe scindere
to glyffe respicere stif robustus a if si A baylif of an centurio onis, hic
hundred A bailife, reave. villicus a ye playntif quaerulus la neckstiff peruicax
acis pensif moestus a pursif anhelus a cestif stipatus ventre In ift. A clift
scissura ae A drift of snow cumulus li ye drift of a matter actio, scopus A
drift of cattle acumen inis, hoc pecus oris, hoc A drift, betle festuca ae A
gift donum, datum A shift remedium i shrift confessio onis thift furtum ti
thrift frugalitas atis A lift alleuamen A rift ruptura rae A rift, belch ructus
us, hic to lift alleuare to shift from a place remouere to shift, or make
expedire shift to sift cribrare to rift ructare ye fifth quintus a swift velox
ocis In ife. A knyfe cultellus i life vita ae A sheriff praetor prouincialis
strife contentio A wy^e vxor oris, haec ryfe, ready promptus a an huswyfe
matersan^ilias A mydwyfe obstetrix ieis, haet A penknyfe scalpellum i A
woodknif falco onis, hic I ante G.
In igge. big, corn. hordeu^ quadratu^ drigges faeces cum, hae A fig ficus
us, haec, A brigge pons A gygge garrula mulier A nigge parca mulier A pigge
porcellus li A rigge of land sura, ae, porca ye rig of a house culmen ye rig of
a beast dorsum, spina A snig anguillae genus A twig vimen inis, hoc whig, and
whay. idem. serum lactis to big, or build. aedificare A wygge, cake subucula
lae to dig fodere to twig verberare to twygge puture viburna to rigge
lasciuire puellam A nutmig nux myrist icae In igh. A thigh semur, oris, hoc to
sigh sus^^are A sigh susthirium i high altus ta nigh propinquus, a, prope In
ight. A Knight miles itis, hic ye light lux ucis, haec might vis, robur, oris
hoc night nox, noctis, haec plight valitudo inis, haec right ius, iuris, hoc
sight visus us, A wight creatura ae A wright faber lignarius to dight parare,
colere to light, fire accendere to light on horse ascendere to light from horse
descendere to light on one contingere to plight spo^dere, promittere to right
dirigere bright lucidus da light clarus ra right rectus a wight, strong
robustus a foresyght prouidentia ae foreslight prosugium ij A seuenyght
septimanae nae a fortnyght semensis is, hie insight of household supellex
insight of knowledge scientia midnight nox intempestiua oversight negligentia
ae oversight procuratio onis vnbright illucidus da vnlight obscurus a unright
iniustus sta upright aequus a vnwight inualidus dae In igne. A sign signum ni
to sign signare to resign resignare to assign assignare I ante K.
In icke. A brick later eris, hic ye crick, disease episthotonus ni A crick
rima mae A flick succidia ae, lardu^ A nick incisura ae, creua ae A prick
stimulus li A prick, mark meta ae A stick virgula ae A ticke pediculus li A
trick facinus noris, hoc brick to burn lateres coquere to brick recalcitrare
to lick lambere, lingere to nick incidere to pick iaculari to prick stimulare
to be sick aegrotare to stick unto adherere to stick one confodere to trick, or
trim concinnare to trick or trippe. cesthitare quick citus a, agilis ie whick,
alive viuus a, superstes sick aegrotus, infirmus a thick spissus, densus a
trick nitidus a, co^cinnus a arsnick, herb artonicum i A carrick ship. cyrserum
i magic magia ae ye colic colica ae A bolick scortum ti logic logica,
dialectica a an ethnic ethnicus a garlic allium ij music musica ae physic
physica ae ye tisick ptysis is, haec A potstick rudicula ae A candelsti^k
candelabrum i arithmetic arithmetica ae metaphisick metaphysica ae rethorick
rhetorica ae tamerick myrica ae There be diverse other that end in ricke, or
vvicke, signifying offices, which have their latin commonly in atus, or in
ura: as, A bishopric Episcopatus us A bishopwick idem Diocesis is, haec A
baylyrick villicatus us A baylywick villicatura rae braynsicke phreneticus a
ethnicke ethnicus a fran^icke cerebrosus a frensicke phreneticus a logic
logicus a magic magicus a practicke practicus a splensicke sthleneticus a
vntricke inconeinnus a catholic catholicus a apostolic apostolicus a
choleric colericus a fleumaticke fleumaticus a harmonicke harmonicus
lunaticke lunaticus a magnificke magnificus a pleureticke pleureticus a
public publicus a In ickle. A sickle falx dentata A prickle stimulus i A
prickle, sause tharia ae brickle fragilis e fickle futilis e mickle multus a
tickle impatie^s, intactilis sickle valetudinarius a to pickle, flesh condire,
salire to pickle, eat nicely edere minutim to prickle stimulare to stickle in a
matter co^tendere, litigare to tickle titillare to trickle down destillare a
banstickle trachyda ae a chronickle chronicae, orum a conuentickle conuenticula
ae a manickle manicae, arum to manick^e manicis tortare In ickt. an ass^ickt
asslictio, onis a conslickt consli^bus us to ^^^lickt affligere to conflickt
confligere In ike. a dike, or ditch foss^e ae, scrob. obes a pike, prick
ac^leus i ye wike of the eye hirquus i a tyke, dog canis is a pike, for the
ear scalprum i a pike, fish lupus i a strike for measure. hostorium to dike, or
ditch fodere to be like simulare to like, or allow approbare to pike, woll.
etc. carpere to strike ferire, percutere like similis e like sicut, vt, quasi
to mislyke improbare, displicere to public publicare maydenlike virginalis e
manlike virilis e mislike dissimilis e unlike idem motherlike maternus a
fatherlike paternus a brotherlike fraternus a public publicus a womanlike
muliebris e Many other there be that end in ike, here omitted, but namely
adjectives and aduerbes of quality derived of substantives: as of King,
kinglike, regalis, iter, Lord, Lordlike, imperiosus, ose man, manlike, virilis,
viriliter. beast, beastlike, brutalis, aliter. and such other: where note,
that this termination, like, is put for lie, and lie, for like in many places,
but namely in meter. I ante L.
In il. A bil written scriptum, epistola A bil of hand syngraphum i A bil,
staff falx, alcis, haec A dil herb anethum i gils of fish branchiae, arum An
hill collis, is, hic A mil mola ae mil, herb. milium i A pil, medicine.
catapotium i A quil calamus, i. penna A still stillatorium i will voluntas, atis
A will testamentum i A fill saturitas, atis to chil with cold algere to fill
implere to kill occidere, interficere to mil molere to pil and pol depeculari to
pil off bark decorticare to pil of skin deglubere to hill, cover operire,
tegere to spil effundere to still a trouble quietare, sedare to still waters,
concoquere to still down destillare to swil drink ingurgitare to thil
perstringere to til colere, arare to tril circumuertere to will velle to be still
quiescere, tacere chil, cold algidus a gril idem il malus a, perperaem shil or
shirle argutus, canorus, a acutus a still iugis e, co^tinuus a still iugiter il
male basil, herb basilica ae azel acetuus i An anuil incus, udis, haec A maruil
miraculum i marbil marmor, oris, hoc beril, cristal glossum i peril perieulum i
A bittil, ^^ee scarabeus i A tittil apex, icis, hic A caril cautic um i A baril
cadus i Carlil a town Carliolum cheruil, herb tarrefolium i A chesil celtis,
is, haec A devil demon, onis, hic the devil diabolus i A driuil mancipium i An
apple pomum i A stappil capulum i A babble pegma, atis, hoc April aprilis is,
hic bra^bles, briers dumi, rubus, i ye shambles macella, orum A rabil series,
ci A capil caballus, i. hic A bristle s^ta ae A whistle fistula ae A byndle
fasciculus i A spindel fusum i A cavil calumnia ae couples copulae arum A
cople copula ae A stopple obstructorium i A credil crepundia, orum A damsyl
puella, ae A dybbil pastiuum i. a ridle look riddle problema atis, hoc a bedil
lictor, oris ye gargil gurgulio, onis, hic a gyrdil cingulum i a gristil
cartilago, inis, haec ye handil manubrinm i ^ydles latebrae, arum an hirdle
traha ae ye houswil eucharistia ae ye ickles stiria, orum a kettyl ahenum i a
nettyl vrtica ae a kyrtil interula ae a myrtle tree myrtus, i. haec a ladil
rubicula ae lentil lens, entis, haec lyntil of a cart radius i a pin penis, is,
hic ye maysilles variolae, arum a mantill gausape, is, hoc ye middil medium i a
dungil stercorarium i a mungril spurites a a m^^^^hil fumarium i a ^^^kil
concha, ae, haec a mousil fiscella a ^auil vmbelicus i an ousyl, hird merula a
need^l acus, u^, haec a nypil papilla ae a pybble stone calculus i a kyble
baculus i a peckil macula ae an heckyl pecten, inis, hoc a spe^kil macula ae a
pynsil penicillum i ^ynsil, clo^h. intertextus i peril periculum purpil purpura
ae a pnpil pupillus i a saddil ephippium a stadyl ves^igium i a shackil compes,
^des, hic a tackyl retinaculum i a shingil scandula ae ye sniuil mucus i ye
driuil at nose pus, uris, hoc a weuil curculio, onis, hic ye spe^cil
sub^egulaneum i a spe^ kill s^int^lla ae a sprinkil spergillum i a stabil
stabulum i a labil infula ae a s^eepil campanile, is, hoc the siubbil arista ae
r^bbil rudus ^^is, hoc a sweapil partica ae a neapil papilla ae a tabil mensa,
tabula ae a sabil appendix icis, haec the tables to play tessare, tesserarum
the lables of a miter insulae arum a tasil virga pastoris a tauil liciatorium i
a thymbil digitale is, hoc a wymbil terebrum i a thyuil rubicula ae a throttil
guttus uris, hoc a throppil idem, iugulum a tirdil rudus eris, hoc an birdil
caula ae a titil titulus i a tittil apex icis, hic treakil theriaca ae the
trebbil part triplex icis a trendil rota ae a thistil carduus a a tristil
tripes edis, hic a trifill nuga ae troubil turbatio onis, hic a twybil bipennis
i, haec a vigil vigilia ae an vnkil auunculus i, paternus a wesil mustela ae an
hasil corylus i, hic to anil ad nihilare to desil, neutre stupere to destil,
act. perstringere to addil demerere to maddil delirare to ambil tolutare to
crambil reptitare to babil garrire to brabil idem, multu^ loqui to iabil idem
to bibil biblere to cauil calu^niari, cauillari to toppil copulare to crimbil
micare, minuere to trimbil tremere, to destil destillare to fulfill adimplere to
donbil duplicare to soupil macerare to do evil malefacere to faffil balbutire
to maffil rudere to fumbil ineptire to rumbil tonitare to stumbil titubare to
tumbil volut are to gargil gargarizare to gingil tinnire to tingil idem to
handil tractare to dandil mulcere to iuggil fascinare, praestigiari to kindil
accendere to mangil laniare to iangil garrire to maggil mactitare to mingil
miscere to muffil, the face velare to ruffil magnifice grassari to meddil
mediari to mumbil balbutire to nestil nidulari to wrestil luctari to prattil
gannire to rattil tonitare to rifil inuertere to stifil suffocare to sadil
ephippiu^ insternere to swadil fusciare to resembil simulare to sembil
simulture to trembil tremere to settil considere to fettil componere to shingil
scandulare to swingil, hemp verberare to shuffil confundere to soupil sopire,
linire to strangil suffocare to intangil illaqueare to wrangil cauillare to
rankill putrescere to sparkil scintillari to sparpil segregare to sprinkil
spergere to wrinkyl plicare, rugas co^tra here to triisle nug as agere to
stathil mingere equum to swathil fasoys inuoluere to striddil varicari to ridle
cribrare to throtil suffocare to thropple idem. iugulare to tickil titillare to
prickle stimulare to typpil potitare to ripple rescindere to titil intitulare
to pickil sallere to trickil destillare to treubil turbare to whistil fistula
modulare camunril camomilla ae A da^^^^il anthercum i A d^^ngil latomia ae an
epistil epistola lae an exampil exemplum i an Apostil apostolus li A crocodil
crocodilus li A Discipil discipulus li heny suckle locusta ae A periwinkil
cochlea ae A pinnakl pinnaculum li A principil principium i A sowthistle
cicerbita ae A spectakle spectaculum li A tabernakil tabernaculum i tormentil
heptaphillon A triangil triangulus li a quadrangil quadrangulus li a versickil
versiculus li docil docilis le facil facilis le fertile fertilis le gentil
benignus ae hiunbil humilis le idil ociosus a littil paruus a brittil fragilis
e myckil, much multus a sickil valetudinarius a nobil nobilis e rakyl insolens
entis soupil lentus a stabil stabilis e steril sterilis le subtle subdolus la
suttil idem. astutus a tickil titillenus na flexibil flexiblis, le horribil
horridus da impossibil impossibilis le incredibil incredibilis le indiuisibil
indiuisibilis e inuiolabil inuiolabilis e newfangil nouorum cipidus po^tbil
possibilis le semblabil simil^s le so^ubil solubilis e vngentil immitis e
vtensile vtensilis le Note, that ofrtimes ble, is written for bil, dle, for
dil, fle, for fill, gle, for gil, kle, for kill, ple, for pil, sle, for fill, tle,
for til, ule, for uil. And these for the other again indifferently as amble,
or ambil. sadle, or sadil. stisle, or stifil pigil, for pigil: verbasculum
gargle, or gargil muskie, or musk il. staple, or stapil hastle, or hastil.
hasle, or hasil. title, or titil. taule, or tauil, etc. Wherefore, if ye find
not in the one of these seek in the other and ye shall not miss. More over,
this termination bil, answers in english, commonly to the adjectives in
bilis, as we have said in the terminations able, and ible, for which, the
termination bil is put, look in the other In ilch. Milch, milk. lac, lactis,
hoc to milch mulgere to silch, steal surripere to filch, beat fustigare to
pilch, miche. suffurare In ilde. A child puer, eri, hic A field ager i, hic
mylde blandus da wild ferus ra This terminacion, idle, is oftymes in meter put
for participles in idle, as, fylde, for field, tyld, for tyled, but I think,
that they should be written in yield: as defield, for defiled: begielde for
begyled, etc. In ilte. ye hilt of a sword. manubrium ij A quilt culcitra ae A
stilt grallus li bilt aedificatus a This termination, ilte, is also often
written for participles in, illed, with double, II, as fillde, for filled:
spilt for spilled: kylte, for killed, and such other. A filth, drab scortum ti
ye filth at nose pus uris, hoc ye silth of a wound lues is, hoc fylth dirt
situs us, lutum ti stilth, furtum ti tilth, tillage. agriculturae a In i will. A
bile vlcus eris, hoc A file lima ae A gyle dolus li A kyle bilis is, haec A
mile milliarum i A pile strues is, haec A sile colum li A style formula ae,
stilus, i A style at an hed^ scabellum li A tyle tegula ae A wyle astutia ae an
I Will insula ae to fyle, foil deturpare to fyle limare to syle, milk. colare
lac. to will persuadere vile vilis le exile exilium lij A gentile gentilis le
to defile deturpare to exile in exilium agere. to compile compilare to concile
conciliare to reconcile reconciliare to revile expostulare servile seruilis le
vtile vtalis le somewhile aliquando otherwhyle aliquando erwhyle dudum, nuper.
I ante M.
In im. ye brim of a cup labrum, ripa ae an himne hymnus ni A limb membrum bri
to climme scandere to diunne obscurare to skimme despumare to swim nalare to
trin^ concinnare dymme obscurus ra grymme horridus da him illius i, illum, in
obliquis trumme nitidus, concinnus vntrym inconcinnus i A hosym sinus us, hic
margerim amaricus i ye migrim hemecrania, ae A panym ethnicus a A pilgrym
peregrinus ni venim venenum ni to venym venenare In imble. A thymble digitale
is, hoe A wymble terebrum i to crimble comminuere to trimble tremere nymble
agilis le In impe. an impe surculus i A shrimp squilla ae A Nyinphe Nympha ae
to himp surculare to limp claudicare In imple. A wymple focale is, hoc a pimple
pupula ae simple simplex ici^ In i am. A lyme lithocolla lae a clyme clima atis,
hoc a chyme of belles classicum i fyme simus i lyme for birds viscum i lyme,
burnt calx, calcis, haec ye pryme aureus numerus ye pryme, time ver, veris, hoc
a ryme metrum, rithmus i slyme limus mi time tempus oris, hoc to crime
criminari to gryme criminari to lyme gypsare to lyme birds inuiscare aues to
ryme metrificare, versificare a pastyme recreatio to pastyme recreare I ante N.
In inn. a binne scriniu^, vimineum a chinne mentum ti dynne, noise. ^lamor,
sonus, ni a fynne of fish pinna nae a ginne machina ae a grinne pedica ae an
Inn hospitium, diuersoriu^ a kin cognatio, tribus us linne, linen linteu^ a
pin for clothes acicula ae a pin of iron spinthrum i a pin for a wall clauus i
a shin tibia ae sin peccatum ti ye skin of a man cutis is, haec ye skin of a
sheep pellis is, haec ye skin of a beast tergus oris, hoc a skin tawed aluta
ae a skin tanned corium i Tin stannum i a whin rhamnus i twins abies ei,
haec gemelli orum to blinne desistere to grin ringere to pin configere to
sin peccare to skin cutem inducere to spin nere to twyn seiungere to win
vincere thin gracilis e, tenuis e in in a Bodkin pugiunculus a dodkin hilum i
a damsin prunum i nor a dodkin ne hilum, nihilum an ermin, mouse. scytala ae a
termin, bound. terminus ni a by nkin, bird terran^ola e a bunkin, fellow
batauus, strigo, onis a buskin cothurnus ni a bramlin, bird. montifrugella ae a
bu^win, bird. capella ae a cousin cognatus ta a coffin, chest capsa ae a
coffyn, pie artocrea ae an engine machina nae famine fames is, haec a Delphine,
fish. Delphin, inis, hie ye fore skin praeputium i a fruskin saltus, us A
gryffin Gryps, ypis, hic A iauelyn lancea ae A ierkin tunicella ae A kemelin
sinum i A kytchin culina ae A kylderkin semicadium i A laykin, babie crepundia,
orum lattin aurichalcum A malkin panniculus i A marlin alietus i A myddin
fimarium i A napkin mantile, is, hoc orpin telepinum i A porkin porcellus i A
porpin histrix, icis, haec A poppin oscillum i rosin resina ae A puddin fartum
i seasin possessio, onis vermin vermis, is, hic A virgin virgo, inis, haec A
werdin volemum i the welkin, air aura, ae: aer, eris, hic wodbin periclimenon
i to imagine imaginari, machinari to begin incipere In inche. a binch scannum,
subsclliu^ a chince parcus a a finch, bird achantis, itis, hic an inch vncia ae
stinch fo^ter, oris, hic to clinche clingere, stringere to linche claudicare to
pinche premere, vrgere to stinche foetere to winche calcitrare to mince minuere
to rince deluere to wince calcitrare a bulfinche, bird ribicilla ae a cafinche,
bird frugella ae a goldfinch, bird carduelis, es haec In inde. a kind genus,
eris, hoc the mind men's, entis, haec the rind, of bark cortex, icis, hic the
wind ventus i to bind ligare, vincere to grind molere to mind meminisse,
inte^dere to find inuenire, reperire to wind insinuare, colligere blind
caecus ae kind humanus a mankind genus humanum, humanitas withwind, herb
cassutha ae wedbinde periclimenon i behind pone, posterus ae poreblinde lippus
a sandblinde idem stoncblinde caecus ae the hurlewinde turbo, inis, hie hodeman
blind, play. mya ae In ing. a bing scrinium, vimineu^ a king rex a ring annulus
ling, or heath erix, erice, es a sling funda, tormentum a spring sons, ontis,
hic, origo a string chorda ae a thing res, ei, haec, eus a sting aculeus, i^
stigma, atis a wing ala ae to bring afferre, apportare to fling iacere, mittere
to ging tinnire to cling clingere to hing, hang pendere to sing cantare, canere
to spring oriri, crescere to thring artare, stringere to ting tinuire to wring
torquere, tortare a chyttering omasum i a chitterling idem a darling electus,
a, charus, a banning maledictio: imprecatio the dawning diluculus i a driueling
scraptia ae a duckling anaticula ae ye dripping of roast liquamen, inis, hoc a
dwelling habitatio, onis ye evening vespera e ye euesing suggrundiatio birding
aucupium i cunning peritia ae a farthing semiobalus i fauning adulatio, onis
flattering assentatio a flemming t^utonus i forewarning praemonitio a frankling
libertus, us, municeps a gelding spado, onis, hic a gosling anserculus i ye
grasing of cloth^ sublitio ye grasing of catel pastio, onis an herring halec,
is, haec a lawing vpupa ae the morning aurora ae a merling fish merula ae
nothing nihil An offspring proles, is, haec paynting pictura ae A poppling
populus, i, hoe A pudding furtum i winning, gains lucrum i wynning victoria ae
A wonning habitatio iutting proiectus a A wageling mercenarius ae A whyting,
fish merula ae A wylding arbutum i Awedding nuptiae, arum agreing co^ueniens.
co^gruus a being existens, entis bowing lentus, a^slexilis ae cunning gnarus,
peritus, a^ fauning blandus a flourishing floridus ae groufling pronus a
headling praeceps, itis according secundum, iuxta lasting permanens, entis
nilling nolens, inuitus a willing volens, spontaneus a ontaking capax, acis
unbelieving incredulus a vnbragging inglorius a uncunning imperitus a unknowing
inscius, ignarus a vnliking displicitus a vnleuing inamicabilis e vnsustering
impatiens, entis vntrembling intrepidus a vnwauering immotus a vnw^ting ins^us
a unwilling muitus a believing credulus a bragging gloriosus a knowing conscius
a suffering patiens, entis trembling trepidus a wavering ins^abilis e edgling
cesan Belonging: pertinens, spectans: Belonging, is also the sign of
adjectives passiues, as, belonging, the garden, hortensis, belonging the field,
agrestis. The like is to be thought of this word perteynyng, pertinens,
spectans, as perteyning to my father, paternus, a, perteyning my mother,
maternus. etc. There be also certain nounes ending in ling, here to be formed,
when ye will, as. Gosling of goose, anserculus i duckling of ducke,
anaticulus i porkling of porke, porcellus i These be diminitiues, and may be
expounded by this sign little, as gosling, or little goole, porkling or little
porke And their Latin ends for the most part in, ulus, or in ellus, as,
anserculus porcellus etc There be also many other that end ining, here not
expressed, ebecause they may be derived out of verbes three manner of vvayes
when ye will, after this fore, ^^d participles of the present ^^uies, as
loving, teaching, reading, of love, teach read by putting to (ing) whose ^atine
is easily formed or the gerund in, d^, by turning di into, was, amand^, anians,
doc^nd^, doc^^s, legen^h, legens etc. 2 The second kind is of the gerund^s
o^^e^bs, as amand^ of loving, do^^endi of rec^ing, legedi of reding. 3 The
third kind is of nounes verbals, whose Latin ending in, io, or us is formed
of the larter supme, as, loving, amatio, onis, baec, of amatu, teading, lectio,
onis, haec, of lectu, hearing auditio, onis, haec, auditus, us, doing actio,
onis, haec, actus, us, hic. Of al these kinds the english is one, but the
Latin is diverse, as the examples declare In ink. ye brink of a river ripa ae,
labrum drink potus us, hic A chincke rima ae, hiatus us A link, torche
lichnus i, hic A link, chain vinculum i A sink cloaca ae, sentina a stink
foetor oris, hic ink atramentum i to drink bibere, potare to link
concatinare to shrink cedere, contrahi to sink descondere to swinke desudare,
inuigilare to stink foeteri to think cogitare to wink conniuere a periwinke
cochlea ae to bethink cogitare to forthinke poenitere In inkle. a periwynkle
cochlea ae a sprinkle spergillum i strinkle idem a wrinkle ruga ae to sprinkle
spergere to twynkle conniuere, nictare to wrynkle rugare In inct. to distinct
distinguere to extinct extinguere distinct distinctus ae extinct extinctus a In
int. a dint impetus us calamint calamintha ae asquint obliquus a In inc. brine
salsugo, inis, haec ye chine of a beast spina ae an hine villicus i kine
vaccae, arum a line linea ae a mine fodina ae a shrine statua ae, ossuariu^ i a
sign signum i a serine scrinium i a swine porcus i a vine vitis, is, haec wine
vinum i to dine prandere to line clothes duplicare to pine away tabescere to
shine lucero to sign signare to twine contorquere to mine suffodere to whine
vociferare vt canis to wrine vociferare, vt poreus mine meus ae nine nouem
thine tuus a a brygantine catascopium i a concubine concubina ae carrine
cadauer, eris, hoc a dyuine theologus i eglantine cynorrodos i discipline
disciplina ae doctrine doctrina ae an engine machina ae a medicine medicina ae
sauine, herb sabina ae celendine, herb chaelidonia ae ruin ruina ae
turpentine terebinthina ae the matines matutina officia to declyne declinare to
d fine definare to divine, guess diuinare to enter^yne interponere to inclyne
inclinare to medicine mederi to undermine supplantare to untwine retractare,
retorquere. I ante P.
In ippe. a chippe assula a, fragmentu^ a drippe, drop gutta ae ye hippe
coxendix icis, haec A lip labuim bij A nippe compressio onis ye pippe pituita
ae A quippe flagellum li A skrippe pera ae A slip lorum ri ye tippe of a
staff ferretum ti ye tip of my finger extremitas A tip, sheep. aries etis, hic
to dip intingere to drip destillare to nip we fingers comprimere to nip, taunt.
arguere to quip flagellare to rip resuere, rescindere to slip labi to sip
sorbillare, pitissare to ship nauigare to skip exultare to clip sheep tondere
to clip embrace ampl^^^i to clip, name. nominare to strip denudare to tip
aerare to trip caespitare A collip cremium ij cowslip herb herba paralysis A
g^ssip compotrix icis friendship amicitia ae A princeship princ^patus us A
lordeship dominatio onis A lordship, town praedium i A parsnip partinaca ae A
wardship tutela ae worship honor, dignitas cous^^ip (...) cognatio, affinitas a
deacenship diaconatus a A phillip talitrum i A ^llabe syllab^ ae fellowship
s^dalit^um i ma^stership magisic^tum ij niggarship ten^^itas atis ye
ques^orship quaestura rae A reteynership chentela lae A stewardship oeconomia
ae workmanship artificium ij Egypt Aegiptus ti to syllip talitrum infligere to
ouership praeterire, omittere There be also many other, that end in, ship,
signifying arts or offices, and be derived of substantives, as are these
following. maiorship of mayor, maioratus us baylyship of bailey, villicus us
byshopship of bishop, episcopatus us The latin of these for the most part
ends either in atus, us, of the fourth decle^son, as the examples declare: or
else in ura,, of the first decle^son, as prlatura, ^e, praetura, qua stura,
etc. In iple. A criple claudipes ides A principle principtum ij A Disciple
discipulus li A manciple princerna nae A participle participium ij to tipple
potitare to sypple sorbillare ye Eclypse eclipsis ios, haec In ipe. A Grrpe
Gryps, ipis A pype fistula lae a snype this, is, haec ye gripe of a hand pugnus
i, manipulus to grype palmare to pipe fistulare to ripe maturare ripe maturus
ra to wype tergere to type a ball. profligere In irre. fur abies ei, haec
mirre myrrha ae a blirre deceptio onis to blirre fallere to flirre and laugh
ridere A gird, fit actus us, passio a gird, veheme^ce impetus us a bird auis
is, volucres is to gird cingere, stringere, In irke. hirk, or irk. taedium i A
kirk, church templum i to hirk, pigere, taedere mirke, dark. obscurus
ratenebrosa ae In irkle. a cirkle circulus, li, zona ae an half circle
hemieyclus i ye circkle round orbis, sphaera ae ye cirkle of cancer, tropicus
ca^cri ye circle of capricorn, tropicus capricorni ye cirkle meridional,
meridionalis e ye cirkle equinoctial, equinoctialis e. In irle. A girl ancilla
ae, puella ae A whyrle spondilus li to birle promere, haurire to whirle
circu^agere, vertere toruare, rotare In irme. firm firmus a to firm firmare,
stabilire to affirm affirmare to confirm confirmare In irne. a chirne fidelia
ae to chirne creare butyrum In irt. a birt, fish rhombus i dirt lutum ti In
irth. a birth natiuitas, partus us a girth cingulum li. In ire. a byre,
cowhouse bouile is, hoc fire ignis is, hic hyre merces edis, haec ire, anger
ira ae, s^ror mire fumus i, lutum a a shyre comitatus us an empire imperium ij
to aspire aspirare to enquire inquirere to enquire requirere to inspire
inspirare an esquire armiger eri, hic I ante S.
In isse. bliss beatitudo inis, hae^ a kiss osculum li a miss delictum,
error. piss lotium, vrina. A creuisse, fish. cammarus i to hiss sibilare to
kiss osculari to miss delinquere, errare to piss mingere his suus a amiss
perperam iwisse seen, scilice^ In ishe. A dish of meat fir^ulum li A dish, for
meat patina ae fish piscis is, hic A glish coruscatio A rish iuncus i A plish
picula ae A wish optatum ti to fish piscari to glish corruscare to wish optare
A skermish velitatio, turbatio A blemish labes is, haec A buirish tropice es,
hic an anguish angustia ae flourish germen inis, hoc a garnish of peuter patinae
A mauish, bird turdus i A pumishe, glass pumex icis, haec A radish root
rhaphanus ni vernish encaustum A warish callus i, hic to admonish maculare to
abolish abolere to accomplish perficere, complere to diminish diminuere to
famish fame perire, pdere to finish finire to cherish indulgere, mulcere to
flourish flerere to frubbish fricando polire to furnish exornare, to lavish
largiri to lavish rapere, viciare to anguish angustare to languish languere to
mynish minuere to monish monere to nourish nutrire to punish pumicare to vanish
euanescere to vanquish euincere to brandish vibrare to pattish pacisci to
perish perire to polish polire to empouerish depauperare to publish publicare
to relinquish relinquere to replenish replere to vernish encaustare to warish
occallescere to punish punire apish simialis e babish puerilis e boyish
puerilis e coyish lasciuus a bookish studiosus, librosus blockysh stupidus a
cockish salax acis carlish rusticanus a chyldish puerilis e churlish inhumanus
a currish caninus a coltish effrenus ne doltish stupidus da cowish vaccinius a
sowish suillus a clownish rusticus a, agrestis bownish rudis e clayish
latulentus a cowardish timidus da diuillish diabolicus a fyerish feruidus,
igncus a doggish caninus, inuidus foggish pinguis e hoggish porcinus na English
Anglicus a Irish Hybernicus a dankish vuidus, nebulosus foolish fatuus a
glewish glutinosus sa bluish subcaruleus a newish recentulus, nouitius. Jewish
Iudaicus a gotish caprinus na dotish delirus ra barrish leporinus na hellish
infernalis le fellish montanus a knauish peruersus sa lumpish tardus a,
stupidus a momish mimicus, bardus Romish Romanus na niggish parcus ca riggish
licentiosus a niggardish tenaculus la peakish mimicus a sneakish bardus a,
mimus peuish prauus a theuish furax acis petish effraenis e, iracu^dus rammish
hircosus a, olidus a saltish salsulus a serwish imperiosus a sheepish ouinus a
shrimpish pusillus a sluggish languidus a sluttish sordidus a snakish anguinus
a snappish argutus a swamish inaudaculus wolfish lupinus a sleepish somnulentus
a lympish claudus a There be many in ishe beside these, namely of two sorts:
the one derived of substa^tiues, the other of adjectives, and both be
adjectives diminutiues, signifying some affection, inclination or degree of the
primitive: as of water, aqua, comes vvaterish, or somevvhat watery, aqueus,
aquaticus, a: of red rubeus, a, comes reddish, rubicundus, da. etc. These be
also put often for those in ie, whose latiue end in, osus, and entus, as
aforsayde, as slepyshe or full of sleep, sleepy, somnulentus, ta. etc. The
Latin of these end in eus, ellus, or ulus. In isme. A scisme schismus, mi
baptism baptismus A sophisme sophisma atis, hoc an exorcisme exorcismus mi
There be diverse other, that do end in isma, are derived of latin words and
greek words, in isma, and inising, and they be of three fortes. ^ The first
is of the common speech, as these aforesaid: The second be taken of a country
o^ language, as of latin latinisme, latinismus, 1, Greek, Graecisme,
Graecismus, 1, Haebrew, Hebraisme, haebra^smus, i, Barbary, barbarism,
barbarismus, i, laconie, laconisme, laconismus, i, atticke atticisme
Atticismus, i. Britannie, Britanisme, Bri^a^ismus, i. Scotte, Scotilme,
scotismus, i, and many other. The third, is of sects and factions, vvho^ we
call after the masters and beginners of opinions and doctrines, as of pape,
papisme, papismus, 1. Luther, Lutheramsme, Lutheranismus, Ariane, Atianisme,
Aranismus, i. Calvin, Caluynisme, Caluinismus, i. Plato, Platonisme,
Platonismus, and such other sects, the folovvers vvherof do end in is it, as,
Baptiste baptista, ae, hic, ^ophiste, sophista, latiniste, latinista.,
iaconiste, laconista papiste, papista, ae, Platoniste, Platonista, ae, and such
other, as many or mo as end in isme: for commonly they have both one
primitive: the first, signifying the sect it self, tongue, or manner of
people, and the latter beetokening him, that either is good and canning, or
else is studious and earnest in the same. In iste. A fiste pugnus i ye list of
cloth fimbria ae ye miste nebulae arum to list libere A colligioniste
collegionista ae, hec A confessioniste confessionista ae, hic A exorciste
exorcista ae, hic A questioniste questionista ae, hic A psalmiste Isalmista ae,
hic A sophiste sophista ae, hic Many other end in, iste, concerning which,
look the note of isme, as aloro to assiste assistere to consiste consistere to
desisee desistere to persiste persistere to resist resistere In istle. A
bristle saeta ae A gristle cartilago, inis, haec A thistle carduus i A tristle
tripes, edis, hic A whystle fislula ae A southistle ^^erbita ae to whystle
fistula modulari grysse color glauculus a In ise. A gyse ritus, us, mos, oris
A guyie idem to rise surgere to ^^se taxare anise, herb anetum i A divise
inue^tio, machina ae ye iandise aurigo, inis, haec lattise canc^lli, orum
licorise glycirriza ae A mainpryse vadimonium i merchandise mercatura ae A
mortyse cumphus i A nouise neophitus i A premise premissum i A promise prouisum
i A surmiso figmentum i A enterprise incoeptum i A quentise modus, mos
insolitus to decise decidere, discutere to devise diuidere, excogitare to
advise aduertere, deliberare to canonise canonizare to circumcise circumcidere
to disgyse commutare to exorcise exorcizare to intise allicere to maynprise
vadimonio obstringere to manumise manumittere to patise pacisci, conspirare to
promise promittere to recognize recognoscere to solemnise celebrare to surmise
comminisci, fingere likewise similiter otherwise aliter thiswyse sic, hoc modo
rightwyse iustus a I ante T.
In it. a bridle bit chamus i a bit buccella ae, minutal a brit, fish rhombus i
a fit of a story pars, artis, haec a fit of a play actus, us a fit of
sickness passio, onis git, herb nigella ae grit for scouring scrobs, obis it
illud, id, istud a kit, a little vessel cantharus i fidelia, ae a knit lens,
endis, haec a nit idem a pit puteus i a slit scissura ae a spit veru, u,
obelus, i a titmose, bird todus i a tit. little jade equulus, equulae a whyt
hilum i wit ingenium i A writ scriptum i chits, pulse lenticula ae to flit from
a place migrare to flit, straw plicare to git, get acquirere to git, be get
gignere to hit tangere, attingere to knit nectere to quit rependere to sit
sedere to slit discindere to spit transfigere fit aptus a Fit, is also a sign
of verbals in bilis, and of participials in dus: as, fit to be loved, amabilis
e fit to be red, legendus a fit to be done, faciendus a fit to be said,
effabilis e a condit aquagium i a fleabit morsus culicis ye forewrit titulus,
prescriptu^ an habit habitus, us a hermit heremita ae a limit limes, itis, hic
a meritit meritum i nowhit ne hilum, nihil a pulpit scabellum, pulpitu^ a luit,
lapwing vpupa ae puit phalaris, idis, hic vomit vomitus us to acquit rependere
to admit admittere to commit committere to omit omittere to permit permittere
to disherit exhaeredare to habit habitare to inhabit inhabitare to inherit
haereditare to inhibit inhibere to limit limitare to merit demereri to profit
pro^icere, prodesse to prohibit prohibere to acquit parpari refer to vomit
vomere to exhibit exhibere out of wit insanus amens unfit ineptus a In iche.
A bitche canicula ae ritche cicer eris, hoc A ditche fossa ae A fitche vicia ae
ye itche purigo inis, haec ye stitch dolor, lateris a stitch in sowing ictius
us A knitch of wood fascis is haec pitche pix icis, hic A witch fascinatrix
icis A wrytche miser ae A flitch suc^idia ae to ditche fodere, sepire to itch
prurire to stitche acupingere to bewitche fas^mare In ith. a with restis is,
hic, haec a writh cesticillus a rigwith dorsualis is hoc ye tugwith traha ae,
helcinum i with cum forthwith actutum, mox a kith, or kin cognatio a smith
faber serrarius In ittle. a tittle apex icis, hic a bittle scarabeus i Little
look little and seek all the other in, itle, in ill. In ite. a byte morsus us,
rictus a kyte miluus i a ^yte, or little parum i a myte, vermin curculio onis,
hie a myte of money minutum i a suyte this is, haec spite inuidentia ae plite
plight habitudo inis to byte mordere to dryte, for shyte cacare to flyte, chyde
fligere, iurgare to cite citare to lyte or trust fretus esse to quyte par pari
refer to shyte cacare to smite percutere, serire to spyte inuidere to thwite
excidere to wite culpare to write scribere lite, or littil paruus a white albus
a tite, quick cito as tite quam cito, tam cito ye appetite appetitus, us
dispite despectio, inuidia An hypocrite hypocrita ae Aleuite leuita, ae,
diaconus A margarete margarita ae A parasite parasytus i A spirit spiritus i
to delight delectare to endyte dictare to inuit inuitare to recite recitare,
recensere to requite reddere, rependere to incite incitare to solicit
sollicitare exquisite exquisitus a infinite infinitus a perite peritus a
partyte partitus a bipartite bipartitus a tripartite tripartitus a
quadripartite quadripartitus, us In ythe. blythe, merry blandus, a: alacris
lythe, calm serenus a a sithe falx foeniseca swythe oeyus to kythe, acknowledge
agnos^ere to lythe, he rke aus^ultare to tithe de^^mare In itle. A little parum
i A title titulus i to title inscribere little paruus a The word little is
also the sign of diminitiues, as these derived of substantives A little king,
regulus i A little book, libellus i A little man, homunculus i A little woman,
muliercula ae A little fly, muscella ae and such other, whose Latin ends
in, vlus, ellus, vla, ella, ae. etc. I ante V.
In iue. chiues caepulae, arum ciues idem gyues manicae, arum an hiue alueus i
a syne cribrum i A shiue of bread sectio panis A strive certamen, inis, hoc to
diue vrinare to drive agere, vrgere to give compedire to hiue in aluum
colligere to live viuere to prive priuare to riue, eat. rumpere to shiue
dissecare to sliue, tear. disrumpere to strive certare to thrive prosperare to
wiue vxorem ducere to shriue confiteri endive, herb. intybus i a captive ca^
tiuus a an abortiue abortiuum i a disjunctive disiunclina co^iunc. a fugitive
prosuga ae a relative relatiuum i a prerogative praerogatiuum i to deprive
depriuare to descriue describere to atchieue persicere to arrive appellere to
captive captiuare to derive deriuare to retriue retrudere to revive
reuiuificare defective defictiuus a intentive intentus a excessive excessiuus a
active ac^iuus a native natiuus a primative primatiuus a captive captiuus a
procliue proclinis ue There be many other in iue, derived out of verbes,
whereof some signify actiuely, as affections which move, and othersome
passiuely, as affected with some thing: the next following be actiues and such
other. defensive defensiuus, defe^sorius demonstratiue demonstratiuus
exhortatiue exhortatiuus a disjunctive disiunctiuus a exclusive exclusiuus a
infectiue infectiuus a inuentiue inuentiuus a laxatiue prou ^^ans aluum
nominative nominatiuus a perspectiue perspectiuus a pingatiue purgatiuus a
putrifactiue putrifactiuus a stopefactiue stupefactiuus a Th^se following, and
such other, do rather signify passiuely: as incostiue stipatus ventre costiue
stipticus a veriuatiue deriuatiuus a figurative figuratiuus a fugitive
sugitiuus a positive positiuus a possessiue possessiuus a Finally these in ine,
can not be written in ivve, for the causes recited in the termination aue, if
thou doubt, look there.

In O, desiuentia.
In O. A do dama ae, haec A fee hostis, immicus a A ree buck, dorcas adis, hic
A ree do capraea ae A toe digitus pedis woe dolor, tristitia ae A sloe
^^incolu^, prunellu^ li A shhooe calceus i an horse shoe solea ae ye echo echo
to do agere, facere to shoe calceare to go ire, vadere to fordoe abolere to
forgo amittere to misdoe iniuriari to undo perdere blo, blackblew. liuidus da
more plures ra two duo ae, o, fro a, ab, abs, hoe reuocantis vox est, lo ecce
no non, nullus la so sie tho, though si, licet to ad, vsque unto ad, vsque,
donec. ^otoo nimis, valde to and fro huc illucque whereto quorsum hitherto
hactenus, hucusque In ob. a bob of flowers floretum i a bobbe of leaves
frondetum ti a blob on ye water bulla ae a knob on a tree callus, bruscum In
oble. noble nobilis le a noble aureus i unnoble ignobilis le In obe. a robe
pallium, stola ae a globe globus by ye astrolobe astrolabium i O ante C.
For them in ocke, look in O ante K. In oche. a broch veru ru, hoc a reproach
opprobrium i to coce cambire to imdoche insoulpere to encroch intercipere to
reproach vituperare O ante D.
In odd. a clodde, clot gleba ae a codde, fish. capito onis, hic a codde
cushion puluinar aris, hoc God Deus, dei a rod virga ae a sod, turse cespes
itis, hic a todde, weight. sexdecim pondo a trod, path callis is, haec ye codde
of a beast scortum, coleus ye codde of peason siliqua ae a wood lucus i wood
lignum i to codde peason siliquas legere to podde, or porre pungere to nodde
nutare shodde calceatus fodde coctus, elixus a odd impar aris, hoc a metrod
partica ae a synod synodus i, haec In oode. blood sanguis, inis, hic a flood
flumen inis, hoc food esca ae, cibus i an hoode cuculus i, hie a mood, mind
animus mi A mood modus di ye ^oode crucisixus i stood stabam, as, at. good
bonus na wood ferus a, furibu^dus a falsehood perfidia, fallacia knyghthood
militaris ordo A liuelode patrimonium ij manhood virilitas, virtus preesthood
secerdotium ij Look in head for more. to beblood funestare, crue^tare In ode. A
good partica stimulata a lode onus cris, hoc A rode, in war expeditio onis,
to lode onerare A tode buso onis, hic broad latus ta an abode mansio onis, haec
In odge. A lodge hospitium ij to bodge sarcire to dodge illiberaliter se habere
to lodge hospitare O ante F.
In offe. A scoff scomma atis hoc A goffe, fool morio, bardus i to doffe, for
do of. exuere to skoffe scommari to woff like a dog latritare of a, ab, de.
thereof inde whereof vnde Of, is also the sign of the genitive case as of me,
m^i, of thee, tur. etc. also the sign of an ablative, or dative after pass,
(...) I am taught of thee, Doceo^ a te ^^cene of me, visus mihi, alto the
fig^^e of (...) possessiues, and ^^tenalls: as paternus, a of my father
^^aternus a, of my mother: anieus a of gold, a^ge^teus, a, of silver. Finally,
it is the sign of a dative case, after adjectives in bilis, and participials
in dus, as visibilis ommbus, able to be seen of all men, amandus ommbus to be
loned of all men. In often. A loft stristegu^ i, tabulatu^ ye woft of a web
subtegmen soft mollis le aloft sublimis e aloft in alto, sublime o^t saepe to
loft contignare soft to make mollire In ofe. ye hoof of a foore vngula la A
lofe massa panis A proof probatio onis ye roof of an house tectum ye roof of
ye motuh palatum ye woofe or a web subtegmen inis O ante G.
In ogge. A clog, log truncus i A dog canis is, hic, haec A bogge charybdis is,
haec fogge postsoenium i A srogge rana ae An hog porcus i A clogge at ye
foot impedimentum A gogge obliquus a A bandogge canis catenarius In oge. A
dialoge dialogus i An epiloge epilogus i An hedgehog herinaceus i A praloge
prologus i to proroge prorogare A roge vagabundus a to roge vagari O ante K.
In ocke. A block truncus i A brocke, beast taxo, onis, hic A clock
horologium i A clock, siee scarabejus i A cock, bird gallus i A cock of hay
meta ae A cock of dung collis is the docke clunis, is, haec A docke, herb
lapathum i the dock of a ship puppis, is, haec A crocke, sheep adaria ae ye
crocks of a house bijuges um A flock grex, egis, hic A frocke sagum i A knock
actus us, pereutio A lock sera ae A lock of woll solox, ocis, haec A flock,
or shorling sloc^us i A mock irrisio, illusio ye nock of an ar^ o ereua ae A
po^ke phagedaena ae A rock, distaffe colus i, haec A smock supparum i A socke
soccus i A stock stips it is, hic A rock of stone petra ae rupes is to flock
congregare to knock tundere ye stocks cippus i, pedicae to lock serare,
obdere to mock irridere, illudere A ballocke testiculus, scortum A battocke
clunis is, haec A ca^locke, herb eruca ae ye french pocke morbus gallicus a
gymlocke tere bellum i an haodo^ke, fish ascllus i an hemlocke cicuta ae a
mattocke bidens entis, hic mullocke puluis eris, hic a parocke fundus i a
pecocke pauo onis, hic a pinnocke, hedge sparow curruca ae a princocke precox,
lasciuus a puttocke miluus i a ruddocke frigilla ae wedlock coniugium i a
artochocke cynara ae a physbuttocke trossulus a Ocke, is also the sign of
diminitiues formed of substantives, as hi^locke, Colliculus i bullock,
iuuencus i pillocke, pilula ae millocke, parua mola and other, whose Latin is
in vlus, vla, ellus, ella, as the examples declare, and must be expounded be
this sign, little, or small, as, hillocke, or little hill, pillock, or small
pill, etc. In ockle. a cockle concha ae to cockle, cherish indulgere In ooke. a
book liber i, codex icis a brook riuns i, slnntus i a cook coquus i a
crook, hook hamus i, curuamcu a flooke, fish peclunculus i a hook hamus i a
^ooke, corner angulus i a took, crow cornix uis, haec ye smooke fumus i to
hook hamare, incuruare to look videre, speclare to smooke sumare to s^ooke
olsacere to forlooke f^scinare In oak. an oak quercus i, haec a poke, little
sack sacculus i ye spoke of a wheel radius i a stroke ^ctus us, percutio a
cloak chlamis idis, hic holyocke alihea ae to proke procare to strcke mulcere
to provoke prouocare to revoke reu^^are ye hoar roke pruina ae O ante L.
In oll. to poll pil spoliare a holy caligrat ae to poll the head tendere ye
doll o^the hand vola ae a fyoll, pot anuila ae a gymoll vertibulum i an idol
idolum i a chibol talia ae to enroll inscribere to ex^oll exaltare In old. ye
cold frigus oris, hoc ye mold humus i, haec a mold talpa ae bold audax cold
frigidus a Seek other in old: for olte, seek also, oulte In ole. ye hole of
a tree corpus, slemma a cole cold carbo onis, hic a cole bote pruna ae a dole
elcemosynae distributio a fool pullus equinus a gole, or mark meta ae an hole
foramen inis, hoc a iole of fish fauces um a pole partica ae ye pole norsh
arctuus i, haec ye pole south anctarcticus i, a sole, fish solea ae ye sole of
a shoe solum i A catchpoll lictor aparitor A thirleyoole balena ae A hurlepoole
idem. ye sole of the foot planta pedis to hole perforare to sole solum
adhibere to thole, suffer sustinere sole, alone. sanus a whole intiger a In
oole. A soole stultus, morio A poole palus udis, haec a seoole schola ae a
stool sella ae a tool instrumentum Yool, Cristmas Natiuit as Christi tool,
sorrow. dolor oris, hic to cool deser bear to doole, sorrow. dolere to school
corrigere, instruere cool quiet us a a padst oo'e tuber eris, hoc a todestoole
fungus gi. O ante M.
In ome. a come or comb pecten inis, hoc foam spuma ae home domus mi a mome
morio, bardus. to come, or comb. comere to foam spumare a besome scopa ae a
botom of yarne glomus mi ye boto^ of ye water sundum di a cockome crista ae a
dukedeme ducatus us an edgelome culier t, haec an earldome comitatus us a work
home instrument^ an epitome epit^^e es, haes a fathom hexapedia ae fredome
libertas atis an horsecome strigil tlis, hic a kingdom regnum ni martyrdom
martyrium ij a phantome phantasma atis a ransom redemptio onis, hoc synamon
synamomum i ye transeme of a bed. trabula ae an inc^me incola, aduena ae an
oncome disease morbus adu^titius whordome meretrieium ij wisdom sapientia ae
There be diverse other that end in dome, as princedome, principatus, us:
kingdom, regnum ni: Christendom, Christianitas atis, and both in latin and
english are derived of substantives sigoifying, gouerners or officers as the
examples do declare. fulsome foedus da growsome horridus da handsome scitus a
handersome factiesus sa to overcome vincere to misbecome dedecere to ransom
redimere to vncustome desuefacere to accustom assuefacere loathsome nausebundus
a noisome nocuus a, nociuus seldom rarus a, raro quilome quandoque burome
pronus a, promptus In ompt. to account computare an account computus ti prompt
promptus a In oome. a doom aestumatio, iuditiu^ a bloome germer inis, hic a
groo^ne subenbicularius to doom astimare, iudicare to bloome germinare O ante
N.
In onne. a son silius i. gnaetus i ye son sol alis, ^^e to don, do on
induere to son insolare to won habitare a baron baro onis, hic Alcoron
Alcoranum ni an andiron andela ae bacon lardum di a brandiron andena ae a
button fibula, apex icis a glutton edax, helus a capon capo onis, hic a
caldrone l^bes ^tis, hic tynamon cynamor^um i a common compas^num i a
comparison comparatio enis cotton bambucum i a Deacon Diaconus ni a meacon,
segge. carex icis, hic a babbon pupus pi a cabben gurgustiu^, cubile is a
basson sinus ni a beacon speclaculu^, pharus celidou calidonia ae centron
centaurum i a chanon canonicus i a chanen gunne torn enti genus a ^u^pen
particula encheasen causa, necessitas treason maiestas, reatus, proditio.
season oportunit as, tempestas a fection faclio, secta ae a f^shion mos, ritus,
us a salcon falco onis, hic a salche en ensis fulcata a sellon transgressor,
fur. a felou sore furunculus i a stayon lagena ae soyson faecunditas a gallon
semiurna ae a gegeen, fish. gobio onis, hic a gau^^on perna ae a garisen turma
ae, caterua a gurnison idem. manipulus il a gybbon poderis is, haec a gyrdiron
craticula ae a habergeon lori^a ae all hearon ardea ae a targon, rhyme. fabula
meirica iren f^^rum ri a laggon lagena ae a wagon v^hiculum li A lampron murena
ae A legion legio onis, hic A lesson lectio onis, haec A limon limon onis, hic
A lemmon amasia ae A Lion Leo onis, hic A mason lapicida ae A musheron fungus
i, hic A motion motio, sollicitatio A niggon parcus a A nigion morio, ideota ae
an onyon caepa ae A pardon indulgentia ae A person persona ae A patron
patronus ni pedilion leontopodion i A peapon pepo onis, hic A pompon idem A
pinsone osa ae poison venenum ni A prisone carcer eris, haec A randon, race.
petitus cursus reason ratio onis, hic saffron crocum i A samon salmo onis, hic
A sermon sermo onis, hic ye sessions sessiones number A step son priuignus ni
taragon tragonia ae A tenon impages, agis, haec A trenshon fragmentum ti
v^nison ferina ae vermilion minium i A condition conditio onis, haec A wanton
procax, lasciuus a A weapon arma orum, telum upon super A wigion, bird glaucea
ae to abandon extermir are to burden onerare to condition pacisci to emprison
incarcerare to enuiron communire to iargon nugari to missashion deformare to
motion mouere to pardon indulgere to poison venenare to reason ratiocinari to
season condire to summon summonere to vnburdon exonerare Albion Britannia ae,
Alba niae an assertion assertio onis A benediction benedictio onis A champion
pugil ilis, hic A companion comes itis, hic haec, A complexion complexio onis a
condition conditio onis, haec a dominion dominio onis an extortion exactio onis
an action actio, causa an addition additio onis ambition ambitio onis an
exhalation exhalatio onis a fundation fundamentum fruition fruitio onis
function functio onis fustion gossopineum i indignation indignatio onis
jurisdiction iurisdictio onis manumission manumissio onis mention mentio onis a
minion bellulus a a nation natio: gens entis an occasion occasio onis an
opinion opinio onis an oration oration onis a pauillion castrum i a pension
pensio onis perdition perditio: interitus us a physician phisicus i a pigion
pipio onis, hic a pinnion pinula ae a portion portio onis a possession
possessio onis a potion potio onis a proclamation vulgatio onis a proportion
proportio, onis a question quaestio problema a region regio, natio onis
religion relligio onis resurrection resurrectio onis a reuersion residuum i
salvation saluatio onis a skalion scirtum i a scorpion scorpio onis a scullion
lixa ae a sedition seditio onis, haec a station statio onis ye stranguilion
stranguria ae a surgion chirurgus i a suggestion suggestio onis superstition
superstitio onis a supplication supplicatio onis a succession successio onis a
tradition traditio onis a tuition tuitio onis, tutela an union vnio onis, haec
There be also many other beside these which end in on, and are to be
derived, when ye vvil of the later supine of the Latin vethe, by turning v,
into, iou, like as the Latin nounes (for they be nounes verbals) are formed of
the same, by turning, u, into io, as in these that follow and such other.
relation relatio revelation reuelatio reuoiution reuolutio a vocation vocatio a
visitation visitatio unction vnctio. etc. All which make the genetiue case in
onis, and are declined with haec, there be almost as many of them as there be
Latin verbes of the active signification to be found. In once. a sconce
laterna ae ouce semel, oline In onde. an almonde amigdalum i a diamonde adamas
antis, hic a boude vinculum a sonde missio onis a ponde piscina ae beyond
vltra ye second secundus a fond stolidus a In ongue. a prongue hasta furcata
a songue ca^ticum, cantilena a thongue lorum i a throng stipatio, densitas a
tongue lingua ae to longue languere, appetere A wrongue iniuria ae wrong
iniurius a, perperam strong fortis e, validus a long longus a A dipthong
diphthongus i, haec adders tongue lingua serpentina dogtong cynoglossus i
euensong vespertina officia A furlong stadium die hearts tongue hemionitis idis,
haec to belong pertinere, spectare to prolong prolo^gare, ptrahere along
direct, recta. among inter awrong perperam, male endlong erecte yongue iuuenis
i, iuuenilis e Young is also a sign of diminutiues, as these. young hyng regulus
i A young bird auicula ae A young boy puerulus i A young wench puellula ae A young
goose anserculus i a young whely caniculus i And such other whose latin ends
in ulus, ellus: or in ula, ella, and be derived and formed of substantives, as,
regulus of rex, and auicula, of auis. In onge. A gonge firica ae A sponge
spongia ae to plonge cespitare to sponge spongiare In onke. A monk monachus i
ye donk, rain. nebulae arum In ont. A month mensis is, hic A font fons ontis,
hic A front frons ontis, acie; In one. A bone os, ossis, hoe A brone be fucus
i lone mutuum i an hone coticula ae A stone lapis idis, hic, sax^ A stone,
weight. octopondium i A throne thronus ni A wone habitatio to groan ingemere to
throne inthronizare gone praeteritus a prone pronus a, promptus ae the backbone
spina nae brimstone sulphus uris, hoc A grynestone mola ae, cos, stis A matrone
matrona ae A mulstone mola ae A pompone pepo onis, hic A tutchstone lydius
lapis good, wone abundantia ae evil, wone inopia ae to vnbone exossare alone
solus a, tantum anon wox, actutum estsones deinceps In oone. A boon petitio
onis, haec ye groon of a swin probossis idis, haec the moon luna ae noone
meridies ei, hic A spoone coclear aris, hoc A toone tonus ni to toone modulari
ye new moon nouilunium i done actus, praeteritus soon cito undone perditus
a O ante P.
In oppe. ye crop of a bird ingluuies ei, haec a drop gutta ae, stilla ae ye
coppe of a cap apex icis, hic ye cop on a birds head cristale A proppe fulcrum
i A shop officina ae A sloppe lumbare is, hoc A soppe offa ae A stop
impedimentum i A top trochus i ye top of a thing culmen inis, hoc cacumen
inis, hoc to chop herbs concidere to drop destillare to hoppe saltare to lop
a tree tondere, putare to loppe as milk coagulare te moppe, maw mouere labia to
poppe coniectare to proppe suffulcire to soppe offam intingere to stop
obstruere to stop, let resistere to loppe tondere A hoppe humulus, lupulus
(...) A bishop Episcopus pi A caitrop hamus i A gallop extensus cursus A garnop
basis poculi A grashop cicada dae horseknop sysimbrium i A milksoppe
lactiphagus i A stirrup strapes edis, hic to gallop fundere gradus to wallop
idem. cursitare In opt. This termination opt, is written for opped, in the
participles of the preter tense: as stopped, for stopped, lopt, for lopped,
propt, for propped, etc. In open. A cope cappa ae, pallium A trope tropus pi
hope spes ei, hic the pope papa ae, haec A rope funis is, hic, haec soap sapo
onis, hic to cope cambire, emere to hope sperare Europe Europa pae wanhope
falsa spes a wardrope vestiarium i an handgrope furcifer i bysope, herb.
hysopus i a syrope apozema atis, hoe In ople. A copple copula ae A stopple
epistomium i A thropple guttur, iugulum to copple copulare to popple bullire,
scaturire to thropple iugulare synople. sinopis idis, hic O ante R.
In orre. A dorre, be. fucus i A dorre, blanke argutia ae to dorre arguere
for, coniunct. nam, quia for, prpos. pro, prope nor nec, neque A leasor locator
An humor humor oris, hic A rumor rumor oris, hic a praetor praetor oris, hic a
rethor rhethor oris, hic a doctor doctor oris, hic a proctor procurator oris a
progenitor progenitor oris a questor quaestor oris a testor testator oris a
rancor inuidia ae a rasor nouacula ae rigor rigor oris, hic a senior senior
oris a junior junior oris a superior superior oris interior inferior oris a
tenor tenor oris, hic traitor proditor oris a vapor vapor oris, hic a victor
victor oris a visor laruale is, hoc to abhor abhorrere to vapor euaporare In
orche. a porche vestibulum i a torche taeda ae In orde. a board asser eris, hic
a cord funiculus i a lord dominus i a sword gladius i, ensis, hic a word
verbum i concord concordia ae discord discordia ae a record testis is, hic,
haec a watcheworde symbolum i to accord concordare to record contestari In
orge. a forge fabrica ae a gorge ingluuies ei to torge, smythe fabricare to
forge, feygne adumbrare, singere In orke. cork suber eris, hoc a forcke furca
ae, haec a porke porcus i porke porcina ae a storke ciconia ae a work, done
opus eris, hoc work, labor opera ae, labor York, city choracum i a
pitcheforke hasta sincata wolworke lamficium i to work laborare, operari any
work opificium In orle. a whorle verticillum, splendilus i to whorle
contorquere, rotare ye world mundus i, seculu^ i, In orme. a form, bench
scannum i a form fashion forma ae ye form of an hare seeds is, haec a storm
procella ae, te^pestas. a worm vermis is, hic to form formare, fingere to
storm saeuire a ringworme impetigo igis, haec to conform conformare to
inform informare to deforme deformare to perform perficere to transform
transformare conform conformis e In orne. corn annona ae, far an horn cornu
u, hoc a scorn ludibrium i, irrisio to scorn illudere, subsannare borne natus
a, genitus shorn tonsus a sworn iuratus a torn lacer ra, laceratus worn
tritus a worn on indutus a, gestus, latus a an accorne balanus ^ numcorne
trimestre hordeum a unicorn vnicornis is, hic to adorn adornare to suborne
subornare foresworne perturus a forlorn perditus a mysborne obortiuus ae
stubborn pertinax, peruicax unshorn intonsus a unsworn iniuratus a untorn
illacerus a In orse. a corse, perizonium i a corse, corpse corpus, cadauer forse
vis, violentia an horse equus i remorse remorsus us, instinctus us to force
cogere to divorce dimittere, repudiare. to enforse cogere, compellere perforse
vi, violenter horse raucus a worse peror us In orte. a port, gate porta ae a
port, haven portus us a port, be hauyor gestus, habitude port, power
magnisicentia a sort geaus eris, hoc a sort many multitudo a sport iocus i,
scomma to snorte stertere to sort digerere, distinguere to sport ludere,
iocundari short breuis e, curtus a coleworte brassica, caulis is comfort
solatium i chafewort cartafilag^ inis iudwort idem. figwort chelidonium i
lingwort belleborus ri longwort verbas^um i motherworte artemisia ae mugwort
idem. penywort sysimbrium i ragworte elephabas^um i A report rumor oris hic a
resort frequentatio ribwort arnoglossa ae A misreporte defamatio onis speat
wort flamula a st supporte adminiculum li to comfort confortare, consolari to
exhort exhortari to extort extorquere to report refer, publicare to resort
frequentare to misreport defamare to support supportare, adminiculari extorte
extortus a contort contortus a In orthe. the north aquilo onis by north Boreas
ae, hic ye worth of a thing precium, dignitas In ore. A bore aper i, hic y^
core of an aple cor ordis, hoc A gore gremiale is, hoc lore, lerning doctrina
ae anore remus i, hic A pore porus i, meatus us a skore ^renale is, hoc ye
shore of the sea littus oris, hoc A sore morbus i, vlous store of vituall penu
u, hoc store of cattle pecuaria ae store of house supellex, res familiae riae
A score viginti A whore meretrix scertu^ i to bore terebrare, perforare to
glore, gase. patulis oculis spectare to slore instaurare to gore perfodere,
co^fodere to pore, prye. spectare to rore rngire to score crenare, incidere to
shore obliquare to snore, snort. stertere more plus uris, hoc more magis, plus
sore morbosus, molestus sore, cruel. dirus a, durus a yore, before. ante, prius
to adore adorare to restore restaurare an uproar simultas, commotie before,
presence coram before, presence coram, in co^spect^ before time ante prius
affore time ante prius furthermore porro, praeterea wherefore quare, ideo,
igitur. In oore. A door porta, ostium i A floor area ae, solum oore of brass
cadmia ae oore of silver molybdena ae oore of lead plumbago inis, haec oore of
gold aluta ae A moore, heath. montana orum A Moore Maurus ri A stoore
commotio, turbatio to floor contabulare to stoore tumultuare to snoore
supprimere In oord. A board asser eris, hic A board, table. mensa ae A foord
vadum i an board the saurum i A sword gladius i A toord stercus oris, hoc to
board contignare to board mensam facere to board thesaurizare O ante S.
In osse ye bosse of a buckler vmbo onis, hic moss muscus i A cross crux
ucis, haec dross fex ecis, haec loss damnu^ i, iactura a to cross obliquare
to toss agitare gross grossus a buglosse euphrasinum i wodwosse glastum i to
engrosse inscribere acrosse obliquu^ a In oste. A cost terminus i, finis cost
sumptus us the frost gelu u, hoc, frigus a ghost spiricus us, larua an host,
of men exercitus us an host hospes itis, hie A post postis is, hic roff meat
assatura a A toste off^ ae, tostura A post, runner. veredarius i to coaste
circuire to cost constare to post properare to roste assare to to ste
torrere, assare foremost primus a furthermost vltimus a mid^emost medius a
inmoste intimus a outmoste extremus a nermost proximus a an Apostle apostolus i
O ante P.
In otte. A blotte labes is, hac ye bottes verminatie A clot gleba ae, haec A
dot obstructorium i A knot nodus i, hic A lot sors, ortis, haec A pot olla ae
the rotte tabes is, haec A Scot Scotus i ye slot of a door pessulus i snot pus
uris, hoc A sot fool morio, stultus a A spot macula ae A stot, bullock.
iuuencus i A sprot halecula ae a trot succussorius gradus to blotte maculare to
clotte glebas, vel, colles rus ere to rotte, neuter putrescere to rotte, active
putrefacere to spotte maculare to trotte succussare not non, haud an eglotte
brackolum i a chariotte vehiculu^, quadriga an emmotte formica ae a faggotte
fascis is, hic a gyglotte ridicula ae an harlotte mereticula, ae an hotchpotte
incisium i a iegotte idem an idiotte ideota ae, hic a maggotte terms etis,
haec a pilotte nauarchus i a pispotte vrinale is, matula riotte luxuria, luxus
us ye sabbotte sabbatum i A spiggotte epistonium i A tostpotte bibax,
compotator A verlotte verna ae, scurra ae waynscotte contignatio, tabulatum to
forgotte obliuisci to riotte luxuriare to waynscotte contabulare In ottle. A
bottle obba ae, vter eris A bottle of hay manipulus i A throttle iugulum i to
throttle iugulare. In otch. A botch bilis, vleus eris, hoc ye botch pestilentia
ae to potch an egg putamine lixare In oath. A brothe pulmentum i clothe pannus
i a mothe erugo, tinea ae both ambo ae frothe spuma ae to clothe vestire to
frothe spumare to loathe nausere wroth iratus a loathe inuitus a An oath
iusiurandum i In ote. A boat cymba ae, acatum i A cote tunica ae A got capra
ae A grote dram ae grotes auenaceum i otes auena ae A mote atomus i, hic A
mote, ponde amnis is, hie A note nota ae A stote, vermin furnuculus i A throat
iugulum i to cote tunicare to dote delirare to note notare I wot scio, nosc^ I
wrote scribebam as hot calidus a A carote pastinaca ae A parrote spitacus i A
kydcote argastulum i melilote melilothos i A peticote interula a to promote
promouere In cote. A boot o^rea ae A coote, bird fulica ae A foot pes edis,
hic A root radix i^is, haec soote suligo inis, haec A soote, of things genus
eris, hoc hare foot, herb. logopus i to foot gressus ponere to soote, a
stool pedem addere to moote arguere, mouere dubia to root radices ponere to
vnroote eradicare to stoote, stutte titubare to wroote vertere, depopulari to
shoot sagittare In oo^he. A boothe, stall tentorium i ye soothe veritas atis,
haec A toothe dens entis, hic smothe politus a O ante V.
In oue. A drove agmen inis, hoc A grove arboretum i cloves, spice garyophilli
orum to roue, rob rapere to roue about erraere, vagari In ooue. A dooue
columbus a, ae A glooue chiroteca a love amor oris, hic to love amare,
diligere to move mouere A disprooue improbatio, co^sutatio A foxglooue
digitalis is, haec to disprooue improbare, co^futare to re^^ooue rem^^ere,
migrare to reprove reprobare above sup^^superius Note that oue, can not be
written, owe, for the causes recited in the ter^^nation, aue look there. O
ante W.
In owe. A bow arcus us, hic A browe supercilium i A cow vacca ae A crow
cornix icis, haec A frowe vxer, matrona ae A scrowe sheda ae A shrowe praua
mulier ye snow nix iuis, haec A sow sus uis, haec A throw iactus us towe
stupa ae A vow votum, iuramentu^ to glowe, burn. as the ear flammescere,
ardere to grow crescere to know cognoscore to low boar to mow mouere labia
to owe debere to row remigare to snow ningere to sow suere to trow
existimare to vow vouere to wowe procare, ambire low humilis e slow taerdu^
a, piger a how quomodo? qui? now nunc, iam An arowe sagitta ae A barrowe
vehiculu^, feretrum A below follis is, hic A fellow socius a, comes A bo^ow,
pledge vas adis, hic, obsc^ A cuckowe cocix, cuculus ye cockrow gallicantus us
An elbowe cubitus i fenawe mucor oris, hic A foreshowe praeludium i A furrowe
sulcus i ye gallows crux ucis, haec talowe arunia seuum i An harowe pecton
^nis, hoc marowe medulla ae A sparow, bird passer eris, hic An hubbleshowe
tumultus us har^orowe hospitium i A malowe malua ae salow, land aruum i A
swalowe h^^undo inis, haec A me^owe pratum i A m^nowe, fish mena ae ye morrow
aurora a sorrow dolor oris, hic A wyllowe salix icis, haec A pillowe puluinar
aris, hoc A salowe tree salix icis, haec A shadow vmbra ae A wyndowe fenestra
ae yarowe, herb millefolium i to bestow confer, impertire to beshrowe
imprecari to borowe mutuari to sorrow dolere, moueri to follow sequi to furrowe
sulcare to foreslowe negligere, omittere to foreknowe praes^^re, agnoscere to
foreshowe praedicere to halowe sanc^^sicare to halowe, land arare to barowe
triturare to harowe occare to farowe suemparere to ouerslowe praetermittere to
ouerflrowe supersternere to ouerslowe superfluere to ouergrowe supercrescers to
overthrow euertere to shadow obumbrare to swalowe deglutare to walowe
volutare holowe cauus a narrow angustus a to morrow cras, erastino yelowe
slauus a

Seek other in, ou, having consonantes after them in their places, as, ou,
ante, b, ou, ante, c, ou, ante, d. etc. for, ou is a letter compounded, that is
a Diphthonge vovvell, and has his place in the Alphabete order before the
consonantes, and is the last of the same, in this book,
V ante B.
In ubbe. A cubbe vulpecula ae A club fustis is, hic A chubbe b^uscum i A iubbe
cantharus, s^yphus i A knubbe bruscum, callum A shrubbe vi^^rnum, virgultum A
snubbe correptio A stubbe stipes itis, hic A tubbe dolum, labruns A trullibubbe
aulicocia ae Belz^^ub a devil beelzebub to dub the house exornare, putare to
dubbe a cock coronare to dubbe a knight decuriare to rub fricare to snubbe
arguere culpare In ubble. A bubble bulia ae rubble rudius eris, hoc stubble
stipula, arista ae to bubble bullire, biblere to dubble duplicare dubble duplex
icis, geminus soluble solutilis e V ante C.
In uce. A cruce cherchesia e, poculum auritum A luce, fish lupus sluutalis A
fluce emissorium i truce soedus eris, hoc spruce eorium pumicatu^ iuce of
herbs succus i to induce inducere to reduce reducere to seduce seducere In
uct. to induct inducere to instruct instruere to introduct introducere An
introduct introductco oni^ In uche. much multus a such taelis e A eunuche
gralius i to tutche tangere A eunuche ennuchus i, hi^ In ucre. lucre lucrum i
to lucre lucrari V ante D.
In udde. A budde germen inis, hoc ye eudde rumen inis, hoc A fiudde flumen
inis, hoc mudde limus i A studde bullae a, bacca ae cruddes coagulum i to
crudde coagulare to chawe cudde ruminare to scudde cursitare to studde baccie
ornare, geminare In udge. A drudge mancipium, verna A judge index icis, hic A
grudge murmuratio A grudge of sickness. praesagium, recursus us A snudge
parcus a to grudge murmurare to judge iudicare to foriudge abiudicare to
foreiudge praeiudicare to adiu^ge adiudicare In ude. An interlude comoedia,
fabula ae A multitude multitudo, coetus us magnitude magnitudo promptitude
promptitudo A similitude similitudo, parabola to allude alludere to delude,
mock deludere to exclude excludere to conclude concludere to extrude extrudere
to illude, mock illudere to seclude secludere rude rudis e V ante F.
In uffe. A buffe bubalus i buffe, lether aluta bouinacea bubalicea A cuffe
colaphus i A puff of wind flatus us A ruff, fish melanurus i ye ruff of a
shirt sinus us ye ruff of a house culmen inis, hoc ye ruff of a ca^dle finale
is, hoc A snuff argutia ae A tuffe, or bush dumetum i A tuffe of hairs
crinetum i A iufte idem stuff res, supellex ectilis, to cuffe colaphizare to
puff flare to snuff nasum suspendere to stuff suffercire danruffe furfures
rum In uff^e. A muffle socale is, hoc A muffle for a dog fistella ae to muffle
the face velare to muffle ye mouth obturare to ruffle the hear disturbare to
ruffle, as roisters magnifice quassari to shuffi^ cards confundere V ante G.
In ugge. A bugge spectrum, larua ae A judge poculum i A mugge, pot ollula ae
ye tugges of a cart trahae arum to hug horrescere to scugge nausere to lugge
trahere, vellere to tugge idem In ugle. A bugle bubalus i A bugle, borne
cornicinium i to iuggle incantare In ugne. to impugn impugnare to repugne
repugnare to propugne propugnare V ante K.
In ucke. A bucke dama ae, hic A ducke anas atis, hic luck fortuna ae, omen
mucke fimus i ye suck of a plow venture, eris, hic to plu^^e vehe^e to suck
suge e In uckle. A buckle fibula ae ye buck ebone compendix icis haec A truckle
bed cubile i, hoc to buckle fibulare to buckle him parare se honey suckle
locusta ae pers^l^menum i V ante L.
In ul. A bu^l tu^rus i A gull, bird platalea ae, platea An ^ul for hogs
por^^le is, hoc mul rudas eris hic A scul calua ae, caluitiu^ i A trul tr^ssula
ae dull haebes etis, tardus a full plenus a A consul consul ulis, hic An handful
manipulus i bashful stupidus a, verecundus a blisful b^atus, a, foelix careful
curiosus, sollicitus a cheareful hilaris e comforiful consolabundus a fearful
timidus a doubtful dubious a faithful fidus a fidelis e feastful festiuus a
grateful gratus a hateful inuidiosus a healthful incolumis e lawful legitimus a
awful a^^^erus a manful vir^^s e me ciful ^^sericers meedeful ineritorius a
^^deful indignus a speedeful maturus, expeditu^ myndfull memor oris neyful
no^iuus a pitiful p^us a, misericors scatheful damnosus a skillful peritus,
artifex wylful effraenis, lice^tiosus a incontin^ns spiteful inf^slus a
sportful iocosus a thankful gratus a vnbashful impudicus, imperculsus
vnbeutiful informis, indecorus vnblameful inculpabilis e vnshameful impudicus a
vndoubtful indubitabilis e vnsaythful insidelis e, apistus a vnchearful
iniucundus a vnfearful intrepidus a unfruitful inutilis, sterilis a vnheedful
incautus a vnspeedful inexpeditus a vnhurtful innocuus ae unlawful illegitimus
ae unmerciful immisericors unmindful immemor oris vnpaynful immolestus,
indoler^ ungrateful ingratus a vnhatefull non inuidus a unskillful imperitus a
vnwilfull illicentiosus, continens vn^hankfull ingratus a warstfull
dispendiosus a vnwaystful fr^galis e woeful moestus a vnwoful indolens There be
also many other which end in sull, beer omitted, whose Iatine does end in
(osus) entus, lis or in (dus) these ye may form out of substantives, as we
also said of them, that end in (ie) when ye will: and they signify
plenty, or much of that which the substantive betokens, as In osus.
bewtiful decorus, formosus a deceiptful insidiosus a disdaynful fastidiosus a
dreedful formidolosus a dewtiful officiosus a dispiteful inuidiosus a forgetful
obliuiosus a fruitful fru^tuosus a hateful inuidiosus a hirkful taed^esus a
paynful laboriosus a plentiful copiosus a shameful contumeliosus a slowthful
desidiosus a wrathful iracundus a wrongful iniuriosus a In lis. dreedful
horribilis e reprocheful reprahensibilis e scornful ridiculus a wonderful
mirabilis e In dus. rebukeful culpandus a rewthful dolendus a wonderful
mirandus a In ulke. ye bulk thorax acis, hic An hulke stlata ae In ulfe. A
gulf gurges utis, hic A wulfe lupus i In ulse. pulse legumen inis, hoc dulse,
sweet dulcis e A repulse repulsa ae In ulte. A tumulte tumultus us, hic
difficulte difficilis e to exulte exultare to tumulte tumultuare to resulte
resultare V ante M.
In um. bum, drink potus us ye bum of a pipe oblonga fistula A crum mica ae to
crum minuere, micare dumb mutus a to cum venire, accedere In ume. fume fumus i
spume, foam spuma ae ye spume of lead molybditis itis, haec ye spume of silver
argyritis itis, haec to fume, as fire fumare to fume, freat fremere alume
alumen inis, An apostume rumentum i to perfume fumigare to presume praesumere
to resume resumere In umble. to fumble balbutire to rumble strepitare, tonitare
humble humilis e to mumble murmurare V ante N.
In unne. A bunne crocotyrium i A gunne tormentum i A nun sanctimon^alis is A
tun dolium i ye sun sol ol^s, hic to run currere to shun deuitare to
sun insolare dunne fus^us a spunne filatus a to cunne lesson in^umbere,
colere, mandare to forerunne praecurrere to ouerrunne anteuertere In unche. A
bunche brus^um i A bunche of flowers. floretum i A punche punctorium, pugio to
punche pungers In uncle. An uncle auunculus i, patruus A carbuncle carbunculus
i In ung^e. dungue fumus i to dungue sler^orare to bungle infabr^facere In
unke. drunk ebrius a sunk immersus a In unt. A cun^ vulua ae A frunt acies
ci, haec A brunt impetus us An hunt venator oris to grunt grunnire to hunt
venari blunt obiusus a brunt. adustus a In unc. June, monthe Junius i A pr^ne
prunum i, prunae fortune fortuna ae misfortune infortunium i V ante P.
In uppe. A cup po^nlum i A suppe sorbillum i A tuppe aries etis, hic to
suppe sorbere to suppe coenare Up in composition ad, as to rise up, assurgere,
to stand up, astare assurgere. A syrruppe apozema a^^s, hoc A styruppe strapes
edis, hic In upte. to corrupt corrumpere to interrupte interrumpere corrupt
corruptus a In upple. A scrupple scrupulus i supple lentus a A ^upple d^o,
binae V ante R.
In urre. A burre lappa ae, glis iris, A surre canis is, hic, haec furre
pellitium i A knurre brus^um gibbus i ye murre grauedo inis, haec A spur
calcar aris, hoc A stir tumultus us, co^motio to flurre with the labia
promittere lyppes to furre pelliculare, duplicare to spur stimulare to
stir, active mouere to stir, neutre tumultuare A murmur murmur uris, hoc to
besturre mouere se to incur incurrere to murmur murmurare In urche. A church
ecclesia, templum to lurche latitare In urfe. ye scurff of ye head furfures rum
scurfe, itch prurigo inis, haec A turfe cespes itis, hic In urfle. curfle
operitio ignis purfle effila^um, orarium In urge. spurge tithymalus i to purge
purgare to urge. vrgere In urle. A churl ingratus, parcus a an hurl iactus us
to curle crispare to hurl iactare In urke A turk turca ae, hic to lurk
latitare In urne. A churne fidelia ae turn vicissitudo, cursus us to burn
vrere, incendere to burn, sore ardere to churne butyrum creare to spurn
calcitrare to turn vertere to ouerturne euertere to return reuertere
stubburne pertinax acis In vrpe. to churpe pipilare to usurp vsurpare purple
purpurea ae In urse. A burse bursa ae A curse maledictio, anathema A nurse
nutrix icis, haec A purse marsupium i to burle imbursare, reponore to curse
maledicere to nurse nutrire, educare to purse look burse. A pickpurse
manticularius a A cutpurse idem, saccularius to accurse excommunicare to
dispurse expendere to disburse idem, in sumere to vnburse, and vnpurse. idem In
urt. A hurt nocumentum i to hurt nocere, laedere hurt lasus a In u^tle. A
turtle turtur uris, hic to churtle pipilare In ure. A cure cura ae, officium to
cure curare pure purus a sure certus a, solidus a a creature creatura ae a
friture fi^tilla ae a conjecture coniectura ae a confecture confictio onis
incorporature incorporatio onis a countermure promurale is, hoc a demeanure
gestus us a displeasure maleficium i a departure decessio, abitio a
discomfeyture deuictio, euertio a festure penna ae, fistuca ae a gesture gestus
us a vesture vestitus us an adventure fortuna, casius, eue^tus a indenture
syngraphu^^ i a ioyncture iunctura ae laysure otium i a raysure nouacula ae a
lecture lectura ae a measure mensura ae a mixture mixtura ae a misaduenture
inf^rtunium i a cloysture claustrum i moisture humiditas nature natura ae a
stature statura ae nurture ciuilitas atis a paslure pas^uum i a picture pic^ura
ae pleasure voluptas atis a pleasure beneficium i treasure thesaurus i
portrature pictura ae a porture idem, effigies ei a pressure pressori^m; i a
dressure mensa structoria scripture scriptura ae a ^^mperature temperamentum a
forfeture fallonia ae to assure securum facere to ensure idem to adjure
adiurare to endure durare to adventure periclitaeri to conjure coniurare to
gesture gesticulari to measure mensurare to moisture humectare to nurture
nutrire, educare to pasture pascere to pleasure gratificari to porture pingere
to prorure procurare to put in ure in vsum trahere demure pudicus a imp^re
impurus a obscure obscurus a secure securus a unsure incertus a V ante S.
In vsse. A trusse sarcinae ae to trusse sarcinare to discuss discutere A
trusse for hose strigil ili^, hic In ushe. a brushe verres is, haec a bushe
dumetum i ye bush of the head caesaries, coma ae a pushe pustula ae a thrushe
turdus i a tush of briars vipretum a tushe of heirs crinetum a tushe of
thorns dumetum a tushe of trees arboretum tushe vah, hui to blushe erubescere
to brushe verrere to flushe fluitaere to gushe out effluere, prorumpere to
pushe pellere, tundere In uske. a buske, idem quod bushe and tushe ye husk of
corn ^luma ae a luske, lubber iners ertis muskle moschum i a tuske dens
exartus In vskle. A muskle concha a to ruskle pandiculari to mustle strepere In
uste. A bruste se^ ae duste puluis eris, hic A cruste crustum i A fluste
flustrum i lust libido inis, hie ruste erugo inis, haec trust fidue^a ae to
cruste crustare to huste silere to lust concupiscere to must oportere, debere
to ruste rubiginare to trust fidere, confidere to thruste pellere, trudere
just iustus a, aquus, ae A locuste locusta ae m^stcuste diffidentia ae to
mistruste diffidere unjust iniustus a aduste adustus a In use. A cruse
cantharus i use vsus us, ritus us ye muse musa ae to muse mirari, meditari to
use vti, fungi An abuse abusus us disuse desuetudinis An excuse excusatio onis
A mysuse abusus us ye refuse repudium i to abuse abut^ to mysuse idem to disuse
desues^ere to excuse ex^usare to atruse accusare to incuse incusare to peruse
peruti to refuse recusare confuse confusus a V ante T.
In utte. A butte vessel ^rea ae a butte of land iugerum i a butte to sho te at
meta butte sed, ver^m, at a gutte intest inum i a nutte rux u^^s, haec a slu^te
serdida, spilumenes to ^utte adiacere to cut s^^^re to put^e ponere to s^utte
clandere to s^utte titubare a c^esnutte castan^ea ae a gelygutte helu^ on^^,
hic ^alpbutt^, s^sh vmbrana ae turl utte, s. sh chal^his, (...). bus i a
wainutte nuglans andis, haec In ^tche. a crutche grallus i an ^utche the
saurarium i dutche (...) a Seek the others in vche. In nttle. a scuttle
sportula ae a shustle radius i In nte. a brute, beast bru^^m i a brute, rumor
fama ae a s^ute aulus i s^ute fructus us a lute barbiton i a mute, letter muta
ae to brute prouulgare to lute ^yther^zare to to^e in a horn cornucmere a
circuit circu^tus us a depute deputatus i an u^stitute institutum i a mynute
minutum i a sub^itute substitutus i a tribu^e tributum i to ^^pute deputare to
impure imputare to erecute exequi, perdgere to dist^^ute distribuere to
constitute corstituere to (...) st^ute instituere to restitute restituere to
perse^ute persequi to prosecu^e prosequi to pol^ute polluere to prelo^use
proloqui to repute reputare to salute s^lutare to solute soluere to sul ^^itute
subs^^tuere to triberte arthuere to tentr^ ute contribuere absolute absolutus
ae dis^olu^e disosutus a In ay. A day dies ei to day hodie to morrow cras
yesterday heri eueryday quotidie one day olim, aliquando hey day euax hoy day
idem well aday heu, hei well away idem, disperij always semper away ab, a haway
ehodum, quid stas? parfay medius fideus astray, adiec deuius a astray, aduerb
erronice whatway qua, quomodo? someway aliqua this way ha;c, hoc modo that way
istac, isto modo yonderway illac, illo modo every way omni mado, quaeuis n^way
nullo modo out of the way deuius a right way re^ta any way quauis, vllomodo
neither way neutra least any way nequa to tournay hastis concurrere to iournay
itinerari, iter sacere to disobey inobedire to dismay stupefacere to underlay
supponere to ouerlay superponere to ouerweygh superare

Ay ante D.
In aid. aid auxiliu^, praesidium a brayde impetus us, vis a maid virgo ^nis,
hac a maid servant ancilla ae an abrayd impetus us an handmayd ancilla ae a
maremayd siren enis, haec to abrayd irruere to vmbrayd exprobrare said dictus a
laid positus a vnsayd non dictus a vnlayd non positus a In ayge. A gayge pignus
oris, hoc warge merces edis, haec stipendium rayge furor oris, hic to gayge
pignorare to rayge furere, dementire to wayge conducere to wayge battle bellum
indicere In eyghe. to weyghe ponderare to ouerweyghe superponderare to
purueyghe prouidere In eight. eight octo weight pondus eris, hoc Ay ante K.
In ayke. a layke, play ludus i a snayke anguis is hic a rayke ambulacrum i to
layke, play ludere to rayke ambulare blayke flauus a wayke imbecillis e Ay ante
L.
In ayle. a bail vadimonium i fail defectus us a flayle flagellum i a iayle
carcer eris, hic hayle grando inis, haec a nail clauus i a payle caulus i a
payle for mlike mulctrum i a quayle, bird coturnix icis, haec a rail, bird
rusticula ae a rail perch cantherium i a rayl for a woman amictorium i the
rail of a pale longulus i a sail velum i a snayle limax acis, haec a tail
caudex icis, haec a tail, score crena ae a trayle, siedde traha ae a veil
velamen inis, hoc to bail vademomare to a isle dolere to sail d^ficere to
ha^^^ grandinare to nayl^ affigere to (...) deferbere to raple rixari,
conuiciari to (...) nauigare to (...) trahere to (...) plangere, plorare to
vatrayle pugna ae praelium catayle bouex oum, obus counsel consil^um i a
countr^tayle anticopa ae an agnayle pterigium i a curtayle curtatus a ye
foresayle antemna ae a frontayle fiontale is, hoe horstayle equisetum i a
marvel miraculum i a ringtayle pygargus i travail labor oris, hic a wagtayle
motacilla ae a wartwayle pterigium i vitayle victus us, penu nu to avail
praeualere to counsel consulere to entayle land addicere, adoptare haeredes
to intayle, grave insculpere to marvel mirari to pr^uayle praeualere to
travail laborare to travail countries peregrinari to vitayle obsonari Ay ante
M.
In aim. aim praesagium i a claim vendicatio onis to claim vendicare to
reclayme reclamare a mayme mutulatio to mayme mutilare Ay ante N.
In ayne. a bayne balneum i a blayne pupulae ae ye brain cerebrum i a chain
torques is, hic a brain, be fucus i gain emolumentum a grain granume i
graynes, spice cardimonium an hayne verna ae pain pena ae, dolor ye rain
pluuta ae a skayne forago inis, haec Spain hispania ae a squayne assecla ae a
train comitatus us a train, deceit proditio a vain vena ae a wayne plaustrum
i a prayne planula ae to brain excerebrare to feygne fingere to fam in sin
ging succinere to gain lucrari to layne reticere, occultare to mayme mutilare
to pain molestare to plain queri to plain a bourd polire to rain pluere to
stayne contaminare, imbuere to strain stringere to strayn through colare a
cloth to train a child dssuefacere to wayne a child ablactare to wayne
lambs idem, depellere bayne, buxum promptus, obsequens feign lubens, contentus
slain excoriatus a plain, ^uen planus, aequus a plain, manifest apertus,
lucidus a slain occisus, interemptus ae twain duo, ae, o vain vanus a feign
lubenter a bargayne pactum, conditio a Brittayne Britannus a a captain dux
ucis a chief ayne primas atis, hic a chaplayne sacellanus, capellanus a
curtayne cortina ae disdain contemptus us, fastidiosus dittayne, herb condris
Almayne alemanta ae a forayne forica ae a lorayne furcifer i, hic a fountain
fons ontis, hic a mountain mons ontis, hic a dagswayne, gausape is, hoc
garment a gardayne hortus i, hic a wardayne volemum i a wardeyne, tree volemus
i a guardayne custos, tutor legerdemayne praestigium i molayne, herb blattaria
ae a sullayne, fish salmo paruus ye murrayne lues is, haec, contagio plantayn,
he^b plantago inis a quartayne Fever. quartana a soueraygne princeps,
singularis a villayne verna ae to bargayne pacisci, contrahere. to disdain
spernere, fastidire to entertayne recipere, excipere to explayne explanare to
absteyne abstinere to restreyne retinere to distayne violare, maculare to
perteyne pertinere, spectare to atteyne attingere to reteyne to one attingere
ad aliquem to maintain fouere, defendere to mainteyne domum continuare house
to drdeyne ordinare, instituere to refrain, act. refraenare, cohibere,
continuere to conteyne continere, compraehendere to remain, bide remarere,
commorati to remayn, leave redundare, superesse to sustain sustinere barrayne
sterelis e certain, sure certus a certain, some aliquis, quidam, forayne
extraneus a sudden subitus, subetaneus a solayne subdolus, varius a soueraygne
clemens, benignus again rursus, iterum In aynge. a chaynge mutatio onis, haec
a graynge predium i to chaynge mutare to raynge abroad diuagari to raynge a
place explorare straynge peregrinus a to staynche sistere, sedare against
contra, aduersus In aynte. a playnte quaeremoniae to paynte pingere a
complaynte quaeremonia ae a coustraynte coactio a restraynt retentio onis to
acquaynte as^is^ere quaynte mirus a, rarus ae faynte fissus a, debilis Ay ante
R.
In air. ye air aer aeris, hic an hair of hauks haeres edis, haec a chair
cathedra, sella ae a fair nundum i a pair par aris, hoc a quayre quaternio
onis, hic a snayre laqueus i, pedica a stayre greece gradus us, ascensus to
pair minuere, putare to snayre illaqueare to stayre aspicere, contemplare
fair pulcher a, formosus An effayre negotium i, res A coheyre cohaeres edis,
hic despair desperatio onis, to empayre peiorare, minuere to despair
desperare to repair reparare Ay ante S.
In ayse. A maise of hering quingenta A payse pondus eris, hoc praise laus
audis, haec A wayse cirrus i, cesticillus i to gayse conte^plari, spectare to
payse ponderare to praise laudare to raise excitare, exuscitare a disprayse
vituperium i a pomayse pumex icis, hic to disprayse vituperare to pomayse
pumicare In ayste. wayste co^sumptio, perditio wayst of body tabes is, haec a
swrayste plectrum i ye wayste cinctura ae to wayste consumere to wayste in
substance tabescere to wrayste torquere Ay ante T.
In ayt. a bayt esca ae, illecebra a bayt refrigerium, refectio ye bayt of a
bear vrsiprelium ye bayt of a bull tauri venatio a gayt, or got capra ae ye
playt of a cote plica, ruga ae playt thin bet lamina ae playt vessel vasa
caelata ye waytes aulaedi orum to bayt inescare to bayt by ye way reficere to
bayt a beast venari, captare to playt a cote plicare, rugare to playt a nail
replicare to rayt iurgare, expostulare to wayt for one expectare to wayt upon
one familiari to wayt or spy obseruare deceyt deceptio, fallatia ^ a forfayt
fallonia ae receyt recepta orum ye receipt in war receptus us a retreit in war
idem, refugium to forfayt transgredi to retreyte cedere, pede^ refer. Ay ante
V.
to wayue, wag. agitare to deceive decipere, failere to conceive concipere to
perceive percipere to receive recipere

In ea desinentia.
In ea. a flea pulex icis, hic ye sea mare is, hoc to slay occidere, necare yea
etiam, ita. Ea ante C.
In eace. A deace, table. mensa ae A fleace vellus eris, hoc grease inguen,
alluuies A mease of men quatuor A mease of meat. ferculum i A lease letter
locator, dimissor ye lease byer conductor trix peace pax, acis, haec A preace
of people confertus populus pressura ae hearts ease caltha ae to lease or let
leas locare dimittere ye lease letting locatio, dimissio ye lease let locatum,
dimissum to peace tacere, silere to preace upon instare, irruere to please
placere peace tace, au. In each. A beache tree fagus i, haec A peache apple
pomum persicum A peache tree malus persica speech loquela sermo A reach
porretio, onis leache, gelly gelu, ^oagulum to bleache cloth insolare,
candidare to preach predicare, docere to reach porrigere to streache
extenaere to teach docere, erudire an horseleach, man hippat; us i an
horseleache worm. sanguisuga to depeache absoluere to impeache incusare,
prodere to ouerreache anteuertere to misteache dedocere In eacle Treacle
theriaca ae a freckle neuus i ye freckles variolae arum Ea ante D.
a dead bacca ae, calcului bread panis is, haec feade odium i a gleade, kyte
miluus i an head caput itis, hic leate plumbum i a meade pratum ti meade,
drink promulcis idis, hic a stead, place statio, status, locus to head
decollare to kneade subigere ferme^tum to lead ducere to plead dicere causam
to shreade comminuere to spread sternere to tread upon calcare to tread, go
gressus ponere dead mortuus a read ruber a, um An assehead stupidus, bardus a A
blockhead stupidus a a grouthead capito onis, hic A forhead frons ontis, haec A
gyldhead, fish searus ri ye gyrdlestead cinctura ae A hogshead dolium i
maydenhead virginitas atis neyghborhead vicinia ae The^ be also many other in
head, and in hood, derived of substantives, signifying the state or degree of a
man and therefore may be called denominatiues: as chyldhead pueritia ae
womanhead muliebritas atis godhead numen inis, hoe manhood humanitas atis and
such other, the latin vvherof are also derived and fourmed like those that
come of adjectives, as the examples declare. to behead decollare euenheads
coaquales ye breadth of a thing latitudo In eafe. A leaf folium ij A sheaf of
corn manipulus i a sheafe of arows. xxiiij. calami deaf surdus da deaf to be
surdes^ere In eague. A league of peace foedus eris, hoc A league or mile
milliarium A beagle canicula ae In eake. ye beak of a bird rostrum i A fleake
matta lignea A freake gigantulus li ye weak of a cadle lichnus n^ to break
frangere to cleake corripere to peake into a place inspuere to screake screare
to speak loqui to wreake vlcis^i, vindicare^. A hornbeak, fish acus i A
thornbeak, fish. idem. bellium i to forespeake praedicere to forspeake
fascinare. Ea ante L.
In eale. An Eale anguilla ae A beale, den spelunca ae A deal portio onis
meal farina nae A peale of gu^nes etc. classicum i A queale pupula lae A
seal, fish. phoca ae, vitulus marinus A seal, signet sigillu^ li A teale,
bird querquedula ae veale velum i veale, meat vitulina nae A wheale pupula ae
A veale, calfe vitulus li to beale boar to ceele a house caelare to deal
distribuere to feale velare, abscondere to beale mederi, sanare to seal
signare to steal furari, surripere to sweal, as ye fire esslammare to weal,
choice eligere leale legittimus a A little deal parum ri A great deal multum
ti by flock meal minutim to appeal unto appellare ad to appeal, apeach.
accusare to repeal repellere, rescindere to reveal reuelare, detegere In
eald. eald age aetas atis, haec eald, old age. senium, senectus ye beald, for
we^ there vmbraculum to beald adificare to beald, succor. adu^brare, protegere
Ea ante M.
In eame. A beam trabs abis, haec An came, uncle auunculus li A dream
somnium, visio a leame of lightning corruscatio fleame flegma atis, hoc A leame
of fire fax, acis, haec ye leams of ye son radij solares a seame fimbria,
sutura ae a stream flustrum aquae a teame, cheane temo onis, hic a teame of
cattle iugum i to dream somniare to gleame corn spiciligere to stream
fluctuare to sweame somniare neamble agilis le Ea ante N.
In eane. a bean saba ae a cheane catena a a mean via, modus i ye mean
mediocritas atis a queen scortum, meretrix. to lean innitor eris to mean
velle, intendere to weane a child ablactare to weane lambs depellere lean
gracilis le mean medius, me diocris e to demean gerere se unclean impurus,
immu^dus a Ea ante P.
In eape. an heap cumulus i, aceruus i a leap saltus us to cheap licitari,
appreciare to heap cumulare to leap saltare to reap metere In eaple. a
sweaple partica ae a steaple campanile is, hoc a neaple, teate papilla ae Ea
ante R.
In ear a bear feretrum i a Bear, beast vrsus i, vrsa ae a bryar vepres
etis, haec a dear dama ae an ear auris is, haec an ear of corn spica ae
fear metus us a feere, mate familiaris is, hic a friar frater tris, hic gear
res ei, haec a meare stagnum i a pear pyrum i a spear hasta ae a tear stilla
ae, lachryma ae a whyer chorus ri a quear of paper liber, ri a year annus i,
hic sheares forsex icis, haec to bear far, gerere to bleare lippire to ceare
caerare to cheer exhilarare to dear, hurt molestare to fear timere, metuere
to hear audire to rear erigere to sheare tondere to smeare vngere to swear
iurare to t^are lacerare to wear on far to wear, waste. conterere clear
clarus a dear carus a meare merus a near propinquus a rear recens entis
near prope an herb herba ae In earche. a pearche ames itis, hic a search
inquisitio onis to search inquirere In eard. a bearde barba ae an heard of
catel grex egis, hic a sweard gladius i a yearde virga ae a yeard mesure verber
ye yard of a house atrium i ye yeard of a beast penis is, hic a globerd, worm
lampyris ios, haec a churchyeard coemiterium i ye wodyeard lignarium i There be
diverse other ending in yerd names of places where things grow, or are kept,
as these that follow. an hopyard lupularium i ye appleyard pomarium i the
fygyeard ficetum i the swynyeard porcile is, hoc and such other, whose latin
as the examples declare, do commonly end in arium, i, or in i will, or in etum, i.
a cearge caereus i an Earl Comes itis, hic a pearl gemma ae In earme. A
term terminus ni A term, word. vox, thema to term terminare to term,
name nominare, vocare In earne. fearne filix icis, hic an hearne ardea a to
earne moereri to learn discere dearne dirus ra In earse. A cearse incerniculum
li to searse sorutari fierce ferox ocis to perse penitrare oldfarne years anni
praeteriti, seculum prius. In earte. pearte audax, impudens malapert audaculus
a the earth terra, arida ae Ea ante S.
In ease. ease, quietuesse ocin^^ i ease of payn^s refrige ium i ease of ^bour
remissio ^^is ye ease o^ eues of a house suggrund^a orum Look other in eac^.
pease pisum to ease himself requiescere to ease pain mollire, to ease labor
remittere to lease perdere to sneese sternutare to disease molestare to
displease displicere an heasle corylus i, haec A wesyll mustela ae In east. ye
East oriens entis, hic A beast, tame iumentum ti A beast, wild sera rae A
beast bestia animal A breast pectus oris, hoc A feast coena, conuiuium i A
^east, scoff tocus i, sco^ma atis A gest or story gesta orum A smelfe ast
parasy^us i to feast conuiuari to jest iocari least, adiect. minimus a least,
prohib. ne A leashe lorum i In ^a^e. A ^^ale facinus oris, hoc ye (...) of a
lute paralelli orum ^^^te electrum i heat astus us, calor meat cibus i, esca
ae A peate cespes itis, hic A seat seeds is, haec, sella sweat sudor, oris,
hic A ^eate vber, papilla ae weate humiditus atis wheat criticum, frumentu^ to
eat edere, manducare to beat caedere, flagellare to bleate balare to freate
fremere to heat calefacere to s^eate sudare to threate minari to weate
humectare ye escheat fiscum i to defeat destituere, decipere to exchcate
confiscare to entreat inuitare, exhortari to entreat, handle. tractare to
repeat repetere neat nitidus a great magnus nae Great is also the figne of
certain adjectives, derived of verbes called verbals in ax: as great eater
edax acis great drinker bibax acis great liar mendax acis great flyer fugax
acis great speaker loquax acis. It is also the sign of diverse other adjectives
that answer to them in osus, when this sign full can not be used, as
ventrosus, we call great bellyed, because we can not well say, full of
bellyes. etc. great brested pectorosus a great backed tergosus a great necked
ceruicosus a great buttocked lumbosus a great legged tibiosus a great lipped
labiosus a And such other. Finally it is also the sign of certeiue
substa^tiues in o, derived of substa^t. great headed capito onis, hic great
cheeked bucco onis, hic great nosed naso onis, hic great toothed dento onis,
hic Ineath. A brcath spiritus, us, an heath caluetum i a sheath vagina ae A
wreath cirrus i, cesticillus i heath, herb crix icis, hic to breath spirare,
respirare. eath facilis le vneathe difficilis le uneath difficulter. Ea ante V.
In cave. ye eues of a house suggrundia, orum A leave folium ij to heave
attollere, elcuare to leave relinquere to reaue rapere to weaue texere, ordior
itus to bereave spoliare, priuare. Ea ante W.
In eawe. to breawe coquere potum to heawe tingere to teawe lether terere,
condire to veawe astimare to teawe wax mollire, terere to speawe, spuere,
vomere.

In Oy desinentia.
In Oy. A boy puer eri, hic Joy gaudium i ye roy haeres, princeps. A toy nuga,
sco^ma, iocus Troy, a city Troia, ae, Ilium i to cloy fame consumere to noy
nocere to be coy lasciuire coire to joy gaudere, latare coy lasciuus, a, salax.
to enjoy habere, frui. to employ nauare, elaborare to supploy vice fungi to
destroy destruere In oyce. A choice delectus us A voice, election. vox ocis,
haec A voice in election suffragium ij Look in oyse for mo. In oyde. void
vacuus a, cassus to void euacuare to avoid deuitare Hemoroydes. mariscae arum
A coyfe pilcolus li In oil. Oil oleum i A royle oblongula mulier soil solum
li spoil spolium, praeda to coil seligere to foil violare, polluere to royle
abroad diuagari to soil as a sow luto volutare A toil instrumentum ti to
spoil spoliare to toil el^borare synkfoyle pe^taphillon i, hoc goldfoyle
bractea ae a grounsoyle hypothyron i mylfoyle millefolium i A recoyle recessus
us terfoyle trifolium ij tynfoyle bractea ae tryfoyle trifolium ij to despoyle
despoliare to parboyle praecoquere to recoyle recedere In oyne. A coin numisma
atis, h^^ A ^oyne punctus us A loyne lumbus by A printers quoyn cuneus,
cuneolus i to coin cudere, signare to hoyne haerere, pausare to join iungere
to eniayne iniungere to vnioyne depangere to reioyne repangere. to adioyne.
ad^ungere In oynct. A point, prick punctus us A poinct ligula ae ye point of a
knife cuspis idis, haec A ioynct iunctura a A joint of body membrum i ye joint
of a straw nodus di ye joint of a finger articulus li to ioynct iungere to
vnioynct disiungere to point pungere to point a knyfe acuere to point with the
finger demonstrare A counterpoynt stragulum i to disappoynte destituere. Oy
ante S.
In oyse. ye ioyse of a house trabula ae A noise sonus us, strepitus A froyse
fritilla ae A poyse pondus eris, hoc to choice eligere to hoyse up attollere to
poyse ponderare, librare A tortoyse, fish chelys idis, hic to rejoice laetare,
resultare In oyst. A foyst, ship. liburna ae to foyst suffercire to moist
humectare to royst susque deque grassari moist humidus da In oyte. A coyte
discum us, i to coyte discum mittere.

Ou ante B.
In oubt. A doubt dubium i to doubt dubitare In ouble. trouble turba ae,
tribulatio to double duplicare to trouble turbare, vexare Ou ante C.
In ouche. A brouche monile is, hoc, mure nula A clouche pugnus ni A couche
cubile is, hoc, grabbatu^ A pouche sacculu^ i to couche nigh to^ gither
comprimere to couche down cumbere, decu^bere to touch tangere to anouche
asserere to mouche, eat mandere Ou ante D.
In oude. Blood sanguis inis, hic A cloud nubes is, haec A flood fluuius i A
shroude amiculu^, funerale is to shroude tegere, velare proud superbus,
gloriosus vnproude inglorius a Ou ante F.
In oufe. ye house of a horse vngula ae A proof probatio, tentatio A disproufe
improbatio to proof probare to disproufe improbare Ou ante G.
A bough ramus mi A chough cornicula ae ye cough tussis is, haec A plough
aratrum i a slough exuuiae arum A through of stone, of paper quadratus lapis
integra charta A trough, bote linter tris, hoc through per to plough arare
roughe asper, pilosus a tough tenax In ought. A bought plica ae, ambages naught
nihil, nihilum i thought cogitatio onis brought allatus, adductus ae bought
emptus a wrought laboratus a unthought incogi^atus a unwrought illaboratus a ye
longue sought pulmonia a Ou ante K.
In ouke. A slouke iners ertis, ignarus ye couk of an opple cor ordis, hoc A
iouke in war expeditio onis A stouke of corn strues manipuloru^ to douke
vrinare to souke sugere Ou ante L.
In oule. A boule globus i ye boule of a pot ansa, capulum A foul v^lu^res
is, haec A goule, gole meta ae A moule talpa ae An oule vlula ae, bubo A scoule
rixosa mulier A soul anima ae ye toule census us, i to boule mittere globum to
oule vlulare to poule an head tondere to poule by bribes depeculari to proule
for fish percontari to proule for riches omnia appetere to scoule rixari to
toule, take censum exigere toule, pay censum dare, soluere foul turpis e,
foedus a A swylboule helluo, bibax ye boult of a door pessulus i A coult
pullus equinus A boult to shoot sagitta ae An hoult of wood arboretum i In
old. ye could frigus oris, hoc gould aurum i An hold in war vallum, turri^ ye
hold of a thing retinaculum ye mould of the earth humus i, haec A mould talpa
ae A scould rixosa mulies A fould, or playt plica ae A fould for cattle
claustrum i A fould, for sheep ou^le is, hoc could to be frigescere to fould
plicare to mould inhumare to scould rixari to hold tenere bold audax acis
could frigidus a old senex, antiquus ae sold venduus a told dictus a An
household familia ae, haec A marygould calendula ae A scaffould theatrum, scena
ae A threshould limen inis, hoc to unfold replicare, explicare to wythhould
retinere, detinere manifould multiplex icis vnbould timidus, ignauus ae A
sheepefould ouile is, hoc There be diverse other, which ending in foulde, do
signify the place where some thing is kept: as these. A wodfould lignarium i
A pinfould argustulum i And such other, whose Latin ends in arum, or in,
i will, as the examples declare in oune. In oulne. to boulne tumere, turgescere
stoulne surreptus a Ou ante M.
In oume. A bloume germen inis, hoc broume genesta ae A broume scopa ae A
plo^me prunum i A room locus i, seeds is to bloume germinare, florere to
gloume, froune caperare frontem renoume gloria, laus audis Ou ante N.
In oune. a cloune rusticus a a croune corona ae ye crown of the head vertex
icis, hic a goune ^oga ae, sagum i a noune nomen inis, hoc a town oppidum i to
boune parare, accingere to br^une obsuscare to drown immergere, aquis
suffocare to croune coronare to froune caperare to poune spice tundere to roune
in aurem loqui to soune desicere to swoune idem, extasin pat^ oune debitus a
boune, ready paratus a br^une, black ater a broune fuscus a down deorsum A
pronoune pronomen inis, h^^ renoune gloria ae, sama ae In ounce. an ounce vncia
a a bounce, leap saltus us a bounce, of sound bombus i to pounce ins^ulpere to
denounce denunciare to pronounce pronunciare to renounce renunciare In ounche.
A bounche bruscum i In ound. A bound terminus, limes itis ye ground tellus
uris, haec ye ground of a building solum fundame^tum An hound canis venaticus a
A pound libra a, aes, pondus, A sound sonus i A stound statio, terminiu i A
wound vulnus eris, hoc to bound termenare to found fundare to ground idem,
fundare to pound ponderare to rond the nayls putare to round rotundare to sound
sonare to wound vulnerare bound ligatus, deuinctus round rotundus a an h^^hound
tricerberus i horchound marubium i maw^ound mahumetes i^ to expound exponere to
c^nfound confundere to redound redundare profound profandus ae unbound liber a
In ount. A mount mons ontis, hic to count comput^re to mount ascendere an
accoumpt computus i to accoumpt rationem facere to ouermount transcendere to
surmount excellere, excedere Ou ante P.
In oupe. a coupe, pen caula ae an houpe annulus i, canthus i a loupe ansa,
capulum i to scupe coenare to stoop humiliare se In ouple. souple lentus,
mollis e to souple mollire, linire Certain words omitted in O ante S.
In ose. a close fundus i a gloss glossa a an hose caliga ae a nose nasus i a
prose prosa ae a ro^e rosa ae to close claudere to gloss commentari to ^ose
perdere close clausus a almose cle^mosyna ae perclose vacerra ae a primrose
verbascum i a piupose propositum i to depose deponere to disclose detegere to
dispose disponere to enclose includere to oppose apponere to purpose proponere
to repose refuere to suppose supponere, putare In oose. a boose, stall bouile
is, hoc a goose anser eris, haec a booste, box pixis idis, hic Ou ante R.
In our. a boure conclaue is, hoc a flower flos oris, hic an hour hora ae ^
toure turris is, haec to coure cumbere, occultare to flower florere to pour
fundere to scour mundare, polire our, ours noster a your, yours vester a An
arboure arboretum i An herboure viretum, herbaretu^ harbor hospitium i
armoure armatura ae An augoure terebrum i An auctoure author oris, hic An
auntiatoure senior, antiquior An ambassador fecialis, legatus i An auditoure
auditor, rationarius A barboure tonsor oris, hic A barratoure factiosus a
behauoure gestus us, hic A color color oris, hic dishonor dedecus oris, hoc
honor honor oris, hic A dressoure, table tabula structoria An emperor
imperator endeavor conatus us, opera An error error oris, hic A contessour
confessor oris, hic A factoure factor, aduocatus A fatoure fallax acis favor
favor oris, hic A fautoure fautor oris, A genitoure genitor oris ye genitoures
testiculi orum An inquisitoure inquisitor oris labor labor oris, hic A
lechoure moechus i liquoure liquor oris, hic A manoure praedum i A myrroure
speculum i A neighbor vicinus, propinquus An oratoure orator oris, hic A
paramoure amasius i A parloure conclaue, coenaculu^ A savior seruator,
saluator A senatoure senator oris succoure auxilium, praesidiu^ A sodioure
miles it is, bellator A taboure tympanum i A vapoure vapor oris, hic A visdure
larua ae to color colorare, tingere to deflowre viciare, violare to devour
deuorare to honor honorare to dishonor de honorare to endeavor conari,
niti to favor fauere to labor laborare to sauoure sapere to succoure
succurrere to vapoure euaporare exterioure exterior oris interioure interior
oris superioure superior oris inferioure inferior oris Some write our, for
er, as sodioure, for sodier, pilloure for pillar, sclandoure, for sclander,
dangeoure for danger, printoure for printer, teachoure for teacher, redoure for
reder etc. Some also our, for or, as doctoure for doctor, proctoure for
proctor, senioure for senior, iuniour, for junior etc. Wherefore if any be here
not expressed, seek them in one of the other, and thou shall find it, or some
rule how to know it and to derive it, if it be such like. In ourd. A bourd
scomma atis, iocus ye courd of milk coagulum i A gourd, herb cucurbita a A
gourd, cup ^alix ieis, hic A tourd stercus oris, hoc merdae ae to bourd iocari,
scommari to cour as milk coagulare ri In ourge. A scourge flagellum, naruus i
A sourge of ye sea fluctus us, flustru^ i to scourge flagellare to sourge
fluctuare In ourne to mourn lugere to adiourne comperendinare to adourne
adornare, exornare to sciourne commorari In ourse A course cursus us, stadium i
An intercourse commertium i A concourse concursus us A recourse recursus us to
course cursitare course vilis e, grossus a Ou ante S.
In ouse. a crouse cherchesia an house domus us, haec a louse pediculus i, hic
a mouse mus uris, hic a spouse sponsus a to bouse captare pediculos to louse,
lose soluere to rouse a dear elustrare to spouse desponsare to towse laniare
louse laxus a, solutus a coperouse chalcantum i a dormouse glis iris, hic a
milhouse p^strinu^, moletrina a reremouse vespertilio onis scabiouse, herb
scabiosa ae a tirmouse, bird todus i a penthouse proiectum i a workhouse
officina ae a wodhouse lignarium a bakehouse pistrina ae There be many other
endyng in house, which signify the place where things be kept and occupied:
the latin ends in arium i, or i will is, as these: a wolhouse lanarium i a
cowhouse bouile is, hoe a shepehouse ouile is, hoc ye henhouse gallinarium i
effectuouse efficax, acis amarouse amicabilis e barbarouse barbarus a
bounteouse bonus, munificus a captiouse captiosus a compendiouse compe^diosus,
breuis contagiouse contagiosus a contrariouse contrarius a couetouse cupidus a
couragiouse animosus, audax dangerouse periculosus a ebriouse ebriosus a
enuiouse inuidiosus a ambitiouse ambitiosus a commodiouse commodus a courtiouse
blandus, effabilis dolerouse dolor plenus enuyouse inimicaebilis a exterouse
exterus a factiouse factiosus ae feionouse furax acis foysonouse foecundus a
goudiouse solennis e gorgrouse sumptuosus a greuouse moelestus a jealous
zelotypus a incuriouse incuriosus a infamouse infamis e industriouse industrius
a ioyouse laetus a lasciuiouse lasciuus a lazarouse leprosus a lecherouse
libidinosus a lycorouse delicatus a lethargiouse lethargi^us a lucriouse
lucriosus a merualouse mirandus a melodiouse harmonicus a meritoriouse
meritorius ae notoriouse notorius a, insignis odoriferouse odorifer, aromatic^
outragiouse immoderatus a pestiferouse pestifer a pitiouse pius a, miserieors
plentiouse copiosus a, abunda^^ preposterous praeposterus a ^^ottouse
luxuriosus a sklanderouse scandalosus a seriouse seriosus a tempestuouse
tempestuosus a timerouse timidus, verocu^dus tyrannouse tyrannicus a
trayterouse perfidiosus a treacherouse proditorius a variouse varius a,
instabilis auaritiouse cupidus a, auidus villanouse flagitiosus a vnco^modiouse
incommodus a vncurtiouse immitis e vncuriouse incurius a, ignauus vngratiouse
peruicax, perditus vnpretiouse impraetiosus a, vilis vnrebelliouse impertinax
acis vnreligiouse irreligiosus a There be many other, that end in (ouse)
beside these, namely adjectives formed of substa^tiues, and commonly those,
which answer to the Latin adjectives in (ofus) and in (entus) and signify
fullness or plentye of that thing which the substantive betokens, as
disdaynouse signifies full of disdayn, fastidiosus, a, contagiouse full of
contageon. contagiosus, a, and such like as these that follow. copiouse
copiosus a famous celebris e, famosus furiouse furiosus a, dirus a gloriouse
gloriosus a glutonouse gulosus a gorgiouse praetiosus a gratiouse gratiosus a
ieoperdouse periculosus a iniuriouse iniuriosus a inuiouse inuidiosus a ioyouse
laetabundus a laboriouse laboriosus a licentiouse licentiosus a malitiouse
malitiosus a menstruouse menstruosus a mis^heuouse flagitiosus a monstruouse
monstrosus a odiouse odiosus a, infestus a penuriouse penuriosus a perliouse
periculosus a pernitiouse pernitiosus a ponderouse ponderosus a populouse
populosus a preciouse prae^^sus a presumptiouse prosumptuosus a prodigiouse
prodigiosus a prosperouse prosper a rauenouse r^pax acis religiouse religiusus
a righteouse iustus a rigorouse rig^dus a ruinouse ruinosus a scrupulouse
scrupulosus a seditiouse seditiosus a sententiouse sententiosus a se^viouse
studiosus a sumptuouse sumptuosus a superstuouse superfluus a superstitiouse
superstitiosus a su^fettouse crapulosus a suspiciouse susp^iosus a tediouse
taediosus a troublouse turbidus a venemouse venemosus a virtuous studiosus a
vitiouse viciosus a victoriouse victoriosus a All which be of the same
signification that some of those deriuatiues are of, which end in, ie, as we
said in his place, and seem for the most part to be borovved and formed of
the Latin themes as copiouse of copiosus, furiouse of furiosus, famous of
famosus, and so forth of other. The Latin of these commonly ends in (^sus)
sometime in entus, and in other terminations. Ou ante T.
In out. A doubt dubium i A sloute, mock illusio. sucus i ye gout in ye
hand chiragra ae ye gout in ye ^eete podagra ae a loute verna, nebulo onis a
route of (...) caterua ae, turba ye snoute of a dog rostrum i ye snoute of a
ship rostrum i ye snout of a fish idem a spoure imbrex ieis, hae^ a troute,
fish varius i a ^rouse spear susciua a a clouse panniculus i ye clou^ set on a
garment, or on a shoe cento onis, hic to clou^e sarcire ^o doubt dubitare
(...) poute caeperare to route, snorte stertere to route, or royst grassari to
spout water exspuere shout, proud super^us, elatus ae stout, valiant validus,
strenuus a out for as a bankerout fidifragus a, are alieno oppressus a
wonderclout, blabbe garrulus, a, linguax a roundabout circulus i to bankerout
fidem fallere to mysdoubt diffidere devout pius a, deuotus, religiosus a about
circum, circae without sine, absque without door extra foris to go about
circuire to turn about circumuertere Compounde other verbes, ^gnifying to do
about, with circum, as, circumducere, to lead about or with, am, as amputare:
to cut about. etc. In outhe. a bouthe tentorium i a mouth os oris, hoc ye
southe auster i, hic ye southwest lybs ybis, hic ye southeast notus i, hic
slouthe accedia ae, ignauia, inertia ae ye truth veritas atis, haec youth
iuuentus utis, haec smouthe politus a a smouth tongue lingua compta to smouthe
polire, comere, concinnare.

DEO GRATIAS.
FINIS.

