AN EXCELLENT AND LEARNED TREATISE OF APOSTASY MADE BY the most reverend and
godly learned man M. John de l'Espine Minister of the word of God in the
Church of Angers in the Dukedom of Anjou.

DIRECTED AGAINST THE Apostates in the Churches of France.

Written first in the French tongue by the author him self, and now faithfully
translated into English.

The contents of the book appear in the page following.

ANCHORA SPEI

blazon or coat of arms

* Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollier dwelling in the Blackfriars near
Ludgate.

Anno. 1587.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPters following in this Treatise.
The Preface. Chap. 1. That there is want of judgment in the Apostates. Chap.
2. What the wretchedness of the Apostates is. Chap. 3. That God departs from
the Apostates. Chap. 4. That the Apostates are ever pursued by the Justice of
God which suffers them not to have any rest in their consciences. Chap. 5.
That the Apostates are without God though, they think and defend the contrary.
Chap. 6. That as the Apostates are without God, so they are without Christ.
Chap. 7. That the Apostates being departed from Jesus Christ are miserable.
Chap. 8. That the Apostates being separated from Jesus Christ are also deprived
of his spirit. Chap. 9. That as the Apostates have given over God, which in
the author of life, so also they do co^te^ne those means which they may use
to come unto him. Chap. 10. That the Apostates are deprived of the Sacraments
as well as of the word. Chap. 11. That the Apostates have no faith. Chap. 12.
That the Apostates are without the Church. Chap. 13. That it is a most
dangerous thing for the delayers of time who know the true Church not to
adioyne themselves presently unto it. Chap. 14. What the causes are which
hinder the delayers from coming to the Church, and how light and frivolous
they are. Chap. 15.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL MASTER THOMAS RANDOLPH Esquire, Master and
Comptrouller of her Majesty's Posts, and one of the Chamberlaines of her
Highness Exchequer:
THOMAS VAVTROLLIER Printer, wishes prosperity in this life, and the joys of
the life to come.
OUR Savior Christ, (Right Worshipful, and most Christian Gentleman) setting
forth the state of the kingdom of heaven, by the parable of the seed, Matthew
13. teaches, that some felvp^n stony ground, where it had not much earth, and
^one it sprange up, because it had not depth of earth, and when the Sun rose
up, it was parched, and for lack of rooting withered away; which our Savior
himself in the 20. verse of the same chapter expounds to be, he who hears
the word, and incontinently with joy receives it, yet has he no root in
himself, and dureth but a season; for as soon as tribulation or persecution
comes because of the word, by and by he is offended. The truth of which
doctrine has been most evident in the Church of God in all ages. Genesis 18.
Lot his wife will needs look back to filthy Sodom, because it is a rich,
and a pleasant place; and the old sons of Israel rather then they will
suffer a little adversity as the people of God, will return into Egypt (an
accursed land) so they may have their Leekes, their Garlike, and Onions; and
many will rather return to Caiphas, and to the palace of the High Priest,
Heb. 13.13
then they will go forth with Jesus Christ out of the Camp, bearing his
reproche^ refusing utterly to drink of the cup of the Son of God, to wear
his cognizance, and ar^ ashamed of the choler of his order; and will at no
hand suffer any thing with Jesus Christ (who has suffered all things for
them,) t^ reign, and to be glorified for ever with him^ And surely very
miserable experience hereo^ in these last times, may dailye be seen in the
Churches about us, as those of France, and other places: so many for the heat
of persecution, and least they should bear the cross of Christ, have, and
daily do return to that spiritual Egypt, and mystical Babylon, the mother of
all abominations. Among many reuolts and defections, there has been none more
fearful and horrible, then that most dreadful Apostasy, which befell not
long since on Saint Bartholomewes day, in the Churches of Anjou; so many
falling away, which never since returned to the sheepefolde of Christ: which
moved this excellent and godly learned man, Master I. de l'Espine, Minister of
the word of God, in the Church of Angers, to write this most excellent Treatise
unto them, that they might remember from whence they be fallen; that they may
see how they have defiled the Temple of God, and made sad his holy spirit,
and the holy Angels to be in sorrow and heaviness, beholding their fall, in
betraying the son of God, and in sclandering the sufferings of his glorious
Martyrs, banished and driven from their countries and houses, deprived and
forsaken of their fathers, mothers, wives, children, parents, and friends, cast
into dungeons among Toades and Serpents, bound and fettered, with ^ll cruelty
and outrage by hangmen and executioners mangled, afflicted, and tormented. But
alas these have refused this so great an honor, 1. Pet. 4. Romans 8.
as to communicate with the passions of Jesus Christ, and to be made
conformable unto his image, in suffering with him, and for the profession of
his most glorious Gospel. This godly and learned Treatise, written by the
Author in the French tongue, for the use and benefit especially of his own
Church, being delivered and commended unto me by a reverend and learned man,
faithfully translated into English: I thought it a meditation very necessary in
these times for the Church of England also: who although now (God be praised)
she need notto shrink for any fiery trial yet she knows not how near the
Lord his visitation is, Mat. 25.
and our Savior teaches his servants continually to watch. That I have
presumed to dedicate it unto your Worship. (...) think few men will ask,
and no man ought to marvel, who knows your zealous and most Christian
profession; and the great duties wherein I stand bound to your Worship for your
great favor and assistance in my distresses and afflictions. Only I beseech
you t^ receive it as a signification of my thankeful^ mind in duty toward
your Worship. The Lord give you grace still to continue even t^ the end, to
bless you here with all increase of Worship, and with all spiritual joys in
heavenly things, in his most blessed Son Christ Jesus. London, From my poor
house in the Blacke-Friers this present 9. of May. 1587.

Your Worships in all duty THOMAS VAVTROLLIER.

Heb. 6.4. It is impossible that they, which were once lightened, and have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and
have tasted of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come.
If they fall away should be renewed again by repentance: seeing they crucify
again to them selves the son of God, and make a mock of him. Heb. 10.26. If
we sin willingly after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sins, But a fearful lookyng for of
Judgment, and violent fire, which shall devour the adversaries. To the
Reader.
THere is some space of time expired since, that I purposed to write some little
treatise of Apostasy, and especially since the slaughter committed on Saint
Bartholomewe his day, in the which there chanced a most horrible and fearful
reuolting in all our Churches, so that of three parts two of them at the least
slipped back, of those which in the beginning entered into it with so great
readiness and courage, that it seemed they would continually abide in it,
without a mind ever to depart, whatsoever temptation should offer it self
unto them. Nevertheless I had hitherto deferred the same hoping that the fear
being ouerpassed, which as a storm and vehement wind, had carried them away
from the sheepefold, and having had leisure to settle themselves and gather
their wits together, they might either of themselves return, or else be easily
called back again by the voice of their pastors. But perceiui^g that the most
part of the Apostates, do not only slumber and harden themselves in their sins:
but also become contemners of God, and blaspeme without shame his word and the
true religion, and not content with this, strive by all means to withdraw
those from the house of God which continued steadfast in his service, and to
hinder those that desire to enter into it again. I deemed it not meet to
dissemble any longer, but to be necessary to put in execution the charge which
God has given his servants whom he has placed in the Church, not only to
pronounce remission of sins, to all those who by a lively faith will lay
hold of it through the preaching of the Gospel: but also the vvithholding of
the same, from all those, who with an hard and obstinate heart, do
stillre^ect the words and promises of salvation. Which must not seem
strange, seeing the Ministers of the Gospel be not only ordained to unloose
and absolve those that believe, but also to bind and condemn those that
remain obstinate in their infidelity. For which cause God seeing the
stubbornnes and hardness of the Jews, does send unto them his Prophet Esaias, to
blind and harden them yet more. Esaias. 6.9.
Go (says he) and say unto this people ye shall hear in deed, but ye shall
not understand: ye shall plainly see, and not perceive. Make the heart of this
people fat, make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, least they see with
eyes, and hear with ears, and understand with their hearts, and convert, and
he heal them. Which afterward was oftentimes alleged against the Jews by
Jesus Christ, Matthew. 13. Mark. 14. Luke 8. Acts. 28. Romans 11.
and his Apostles, to condemn their obstinacy. And as Moses publishing the
law, said to the people, that in it he set before their eyes life and death,
according to their obedience or disobedience toward the same, so S. Paul
writes, that the one and the other are represented in the Gospel, according
as the men to whom it is preached, are faithful or unfaithful. We are, 2. Cor.
2.15.
(says he) unto God the sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and
in them that perish: that is to say, to the one the savor of death unto death,
and to the other the savor of life unto life. And Jesus Christ also, as Simeon
said to the Virgin, is not he as well appointed for the fall, as for the rising
again of many in Israel? Luke 2.34.
And as he is to some sanctification and salvation, is he not likewise to
others a block of stumbling, and of offense, a snare and a net unto all those
which abide in unbelief? If then it chance that any Apostates or delayers of
time will spare so much leisure as to read this treatise: I desire them that
it may be with great attention, and that without any passionate or preiudicate
mind, they weigh all the reasons and arguments of the same, setting alvvayes
that before their eyes, which Jesus Christ spoke to his Apostles: that
whatsoever they should bind on earth by his word should be ratified and
firmly bound in heaven. To the end they may not deceive themselves in their
discourses and vain imaginations, esteeming the thoughts of God to be as
their thoughts, and his ways as their ways: contrary unto that which the
Prophet says. Let all of us therefore give place unto the word of God, and
let us believe that it shall be sure for ever and endure eternally. And
considering that by the decree and irreuocable ordinance of God it is necessary
that all knees should bend to do homage unto Jesus Christ: let us rather
choose to acknowledge and embrace him now for a Savior, and welspring of
life, then in the end be constrained to auouche him and find him, as the
Devils, a judge that will not be entreated, and a consuming fire.

A TREATISE OF APOSTASY MADE BY M. I. DE L'ESPINE MInister of the word of God
in the Church of Angers.
The Preface.
Chap. 1.
THE inconsta^cie of men is a thing which cannot be but most wonderful, unto
those who will consider it well, which may be perce^ued diverse ways: but
especially in the variety and alteration of their purposes and affections, and
in that they can not find any state of life in this world, which may either
wholly satisfy their humor, or in which they an abide and rest any long time,
for being by ^and by glutted with the thing which they ^resently enjoy, they
do either with grief de^re that which is not any more in their power, ^r else
long for those things which they could ^ot as yet obtain, and when they have
obtai^ed them, they will loath them as well as those which erst they had
enjoyed. And are like unto those who having a queasie stomach, find nothing
well seasoned for their tooth: or as sick bodies which are not able to find
any good resting place in bed, wheresoever they be laid. And although God by an
especial favor, does call some of them into his house, Heb. 6.4.
and bringing them into his church, does adopte the^ into his family to
lighten the^, and to make them taste of the heavenly gift and of the good word
of God, to make the^ partakers of the holy ghost, and of the powers of the
world to come, which is a condition the best that can be chosen or desired in
the world, and the which alone is able to bring contentement, and a perfect
felicity to all those that can obtain it: Nevertheless there are some so
crooked and froward, that having tasted of it, do in the end loath and
disdain it as well as the other. Though in deed: the dwelling in the house of
God be so happy a thing, Psalm. 84.
that the silly doorekeepers of the same ought to account themselves more happy
for having a little corner to abide in it, then if they had in other places the
most rich, gorgeous, and stately buildings in the whole world. But that
befalls these kind of men which the Poete^ and fables do record of the
moon, who desiry^ng her mother that she might have a garment, made fit and
proportionable for he^ body: she excusing her self, said: my daughter how can
that be since thou have a body subject to so many changes and alterations, and
which never any space reteyneth the same form? Even so it is not possible to
fit these men which are so inconstant and unstable, of any estate wherein
they can abide, and although to cover their shame, and to cloak somewhat their
inconstancy, they seek some vain and frivolous excuses, striving to ^ay the
fault of their lightness, upon that side which they had chosen: raising all
the false rumors and seladers that they can imagine, to diffame it and to show
that they have not forsaken ^t without great cause: nevertheless when all
things shall be narrowly searched, all the blame will light in their own necks,
and in the end ^t will appear, that even as, one can not fit a garment for
him that has a body misshapen, ^or a shoe for him that has a stubbed foot,
^ot because of the imperfection of the garment, ^r shoe, but because of the
body and of the ^oote to which they should be fitted: so these ^inde of men,
cannot find any estate which ^oth beseem them, or is altogether answera^le
to their appetite, only because of the de^ulte and corruption of their minds,
which ^e perverse and crooked, for as a body strong and well made, ca^ as well
bear the great coldes, and intolerable sharpness of winter, as the extremest
heates of summer: so a mind well disposed and as well instructed, is ever like
unto it self, and does not change according to the diversity of chances which
happen unto it: but having foreseen that in all kinds of life, there is
pleasure and pain, sweet and sower, and a like succession and recourse from
the one to the other, is never but well resolved happen what will: but in all
mutations remains steadfast, and as a quadrate and fouresquare body, is ever
firm and stable on what side soever it be laid.

That there is want of judgment in the Apostates.
Chap. 2.
What can then be said or judged o^ these wretched Apostates of our days, who
have so disloyally betrayed and denied Jesus Christ, forsaken the Church for
the redeeming and sanctifying whereof, he yelde^ himself to death, and
rejected the doctrine o^ the Gospel which was sent us down from heaven by the
spirit of God, Ephe. 5.25 2. Pet. 1. Heb. 1. 1. Tim. 3.
received of all the Patriarchs, preached by the Prophets, Jesus Christ and
his Apostles believed and approue^ in the world, and sealed by the death and
blou^ of so many millions of Martyrs and faithful witnesses, all which with
great constancy and invincible courage, have confessed and maintained it even
before Kings and Emperors, being not astonyed either with their presence, or
threatninges, or with most cruel torments which were prepared for the^, or
with any danger which either could be set before their eyes, or else which they
themselves could conceive? what ca they allege to colourther Apostasy? They
will in deed co^dene in the company of infidels, (which allow all that they
say and take pleasure ^n their talk) our Religion in general: yea there ^e
some so far gone and so shameless, that they dare openly name it evil: But
when any do urge them to show or note some particular ^ointe, either in the
doctrine or discipline, or ^ls in the whole order which we use in our
Churches, that may with reason be reprehen^ed: the^ they become as dumb as
dogs, and ^ewe unto all me^ of judgment and good vnder^a^ding that they are
but backbiters and that it ^s not any want, or color, that they have espied ^n
the religion, that has caused the^ to reuolte or ^indered the^ from
perseuering consta^tly in the ^me, as many have done, unto the end: But ^at it
was their own affections, which make all ^ose unsteadfast and inco^sta^t which
are not able to rule and govern the^: and a grief of mind, which ca^ not
bear the burden and weight of the cross, 1. Tim. 3.
which is joined with the profession of the true religion. And finally a
rashness and raging of the passions, which bear rule in that kind of men, and
do egg the^ forward, and carry them away in all their intents and actions,
more by a blind and unbridled fury, then by a prudent and sage counsel, and
if there had been in the^ but the least spark of wit and discretion, before
they had embraced the Religion, should they not have listened to the counsel
of Jesus Christ, Luke 14.24
and followed the example of those who inte^dyng to build a great and sumptuous
house, do before the undertaking thereof cast an accounte of the cost and
charges which must be bestowed thereon, lest that not having well weighed their
wealth, taking more in hand then they are able to perform, they be constrained
with shame in the end to leave their work unfinished: or of the king who going
to war with another, forecasteth diligently whether his power b^ sufficient
to overcome his enemy: fearing least that, he assaulting him being but weak,
he should be vanquished and put to flight? Our Apostates likewise, ought they
not before they embraced the Religion, to have considered first of all the
incommodities and commodities they should reap thereby: and that no man is
meet to follow Christ which is not resolved to expose himself to the ha^red,
Math. 5.
reproaches, injuries, and persecutions of the whole world? that has not a
cross continually laden on his shoulders to the which he be ready to be
nailed and tied up for the confession of the name of God when as his hour
shall come? Math. 10.
which also is not ready to give over with a cheerful heart, father, mother,
wife, children, Math. 19.
friends, houses, lands, honors, estates, kindred, goods, riches, pleasures,
rest, liberty, life, and all whatsoever he accounts most dear and precious
unto him in this world, to follow Christ? And who, to conclude according to the
example of Moses, Heb. 11.25.
does not rather chose to suffer adversity with the people of God, then to
en^oye the pleasures of sin for a season: estee^nying the Cross and rebuke
of Christ greater ^riches, then all the glory and treasures not one^y of
Egypt, but also of all the Realms and Empires of the whole earth. If the
Apostates ^ad been wise and well advised, they ought to ^aue forecast all these
things in their minds before they entered into the Church, and after ^o have
considered, whether in taking of this ^arte upon these ca^^^ons and conditions,
their ^trength were sufficient to sustain the^, which they did not: but as
freshwater soldiers, who for want of experience think, when they cause
themselves to be enrolled, and when first they muster under their captains,
that there is no trouble, no labor, no city, no force, that shall encounter
with them, which they are not able to foil and overthrow: and yet
nevertheless be discouraged and dismayed as soon as they come to any assault
or skirmishe, or else to any sore encounter wherein it behooves them to
bestirre themselves, and show in deed their virtue and valor. So they which
never had assayed the enemies of Jesus Christ, nor borne the bruntes and
assaults which the devil, the world, the flesh, the Antichrist and all their
troops do raise against him, and all those that follow him, thought that the
profession of the Gospel had been but a play or sport, and under that hope
entered into the Church of God. But perceiuyng the evil entreaty which the
children of God receive in it at the hands of the world, they continued not
long in it without repenting, and seeking the means by the which they might
withdraw themselves from it, Ioh. 6.
with some honest cloak if it might be possible: because they could be content
to follow Jesus Christ, as those who hoped to have lived of free cost in his
company, and to find always the tables furnished: but not as Simon of Cyren,
upon condition to carry his cross after him. I appeal unto your consciences, O
ye Apostates, is not this the truth of it? If the kitchen of the Huguenotes had
been as fat as that of the Chanons, Bishops, Abbotes and Cardinals of
Papistry, and the Religion which we follow as easy to the flesh, as
Antichrists, you would doutlesse have stayed with us: being yet at this day
convinced in your own consciences, at least if there remain any at all in
you, that the truth is on our side, and that the service done unto God in our
Churches is wholly administered according to the rules and ordinances which he
himself has left us in his word: and that contrariwise the Popes and all his
adherents Religion, is nothing else but mere trifles and toys, and vain
ceremonies, which light headed men have invented and established in ^he Church
of God of their own brain, Psalm. 119.
when the candell of the word of God was extinguished and put out, which ought
ever to go before us as a light, to lighten and guide us in all ^hinges which
we do to serve him: for we can ^ot swerue never so little from it but we shall
^umble by and by, like silly blind men: consi^eryng that the whole service of
God to be ^ue and lawful, must be measured by obedience, which can only be
grounded upon his laws and holy decrees. 1. Sam. 15.
For if we will go about to do any thing which concerns his service, except
that which he himself has expressly prescribed: he will say unto us that
which is written in the Prophecy of Esaias, Esaias. 1.12.
who required or sought these things at your hands? Let the Apostates then
give glory unto God, and cease, if they ca^, from blaspheming against the
spirit of God, against the doctrine of the Gospel, against the Church,
against Jesus Christ: to conclude against the truth and wisdom which they
themselves have justified and approved, when they were as yet in their right
wits, and when as the devil which is entered into their hearts with seven
other spirits worse then himself had not troubled their minds, as he has
done since they are departed from the house of God: and let them accuse rather
their own foolish inconstancy, which has caused them to give over the best
side without all comparison, and the surest, and the most honorable, that can
be chosen by reasonable me^, namely God his side of which David speaks,
Psalm. 16.5.
The Lord is the portion of mine inhetaunce and of my cup, thou shall
maintain my lotte, the lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places: yea, I
have afayre heritage. And moreover I will praise the Lord, who has given me
counsel: my reins also teach me in the ^ightes. I have set the Lord always
before me: for he is at my right hand: therefore I shall not slide. And ^n
another place: yet I was always with thee: Psalm. 73.23
thou ^ast holde^ me by my right hand: thou will guide me ^y thy counsel, and
afterward receive me to glory.

What the wretchedness of the Apostates is.
Chap. 3.
But now let the Apostates stay themselves here a while to consider, into what
a ^eepe pit and gulf of wretchedness and mi^eries they have cast themselves
into, leauyng God, who is the welspring and fountain of ^ife and alfelicitie:
Psalm. 36.8.
in whom alone consists all ^he good that we ca^ ever desire, look or hope
^or: and who alone by his abundance, is able ^o satisfy and content all our
appetites, and ^onely by the brightness of his countenance, Psalm. 16.
^o make us perfectly happy. The happy and e^ernall life, says S. Augustine,
consists in that we live with God and of God: that is to say that he himself
be the soul which does animate and quicke^ us, and the food which does
^ourish us. O God, said David: Psalm. 23.
thou art my portion and all my good: and in the 23. Psalm: The Lord is my
shephearde I shall not want: which is to say, that we may handle more
particularly that which he says in general; into what danger so ever I fall
thou shall be my Savior: in darkness thou shall be my light: in war, thou
shall be my defender: in sickness thou shall be my Physician: in sorrow and
weariness of mind, thou shall be my comfort: in my feebleness, thou shall
be my supporte: in perplexity, thou shall be my counsel: when I am gone
astray, thou shall be my guide: being fallen, thou shall take me up again:
standing, thou shall maintain me: in poverty, thou shall be my treasure: in
misery, thou shall be my felicity: in pain, thou shall be my solace: in
sin thy mercy shall be my justice: in judgment thy grace shall be my absolution:
to conclude in death, thy spirit shall be my life. There is nothing then that can
be wa^tyng unto us in God in whom are all things: what did thou think, O
thou most wretched creature, when as thou forsookest him to yield thy self over
unto Idols, Psalm. 115.5
which cannot teach thee any thing, being dumb, nor see thy miseries, being
blind, nor hear thy prayers, being deaf, Ier. 10.
nor defend thee, being unable, nor go and come to succourthee, Hab. 2.
being notable to bestirre themselves at all: do thou not serve this day for
an example to verify the saying of the Prophet? Psalm. 115.8
that those which serve and worship them are like unto them: having no more
sense or understanding then they have? for it is not needful to allege any
other argument to prove that thou art deprived of all judgment, then the only
exchange and permutation which thou have made of god to Idol, which is as much
as to say of an all to a nothing, and of a happiness to a misery: for so the
false gods are called in the Scripture. May we not now ^ay of thee and of
those that are like unto thee, that which the Prophet Ieremye once spoke with
great exclamation. O ye heavens, Ier. 2.12.
be a^tonied at this: be afraid and utterly confounded, says the Lord: for my
people have committed two evils: they have forsaken me the ^ontaine of living
waters, to dig them pittes, ^uen broken pittes, that can hold no water. If a
^usband were cruel, rigorous, and altogether ^ntollerable in his manners, and
in his conuer^ation, the wife which should leave him, and ^epart from his
house, not being able to bear ^is evil entreaty which he should use toward
^er, might in some respect be excused: but if ^e should love her as he ought to
do, and in ^ll things be gentle and bountiful unto her, supporting her in all
her infirmities, and entreating her with all meekenes and bening nity, should
she not be blamed and condemned of all the world, if she would forsake him?
What then can these Apostates obiecte against God wherewithal to cover their
Apostasy? Psalm. 145. Matthew, 9. Matthew. 5. Psalm. 145.8 verse 15. Psalm. 146.7
God, I say, who is so meek and gentle, whose mercy, as the Prophet says,
endures for ever, who alone is good, and causes his sun to shine upon the
good and bad, and who does send the rain both to the just and unjust. Who is
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great mercy, who is good to all,
and his mercy is over all his works. The eyes of all, says he a little after,
wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat in due season. Thou openest
thy hand, and fillest all things lusing of thy good pleasure. And in the Psalm
following: He executes justice for the oppressed: he gives bread to the
hungry: the Lord loses the prisoners: the Lord gives sight to the blind:
the Lord raises up the crooked: the Lord loves the righteous. The Lord
keeps the strangers, he relieueth the fatherles and widow. Mich. 6.3.
The Lord complains by his Prophet Micha, of his people, that had
treacherously forsaken him, having never given them any such occasion. O my
people, what have I done unto thee? or wherein have I grieved thee? testify
against me. Surely I brought thee ^ut of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee
out of the house of servants. All this complaint does it not belong unto the
Apostates, who have so villanously given over this mighty God, of whom they
have received the life, and all the moving and feeling which they have, who are
only of him, and by him, who have neither and house, nor goods, which they
hold not of him, and of his mere favor: who without him are nothing else but
nothing, and altoge^her vanity: who has so often spared them, ^lthough
through their hypocrisy, and other ^housand and thousand damnable sins, they
^aue deserved many times utterly to be cast ^waye, and who yet at this present
hour would stretch forth his arms to receive and unbrace them, if by a true
repentance they ^ould in some sort return unto him. And notwithstanding after
he had so many ways testified this so great liberality toward them, their
children family, and all that belong unto them, they have all at once
forgotten the ^enefites which they have received, together with the author
which has bestowed them: and they themselves who by the inioying of them, do
make themselves at this present guilty of a most villainous ingratitude, is it
possible, I pray you, sufficiently to detest this most odious and execrable
crime, to have left such a Lord, and with great contempt to have turned the
back unto him, after so many honors and favors, such bountiful and good
entreaties, to go a whoring after those two ruffians and whore-mongers: namely,
the Devil, and the world, who are altogether infected, and most filthye, to
the end to commit again whoredom and adultery with them? Is it possible
also worthily to lament the pitiful and miserable estate, to the which the
poor wretches are brought at this day? For as they have forsaken God: so he
for his part has forsaken them, and departing from them, has also bereaved
them of his spirit, and of his grace whereof he threatened the Jews, who
obstinately rejected him, and the word of the Gospel which he preached unto
them: your house says he to them, Matthew. 23.
shall be left desolate: for when we regard not to know God, Romans 1.28
he gives us over into a reprobate mind void of understanding: and then we
are cast away utterly and destroyed, without all hope of any recovery. As the
Prophet said: Lo, they that withdraws themselves from thee, Psalm. 73
shall perish: thou destroyest all them that go a whoring from thee: as for me,
it is good for me to draw near unto God: therefore I have put my trust in the
Lord God, that I may declare all thy works.

That God departs from the Apostatates.
Chap. 4.
THere have been some which have gone astray sometimes from God, whom
nevertheless God forsook not, as our first parents, who being created of God,
after his image, that is to say, in state of innoce^cie, good, perfect, whole
of body and soul, free, wise, and ^f they themselves had would, immortal and
^appy: nevertheless not being contented with their first estate which he had
granted unto them in his house, forgetting themselves, and ^he great benefits
which they had received at ^is hands, by a pride and damnable oversight, ^hey
forgate straight way their duty, and the ^bligation by the which they stood
bound unto him, and withdrawing themselves from ^is obeisance, they did
forthwith cast themelues and all their posterity headlong into ^he great
miseries which we see and feel yet (...) these days in the world. David
likewise, ^ho had been so loved, cherished, and favored ^f God, who had exalted
him even to the sce^ter, and the royal throne, and had given him the leading
and governing of his people of Israel: yea and had honored him with his
covenants and promises, as he had done our father Abraham: nevertheless all
these graces and favors did not hinder him from forgetting and offending him:
Which was the cause afterward of great broiles and tumults which arose and
spronge up in his house, as it had ben^ out of a spring. The prodigal son
also left his father, and in steed of humbling him self before him, and
staying in his house to perform that service toward him which was due, came
unto him in great pride of mind to ask^ him the portion of the goods that fell
unto him: and since that time did nothing but go^ astray more and more,
frequenting evil company, Luke 15.12
and spending in a short space all that h^ had gathered together with dissolute
and riotous persons, until such time as being driven to extreme necessity,
he began to come to himself again, and to return to a good judgment. S.
Peter likewise, who by the doctrine works, and example of Jesus Christ, had a
long time been instructed and informed in his company, in which he had been
borne-withall i^ his ignorance and other infirmities, and received infinite
favors of his master: Mat. 26.69
neuerthele^ he denied him, and at such time as he ought to have been nearest
unto him, to have assisted and comforted him. Now all these aforesaid, had for
a time left God, and were worthy through their ingratitude and disloyalty, to
have been utterly rejected of him, but he did not execute the rigor of his
judgment against them, Luke 15.4.
nor rewarded them as they had deserved, because in deed they were his
children: but has sought them himself as poor silly lost sheep, which were
altogether ready to perish, if he by his great mercy and grace had not soon
prevented them. And all this good did betide them, because he had neither given
them over, nor forgotten them, as he had been forgotten of them, and because
this deep root of the good pleasure of God did still reserve and retain in
it some sap and juice to keep them from withering and dying. But the
Apostates who willingly, and of set purpose, not being forced by any
constraint, have revolted from God, Heb. 6.6.
of whom we see so great a number in these latter days, what hope can remain
in them, sithence they can not be renewed again by repentance? Heb. 10.26
seeing there remains no more sacrifice for their sins: and se^ng they
crucify again unto themselves the son of God, and make a mock of him? the
Apostle does propound unto them nothing else but a fearful looking for of
judgment, and violent fire which shall devour the adversaries. Moreover, being
no more participant of the prayers of the Church, or of the prayers of Jesus
Christ, Ioh. 17.9.
who going to his death, declared that he prayed not for the world, and by
consequent, they were excluded from the Communion of saints, what hope is
there of their salvation? I know well enough that the most part of them do
jest at those things which we say, and that they do not believe, either the
word of the Apostle, or ours: But they ought to note that which S. Paul
speaks: 1. Cor. 10.22.
namely, that neither we nor they are stronger, no nor so strong as God, that
we should prevail against him. Matthew. 5.18.
Also the heaven and earth shall perish: but one iotte of it shall not pass
till all be fulfilled: and to conclude, that which the wise man says, that men
commonly make great discourses in their minds: but whatsoever they think, the
counsel of God gets the upper hand, and what imagination soever we have to
the contrary, he remains stable, firm, and immovable. If then the Apostates
having cast themselves out of the Church, do give no more place or authority
to the word of God, or to any admonition which may be made unto them in his
name, it is time lost to speak unto them, as experience teaches every day
those that will yet make proof thereof. And what show or likelihood soever
they make, that they have a desire to return to us again, they do it either
to deceive us, or to content in some sort those of whom they have yet some
regard, and not for any good will they bear unto it. Let us therefore leave
them in their filth, following the counsel of Saint John. He that is unjust,
let him be unjust still: Apoc. 22.11.
and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let
him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still. Let those
notable sayings of the Prophet never be blotted out of our hearts. Blessed are
the people that be so, Psa. 144.15 Psalm. 33.12
yea blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord. And this likewise. Blessed
is that nation, whose God is the Lord: even the people that he has chosen for
his inheritance. As also this. Psalm. 73.27
They that withdraw themselves from thee, shall perish: thou destroyest all
those that go a whoring from thee. As for me, it is good for me to draw near
unto God: therefore I have put my trust in the Lord God, that I may declare all
thy works.

That the Apostates are ever pursued by the justice of God, which suffers
them not to have any rest in their consciences.
Chap. 5.
When we said that the Apostates having left God, are also in like manner
rejected of him. It must not be understood generally, as though God were
altogether departed from them: for filling all things (as the Prophets save)
there is no part of the world which is not replenished with his essence: but
we understand only, that he is separated from them, as touching his grace, his
mercy, his spirit, his sanctification, faith, remission of sins, repentance,
and all means of their salvation. For as concerning the power, wrath, and
justice of God, they can not so escape, but that they shall be pursued
incessantly. For there is no mean between the mercy and wrath of God: Ioh. 3.
and it is necessary that whosoever does disdain his grace, should in the end
taste of the rigor of his justice. But now the case stands so, that the
wrath of God abides upon us, until such time as it be turned away, and
avoided by a true faith in the Gospel, Heb. 10.
that is strong and stable unto the end. The Apostates then, who all at once
have not only made shipwreck of their faith, but also of the Gospel, of God,
of Jesus Christ, and of all religion, have they not day and night, waking and
sleeping, the sword of the wrath of God continually hanging over their heads:
Numb. 22.23.
but as Balaam his ass perceived the sword which pursued him before his
master, who rode upon him: so such men are so blinded by the Devil and their
own lusts, that they can not perceive the judgments of God which are at
their heels, and follow them step by step. O that their eyes were open as
the eyes of Elisha and his servant, 2. King. 6.17.
then should they see about them millions of devils ready to destroy them, as
the servants of God saw themselves environed with an infinite multitude of
Angels to defend and save them, though in deed they think nothing less, they
being unto them invisible: nevertheless they ought to consider the danger to be
so much the greater, because hidden enemies are ever more dangerous, then those
who are altogether open and known. So the Devils and all the gates of hell,
yea and all the creatures which are in heaven and in earth, be enemies unto
those that are enemies unto God, and to those from whom he has withdrawn his
favor: and there is not one of them which does not with all her might and maine
strive and contend to bring to pass their destruction: as likewise contrarily,
Romans 8.28
all help to salvation, to those that love God, and are loved of him again:
and there is no creature which does not by and by make a covenant with us, when
we are once firmly knit and united unto him. Hosea. 2.20.
I will even mary thee unto me in faith fulness, (says the Lord) and thou
shall know the Lord. And in that day I will hear, (says the Lord) I will
even hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth, and the earth shall
hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Israel.
Whereby we may easily gather, that all creatures draw near unto the children
of god, and do chearish them as soon as they see them come into favor with
God: and contrarily, that they slide back and start aside from those who are
bereaved of his grace. For it is a general rule which we ought ever to
remember: Leuit. 25. Deuteronomy. 28.
namely, that the grace and love of God, is the offspring of all benediction,
and that his wrath on the other side is the fountain of all male diction: so
that without the one nothing is blessed, and with the other all things are
cursed. What then can these wretched Apostates do, who eating, drinking,
going, coming, whether they sit or stand, whether they walk or lie still, are
ever musing in their bed, at the table, within and without the house, before
and behind them of the wrath of God, with a firebrand in his hand ready to
consume them. If they will turn aside, Amos. 5.19.
they shall meet with a Lion (as says the Prophet) if they will return
thinking to flee, and save themselves: on the other part, there will by and by
a Bear start out before their eyes: and if to assure themselves on all sides
they will come to their house again and lean their hand on the wall, they
shall find in it a Serpent which will ^ite them: which is as much to say, as
that ^hey can neither find hole nor secret corner, wherein they may hide
themselves from the wrath of God, which is exceeding fearful ^o all those to
whom he sends it, as the Apostle says: He. 10.31.
That it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Which
may evidently appear by the examples propounded unto us in the Scriptures,
Genesis 4.14.
as in Caine, who having slain his own brother for religion, and fled from
the face of God, that is to say, having given him over, and the Church which
was gathered together in his fathers house, never had afterward a^ye rest of
conscience: but as a man vexed with fury, went here and there like a
vagabound and runnagate, with a fire which did consume him, and with an
unquietness of mind, which suffered him not to rest in any place. 1. Sam.
18.10.
Saul likewise when the spirit of God had forsaken him, and was departed from
him, did not the cuill spirit foorth-with come upon him, and since the time
never ceased to torment him, vnti^ he had thrown: him headlonge into despair?
Judas also, after he had betrayed Jesus Christ, Ioh. 13.
and that the Devil by reason (...) his covetousness had once entered into
his heart, and had drawn him away from the true Church, which was the
company o^ Jesus Christ and his Apostles, to reconcile himself unto the
Priests and Pharisees, and to make him to enter again into their Sinagogue,
had he ever any quietness in his soul after that? did he ever think of any
thing but only how he might destroy himself hopyng though in vain by this
means to rid himself out of that fearful grief wherewith his conscience
was vexed and tormented? And they of whom mention is made in the Prophets,
Apoc. 6.16 and cap. 9.
and in the Revelation of Saint John, who having received the badge and
cognizance of the beast, and having drunk of the cup of her whoredoms and
abominations not having repented, seeing themselves in the end overwhelmed
with the judgments of God, for having ever been coupled with Antichrist,
will they not say to the mountains fall on us; and to the earth open thy
self, de^our and swallowe us up quick: to the end ^^ey may escape by this
means if it were pos^^le the great grief and anguishe of mind ^herein they
live? All which testify plainly unto us, that the wicked who separate
them^elues from God, and will exempt themselves ^^om his obedience, are so
pursued by his iu^tice, that they can never take any good rest ^^ their minds.
Also the holy Scripture says that in whatsoever happy and flourishing estate
they be, whatsoever prosperity they have, whatsoever riches or goods they do
possess, ^o whatsoever honors and dignities they are exalted, and whatsoever
delicacies and sweet pleasures they mioye, yet notwithstanding they are never
at rest nor at quiet in their minds. Esaias. 49. Psa. 34.16.
For (as David says) The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to
cut of their remembrance from the earth. And their conscience which waits
continually on them as it were a Sargeat never cease to threaten them, and to
set before their eyes, continually the wrath of God, and his arm which is
always stretched forth to beat them down. And I pray you what other thing is
hell, eternal fire, gehenna and the bottomless pit, where the Devil and the
reprobate shall be condemned to remain for ever, then this horror, and lively
apprehension and feeling of the wrath o^ God, which does pearce and goes
clean^ through them? Iam. 2.19.
As Saint James says, that the Devils believe there is a God and tremble There
is nothing that causes the Angels in heaven to be contented and happy, but
only the feeling of God his love toward them, which they read and plainly
see expressed in his face, and in the earth likewise there is nothing that does
comfort the children of God, and uphold them in all their afflictions, but his
great and incomprehensible love toward them, which they see unfolded in his
word, in his sacraments, and in the whole order of the church, and above all
in the face and death of his son. That is it which David desired above all
things, sal. 4.6.
as it appears: Many say, who will show us any good? But Lord, lift up the
light of thy countenance upon us. Thou have given me more joy of heart, then
they have had when their wheat and their wine did abound. I will lay me down,
and also sleep in peace: for thou, Lord, only make me dwell in safety. And
contrariwise there was nothing that he grudged at so much nor that grieved him
so sore, as when he saw the liberty taken away by the tyranny and violence
of Saul from resorting with the people of God, unto those places whereas he
^iscouered his face unto them. Psalm. 42.1.
As the heart ^rayeth for the rivers of water, so pants my ^ule after thee, O
God. My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God: when shall I come and
apeare before the presence of God. And not only David: but also the whole
church in all ^ges has ever in her greatest afflictios sought and found her
principal consolation in the countenance of God. Let us therefore hear what
she says. Turn us again, O God, Psalm. 80.3.
and ^ause thy face to shine that we may be saved. And (...) little after, Turn
us again, O God of hosts: verse. 7.
Cause thy face to shine and we shall be saved. As ^e says in an other place
also, Psalm. 34.5.
They shall look unto him, and run unto him, and their faces shall not be
ashamed. A man who every where would fly the light of the sun, and seek to
^iue in darkness, would he not be most miserable, abhorring the fairest, the
pleasantest, and the most necessary creature, that God has placed in the
world? What will then become of the Apostates who fly the face and presence of
God which is a light in which there is no darkness, 1. Ioh. 1.5.
and of which as of the sun all the earth ought to rejoice, when as by his
grace he sends down his clear light and bright beams upon her. For as the
moon looking upon the sun by her aspect, does receive from him all her
beauty and brightness so we receive of God alone, all the virtue and
perfection that is in us, when as it pleases him to look upon us with the eye
of his mercie^ And as the earth is commonly desert, barren, and not inhabited,
in those regions which lie far distant from the sun, having neither delight
nor commodity that either may draw strangers to frequent it, or else allure
the inhabitants to remain and abide in it: so when God is departed from any
realm, province, city, house, or private person, all is dark and out of
order in it, and there is neither delight nor any good at all that can rejoice
or content him that dwells therein. Cicero.
The old Philosophers had wont to say to cause friendship to be more
commendable and amiable to the whole world, that without it man his life was
loathsome and unsavory, and that in the society and traffic of men, it did
serve to that use that falt does in meats, that is to say, to season them, and
cause that the one take pleasure and delight to live and occupy with the other.
Which is true, and daily experience does teach us that when we power out either
our joys or our sorrows in the bosom of our friends, such communications
serve greatly to increase the one and diminishe the other. But there is no
comparison between the friendship of men which is inconstant and uncertain,
and the ^oue of God which is never more sure and ready, then when all the other
fade and fail, as says the Prophet. Psalm. 27.10
Though my father and my mother should forsake me, yet the Lord will gather me
up. Ought we not then to fear contrary to the Apostates, least God should
turn away his loving countenance from us and look upon us with an angry eye
as David. Hide not thy face from me, Psalm. 27.9.
nor cast thy servant away in displeasure: Psalm. 143.7
And in an other place Hear me speedely, O Lord, for my spirit fails: hide
not thy face from me, else I shall be like unto them that go down into the pit.
Consider in what a perplexity the Church is, that is to say, the true spouse
of Jesus Christ as soon as she feels not her husband by her, and how she
will not cease seeking of him both day and night, not being able to take any
rest until she has found him: Cant. 3.1.
In my bed by night (says she) I sought him that my soul loved: I sought him,
but I found him not. I will rise therefore now and go about in the city, by
the streets and by the ^en places, and will seek him that my soul lo^^h: I
sought him, but I found him not. The ^^chmen that went about the city, found
me: to whom I said, have you seen him whom my soul^ loves? When I had passed
a little from them, the I found him whom my soul loved: I took hold on him
and left him not, till I had brought him unto my mothers house into the chamber
of her that conceived me. By these words we may gather how great the desire of
the Church is to be ever in the presence and company of her espouse, and the
sorrow which she conceiueth, when as she misdoubteth his departure from her, be
it never for so short a space, and we may note also the difference which S.
Augustine makes between the true, and the bastardly Church: the one (says he)
resembling a good woman, who being chaste and loiall toward her husband, whom
she honoreth and loves intierely, does dread nothing so much he being present
then least he should depart very speedily from her, and being absent least he
tarry long before he return unto her home again. And the other contrariwise
who being unfaithful unto her husband, and not contented with his company
has one or many lovers, desires nothing more then if he be absent, then that
he tarry long before he return, and if he be present, she fears nothing more
than that there should befall unto him some business whereby he might be
constrained to abide a (...) continue with her a longer space then she
desires. The Apostates then who having nothing in more horror then to come
before God, and appear in his presence in the companies which assemble
themselves together in his name, and who would for very shame, and ^emorse of
conscience which does prick and ^ting them incessantly, that none should ever
^alke of any Christian assembly, or any exer^ise of true religion: but that all
the world, according to their example should return to their former
abominations, do they not show ^uidently by this, by what spirit they are led,
and that they have forsaken the chaste and ho^est Church, to return to the
unchaste and dis^iall synagogue in which they are ever vexed and tormented with
the fear which they have ^ontinually to be prevented by the sodame ^omining of
the Lord, and by his judgment ^nlooked for: even as the adulterous woman
(...) in a perpetual fear and mistrust to be found and taken in her fact by
the sudden return of ^er husband. Let not those then who revolt ^om God
voluntarily, as we see a number e^erie day, think ever to be at quiet, or
safety, whatsoever they do to find rest, being pursu^d by the Sergeantes and
ministers of the iu^^ice of God, among whom the principal and most combersome
is their own conscience: and afterward as many creatures as are in heaven, in
earth, and in hell. For as S. Paul says: The wrath of God is revealed
manifestly from heaven, Romans 1.18
that is to say, from all parts, upon allinfidelitie, and unrighteousness of
men, keeping back the truth in iniquity. Psalm. 21.8.
And David says: Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies, and thy right
hand shall find out them that hate thee: thou shall make them like a fiery oven
in the time of thine anger: the Lord shall destroy them in his wrath, and the
fire shall devour them. Their fruit shall tho^ destroy from the earth, and
their seed from among the children of men: for they intended evil against
thee, and imagined mischief, but they shall not prenaile: therefore shall thou
put them apart, and the strings of thy bow shall thou make ready against their
faces. Considering that the dominion o^ our Lord God is stretched over all
things, and by consequent, his justice not being bounded or limited in any
place, who is he that can escape and save himself by his own power when as he
shall summon him before him David speaks to this end: Psalm. 139.7
Whether shall go from thy spirit? or whether shall I fly from thy presence?
If I ascend into heaven, thou a^^ there: if I lie down in hell, thou art
there, Cou^ a man who had committed treason, and gri^^uously incensed the king
against him, be at suerty or ease in any part of his kingdom? Upon what then
can the Apostates ground and establish then rest, being wheresoever they shall
become under the dominion of our Lord God, from whose eyes they can not hide
themselves, but he will espy them out wheresoever they lie, and can not shun
the power of his hands, but that he can overtake them, and overthrow them
whenever he thinks it good. If then there remain in them any spark of
light and judgment, to weigh and ponder these things, and as much conscience
to apprehend and lay hold on them: it is not possible but that they should
feel in their hearts most terrible terrors and torments. For as there are no
greater consolations then those which come by a lively apprehension of the
mercy of God^ ^o on the other side there are no crueller pains then those which
spring of the sense and feeing of his wrath and judgments. But some will say,
that the Apostates have commonly their consciences feared with a hot iron, and
^isensed with the Lethargicall drowsines, that ^hey apprehend no more the wrath
then the ^race of God, the threatenings then the promi^es, the cursings then the
blessings, which I ^rant, and likewise that they strive as much as in them
lies, to expel out of their hearts and minds all thoughts which come unto
them, as well of God, as of religion: yet they can not so choke the synteresis
of the conscience, but it will set before their eyes and call to mind some
times such things as they would willingly but yet are not able utterly to blot
out of their memory: for the power of the word of God and his judgment is so
great, that it causes it self to be felt and understood even in creature
that are without life, as the sea, the winds, the waves, the tempests, the
stones, the trees, the mountains, Psalm. 29.3.
as David says: The voice of the Lord is above the waters: the God of glory
makes it to thunder: the Lord is upon the great waters: the voice of the Lord
is mighty: the voic^ of the Lord is glorious: the voice of the Lord breaks
the Cedars: yea the Lord breaks the Ceders of Lebanon: he makes them also
to leap^ like a Calfe: Lebanon also and Chirion like (...) young Unicorn.
Psalm. 114.1
And in another place: When Israel went out of Egypt, and the house of Iaco^
from the barbarous people, Judah was his sanctification, and Israel his
dominion. The sea saw it and fled: Jordan was turned back: the mount ain^
leaped like Rams, and the hills as Lambs. Wh^^ ailed thee, o sea, that thou
fleddest? o Jordan, wh^ wast thou turned back? ye mountains, why le^ped ye
like Rains, and ye hills as Lambs? The earth trembled at the presence of the
Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob, which turns the rock into water
pooles, and the flint into a fountain of water. And in another place: Glory
be to the Lord forever: let the Lord rejoice in his works: he looks on the
earth, and it trembles: he touches the maintains, and they smoke. And in the
prophecy of Nahum: Nahum. 1 3.
The Lord is slow to anger, but great in power, and will not surely clear the
wicked: the Lord has his way in the whirlewinde, and in the storm, and the
clouds are the dust of his feet. He rebukes the sea, and dries it, and he
dries up all the rivers: Bashan is wasted and Carmell, and the flower of
Lebanon is wasted. The mountains tremble for him, and the hills melt, and the
earth is burnt at his sight, yea the world, and all that dwell therein. Who can
stand before his wrath? or who can abide in the fiercenes of his wrath? his
wrath is powered out like fire, and the rocks are broken by him. By these
passages it does appear, how God when it pleases him, does cause even the
most senseles, and most brutish creatures in the world, though they have not
offended him, to feel the force of his wrath. As men sometimes in their anger
will break a pot or a glass, though those things ^e nothing culpable of the
fault of the servant or the maid, who has caused the master to be wroth. And
seeing he can cause himself to be hard and known of sicknesses, of death, and
of the devils, who are constrained to obey his word presently, how were it
possible that the wicked should exempt themselves from his fury, that he should
not make them taste thereof, when and in what sort it pleases him? Although
then the Apostates being departed from God, would feign persuade themselves
that they are well at ease, and make the best show outwardly they can with the
Papists: yea and laugh and scorn with them of religion, yet they can not so
well disguise themselves but that a man may oftentimes perceive the worm which
gnaweth their hearts, and that the laughter which appears in the outward
lips is but a Sardonian laughter, full of anguish and grief, and like unto
those who laugh when they are tickled, which is not natural, but noisome and
grievous.

That the Apostates are without God, though they think and defend the contrary.
Chap. 6.
THe Apostates complain of us; and say we do them wrong, to think so of
them, and to cast in their teeth, that they are without God, considering they
make their prayers unto him, and that they ferue and worship him in the
assemblies of the synagogues where they meet. But when all things shall be
diligently examined, and our reasons well weighed, every one will confess,
that that which we say is most true. And first of al, when we say of them that
they are without God, it is not our intent to say, that they are no more under
the dominion of God, as though he had no more authority or power over them:
for notwithstanding their defection and Apostacy, he does not cease to be
still their Lord and their Judge, as he is also unto the Devils, and unto other
reprobates. But this is it which we ^olde, that they be not the children of
God, Gal. 3.
nor comprehended within his covenant: Romans 9.8.
that ^o them the promises of salvation concerning their efficacye and
operation do not ^ppertaine: Gal. 4.6.
and that they have not the spirit of adoption, which has engraven and ^ealed
the grace of God in their hearts, and makes them to cry Abba father. But now
to speak properly: God is God only of those who by faith are ingrafted into
the family of Abraham, and made the children of the promise: by reason whereof
ten tribes of Israel having severed themselves from the covenant of God, under
the crown of Jeroboam the son of Nebat: God does denounce unto the^ by his
Prophet that he does not acknowledge them any more for his people. And to
assurr, ^n better thereof he commands the Prophet to call his last son his
name Locrian for ye are not (says he) my people: Hos. 1.9.
therefore will I not be your God. To the Jews also who made their boast that
they had God to be their father, Jesus Christ who knew very well that they had
broken his covenant, rejecting and persecuting him so obstinately as they did,
he I say who is the only means and ground thereof said unto them. Ioh. 8.42.
Ioh. 8.44.
If God were your father; then would you love me: for I proceeded forth, and
came from God neither came I^ my self: but he sent me. Ye are of your father
the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do: (...) has been a
murderer from the beginning ^ a^ abode not in the truth, because there is no
truth^ him. When he speaks a lie then speaks he^ his own, for he is a
liar, and the father thereon By this speech which Jesus Christ had wit^ the
Jews it may well be thought that the^ were far ouer-shot in their reckoning,
t^ think they were the children of God, becau^ they were circumcised, and bare
about the^ the tokens of his covenant: seeing they were so far of from being
accounted for such, as ^he does rather esteem them the seed and progeny of
the Devil, because they yielded themselves wholly obedient to his hests, which
are to love untruth and to seek the death of all those, who love, preach, or
favor in what sort soever the truth. We must not then judge by outward
apearance, of those that are of the house and family of God. For there are many
of whom his name is called upon, and who say unto him Lord, Lord, Math. 7.21
which shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he only that does his
will. Many (says Jesus Christ speaking to the Jews) will say to me in that
day, Lord, Lord, have we not by thy name prophesied? and by thy name cast out
Devils? And by thy name done many great works? And then will I profess to
them I never knew you: depart from me ye that work iniquity. And Saint Paul
speaking to the Jews in the same sort, who thought themselves to be united
unto God, because they had received the law, the circumcision, and other badges
of the covenant. Did he not say unto them (reprehending that vain considence
which they put in these outward things) Behold thou art called a Jew, Romans
2.17
and restest in the law, and gloriest in God, and know his will, and
allowest all things that are excellent, in that thou art instructed by the law:
and perswadest thy self that thou art a guide of the blind, a light of them
which are in darkness, an instructor of them which lack discretion, a
teacher of the unlearned, which have the form of knowledge, and of the truth
in the law. Thou therefore which teach another, teach not thou thy self?
Thou that preachest, a man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that
say a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? Thou that
abhorrest Idols, committest thou sacrilege? Thou that gloriest in the law,
through breaking the law dishonourest thou God? And a little after he does
conclude: verse 28.
For he is not a Jew which is one outward: neither is that circumcision, which
is outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew which is one within, etc. If then the
only observation of the ceremonies of the law, though they were ordained of
God, and auctorised by his word, were nevertheless unable to knit the people
unto God: how comes it to pass that the Apostates are so foolish as to
think that for having betaken themselves to papistry again that is to say,
for having returned to their own vomit and abomination, they are entered
again into the covenant of God, who is the God of them only, that by faith,
words, and works, do profess and show that they are and will continue his
people for ever. If ^hen thou have withdrawn thee from it, and ^o cause thy
self to be in account amongst ^hine own, thou do declare openly and
blamely, with a shameless face, that thou will never be of that number again?
Art thou so unwise as to believe, that God will be a father unto him by force,
who does disdain him, and does refuse to be of his people, and to be accounted
in his house among his children? Moreover since there is no agreement between
Christ and Beliall, 2. Cor. 6.15. 1. Cor. 10.21.
and that No man can be partaker of the Lord his table and of the table of
Devils. Having rejected Jesus Christ his part, ^n betaking himself to
Antichrist and his company, and returning to the mass renounced the death and
sacrifice of the son of God: Art thou so brutish as to think that denying
Jesus Christ to be thy brother, John. 1.
his father can account thee for his son? considering that ^e is the only
author and mean of our adoption, and that with out him God does not only not
hold us for his freindes and confederates, but does esteem us for his mortal
foes. And therefore S. Romans 5.
Paul does exhort us to withdraw our selves from the company of Idolaters and
Infidels, if we desire that God should adopt us to be his children. 2. Cor.
6.17.
Come o^ (says he) from among them, and separate you^ selves, says the
Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you, and I will be a
father unto you and ye shall be my sons and daughters says the Lord
almighty. 1. Ioh. 2.23
Saint John says that whosoever confesses the son has also the father,
and contrarily whosoever denies the son, the same has not the father, that
i^ the reason wherefore when he was circumcised the name of Immanuell was given
him, to le^ us understand, that there is none but he alone that can cause us to
come near unto God, and set us into his covenant, making us partaken of his
grace, and of the remission of al our sinne^ by the perfect obedience which he
yielded in our name, Phil. 1.
even to endure for us the death of the cross and to bear the curse which was
enjoined by the law, Gal. 3.
to the end he might acquit us. Considering then that Jesus Christ is the only
mediator of the agreement and covenant which may be handled between God and
men, and that the Apostates departing to Antichrist his side do separate
themselves from him thence it may be inferred necessarily, that they are
without God, being without Christ: as Saint Paul showed the Ephesians writing
to them after this manner. Ephe. 2.11
Remember that ye being in time past Gentiles in the flesh, and called
uncircumcision of them, which are called circumcision ^n the flesh, made with
hands, that ye were I say, ^t that time without Christ, and were aliens from
^he common wealth of Israel, and were strangers from the couenantes of
promise, and had no hope, and were without God in the world. If then these who
had not as yet been called by the preaching of the Gospel during the time of
their ^gnorance and infidelity, were reputed by the Apostle to be without God
because they were without Christ: how much more by greater ^eason may we
avouch the same of those, who after they have been illuminated, and had tasted
of the word of God, and also been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, being
willingly departed from the knowledge of the truth, which they had received,
have trod the son of God under their feet, and esteemed the blood of the
covenant whereby they were sanctified, a thing profane, and committed so
horrible an injury against the spirit of grace. It must then be concluded,
that as the Apostates have treacherously forsaken God: so he for his part has
justly renounced them, and given them over for a pray: as says the Prophet.
Psalm. 81.12.
I gave them up unto the hardness of their heart, and they have walked in their
own counsels: and also (as says the Apostle) as they have made (...)
account to acknowledge God: Romans 1.28
so God has given them up to a spirit void of all judgment, that they may
commit things which are not seemly. These are then the guides which these
poor blind men have to lead and counsel them in their affairs: Romans 8.
namely, the concupiscence of their own perverse hearts, a reason altogether
dulled, Ephe. 2.
their unbridled senses, the wisdom of the flesh, which is nothing else but
death, and over and besides all that, the Devil, who is the prince of
darkness, and the spirit that does work in the children of disobedience being
thus guided can they fail sone to stumble into the pit?

As the Apostates are without God, so are they without Christ.
Chap. 7.
WE have showed in the chapter going before, that the Apostates are without
God. Let us now show that they are also without Christ, and without a Mediator:
which shall be very easy to do. 1. Tim. 2.5.
For as there is but one God, (as the Apostle says) so there is but one
Mediator between God and men, namely, Jesus Christ. Furthermore, as Jesus
Christ is a Mediator of the new covenant, to reconcile the chosen to God the
father, and make him to be their God as he is his, and that with full assurance
they may lay hold of him, and call upon him as their father: Ioh. 17.2.
so God does give them unto his son, to instruct and lead them to salvation,
and unto the life to which they are ordained. So that it can not be but that he
that has the Eternal for his God, has also Jesus Christ for his Mediator:
and contrariwise, he that is deprived of the one, must be also bereaved of the
other. Moreover, following Antichrist, and making open profession of his
religion, as well by works as by words, and bearing his name, his badge, his
cognizance, how can they appertain to Jesus Christ, seeing he is a mortal
enemy unto him, 2. These. 2.8 Matt. 6.24.
and Whom he shall consume with with the spirit of his mouth, and shall
abolishe with the brightness of his coming? None (said Jesus Christ) can
serve two masters, Especially when their natures and dispositions be so far
different, and disagreeing. How then can it be possible to set at one Jesus
Christ with the Pope? Whose doctrine, life manners, counsels and end are
altogether contrary. And if they can not be made to agree between themselves,
Matthew. 12.30.
how is it possible that one man should betake himself to them both? Also He
that is nor with Christ is against him, and he that gathers not with him
scatters. As he said himself to note his, and causes them to be known. A
man may then be known to be a Christian when he is united with his head
unseparably, and that with him he does labor to gather, that is to say, to
make the Church populous, and to increase and multiply the number of the
citizens of the kingdom of God. When as then there is any man seen who
contrarily does strive and glory to employ, all his means and power, to hinder
the establishing of the Church, and who withdraws all those he can, fearing
nothing more then to see it to take root, or has greater despite then to see
it to florishe and bear fruit: may it not be said of him when he is so bent
and animated against Jesus Christ, that he is his enemy, and a true member of
Antichrist? Since he fights with so great a courage to defend and
maintain him in that kingdom and possession which he has, partly by craft
and hypocrisy, and all such evil and wicked means, partly by violence, and
too too great favor which some indiscreet princes have borne him usurped,
upon the son of God: whom he has robbed of his glory and of all his
prerogatives and dignities: striving yet at this with his adherents, to burye
wholly the remembrance of his name. Furthermore, considering the case stands
so, that by two marks those are known, who do belong to Jesus Christ: Ioh.
18.
namely, when they are not of the world, and be of the truth; who will say that
the Apostates appertain unto him, who have forsaken him and his company, to
return to the world. For Papistry whereto they have retired, 1. Ioh. 2.16
is nothing else but the world: that is to say, the lust of the flesh, the lust
of the e^es, the pride of life. And there is neither Realm nor Empire upon the
earth, wherein sloth, dainties, pleasures, whoredoms, dissolutenes, pride,
banqueting, feasting and ambition, with all kind of vanities and excess,
abound more, then in the Roman Court, and in the palaces of their Cardinals,
Archbishops Bishops, Abbots and Priors: neither wherein there are men more
effeminate and corrupt, then those who follow the Popish Court: By reason
whereof the hears of women are attributed unto them, Apoc. 9.8.
by Saint John in the Revelation. Where we may behold a most notable and ample
description of their pompes, riotes, and all their royal magnificences, Apo.
17.4.
under the figure of the great Whore, arrayed in purple and scarlet, and gilded
with gold and precious ^ones, and pearls, having a cup of gold in her hand
sull of abominations and filthiness of her fornication. And the mortal hatred
likewise which they al bear unto the truth, which they cannot abide to be
published without wonderful grief and passion of mind, nor without spilling
cruelly the blood of the faithful witnesses of Jesus Christ, and that in such
abundance, that they and the whole earth are drunken and ouercharged
therewith. All the world sees every day the attempts and practis^ which they
work by their Ambassadors whom they send forth into all quarters like a
company of Furies, to shake all the corner^ of heaven and earth, and to stir
up by all meane^ they may, the great Princes and Potentates, tha^ they should
hinder their abuses from being descried, and that the truth should not b^
known, nor the kingdom of Christ establi^shed. Seeing then that the Apostates
are re^turned to the world, and are gone again t^ the camp of Antichrist,
and do employe a^ their fetches and forces to quench the light (...) the
Gospel, and to hinder the advancement (...) the truth: may we not justly say
of them tha^ they are the enemies of Christ? For those tha^ are of his flock
and are his sheep, (...) Ioh. 10.3.
hear h^voice, and obey him, acknowledging him for their sheepeheard, and
follow him as their ligh^* They are neither afraid nor ashamed to confess his
name publicly, and by their testimony to confirm the whole doctrine which he
has preached, and are not held back from following of him by the remembrance
of the hatred of the world which might be set before their e^es, of the loss
of their goods, of the danger of their life, of a thousand other inco^modities
which do accompany all those that make a true and right profession of the
gospel. The Apostates then who will not bear these burdens, nor submite
themselves to these condici^ons, can not be the disciples of Jesus Christ:
neither can he receive them otherwise into his school and company. Moreover
did he not say that no man could be his disciple except he were resolved
indeed, to abide constant and ^table in his doctrine unto the end? those then
who for a time have received, followed and ap^roued it, and tentations coming
have slidde ^acke from it, have they not showed thereby that it had never taken
root in their hearts, and that the profession thereof which they made for a
time, was but in show and outward ap^earance only? which action he has in
abho^ination above al other things: which he does ^eclare by effectie, when
departing from Ieru^lem, Math. 21.19.
and finding by the cit^e a fig tree without fruit, which had but leaves
only, cursed it at the same time. Neither ought it to be marueiled at, if god
who is for ever true, and who loves a rou^dnes and sincerity in all things, ca^
not suffer long in his house such hypocrites and disguised persons, without
discovering and making them known. When a branche of the vine is shred of,
shall we say it is yet of the vine, or any member to be yet of the body after
it is cut of? If then the Apostates not staying the censure or judgment of the
Church have prevented it, and have excommunicated themselves, se^uering
themselves of their own accord not only from the body: but also from the head:
what ca^^ they look or hope for at Jesus Christ his ha^d^ from whom they are
altogether separated? did they not euedently show by that, that they were not
the plants which God the Father had planted. Mat. 15.13
For if they had been of the number he would not have rooted them up. Ioh. 10.
And that likewise they were never of the fould o^ Jesus Christ: for who were
able to pluck o^ take them out of his hands by force? and also that they were
never well grounded: for the house which has not his ground upon the sand
but upon a strong rock, can not fall o^ be beaten down by any wind that
blowet^ upon it, nor by any tempest or wave that bea^teth teth against it. To
conclude, Mat. 7.24.
they have showed by this their reuoulting, that they were never of the seed:
or of the children of Abraham to whom the promises of salvation and blessings
do belong. Genesis 15.5.
For such are as the stars of heaven, which are so fastened and fixed within
the firmament, that they can never be moved out of the place wherein they were
set in the beginning. So likewise the children of God being ^nce in the
kingdom of heaven, they do abide ^n it as in their houses, and dwell therein
with^out ever departing from thence as the Prophet says: Psalm. 65.4
Blessed is he whom thou choosest and cau^est to come to thee, he shall dwell
in thy Courts. Psalm. 23.5
And in an other place, Thou do annointe my ^eadwith oil, and my Cup
runs over. Dout^s kindness, and mercy shall follow me all the days (...) my
life, and I shall remain a long season in the ^use of the Lord. Whereunto that
agrees which ^ spoken by our Savior Christ in S. John. Ioh. 6.37.
all ^ut the Father gives me, shall come to me: and ^m that comes to me I
cast not away. Whereby ^ appears plainly that when the chosen are ^nce
entered into the fould of the shepeheard it ^ to abide therein, and to be
nourished in the ^me for ever: and therefore S. John speaking ^f those who in
his time had revolted and for^ken the church, said, they were not of us, 1.
Ieh. 2.19
for if they had been of us, Iud. 13
they would have continewed with us. What shall we say then of those wandering
stars, which could not stay themselves in the house of God, to be continually
partakers therein of the brightness of the Son of righteousness, which does
shine day and night without end and for ever: but that they are all eclipsed,
and have loved darkness rather then light and the company of the devil who is
the Father a murderer from the beginning more, the^ Jesus Christ's: Ioh. 8.4.
who is the way, the life and the truth.

That the Apostates being departed from Jesus Christ are miserable.
Chap. 8.
BY the reasons and arguments which w^ have heretofore rehearsed, we have
suffici^ently proved, that as the Apostates are without God, so also they are
without Christ* Whereof it may be inferred, that they are mo^miserable: for who
can be happy without Go^ who is the welspringe and fountain of li^^ and all
happiness; and without whom all oth^^ goods are nothing but a curse and
misery. F^^ the temporal goods, as are riches, possession and friends; the
corporal goods, as health stre^g^an^^ and beauty: the goods of the mind, as
the ripenes of wit, virtue and learning, if all these be not blessed of God,
and accompanied with his grace they can neither profit nor benefit any way
him, who possesses them: but contrarily without the blessing of God all will
turn to his misery, Esaias. 5 1 Timothy, 6.9
his riches shall serve to no other end but to set on fire and continue his
desires: to puff up his heart with pride, to cause him nether to regard nor
make acoumpt of his poor neighbors, to put his trust in vain, corrupt, and
uncertain things, to be at superfluous and prodigal expenses, and which is a
great deal worse and most dangerous, Luke 3.
to withdraw him from the kingdom of god, and to let as thorns and weeds to
hinder the good seed of the word of god, from growing and fructifying in him.
His friends in stead of good counsel will flat^er him, Mat. 13.22
and will seek by him their own profit ^ot his. They will withdraw him from
the fear ^k service of God, to entice him to follow the ^anities of this
world. In prosperity they will ^ugh with him, and sooth him up, but in aduer^ty
they will flitte and forsake him. Concerning ^he bodily goods as health they
will abuse it to ^ugh, sport, leap, dance, play, to hau^t company (...) feasts,
to quaffe, to commit folly and excessewith ^ut al measure: their strength they
will employ to beat, strike, maime, rauishe, steal, spoil and oppress in
every respect al those whom they suppose to be weaker then themselves, and
less able to make resistaunce. They will use their beauty and good favor (if
they have any) be it either in their speech or in their countenance in stead
of a baude, to seduce and circumuent all those with whom they can acquaint
themselves, and into whose favor they can insinuate. As for the goods of
their mind as it might be quicknes and dexterity of wit; they will employ
them to invent crafts and subtities, to cosen and deceive those with whom
they have to deal: and to boaste when by some subtle slight they shall have
gotten and allured some one to intrappe him in their net: if they have
learning, it will serve but to pusse the^ up and to vaunte of: and by a vain
ostentation to cause themselves to be esteemed among men to conclude it is not
possible for a man without God, who is the chiefest good, to use or acquaint
him self with any other good thing. For all creatures be good, and god by his
own testimony after be had created all things in six days, 1. Tim. 4 4.
approved that which he had done, and without any exception spoke of his works
that all in general and every one in particular were good: Genesis 1.31.
that is to say^ commodious, necessary, pleasant, profitable and wholesome.
But in that consideration, that he do by his grace bless the use of them. For
as the Apostle says. 1. Tim. 4.5.
They be all sanctified by the word of God, and thanks giving: unto the
faithful only: and to those which have known the truth. For as he says in
another place: Tit. 1.15.
unto the pure are all things pure, but unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their minds and consciences are defiled.
Is not then the condition of the Apostates wretched, that being without God,
without his grace, they are also miserable in all things? that is to say that
the bread which they eat, the bed whereon they lie, the very coat and shirte
which they put on, the light which does lighten them, the wood and fire, which
warmeth the^, the air which they breath in, the water, wherewith they wash
themselves, the earth which does bear and nourish them, and al things
generally which they use are unclean unto them, Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
and bring a wretchedness upon them. For there is nothing but the word of God
which we believe and observe, the obedience which we perform unto him, and the
fear of his name wherein we walk, that does make us holy and happy in all
things. As the Prophet says: Psalm. 1.2.
that he which delights in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does
meditate day and night? shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of waters,
that will bring forth her fruit in due season: whose leaf shall never fade:
so whatsoever he shaldo, shall prosper, And in an other place. Psalm. 119 165
They that love thy law, shall have great prosperity, and they shall have no
hurt. And as they who love God and serve him do prosper in all their affairs
under his favor and blessing; so the wicked who go astray from him and
blaspheme him, though that for a time they have the wind at will, and though
it seem to them and to the whole world that all things do fall out unto them
according to their mind, nevertheless al their felicity in the end being
accursed and not favored of god, does finish in great misery. As David also
says: Psalm. 1.6.
The way of the wicked shall perish. But as the wicked ca^ not be happy without
god, being the author of all felicity, so they can be no less being separated
from Jesus Christ who is the only means thereof. He is the blessed seed which
at his coming and by his obedience first has taken away all the malediction
which had been brought into the world, by the disobedience and rebellion of
our first parents against the commandementes of God. And then secondly has
brought afterward again the blessing which God had promised to Abraham for
him: Gal. 3.
and his seed. That is to say for those that should believe in the promise to
him made. This is also the reason why among other names which are given unto
him by Esaias, this is one amongst the rest, namely the name of Prince of peace.
Esaias. 9.6.
Peace in the Hebrew tongue signifies prosperity and happy success, it
seems the^ since the spirit of god has so named Jesus Christ, that he would
teach us by the name which he gives him, that he only at this present is the
spring of happiness and of all good whatsoever in the world So the Angels
bringing tidinges of his birth into the world, Luke 2.11.
told the shepherds of Judea to whom they disclosed it first, Unto you is
borne this day in the city of David, a Savior, and verse. 14.
which is Christ the Lord. Glory be to God in the high heavens and peace in
earth, and toward men good will. And the Prophet speaking of his kingdom
said, Psalm. 27.3.
The mountains and the hills shall bring peace to the people by justice.
verse. 6.
And a little after in the same Psalm, He shall come down like the rain upon
the mowen grass, and as the showers that water the earth. Also we see that the
Apostle in all his Epistles does wish even in the beginning unto those to
whom he writes, the peace by god the father, and by our Savior Jesus Christ.
to teach us, that all prosperity comes from God, who does give and send it by
his son Jesus Christ, which the Prophet Malachy would also have signified
unto us, when calling him The son of righteousness, Mal. 4.2.
He does add that it is he that does bear health under his wings, that is
to say, who by his light and heat, which he sends to all the world by his
beams, does rejoice and bless all his creatures. Ioh. 8. and 9.
For by the self same reason he is called the light of the world; not only
because he does lighten our understanding in the knowledge of God, and of all
things which are profitable unto us; but also because in that respect he does
resemble that corporal light: that as it is the means of the bringing forth,
growth, and ripeness of all the fruits, plants, trees, and sensible
creatures of the earth: so is Jesus Christ the cause and mean of the salvation
of the good, and of all the happiness and felicity of the world. And what
other thing would the Prophet Esaias teach: Esaias. 11.6.
when as prophesying of him he said that at his coming The wolf should dwell
with the lamb, and the leopard shouldly with the kid, and the calfe, and the
lion, and the fat beasts together, and a little child should lead them: and
that the cow and the bear should seed, and their young ones should lie
together: and the lion should eat straw like the bullock, and the sucking
child should play upon the hole of the aspe, and the weaned child should put
his hand on the cockatrice his hole. Then should none hurt nor destroy in all
the mountain of his holiness, for the earth should be full of the knowledge of
the Lord as the waters that cover the sea. The Prophet by all this discourse,
and by all these allegories which he has used, and wherewith he has
beautified his speech, would signify unto us nothing else, but that the
felicity which had been banished out of the world by the sin of our first
parents, should be brought in again at the coming of Jesus Christ by his
righteousness. Whereof the Apostle in his epistle to the Romans speaks more
plainly after this sort. Likewise then as by the offense of one, Romans 5.18
the fault came on all men to condemnation, so by the justifying of one the
benefit abounded toward all men by the justification of life. And in the first
to the Corinthians, For as by man came death, 1. Cor. 15.21.
so by man came the resurrection of the dead; for as in Adam all dye, even so
in Christ shall all be made alive. In death which is extreme misery, he does
comprehend all other calamities and curses, which by sin have ouerflowed as
a flood and violencie of waters, and have drowned the whole world, and on the
other part, by life, which is the chiefest felicity, he does understand,
the good, the happiness and all the blessings that Jesus Christ coming into
the world, and taking in it our nature, has by his obedience brought unto the
elect, as well in this world as in the world to come. The case then standing
so, that he is the only means whereby men may be blessed, considering the
Apostates have separated themselves from him, may it not thereof be inferred
that they are wretched and miserable, not only in their persons, but also in
the use and fruition of all other things which are in their power to attain
unto, though they do not perceive or feel it at this present; because they
are blockish and like unto children, who at the age of two or three years lose
their fathers and mothers with the rest of their friends, who in the absence of
their parents, might help and succor them in their necessities: this loss
is a great misery unto them, which nevertheless they do not conceive. No more
likewise do fools consider the loss of their understanding and use of
reason, though it be the greatest evil that can befall them. So these poor
souls being in the extremity of all miseries, as well for having forsaken, as
for having been forsaken of God and of Jesus Christ, think to be at saf^tie
because they have abandoned the Church: and hope in time to come to live at
their ease and in the mean season do not perceive a thousand thousand
miseries which they dragge after them in every place wheresoever they go. An
old Father had wont to say, he was content if it were possible, never to be
sick, but if he were, he desired to have a feeling of his sickness: and surely
not without a cause: for the sore which is not felt, is a double sore: so that
the misery of the Apostates is so much the more dangerous, by how much the
less they feel and know it. Now that we may conclude these things: namely,
that as those who are and do abide in Jesus Christ, are by his means happy
in all things: so contrariwise those that are separated from him, in whom
alone consist all the blessings: which are in the world, can not be but most
miserable. As it does appear by the sentence which shall be pronounced at that
last judgment, wherein those that shall have abode constantly with Jesus
Christ, shall be called the blessed of God, and the other, Mat. 25.34
who have forsaken him, cursed eternally with the Devils. O good God! how
should we be happy without Jesus Christ, who is our righteousness? 1. Cor. 1.30.
without him then we are in sin. Secondly, he is our life, without him then
we are in death. He is our sanctification, without him then we are polluted and
profane. He is our light and wisdom, what are we then without him but
darkness, and silly blind men groping and going at all adventures, until we
have found the pit even to cast our selves headlong into the same? He is our
redemption, and without him we are servants unto the Devil; who is the
cruellest and most barbarous tyrant, that can be imagined. Psalm. 17.8.
He is our King, our Protector and Defender, and we are at safetye under the
shadow of his wings: but if we be once from under them, we are a pray to all
our enemies. He is our suerty, and if by him we be not acquitted, considering it
is impossible for us to pay the debt otherwise, 1. Ioh. 2.1.
we must remain in perpetual prison. He is our Advocate, and he only can
make our atonement with God: without him then we are in perpetual ennemitie
and discord with God. Neither can we call upon him or demand any thing at his
hands without him: S. Ambr.
for he is our mouth and spokesman: neither if he speak unto us, can we
understand him; for he is our ear. To conclude, he is our eye, without which
we can neither see nor behold him. He is our hand, without which we can
neither offer unto him any thing, nor receive any thing from him. And to speak
the truth in one word: he is all in all, and without him we are nothing but
vanity. Let us conclude then, that sithence he is our bliss, whosoever is
separated from him, does abide in perpetual curse.

That the Apostates being separated from Jesus Christ, are also deprived of his
spirit.
Chap. 9.
THe misery of the Apostates may easily be known by the former reasons,
having first of all forsaken God the Father, and then the son, (to wit our
Savior and Mediator Jesus Christ.) It remains now to show how for the
confirmation of their miseries they are also destitute of the holy Ghost, and
by consequent, deprived of the Communication and society of the most blessed
and holy Trinity: that is to say in a word, of the whole Deity, so that to
rule and govern them, there remains only unto them the devil, the world,
their flesh and concupiscences. But when we say that they are destitute of the
holy Ghost, we understand that, of the spirit of sanctification and
regeneration, which is given unto the children of God, to seal in their hearts
their adoption, and as a pawn and pledge to assure them of the inheritance of
the life which is promised and prepared in heaven for them: for as concerning
the spirit of prophesy, and gift of working miracles, Numb. 23. ver. 7. and 24
Number. 24.5 1. Sam. 19.23. Ioh. 11.51 Mat. 24.24 2. These. 2.9 Ezech. 36.26.
we know it has been given unto Balaam, and unto Saul, and to Caiphas, and
to Judas, and also that it may be granted unto false prophets, and unto
Antichrist, and to the reprobate, to whom it pleased God to communicate the
same. But that spirit which is given unto the children of God, to change their
stony hearts into hearts of flesh to sanctify them, to kindle in them a fire
which stirs them up to all good works, and not to seek in them any other
glory then that which is of God: no doubt the Apostates are destitute of such
a spirit: yea they never had it. For as S. Ihon says: 1. Ioh. 4.13
Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of
his spirit. Seeing then they have not remained steadfast in Jesus Christ, but
voluntarily are departed from him, may it not be thereof inferred, that the
spirit of God was never communicated unto them? considering it is given only to
stre^gthen a man against temptations, and to make him so firm and resolute in
his will, that he may persevere in the faith unto the end. For it is called for
this cause the spirit of strength and power from an high. Esaias 11.2. Luke 24.49
Because that me^ (which otherwise by their nature are so weak and feeble,
that the shaking of a leaf or the voice of a damsel will astonish them) be by
him made not only invincible against al assaults, but also victorious against
the Devil, and all other their enemies, which has been seen by experience in
the Apostles and Martyrs, who endued with this spirit, have by his force
vanquished and made subject the world unto Jesus Christ, and have overcome not
only the threatenings, the fury and violence of tyrants, but also the fear and
horror of the fire, of wild and savage beasts, and other cruel torments which
were prepared for them by the enemies of the truth. Moreover, to whom does it
appertain to bestow the spirit of Jesus Christ? Mat. 3.11. Ioh. 7.38.
Who is he that does baptize with the holy ghost, and with fire? Who promised
it unto all those who should believe in his name? saying: He that believes in
me, (as says the Scripture) out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of
life. Now he spoke this as the Evangelist does add of the spirit, which they
that believe in him should receive. Now then if he give it to those only which
believe in him, how ca^ he impart it to those which blaspheme him? who crucify
him again, Luke 11.
and stap him under their feet. Furthermore this spirit is communicated to
those who are of the children, Romans 8. Gal. 4.
and of the household. The Apostates then being no more of the house or family
of God, which they have given over altogether: how can they any more receive
this spirit, which is the sign and gage of the adoption of his children: seeing
that whosoever is filled with this spirit, is the child of the light, and
walks in the light, not communicating in any wise with the works of
darckenes: but rather reproves them, according to the occasion offered unto
him: and seeks the assemblies of the faithful, whereunto he brings
according to the measure of grace which he has received, either a Psalm, a
hymn, or some spiritual song, there in the midst of all the company of the
Saints, to sing publicly with them the praises of God. Considering then that
the Apostates this day fly our assemblies, and that they desire in their hearts
that they were dispersed, and seeing unto this end the vehementest of them
all, do employ their goods and friends which they have, as in this country of
Aniow, the church of Angers and Saumeur, have tried: and finally, that they
have no greater care at this day, then to go the first to Mass, and to bear
the taper in procession of their Idol, to do penance unto it, because they had
for a time forsaken it: and some among them have with great charges reedified,
and set up again the altars in their Temples, Idols and images which they
themselves before in detestation of idolatry had broken down and all to
fitters. And to be short, seeing (I say) that there is no superstition, no
impiety, no work of the devil and darkness in all papistry, to which they
feign not themselves to cleave: is it possible that the spirit of God which
calls it self and is a spirit of truth: that is to say, Ioh. 14.17.
full of singlenes, of sincerity, of simplicity and integrity, should dwell
with such hypocrites? which with us for a while have frequented our sermons,
and feigned themselves to have loved and liked them: and now the Papists and
Infidels go to the Mass, and other idolatries, which they approve by their
presence and countenance. Wisd. 1.
For it is written, that the spirit of God abhors every one that plaieth the
masker, and is disguised. And who (as we do the fashion of garments) change
year by year their faith, their religion, and their customs. And although
they have assaied the true religion, and that which God has prescribed unto us
by his word: nevertheless, they could not buckle themselves unto it, nor hold
it fast, imitating in that the nature of the Chamelio^, who (as they say) can
represent and change himself into al colors, except white. Now if the Scribes
and Pharisees be so often accursed by Jesus Christ, Mat. 23.13
for having been hipocrits in one re^igion only; by how much more strong
reason are the Apostats more accursed for having been, and being at this day,
liars, and cou^terfaits in their religion both true and false? David says
speaking to God. Psalm. 5.6.
Thou shall destroy them that speak lies, the Lord will abhor the bloody man
and deceitful. O good God that these poor souls could open their eyes, and
see the miserable estate unto which they are brought at this present; for being
destitute of the spirit of God they are nothing else but flesh, Genesis 5. Esaias. 40.
that is to say, a lump of sin, filth, and corruption, and are bondslaues unto
Satan and servants unto sin and death. For there is no liberty but only where
the spirit of God is, they can not any more understand or conceive the things
that are of God; which also they esteem as foolish, 2. Cor. 1. 1. Cor. 1.
because they cannot be understood, and discerned but only spiritually. So
being not any more illuminated nor lightened by the spirit of God, they have
neither will nor desire to search for their salvation, no guide to find it out,
nor understanding to comprehend it, but have a spirit of slu^ber (as the
Apostle says) Eyes that they should not see, Romans 11.8
and ears that they should not hear. And are of the number of those of whom
David writes. Psalm. 63.23
Let their eyes be blind that they se not, and make their lo^nes alwates to
tremble. Moreover, of whom can they receive comfort in their adversities, being
not assisted with the spirit of God? Who is the great comforter that Jesus
Christ promised to his Apostles and to all the faithful, to cheer, Ioh. 14.16.
and comfort the^ in their afflicto^s to mitigate the sharp and bitter potions
which they were to drink, in following him, and bearing his cross after him.
Furthermore without this spirit, what strength have they left to bear the
harsh, and strong temptations wherewith me^ are continually assalted both
inwardly and outwardly? Is not this the crook of our shepherd under whose
conduct the sheep may be assured of their safety? Finally, is not he the fire
and water which can burn our concupiscences, and heat us in the love of God;
and wash away our filth, water our hearts, to make them bear fruit, 1. Cor.
3.
quench the thirst that we have of the grace of God, and of the life eternal,
and to sanctify us, and consecrate us wholly to God, to be his temples, to
inhabit eternally? Psalm. 51.7.
Is not this the Isope whereby we are so purged that we become as white as
snow, and as wool that comes from the fuller? It is he that does create in
us a heart wholly pure, and a new life, who does put of from us the old man
that he may put on us the new, who printeth in us the image of God and makes
us new creatures, who does draw our hearts from the earth to lift them up
wholly unto heaven, who does open our lips, and fill our mouths with the
praises of God, who guides our steps in the paths and ways of righteousness,
and causes us not to go astray out of them. We ought then to marvel if David
desired with so great affection that he would continue those things unto him,
Psalm. 51.11
Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me,
restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and strengthen me with thy free spirit,
For we can not have a better schoolemaister to instruct us, nor a better
counselor to direct us in all our affairs, nor a better guide to lead us
safely in all our ways, nor a better champion to defend us, nor (to conclude)
a better or a more faithful friend to sustain and uphold us in adversities
least we should faint in them, or be discomfited, and hold us short in
prosperity, least it should carry us away and make us forget our duty, and
also reprehende us freely of all the faults which we shall commit, to cause us
to repent, and to turn again. Seeing then the great commodities that do
redound unto us thereby, when as we are once endued with the same; ought we not
carefully to take heed to retain him still with us? Doing nothing that either
may be grievous unto him, or drive him away from us? For as soon as he
departs from us, Ephe. 4.
the Devil takes place in us to govern us. 1. Sam. 15. Ioh. 13.27.
Which we see evidently in the examples of Saul and Judas, and God knows
how they are handled that fall into the hands of such a squire, who never
cease as says S. Augustine to gallop him on whom he is once gotten up
therough cloven rocks, through bushes and through quagmires, until such time
as he has cast him away headlong, and spoiled him in all points, which any
man of judgment may observe in the Apostates, who abiding with us had yet some
appearance and show of religion and virtue, Matt. 7.15
and though they were hypocrites and wolves disguised in sheep clothing, yet
they lived more continently in our Churches then they have done since they
forsook them: their malice being suppressed within their hearts, partly
because of the word of God which was preached unto them, and the exhortations
which were made continually: and partly by the example of many notable
personages and virtuous people which they saw among us, but especially by the
discipline which we observe, and the punishments which are ordained for the
offenders, and for those who would live dissolutely. But when they had shaken
of the yoke altogether, and left the Church of Jesus Christ which is governed
by his word and by his spirit, to return to the Synagogue which is governed by
the spirit of the Devil and Antichrist; Esaias. 59. Apoc. 9. and 13.
it has not been long but they have showed the exchange which they made, and
by what spirit they are now led, for there is no vice that seems too
abominable unto them; there is neither shame, fear, nor religion that can
hinder them from blaspheming, serving of Idols, deceiving, quaffing, whoring,
and committing all things without regard or shame, to which the Devil, and
their lusts do lead the^. I know some, whose credit and names at this time I
spare, who since their Apostasy are so out of frame, that notwithstanding they
be already very aged, and even upon the edge of their grave, yet there is no
law, shame, nor fear that can bridle their losenes, and licentiousnes, which
they grant to their flesh, to seek and take without any nay all pleasures,
wherein they do justify our Churches as it has been said, in which they
were constrained whilst they abode in the, to be more precise in their manners
and conversation then they are, and to show in them at least a greater
appeara^ce of virtue and honesty, then they have done since they departed from
them.

As the Apostates have given over God which is the author of life, so also they
do contemn those means which they may use to come unto him.
Chap. 10.
IN the covenant which God has made with his people he does promise to give
unto the^ his spirit and his word, which are two things unseperably knitt
together to work the salvation of men as it is written in Esaias. Esaias. 59.21
This is my covenant with them says the Lord, my spirit that is upon thee, and
my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth nor
out of the mouth of thy seed: nor out of the mouth of the seed of thy seed:
sateth the Lord from he^ceforth for ever. For as in the bringing forth of the
fruits of the earth, the seed is first requisite, and afterward the husbandma^
tilleth the earth, and makes it fit to receive the seed cast thereon: so in the
regeneration of me^, the word of god, which is an immortal seed, is first
necessary, and then the spirit, who as an husba^dma^ prepares our hearts to
receive it, and to make it fructify in them. But the Apostates have it at this
day in disdain and contempt: 1 Pet. 1.23. 2 Cor. 2.16
nay there is nothing more odious unto the^, It is unto the^ the savor of death
unto death: and the cause of it is, that as the evil doer takes no plea sure
to hear the se^te^ce wherein his death is pronounced unto him, nor to se the
gibet, whereon he must be executed, so these traitors can not abide to hear the
word of God, wherein their condemnation is written, wherein they see the
gallows set up whereon they must be hanged, and punished for there disloyalty.
They are like unto those that are sick of the drowsy evil, who will not be
awaked but dye in their sleep, and as they do exasperate themselves against
those that would come nighe their bed, and twitch them by the ear to hinder
them from sleping, thereby to deliver them from death whereunto they run by
sleep: so the Apostates would never meet with any that might awake them,
and tell them of their disease, and lay before them the great dangers wherein
they are, and if by chance they fall in company where their fault is showed
them, and the great offense which they have given unto the Church of God, they
will either bring them to another matter, or else by and by give them the
slipe, finally: they are like unto ill pay masters, who cannot ab^de to hear
any talk of their debtes, because they will not discharge them: And like unto
those who had rather die then to hear the news of death least they should
take some fearful conceit thereof. The occasion then that causes the word
of God to be so odious unto them, is not in it self, which as the Prophet
says: Is sweeter then the honey, and the honey comb: Psalm. 19.10
But in that they do reject it: who because they have their hearts full of
gall, can not taste nor feel the sweetenes thereof. As those who have some
inflammation in the roof of their mouth can not eat bread, nay they abhor
it though it be the best food and most sauorie that may be found: for among
all other meats there is not one wherewith in time we are not wearied and
glutted, be it never so dainty notwithstanding any sauce prepared for the
seasoning thereof: yet we are never weary of the taste of bread. Nay there is
not so much as sugar and honey, but they seem unsavory and of an ill taste
without it. And as those, who having sore eyes can not abide the light, though
it be the pleasantest and most delectable thing that can be desired, although
the only cause which makes them to fly it is not in it, but in the evil
disposition and desease of the eye which can not receive it, In like manner
that that causes the Apostates to have in such abomination the word, is
nothing but their own desease, and for that at this present their ears and
hearts are uncircumcised. They go often to the sermons of these paltrie friars
taking pleasure to hear their blasphemies, lies and slauerings, and do feel
themselves like ravens or filthy beasts on carrions and rotten things having
more delight in that then to eat the food of Angels, and to refresh themselves
with the pure word of God: which as a sweet breath proceeding from the mouth
of God does quicken all those on whom it is breathed, And they are like unto
those that grudged at the stinking garlic which they had left in Egypt, Number.
11.5
and preferred it before Manna that was sent them down from heaven. And unto
Adam who gave more credit unto the speech of the Devil then to the word of God
chosing rather to taste of the tree of knowledge of good and evil against the
express commandment which had been given unto him and by that means make
himself mortal and wretched for ever: then to enjoy peaceably the fruit of
the tree of life, and in obeying the will of god: to become he and his children
happy for ever: and unto Esau who esteemed more a mess of pottage: then the
birthright whereunto were annexed the promises of the covenant of God, Genesis 25
33 Luke 8.37.
and by consequent a certain and everlasting happiness. And to the Gadarens who
had a greater care of the loss of their hoggs: Mar. 5.17
then of Jesus Christ and his word, to which are adjoined all manner of
temporal, corporal and spiritual blessings. And unto Judas, who loved rather
thirty pieces of silver with a gibbet, and a miserable death: then salvation,
and an assured happiness with Jesus Christ, for the Apostates are as much or
rather more wretched then all those above named, because that departing
willingly from the church they do deprive themselves not only of the
participation that they should have therein of the treasures, Coloss. 2 John.
1.
and knowledge of the wisdom of god, which are bestowed and given as a pledge
unto it; but also of the fullness of Jesus Christ, that is to say, of all the
goods which his father will distribute unto us, by his means and by his
grace, which they loose by their sliding back: and which is worst, Heb. 10
the hope also of ever recovering it again, for the means thereof is wholly
taken away from them, when as they loose the fruition of the word of God, which
is called in the Scripture, The word of reconciliatio^: 2 Cor. 5.
because it is the instrument which God does use to reconcile unto us him: and
to adopte us for his children, and to regenerate us, and make us new creatures:
Genesis 1.
And as in the beginning god used his word only to create the heaven and the
earth, and all that is contained in them, so when he would renew the world,
and draw it from the corruption whereunto it was fallen by the sin and
disobedience of our parents, he has wrought it by his word: which he has
sent us in these latter days, first by his son who has spoken unto us, Mar.
16.15
and secondly by his Apostles, and ambassadors whom he sent into all the world,
to preach the Gospel to every creature, to the end that whosoever would
receive him by faith and true obedience, should receive also by the same means
the remission of all his sins, and thereby his salvation and life. Whereby we
may see that the word is the instrument which God uses to accomplish his
work, when he would regenerate us, call us, justify us, and lead us to glory
and happiness to the which he has predestined us, and that finally all that
which does appertain to our salvation, is brought to pass and accomplished
by this word. By it we are illuminated in the true knowledge of God, of Jesus
Christ, and of the whole mystery of our redemption; by it we know our selves
that we are nothing but vanity and corruption, Psalm. 39.5.
to the end we may learn always to humble our selves before God, and presume
nothing of our selves, nor of our virtues, nor of our dignities, nor of wealth,
nor of friends, nor of riches, nor of our power, but to depend of God in all our
affairs and to bow down our necks, and make the courtesy ever before him,
and not to ground the hope of our salvation in any other thing, then only in
his grace and mercy. By it we learn how to serve god; to wit: the affiance
which we ought ever to have in him, and the recourse unto him in all our
necessities, the homage and reverence that we owe unto his majesty, the
obedience which we ought to perform toward him, the fear which we ought to
have in offending him, the care to acknowledge and call to mind oftentimes the
benefits which he has bestowed on us, to thank him: and above all the perfect
love which we ought to bear unto him, with all our heart with all our soul,
and with all our strength: and that does cause us to esteem less of all other
things the^ of his honor and service: by it wear advertised of those things
whereby he may be blasphemed and disho nored, to the end we may take heed of
them and shu^e the^. Furthermore by it wear taught how and after what sort we
oght to pray, what things we ought to ask, Ihon. 14.13. 1. Cor. 14.
what assurance we have to obtain them, when we ask them in the name and
favor of Jesus Christ: by it we are exhorted and moved to perform our duty
when we are neghge^t and slothful, and likewise threatened when we are to much
behind hand. Psalm. 19.
By it we are comforted and vpholden in our afflictions: and there is no kind
of sorrow for the which we may not find a ready and present remedy to assuage
and heal the same, Ephesians. 611
By it we are fortified against all temptations which may happen unto us by
Satan the world the flesh and other cur enemies by it we are sharply reproved
when we go out of order, and out of the way wherein we oght to walk. It is unto
us in stead of a bridle to restrain us, when we would go astray, and of a
spur to prick us foreward when we are laisie and slow to do that which our
master commands us. It the light which does direct our steps for fear of
stu^bling; Psalm. 19.
and the guide which does accompany us to show us the fairest, surest, and
shortest wa^es It is the rule which god has given us, whereby we must squaire
al our thoughts, our affections our words, and actions, and in measuring the^
thereby we must see whether they be straight that we may continue in them, or
crooked that we may redress them. Mat. 4.4.
It is the food of our souls, It is the armor both to hurt our enemies and
defend our selves, to strengthen fortify and assure us in all combats, oh, who
were able to tell all the commodities which the word of God brings to those,
Psalm. 1.2
who will hear, believe, read, and meditate therein day and night as David does
exhort us for the Apostle says that: 2. Tim. 316
The whole Scripture is given by inspiratio^ of god, and is sufficient: When by
the grace and spirit of god, it is received and well imprinted in the heart of
man to make him perfect and absolute in all good works: And he that will
diligently know what is the virtue and efficacy of this word, together with the
great commodities, honor, riches, pleasures, and the felicity which it brings
unto all those which love and follow it: Let him read diligently and
attentively the psalms of David especially the 119, Psalm. 119.1
where even in the beginning he does ascribe unto it the felicity of man.
Blessed are those that are upright in their way, and walk in the law of the
Lord: Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and seek him with their
whole heart: And by and by after he sets down the parts of true
felicity: to wit, honor, riches, and pleasures: the honor in the first place:
ver. 6,
Then shall I not be confounded, when I have respect to all thy commandments:
Secondly the riches: ver. 72.
The law of thy mouth is better unto me, ver. 14.
then thousands of gold and silver, Thirdly the pleasurs, I have had as great
delight in the way of thy testimonies as mal riches. Furthermore in another
place, ver. 174.
O Lord thy law is my delight: and in the 19 Psalm when he says the law of
the Lord is perfect, co^uerting the soul, the testimony of the Lord is sure,
and gives wisedo^ unto the simple, the statuts of the lord ar right, and
rejoice the heart, ver. 10.
the co^ma^deme^t of the iord is pure and gives light to the eyes, and a little
after: and more to be desired the^ gold, yea the^ much fine gold, sweter also
then honey, and the honey comb: and in the 130 Psalm, speaking of the ground
of his hope, and the means which he had to uphold and comfort himself in his
greatest sorrows, even the^ when by reason of his sins he did so fear the
rigor and severity of the judgment of God, that he was altogether beaten
down therwithall, and ready to fall into despair; he says he had no other
means to releaue himself, and to thrust back these horrible fears whereby he
felt him self so assaulted, but by the only remembrance and meditation of the
word and promises of God, wherein beholding his mercy and readiness to take
pittye on all miserable sinners, who with grief, for that they have offended
him, desire humbly his mercy: began to come to himsellf again and say: Psalm.
130.5
I have waited on the Lord, my soul has waited, and I have trusted in his
word, my soul wayteth on the Lord more then the morning watch watches for
the morning. Moreover is not counsel and wisdom as necessary for men to
carry and govern themselves in all their affairs well and happily, as the eye
for the members of man's body to direct them in all their actions? Furthermore
is it possible that in the day without the light of the Sun, or in the night
without a lantern, to make good choice of the paths, wherein we must walk, or
walk in them any long time without stumbling? Eue^ so our understandings
which be not only blind by nature but are even darkness it self, can they
any more think that which is good and right, if they be not guided by a light
from above, Psalm. 119.105.
but now there is no other but the word of god as David says: Thy word is a
lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my path, I have sworn, and I will
perform it: that I will keep thy righteous judgments. And in an other place
in the same Psalm: verse. 24.
Thy testimonies are my delight, and my consellers. And in another place: Open
mine eyes, verse. 18.
that I may see the wonders of thy Law. It may be gathered by all these places
going before, and many other like unto the^, that without the word of God men
are altogether miserable; and that the life, honor, riches, pleasures, and all
true felicity do depend thereon: and where it does want, there wants also
with it all goodness, and all good hope, and that is the reason why the Prophet
does so commend the reading and meditation thereof unto the whole world: Psalm.
1.2. Deuteronomy. 6.9.
And that Moses exhorts every one to write and ingraue it in all the corners
of their houses, to the end it might continually be set before their eyes that
they might ever have a present memory thereof, and feed their spirits therewith
day and night: for the water, the fire, and so necessary for the life of the
body, to maintain and keep it; as is the word of God, for the spiritual
life of our souls to preserve it. Whosoever does love, and follow it, he is
sure that God will bless him, and that within and with out his house al things
will succeed happily unto him, Psalm. 119.165.
as David says: They that love thy law, shall have great prosperity. And in
another place: They shall walk in the light of thy countenance, Psalm. 89.15
and in thy righteousness shall they exalt themselves. Considering these things,
we should pray unto God without ceasing for his grace, that he would continue
unto us so great a benefit, and say unto him that which is written in Moses
song. Psalm. 90.12
Teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom:
return O Lord (how long?) and be pacified toward thy servants, and bewail the
condition of the Apostates, who having forsaken the Gospel, and the Churches,
Romans 1.16
where it is preached; that is to say, the power of God which he has ordained
to salvation to every one that believes, be without al doubt in the way of
damnation, and in danger of eternal death, Psalm. 119.155.
as David says: Salvation is far from the wicked, because they seek not thy
statutes. For they decaue themselves, if they think that they can obtain it
any where else, but only in the church of god where it is purely preached. Esa.
2.2.
Wherefore the Prophet Esaias does allure every one to hear, and understand. Esa.
2.2.
It shall be in the last days, that the mountain of the house of the Lord
shall be prepared, in the tops of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the
hills; and al nations shall flow unto it, and many people shall go and say: come
and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of
Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the
law shall go out of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. To be
informed aright in the will of God, must be done in his church, where he is
worshipped in spirit and truth, and called upon purely. And it must be by the
mouth of his Prophets and ministers which are ordained and established in the
same by him, Mal. 2.7.
to preach and expound it. As Malachy writes. That the Priests lips should
keep know ledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth, for he is the
messenger of the Lord of hosts. Moreover, Ephesians. 4. Romans 12. 1. Cor. 12. 1. Tim.
3.
to whom are the true Prophets and preachers sent? Is it not to the Church of
Jesus Christ? and the spirit of prophecy, and interpretation? Is it not unto
it, which is the pillar and stay of the truth? The Church is our mother, and
the mouths of the good shepherds which are ordained therein to govern it, be
the pappes whereby she gives suck unto her children, who by faith take the
breast, draw and suck the milk, wherewith they do nourish and fat themselves
so much (especially if it be good milk, and in great abundance) that they
become fair, goodly, and marvelous beautiful. But when the breasts come to
be stayed and dried up, as it chances in time of papistry: where al their
Pastors are at this present blind watchmen, Esa. 56.10.
that have no knowledge, and dum dogs, despitefull in mind, which can not bark,
who desire and have no other care but to live, and become fat, and sleep
softly in this world: and moreover where the milk that is given to the
children is all waterish and corrupt, is it not necessary that being so
nourished, they should become dry and withered, and that in the end they die
with languishing for want of good toode? The Apostates then that are gone out
of the Church, where they might if they would, Psalm. 81.16
have been fed with fine wheat flower, God would have fed them with the fat of
wheat, and with the honey of the rock would I have sufficed thee, to return to
papistry as to an Egypt, and to be there fed with stinking garlic and onions,
which are given there unto them: What can they look for of such nourishment,
but in short space to die with languishing: for they have not any whit of the
word of God pure in the synagogues and conuenticles of Antichrist, but only
some little pieces or shreds which are drawn out here and there, out of the
four Gospels and the Epistles of the Apostles, and most commonly il fitted to
that purpose whereto they would have them serve, whereof neither the Pastors
nor the sheep can receive any instruction or edification, because the one and
the other being equally ignorant, neither understand the tongue which is
spoken, nor the sense and mysteries which are contained therein. Considering
that the secrets of the Lord are revealed unto those who have them in honor and
reverence, and who by fear and humility are prepared to the understanding of
the same: and not unto those proud and arrogant Apostates, which are at this
present blasphemers of God, contemners and mockers of his word, and deadlye
enemies of his Church, which they would wish utterly banished. Psa. 25.14.
The secret of the Lord (says David) is revealed to them that fear him, and
his covenant to give them understanding. And does not Jesus Christ say: I give
thee thanks o Father, Mat. 11.25
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise,
and men of understanding, and have opened them unto babes. It is so Father,
because thy good pleasure was such. The conclusion then of all the discourse of
this chapter shall be; that the Apostates being out of the Church, are deprived
of the word of God, and of all the benefits which do redound of the inioying
thereof. And though some of them have books thereof, yet that does profit them
no more, then it does the Jews to have the Bible: whereof they have not the
true sense: and what avails it says the Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 29.11
to have a book that is sealed up, or else open, and not to know the letters
and characters wherewith it is written.

The Apostates are deprived of the Sacraments, as well as of the word.
Chap. 11.
THe second instrument which God uses to entertain, preserve and assure
always more and more the life which he has communicated unto it by his word
and promises, and which he has received by the faith which he attributes unto
it, be the 2. Sacraments: to wit, the Baptisine, and the holy Communion, that
god has instituted and annexed unto his word, as seals to confirm and help
our faith. (...) props and pillars to hold and stay it on both sides so that it
abides stable and invincible against all the temptations wherewith it might be
hurt and assalted of the use and benefit which might be reaped of them, the
Apostates do voluntarily deprive themselves, when they depart from the
fellowship of the church: for being separated from it the baptism can no more
serve the^ for a toke^ to testify and declare the^ to be members thereof, or
that they appertain any longer to the father, the Son, or the Holy Ghost,
whose house and dwelling place they have forsaken. And even as if a knight
having received that order of the King, and made promises, and taken the
accustomed oths, if afterward through some hatred or mislike he should depart
from that promise and troth which he had given, in token whereof he should send
him back his order, to signify unto him that he would afterward be freed and
released from his oath. So the Apostates having given over the covenant of God
have also by the same means forsaken the tokens and marks thereof: so that they
can not at this present call God any more their father whose children they are
not, or Jesus Christ their Savior whose members and sheep they are not, or the
Holy ghost their director and guide whose temples they are not any longer, and
although they have received their external sign of baptism nevertheless they
have not the virtue, efficacy, nor the thing which is represented thereby: so
that it may be said of the^ that they have a body without a soul, they have a
ring, and not a husband, the deds and titles without possessing and emoying the
inheritance; the scepter, the crown, the arms, without the kingdom, and that
which they have can serve them to no other use out to prove and declare their
disloialty and to make them inexcusable in the judgment of God, when as they
shall appear before him. For as a man can not have a more certain, and
evident proof against a thief to convince and condemn him, then to find the
purse which he has lately cut in his own hands: so it is not possible to
allege or bring a more clear argument against the Apostates to prove that
they be disloiall unto God, then to show the couenantes of God which they have
broken, yet printed and engraven in their bodies. And as the Apostates are
departed from Jesus Christ who is the substance of the sacraments, and of the
Church which is the people of God wherein they are administered and received,
and where they only can show forth their virtue and become wholesome, so they
have deprived themselves of the whole fruit which they might have reaped by
their baptisine staying in the Church, as to assure themselves they were
members of the Church, and comprehended within the covenant of God, and that
their sins were forgiven them, and washed away in the blood of Jesus Christ:
that the holy Ghost was communicated unto them to sanctify them, and in
begetting getting them a new by little and little to change their nature, and
become new creatures which be no small graces, or things lightly to be
accounted of. Also they are at this present wholly deprived of the communion of
the Lord which is one of the excellentest means that we have to confirm and
strengthen the union and fellowshippe which we have with Christ. Ioh. 6.
For in it we eat his flesh, and drink his blood, that he may dwell in us and
we in him inseparably: as the food which is never separated from the body of
him that does eat it after it be once changed into his substance. Now if it be
asked to what end they have withdrawn themselves from the table of Jesus
Christ, disdaining the exquisit and precious meats that are served thereon, to
feed those that come unto it, in a sure hope of an eternal and most happy
life? It may be answered that it was done that they might be partakers of the
table of Devils, 1. Cor. 10.21.
where they can not eat or receive any thing but venom, and all kinds of
poisons. For the Mass whereto they have this day so great devotion, that they
run wheresoever it is song, the first to ring to it, and to answer in it, and
to help as varlets of the chamber to attire the fool that shows them this
sport: what is this but a mystery of iniquity, 2. Cor. 2.
much more expectable, then can be named among men, as denying and open
renou^cing of the blood, and the death, of the sacrifice and of their whole
redemption of Jesus Christ? The head of al iniquity and idolatry? and to
conclude the utter overthrow as well of the salvation of men, as of all
religion. For the Devil never made a greater breach into the church of God,
the^ when he established that, because he did at once bury as it were in a
tomb of forgetfulness: first of all the honor of God, Exodus 20. Mat. 4.
who is more dishonored and blasphemed by this mass, then by any thing that
ever he had invented since the beginning of the world. Heb. 9.28. and 10.10.
Secondly, the whole benefit of Jesus Christ, which is grounded wholly upon the
oblation made by him of himself to make satisfaction for all our sins, and by
this satisfaction to procure unto us for ever a general remission and pardon:
which this enemy of mankind has by the means of the mass translated to his
abominable priesthood, and facrifice of Papistrye. And finally all the means
of the salvation and of the hope of men which does depend of it, which Jesus
Christ our sole and only mediator has done and suffered for us. 1. Tim. 2.5.
What then can these poor wretches find there that can serve either to the
glory and service of God, or to their own salvation? I did not stand to prove
that which I said of it, because there are whole treatises thereof, wherein the
impieties, and horrible blasphemies whereof it is full, are touched
particularly, and so well by the grace of God laid open, that there is not this
day any child in our Churches, who is not already resolved readily to give an
answer thereof, and to satisfy all those who will be content with reason.

That the Apostates have no faith.
Chap. 12.
LEt us pass on further and come to the faith which is the chiefest instrument
that God does use to our salvation, Romans 10.
which is wanting in the Apostats as well as the other two above named for
considering the word of the Gospel which is the word of the promise, 2. Cor. 4.
is called theword of faith, because it is the seed thereof without which it can
not be brought forth: seeing that the spirit of God is called the spirit of
faith, because he is the author thereof as well as of other virtues; 1. Pet. 1.
how can the Apostates be faithful being destitute of the spirit of God, who
is the husbandman that waters the heart as it were a piece of ground to
receive faith: and of the word which is the seed that is sown to bring it forth
if they think that true faith consists only in the approbation of the truth
of the scriptures, they deceive themselves, and have no more faith then the
Devils, or Simon Magus, of whom it is written, Acts. 8.9.
that he believed, and was baptized; though in deed he had only a show and an
appearance of faith. For the true faith is in the heart, Romans 10.10.
as the Apostle says: With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with
the mouth man confesses to salvation. And is as well known by her effects, as
by the circumstances which do accompany her, whereof the one is a good
conscience, 1. Tim. 1.
and the fear of God, without which it can not stand: for the mercy and grace
of God, which faith sets before it self in his promises, and whereupon she
rests as upon her true ground, is promised only to those who walk aright
before his face, and who fear to offend and disobey him, as the Prophet
says: Psalm. 103. verse 17.
The loving kindness of the Lord endures for ever and ever upon them that
fear him, and his righteousness upon childrens children, unto them that keep
his covenant, and think upon his commandments to do them. Furthermore in
another place he says: Psalm. 119.1.
Blessed are those that are upright in their ways, and walk in the law of
the Lord: blessed are they that keep his testimonies, Psalm. 73.1.
and seek him with their whole heart. Also in another place: Yet God is good
to Israel, even to the pure in heart. Now I would willingly know, whether the
conscience of the Apostates can be good: having left God, and broken so
villanously the allegiance which they had an hundred and an hundred times
openly and solemnly sworn unto him, infringed the holy covenant which they had
made with him, and stamped with their feet the precious blood of Jesus Christ,
which had been spilt to ratify the same: rejecting his word, and the
admonitions and reproofs that could possibly be made unto them in his name,
blaspheming this day the truth and religion which they have followed a
thousand thousand ways, and afterward serving Idols without any end, and
omitting no kind of superstition whereto they do not adioine themselves;
making the cruellest war that they can to all good persons, only for this
cause, that they are purposed to be more loial toward God, and more constant
in his service then they have been applying them selves unto those whom they
know to be weak to seduce them, and cause them to stumble like themselves.
Finally making open profession of all impieties, blasphemies, sacrileges, and
abominations of Antichrist and being altogether resolved (as they themselves
say) to ^liue and die in that estate. I ask whether these resolutions be not
of such persons as are altogether, lost, impenitent and desperate? And who can
not look for any thing else at Gods hands, but his wrath and terrible
judgment, with a heat of fire which shall devour them and all his adversaries?
And if they yet have any conscience which is not altogether seared with an hot
iron: I appeal unto themselves, whether it serve for any thing else the^ in
stead of an apparitor, or tormentor, or Devil to vex and grieve the^ day and
night, not suffering them to take any rest at all, which thing the good
conscience does not, but comfort and resolves the man that has it, in all
his affairs, and suffers him not to become pale or wanne in his adversities,
yea though it should chance that the world were dissipated, and the heaven
should fly here and there in shiuers and pieces: yet would it maintain him
constant, stable, and immovable in all these tumults. For as the Apostle
says, Romans 2.15.
As it is good or evil so it does accuse or excuse us, and as he whom it
acquitteth, can not give over when it is good: (...) when as it is evil and
does accuse us, none can stand or abide before it. The Apostates the^ having
an ill conscience can not have a good faith: and so being not good, it is not
any longer faith. 1. Tim. 1. Ephe. 4.5.
For there is but one true faith, a^ there is but one true God, and one only
true Church. And being without faith, how can they live? Seeing the just
lives only by faith. Abac. 2.
How can they be in the favor of God, seeing without faith it is impossible to
please him? Heb. 11.6.
How can they be just, seeing without faith no righteousness can be approved
before God? Romans 3.
What place can they have in the kingdom of God? Ioh. 3.3.
Seeing none is admitted unto it that is not borne anew, and none can be borne
anew but by faith: which does purify our hearts, Act. 10.
and make us new creatures. Moreover what good works or good fruits can they
bring forth without faith? Ephesians. 2.
Which does ingraft us into Jesus Christ, that we may be well able to bear
fruit, how can they defend themselves from the Devil, 1. Pet. 5.18
who walks about as a roaring lion, to espy how he may overtake us without
our armor: that is to say, without faith which is the only target wherewith we
cover ^ur selves that we may avoid the shot of his ^iery darts? What
stedfastnes or joy can they ^aue in temptations, when they are assaulted either
of prosperity or aduesitie of the world, ^r of their flesh; if they be void
of faith, which alone stays and vpholdeth us in the midst of all winds,
storms, Mat. 16.
and tempests which ^ay happen unto us Furthermore from whence ^an they have
hope for the remission of their sins, and consequently righteousness, and
life, which do depend thereon without faith? Romans 4.
Which is the Isope that does sprinckle us with the blood of the lamb, to
wash and cleanse us from all our iniquities; and by this means to preserve us
from the destroier and from the wrath of God, whereby otherwise we should be
devoured and utterly consumed. Gal. 3.
Finally since faith is the instrument and hand whereby we receive all the
graces and blessings of God, and as it were salt, whereby we and all our works
are seasoned to be pleasant in his taste? We must conclude that without it we
are accursed and abominable before him; Romans 14.
and that all our virtues whatsoever show or outward appearance they have, be
nothing else but filth, iniquity and sin. And as the Princes liueries are
the marks whereby their pages, and other servant are known: so faith is the
badge of the lamb, which his family and household servants do bear in their
foreheads, Apoc. 7.4.
thereby to be known, and whosoever shall wear this cognizance he is fure
that even the Angels (to whom it is permitted now in these last times to hurt
the earth, the sea, and the trees) can no^ hurt him in any thing, because he is
set apart^ to be safe from all dangers, Apoc. 12.
but unto the fear full and unbelievers, unto the Idolaters an^ liars (as all
Apostates are) their part shall be in lake of burning fire and brimstone, which
is the second death. Romans 11.20.
This ought well to contain us in our duties, and to set oftentimes that
before our eyes, which the Apostle says as well of us, as of the Jews; to
wit, that through unbelief they were broken of, though they were branches of
the true olive tree, and that we stand by faith; to the end that we may not
lift up our selves through pride, but live in all fear and humility under the
protection and mighty hand of our God.

That the Apostates are without the Church.
Chap. 13.
Having showed by all the chapters and discourses going before, that the
Apostates are without God, without Mediator, without law, without faith,
without sacraments, it does follow thereof immediately, that they are also
without the Church. For, 1. Tim. 2.5.
as there is but one God, one creator and redeemer of the world: so there is
but one people which he has chosen and set a part to separate them from
others, Psalm. 74.2.
and to adopt and reserve them for himself, to sanctify them and make
aneuerlasting covenant with them, to rule and govern the^ by his word and his
spirit, and to defend them from al their enemies, Hos. 2.19.
even from death: of whom he will also be particularly known, and called upon,
served and worshipped in spirit and truth This people gathered under one head,
John. 4.23.
which is Jesus Christ by whose means they are joined unto God, Ephesians. 1.5.6.
and entertained into his favor for ever. And there is a double means to gather
them into the same body with their head. Ephesians. 4.
The one is external, to wit, the public preaching of the gospel: and the
other internal, namely the spirit of God: who does prepare the hearts of
every one to believe, and keep stedfastlye that which he has heard, and
perfeuere co^sta^tly there in unto the end. To the which the Sacraments are
adjoined as helps, to the end. They may stay: and bear up the weakness of
our faith, when the temptations whereby it is assau^ted be strong and
vehement. Romans 9.8.
Now since there is no people but this which is allied with God and has the
promises of salvation and life, Mat. 4.4.
to whom Jesus Christ came to save them from their sins, Luke 1.
whose ransom he has paid, for whom he has sacrificed and spilte his
blood, that they might be of his flock. whom he has acquitted as touching the
justice of God: for whom he has prayed unto his Father, Ioh. 17.
and at whose judgment he will acknowledge them his own flesh, his blood, his
bones his brethren and inheritance, which he has purchased to himself there
is none but they that hope for life. What will then become of those poor
Apostates, who are laid open to the wrath of god, no more nor less, the^ were
those to the waters of the floode that were out of the arc and company of
Noah: And in Sodom, Gen 7.3.
the kins men of Lot, who would not accompany him nor go out with him; Ge.
19.14.
and in Egypt those who were without the houses, whose doors were not
sprinkled with the blood of the lamb, Exo. 12.22
And in lerusalem those who had not been marked in the forehead, Ezech. 9.6
and who in the siedge of the Romans would not retire to the other side of
Jordan with those that saved themselves in Pella. Histor. tripartita.
For every man deceives himself, that hops to shune the wrath of God in any
other place then in his house and in his holy mountain. Esaias. 26.
By reason whereof Esaias exhorts the people of god to enter into his closet;
that is to say) into the Church wherein (he says is his home and ordinary
dwelling place: and there to keep themselves quiet and hidden for a short space,
until his indignation were passed over, to which agrees that which David
says. Psalm. 27.5.
For in the time of trouble he shall hyde me in his tabernacle. In the secret
place of his pauilion shall he hide me and set me up upon a rock. For the one
and the other knew well enough, that there is no place surer, no fortress
better fortifyed and strengthened against all dangers: then is his house, though
in outward appearance it seem to be destitute of walls and ditches, rampartes,
platformes, bulwarks and other crafts and engines which flesh could invent
to guard and defend her self from her enemies: nevertheless the grace and
favor of God wherewith it is shrouded and environed on all sides: is a great
deal more sure and stronger then all that, as says David: Psalm. 125.2
The mountains are about Jerusalem, so is the lord about his people from
henceforth for ever: Psalm. 71.3.
And in another place: Thou art my rock and fortress. And in truth when it
does want it, all other means be very weak and unsure. As the prophet Nahu^
says. Nah. 3, 12.
Al thy strong cities shall be like the fig trees, with the first ripe figs,
for if they he shaken they fall into the mouth of the eater, which we have seen
by experience in these last days; wherein we have seen holds that seemed to
be invincible, brought under the power of the enemy in short time, and with
small force, and others which seemed to be very weak and feeble, have by the
grace of God resisted the greatest princes of Europe, which could not overcome
them with all their forces, and have received thereby great disgrace. Let us
then conclude that there is nothing so strong as the house of God that is to
say the Church, which by his favor is invincible and inexpugnable for any
power, as David says: Psalm. 46.5.
God is in the midst of it therefore shall it not be moved, God shall help
it very earlye, when the nations raged, and the kingdoms were moved, God
thundered and the earth melted, the Lord of hoastes is with us the God of
Jacob is our refuge. How are the Apostates then so unwise as even in the time
of war to give over such a houlde where they may sleep and watch at ease:
having such a watchman as the god of Israel who for the great care he has to
keep all those that be his, does neither slumber nor sleep day nor night:
as says the Prophet. I will not suffer my foot to slip, Psalm. 121.3
for he that keeps the will not flumber, behold he that keeps Israel will
neither slumber nor sleep. Considering that God does never forsake them that
trust in him, and repose themselves and all their affairs on his providence,
though he saw himself in extreme danger, becaufe of the conspiracye of his
sone and of all the people that were risen against him: nevertheless he was
never daunted at it, Psalm. 3.4
as he does show. I did call unto the Lord with my voice and he heard me out
of his holy mountain, I laid me down and slept, and rose up again for the
Lord sustained me, I will not be affrayed for ten thousands of the people which
should beset me round about. O Lord arise, help me my God, for thou have
smitten all mine enemies upon the cheek bone, thou haste broken the teethe of
the wicked. Salvation belongethe unto the Lord and thy blessinge is upon thy
people. Imitatinge then this his example, whatsoever storms or tempests we
shall see: let us diligently take heed that we go not out of the house of
the Lord to shun them as the Apostates do. But contrarily let us beseech
God to warrant us, and save us, that he would show us so much favor, as to
take aside, and place us in some corner thereof, when we shall be yet more in
safetye, then in all the castelles of the world. And taking this reasolution,
Let us say with him. Psalm. 27.4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord: and that I will require, even that I
may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life: For what can we
look for out of the pauillion of God, but as Esaye says Fear and the pit,
Esaias. 24.17
and the snarres which are upon the inhabitauntes of the earth: and he that
flies from the noise of the fear, shall fall into the pit, and he that
comes out of the pit, shall be taken in the snare, for the windows from an
high are open, and the foundations of the earth do shake. By these kinds of
speech, Psalm. 5. Gal. 6.
the Prophet would signify nothing else, but the cursing and wrath of God which
is spread every where where sin is, which is the seed thereof, and of all
miseries that are in the world beside: if then we will find the blessing of God,
and the felicity which does depend thereon, we must search where his grace is;
and his grace is, where his righteousness is; 1. Cor. 1.4. Matthew. 25.
and his righteousness is in Jesus Christ; and Jesus Christ is in his house, and
in his Temple, that is to say, in his Church: where he does abide unto the
end of the world, as he also has been there since the beginning thereof, and
not any where else, where a man may be happy. For there lies the blessing and
the blessed seed, which was promised unto Abraham; from whom as from a spring
it was derived to all his family and posterity: and whosoever would be
participant thereof, must first be adopted, and by faith ingrafted into the
body of lesus Christ: for there is none but he alone, in whom the father takes
pleasure; Mat. 3.17.
now those which are united unto him by faith, are known to be his members: so
that the rest of the whole world (this little flock only excepted, which the
shepherd has gathered up) is within the compass of this wrath and curse of
God. Are not then the Apostates wonderful miserable, that having the means to
be as happy as Angels, have voluntarily abandoned it, to become for ever as
miserable as devils. If a man should ask them whether they do not think a man
accursed, that is justly banished, and cut of from the body of the Church,
where is only salvation and life: I do not doubt but they would answer by and
by, it were so: what can they then think of themselves, who voluntarily have
excommunicated themselves, Ioh. 1.
leaving Jesus Christ, who is the fountain of all good and all liberty, to
yield and put themselves under the power of the Devil, who is the cruellest
tyrant both of souls and bodies, that they could have chosen, declaring
thereby that they love darkness more then light, death more then life, bondage
more then liberty, and to live under the dominion of a most barbarous murderer
as Satan is, then in the kingdom of Jesus Christ, who is the support, shelter
and refuge of al poor afflicted persons. Where were ye a while ago, o ye
poor souls? in the Church, Mat. 13.
that is to say, in the kingdom of heaven, and now ye are gone down to the
bottom of hell, to be banished perpetually with Antichrist, and the prince of
darkness; Ioh. 8.
who for not having perseuered in the truth no more then you have, has been
cast down from the highest degree of glory that it was possible for him to
have, to the bottom of the pit of all misery and confusion, without al hope of
recovery. Genesis 3.23.
When our first parents saw themselves so shamefully banished and thrust out of
the garden of paradise, where they did abound in all dainties, end brought by
their ingratitude and rebellion, to the miserable estate whereunto they came
afterward, had they not great cause to lament all their life, so great and
horrible a change which happened unto them by their own fault? would they not
have been desperate at that time, if God had not suddenly prevented them by his
mercy, and lifted up their hope, which was altogether beaten down, by the
promise which he made unto them of the seed of the woman, Genesis 3.15.
which should bruise the serpents head? If the Apostates either could or would
consider the misery, whereinto they have cast themselves headlong by their
reuolting: they have no less cause to be grieved then our first parents had,
for withdrawing themselves from the church they are gone out of paradise,
wherein God shows his face, Cant. 4.
his glory, Matt. 11. Ioh. 1. Esa. 66.
his magnificence, and his great works every day; and where he does unfold his
great riches and blessings, and the rich treasures of his deep wisdom in
the fulness of his son, to enter into hell, where they find nothing else but a
fire to consume them, and a worm that does gnawe their heart, and a torment
and perpetual disquietnes in their consciences, without all hope to find any
remedy, or any comfort, or any refreshing in their miseries. They are like
unto that poor wretched Caine, Genesis ^.14.
who was the first Apostate in the world: who having abandoned his fathers
house, and the Church that did assemble it self therein, and being by that
means departed from before the face of the Lord, was all the rest of his life
a vagabond, and unquiet in his mind, not able to find any resting place, as
also after him have been all his successors, Cham, Nimrod, Ismael, Esau,
Jeroboam, with the ten tribes that followed him, the Sadduces, Pharisees,
Scribes, and Priests, in the time of Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, and
finally, Simon Magus, Ebion, Chemnitus, Carpocrates, Marcion, Valentinus,
Arrius, Nestorius, Eutiches, and other Heretics, that came afterward; who
having separated themselves from the Church of Jesus Christ, have met with a
thousand miseries: as also the two Princes and Heads of all the Apostates
shall shortly do, that is to say, Mahomet and the Pope, with all their
adherents, 2. These. 2.8
whom the Lord does destroy every day by little and little with the breath of his
mouth, until such time as he does pronounce unto them their last sentence and
judgment, wherewith they shall be cast and banished into the pit, with the
Dragon and his Angels, that is to say, Apoc. 12.9
(as Saint John does expound it) that old serpent called the devil and Satan,
which deceives all the world. For it is certain that the great Captain
Michael, who is the God of battles and head of the army of the Lord; after a
long fight, he will remain victorious over all his enemies, Apoc. 14.9.10.
whom he will put under his feet, to wit, the Dragon, the beast, and all
those that will worship him, and receive his mark on their foreheades, or on
their hands, who shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, yea of the pure
wine which is powered into the cup of this wrath, and they shall be tormented
in fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb. And that
great Babylon the mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth, Apoc.
17.5
which bears a name written in her foreheade, a mysterye: which is dronken
with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus,
must stumble, and her fall must be so great that all the earth shall be astonished
thereat. Apo. 14.8.
For which cause all the children and servants of God are exhorted by a voice
coming from heaven, to go out of her quickly: Apoc. 18.4
that they be not partakers of her sins, and consequently of her plagues.
What will then become of the Apostates who in stead of coming and going from
it, Apoc. 18.2
do return unto it: thinking to be at more safety in Babylon, which is (as S.
Ihon says) the habitation of Devils, and the houlde of all foul spirits,
and a cage of every unclean and noisome bird: then in the Church of God which
is the holy city, Heb. 12.22
and the celestial Jerusalem where there is an innumerable company of Angels
set round about it for to keep it, and the favor of God which is in the midst
as a tower to fortify, and stre^ghthen it on all sides? may not one say of
them with the Prophet, Psalm. 94.8.
understand ye unwise among the people and ye fools when will ye he wise? for
ar they not wonderfully deprived of their senses that do prefer Bethauen
before Bethel; that is to say, a house of impiety, of errors, and lies, of
Idolatry, of blasphemy, of abomination, before the house of God, of piety
truth and holiness, of prayers and thanks giving: and love rather to return
again into Egypt, there to feed of Garlike and rotten Onions, which they had
left behind them, then to be daintily fed with the Manna of heaven, and with
the food of Angels. David desiring with grief in banishment the dainties, and
great comforts he did receive in the house of God, then when he had liberty to
frequent it with the rest of the people, whereof he saw himself deprived,
Psalm. 84.34
living among the barbarous and idolatrous, spoke unto God, complaining: Where
be thine altars O Lord of Hosts, verse. 10.
my King and my God: Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will ever
praise thee: for a day in thy Courts is better then a thousand otherwhere. I
had rather be a doore-keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the
Tabernacles of wickedness. If the Prophet esteems them happy, 1. Cor. 14.
which may with all liberty frequent the house of God, and therewith enjoy
the exhortations, comforts, prayers, confessions, and public praises which are
song to his Name: Psalm. 42.
and moreover behold his glorious face, which does shine in this notable
order which is kept in these holy assemblies of the people; does he not repute
contrariwise all those unhappy, who are excluded from the enjoying of so great
a good? and especially when as they do deprive themselves thereof, and forsake
it willingly, Ge. 25, 33.
making no more account of it then Esau did of his birthright; which he sold
unto his brother Jacob for a mease of pottage made of Lentils. I dare say that
none of all the Apostates, who have left our Churches to return to Papistrye,
and to their Masses; that is to say, 2. Pet. 2, 22
to their own vomit as Dogs, and to the wallowing in the mire as Swine, did
ever taste, except it were with the tippe of the tongue only, the sweetenes of
the precious and exquisite meats wherewyth God does nourishe and feed his
familye. For if they had swallowed them, kept, and well digested them in their
stomachs, they would have forgotten all the davnties of the world, in which
the children of God (after they have once with a good appetite eaten of the
celestial bread) do find no more savor. Ioh. 6, 67.
When Jesus Christ demanded of the Apostles whether they would follow the
Apostates, who beeinge offended at his Sermon touching the eating of his flesh
and drinking of his blood, had gone back from him and walked no more with him:
Saint Peter answering for all his fellows, said: Master, to whom shall we
go? For thou have the words o^ eternal life. Showing thereby the good will
that he and his fellows had, never to forsake his company: because of the
benefits and great comforts which they received and reaped continually of his
doctrine. Mat. 15, 22
The Canamtish woman though she had both been sharply rebuked by Jesus
Christ and his Apostles, and also confessed her self that the bread which he
brake was not for the dogs, in the number of whom she accounted her self,
but for the children of the household: nevertheless for all this ill welcome
and hard words, she thought not her self answered: as a poor soul pressed
with hunger, laying aside allshame, is importunate with his crying upon all
those that may give her meat; so she never cease asking till she had
obtained that which she desired, esteeming her self happy to be partaker
only of the little crummes which fell from her Lord his table: whereby we see
how she could not bridle her appetite, and that she did so hunger after the
meats which are served at Jesus Christ his table, that she preferred them
before all other dainties. Luke 10, 39
Marie Marthaes sister (Jesus Christ being come unto their house, and sitting
down to teach the kingdom of heaven) did cast her self by and by at his
feet, and stirred not from thence so long as he continued his speech; she
being as it were tied and fastened to his tongue: forgetting not only the care
of the affairs of the house, but also all other things: for that singular
pleasure which she felt in her soul, hearing the heavenly comfortes which
proceeded from the mouth of Jesus Christ, as from a fountain and welspring of
life, and she is so highly commended by Jesus Christ, that having laid aside
all other things, she was so attentive to hear the word of God: and
contrarily her sister blamed and reprehended by him, that for the too too great
care she had of worldly affairs, she was drawn away from the study and
meditation of heavenly things, which were of greater weight. And the answer
must diligently be noted, which Jesus Christ made unto her, when as she
complained that her sister had left her alone to serve: Mat. 10.40
Martha (says he) thou carest and ar^ troubled about many things: but one
thing i^ needful, Marie has chosen the good part which shall not be taken
away from her. There by it may be gathered, that there is nothin^ better unto
man, then to dwell in the house o^ God, and there to apply himself wholly t^
meditate day and night on the Law of Go^ imparting unto worldly business no
more tim^ or care, then is sufficient to get and eat his daily bread. Ioh.
4.28.
The woman of Samaria which was a wanton and dissolute woman, which had not
all her life long thought of any thing else, but only to follow the world,
and to seek and take her pleasure therein: as soon as she heard that
excellent Sermon which Christ made unto her by the Wels side, where he spoke
unto her: she was so ravished therewith, that forgetting all other things, even
the waterpot which she had brought to draw water, she thought of nothing else
but of the benefit which she had received, and to run hastily to the city to
publish it to her fellow Citizens, and to induce them to come with her to
find the Messiah, who was come into the world, that they might be partakers
of the fulness, and of the great and inestimable riches which he had brought
unto it. Which does evidently show the force which is in the word of God, to
transform men, Heb. 4.12.
and make them become in a moment new creatures. When it is received of a
heart void of gall, Psalm. 19.
and cast into a ground that has been before plowed and tilled by the holy
Ghost: for otherwise it brings not forth any more fruit, then does the seed
which falls upon the stones, Luke 8.6.
and among thorns. My sheep (said Jesus Christ) hear my voice: showing
thereby the mark whereby they might be known, to wit, when they take such a
smack in the word of God, as sheep do in the grass which they find in a good
pasture. For as the one ca^ not be filled with grass no more can the other
with the word: whereof they can not so be well satisfied, but that they hunger
and thirst after it still. Number. 21.5
The Apostates the^ who are glutted therewith as the people were of manna in
the desert, they show thereby, that they were never of the flock and sheepfold
of Jesus Christ, and that during the time they were thereof, they were but
wolves disguised and cloked only with counterfeit attire and sheep skins;
for if they had been sheep the sheepeheard would have attended on them so,
that no creature whatsoever could have wrong them out of his hands. Mat. 15.13
Psalm. 1.4. Mat. 3.12.
But because they were plants which the heauely father had not planted, they
have been rooted out: and as chafe have been carried away with the wind as
soon as God cle^sed his floor and fanned the^, which does not chance to the
good corn, which whether they do fan it or thrash it, it does ever remain
in the floor: and if by the violence of the thrashers stroke, it happen to be
scattered, it shall not be so far (says S. Augustine) but that it may be
gathered up together again with the broom, as we also see in these latter
days, wherein it seemed that the Devil had purposed to war with all his
might against the Church, some weak persons have been chased out of the park
by the violency of temptations: but yet not so far, but that by the grace of
God they were soon reclaimed again and that by tears, sobs, and lamentations
(wherein some of them have been seen to melt) have acknowledged and confessed
both privately and publicly their fault to the great contentment of those that
have seen their repentance, yea of the Angels and of all the host of heaven,
which does wonderfully rejoice at the conversion of all poor sinners. Luke
15.7.10.
And would it had pleased God that al had done the like, and that after the
example of the prodigal child, considering the difference that there is in
the estate of those that dwell in the house of the householder, where they have
store of bread and of all good meats, and of the other who having left it are
constrained to live with the swine and to eat with them the husks wherewith
they can not be filled, and that they had taken in the end the resolution of
the lost child who being come to himself said, Luc. 15.17
How many hired servants of my fathers have bread enough, and I dye for hunger:
I will rise and go to my father and say unto him, father, I have sinned against
heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son make me as
one of thy hired servants. Or else of that poor lewd woman which called to her
remembrance the good entreaty she had of her husband, Hos. 2.7.
and comparing it with the ill, which she received of her lovers whom she
followed, and resolved in the end to leave them and return to her husband,
saying: I will go and return to my first husband: for at that time was I
better then now. But this conversion has happened to those only, who fighting
against temptations, and being not able to vanquishe them because of their
weakness: have yielded themselus hoping to take heart again and fight, after
they had shrunk away, the grace of God assisting them to declare and make
manifest his power in their infirmity: 2. Cor. 12.
which can not be looked for at their hands who in pride of heart, not being
pressed with any other temptation then with their own concupiscences nor led
with any other counsel then their own carnal wit, have willingly departed
from the Church: as it were making no account of God, or of all his blessings,
hoping to find a better party the^ in his house, and howsoever it should fall
out, it should be ever open unto them, whenever it pleased them to return,
after they had assayed other estates. But these poor souls do deceive
themselves making their reckoning thus without their host, of whose will and
advise they make no account, as though the one and the other were in their
power, and as though they had the keys of the kingdom of heaven tied at their
girdles to open and shut, go out and come in at all times, whenever it
pleases them. For as God speaks by his Prophet My thoughts are not your
thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, Esaias. 55.8.
says the Lord, for as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways
higher then your ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts. Gal. 6.7.
They must not then think that God will suffer himself to be so mocked, and
that he does apply himself to all their foolish and vain imaginations, as
they dream, nor that it is in their power to return unto him when they list.
Romans 9.16
For all this is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God
alone which shows mercy, Phil. 2.
and does grant both will and power to perform, to whom soever he will. A
man (says Saint Augustine to this purpose) may kill himself, but so that
being dead he can not raise himself to life again. Psalm. 36.
So when we have once separated our selves from God, and by consequent from
life, which does not abide any where else but only in him: let us not think
that there is any one who has that power besides him, nor that it can
otherwise be brought to pass then by a true repentance: from which the
Apostates being excluded, Heb. 6.
the wrath of God does hang over them, and so consequently they abide in death:
which they show evidently then, when they are exhorted to return unto God and
to enter again into his church. For they never find themselves ready to
perform it: but still delay and drive it of until such time as the wheel of
the judgment of God going over them al at once and even then when they are not
aware thereof, they find themselves crushed and over whelmed on the sudden like
Esope his frog. 1. Ioh. 2.19
Also S. John takes Apostasy for a sign of reprobation, when he says, If
they had been of us (that is, those whom God has elected) they would have
continued with us, but leaving our company, they have sheewed thereby that they
were never of us, though they have been with us: no more then corrupt humors
which are not members of the body though they be in the body: or the tares
which are not of the wheat although they be in the same field with the wheat.
Romans 10.
For if the continuing in faith and the confession of the same be an argument
and certain proof of our election, the forsaking thereof contrariwise, shall
it not be a mark and token of reprobation? Heb. 10.
And if the sin against the holy Ghost be an envious and obstinate hatred
that the devils and men that love lying do bear to the truth of the
Gospel, Heb. 6.4.10.26.
which is as contrary unto them as light to darkness? what is it possible for a
man else to judge of the Apostates, who having received followed, approved,
believed, and confessed the truth for a time, do now reject and blaspheme it,
do condemn it by word and deed and have it in greater detestation, then those
who never made profession thereof? then that the spirit of God being utterly
departed from the^: has given place to the spirit of blasphemye, Mat. 12.44
which finds the house empty swept and garnished, then he goes and takes
unto himself seven other spirits worse then him self which being entered dwell
there: so that the end of such men is a great deal worse then the beginning?
whereof we shall have experience every day in many? who are as it were trumpets
to sound the battle to good me^, and furies which cease not gadding and
running here and there to incense and stir up all contentious and troublesome
persons that they can meet with all like unto themselves against the Church.
And as a candle of tallow if it be put out having been once lighted, it
stincketh a great deal more then if it had never been burned: and as pott
likewise wherein there has been some precious liquor if after there should be
mingled some other which were naught, all that rotten together would yield a most
corrupt and filthy smell: so the good things being corrupted with the evil in
these wicked men, have made the^ worse by the half. And as among the enemies
of Jesus Christ, there was none worse or more traitorous then Judas, when he
was sequestered from his company wherein he had heard so many good lessons and
seen so many notable examples: And as among the Christians of the primitive
Church: the heretics and blasphemers who did separate themselves from the
body of the Church were of all the wickedest: so in these last times the
Apostates have been found to be the dreggs of our Church when as they were
tried. Mat. 9.
The naughty humors which do impair the health of the body which have bin
cast out, the sovereign physician purging the^: The husks and chafe which
have been severed from the grain by the fan and flayle, Mat. 3.12
god sweeping his flower; and to be the very scumme which comes out of the
pott when as the fire is first brought nere unto it, to make the flesh sethe
which is in it: the dross which has been drawn from the gold; when the
goldsmythe puts it into the furnace to purify it: The excrements which have
been cut of, Ezech. 14. Wisd. 3.6.
from the body to bewtifie it and make it fair, when God as a barber took the
rasor and scissers, to pair the nails and cut the hairs thereof. Esaias. 7.
Finally though our churches be diminished by the departing of the Apostates,
nevertheless they are not the worse for it: nay they are thereby made more
healthful and better disposed. And as man his body being full of corrupt
humors is so much greater and bigger, but one the other part weaker and more
unable to all other works: so our Churches were in deed greater and more
populous when that great multitude of Apostates which have forsaken us were
with us: but they were neither so healthful, nor so ready to perform their
duty as they have been since: because such hypocrites being mingled with
others, were nothing else but an heap of offenses and stones of stumbling to
make them fall. Hitherto we have spoken only of those who having been entered
into our Churches and having abode in them some time, some more, some less
have withdrawn themselves: not for any fault that they could find either in
the doctrine that we preach, or else in the prayers and confessions which we
make, or in the Psalms which we sing, or in the Sacraments which we
administer, or in the discipline which we observe, or in the whole course and
order which we follow in ruling and governing our Churches. For thanks be to
God we know what we worshipe, Ioh. 4.22. 1. Cor. 9. Leu. 26. 1. Pet. 3.
and that we walk not at random being ready at all times to render an
account by the word of God of the hope which is in us, and of all our
actions, to any whosoever will require it. It was not them either a fear
which they had to offend God staying with us or else a hope that they could
more sincerely or purelye serve him in other places, that has made the^ to
leave our company: but if they would give the glory to God, confessing freely
and readily the cause of their reuoult, they would say that it was because they
loved more to serve the flesh then the spirit, and to enjoy these delicates of
the world, then to bear the cross of Jesus Christ. But whatsoever it be, they
have declared that they were not the children of the promise, nor of the seed
of Abraham: which is not like unto the planetes which are errant in their
motions, but as the stars of the firmament, that, is to say, those which are
immovable and permanent in the place of the firmament where they were once
fixed, Gal. 4.3.
and also if they had been the children of the free woman, they would have
stayed in the house for ever: and would not have been driven, out as the
children of the bondwoman, who have no part of the inheritance.

That it is a most dangerous thing for those that know the true Church not to
adioyne themselves presently unto it.
Chap. 14.
IT remains now before we shutt up our treatise, to speak also of some who
in deed confess that the Church which we follow is the true church, and that
it is built according to the platform that Jesus Christ and his Apostles have
left unto us: and yet they dare not adioyne themselves thereunto. Some being
held back with many vain fears, and other by as many frivolous hopes that
they do propound unto themselves. They may well be compared unto Tantalus who
dies for hunger and thirst though he has by him great abundance wherwithall
both to eat and drink: this difference only being excepted that is between him
and the^, that the meats do fly Tantalus when he would approach unto the^, and
they contrariwise fly the meats when they come near the^. For they have (as
I may say) the Church set up and open at their doors, and yet will not take the
pains to take three steps to enter into it, to be fed with the celestial
bread. Which does show that they do not much hunger after it, and by
consequent that they make themselves unworthy of the administration thereof
unto them. For the benefits of God are only for those which do desire and
long after them, and not for the other who do disdain them: as the virgin
Marie says in her song: Luke 1.53.
He has filled the hungry with good things and sent away the rich empty.
To which that agrees also which Jesus Christ said, Matthew. 5.6
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for righteousness: for they shall be
filled: And in an other place, Ioh. 7.37.
If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. He that believes in me
(as says the Scripture) out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of life.
Which he spoke of the spirit that they should receive who should believe in him.
And Esaias agreeing unto this, Esaias. 55.1.
says: Ho every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and ye that have no
silver, come, buy and eat: Come I say, buy wine and milk without silver and
without money. Wherefore do ye lay out silver and not eat bread? And your labor
without being satisfied? Harken diligently unto me, and eat that which is good
and let your soul delight in fatnes: Incline your ears, and come unto me:
hear, and your souls shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant,
with you, even the sure mercies of David. By all these places of the Scripture)
it may appear that the Gospel, the grace of God, the remission of sins and
all spiritual blessings, be not offered but only to those who desire them: not
given but to those who seek them, yea and asking them it is forbidden: Mat.
7.6.
to give that which is boly unto Dogs, or to cast pearls before swine, James.
1.
that is to say unto profane men, which love rather the mucke of this world,
Mat. 11.
then all the rithes of the kingdom of heaven, which was gredely longed after
by them in old time, and as it were snatched by those who were more vehement:
so great was the press and multitude of those which striued to enter therein
first, and were not kept back from running and aduau^ting themselves unto it,
with any fear they had of the threatenings of tyraunts, or of the loss of
their goods, or of most cruel torments which they saw prepared for them, if
they followed the Religion of Jesus Christ. For they counted nothing more dear
then the ready suffering of Martyredome, to be crowned with glory, which he
does promise in heaven to all those which shall neither be ashamed, Mat. 10.32.
nor affrayd to confess his name beneath here in earth But at this present men
be so cowardly and so faint hearted, that the most part of them draw back, and
look one upon another, lingering who shall be the last to follow the captain.
And they think that their cowardice is not seen when they do forgo some
frivolous excuses to cloak it withal. But before we come to the confutation of
their excuses and to take away the visarde, whereby they would dissemble there
hypocrisy, we must propound unto the^ some certain infallible Axioms it
shall serve for a rule to direct them, and for a light to lighten the^ in their
co^sultations. The first shall be that there is no salvation but in the church. As
the Prophet says. Joel. 2.32.
And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call one the name, of the Lord,
shall be saved for in mount Sion, and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance as the Lord
has said, and in the re^^ant, whom the Lord shall call. Esaias 4.5.
Esaias says as much. The Lord shall create upon every place of mount Sio^, and
upon the assemblyes thereof, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a
flaming fire by night, for upon all the glory shall be a defense, and a covering
shall be for a shadow in the day for the heat, and a place of refuge, and a cover
for the storm and for the rain. So does Zachary in his song, Luc. 1.68.
Blessed be the Lord god of Israel, because he has visited and redeemed his
people. That we may the^ be made partakers of the salvation which god the
Father does offer unto us in his son, we must be united unto him, and made
members of his body: that is to say that we be adopted into the household of
Abraham with whom the covenant has been made, and associated by faith with the
holy and universal church, which ca^ not be done except we believe the
communion of the Saints and until such time as we be joined with the^ in the
public assemblyes, wherein the word of God is preached, the Sacraments
administered, the order kept in confessions, prayers, and open thanks geuinges,
and in the discipline and censures, which are made of manners, to put in
authority the practice and use of the word of God, and to meet with those
corruptions which otherwise easily enter into the Church and alter it. The
second Axiom is, Luke. 12.
that in things: which God does command we ought not to delay, nor to be
slow to put them in execution. But always to have our loins girded up, and
houlde in our hands the burning lamp, to be ready to go every where,
whether it shall please him to send us. And to do readily that which he
commands us: Romans 1. Heb. 11. Genesis 12.4.
For true faith is ever accompanied with this ready obedience, as we see by
experience in Abraham the Father of the believers; who was ready to depart out
of his country and leave all his commodities, yea and to sacrifice his own
son in whom he put the effect and truethe of the promise, Genesis 22.3.
as soon as God had commanded him. And that is it which Jesus Christ teaches
us to ask of his Father, to wit: Mat. 6.10.
that his will should be done in earth as it is in heaven: That is to say that
he do grant us the grace, that we be as ready and willing to do his will, as
the Angels which are in heaven who have no sooner received the commandment of
God but even in the very instaunt they put it in execution: for God loves not
those dodgers which bargayne and ask still more days of advise to deliberate
upon that which he commands them, whether they should do it, or not. For
since he is the Sovereign Lord, and commands nothing but that which is
reasonable and for the profit of those whom he will employ in his service must
we take counsel: whether we should obey him or no in that which he does
command us? and to be more hasty or slower in accomplishing his will, then
are senseles creatures; which do not come short, or go beyond in any one
little point of that, which the creator does command them. Psalm. 23.5. Exodus
4.14 Ier. 1.7.
The Scripture teaches how God was grievously provoked against Moses, Jeremy
and Jonas, in that they were wayward in taking the charge and commission which
he was to give them, and in obeying that which he commanded them. And the
great danger wherein Jonas fell because because he would have fled away,
Ion. 1.4.
to the end he might have exempted himself from going to Niniuye, whether God
would have sent him does show plainly enough, the iminent peril to which they
lay open themselves who delay so long to enter into the Church: and to obey in
that the calling of god, who does summone and inuit them so willingly unto
him, Esaias. 65.
having every day from morning to night his arms stretched forth to receive
and embrace them coming unto him. And are they not amassed at that which Jesus
Christ spoke unto him that would have followed him, but upon that condition
that he would suffer him: Luke 9.62.
first to go bid them farewell which were at his house: No man (says he to
him) that puts his hand to the plowe, and looks back, is apt for the
kingdom of God. The third Axiom, that we ought never to let flippe the
occasion of weldoing, nor a receiving the benefit that God does set before us,
when occasion offreth it self: but apply our selves immediately unto it, and
use it, lest that it being once lost, it cannot be possiblye recovered again.
That is it which Christ Jesus said speaking unto the Jews, Yet a little while
is the light with you, Ioh. 12, 35.
walk while ye have light, least the darkness come upon you: for he that
walks in the dark knows not whether he goes, admonishing them thereby,
that they should take heed of rejecting of the grace which God offered unto
them in him, and by him, and that if they did, it being taken from the^, they
could no more come by it, which they have found in deed; for having not
received the light then when it was offered, they have been utterly deprived
thereof, and are yet at this day. So that since fifteen hundred years ago,
there has not been in the whole world, a people more wretched than that;
because they have not known the time of their visitation, Luke 19, 44
and have not received the great benefits which God would have bestowed on
them, then when they were offered; those that were bidden to the wedding of the
kings son did excuse them selves, Matt. 22, 5.
the one alleging their merchandise, the other their domestical business, and
the rest those impediments which they had: they were so far from satisfiyng
and contenting the king by these excuses, that contrariwise his anger being
more extremely kindled against those that had not made any account of the honor
and favor that he did unto them, he pronounced them unworthy of his
liberality, and of ever being received into his house. Mat. 25.10
The foolish virgins, because they had not the care to light their lamps in
due time, were overtaken by the coming of the bridegroom, and excluded out
of the hall where the banquet was made, which does teach us not to imitate the
slouthefull, who gasp and wringe their hands, or hang down their arms
then, when they should work in the time of need. But to follow the example
of the Ant, who earelie and betimes makes her provision, foreseeing, that in
winter she shall not have either means or leisure to do the same. The Turtle,
the Crane, Ier. 8.7.
and the Swallowe observe the time wherein they must go a way, least they
should be overtaken with the frostes and cold, which be contrary and
hurtful unto their nature. But my people (says God) knows not the iugements
of the Lord. Jesus Christ did object the same thing to the Scribes and
Pharisees, Mat. 16.3.
O Hypoenites (said he) ye can discern the face of the sky, and can ye not
discern the signs of the times? To conclude then our purpose, when the
occasion and opportunity is given us to do that which God commands, we must
never delay, but readily put the hand to the work, and willingly apply our
selves thereunto, and ever be prepared to receive his graces; whenever he is
willing to impart them unto us. The fourth Axiom is, that it is a most
dangerous thing to tempt long the patience of God. Whereof there is such a
notable place in S. Paul: Romans 2.4.
Despisest thou the riches of his bountifulnes and patience, and long,
sufferance, not knowing that the bountifulnes of God leads thee to
repentance? but thou, after thine hurdnes, and heart that can not repent,
heapast unto thy self wrath, against the day of wrath, and of the declaration
of the just judgment of God, who will reward every man according to his
works: that is, to them which by continuance in well doing, seek glory, and
honor, and immortality, eternal life: but unto them that are contentious,
and disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath.
For my part, I do marvel that such threatenings do not move otherwise these
delayers, which do abuse so long the patience and goodness of God, which we can
not contemn, without thrusting our selves into an open danger of alienating of
God and his grace from us for ever, and to deprive our selves consequently of
all the hope that we can have of eternal life, and of the rest which God has
promised to his chosen. Psalm. 95.7.
As the Prophet says: To day, if ye shall hear his voice, harden not, your
hearts, as in Moribah, and as in the day of Massa in the wilderness. When your
Fathers tempted te, proved me, though they had seen my works. Fortye years
have I contended with this generation, and said, they are a people that err in
their hearts, for they have not known my ways. Wherefore I swear in my wrath,
saying: surely they shall not enter into my rest.

What the causes are which hinder the delayers from entering into the Church,
and how light and frivolous they are.
Chap. 15.
THere are three things which cause the delayers to slumber, which they ever
set before their eyes, to flatter themselves in their sluggishnes, and which
the devil can use marvelous well, to keep them fast in his bands, and to
hold them from going from him. The first is, that they doubt of the threatenings
of God, and that which causes them to doubt is, Psalm. 103.6
that he is slow unto anger, and to execute his judgments. For he is inclined
of his own nature unto mercy and meekenes, Ezech. 18.23. and 32.
and desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent and
live. It is a grief to him, and against his will, that he stretches out his
hand to strike us: and when he does it, being constrained by our malice and
obstinacy, he does it against his own nature, and does as Esaias says, Esa.
28.21.
a strange work. The Lord shall stand as in mount Perazim, he shall be wrath
as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work, and
bring to pass his act, his strange act. Nevertheless, being just as he is, to
satisfice his justice after he has long stayed, if he should see that we
should persevere in our iniquities, and that we should make no account of
leaving our evil ways, to return to him, then to his great grief he
begins to show his wrath, and execute his judgments upon us: protesting in
the mean time, that it did not lie in him, Osea 13.
that we are not saved, and that our ruin and destruction comes from none
other, but from our selves. So though God suffers our sin to sleep for a
season, and goes not about to punish it as soon as it is committed: yet
notwithstanding he forgets nothing of his justice, but calls at the very
instant, wherein he holds his assizes all his debtors, and emiseth them to
pay unto him his due, and all revenues already past. We must then hold this
for certain, that God is true in all his sayings, and that his truth being
essential and coeternal with him, he can not choose but put it in execution,
2. Cor. 1. James. 1.
and as well his threatenings as his promises, in the time which he has
appointed: because in him there is not yea and nay, nor any mutation or shadow
of change. The other thing which does abuse the delayers, is the opinion which
they have, that the judgment of God is ever farther of from the^ then it is:
and that seeing it approach they may easily escape it. That is it which deceived
those who lived in the time of the floode, and the Sodomites, and Pharaoh, and
Achab, and Balthazar, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem when it was destroyed
by Nabuchadnezar, and since by the Romans. For although the judgments of God
were even at their doors, and that they were often forewarned thereof by the
Prophets and servants of God; nevertheless they never believed any thing,
until that they were taken at unawares, and that drinking, eating, laughing,
sporting; Matthew. 24.
and even then when they thought themselves to be most sure, they were all at
once overthrown. For, 1. These. 5.2
The day of the Lord comes as a thief in the night, Who does watch a
fit hour to slip himself easilye into the house which he intends to
rob, that he be not discovered. And as the lightning, which is no sooner
seen but it vanishes away: therefore they that delay to perform their duty
and do take their pleasure for the hope they have that God is not ready to
call them to his audit to make their accountes, are oftentimes deceived, as
well as the naughty servant who said in his heart, my master does defer
his coming, let me cate, and drink and be merry: and in the mean time his
master comes in a day when he looks not for him, Mat. 24.50
and in an hour, that he is not aware of, and does cut him of, and give him
his portion with the hypocrites, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth.
The third thing which deceives these delayers, is the vain hope which they
have, that they shall ever have some means or other to agree with God before
they die. Prou. 3.7.
But it were better for them not to be wise in their own eyes: but to fear
the Lord and to depart from evil. And hear what the wisdom of God says
by Solomon, Prou. 1.24
Because I have called and ye refused: I have stretched out my hand, and none
would regard: but ye have despised all my counsel, and would none of my
correction. I will also laugh at you destruction, and mock when your fear
comes, like sudden desolation, and your destruction shall come like a
whirlewinde: when affliction and anguish shall come upon you, then shall they
call upon me, but I will not answer: they shall seek me early, but shall not
find me: because they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the
Lord. They would none of my counsel, but despised all my correction,
therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with
their own devises, for ease slays the foolish, and the prosperity of
fools destroys them. But he that obeys me, shall dwell safely, and be
quiet from fear of evil. It is recorded of Fabius Maximus, that in prolonging
the time he stayed and aswaged by little and little the fierceness of Hanniball,
and by delay he delivered the common wealth of Rome, from the greatest peril
that ever befell unto it: by reason whereof the wise worldlings use of tentimes
dissimulation and leisure in their affairs, and condemn swiftness and
speediness for great rashness: and in truth, for those who have to do
amongst men it is requisite to have a stayed, and well settled wit that does
not hasten too much: but ponder and weigh wisely all counsels, and all reasons
before it conclude what to do. For as the Grecians say, the latter thoughts
are commonly the wisest and best, but toward God there is nothing more
dangerous then to delay, nor more necessary to salvation then a swiftness and
readiness, to hear and put in practice that which God commands us because
he commands nothing but with reason, and for the great benefit of those
that obey him. Let us not then be slack: But let us cast away every thing that
presses down, Heb. 12.1.2.
and the sin that so easily compasses us about: let us run with patience the
race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our
faith; who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, and
despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. Consider
ye delayers him who has suffered such gainesaying of sinners against himself,
that you give not over in your hearts. 1. Cor. 9.24.
Know ye not, that they which run in a race, run all, yet one receives the
price? So run that ye may obtain. See that ye despise not him that speaks:
Heb. 12.25
for if they escaped not which refused him that spoke on earth: much more shall
we not escape, if we turn away from him, that speaks from heaven. Pray ye
unto him that he may break the nets, which hold you so entangled: and that he
unwrap you out of all those vain fears and desires which hinder you, and
cause you to let his spirit from directing you in doing his will. Psa. 119.32.
Say unto him as says David, I will run the way of thy commandementes, when
thou shall enlarge mine heart. Furthermore I will keep thy statuts: forsake
me not ouerlong. Tertullian speaks that which we shall find daily to be most
true, that is, that our flesh which by nature is rebellie us against the^ will
of God, can not stoop to submit and suffer it self to be tied to the yoke of
his word: but will still strive to the contrary. And as it is crafty and
politic, and has ever some subtlety and sophistry to flotter her self in
her iniquity, and does allege always an excuse to those that do exhort her
to do her duty, when they urge her somewhat more instantly to do any thing
which is against her will, and when one of her reasons be answered, she does
presently invent an other to make reply again: so that she finds as many or
more shifts and exceptions to excuse her from doing well, then an onion has
skins to cover it self. But we ought to think or at least we should
think, with whom we have to deal, and that we dispute in vain against God,
who as David says: Psalm. 44.21 Psalm. 138.6
Knows the secrets of the heart. And as in an other place, For though the
Lord be high, yet he behouldeth the lowlye. For every thing that he
commands, and whatsoever he does, is most justly and most wisely done, and
there is nothing in all his counsels, his words, and his works, that is not
void of all blame or reproof. Psalm. 111.8
As the Prophet says: All his statutes are established for even and ever, and
are done in truth and equity. Wherefore it were most safe and expedient for
us, when God speaks, to stop our mouths continually, to reply nothing
against that he says, to open our ears, and to hearken attentively to that
which pleases him to command us: and to be always ready to crave his grace,
to obey and execute chearefully his will. For we can not offer unto him a more
acceptable sacrifice, then a ready and willing obedience. But to show how
frivolous the excuses are, which the delayers commonly bring forth, to acquit
themselves from performing their duty, and entering into the Church, which is
the only place where they ought to seek, and are able to find their
salvation. We will examine some of them more perticularly, to the end we may see
what show of ground they can have. The commonest is, for the most part, that
which all use to allege, the fear that they have of falling into those
dangers, whereunto they see those laid open, who would withdraw themselves
from the company of Antichrist, to follow Jesus Christ. But now I demand of
them, whether the fear of God ought not to take place and be preferred before
all other fears? And whether as the love of God which commands us to love
him with all our heart, with all our strength; and ought to be the rule of al
other our affections? So also the fear of God ought not so to govern all
other fears, that we love and dread him as much or rather more then any other
thing? But if this true fear, which is the chief and principal point of true
wisdom and godliness, Prou. 1.7.
were well imprinted in our hearts, it would straight way chase away all other
vain fear, as Saint Augustine says: Will thou fear nothing? (says he)
fear God. And experience has proved in all honest persons of time past, who
walking uprightly in their calling, and setting always before their eyes the
favor and grace of God, which did assist them in all their ways, were not
daunted with any danger that could happen unto them. Exodus 14.
Had Moses any fear and dread of Pharaoh, when he saw himself and all the
people which he led, enclosed between the sea and the army of the
Egyptians, so that there appeared no means, either to fly back, or else to
pass one? Was he moved, or any whit amassed at all this? though he saw the
imminent peril, and all the people about him in that sort astonyed, that they
thought not but that they had been utterly cast away: nevertheless he
remained steadfast and inmooueable in the midst of this great fear, never
douting but that God would show some notable act of his sovereign power, or
else open unto them some passage whereby they might escape. Ios. 12.
Iosuah to whom God after the decease of Moses committed the charge of his
people, and to make war to thirty and one Kings, all of them mighty and
having their people brought up in Martial feats, their cities strong and well
fortified, their men well appointed to fight: did he ever fear any of all
these things? Did he not go cheerfully against his enemies, making no more
account of them and their forces then to eat a morsel of bread? Judge. 3.31.
Shamgar with an ox goade assaulted six hundred Philistines, Judge. 7.19.
whom he discomfited. Gedeon with three hundred men who were only armed with
trumpets and pitchers, went boldly against an innumerable multitude of
Madianites, Judge. 15.15
whom he destroyed. Sampson with the iaw bone of an ass, smote a thousand
men. David being yet but a child addressed himself courageously to the
combat, Sam. 17.49
against that great and terrible giant Goliath: whom he smote dead to the
ground, with the first throw of his sling. And he himself was wont ever
since that time to say (to show the great boldness that he went withal unto
the war under the confidence and conduct of the Lord, of whom he saw
himself assisted in all his affairs) I will not be afraid for ten thousand
of the people, that would beset me round about. Whereby we may plainly see,
that all they that live in a true fear of God, and who by his promises assure
themselves of his help and favor: do not fear nor are affrighted with any
thing whatsoever. Nay even in death they are most resolute: as it appears in
David. The Lord is my sheepeheard, I shall not want, Psalm. 23.1.
he makes me to rest in green pastures, and leads me by the still waters.
He restores my soul, and leads me in the paths of righteousness for his
names sake. Yea though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear none evil: for thou art with me: thy rod and thy staff,
they comfort me. Thou do prepare a table before me, in the sight of mine
adversaries. And we must not think, that this was a peculiar grace which God
had bestowed upon David only: for it is common to all true believers, as he
himself does testify unto us. Psalm. 125.1
They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Sion, which can not be removed,
is most justly and most wisely done, and there is nothing in all his
counsels, his words, and his works, that is not void of all blame or
reproof. Psalm. 111.8
As the Prophet says: All his statutes are established for even and ever, and
are done in truth and equity. Wherefore it were most safe and expedient for
us, when God speaks, to stop our mouths continually, to reply nothing
against that he says, to open our ears, and to hearken attentively to that
which pleases him to command us: and to be always ready to crave his grace,
to obey and execute chearefully his will. For we can not oss^^ unto him a more
acceprable sacrifice, then a ready and willing obedience. But to show how
frivolous the excuses are, which the delayers commonly bring forth, to acquit
themselves from performing their duty, and entering into the Church, which is
the only place where they ought to seek, and are able to find then salvation.
We will examine some of them more perticularly, to the end we may see what show
of ground they can have. The commonest is, for the most part, that which all
use to allege, the fear that they have of falling into those dangers,
whereunto they see those laid open, who would withdraw themselves from the
company of Antichrist, to follow lesus Christ. But but remains for ever. The
reason whereby the delaiers are tossed, Mat. 6.33.
and withholden by so many vain fears, which hinder them from obeying God
readily, and seeking his kingdom and his righteousness above all other
things, is for that they have no true fear of God, which would expel out of
their hearts all other fear, if it were once entered into them: But so long
as they lie still in there filth, and will not once move themselves to enter
into the Church to hear the word of God, Esaias. 59.
to be strengthened by his spirit which does accompany it: they will still
tremble for fear, imagining unto themselves fear, where there is none. There
shall need as the Prophet says, But the sound of a leaf sh^ken, Psalm. 53.5.
Leu. 26.38
To terrify them, and to exanimate them altogether. Whereas being endued with
faith they would be so constant, Mat. 16.18
that even the very gates of hell, that is to say, the counsel and the
power of the Devils, could in no wise move them. If they will then be rid
of this so weak and effeminate an heart, which does entangle and hinder them
from performinge their duty: let them hasten to come into the Church? Which
(as the Prophet says) does bring forth men children, Esaias. 66.7.
that is to say, having a stout and a manly courage: and who do not yield
themselves easily, Apoc. 12.5
whatsoever sharp and furious assaults the Devil and the world make against
them. Now after we have spoken in general of the vain fear which they
have, and showed that it proceeds not from any other thing, then from the
want in them of love and affiance and true fear toward God: let us now
show the same more particularlye, and let us handle every fear more
seuerallye one by one. They do allege first the fear that they have to
indaunger the loss of their life. To which I aunsweare them, Romans 1.25 Romans
2.5.
that trusting to save it as they hope, to wit, in dissembling and withholding
the truth of God in unrighteousness, and on the other part, heapinge
continuallye unto themselves the wrath of God, by the Idolatryes and
superstitions wherewith they defile themselves day by day, they do loose it,
as Jesus Christ says: Ioh. 12.25.
He that loves his life, (and studieth to keep it by unlawful means) shall
loose it: And contrariwise He that hates his life in this world, and does not
fear to forgo it for the honor and service of God and for the confession of
the name of Jesus Christ, and of the truth of the Gospel, shall keep it unto
life eternal. Moreover God who has given it unto them is it not he alone
which ca^ continue it unto the^, and can defend it a against al those that would
take it away from the^: as theprophet says, Psalm. 31.15
my times are in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from
them that persecute me. Furthermore in another place ye that love the Lord,
Psalm. 97, 10
hate evil: he preserves the souls of his saints: he will deliver the^ from
the hand of the wicked light is sown for the righteous, and ^ye for the
upright in heart: rejoice ye righteous in the Lord, and give thanks for his
holy remembrance Again in an other place, Psalm. 17.8.
He keeps al his bones not one of the^ is broken: al these places do teach and
assure us that no creature whatsoever can hurt us, either in our bodies, or any
thing else, but by the permission and will of God; who keeps us as the apple
of his eye, and hides us under the shadow of his wings. Moreover what reason
is there to preserve the life of the body, which is so vain, so short and
moment any, so uncertain, so frail and miserable, in this world to loose
the happy and eternal life, as well of the body as of the soul in the
kingdom of heaven. Psalm. 36.9. Ioh. 14.6 Ioh. 6. Abac. 2.
For God being the well of life and Jesus Christ the way truth and the life:
and the word of God and faith being the two means whereby God grants life
unto us: if we be deprived of both these, that is to say, of all causes and
means of life (as we are in deed being out of the Church) be not the
delayers as well as the Apostates wonderfullye deceived, seeking and hoping to
find life, in the world, Romans 14.8
where there is nothing but death and malediction. Furthermore do we not
appertain unto Jesus Christ as well concerning the body as the soul. 1, Pet.
1.18
Who has redeemed us by his death, and paid our ransom: not with gold,
silver, or other corruptible things, but with his precious blood, 1. Cor.
6.20.
which was the greatest price which could be esteemed in the world. Seeing then
we now belong unto him, and not unto our selves, and that he is Lord of our
life, and of our death; is not the one and the other in his disposition, to do
with them, as it shall seem good unto him. And ought not we also to consecrate
them wholly unto his honor, and to have them ever ready to employ in his
service? And casting away all fears and dread that may withdraw us or keep us
back from doing our duty, and resting wholly upon the providence of God, Mat.
28.20
who has promised to be always with us and to have so great a care of our
souls, and bodies, Mat. 10.30
that even one hear shall not fall from our head, without his will and
special ordinance: Good God what makes us (I pray you) so to love this life
wherein there is no kind of liberty, no rest, no pleasure that is perfect,
and that is not entermingled with a thousand griefs, sorrows, and bitter
vexations: and where at all hours of the day we are constrained to fee and
hear against our wills innumerable things which grieve us; and which is
worse: wherein we can not walk three stepps but we shall meet with some
offense, that shall cause us to stumble daungerouslye and offend our good God,
to whom we are so much bound. And alas, what does make us likewise to have so
great a fear of death, which is at this present so unarmed, 1. Cor. 15.
that there is not so much as one stinge left unto it to prick us withal,
Act 2.24.
nor a chain, or coarde wherewith to bind us: which is the door and entrance
into the kingdom of heaven, and as a commissarye appointed and sent of God to
put in possession and enjoying of life, glory, honor, Romans 8.
peace, joy, rest, and all the perfect, and abfolute felicity, which we
possess not here in earth, but only by hope. Where is the faith which we
ought to have of eternal life? which can not be in our hearts but it shall
send away presently all fear of death. Luke 24.
Where is the spirit of strength and virtue from above and that old faith of
the Martyrs wherewith they have astonished the most cruel and fiercest
tyrauntes of the world, Math. 12.24.
and made Beelzebub himself the prince of the Devils, with all his troops
and legions to tremble in Hell? Where are the invincible courages which never
yielded either to the iron, or to the fire, or to the teethe of Lions, or to
threateninges, or to armies, or to any torment that was set before them, He.
11.33
were it never so cruel and horrible? For they had ever that before their
eyes, If God be one our side, Romans 8.3^
who can be against us? And that which the Prophet said seeing the rage, of
his enemies, Psalm. 118.9.
The Lord is with me: Therefore I will not fear what man can do unto me: The
delayers then think to be at more sauegarde being one men's part then on Gods,
and that following the band of the Idolaters and blasphemers they can not fall
into the dangers whereunto they see the children and servants of God subject
who do serve him and walk in his fear. But David is not of this opinion. It
is better to trust in the Lord, Psalm. 108.12.
then to have confidence in man: It is better to trust in the Lord, then to
have confidence in Princes. And otherwise, Give us help against trouble, for
vain is the help of man: Thorough God we shall do valiauntly for he shall
tread down our enemies. Then to assure our selves sufficientlye both living
and dying, we can not do better then to commit our selves to his protection,
who has in his hands the keys of life and of death: Apoc. 1.18.
The delayers allege also unto those that do exhort them to come into the
Church, to lay open themselves and to make public profession of their
faith, as God has commanded them: that the fear wherein they are and of the
loss of their goods does hinder them, Luke 1.1.
and that they will not be poor and naked as commonly those are who make true
profession of the Gospel. Yea? but I demand of them, who has bestowed
these goods upon them, and to what end they have been given unto them? is it
not God, who being more liberal toward them, then toward many others,
does make them welthier then their fellows, that he may bind them unto
himself more straightlye, and give them occasion to love him more, and serve
him with a more willing heart? and yet that which ought to draw them nearer
unto him, and make them more devout and affectionate toward his service, is
that which does withdraw them, and makes them altogether to forget it. Good
Lord can they think that such a heinous ingratitude, shall in the end remain
unpunished? and that God has not as much power to punish it, and as much will
to take it away from them or their children, as he has had to bestow it on
them? Let us hear what David says thereof. Psalm. 37.17
The arms of the wicked shall be broken, but the Lord vpholdeth the just men:
the Lord knows the dates of upright men; and their inheritance shall be
perpetual. They shall not be confounded in the perilous time, and in the
days of famine they shall have enough, but the wicked shall perish, and the
enemies of the Lord shall be consumed as the fat of Lambs, even with the
smoke shall they consume away. The wicked boroweth, and paieth not again: but
the righteous is merciful, and gives: For such as be blessed of God, shall
inherit the land, and they that be cursed of him, shall be cut of. Also in
another place: Their beauty shall consume, Psa. 49.14
when they shall go from their house to grave: but God shall deliver my soul
from the power of the grave: for he will receive me. Be not thou afraid when
one is maderiche, and when the the glory of his house is increased: for he
shall take nothing away when he dies, neither shall his pomp descend after
him. And in another place: Psalm. 39.5.
Surely every man in his best estate is altogether vanity: doubtless man
walks in a shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain: he heapeth up riches,
and can not tell who shall gather them. Thereby it may appear, how uncertain
the hope of those is, who by offending God, and disobeying him, think to keep
their goods, and to enjoy them peaceably: seeing it is he alone that can give
them, and take them away, as it seems good unto him. Moreover, what avails
it to have many riches, if God do not bless them, and give us the power to use
them aright? For we possessing them without his grace, except he stretche forth
or extend his blessing upon them, they can not serve but for our own evil,
and for a means to accomplish and augment our destruction, making us the more
sinful before God. But what can it profit me to live here a very short time,
enjoying all the riches of the world with great labors, fears, sorrows, and
defiances, if in the end of this life I be constrained to leave them, Luke 16.23
as the naughty rich man, for having abused them? We do root out of our
fields and gardens, thorns, briars, and all weeds, which do hinder the
growth and prospering of the grain, and other good seed: why do we not
pluck out of our hearts also that covetousness, and greedy desire, that
hinders the word of God (which is an incorruptible seed,) Luke 3.
from taking root, and does beat it down, and smother it when it would arise?
Crates the Thebane, knowing that the goods of this world hindered the mind,
from applying her self freely to the study of Philosophy, took all that he
had and threw them into the sea, saying: that he had rather drown them, then he
should be drowned by them. Will not this poor Pagane rising from the dead, in
the day of judgment, condemn all those, which for the excessive love they
bear to their riches, are gone astray from the true Christian Philosophy? that
is to say, the word of God, where as they might learn to know God, Ioh. 17.8.
and Jesus Christ, and to know themselves, and all the foolish vanity of the
world, which are the only means whereby men can be saved. I would to God that
all delayers, and all other persons, who are kept back by their goods from
entering into the church of God, to learn the way of their salvation, had
soundly practiced in the whole course of their life this one lesson of the
Apostle: to wit, 1. Tim. 6.6.
that godliness is great gain, if a man be content with that he has: and that
having food, and raiment, we ought to be by reason contented, seeing we have
brought nothing into the world, Psalm. 37.16
and that we can carry nothing away. And this of David. A small thing unto the
just man is better then great riches to the wicked and mighty. Let such persons
consider diligently, that which the Apostle says, touching the desire of
riches. The desire of money is the root of all evil, which while some lusted
after, they erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows, and are fallen into temptations and nets, and into many foolish and
noisome lusts, which cast men into destruction and perdition. And what a great
and grievous loss they sustain, when to obey their desires they lose the
faith, and by consequent, Phil. 3.8.
the grace of God, which is the welspringe of all goodness. Saint Paul after he
had known Jesus Christ, and the great riches which he brings unto those
which receive and possess him by faith: did esteem no more of all those
things whereof the flesh uses to boast, then of dunge. So all those who (as
he) have soundly felt and tasted of the benefits which God the Father does
bestow on us, by the means and favor of his son; do not now make any great
account of worldly riches, 1. Cor. 7.13. Psalm. 62.10
or of any other earthly goods, but possess them as not possessing them, and
not setting their hearts upon so frivolous and so uncertain things. As we see
by experience in the example of Abraham, Genesis 12.4.
who after that he had made a covenant with God, and believed that which he had
promised unto him, that he would be his buckler, Genesis 15.1.
and his exceeding great reward, and that he would always be with him, Genesis
17.
to guide and lead him in all his ways, and defend him in all dangers, did
not delay to obey his commandment that he laid upon him, to go out of his
own country, to leave all his inheritances, houses, lands and possessions,
his parents, and friends, and generally all his commodities and eases, to go
(as it were at all adventure unto the place that he should show him, Genesis
24.9.
nor to purchase land but so much as would serve him to make a common
sepulcher for him, his wife, and his children, neither he, nor all his household
to dwell otherwise then in tents and pauillions. Showing thereby, Heb. 11.9.
that he esteemed himself as a pilgrim and stranger in this world, and that
he waited for a city in heaven which has a foundation, Heb. 11.24
whereof God is the workemaister and founder. Moses also since, being come to
age, refused he not to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter? chosing rather
to be afflicted with the people of God, then to enjoy for a time the dainties
of sin, esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches then the treasures of
Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward. The Apostles
followed Jesus Christ so soon as he had called them, Mat. 4.20.22. Luke 19.
and to follow him readily left Father, mother, wife children friends,
houses, and all other things even to nets and boats. And after they had
continued a space in his company, and perceived the great treasures of the
knowledge and wisdom of God that flowed out of his mouth, as it were out of a
lively spring: then they forgot altogether the commodities and ease which they
had in their houses, having not any mind to return unto them, for the pleasure
and contentement that they received of the words of life which he preached
unto them. Ioh. 6. Mat. 9.9. Luke. 19.2
S. Matthew leaves his custom, and his chief traffic Zacheus the chief
receauer of tribute, a man rich and welthie, gives liberally the half of his
goods to the poor, and restores fourfold if he had taken away from any man
by forged cauillation: so sone as the one and the other had known Jesus
Christ, and the great benefits which he brought from heaven to those which
would receive them on earth. And after that Jesus Christ was ascended up into
heaven, and the holy Ghost being descended upon the Apostles, and the Church
began to grow and ^^ultiply in Jerusalem: All those that believed were they
not together making all things common, and selling all the possessions and
goods to impart them unto all, according to every one his need? Whereby it
may appear, that that which was propounded heretofore is most certain:
namely, that the sense and feeling which we have of Jesus Christ, and of the
heavenly treasure which he brings unto us, does impair and diminish much the
value of the earthly and bodily goods, the desire and love whereof beguineth by
little and little to fade away, as soon as we have tasted of the other which are
sound and stable, and which bring a true joy unto all those that do possess
them. Moreover, is there any good thing more to be desired then the peace and
the rest of the spirit? and that our hearts be ever constant and settled, to
bear moderately all chances, mutations, and alterations that may happen,
without troubling them, or being amafed at them? Now there is nothing but the
faith which we have in Jesus Christ, that can bring unto us this great benefit:
for it is he alone that is the Prince of peace, Romans 5.
and who is able to still the storms, Esaias. 19.
and torments of our consciences, when they are oppressed with the fear which
they have of the wrath and judgment of God, because of our sins: Ephe. 3.
and that he dwells by faith in our hearts, does make us feel in them by his
spirit, the remission that he has obtained for us by his death. But otherwise
the desires do never cease troubling them: and it is not possible for a man
that is desirous to take any sound sleep, to rest at his ease, because day
and night he is ever dreaming how he may satisfy all his covetous lusts: but
it is in vain, for they are insatiable and infinite. Every man then is
miserable, who for the fear he has of forgoing some corruptible goods, which
do but torment him, loses goods incorruptible, which would by and by content
him, if he would receive them when they are proffered unto him. But the most
part of men think no more then brute beasts of any other life but of this.
And therefore also they are not careful, but only to seek those things
which can set the flesh at ease, for that short time which they have to live
in this world, without remembering at all what they shall ask, when by death
they shall be constrained to forsake them. It is of them of whom David
speaks, Psalm. 49.18
when he says: While he lived he rejoiced himself: and men will praise thee,
when thou make much of thy self: he shall enter into the generation of his
fathers, and they shall not live for ever; man is in honor, and understands
not: he is like beasts that pe^^ish. Such persons seem to be accursed, as the
Serpent was, because as he, so they also live with earth, and yet are not
afraid, that their hearts being buried in the earth, do rotte as all other
things which are covered therewith. It is here where they make their paradise
like Moules. For as Jesus Christ says: Matt. 6.11.
Where their treasure is, there will their heart be also: and where their heart
is, there will be their God: and where their God is, there will their paradise
be. O poor souls, that for an apple (as I may say) do give over, not earthly
paradise, as our first parents did, but the kingdom of heaven, where the
majesty and glory of God does show it self openly to the blessed spirits that
be with him. Mat. 18.8.
Here it is, here it is (I say) where we should use violence unto our selves,
and pluck out not our eyes, if they cause us to offend, not cut of our hands
if they give us occasion to stumble (as Jesus Christ advises us) but cut down
even to the root this cursed desire which entangleth our hearts, and hinders
them from lifting themselves up on high from meditating and seeking those
things that are heavenly, as all Christians that are regenerate, (that is to
say) dead and risen again in Jesus Christ) ought to do; which those never did,
in whom sin reigns as yet. So that they are more possessed of their goods
the^ they possess the^, and more servants to their own affections then to God.
They say also that the fear which they have of persecution, and losing their
ease and rest, does withholde and keep them back from adjoining themselves to
the Church. Mat. 10.
Whereby they show themselves to be of a lither and cowardly heart, and
altogether unworthy of Jesus Christ, refusing to go with him to the battle
that he makes in their behalf, against their enemies, wherein they are sure
to bear away the victory, going under his banner and conduct: and besides
that, first to enjoy a glory and immortal praise, and afterward an eternal
and heavenly kingdom, in which they shall triumph for ever. 2. Tim. 2.12.
For this is a true saying: that if we suffer with him, we shall also reign
with him: if we deny him, he will also deny us. But I would gladly demand of
them, whether they desire or hope one day to enter into paradise, and whether
there be any other way to lead us thither, then that which the son of God
has traced out unto us? who says himself, Luke 24.26
that he ought to have suffered, and to enter into his glory. To which also that
agrees which Saint Paul says: Act. 14.22.
That by many afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of God. 2. Tim. 3.12.
And in another place: All those which will live in the fear of God, and of
Jesus Christ, shall suffer persecution. For it is an ordinance of God which is
general, that if we be partakers of the glory of his son, Romans 8.17
we must be likewise participant of his cross and tribulations. Will they the^
that God, who is unchangeable in his counsels and decrees, should break them
for their sakes; that by an especial privilege he should except them from the
common rule, and exempt them alone from persecution, from which his own son
was not freed, when in great fear and horrible anguish of death, he desired
his father, saying: Mat. 26.39
O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. Should they not
content themselves with this condition, that their estate should be like to
their Lord and Masters? And yet it is better; Heb. 7.26.
for of all the children of God, there is none that has suffered so much in
this world, as the first borne, who was his natural son, his only son,
his well-beloved son: and who alone was innocent and undefiled amongst all
men. Were it not a great shame for a man to request to be crowned, having not
fought? and to receive the price of the race, 2. Tim. 2.5
wherein he never ran? that were to reap, having not sown; and to gather,
not having labored? 1. Cor. 9.
Do not we fear least we should be thought not only too too fine and
dainty, but also treacherous and disloyal, if whilst the other fight in the
field covered on all sides with dust and blood, weary and out of breath, and
half dead for the great thirst which they endure: we should stay still under
the tent in the shadow to refresh us at our ease, by the bottels and flagons?
When David would have sent the valiant knight Vriah unto his house, 2. Sam.
11.11.
there toly and delight himself with his wife being returned from the ca^pe,
from which he came by the commandment of his general, to bring tidings unto
the King of the army: excused himself from doing of that which the king
commanded, by a notable and excellent answer, God forbid (said he) that thy
servant should ever suffer so shameful a reproach, that he has lien soft in
his house, when his captain in the war has in his pauilio^ laid on the straw
bed. What shame then, or rather what impude^cy is it for the delaiers, to dwell
still in their houses, drinking of good wine and making merry, and in the mean
time they behold their captain Jesus Christ tied unto the cross; Ioh. 19.29.
to whom is given vinegre to quench his thirst. The Rubenites Gadites and the
half tribe of Manasses, Numb. 32.
though Moses by the consent of all the other tribs, had assigned unto them their
portion and dwelling in the lands which they had conquered on the other side of
Jordan, upon the two Amorean Kings Sehon and the King of Basan: and for that
cause, had noweleisure to rest themselves, their wives, and their children, not
taking any more pains in the travels and labors of war: nevertheless they
would not enjoy this rest whilst their brethren were in the fields fighting
and conquering of the Chananits, and the residue of the land which God had
promised unto the^ for their inheritance; but with a noble and valiant heart did
offer themselves to go the foremost in the battle, and to be partakers of all
the toiles and dangers of their brethren, until such time as they also should
be settled and have occasion to rest as they themselves had. Which is an example
of great courage, and which these weak and faint hearts, should set before
their eyes to imitate: and consider with themselves what a reproach it is to
eat the honey as drones when it is gathered, and refuse in the mean time the
pains to go into the fields to gather it. But what? Which of these two will
they be? Children, or bastardes? Heb. 12.8.
If they choose rather to be bastardes, besides the reproach they get thereby,
they can not be heirs. If they be children, they must be partakers of the
chasticements and afflictions which are common to all the children, whereby
they get their inheritance. Romans 5. Gal. 6. Mat. 5.11.
Why do they fly the cross and persecutions of Jesus Christ; seeing it is
the badge and chiefest glory of Christians? Do they think they shall be
miserable when they shall be iniuried, imprisoned, banished, robbed of al their
goods? That their names shall stink and be execrable to the whole world? and
that every evil word shall be said against them for Jesus Christ his cause? Nay
contrariwise he pronounces those happy, and says that it is one of the
seals of our election to assure them that the kingdom of God does belong unto
them, and that this narrow way which they abhor so much, Mat. 7.14.
is even that which leads thereunto, and he pronounces those wretched who
desire riches, pleasures, and the honors of this world. Woe be to you that are
rich: Luke 6.24.
for ye have received your consolation. Woe be to you that now laugh: for ye
shall wail and weep. Woe be to you when all men speak well of you: (for as he
says in an other place) that which is highly esteemed amongst men, Luc. 16.15
is most commonly abominable in the sight of God. Soph. 1.
I will visit all those who as wine rest upon their dregs. That is to say,
which love rather to wallowe and rot in their filth then to rise and hasten
themselves to prevent the judgment of God, and the day of his wrath. Which
shall be unto them no doubt a day of tribulation, and anguish, of darkness and
obscurity, of weping and gnashing of teeth. Apoc. 21.8
The fearful (says S. John) shall not enter into the kingdom of God: but
shall have their part (as also al unbelievers, liars, and Idolaters) in the
lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death: but he
that overcomes, shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he
shall be my son. Should not the threatenings of God so horrible, correct the
fear of the most fearful person in the world? And on the other side those
excellent promises that God makes unto all those that shall, be courageous,
and who fighting manfully shall be victors over their enemies: ought they not
to encourage and stir up the greatest coward that is, to take the whole
armor of God, that is the breastplate of righteousness, The shield of faith,
the helmet of salvation, Ephesians. 6.13.
the sword of the spirit which is the word of God: To resist the Devils and the
Lords of the world and gouerners of the darkness of the same and to fight
against all the malicious spirits which are in heavenly places, 1. Cor. 10.5
and cast down all imaginations and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God: and bring into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ. The spirit of God which is a power from on high, Luke
24.49 Ioh. 3.5.
which by faith is communicated unto us by our regeneration, is it a spirit of
fear, and not rather of power, of love, and of a sound mind? How can they then
that are destitute of this spirit, assure themselves in their consciences that
they are Christians? But I do marvel much how these persons think that they
may be of the church of Jesus Christ, and in the mean time be freed from
persecution, seeing Jesus Christ has foretold to all his disciples, that in
the world they should suffer affliction, and that if he has been hated and
persecuted in the world, Ioh. 15.20. Chap. 16.
so shall they be also: purposing to teach the^ thereby, that injuries and
persecutions can by no means be avoided of the^. Wherefore Lactantius says,
that it is the poesy of the true church, 1. Tim. 13.
to do good and suffer evil: in being the pillar and the prop of truth, Ioh.
8.44.
and as it were a witness thereof, considering that the truth is, and has been
of al antiquity odious unto the devil, who is the father of lies, and to all
men who by nature are vain and liers: but above all other to Princes and great
Lords who love to be flattered. Psalm. 39. and 116.
Is it possible that either the true ministers and servants of God, ca^ make a
true profession of preaching thereof, or his children believe and follow it, not
raising against the^ by and by the joint hatred both of men and devils? So that
the painters which would draw her, have given unto her a sword in her hand,
which she thrusts through the throat of him that bears her. 3. Esd. 4.
But that ought not to astonish us, for howsoever it stands, she will in the
end remain victorious over all her enemies. And we are certain that God who
is the Father thereof, will uphold all those that will freely embrace her and
will destroy, not only those, who by hatred, and because they are possessed by
the devil, do reject and fiercely resist it: but also those who for fear lest
they should incur the hatred and the evil will of the world, do love rather to
dissemble and delay time with the enemies, the^ to join themselves to the
companies of her friends, and put themselves under her banner to defend her.
Ought we not to think that to preserve faith and other graces and virtues
which God has ingrafted in us, it is needful that they should be practiced?
And that without exercise they do rust, and become in time cankered as Iron
and, in the end come to nothing? It is then for our profit that we should
have enemies, which make war continually against us to exercise us. For that
makes us vigilant; strong and ready, as Saint Paul says, My power is made
perfect through weakness, 2. Cor. 3.9.
very gladlye therefore will I rejoice rather in my infirmities, that the
power of Christ may dwell in me. Wherefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in anguish for Christ's sake: for
when I am weak then am I strong. Seneca says, that virtue will fail, and
fade away, if she have not an aduerfary, who in exercising of her does make her
to flourish. Let not the delayers then allege any more either their
persecutions, or their infirmities, to excuse themselves withal from entering
into the Church: for both the one and the other ought to drive them unto it.
The cross, because it is an occasion to fight, and fighting a mean to come
unto the glory, honor, rest, crown, happiness, and felicity, whereunto they
aspire: and their infirmity, to the end they may be strengthened: for the
church is the school where al virtues are learned, but especially magnanimity
and constancy which do still accompany faith: to cause her to contemn death
threateninges, Mat. 16.
dangers, prosperity, adversity, and all other frail and corruptible things.
Is it possible that hearing so many excellent promises of God, Psalm. 46.
whereby he does make us certain for ever of his presence and favor, and that
he will never forsake us either in fire, or water: but will keep us ever in our
ingoinges and outgoinges whether soever we walk. Esaias. 43.2. Psalm. 83. Psalm.
121.
And after seeing so many examples, of those who being vpholden by the spirit
of God in the church, have been invincible against all temptations and
torments, Heb. 11.
is it possible but that we should be encouraged? And although we were more
fearful then hearts, is it possible (I say) that following so many valiant
captains and champious, we should not be under their conduct as bold as
Lions? Hasten you, o ye delayers to enrowle your selves among the company of
old beaten soldiers that never fledd back for any assault whatsoever was made
against them, and who continually esteemed the glory of God and of his truth
dearer, then all the dainties of the world. There be some also that fear to
be expelled out of their own country where they are had in honor, and have
great offices and gorgeous houses; where they, their wives, and their children,
be at their ease and well provided of all those things they need, dare not
commit themselves to the church, lest that perfecution coming, they be in
danger to loose all their commodities. To answer particularly to all that
which they object, I say first, that the true country of a Christian man (as
says S. Basil) is the Church wherein he is borne a new: and where he has
his father, Ioh. 3.
his mother, his brethren, and friends, his dwelling, his goods, and his
inheritance. And I say furthermore that it is the best, happiest and most
delightful and pleasantest soiourning that is in all the world. For it is the
guard on which God has plated, which he himself has tilled, and wherein he
takes all his delight; where the trees of righteousness, the blessed plants of
the house of God, the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and the tree of
life, which is always green are to be found. besides there are the clear
rivers and springes, of the water, Cant. 4.
of life, springinge to life eternal: There are also the sweet flowers, the
smellinge of the lillye, the roses, the camphire, the spikenarde, the Lauender,
saffron, calamus, cynnamon with the trees bearing incense, myrrh, aloes, with
all other chief spices: Apoc. 21.
And to conclude there is the gold, and precious stones, the most rare and
excellent that can be found: Esaias. 5.
desired and wished for. It is the vine of the Lord which he has adorned:
withal the greatest excellencies that can be wished, to take his pleasure
therein. If then God do content himself to dwell therein, as in the
stateliest palace, as in the gallantest garden of pleasure that he has:
should not this dwelling like us? Moreover, is not our habitation in heaven?
Phil. 3.
since we are heavenly plants (as Plato said) and that we are risen with
Jesus Christ. Wherefore then have we our hearts still in the earth, to seek
the things that are beneath? why do we not lift up our selves to heaven,
where our treasure is? Coloss. 3
when it was demanded of Socrates from whence he was? He answered: I am a
citizen, and burgess of the world: Showing by his answer, that a good man
ought to esteem the whole earth to be his countreye, and that there is no
place so desolate or so waste, nor any Nation so barbarous, in which God does
not lodge and place his, when it pleases him to call them from their native
country, to place them else where, where he knows they will fructify best.
As we see in the examples of Abraham Joseph, Mardochie, Daniell, all which
came to high estates out of their own country. There was an oulde father who
said, that honest men, yea even the faithful ought to be like unto Torteises
and Snayles, and carye still their houses about with them. For they which
build in one place, thinkyng ever to dwell there, deceive them selves, and do
not consider that the condition of the Christians in this world is not to have
any certain house or City: Eb. 13. 1. Cor. 4. Heb. 11
but to be in it as trauailers and pilgrims, now in this place and anon in
another. And so pass therein as pilgrims and strangers, not restyng our
affections in any place: but so long as God shall appoint. Briefly we ought to
build, purchase, and possess, as though we possessed not, and use the world
and all the things that are therein, as though we used it not: as the Apostle
says, that The fashion of this world goes away and there is nothing
certain therein. 1. Cor. 7.30.
If our earthly affections were well mortified, and the world were well
crucified unto us, and we unto the world, as we ought to be, we should not be
so curious or so coy in all these things, which do but serve for the body and
for this present life, as we are. For very little or nothing at all is
needful to content a mind which desires nothing but that which is necessary
to maintain it self. This insatiable desire then which we have to dwell at
our ease, and only caring to leave our houses well stored and furnished of all
things that may be desired for delight, can not proceed from any other cause,
then from too too great desires of those superfluous things and of a false
opinion which we have, that without those things we can not live
co^inodiously. For if we could content our selves with the things which are
necessary for the preservation of this life, we could not have so little but
it would suffice us. We would not fear that serving God, lodging, food, or
garments should never fail us, in what place soever we should be, were it in
the midst of Scythia. Genesis 28.11
Jacob slept at his ease though he were in the fields in the rawnes of the
night, and had but a stone under his head for his boulster. 1. Kin. 19.6
Elias contented him self for a meal to have but a cake baked upon coals,
and a pott of water. Mat. 3.4.
So Ihon who was apparalled but with cammels hear, and was nourished but with
locustes and wild honey, was contented therewith. Luke. 19.
The Apostles having barlye bread with two or three little fishes broyled upon
the coals, with a little water, desired no more. Dan. 1.
Daniell and his fellows which were fed only with herbs were fatter and in
better case then the other children which were served with the Kings dishes.
And Jesus Christ the son of God being in the world had not where to lay his
head: and yet none of all these ever wanted any thing that was necessary for
the preservation of their bodily life. True it is that God sometimes to prove
and put in practice the faith of his children and servants, or else to make
them known that they may serve for examples to others, does drive them to
great necessity: so that it seems he will give them over or else that he
has forgotten them. But he never fails to be ready at the ^erie hour and
instant, wherein they have most need of his help, making them to understand
and prove aboundantlye the remembrance that he has of his promise and care,
to succor his, when nederequireth. Whereof Paul warns the Corinthians and
all of us, 2. Cor. 4.8.
that we be not discouraged. Though sometimes being in affliction, we be
brought to the pinche, says he, yet are we not in distress, being in
pouertye, we are not destitute: being persecuted, we are not forsaken: being
cast down, we perish not. Psalm. 66.9.
And David to this purpose says: He holds our souls in life, and suffers
not our feet to slip: for thou, O God, haste proved us, thou haste tried us
as silver is tried, thou haste brought us unto the snare and laid a straight
chain upon our loins. Thou have caused men to ride over our heads. We went
into fire, and into water, Heb. 13.
but thou broughtest us out into a welthie place. I will go into thy house
with burnt offerings and will pay my vows. Having then so many promises of
God that he will not leave us, Mat. 6. 1. Pet. 5.
nor give us over, that in seeking his kingdom, and his righteousness all
temporal charges shall over and besides be administered unto us; Let us then
cast all our care upon him, and assure our selves that he will be careful to
provide all things that shall be necessary in what place soever we do remain.
I say necessary, and not superfluous: for what need have we of them: when
we may be without them: And moreover they hinder us and increase the cares and
vexations of our minds, and finallye they serve for nothing else, but to
kindle and stir up the concupiscencees of our flesh. Which we should
mortify. Ye: Iam. 4.3.
ask (Saiethe Saint James) And ye receive not because ye ask amiss, that
you might consume in your own lusts. Let us then take heed that we so rule
all our affections, that having our food, and wherewithal to cover our
bodies, that is to say, our daily bread: which we ask every day of God,
we content our selves therewithal. And then we shall know by experience,
that God never fails to provide in time for all the necessities of all those
that hope in him, and call upon his name. For that which makes as so to
mistruste poverty, and to fear that entering into the Church to serve God
sincerely, we should have great discommoditie through the want of many
things: is because we covet to many things to satisfy not our necessities
but rather our delights and pleasures. When then our desires shall be well
governed and brought under the yoke of reason, which will keep them under
through, sobriety and temperance, we shall not fear, but that we shall have
ever in all sufficiency that, which is needful for us. If they fear the
loss of their offices, and that keep them back from the service of GOD: let
them call to remembrance that which the Prophet says, speaking unto God, in
the griese he had, to see himself banished from his house. Psalm. 87.9.
Behold, O GOD, our shield, and look upon the face of thine unnoynted. For a
day in thy Court, is better then a thousand other where: I had rather be a
dore-keeper in the house of my GOD, then to dvvell in the Tabernacles of
wickedness. The honors then, and the great offices which either we have, or
hope to obtain in the Courts of Kings and earthly Princes, ought not to
hinder us from enteruig into the house of GOD, wherein we can not be so base,
but we shall be higher then all the Lords, or most famous and noble men that
are in the world: as Jesus Christ showed, speaking to the people of John
Baptist; whom he preferred before all other men. Verily I say unto you, Mat.
11.11
among them which are begotten of women, arose there not a greater then John
Baptist: notvvithstanding he that is least in the kingdom of heaven, is
greater then he: For all the servants of GOD, Apoc. 19.
and all those that are in his kingdom, be all Kings and Priests; and Judges
of the world, and of the Angels. All that then, which we could possibly lose in
the world, we do recover, to follow Jesus Christ; not two fold or four
fold, but an hundred fold: and over and besides life everlasting, Heb. 11.25
which can not be measured. Which Moses considering, he was not grieved to give
over the kingdom, and all the glory of Egypt, to serve God, to couple
himself with his people, and to be partaker with them of all their
afflictions, which were more dear unto him, then all the riches and royal
wealth. The chiefest Gentlemen and Officers in the Court of the Emperor of
Constance, at being preferred and permitted unto them to keep their Estates
and the services of their Lord, so that they would forsake their Religion:
chose rather to forgo all the honors and favors of the Court, then decline
never so little from the pure and lawful service of God: which the Prince
perceiving, kept them in his house, and continued unto them and made them an
assurance of all their estates and offices. And contrariwise sent all from his
house and out of his service which had offered to leave their Religion and
serve him, deliueryng unto them a sentence worthy remembrance, that seeing
they were faythlesse unto God, it was not possible they should ever be
faithful unto man. When the Emperor Dioclesian made a proclamation of the
general persecutions, which he and his fellows had purposed to make against
all the Churches that were established within the dominions of the Roman
Empire, the Governor of Nichomedia which was a City in Asia where the Court
of the Emperor lay, In the which the proclamation was first published, went
into the common place where it was set up, and in the presence of all the
people pulled it down and rent it as a thing full of iniquity, and done
against God, and against all reason. Which being signified unto the
Emperor, he commanded him forthwith to be put to death. Now as they talked in
the euenyng in the Palace, of the death of this Governor, and of the great
constancy which he had showed unto the end, three Gentlemen of the chamber
which were most in credit, Eusebius.
and which were the forewardest, in the Court, namely Peter, Gorgogne, and
Dorotheus, began to defend his innocence, and to hold that he was unjustly
condemned, and that in no wife he had offended his Majesty, or done any
thing against duetye, opposinge him self unto a cruel and barbarous
Proclamation, which was made against all right and equity: and though the
Emperor who loved them desired to save them, and to withdraw them from their
Religion, promised unto them the chiefest offices in his house, and the
greatest gouernementes in his Empire, nevertheless he could never obtain any
thing at their hands, nor prevail with them in any sort so far, but that
they still rather chose to give over the profers which he made unto them, and
even loose their lives, then to say or do any thing which should derogate
never so little from the Religion and service of God, and from the duetye
whereby they were bound unto him. Valentinianus being solicited by Julian the
Emperor, to forsake his Religion, if he meant to continue in the office and
charge of his Conestableship which he had bestow upon him, as well in
recompense of his services, as in consideration of his virtues; made no
difficulty to yield over presently his office into the hands of the Emperor,
to dispose it at his pleasure, being fully resolved to persevere constantly in
his religion, and show by deed that there was nothing in the world so great,
that could be more dear or precious unto him, then the service of God. The
delayers should propounde unto themselves such examples to imitate, and
following the heroical virtue of those great men, should prefer the fear
of God before all other things, and not do as Pilate did, who for fear he
should incur the displeasure of the Emperor, and lose his office, Ioh. 19.
condemned Jesus Christ: or as the Princes, who loving the praise of men more
then the praise of God, durst not make manifest the faith which they had in
him, Ioh. 12.
and in his doctrine which they heard preached. There be some also which
allege their wives and their children* whom they can not forsake with a good
conscience, and in the mean time are not afraid to abandone God, whose honor
ought to be more dear unto us, then the very salvation of our own souls:
for if our death could serve to advance (...), we must no more spare it in this
case, then our life, considering he is as well the Lord of the one as of the
other, and that he has created us, and all other things for his glory. It is
then too too great ingratitude in men, when the wife and the children, and
other innumerable goods which GOD has bestowed upon us, to provoke us to serve
and honor him: are contrariwise an occasion to cool us* and in the end
altogether to withdraw us from his service. It is true in deed, 1. Tim. 5.
that we ought to have a singular care of our family, and of all those which
are of our household: love our wives, and our children, procure their good and
their salvation, as much as lies in us, yea but the best means that we can
invent to that end, is it not that we should instruct them as well by word,
as example? to know, love, and fear GOD, sithence he does promise his grace,
Exodus 20.
and all happiness to those that shall love him, and keep his commandments?
Thou do then accuse thy self hypocrite, when thou would excuse thy
self: For if thou louedst thy wife and children, as thou say; thou would
bring them to the Church of God, and would show them by thine example the
way to follow and enter in. For it is the school and only place, where it is
possible for any man to learn to be happy; and if they refused to follow
thee being not drawn of the Father, without whose favor none can come to
Jesus Christ: thou art yet at the least discharged of thy duty toward them,
and toward God. But what if a woman be so wilful, that she will torment her
husband without ceasing, if he do not consent unto her to commit idolatrye,
and go to the Mass with her: ought he not in this to obey her, to live with
her in friendship, and to continue peace in his house? To answer to this
question, when that chances, it is a great temptation for the husband, who
ought then to pray unto God earnestly, that he would strengthen him to abide
constantly in the obedience of his holy will, without declining from the same
in any sort. Genesis 3.
And not do as Adam did, who willing to please his wife, displeased God,
breaking his commandment, whereby a thousand and a thousand evils ensued
unto him, and all his posterity. 1. King. 11.
Neither as Solomon, who to the end he might not offend the strange woman
which he had taken to wife, against the commandment of God, was by them
brought even to that point: namely, to build Temples to their Idols, and
forgate himself so much, that he worshipped and offered sacrifice unto them.
1. King. 12.
Which was the cause that of three parts of his Realm, two and more were taken
away from his son Reheboam, and translated to lereboam the son of Nebat.
Deuteronomy. 13.
If there had been found in old time among the people of Israel, a woman
which would have entised her husband to go and serve strange Gods, the
husband was commanded by and by to make her known unto the Magistrate, that
she might be condemned, and after sentence given, that he might cast at her the
first stone to stone her. So far was it in those times from the husbands to
be permitted to believe their wives, and to obey them, and worship strange Gods
with them. Let them then allege no more such excuses to cloak their
disloyalty. There are some also, who when they are urged to enter into the
Congregation of the Church, that allege for their excuse, that it is good to
wait until all things be at a better stay, and more at quiet: but they
stay, for that they will not be of a long time ready: Genesis 3.
for do they think that the Devil, who bears a deadly hate against the
Church, and who has sworn to make war even from the beginning of the world,
will ever cease to provoke and stir up by almeans possible, the tyra^ts, the
heretics, the Philosophers, the hypocrites, and the whole synagogue, with all
her adherents against it; Apoc. 20.
to persecute it especially in these last times, wherein he is loosed and more
fierce then ever he was before, seeing the day of his judgment draws near,
wherein he shall be condemned to the botto^les pit of hell for ever. Apoc. 9.
Do they think also that the 2. Antichrists, that is to say, Mahomet and the
Pope, the one in the East, and the other in the West, would not strive with all
their might to maintain their tyranny which they have usurped in the Church of
God, and to this end, 2. These. 2.
they would not endeavor still to put out the light of the gospel and of the
word of God, which is the sword whereby the one and the other shall in the end
be destroyed? Do they think moreover, that the truth can be without enemies
in the world, where the devil the father of lies, bears rule? and men being
liers and unfaithful by nature, be his bondslaues? Moreover, what does the
Apostle promise us more in the end and latter age of the world? 2. Tim. 3.
This know (says he to Timothe) That in the last days shall come perilous
times: for men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
cursed speakers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, intemperdte, fierce, despisers of
the^ which are good, traitorous, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasure more
then lovers of God, having a show of godliness, and denying the power thereof.
Matthew. 24.
And has not Jesus Christ admonished us and foretold us, that there shall be
so great tribulation, as was not from the beginning of the world, nor is at
this present, nor shall be hereafter? We must not then hope that in this
wretched world, Psalm. 12. and 119.
where good men are abased, and where there is no faith, no law, that can hold
back the malice of men, that we shall ever have rest that shall be permane^t or
sure: By reason whereof the delaiers must not flatter themselves, nor feed this
vain hope, nor think that in the Church of Jesus Christ, so long as it
endures in the world, there should ever be peace, which will not be troubled by
the devil and the wicked. Let us tarry to se those happy times, and enjoy that
rest which we desire, Psalm. 110.
until Jesus Christ put all his and our enemies under his footstool: and that
the son having abolished al principalities, and all powers, and strength, Heb.
1. 1. Cor. 15.
and give the kingdom to his Father, God be all in all. Finally, there are
some that allege for their excuse, when they are exhorted to come to the
Church, that they pray unto God in their houses, and that is sufficient for
them: but they abuse themselves 2. ways: first, in that they think that
being out of the body of the Church their prayers and other exercises can be
acceptable unto God: for if the father approves no oblation but that which is
offered upon the altar, that is to say which is presented unto him by the
son, how can they assure themselves that their prayers are heard and granted
of him, seeing they are not members of the body of Jesus Christ? And also that
they be cast of and denied of him, which knows his sheep and those which are
in his sheepefolde. My sheep (says he) hear my voice, Ioh. 10.
and I know them, and they follow me. Considering then that they do follow
not the pastor and hear not his voice. Thereof it insueth that they are not
numbered among his sheep, and consequently that they and all that proceeds
from them is abominable before God. Therefore he says, speaking of such
persons who being separated from the Church content themselves to make their
prayers privately. Matthew. 7.
Every one that says vnme Lord, Lord shall not enter into my kingdom of
heaven: but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. Many will
say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not by thy name prophesied, and by
thy name cast out Devils, and by thy name done many great works? And then will
I profess to them I never knew you: depart from me ye that work iniquity. Let
us then conclude, that the prayers which are made at home, and privately done by
some particular man can not be acceptable unto God if he be not a member of the
Church, and he can not be a member of the Church, except he be united with the
body and the head. For those that thus withdraw them selves from the
assemblies, whatsoever exercise of religion they perform in their houses, they
make a sect by themselves, and by consequent are excommunicated. The second
is, that a faithful man ought not to withdraw himself from frequenting of the
assemblies, which be made in the name of God by his people in certain days
that are appointed, wherein they are called together, to sanctify publicly his
name for the reasons which follow. First of all, it is forbidden them, Heb.
10.24
Let us consider one an other (says the Apostle) to provoke unto love and to
good works, not for saking the fellowship we have among our selves, as the
manner of some is: but let us exhort one an other, and that so much the more,
because ye see that the day draws near. For if we sin willingly after we
have received knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for
sins, but a fearful looking for of judgment, and violent fire, which shall
devour the adversaries. And afterward when God commands every one so
expressly to sanctify the day of rest, is it not to the end that the people may
inore conveniently assemble themselves, to hear the word of God preached, and
by their confessions, praises, and public prayers, which they make together,
join and unite themselves still more and more, in the one and self same faith
and religion, and wait for the performance of the promises which God has made
to be in the midst of such assemblies, and to power upon them abundantly his
spirit, his graces, favors, and holy blessings (as David says) As the dew of
Hermon which falls upon the mountain of Sion: Psalm. 133.3
there the Lord appointed the blessing and life for ever. And this is the
reason why this good and wise king esteemed so much these holy assemblies that
there was nothing in the world more dear and precious in his eyes, then to be
in the midst of them, at the days wherein they were called together, as it
appears by an innumerable multitude of places in the Psalms. Psalm. 26.8.
O Lord I have loved the habitation of thy house and the place where thine
honor dwells, Psalm. 43.3.
And in an other place, Send thy light and thy truth: let the^ lead me: let
them bring me to thy holy mountain and thy tabernacles. Again other where:
Psalm 138.1
I will praise thee with my whole heurt: enen before the Gods will I praise
thee. I will worship toward thine holy temple, and praise thy name, because
of thy loving kindness and for thy truth. And in many other places he shows
the delight which he had to resort to the public co^gregatio^s of the church,
and the singular pleasure and contentation of mind he received in them, and
does teach every one by his example to seek after and frequent the^, because
there is no better means to preserve, nourish and increase faith the^ that: and
to be edified in the knowledge and fear of God, and in all true kind of
godliness and religion, 1. Cor. 14. Ephesians. 4.
as the Apostle teaches the Corinthians and the Ephesia^s. Moreover those that
abstain from the^ do they not detest the church of God and Jesus Christ, who
is ever in the midst of those that are gathered together in his name? Do
they not make themselves unworthy, of the great blessings that God imparteth to
them so abundantly, 1. Cor. 11. Matthew. 18.
as though they were heathen and publica^s? Do they not forsake the company of
Jesus Christ of the Patriarchs, prophets, and Apostles and of all the elect
children of God, which are all members of the church? Deuteronomy. 23.
To go to the bastards the Ammonits and the Moabits, who by the ordinance of
God were in old time banished from the tabernacle and from the covenant of God.
O wretched souls which do not know the days of their visitation and who
turn their backs to the sheepehearde when he seeks them, and shut the door
on him when he comes to knock. But to come to the end of this speech and
treatise, I say in a word that the delayers whatsoever faith they suppose or
feign themselves to have. They are endued with none at all: for the true faith
is always joined with confession (as the Apostle says) which ought to be
public and in the sight of men: Romans 10. Matthew. 10. Matthew. 5.
for our light ought not to lie under the bushel but to be Set on high upon a
candlestick to lighten all those that come into the house We ought to bear
the badge of our Savior Jesus Christ in our foreheades, Apoc. 7.
which is the place most eminent and apparent in all our body, we ought not to
hide our scarfes, nor to turn our coats, nor fear to be known by our livery
to the soldiers of Jesus Christ. He has died for us, not secretly, in an
unknown corner, or closed from the knowledge of the world: but in the open
place of the sculles, where they had wont to execute the guilty and evil
doers, John. 19.
and was lifted up on high on the cross between two thieves, and has drunk
and swallowed up this shame and ignominy in the midst of the world, that we
might be honored before God. What vilanous and detestable ingratitude then is
in them, which would dissemble that, and conceal such an act to, as all the
trumpets in the world can not sufficiently sound, and spread abroad? He is not
ashamed even now that he is in his glory to acknowledge and avouch us for his
brethren, and shall we be ashamed to confess him to be our Savior? God by his
grace and perfect goodness, grant to the delayers, to know and understand betime
the great fault which they commit, by dissembling so long: that they may by a
true repentance speedily prevent the fearful judgment of God which hangs
over their heads if they hasten not. So be it.


