AN EXCELLENT TREATISE OF CHRISTIAN RIGHTEOUSNESS, WRITTEN FIRST in the French
tongue by M. I. de l'Espine, and translated into English by I. Feilde for the
comfort of afflicted consciences, very necessary and profitable to be read
of all Christians, as well for establishing them in the true doctrine of
Justification, as also for enabling them to confute the false doctrine of all
Papists and Heretics.

ANCHORA SPEI

printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollier dwelling in the Blackfriers. 1577.

To the Reader.
Lo here the joy of Christians all,
laid up within this book:
To teach the way that leads to life,
whereon each man may look.
It is not we, but it is he,
that freely gives life:
That none but he, may praised be
without gainesay or strife.
TO THE VIRTUOUS AND MY VERY DEAR FRIEND THE LADY ELIzabeth Terwhitte I. F.
wishes increase of godliness, and constancy in the true religion of Christ to
the end and in the end.
RIght worshipful, and my very good Lady, after I had perused this little
treatise of Christian righteousness, as it was first written in the French
tongue, I took great comfort in it and thought it to be very necessary, to be
turned into English for the benefit of Christ's poor Church. I therefore as
occasion served at convenient times, performed that I purposed, wherein I have
studied to be as simple and plain (because of the unlearned) as possibly the
matter and phrase of that tongue would suffer me. I am not ignorant what an
hard thing it is to translate well, and contrariwise, how easy a thing it
is for every carping Momus, or ignorant zoilus to find fault: but herein I
shall as God shall asist me, arm my self with patience to bear whatsoever
has bin, is, or shall be laid upon me. This only shall comfort me, that I walk
not before men, but before God: in whose presence I protest, that according to
the simple knowledge he has given me, I have dealt simply and sincerely. Of
all vanities I esteem it the greatest, to hang upon the blastes of men's
mouths. They that are that ways carried highest, and have not the testimony
of good consciences, neither seek to approve themselves to God, to whom they
must stand or faule, they shall find no comfort in it, in the day of death. It
little avails a man to be justified of the whole world, and to be condemned
before God. Therefore God give us grace to walk as in his presence, that
whatsoever we take in hand, it may be consecrated to him, and have an
excellent blessing upon it. I have dedicated my labors herein, to your good
Ladyshippe for sundry causes, though I deny not, but my meaning is to make them
common to the church of God: first that they may be a testimony to all
posterity of your forvvardnes, fidelity and sincerity in the religion of
Christ Jesus: Then, of my bounden duty and good will toward you. And I most
humbly beseech you in the eyes and sight of the whole world, that you
constantly and inuiolably hold and keep that blessed hope of your best
inheritance. And as God in mercy has drawn you out of the sincke and mier of
Popery, and of the false vvorshippe of God (whereto, as to all other vices we
are most apt by nature) to the true religion of Christ, so go forwards, and
most humbly and continually thank him for it. Acknovvledge it the greatest
benefit that ever in mercy he could have bestovved upon you. Bevvare of the
world, that makes least account of this most excellent, and vvaighty thing.
Study by all means to answer this holy and excellent calling, that your
religion may shine as well in works as in words, in an holy conversation
as in a sincere profession. Know assuredly that where the truth of God
reigns, there the kingdom of Satan decaieth, the strength of sin abateth,
the pleasures of the flesh are restrained, and Jesus Christ by the scepter of
his holy word and blessed spirit, continually works, to the daily
mortifying of the outvvard man and quickening the inward, to the brideling and
maistering of the affections of the mind: till it be renewed, reformed and
changed into his holy obedience, and so by little and little be translated into
his kingdom. And till this be brought to pass, you shall never feel what
Christ's righteousness is (which is our only happiness) vvherof this book so
notably and comfortably entreats. The Lord Jesus open your heart, and give
you understanding in all his mysteries, that you may see his great glory, till
you may comprehend with all Saints the height, depth, vvidth and length of
his glorious righteousness, laying hold upon it through aliuely faith, and so
be sealed up through him (as I doubt not but you are) to everlasting happiness,
fare you well most humbly from my poor house this second of November. 1577.

Your good Ladyships bounden in the Lord. I. F.

AN EXCELLENT TREATISE, OF CHRISTIAN RIGHTEOUSNESS, Made by M. I. de l'Espine
Minister of the word of God, and newly put furthe for the instruction and
consolation of the children of God.
THERE is not any one article in all our Christian Faith the knowledge whereof
can be so helthfull and necessary unto us, as this of Christian
righteousness. Abacuc 2. 4
Now forasmuch as of this righteousness depends everlasting life, Rom 1. 17.
and of Faith depends this righteousness, Romans 3. 24. and 15.
and of Faith comes that knowledge which we have of the promises of our God,
2. Cor. 1. 28.
and of Jesus Christ, who is the only mean, that they are applied, and freely
accomplished toward us, without having any respect to any of our works: It
behooves for the better understanding of all these things aright, that we lay
them furthe in order, and begin with the definition of Christian
righteousness. The definition of the righteousness of the philosophers and
schooleme^.
But it must be noted that in the holy Scripture the signification and use of
this word (Righteousness) is far different from that which is usurped in
the books of the philosophers and schoolmen: because they take
righteousness, for a certain habit and quality, which being enclosed in our
mind, enclineth us to live honestly, and in such sort to order the course of
all our actions, that they be entirely conformable to reason, and to those
rules that are set out unto us in the Law. A thing that we can not do
perfectly, seeing that we are laden and compassed about with so great
infirmity, and for that our nature being so diseased and corrupted, it
yrcketh us, and wholly turns us, from the love, study and exercise of that
which is good: and disposes and stirs us up to the quite contrary, to
embrace and follow vice, with a marvelous will and readynesse. Add hereunto,
that we are driven and led in this case by many tentations and assaults,
wherewith the flesh, the world and devil do continually assail us. Wherefore
we must conclude, that in the whole world, there can never be found a
righteous man if righteousness be to be measured according to that definition,
which the philosophers have given: and that it be established, in a perfection
of virtue, which we must more love, esteem and honor, then any other good,
and apply our whole spirit, and all our understanding to atteine to it, and
possess it: without thinking at any time that this is any mean to make us to
be accounted righteous before God, in whose presence and judgment all our
works shall ever be found imperfect and damnable, Job. 4. 18. and 9. 3. and 25.
4.
if they be examined according to the rigor of his righteousness.

To understand then what this Christian righteousness is, and in what it
consists, it is meet to note, that Righteousness and judgment, are
corelatyues, and for the better understanding of the one, it must be laid and
joined with the other. Romans 3. 4. 5.
The which thing may easily be observed in many places of the new Testament,
where righteousness is joined with justification, and justification with
righteousness. In such sort, What righteousness is.
that comparing these places one with on other, a man shall find that
righteousness is no other thing but the mean whereby we are justified before
the judgment seat of God. What justification is.
And that justification is nothing else but a release of our sins which we
obtain there through the favor, and in the contemplation of the merit of
Jesus Christ, who has there discharged us.

But here it is to be noted, Many kinds of judgments.
that there are many kinds of judgments differing one from the other, that is
to wit, there is the judgment of God: the judgment of the Law: the judgment
of men, and of our own conscience: and we must know whether our own
righteousness be sufficient to satisfy and answer to every one of these
judgments, and whether the same in any of these, can stand us in steed to
obtain an acquitement and deliverance of the accusations that are propounded
by our enemies there against us.

Concerning Gods judgment which is the first of the four, The judgment of
God.
we must answer that it is impossible there, that we can defend us, if we
have no other thing to bring forth and allege but our own innocence:
forasmuch as our thoughts, our affections, our words, our actions, Psalm. 39.
6. 12.
and generally our whole life and nature being examined, it shall be found that
in man is nothing else but vanity, Psalm. 51. 7. and 62. 10.
and to be short the very matter of death and damnation, for how can an evil
tree bring forth any good fruit? and how can rotten and wormeaten seed,
Similitudes showing the corruption of man, and his vnhabilitie to do good.
engender any thing, but like it self? In like manner how can a man from a
poysned and infected vessel draw one drop of good wine? let us conclude the^,
that we neither do, nor can do any thing, that can be able to sustain, the
rigorous examination of the righteousness of God, and that in us and in our
whole life there is nothing yt can in this case defend and deliver us but his
mercy alone. Because we are as the Prophet says, Osee 2. 3.
a wilderness altogether covered with thistles, brambles, and briars, which are
good for nothing, but to be burnt, In his book of confessio^s. 2 chap. 10.
and a very dunghill of corruption where there is nothing (as S. Augustine
says) but even the very sincke and abundance of misery and filthiness.

The beginning then of our righteousness is, The beginning of our righteousness
is to know our unrighteousness.
that we accuse and condemn our selves, and that we confess before God that
(which he knows well enough) to wit that we are nothing but dust and
corruption.

The prodigal child being far from his fathers house, The example of the
prodigal child.
never thought that he could return thither or attain to righteousness and
virtue, from which he was departed, but by the knowledge and feeling which he
had of his faults, Luc 15. 18.
and the sure persuasion which he had conceived to confess them.

The publican coming to the temple laden and covered with vice and sin had
remembrance of his vice and wretchedness, The second example of the publican,
Luc 18. 13. 14.
which he with great grief and deep gronings confessed: whereupon it came to
pass that he returned righteous into his own house.

After David and holy Peter were fallen from God, 3. Example of David and of
Peter.
through a great unkindness and ignorance, as well from him, as from those
graces, which they had received of his large liberality, 2. Sa. 12. 13
had they any other mean to be reconciled unto him, Luc. 22. 62.
but by ye acknowledgement and confession of their sins? whereupon we must
conclude, that by this we must approach before God. And that there is nothing
that does more allure and knit us to him, then a penitent heart which (as S.
Augustine says) feels and continually complains for his sins and
imperfections.

This humility is not only the foundation of our righteousness (as John
Chrysostom says) but also of all our religion, The acknowledgement of our
miseries is the fundation of our religion.
the which decays as soon as we begin to conceive any opinion of our selves
or of our own virtues. He (says S. Augustine) will not be any longer of the
body, that refuses to be humble, and to make himself little with his head: for
ordinarily as the valleys are more abundant and bring forth more fruit then
do the mountains, A similitude showing the good that comes of humility.
by reason that being more low, they receive more commodiously all the fatnes
which falls and descends from the hie hills: even so it behooves that we
be more low and humble in our own eyes, 1. Sa. 15. 17
if we will, that God fulfill us with his graces: the which may find no place
in us, if we presume any whit of our virtues. The same which Christ says to
those Scribes and Phariseis, when he saw them arrogant and presumptuous, and
puffed up with a vain and false opinion, that they had conceived of their own
righteousness: you justify your selves before men, says he to them: but God
knows your hearts within, Luke 16. 15.
before whom, they are most abominable, that are in greatest credit and
reputation, in the world.

Wherefore where there is any question concerning righteousness, Pride is quite
contrary to our health.
we must diligently take heed that we be not like those that are sick of the
dropsy, A similitude.
who by reason of the grossness of their bodies, seem to be in good estate:
notwithstanding they be full of nothing but water and such evil humors, which
in the end are the cause of their death.

That then ye outward appearance which we may have of any virtue do not abuse
and deceive us, A similitude shewinge that all the perfection that me^ in any
wise may have, is nothing else but imperfection before God.
let us know that all the virtue, whereof we may be furnished, can no more
endure before God, then wax before the fire. And as it can not be but that one
pin or needle is enough to pearce a bladder, and to make all the wind
therein enclosed, incontinently to come forth: even so it can not be, but that
even a little tentatation is enough to draw the vizard from hypocrites, and to
discover them to every one, who shall know, after that they shall be sifted,
that there was nothing but a color and an imagination of all the reputation of
righteousness and virtue, which they had gotten amongst men.

Let us not make then any account of all the righteousness which can be in us,
nor let us not bring it to ye judgment of our God, to better our cause, or to
win there by law any thing for us. Forasmuch as there was never any other
cause of the ruin of the Jews, nor any thing that ouerthrewe them, and made
them frustrate of the hope they had to attain to the righteousness which they
pretended, Romans 10. 3.
but the only presumptuous opinion they had conceived to be able to appear
there, through their own righteousness.

Now to the end we faule not headlong into the like danger and inconvenience,
let us acknowledge and feel in our selves, that we are not able to think one
only good thought, 2. Cor. 3. 5.
but let us be resolved in this, that all our ability is from the alone grace
and bounty of our God. For all our glory (as S. Paul says) is excluded, Romans
3. 27. and 5. 2.
and we have not any thing in our selves, whereof we may boast our selves.

For being naturally dead in sin as we are, Arguments to prove the
corruption and unrighteousness of man, before God.
can we have any good motion or feelinge? But it is certain that before our
regeneration, and before we be called through the grace of God to the knowledge
of him: we are blind and can not see any whitte of the mysteries and secrets
of God. Moreover, we are deaffe and can not hear his voice: 1. Cor. 2. 14.
we are sick of the palsy and impotente, Deuteronomy. 14. 4.
and not able to walk in his ways: Ezec. 11. 12. 19. and 36. 26.
we have an heart of stone. which brings forth no good affection: and a
mouth full of bitterness and curssing, and we are as a grave within, from whence
comes nothing but stenche and corruption: Romans 3. 13.
to conclude, we are altogether dead, deprived of all good, in such sort,
that we have not any good use of our reason. Let no man flatter him self
(says S. Augustine) forasmuch as we are nothing of our selves but devils and
Satan's: Augustine upon John.
that is to say of our own nature, we are enemies of God, of his honor, of
his law, and of all virtue: and there is not any other difference betwixt us
and Devils, but the only pity, which God has unto us, and the gracious
favor which he would show us. And although God have accepted of us, and that
being received into his covenant, we are consecrated unto him to be his
temple: notwithstanding all these great and incomprehensible favors which he
has showed us, we ought not utterly to abolish the remembrance which we ought
always to have of our horrible corruption. The Scripture to the end to
repress our presumption, and to let, that we forgette not what is the
corruption of our nature, puts us continually in remembrance, Iosue. 40. 6.
that we and all flesh are nothing but grass, worms meat, dust, and filth,
as David says that God knows us, Psa. 103. 14
and whereof we are made: and that to be brief, we are nothing but dust and
putrefaction: yea that the greatest and goodliest of the whole world with all
their commodity and bewty, Psa. 62. 10
which men worship, are nothing but vanity: and that if they were put into the
ballaunce to be wayed with nothing, nothing would be found heavier then they.
Being then so noted in the Scripture, yea when we are so adorned and enriched
with the great and precious gifts of our God: in what estimation shall we have
righteousness and virtues whereof we think to have so great plenty?

We do as marchaunts, A similitude to show the hypocrisy and misery of man.
who always praise and esteem their wares and marchaundise more then they are
worth: even so do we of our virtues: but when they are examined and prised by
those which know them, as by the spirit of God and his Prophets, they are
altogether as old rags, torn tied together and patched: and as old images
new gilded over, ye which outwardly have some glistering and show, but within
are nothing but dust and dirt: or, as counterfaite money, which is of ill
metal how goodly a printe soever it have. Testimonies of the Scriptures, and
Fathers to prove the unrighteousness of man before God.
All our righteousnesses says Esaias are as old rags, foul and loathsome to
see. S. Paul albeit he walked in the law, without rebuke, and that he felt
himself not culpable in any thing in his conscience nor willingly to have
transgressed: yet notwithstanding he esteems his righteousness as dongue.
Daniell praying unto God, alleges not his own righteousness and virtues,
Philip. 3. 8.
neither the righteousness and virtues of his compagnions, Dan. 9. 5.
to the end to cause God to incline, and to hear his prayers. Now (says he)
that we are before thy face, we can set nothing before thee, nor propound any
thing on our part but shame and confusion. Augustine.
Cursed (says Augustine) be all our righteousnesses, if they be judged without
the mercy of God. Tertullian.
And Tertullian: All the good that we do (says he) and all the righteousness
and virtue which is in us, is nothing but shame and reproach.

When they spoke these things, it was not without great reason, because there
is no righteousness and virtue in us, which is not defiled and polluted with
great vices. Also, there is not any faith, which is not mingled with an
infinite number of doubts, errors and fond imaginatio^s: nor likewise, any
godliness which is not contaminate with innumerable scruples and superstitions.
To conclude: all our wine (as Esaias says) is mingled with water, Esaias. 1. 22.
and all our corn is full of darnell and dirt.

Now if a man would boast of his strength and health, These similitudes and
other following, show the beastly pride of them, that think to have in
themselves wherewith all to stand before God.
and yet were subject to a thousand diseases: or of his knowledge, and yet
were ignorant of all good learning: or of his riches, and yet were indebted
and indaungered to the whole world: would not every one mock him as an idiote
and a fool? even so we as well show our ignorance, and what sclender
understanding we have, when we will attribute any righteousness to our selves,
and boaste our selves in it, be it never so little.

He that is strong (says Jeremy) let him not boaste and presume of his
strength, Iere. 9. 23.
nor he that is wise of his wisdom, nor he that is rich of his riches,
because that, if we consider what we have on the one side, we must mark what
we lack on the other. And when all shall be well cast, it shall be found that
the expense will far surmounte the receipt, and the debtes are much greater,
then the revenue. Moreover, all that is greatest under the Sun, and that
which men most wonder at and worship in the world, Eccle. 4. 2. and 1. 1.
is nothing else (as Solomon says) but vanity. Is there any thing so stable
and durable, which is not mutable, transitory, and uncertain? what madness then
is it to make so great a matter and so highely to esteem of our selves, for
things of so small valewe? we are oftentimes like to those that dream and
wake again, A similitude.
who when they are a sleep think to have found some great treasure, and have
a great joy in it: but after their wakening, they see that all is vanished
like smoke, whereupon they vex and greiue themselves. Likewise when we think
that we are righteous, this is a dream, which passes through our spirits and
vanishes as soon as we are awake and are delivered from the darkness of
ignorance, wherein we were a sleep and buried. S. Paul whilst he was
ignorant, without a true and right knowledge of ye law, An example in Paul
before his conversion.
thought to be righteous, and feelt not sin any whitte reigning in him,
until that God by his grace, had illuminated him, and made his will by the
law known unto him, and so consequently the lusts, and corruption yt was in
his nature. The which made him soon enough to forgo the opinion which he had
conceived of his own righteousness and virtues.

After that we have well swept our chambers, An other similitude.
it seems unto us yt they are very clean. And yet notwithstanding, when the
sun comes, to enter there by the windows, we perceive straight ways by
the beams an infinite deal of dust, which ye philosophers call motes: even so
oftentimes before we be well instructed in ye law of God, if we be exempted from
gross and palpable sins, such as are murders, whordomes, theftes, we glory
that we are perfect and innocent. But when our consciences come to be discried
by the word of God, and that Jesus Christ who is the light has entered there by
his spirit: then he makes us to see by his beams an infinite number of
faults and imperfections, which are hidden in our hearts, as are the
serpents in their holes. Romans 7. 7.
S. Paul says that he never understood, that concupiscence was a vice, until
he had seen in the law, that it was there forbidden. Yea, but had he not
learned this in the school of Gamaliel, before his conversion? I grant, as
concerning the outward bark and superficially. But he had not attained yet
to the bottom, the which we can not do, until we have been in the school of
Jesus Christ, who in the law will make us truly to know both God and our
selves, even as the sun shining by his brightness makes us to see it self,
and all things with it.

In the night by reason of the darkness spread upon the earth, An other
similitude.
all things are hid and covered: which causes that we can not discern and
discover the spots which we have in our faces: But when the light begins
to appear, and that we take a glass, to behold our selves therein: then they
are discovered and show themselves: even so likewise during the time that we
are covered with the darkness of ignorance, the vices that dwell in us, are
hidden there, and oftentimes we think, being leprous and deformed, that we are
bewtifull and perfect: but our eyes being open, and illuminate by the spirit
and grace of our God, and taking the glass of the law, therein to behold the
estate of our nature and our life: then we begin to know the great and
grievous imperfections that are in us: and we attonce loose the opinion which we
had conceived before, of our owen righteousness and virtues.

We are oftentimes like unto drounkardes who being ouercharged with wine and
meat, An other similitude.
have no manner of knowledge or feeling of the case wherein they are, nor of any
thing else, and yet having their face covered, and all to berayed with dirt,
they can not perceive it until that their wine be drienched, and their
brain delivered from those fumes and vapors whereby they were so let, and
darkened. We likewise, before we be regenerate, are in such sort besotted with
a love that we bear to our selves, and with a vain opinion that we have
conceived of our selves, that we know not the filthynesse and vilanies wherewith
we are berayed. But when the light of the spirit and word of God begins to
break forth unto us, we come by little and little to break and scatter those
clouds, which were before our senses, and recovering the view of our reason,
we begin to awake our selves, and discover the pitiefull and miserable estate
wherein we are. And look as this knowledge grows and increases in us, so
much the more it augmenteth and increases the knowledge of our vices and
imperfections. The Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles: in whom they sought
their righteousness.
As we may see by experience in the fathers, who though they were notable and
excellent personages, and marked with all notable virtues: yet notwithstanding
they made no account of them: but contrariwise they confessed that they were
the greatest sinners in the world as a man may see by those goodly
confessions which the scripture mentions, to have bin made of Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, David, Jeremy, Daniell, S. Paul, S. John, and generally of the whole
Church: by which we would judge them to have been the most wicked men, which
were upon the earth, if we knew not the humility, that was in them, and in
what contempt they had them selves and their works, for the great knowledge
they had of the law of God: the which engendered in them an other thing, to
wit, the knowledge of the imperfection which was in them and in their life,
when they came to measure it, according to the rule of the law, and brought
all their thoughts, desires, words and actions, to be tried by the will and
ordinance of God.

We say in a common proverb, that such a one as thinks himself in best
health, carries death in his bosom. Which must not only be understood of the
bodily health, but also of the health of the soul. A similitude taken of a
common proverb.
For the diseases of the body are nothing so dangerous, as those of the soul:
because that very many (albeit their hearts are full of distrustes,
doubtinges, errors, false opinions, ingratitudes, enuies, reuengements,
darkness, ignorance, and other deadely diseases) nevertheless they think them
selves in very good health, and that their righteousness is sufficient to enable
them, to answer and satisfy the judgment of God. As that proud Pharise, Luc
8. 11.
who in stead of humbling himself before God and confessing this faults to
him sets forth and extolleth his owen works, Mat. 19. 20
in his prayer: And the Scribe that bragged, that he had accomplished the whole
law: Iere. 2. 23.
and the Sinagogue, that boasted her self, of her owen innocence, and in that,
that she had not sinned. Wherefore God caused complainte to be made against
her, to convince her of hypocrisy, and of the sins, that she had forgotten,
through negligence, and of the love, that she ought to have borne unto him.

Although then that God does not always discover our faults wholly unto us,
he will not therefore that we make light of them: but if we do, he straight
ways calls us to a reckning, and requires them of us, and constrains us
to confess them unto him, that he may forgive us: to the end, that we may
have occasion hereby, to acknowledge and set forth his great liberality. And
this is all that he requires and demands of us for having acquitted and
discharged us of such a great and notable sum, wherein we were indebted to
him. For look how much soever of the glory of any righteousness and virtue
we attribute to our selves, so much we diminishe of the bounty and
liberality of our God, and we provoke him to jealousy, because we bear him
not that love, nor reverence, that we owe unto him, but do more love our owen
honor then his. And even like as a housband loving his wife tenderly, A
similitude.
(to make his affection known unto her, bestowing upon her many great
presents of gold and costly iewelles,) is very heavy if she dissemble the
gifts which he has bestowed upon her, and say she has purchased them by her
owen money: Even so God can in no wise be pleased with us, if we will conceal
or else attribute to our selves, ye graces which he has bestowed upon us, which
he would have to be testimonies, tokens and demonstrations of the inviolable
love and fidelity that he bears unto us.

Moises said unto the people of Israel, whilst they were yet in the
wilderness: When thou shall come into the land which God has promised to thy
fathers, and shall have taken possession thereof, and peaceably enjoy the
fruictes and delicate things that it shall bring forth unto thee, Deuteronomy. 8. and
9.
Take good heed that thou say not, that they strength and righteousness has
gotten all this: but acknowledge that God, by his only goodness and love which
he bears unto thee, has showed these great benefits and favors to thee,
without having any respect of thee, who wast a rebellious and idolatrous
people, nor to thy works, which were altogether vicious and faulty: even so
if God has once brought us into his Church, let us beware that we say not
that we have merited or gotten the graces that be there communicated unto us by
our own industry: but let us continually confess our poverty and
unworthiness, and acknowledge with the Apostle, that in that we are virtuous, we
are so, by the mean of his only goodness: and then without all comparison we
shall be richer and happyer, then we should be, if we would be so, by our own
mean and by our own strength: much more I say by the liberality of our good
God, who is much richer and more aboundaunt to give unto us, then our own
strength and force can purchase, or heap upon us. And we must persuade our
selves that God can do us more good in one moment, then we know how to
desire or to compass by our travel or diligence, in ten milions of years.

What cause then is there, Similitudes shewinge that we have need to be
justified by the only grace of God.
that we should not desire and labor to be more righteous by the grace of our
God, then by our own virtue? A man shall be a great deal more healthful that
will be thoroughly governed by the regiment and counsel of some good and expert
physicians, then he that will be lead altogether by his own appetite. A beast
is a great deal better governed by man, then it can be by it self. A feilde,
a vine, a tree, are in much better case, being tilled, cut and pruned by
laborers and housbandmen, then if they were left to them selves. Bodies also
being alone, and without any life, are blocks, but having the soul and life
in them, they are applied and used to an infinite number of goodly and
excellent actions: Whereby a man may easily perceive, that the inferior
natures, to the end they may be well governed and ruled, have need of the
government and guiding of the superior. Whence comes it then, that in the
matter of righteousness, we think that our reason and will have more might,
then the grace of our God?

There are certain glorious beasts, which brag that they have gotten that
which they know, by their own only diligence, and without the help of any
other master and teacher: and that they are no further bound, for the good
they know, then to their own labor and travel. And also there be some others
yet more proud and arrogant, who think them selves with power sufficiently
enabled, to get all virtues by their own natural faculties: as Pelagius and
all his sect, Pelagius and his sect.
who can not better show their arrogancy and ignorance, then in thus
pleasing them selves, in them selves, and having in such estimation and
admiration, the natural force and power, which they falsely attribute to them
selves. The which is an evident sign, that they never knew them selves nor
the strength of their own shoulders, in vaunting so of the weakness and
poverty that is in them.

But for our parts, if we desire to be cladde with a righteousness, which is
able to stand before the face of God, and to appear with assurance in his
judgment, let us not seek it in our selves, but let us seek it, and find
it, in the only grace and mercy of our God. For (as S. Augustine says)
there is nothing within us, that can please and content him, but only that,
which he has put in us of his own goodness.

Let us not then follow these proud spirits, which delight and content them
selves in nothing but in their own works, and through a doting imagination
accompting and esteeming them goodly and perfect, even as apes do their young
ones: but contrariwise, let all that is in us, and all that we do, displease
us, and let us be the first judges to condemn our selves and our works,
forasmuch as the mean to come to righteousness, is to be able to approach with
confidence, to the throne and judgment seat of our God, and continually to
say with the holy Apostle: Romans 7. 14.
I know that I am carnal and soulde under sin: by means whereof I can in
no wise approve that which I do. For I do the evil which displeases me, and
can not do the good I love and desire to do, certainly, there is not in me,
(that is to say in my flesh) any good thing. I see and feel continually in
my members a law which fights against the law of my mind, and leads me
captive to the law of sin which is in my members.

O how this confession ought thoroughly to beat down the pride and arrogancy
of those presumptuous ones, and stop up the mouths of all those that will be
justified by their own works and virtues! For it comes from a vessel and
instrument which God by spiritual favor had chosen from among all the men of
ye world, A notable consideration upon that Paul confesses him self a
miserable sinner.
and who even in those times of his ignorance lived in such sort according to
the righteousness of the law, that he was blameless and unrebukable toward
men. What a one then might he be (being regenerated, taken up into the third
heaven, 2 Cor. 12. 1.
where he had heard secrets, 1. Cor. 3. 6.
which it was not lawful for him to utter, Galat. 2. 6.
and who had so greatly traveled in the work of the Lord to plant and to
water his Church, 2. Cor. 11. 5. 23.
that therein he passed and far out went all his compagnions. And to
conclude, he gave place to none of them, neither in knowledge, nor in zeal,
nor in high, and divine meditations, nor in diligence, nor in virtues, nor in
any other thing which was agreeable to his vocation, for his good and vprighte
walking therein. If then such a person did in such sort and so much humble him
self, what ought we to do after him?

Isaye, An other example of the humility of Isaie, the excellent servant of
God.
whose mouth and tongue was cleansed by one of the Cherubins, and was sent
from before the face of God for this purpose: who also had exercised his
ministry in the Church of God the space of three skore years and more, and
without ceasing day and night, was as a good watchman upon the wall to discover
the coming of the enemies, Isaie 6. 6.
to the end that both him self, and those over whom he had charge might not
be over taken through negligence: what says he of him self? and in what place
and degree does he put him self? Isaie 46. 8.
Thou art (says he to God) our Creator and we are nothing but earth and
dust. All our righteousness is as filthy cloutes, and we are all faded as a
leaf, and our iniquities have carried us as the wind: there is none that
calls upon thy name, nor that stirs up him self to lay hold upon thee:
For thou have hid thy face from us, and have consumed us because of our
iniquities. Ought not this confession to make all the glory and righteousness
of these proud hypochrites, to blush for shame? Certainly the perfection
which those imagine, deserves not to be compared to the imperfection of those
excellent servants of God, nor their fantastical riches and abondaunce to
their poverty. For as much as the basest gold, A similitude against the
righteousness of hypochrites
though it be rayed with some dirte, is always more precious, then the
brightest lead that a man can find. Even so the righteousness of a Christian
man, though it be defiled through many infirmities and imperfections, yet
notwithstanding is more to be esteemed then all the righteousness of
hypocrites and infidelles.

There is nothing better, The fruit of Christian humility.
then for a man to humble himself before God. Humility was the cause that the
Caanitysh who was otherwise a dog, became a faithful woman, and that her
faith was preferred, before the faith of all the people of God. Because there
is no better mean, to lift us up, then to humble our selves: to be wise, then
to repute our selves fools: to be strong, then to feel our one debilitie and
weakness. And this S. Augustine confirming, says, that all our strength is in
humility, and that there is nothing more weak and frail then pride and
presumption. A similitude of the proud and of the humble.
Forasmuch, as all proud persons stay them selves, upon their own strength,
that is, stay upon a reed and upon the ice of one nights fresing: and are
like unto smoke that mounteth up on high, and so in going up is scattered and
comes to nothing. But the humble man is as a rock or a square body, which is
always steyed on which side soever it be turned, and there is no man (as
says that same good father) so hard to be healed, as he that thinks him
self to be hoale: forasmuch as he always refuses counsel of the physician,
and will take no remedies, nor keep any good diet or government of him self,
which should be meet and healthful for him. Even so likewise there is no man
farther of from the righteousness of God, then he that has some good opinion of
him self. For such commonly are obstinate, and can not without great
difficulty, be brought from the persuasion, which they have conceived of their
own righteousness.

There is then no greater presumption nor more dangerous in the world,
Presumption very dangerous.
then this. For who soever presumes so of his own stength and virtue, and
that he can of him self become wise, he makes himself equal with God. For
there is none but God, which is of him self, and by nature wise, righteous,
blessed and perfect. Men are not otherwise wise, then by learning and
instruction: nor righteous, but by grace: nor happy, but by the fruition and
participation of the sovereign good: If then a man will depend upon him self,
and establish in him self the foundatio^s of felicity and happynes, presuming
that through the light and quickenes of his own spirit, he can obtain
wisdom, and by the power of his own will, righteousness and by the
contentation and delight which he has of his own virtues and actions,
perfect felicity: certainly this man esteems him self to be like unto God.
But those persons that have such an opinion, and presume so much of them
selves, they are found in the end to come to short of their account: because
it comes to pass with them as it did to our fore fathers, who when they
acknowledged not the honor which God had bestowed upon them, but went about to
lift up them selves in an higher degree then he had set them, they fell
attonce hedlonge, and became like unto brute beasts: which thing happened to
Nebucadnezar, Nebucadnezar punished for his pride.
who being become drunken and besides himself through the great victories and
prosperities that he had gotten, Dan. 4. 22.
thought to mount up to heaven and to make himself equal with God: but
contrary to his expectation, to beat down and break the idle thoughts and
discourses of his heart (no otherwise then happened to them that builded the
tower of Babell) God having attonce discharged him of his authority, dignity
and might, together with the love, obedience, fear, and fidelity of his
subjects, friends and servant, in the end having made him like to wild
beasts, with whom he lived, and did eat, and drink, as though they had been
his familiers and compagnions: he was taught by experience what it was, and the
danger thereof for an earthly man to seek to exalte himself, and to take upon
him to be hail fellow with God: Exodus 20. 5.
forasmuch as he is geleous of his glory, and can not at any hand abide that
his glory should be abased or diminished, without being kindled and provoked
to revenge him self upon all those whom he finds guilty of any such
audacitie and rashenes. He would show us that we are bound unto God for all
the good things we have, and that we owe unto him therein faith and homage, and
principally for those spiritual gifts of our goodness and felicity: so as he
will be accounted and confessed to be the chief cause and thauthour of that we
are, afterward for this that we are good, and to conclude for that we are
blessed: and when so ever we will attribute any of these three things unto our
selves, or else refer that unto any other then to him, he can not abide it.

Alexander the Great hearing the rehearsal of the great victories and
Conquestes which Philippe his father had gotten and made, Alexander the Great
an image of all ambitious princes.
was greiued, for that his father having so brought into subjection the whole
country and brideled his enemies on every side, already he took from him all
hope of doing any honorable or glorious thing: As he had borne himself in
hand he would do, it so fauling out that matter and occasion to employe
himself, and his power failed him not. For this is the property of all
valliant and noble Princes, to be agreiued when they loose opportunity to make
themselves esteemed and to win honor and renowen by their prowess, and that
they are constrained to rest them selves and be idle at home in their house, as
cowardes miching and dastardes. In so much, as there is nothing that they are
more gredie of, then the glory and immortality of their names. Is it then any
meruaill if God who is altogether perfect, and in whom a man can not reprehend
any thing, or desire any thing, should in such sort love his glory? seeing
that sinful men are so desirous of theirs, if once they think to have any
thing in them that is commendable. But as concerning us, we may not suffer our
selves to be vainquished or ouermaistred of any such passion, which (as S.
Augustine says) is the worst guide, and most dangerous counsailour, that we
can choose, to rule and govern our actions by. And it is impossible but that
we should obaye this passion, when we are once submitted unto it, and become
the sclaues thereof.

Wherefore that we may go safely, we must be maintained in a simple humility,
not lifting up our hearts to hie, but in such wise taminge our appetites, A
similitude showing the fruit of humility.
that we be like to little children that come from the nourse. They that go the
plain way, are not in so great danger to fall as they which go upon the
ridge of houses, or upon the top of some high mountain: Even so they that
will be modest and have no opinion of them selves, they go a great deal more
safely and surely, then they which have a big heart, and lofty looks. For
the way that leads to life is straight. And so is the gate whereby a man
must enter there. Wherefore if we will pass thereat, we must not be so big
and puffed up with an opinion of our selves: but we must be lean and spare,
and we must not esteem more of our selves then we are worth.

Philo the Jew writes that the cause why leaven was forbidden the Jews, An
allegory of the leaven forbidden to the Jews.
at the feast of the Passover was, to give them to understand that by this
prohibition, they had to keep them selves from the danger of pride and
presumption, into which they do easily slide and fall, which have any opinion
of them selves, puffing up themselves, thereby as the dough is with the leaven.
Wherefore it is very requisite that we take good heed, in all our works, to
follow that counsel which our Savior Christ gives touching our alms: to
wit, that our left hand know not what our right hand does. He would teach
thereby, that we ought to be so virtuous, that our virtue be known to all the
world, to the end to edify them which shall see it and know it: but of our
selves it must not be known, for fear that we knowing it, it engender some
presumption in us, which might corrupt that foresaid virtue: like as the
leaven sowreth the dough wherein it is mingled. But this ambition, as it is
masked and disguised, so it knows very well how to dissemble, and to flatter
our appetites: so as we can hardly take heed to our selves, yea though we
study the best we can, to be humble: forasmuch as it steals unawares upon
us, and shrowdeth it self secretly within our heart, within which oftentimes
it is found or ever we wiste that it was entered. And this is the reason why S.
Augustine says, that all other sins are to be feared and fled indifferently
of all persons: but the most perfect, and the best exercised and experienced in
virtue ought principally to take heed of this rock. A similitude against
ambition.
For, as worms engender sooner in a soft and tender wodde, then in other that
is more hard and knottie: and likewise as mothes do breed sooner in fine woll,
then in course flocks: even so ambition sooner assaulteth an excellent and rare
man in all kind of virtue, then an other which is not so virtuous.

It is therefore very needful that we take good heed yt we be not sleapy,
neither become slothful, as it happened sometimes unto David, Psalm. 30. 7.
as himself confesses, saying: when I was in prosperity I thought I should
never be shaken: The Lord having in such sort established me and underpropped
me by his grace, so as I assured my self to be firm as the rock: but as soon
as he had turned away his countenance and taken his spirit from me, I was
found on the earth, and I began to know and feel my feeblenes and
infirmity. It is conueniente therefore that we be vigilant to consider well
all the means, and prevent all those ways by which we may be taken and
deceived. A similitude against ambitious hypocrites.
There be some which are like to those that tugge at the oar in a Galley. A
man would judge seeing their manner of doing and how they streatch their
arms forward, that they would go on and sail forth right: when with all
their might they enforce them selves to draw backewardes: even so being vain
glorious, they will nevertheless persuade, that they have nothing in greater
detestatio^ then vain glory: when there is not any thing whereof they are
more desirous and gredye. Such in times past were the Phariseis as are yet at
this day the Priests and Monks of the Papacy, who have their hearts swollen
and puffed up with ambition: To whom hypocrites may be resembled.
which they cloak and color under the vizarde and outward show of humility.
These may be resembled to Antisthenes, who on a time walked in the common
place at Athens, with a cloak all to torn and tottred, to the end that every
one beholding him so apparailed, Antisthenes noted of hypocrisy by Socrates.
might judge that he did it through humility, and not for lack of goods,
because he was a man well esteemed and of good reputation. But Socrates having
discovered by the readynes and ripenes of his good spirit and judgment the
hypochrisie of this philosopher, said all a loud, that he saw his ambition,
through the hoales of his cloak. Diogenes also entering on a time into Plato his
chamber, and seeing his bed very finely made (because being of a civil, and
gentleman like nature, he was nete, in his moueables apparel, and gestures,
and to be short, Plato noted of pride by Diogenes whom likewise he reproved for
that offense
in all his conversation) he went and wallowed him self like a swine upon it,
saying that he trampled down Platoes pride: but Plato answered readely, that
this was done with a greater pride: whereby it may appear that there are many
conterfaict humilities, serving for no other purpose but to abuse the simple,
who can not beware of them.

There be of them others, Humility in words.
who having a certain verbal humility in mouth only, say they presume not
any thing of them selves, and that they would they were as clean from other
sins as from that of ambition. And yet a man may easily know by their
fetches, the great desire and gredynes that they have of honors, seeking all
the ways they can, to compass them, and piteously tormentinge them selves,
when they see they are frustrat of them. Add hereunto, that they desire to be
flattered, and are never so well content as when they hear themselves
extolled, and there own praises set out: contrariwise never so displeased, as
when they see men hushte and say nothing praisworthy of them: or any manner of
way to obscure them: Wherein they discover their notable hypochrisie, and show
evidently, that they are liars, and accuse and condemn themselves: when they
confess that they are teinted with other sins, and yet will be free from
this of ambition. James 2. 10.
For (as S. James says:) He that sins in one point of the law, he is
guilty of all. Which thing every one may acknowledge in himself, if he will
well examine the bottom, and secrets of his own conscience, and consider by
pecemeale all the circumstaunces of every sin. For as among the virtues there
is such a chain as entertaineth and embraces each other, (as men that are in
a round or that hold one an other by the hand) even so among vices there is
such a conspiratio^ as lightely they are never sondred one from the other.
Whereupon we must think that we can not be guilty of any one vice but we must
also in like manner be guilty of all the other.

These then be not those humilities, (being counterfeit and bastardlike) that
it becomes us to bring to the judgment of God, to defend us: forasmuch (as
David says) that the cause of all reprobates shall there be quite
overthrown, and all their actions condemned, being strange from God. Gregory
the divine.
But the true humility which God requires, and which is necessary, for to
make us appear with confidence before his face, is a true knowledge which we
ought to have of our selves, and which engenders in us a true feeling of our
vices and imperfectious, and causes us to bewail and lamente, to accuse and
confess them before God: and makes us always ashamed and confounded before
his majesty: in such sor^ that when we appear before him, we dare no more
lift up our eyes to heaven, Luc 18. 14.
then that publicane: but looking down to the earth we say with him: Lord be
merciful to me poor and wretched sinner: Psalm. 54. 4.
and with David: wash me O Lord from my iniquity, and cleanse me from all my
sins. Also as he says else where: Psalm. 143. 2
Enter not into judgment with thy servant: For no man living shall be instified
in thy presence: and with Daniel: Dan. 9. 5. 7.
O Lord to thee belongs righteousness, and to us shame and confusion: for we
have sinned, we have committed iniquity, we have been wicked and rebellious,
and have always been contrary to thy commandments and judgments.

With such an humility and confession, we may at all hours present our
selves before God, and be assured that he will not reiecte us from his
presence: Psa. 51. 19.
because (as David says) he neither despises nor rejects sorrowful
souls, hearts that are humbled and cast down, and penitent spirits. Isai 66. 2.
I say says: upon whom shall the spirit of the Lord rest, but upon the
humble, and upon him that trembles at his word? S. Augustine.
S. Augustine says: that men join them selves and seek out such as are
their equales, Like will to his like.
and may match them in greatness, dignity and riches: but contrariwise God who
is the sovereign in majesty and highness, he joins him self to none, but to
those that are humble and lowly in their own sight.

Let us conclude then that there is nothing so necessary and expediente, The
co^clusio^ touching Christian humility.
as to humble and throw down our selves, as has been said. We see that reeds
and young osyers, A similitude.
which bow and yield to the wind, abide stable for the time of the tempest,
where as the great trees that seem to be so strong and so well rooted, can not
resist the violence and force of a great wind, so as many times they are
blown down, shiuered and rooted up by the roots: even so there is none
lost, condemned, destroyed and overthrown in the judgment of God: but he
that will be there compted good, and will defend him self there with the
virtue and strength of his own righteousness. For this is as a great thunder,
Similitudes shewinge what the thoughts of the faithful ought to be when they
present themselves before God.
that never puts forth his might but against things of resistaunce: but
against any heap of earth, or against a wolle pack, or some such other
flexible and yielding substance, the blow is broken and it straight ways
dies. It is a great reproach and shame amongst men for a man to break and
become bankeroute for worldly goods: but before God it is a great glory and
honor, and we know not how to do any thing more profitable and honorable for
us, then (as a man would say) to lay the keys under the door, and to
forsake all, confessing that we have no mean to pay, and to discharge our
selves toward his righteousness. We had need in this case to be like covetous
men, who always think that they are poor, how great substance soever they
have, because they have more regard to that they desire, the^ to that they
have. Moreover, they think always (as the Poet says) that their neighbors
vineyard and feelde is goodlier and more fruetful then theirs. We in like
manner considering both our selves, and the whole estate of our life, shall
find that that which is maimed and wantinge in us, is more then that which
either we have or can have here in this world. Let us not think therefore
to be rich before God, or that our neighbors are poorer then we, as the
Pharisie thought and said: but let us be certain and resolved in this
opinion, that before God we have not any thing whereof we make sure account:
neither righteousness nor wisdom: nor virtue, that we may set out or allege
before his judgment. And touching our neigbours we must always think, that we
have so little, that we may not dare prefer or compare our selves to any of
them.

Now being thus prepared to present our selves before God, The second point
showing that we must find though not in our selves, a perfect righteousness
that may stand before God: and in what that righteousness consists.
to wit, through a right knowledge of our selves, through an inward feeling
of our vices and corruptions, and by an humble confession of our errors and
imperfections, it is meet yet to seek out a righteousness, that we may bring
it out there, and such a one as is not only sufficient so sustain the rigor
and severity of that judgment: but also to obtain full forgiveness and
justification of all sins and offenses, and of all accusations which our
adversaries can allege there against us: which we can not find in our selves,
nor in any mortal man as we have showed and declared before. Psalm. 14. 1.
For all have gone astraye, and are of themselves abominable before God, Romans
3. 12.
there is not one that does good no not one. Gene. 9. 21.
Noah was drunk: Numb. 20. 24.
Moses murmured at the waters of Miribah: Abraham was an Idolatrer: David a
murderer and adulterer: Joshua 24. 2.
S. Paul a persecutour of the Church: 2. Sam. 11. 4
S. Peter denied Jesus Christ: 1. Tim. 1. 13
S. John with his brother James, John 18. 25
and the other Apostles were ambitious. Mat. 20. 20
To conclude, Luc 22. 24.
there was not any among all the fathers and Saints, that have been since the
foundation of the world, to whom it has not come to pass to commit some
one notable fault or other in their life time, and who not continually
acknowledged his great sins, as occasion has been offered unto him. 1. Cor.
1. 29.
So as no flesh has whereof to boaste it self or to glory before God, who
has shute all men under sin and infidelity, Romans 11. 32.
to the end, that he may have mercy on all, and that every one may acknowledge
and confess, that his salvation in and through all, consists in the only
grace and mercy of God.

We must not therefore think to find the righteousness that we seek after,
Our righteousness is in Christ Jesus alone.
any where else, then in Jesus Christ, of whom Jeremy says: his name is
called the eternal, our Righteousness. 1. Cor. 1. 30.
S. Paul says, agreably to the Prophet, that he was made our Righteousness,
wisdom, sanctification and Redemption. Romans 5. 19.
And else where he says: that as by one man's disobedience, many became
sinners: so by the obedience of an other many shall become righteous. To what
tends all that which is spoken of him in the scripture? Isai 53. 4.
to wit, that he has paid our debtes: Coloss. 1. 20.
that by him we are reconciled to God his father: 2. Cor. 5. 19.
that he has obtained for us remission of our sins: that he is our
resurrection and our life, John 11. 25
and our intercessour to the father, 1. Tim. 2. 5.
that by his death and sacrifice, Isay 53. 5.
he has pacified the wrath of his father against us: Apoc. 1. 6.
that he has washed us in his blood: and by an infinite number of other
excellent sentences that are set out unto us, and tend to no other end, but
to make us know and to persuade us, that there is no other but he alone who is
our righteousness, and the mean of our salvation and of our life.

It is not then the law, Heb. 9. 10.
nor any other ceremonies or sacrifices of goats, sheep, oxen and lambs,
Tit. 3. 5.
nor yet any works and virtues that can justify us before God: but the only
blood of Jesus Christ, through which his testament and new covenant which he
has made with us, is passed, accorded, sealed and ratified. All things
(says he) are given unto me of God my father. Mat. 11. 27.
If we then will have all that is necessary for our happiness, as the favor
of God, righteousness, life, light, the forgiveness of our sins, and the holy
spirit to regenerate and sanctify us: we must address our selves to Christ,
John 6. 27.
forasmuch as it is he, whom the father has chosen to be Treasureour and
steward of all his graces. Moses by whom the law was published and delivered
to the people, conducted them safely through the deserte: but he brought them
not to the place of their rest: Iosu 1. 6.
For that was Iosue, who was a figure of Jesus Christ, who made them pass over
Iordaine, to establish them in that possession and inheritance which God had
promised unto their fathers.

The law therefore may well lead us and teach us the way that we must take
and walk in the midst of the darkness and wilderness of this world, The
effect of the law toward the faithful.
like as some mark by the way sides, Similitudes
may well direct us, and show us which way to take: but the law can not give
us strength and courage to go through, if we be weary, neither enable us to
come to the place whither we go. Heb. 4. 8.
Likewise the law can not bring us to that rest, which God has promised unto
his elect: nor any other, but our great Iosue, that is to say, Jesus Christ our
Lord, who only can do it, by his righteousness. Therefore S. Augustine said
very well, S. Augustine upon S. John.
it is very necessary that we daily lift up our eyes on high, to behold that
Serpent hanging dead on the Cross, to the end we may be preserved from the
venom and bytinge of that serpent that is alive and reigning yet in the
world. And in an other place he says: this is the way in which we must
walk, and the truth upon which we must rest, and the path in which we must go.

When then we are once marching toward him, Christ is only the way the truth
and life.
we ought not to fear but that going on in this way, and continuing therein,
we shall come in the end to the goal and to the felicity, whither we bend
our selves. Forasmuch as this is a sure way which can not be stopped nor laid
with thieves, nor drowned with any showers or flowdes of waters. Moreover, it
is plain and straight and has neither rocks nor blocks or any other lettes
which may make us stomble. It remains only then that when we are in this
way, we keep our selves there without standing still, or going backewards, or
turning aside either to the right hand or the left: because we can no sooner
leave it, nor depart in any other manner, but by and by we go astraye, and
are laid open to all kind of dangers: Similitudes
Even like as in winter we can no sooner be from the fire, but we are a cold,
nor out of light but we enter into darkness: even so we can no sooner be parted
from Jesus Christ, who is our righteousness and our life, but straight way we
are in sin and in death: forasmuch as he is the life that quickens us, the
Sun that gives us light, and the fire that warmeth, comfort and
refreshes all his members. As the moon has no light but that it has from the
Sun, and as that light is little or great, as it is near or far of, in such
sort that if it depart from it, it remains altogether obscure and dark:
Even so in like manner the Church has no light, righteousness, life, health,
strength, and happynes, but that, which it has pleased her husband Jesus
Christ to give unto her, because of that union and fellowshippe, which he has
with her. Wherefore if at any time she be separated from him, and that there be
a divorce between her and her husband, there remains to her nothing but
darkness, vice and wretchedness.

Eve in the beginning was created of the flesh, Genesis 2. 23.
bone, Ephesians. 5. 30
and blood of her husband: even so the Church is regenerated by the
participatio^ that she has with the flesh of Jesus Christ, The regeneration
of the church.
through the sacrificing whereof she was redeemed, washed and purged from all
filthynes in his blood, and through the participation of his bones was
fortified and mainteyned against all tentation. For he who in the beginning was
the aucthour of our life, he is likewise now the aucthour of our good life. And
we must not think that there are two diverse beginninges of our being and
righteousness. For he himself that has made us me^, has also made us
Christians: and as in the beginning he created us and made us of nothing: even
so afterward, he regenerated us, being nothing, but vanity, the children of
wrath and maledictio^: and when we were worsse then nothing he chose us and
that before we were conceived and borne: he has called us when as rebellious
servants to masters, we fled from him: when we turned our backs to him:
he justified us being sinners, sanctified us being profane and polluted,
raised us up being dead: And will also glorify us although we be yet
altogether covered with ignominy and corruption: whereupon a man may infer
that, S. Cyprian.
which S. Cyprian says is very true: that in our salvation we must glory in
nothing. For there is not any thing of ours, and which we should not confess
to be wholly from God.

If we will examine this thoroughly, The confutation of their error which say
that it is in our own power to dispose our selves to receive our salvation,
when God offers it unto us.
and consider it in every part, we shall confess the truth, what soever the
schoolmen prate and babble, that of our selves we can dispose our selves to
receive our salvation when soever God offreth it unto us. It is so far of
that it can be true, that quite contrary we are the^ wholly turned away, and
resist against it with all our power. Which thing may plainly appear by the
example of S. Paul, who was called and led by Jesus Christ, as it were by
strong hand to his sheep fold, even then, when he was going to Damascus,
Acts 9. 5.
being carried with a deadely hatred, and enflamed with fury to persecute and
utterly to root out (if he could) the memory of his name. There is nothing
more certain, then that S. Augustine says that all they that labor and
sweat under the heavy burden of this flesh, S. Augustine
and complain of this miserable life, they have but one only consolation and
hope, that is to say, that Jesus Christ is their Mediator and their
righteousness. By reason whereof when he made his entrance into the midst of
Jerusalem, all that went before and behind him cried out with one voice,
Hosanna, etc. that is to say* Save us O son of David our Savior. To the end
to show that there was never good man neither before nor after his coming
which did hope to be saved by any other means, then only through his
righteousness and obedience. S. Augustine
And therefore S. Augustine says, that all the Saints, since Abell unto
John Baptiste, and after the Apostles, unto the end of the world ought not to
be praised but in him, and not in them selves. In so much that the first have
said, Psalm. 34. 3.
My soul shall rejoice in the Lord: and those that came after have said in
like manner: 1. Cor. 15. 10.
By grace I am that I am: and all in general say: That whosoever will glory
he must glory in God.

And in very truth this is he that has borne the wool and the flece, The
perfection and righteousness of Jesus Christ.
of which was sponne this cloth, wherewith we must be clad, that we may be
shrouded against heats, cold, and other injuries of heaven. All you (says the
Apostle) which are baptized in Christ, have put on Christ. Gal. 3. 27.
This is that king, who for the adorning of the Queen his spouse has made
for her rich and sumptuous robes, Psalm. 45. 14
as the Psalmist says: Ezec. 16. 9.
Which thing Ezechiell shows also more clearly: I have washed thee with
water, yea I have washed away thy blood from thee, in which thou wast
altogether polluted: I have anointed thee with oil, and clothed thee also with
broydred work, and have set a crown of Gold upon thy head: and I have
decked thee with gold and silver, that thou might be very bewtifull. All
that same long Alegorie, which he uses there in the 16. of his prophecy, is
to no other end, but to extol the righteousness of Jesus Christ, with which
the Church is apparailed and adorned: with those other precious gifts, graces
and blessings, wherewith she is altogether covered and replenished. And as
there is nothing, more unclean then she, when she is naked: so is there
nothing more bewtifull then she, when she is decked in the liuerie and color
of her husband. For then has she a special grace, that makes her very
amiable, delightful, and in passing good liking to God him self: Moreover,
being so clothed in this robe of innocence, all that was foul in her, and
which disfigured her, is in such sort covered and defaced, that there
appears no more uncleanness in any part of her, because Jesus Christ (as S.
Augustine says) is as a spounge which wipeth us and cleanses us from all our
filthynes, which he takes in exchange for the beauty, righteousness, and
perfection, which he communicates unto us: Wherein we ought to acknowledge and
to adore this great and incomparable love which he bears us, and which he
has truly and in effect showed unto us, heaping upon us at the day of our
marriage so great and precious joys: although he receive nothing of us in
dowry, but old baggage altogether covered with thick and filthy dirte: to
wit, even our imperfections and iniquities.

We receive then, in doing this thing two great commodities of his
righteousness, Christ delivers us from death, and gives us eternal life.
which serve us for two purposes: to wit first to draw us out from the mier
and claye wherein we were buried: to deck us with goodly robes wherewith we
are clad to make us bewtifull: that is to say, to deliver us from the
malediction and curse, wherinto we were fallen: and then on the other side to
bless us and to bring us into favor with God his father, to draw us back
from poverty, and to enrich us: to raise us up from death, and to give us
life: to draw us from hell, and to make us mount up into heaven. Even as
Jesus Christ on the one part has delivered us from fear, terror and torment
of conscience, sparring and shutting up hell gates: so on the other he has set
us in a certain and undoubted hope of everlasting life, and of a blessed
rest, opening his paradise unto us. Apoc. 1. 18.
This is that, which is said of him in the scripture: that he keeps the
keys of death and of life: the one, to make fast and shut up the gate, which
was always open to swallow us up and devour us: and the other, to open unto us
the kingdom of heaven, which was always locked and shut against us. By
mean whereof at his death the veil that let the entrance into the Sanctuary
was broken and clefte into two parts: Mat. 27. 51.
to the end that that way might be made open for us, and that every one might
have a mean and liberty to come unto God, and to present them selves before
him with confidence. This is the cause that Paul writing to the Hebrews
said: Heb. 9. 10.
that by his flesh he has prepared a way for us to heaven, to attain unto
life. Forasmuch as he has in that flesh rendered unto God for us perfect
obedience: and by his death has satisfied his righteousness for our sins,
obtayni^g for us by this means, the forgiveness of our sins, and through this
remission righteousness, and by righteousness the grace and favor of God, and by
Grace, life: in such sort as we may now present our selves to him in all
assurance: Isay 33. 14.
who before was as a consuming fire, to consume us and bring us to nothing etc:
but now by the means of Jesus Christ is a shadow to releive and refreshe us
again. By Jesus Christ alone we have access unto God the father.


This is the reason for which Jesus Christ was figured by the ladder which
Jacob saw when he sleept, whereupon the glory of God rested it self. Genesis
28. 12.
Forasmuch as in the humanity of Christ dwelled the fullness of the Divinity
bodily, Coloss. 2. 9.
because by it God descends down unto us: Even as Jesus Christ having taken
our humanity, Isai 7. 8.
was called Emmanuel, which is as much to say as God is with us, so also we
through him mount up as it were by degrees to heaven, Mat. 1. 23.
where our conversation is, Philip. 3. 10.
and whereof at this day we are Citizens and of the householde of God. Ephesians. 2.
19.
Being then very God and very man of two diverse natures, the one divine and
the other human, which are conjoined and united together inseparably,
without any confusion or division: in that he is God, we must go unto him to
be in saftie, and to live happily: and on the other side in that he is man, he
is the way by which we must march on to attain to everlasting life. S. Augustine
So the^ we must go to Jesus Christ that is God, by Jesus Christ that is man,
by the word that is made flesh, to the word which was in the beginning with
God, and by the bread which men eat unto the bread which Angels eat.

And there is no need that we seek for any other but him, All our felicity
consists in Christ alone
whether it be to rest our selves in, or to lead and direct us thither. For
being God, he is the sovereign God, and the end whereunto all our appetites
and desires ought to be directed. And when we are come thither, there is the
place where we must rest and altogether repose our selves: forasmuch as he is
perfect and replenished with all virtue and righteousness, which he
communicates unto us, by means of that communion and fellowship that we have
with him. To conclude then, he is the way that must lead us to our felicity,
and the only mean to make us attain thither. When we are washed with his
blood, this is it that preserves us from that destroyer, this is the cloud
that shrowdeth us from being burned and consumed with the extreme heat of the
wrath of God, and the liberty whereinto we must retire from the fury of the
enemy that pursues so hard after us. To be short, this is the gate of
salvation and the haven where we must harborre and save our selves in the time
of tempeste.

This is the cloak under which we may obtain the blessing of God, We obtain
through Christ the blessing of God.
as Jacob obtained that of his father Isaake, being disguised with the apparel
of his elder brother Esau. And as the high Priest never appeared before the
face of God, Genesis 27. 19.
without his holy embroidred garments, his Ephod, Exodus 28. 2.
his robe, and his other priestly apparel, without which he could not find
any favor when he appeared in his presence: Even so (to follow the truth of
this figure) we ought never to present our selves before God (if we will be
accepted and received of him,) but we must be clothed and decked with the
righteousness and innocence of his son: wherewith if we be once covered, we
need not fear that we shall be rejected and despised of him, or that there is
any enemy whosoever he be, that has any power to hurt us. For such armor can
defend us even from the wrath of God it self, against which no other thing
can resist.

It is written that Alexander having conceived a great hatred against the
city of Jerusalem, Joseph lib. 11. de antiqui. Iudaic. cap. 8.
was fully resolved utterly to destroy it, because that laying seidge to the
city of Tyr the inhabitauntes of Jerusalem had refused to help him with
victuals and other munition which he had demanded of them. Now after that he
had taken Tyr, he marched forth with all his army against Jerusalem, with full
purpose utterly to destroy it. The which thing when the high Priest named
Iaddus understood, he apparailed him self with the holy garments of the high
Priest, and so presented him self before Alexander, who upon the sudden,
when he saw him in this habit, alighted from his horse, and bowed his knees
before Iaddus, and reverenced him, and showed him great honors, and great love
to the country, and gave great gifts to the temple. Now if an enemy so
furious and terrible were so suddenly appeased, at the only sight of this
high Priest so apparailed (who was but a figure of Jesus Christ:) what shall
it be when Jesus Christ shall appear in his glory and all his members with
him, clad and covered with his righteousness, and showing them selves to all the
world, in such and so magnificall and glorious apparaill? Shall not the
devils and hell bow their knees then for fear when they shall see him in his
majesty and in such excellent glory?

Let us conclude then that being garnished and covered with the righteousness
of Jesus Christ, we can have no lack of strength and might to vanquish and
overcome our enemies, nor of any other thing that may make us perfectly happy
what soever. S. Ambrose.
As S. Ambrose writes very elegantly, in his second book of Virginity,
that Jesus Christ is unto us, all in all things: If we be sick, he is our
physician: If we have an Ague, and that we are altered, he is our fountain: If
we be laden with iniquity, he is our righteousness: If we be weak and weryed,
he is our strength: If we fear death, he is our life: If we desire to mount
up to heaven, he is our ladder: If we have byne darkness, he is our light: If
we have houngred, he is our bread and nourishment. Whereupon we may perceive
and know the great riches and commodities that Jesus Christ brings unto all
them that possess him.

Now having showed that there is no other righteousness, The third point showing
in whom the justice of God is, and how a man may obtain it.
but the righteousness of Christ, which can be sufficient to bear the rigor of
the judgment of God, and that may enable us to appear and answer there: it
remains now that we declare upon what matter it works and where it rests
and dwells: how it may be obtained: and in what sort a man may assure him
self of it: finally, having obtained it, what fruits it brings forth in us.

First the righteousness of Christ has two principal parts, The righteousness
of Christ has two parts.
to wit Justification, and Sanctification, that is to say: when it is
communicated unto us, although that before we were the wickedest in the world,
and guilty of death before God, and moreover, that our nature was altogether
corrupted and teynted in every part of it: How we are justified.
notwithstanding all this, we are holden and reputed for righteous before God,
and are allowed and received of him for his children and heirs, when we are
provided of this righteousness, and when we are clothed with it, he gives us
his holy spirit, to lead us and conducte us (as a schoolmaister does his
children) and for to sanctify, instruct and strengthen us in all his ways.
And that this is true. S. Paul writes, Romans 4. 22.
not only that it was said of Abraham that his faith was counted to him for
righteousness: but also that we shall be accounted righteous before God, as he
was, if we believe in Jesus Christ: Also, God was in Christ and reconciled the
world to himself, 2. Cor. 5. 19.
not imputinge their sins unto them. And joining both these parts together
in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, he said to them speakinge of their
life, that they had been altogether led in wickedness, and were dissolute in all
kind of mischief: but that they were now washed, 1. Cor. 6. 11.
justified and sanctified in the name of Jesus Christ, and through the spirit
of God.

Now if we will know by what mean this is done, We are justified and
sanctified by the righteousness and holiness of Christ.
we must note, that being united by faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and
graffed in him, (as members in their body,) that he is then become our head,
and we are joined to him as the housbande to his wife. By means whereof he
charge him self with all our debtes, The first reason.
and appoints him self to be the answer and pledge for us, to the end he
may pay all for us and thoroughly acquit us of all, that we are indebted and
bound for, offering him self to satisfy the righteousness of God, by his own
death, to the which death we were bound by reason of our sins: Galat. 3. 13
and to deliver us by his Cross, from the curse, to which we were likewise
subject, for having disobeyed the will of God, and broken his law, in a
thousand and a thousands things: he has also rased out our disobedience,
Romans 5. 19.
by his obedience, which being so perfect and accomplished in all points, he
has supplied and made amends for all our faults and imperfections, and for
the duty wherewith we were bound to God with all our might, being his
creatures, children and servant. The death then which Jesus Christ has
suffered, the sacrifice which he has offered, the curse which he has borne,
and the obedience that he has rendered: all this was done in our name, and for
our discharge, and is received before the judgment of God, for acquitall in
full payment and discharge of all our debtes, in such sort that no more can be
demanded again of us, he having through his innocence fully satisfied that
promise which he had made for us. Behold the first reason, why the
righteousness of Jesus Christ is imputed unto us and accepted of God in his
judgment.

The second reason is, 2. Reason.
that being knitte and united together by marriage, Ephe. 5. 30.
both we and he are but one body and one flesh: and there is a mutual
communion between us. And as he participateth with our afflictions, miseries,
pouerties and infirmities, so when we are persecuted by tyrans, he complains
with us and lamenteth our adversities and sorrows, likewise, when we are
houngry, sick, diseased, in prison, etc. he bears and endures all our
calamities with us. We also on the contrary part are partakers of all his
benefits, graces and gifts which his father has bestowed upon him: and in
general, of all that he has done and suffered for our salvation and
redemption: we are anointed, as he was, with the oil of his holy spirit: we
are dead and buried with him, and we are raised up and carried into heaven with
him where we are set at the right hand of God his father, Romans 6. 4.
as he is. Coloss. 3. 1.
We are inheritours together with him, Ephe. 2. 22.
and we have part in his glory, in his rest and in all his felicity, Romans 8.
17.
by mean of his righteousness, obedience and innocence, of all which through
his grace we are made partakers. Also, of his death, sacrifice and
satisfaction. And to conclude, A similitude.
as marchantes which are of one company and become parteners, are partakers
alike of all the profittes and damages which grow of their merchandise: even
so Jesus Christ, by reason of that society we have together with him, gives
us a part, and we likewise give him, of all that we have and possess. The
difference that is in this, is, that the gains and losses, that come of the
traffic that is exercised amongst men is equal and common amongst them
all, but here we gather up all the fruits that arise of the righteousness of
Jesus Christ: he on the contrary part takes upon him, and charge himself
with all the damages and losses that came of our disobedience.

The third reason, 3. Reason.
for which the righteousness of Christ is imputed unto us, Ephesians. 1. 2.
is, that being knitte to him, as the members of a body are to their head
(the which, by means of this conjunction receive thence one influence which
gives them life, and distributeth to each their motions and senses according
as is fit for their nature, and as is requisite for their actions) we receive
from him as S. Paul says, our life, our nourishment, our grouth, our force
and strength: for the enabling and disposing of us to do those good works
that belong unto our vocation. And by reason of this conjunction there is such
an union betwixt him and us, that as he communicates with us in our
afflictions: so we likewise on the other side communicate with him, in his
riches: we are righteous by his righteousness, we are acquitted by his
satisfaction, we are quickened to life by his death, and obaye God through his
obedience. A similitude.
And even as in a natural body, the power that the eye has to see, serves
more to ye use of the other members then for it self because that seeing and
marking them all it is watchful rightly to guide them and to direct every one
of their actions, not being able in the mean time to see them selves, nor to
serve it self: even so the righteousness, innocence and obedience of Christ
Jesus, stand us in more sted then him, seeing that notwithstanding he had all
these things, and it was in his nature, life, and whole conversation absolut
and perfect, yet for all this, he was condemned and crucified. We on the
contrary part albeit his righteousness, innocence, and obedience be only
imputed unto us, yet for all that, by means of this imputation we are
absolved, justified and discharged of all our sins, and of all accusations
that all our enemies can bring against us.

The other part of the righteousness of Jesus Christ consists in the
sanctification not only of us but also of our works. The 2. part of the
righteousness of Christ.
For although that there is not (as Paul says) any fellowshippe between
righteousness and unrighteousness, 2. Cor. 6. 14.
between light and darkness, between the temple of God and Idols: yet for all
this, when Jesus Christ will join us with him self, and will choose us and
consecrate us, to the end to dwell in us, as in his temple: S. Augustine
he sanctifies us first by his spirit and prepares the house where he will
dwell. And because it is over straight to entertain so great a lord, he
enlarges it: and whereas it is old and ruinous, he repayreth it and builds
it new again: whereas it is stinking and full of filthe, he sweepeth and
cleanses it. And to be brief, where as it is naked and unfurnished, he
furnishes and decketh it. And even as, when he would be borne of the Virgin
Marie, and before he would be lodged in her womb, he sent his servants
before him, that is to say, his spirit, to the end to take it up for him and
to set his mark there: so also when he will be conceived in our hearts, and be
borne of us, he prepares and regenerateth us before, sanctifying the place
where he will make his abode.

Now this sanctification consists in four points. The sanctification of the
faithful consists in 4. points.
The first is, that we feel and confess our sins, and that we accuse,
condemn, and deteste our selves before God as miserable and accurssed in all
points. 1. Hatred and detestation of evil.
The second is, that we have a settled zeal and fervent affection to the study
and exercise of good works, searching out, 2. A love and endeavor to good.
with all diligence, all the means and ways to apply our selves to good: and
shuming on the contrary, 3. Resista^ce against te^tations.
all the things that may turn us away from it. The third is, that we fight
courageously against all the desiers and concupiscences of our flesh, and that
we be strong and resolved against all the other tentations of the devil and
the world, whether it be that we are sweetly enticed or flattered thereunto,
or violently drawn and enforced. And that we be not cold and white lyuered in
these combats, but hardy, vigilant, and attentive to epsy and to take all
occasions, 4. Continual invocation for Gods favor.
whereby we may resist, and vanquish all our enemies. The fourth is, that as
we continually sin, so we also as often diligently pray unto God, that it
will please him of his great mercy to pardon our offenses. And as the people of
Israel, going through the deserts, had to sight oftentimes against the
serpents, and when they were stonge and smitten by them, for to be preserved
from the venim and from death, they lifted up their eyes toward the brazen
serpente that Moises had set up amiddest their tents, by sight whereof they
were healed: we in like manner fighting against our concupiscences, if it come
to pass at any time that they give us any blow, to the end that this stripe
may not be deadely unto us, we must lift up our eyes toward Jesus Christ
hanging upon the Cross, and beseech him that he would forgive us all our
trespasses. What it is, to apply a ma^s self to good works.


Now when it is said that to show our sanctification by the effect we must
apply our selves to good works, it may not be understand that it is enough
to exercise our selves in one or in two, leaving the rest behind: as many do,
who do not take nor use the word of God, but in that only where it is
agreeable and may be referred (they think) to their appetite: but it is
needful to embrace it wholly, and not to think that we can do our duty in
any sort whatsoever, unless we enforce our selves to keep all the
commandments of God, without omitting the least point or title thereof. Even
like as to be healthie in our bodies, A similitude.
it is not enough, not to have the plague or a pleuresie, but generally to be
free from all diseases: even so to be holy in our souls, we must be clean
from all spots and defylinges: and we must take the whole law of God, as an
universal rule of all our thoughts, affections, words and deeds, to the end
to keep it from point to point, and not to omit any thing which is there
commanded us. A similitude.
And what would it profit in a city, diligently to watch at one gate and to
keep it shut against the enemy, if in mean while all the rest stood wide
open to him? even so likewise it is to no purpose to keep our selves from one
vice, unless we make account, and conscience to abondon our selves from all
others: like as amongst archers (as says Aristotle) there is but one only
mark whereto they must direct their arrows to shoot well, and yet many means
to miss and shoot short: so is there but one only holiness, whereunto we must
aspire, which is a settled desire, fully resolved wholly to obaye God. But there
are many kinds of vices and means to disobey him, and to withstand his will.
We conclude then, that to be applied to good works, it must not be done to
halues, but perfectly and without exception to take care and endeavor to keep
all that God commands.

But here a question must be resolved, Of the perfection of works.
and that is: that if to do our duty, and to satisfy the will of God, we
must be perfect in every kind of virtue. And we can not otherwise be Saints
and Christians, unless we have in perfection all the points of holiness. The
Philosophers and schoolmen, The opinion of the philosophers and schoolmen.
they say that this is necessary, and that a man can not be said to be
virtuous unless he have attained to the fulness and perfection of all virtues:
But the scriptures and the ancient fathers they speak otherwise. Sentences of
the scriptures and ancient doctors.
For S. Paul says, that the mind is accepted according to that it has:
that is to say, 3. Cor. 8. 12.
that we are accepted of God when we employe that portion and measure of power
and strength which he has given unto us to the end to do well, and he is
contented with that, although we lagge somewhat behind, and in a great sort
of things come very short of that end and perfection, which is propounded
and set out unto us in the law. And the selfsame Apostle confesses, that he
had nothing, but that same only will: Romans 7. 18.
To will is present with me (says he:) but I find no mean to perform that
which is good. Abraham sacrificed his son, Genesis 22. 16.
no otherwise then in effect, and he had nothing but the same will which was
imputed unto him, as if he had accomplished all that was commanded him. So as
God him self witnesses of him, saying: Forasmuch as thou have done this
thing, and to obaye me have not spared thine only son, I will bless thee
and multiply thy seed, as the stars of heaven. Jesus Christ shall say unto
his elect, which shall be on his right hand in the day of judgment: Mat. 25.
34
Come ye blessed of my father: inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you before
the foundation of the world. Forasmuch as when I was houngry ye gave me meat,
etc. This is certain that among the elect, there was some who being holden in
poverty, or for lack of ability, or by some other let, did not that, which
Christ shall say there they did, which things themselves confess not to have
done in the same place alleged: And yet for all this, it shall be said unto
all, not because all have done those things, but because they had a will to do
them. Moreover, if in respect of vice, the will only be enough to convince and
condemn a man, and that he is accounted an adulterer before the judgment of
God, who has only looked on his neighbors wife to lust after her: and that
he is also reputed a manqueller, that hates his brother: even so likewise in
respect of good works we must not doubt but the good will, and desire we have
to perform them is accepted and approved of God though always the effects
follow not so soon and so excellent as we desire.

As touching the ancient fathers, they say the self same thing, S. Ambrose.
S. Ambrose upon S. Luke, affirms that ye righteousness of a Christian man
consists more in the will, then in the work, and that it ought rather be
measured by the affection then by the effect. But in the book which he has
written De fuga mundi, he says, it is a hard thing for one to keep himself
wholly from vanity, and that it is impossible altogether to depart from it,
otherwise then in will and desire alone. S. Augustine
S. Augustine upon the first Epistle of John says: that the whole life of a
Christian is no other thing but an holy desire and good will: And in his 9.
book of the Trinity, he has a saying serving to this purpose worthy to be
noted: He (says he) that knows righteousness and loves it perfectly, that
man is righteous, notwithstanding that outwardly he has not yet showed by his
works, in any sort, that good affection of his heart. To conclude, look where
and how often so ever God has commended unto us the study and keeping of his
law, he does it always in these terms: Thou shall take heed to do those
things which I command thee: To give us to understand that the principal
point that he requiers of us, is, that we have a desire to please him, and a
ready good will to do that, which he has commanded us according to that grace
and strength that he has given us, which is the thing that he most esteems
in us. As we see a father a great deal more to content him self with that
his son does, be it never so little, then of all that his servant can do:
because he esteems their works not according to their greatness, or the pain
and time that they have spente in doing them: but according to the will and
readynes which they have that do them.

We must then conclude, that the holiness of a Christian man, the deutie and
diligence which makes him to employe those graces that he has received of
God, to profit in his fear, and continually to better him self in the
exercise and grougth of good works, are imperfect in many respects. Ieronim.
And as S. Ierom says: the perfection of all the righteousness that is in the
flesh is maimed: and to be perfect it is necessary that we acknowledge,
confess, and feel with an inward feeling, that we are imperfect. S. Augustine
confirms the same, S. Augustine
saying: that a righteous man's virtue may be said to be perfect with this
condition, that his perfection consists in having the knowledge of his
imperfection, and in making humble confession thereof before God. And how
soever there be great lack in us in this point, and that our righteousnesses
are as imperfect beginnings in this world: yet nevertheless, we must not think
that he will reject and deny them: For he is not as other creditours rigourous
and not to be entreated, who will not be contented with him that is bound
before they be paid and satisfied the uttermost farthing: but he is gentle and
gracious, and is pleased with us, when we deny not our debtes, and will not
excuse our selves in this, that we are not able to pay: but without all
dissimulation or constrainte, we frankly and freely confess, showing him the
desire we have to satisfy him, which yet we can not do (by reason of our
poverty) and therefore humbly beseech him that he will take in good part that
little we have, and offering that unto him, which he has given us of his own
special grace.

When we thus submit our selves wholly unto him, and pray him to use such
favor and gentleness as shall please him toward us, we likewise bearing and
showing such a sincerity and vprightnes toward him in the affairs we have
to do, there is no doubt but he will in like manner take in good part that
little which we present unto him: and that both we and our works (how imperfect
so ever they are) shall be accepted and approved of him, in the favor of his
son, as if they were perfect, and absolute in every point. A similitude
showing that god rejects not his children though they be imperfect.
For a father casts not away his children, because they are sick, croke
backed, blind, or maimed of hand or foot, or otherwise counterfeit and
imperfect: but handles them more tenderly, and deals more softly with them,
then with the others, respecting their debility and feeblenes. We cast not away
wine though it have lies or grounds, nor gold how soever it be covered with
durte. A housband man refuses not land, though it be ouergrowen with brambles
and briars: but will use the greater diligence to stock it and to plowe it,
hoping with his diligence, that it will bring forth fruit plentifully: God
likewise will not refuse and put us away, because he sees many imperfections
and infirmities in us, nay rather that is an occasion, that he will take the
greater pity upon us: Psalm. 103. 13.
as David says: Albeit (says S. Ambrose) the light be oftentimes hidden by
a cloud, S. Ambrose.
which is carried before the sun, yet therefore it is not quite put out. And
the sun cease not to be the sun, though his beams be stopped, and can
not pierce unto us: even so likewise howsoever our faith oftentimes be
disfigured, and corrupted by many errors, doubtings and distrustes: it is not
therefore quite choked, Two notable questions.
and we leave not to be faithful for these imperfections.

But before I end this matter, it is meet, that we yet handle two points: 1.
Why God accepts the imperfecte works of his children.
one of which, is the reason, why our holiness is acceptable unto God, and the
service which we do unto him, seeing both the one and the other are imperfect:
and seeing in his law he rejects all the sacrifices, 2. Why the faithful
are not perfectly regenerated in this world.
which had in them any imperfection at all. The other point is concerning the
cause wherefore he regenerating and sanctifying us by his holy spirit, has
yet left such an heap of vices and imperfections in us, and so much
corruption in our nature and life, which notwithstanding all the diligence and
labor we can, to correct and mortify it, yet we can not come any thing ^eare,
to be wholly delivered and exempte from it. An answer to the first question.
Touching the first of these two points, there are two reasons, for which our
virtues and works are approved and accepted before God, how imperfect so ever
they be. One is, because Jesus Christ has covered and taken them under the
cloak of his righteousness, as soon as we are united and knit unto him: so as no
such spotte appears in us that can offend God. And for that he is our
Mediator toward God his father, we see God no otherwise then in him and by
him: As the father in like manner will not see nor behold us other where then
in Jesus Christ, and through his humanity as members and parts of his body.
And this is the cause that makes us to appear altogether other then we are:
Similitudes
For even like as loking aside through any glass, be it blew or yelow or of
any other coulor, all the things we see seem to us to be of the coulor of the
glass, through which we did behold them: So God also beholding and looking
upon us in his son, we seem to him to be of his coulor, and we have the
appearaunce and brightness of his innocence and righteousness: which causes that
in seeing and touching us, he thinks he sees and touches his own natural
Son. As Isaac speaking to Jacob his younger son, and feeling his neck and
hands, thought it had been Esau his eldest son. The other reason is, that
the grace of Gods spirit, being mingled with our works, our works derive and
fetch from thence their greatest dignity, beauty, A similitude.
estimation and free strength, as when we mingle water with wine in a cup or
in a glass, that which is taken in there is called wine, though water be
mingled with it: and albeit there be more water then wine (as it may be) yet
that which is the more principal and most precious part of all, bears the
name: even so the works which we do by the grace of God, be it that they have a
great many spots and imperfections, as they proceed from us, yet for all
that, they hold always the name and reputation of him, who is their
principal aucthour.

Concerning the second point, An answer to the second question.
which is to know the reason why God does not wholly regenerat and sanctify us,
from the first hour that he calls us to his knowledge: seeing that all his
works are perfect, and that the law requires of us, that we should be holy
as he is holy: that is to say, that we should be wholly and perfectly holy. We
must mark, in very deed, that our regeneration and sanctification are works
of God which are perfect and absolute, as all that he does is: But this
perfection is successiue or by degrees. As we see that it is in many of his
creatures. Similitudes
Seed cast into the earth does not by and by sprout, increase and come to his
perfection: but by space and length of time, it attaineth to his perfection and
ripenes, in that season that God has appointed. A tree likewise, is not
perfect as soon as it is planted. An infant is not straight ways upon the
sudden as soon as it is conceived in the womb of his mother, become a man
but with time: even so we are not all at the first dash regenerated. But this
regeneration rises by degrees, and being once begone, then it proceeds
fair and softly by little and little increasing every day, till we come to
everlasting life in the heavens. And in that God delights so to regenerate
and entierly to reform us, to make us altogether new creatures, Three reasons
why God differreth to regenerate us perfectly.
he does it for three great and weighty reasons. First, because he would humble
us, forasmuch as being naturally enclyned to presume to much of our selves, we
have great need that this pride be keept under: and that this mischeuous
inclination which we have to such manner of arrogancy should be dug up and
rooted out of our hearts: which thing God does after that he has adopted us
leaving us subject to many miseries and diseases, as well of the body as of the
mind, to the end that by this mean we should be barred from lifting up our
selves in any opinion and admiration of our selves, and that we should not
speak more biggely and proudly then we ought: and herein he makes of a
poison, a remedy and preservative against the poison that is in our nature: as
we see by experience to be done in the confectio^ of triacle. For even like as
of the flesh of the viper men make a sovereign and excellent remedy against
the bytinge of them: Similitudes full of great consolation.
even so God makes of those infirmities that remain in us after our
regeneration, and which of them selves are deadly and damnable sins before
him, an healthful remedy to correct and repress the other vices and
diseases, which are a great deal more pernicious: as is arrogancy and vain
confidence of our selves, contempt and forgetfulness of God, and such other like
pestilences which would kill us suddenly, if they were not spedely prevented.
Which thing our good God does, who knowing the danger wherein we are, as a
good father is more careful for our good and salvation then we our selves. By
mean whereof, he preuenteth and cutteth of the way that leads to the
danger of death (wherein otherwise we are) by these afflictions and diseases,
which always puts us in mind and sets this medicine before our eyes,
driving us to search after him and to requier aid at his hands. He deals
with us, as a judge in some criminal process, who will give an enlargement,
but yet with condition, or as they say with a quousque, that is, till the time
that he calls it back, and puts him in his former estate wherein he was
before, if it happen that he fall into any new fault again. The judges do this
to keep them always in fear and diligence, to do their dewtie, and to stop
them from taking to great liberty. God likewise does so with us, when he will
pardon our sins and set us at liberty, leaving us notwithstanding a great
sort of infirmities and imperfections, which may always serve him, to charge
us, and for matter to call us to a reckoning, when we would wind out of that
bondage, and boast our selves abroad of the goodlynes of our reason and
loialtie.

The second reason is, The 2. reason.
because he would correct our ingratitude, which is a vice as natural to us
as presumption. For there is nothing, into which we fall so easily, as into the
forgetfulness of God and of his benefits, which we have received of him,
especially when we are at ease and in prosperity, which makes us wanton, and
bereueth us oftentimes of our senses and understanding, which is an other of
the most pernicious vices that can be and provoke the heavy wrath and
judgment of God against us. And this is the cause, why he leaves us always
in such necessity to the end he may meet with such an inconvenience and give
us occasion to seek after him. A similitude showing the wisdom of God in
governing those that he his.
Again he does us not all the good he will do, at one clappe, fearing least
that we would utterly abandon and loose it. And herein he does as a father of
an household well advised, who at the first dash does not much advance his
seruau^ts: but does for them by little and little, the better always to put them
in comfort and hope to receive advantage at last, to the end that by this
mean, they may be holden in service, and not depart from his house: even so,
God during the time that we are in this world, gives us more hope, then he
does benefits (and yet it is plain that the graces that he bestows upon us
are infinite) for fear least that if he should make us great and rich
attonce, and should give us out of hand all the good that he keeps in store
for us, it would make us to abandon his service, as we see sometimes it
happened to the Jews by this occasion. Iere. 22. 21.
As God reprocheth them by his prophet Jeremy: I spoke unto thee when thou wast
in prosperity, but thou saydest, I will not hear: this has been thy custom
and manner from thy youth, etc.

The third reason, The third reason.
why God does not attonce defend and fortify us and that throughout, when he
has regenerated us, is, to the end that those infirmities which yet remain in
us after our regeneration, should serve to exercise us, and to keep us from
slothfulnes and sleeping. S. Ambrose.
For having (as S. Ambrose says) a robe or garment which is all to torn and
vnsewed, and which for this cause had need to be amended, we must occupy our
selves in repairing and amending the same: and must avoid by this mean
slothfulness and idleness. Moreover, being so exercised we grow more strong
and able to fight against the flesh and against all other enemies. Which thing
was answered to S. Paul (when he desired to be delivered from that prick of
the flesh that so continually troubled him) that he ought to content him self
with the grace of God which is sufficient: 2. Cor. 12. 9.
the strength whereof shows it self more in our infirmities then in our
prosperities. Mark then that our diseases and afflictions stand us in sted and
greatly profit us, when we suffer and bear them patiently, and we ought to
content our selves with the only will of God that sends them, and likewise
we must way that the end of these imperfections, which he has yet left in us
after that he has regenerate us, is, to keep us in obedience, and to bridle
us, that we do not stumble and go astraye. For even like as to be wise, it
behooves us to be fools (as S. Paul says) and to the end we may see more
clearly (as Jesus Christ says) to be blind: 1. Cor. 3. 18.
even so that we may be perfect we must be imperfect, John 9. 41.
and that we have foul and dirtie feet, it is to keep us occupied in washing
them.

Having now handled these two parts of Christ's righteousness, The 4. point
where the righteousness of Christ is to be found.
it follows necessaryly to be known, what the matter is wherevpo^ this
righteousness works, where it rests and is to be found either in him or in
us. Where as the Sorbonicall sophisters say that we can not be otherwise
righteous, then by the righteousness that is in us: we say clean contrary, to
wit, that ye righteousness which we must have to escape the judgment of God,
is not in us, but in Jesus Christ. 2. Cor. 5. 21.
As S. Paul says, that he was made sin for us, that we should be made the
righteousness of God in him. If we will therefore rightely understand, how his
righteousness is attributed unto us, we must know in what respect our sin is
attributed unto him: forasmuch as there is the like reason of the one, as there
is of the other. But it is very certain that our sins were never
effectually in Jesus Christ: who being conceived by the holy Ghost was always
holy, innocent, clean, and without spotte: but our sins were only imputed
unto him, Heb. 7. 26.
to the end that he should bear the punishment of them for us. In like
manner, his righteousness is not essentially in us. For to what degree soever,
of holiness or virtue we be come unto in this life, there is notwithstanding
always in us a great many of disordred and unruly affections: in our
understanding a great many of evil thoughts: in our mouths a great many of
evil words: in our works a great many of imperfections and indirect
dealinges: in all our life there is so much corruption and filthynes, that of
it self it is abominable and stinking in the sight of God. Whereupon a man
may well know, that such a righteousness as that is that was in the son of
God, neither dwells nor remains essentially in us, but only by imputation:
to the end that thereby we may receive the reward. Coloss. 3. 3.
And altogether like (as S. Paul says) that our life is hid in him, and
must not be reueiled, till the time that he shall appear in glory: even so is
our righteousness, the which appears not clearly enough, by reason of our
imperfections, no more then our life does by reason of our mortality and
corruption, till the day that God shall appear in judgment in the person of
his son.

This is the reason why this righteousness is compared to a robe, The
righteousness of the faithful compared to a robe.
according to that which is said in the Psalm: that the priests should be
clothed with righteousness. For as a robe is not borne with us, Psalm. 132.
and we have it not from our mothers womb as we have our skin: and it is not
fastened to our bodies as the skins of beasts: even so likewise neither is
the righteousness wherewith we are covered, as with a long robe, to the end
that our imperfections may not be perceived. And this is a great benefit and
mercy that God has done and bestowed upon us, in that he has not assigned it
to our selves nor put it over in our own hands, but has provided a steward,
to whom he has delivered it in trust: forasmuch as we are so ill aduiced, and
so ill housbandes, that had we once the ordring of it our selves, the devil by
his sleightes and conuayaunces would sone beguile us. For if our fore fathers
who were so wise and endued with so many excellent graces, could not keep
safely that original righteousness for so small a time, (wherewith they were
adorned from the beginning) and were notable to preserve them selves for so
little a while from the crafty fetches and snares of Satan, but that they lost
it: What may happen unto us, which are not so wise as they were, if we should
have the keys and charge of so great and precious a treasure, as is the
righteousness of the Son of God?

It is a great commodity and very good for a tree, Diverse similitudes
showing that it is not necessary that Christ his righteousness should be
essentially in us.
that the life and sap thereof lies hid in the root: For this is the mean
to defend, and preserve it from the storms and frostes of the winter: even so
is it for our profit, that our life and our righteousness are in Jesus Christ,
who is our foundation and root. For being locked up in so sure a place, it
shall be preserved and kept for us against all those that would rob us or
snatche it away from us by treason or violence. We see that kings and great
lords, they neither meddle nor deal with any money, but they leave their
revenues in the hands of their treasorers and receauours to dispose of them,
contenting them selves when they have any need, or other affairs, to be
puruayed and provided for, of that which is necessary: what need the^ is there
that we should have our goods in our own hands, seeing that we shall lack
nothing, that is needful for us? We have the grace of God, we are his children
and consequently his heirs: we are enlightened, guided, strengthened, and
comforted by his spirit: we are citizens of his kingdom, and servants of
his householde: to be short, we have all the profits, rentes and commodities
that grow of his righteousness: what would we desire more? Is it not enough that
we gather the fructe of a tree, and that it always remain in his place, and
that we carry it not away with us? In like manner also we must content our
selves to be partakers of the fructes of Christ his righteousness, albeit it be
not essentially in us: but only by imputation, and in as much as through his
only mercy it is bestowed upon us.

But here a doubt may be moved, How we may be righteous by the righteousness
of an other.
by the righteousness of an other, seeing that this is a personal quality,
which can not be communicated to an other, no more then health, wisdom,
strength and beauty. Now can I be otherwise in health, then by the health that
rests effectually in my body: how can it be then, that I should be
righteous, by the righteousness, that dwells in an other? We must answer
that this is done by imputation: And as a man may be acquitted of his
creditour, The similitude of the debtour, acquitted by an other.
by the paymente which some shall make of his own money in the name of the
debtour: even so we may be righteous, by the righteousness of an other, when he
is accepted in our name, as that is of Jesus Christ, when we are united and
knit unto him. All the members of the body without the eye, The similitude of
the members of the body enlightened by the eye.
are altogether blind of them selves, and yet notwithstanding, they cease not
every day to do their duties rightely. The feet go without stombling, the
hands without offending: in such sort that each one of them is led in his work
by the light of the eye which illuminateth and directs them: and as the sight
of the eye is communicated to all the members of the body, who see by it and in
it: even so we in like manner are profited by the righteousness of Jesus Christ,
which is imparted with us, as the sight of the eye with the members, to the
end that we may use it in the judgment of God, there to be acquitted and
justified, and pronounced altogether innocente and discharged from all our
faults and offenses.

Now let us come to the other point, The first point showing by what mean, we
may appropriat to our selves the righteousness of Christ Jesus.
which is, to know by what mean we may obtain this righteousness, and
appropriate it to our selves. The only mean is Faith as we may know by many
places of the scripture. For S. Paul says that the righteousness of God is by
faith. Also: that righteousness is reueiled in the Gospel, and communicated by
faith. And in an other place: Romans 1. 17.
being justified by faith, we have peace in our conscience. Romans 5. 1.
And the Prophet also says: Abac. 2. 4.
That the righteous man shall live by faith. And Jesus Christ, in the word
whereupon we altogether rest, John 3. 5.
says: that who soever believes in him, shall not come into judgment. And to
them always that were sick, and were healed, he says commonly, that their
faith had saved them, to the end to teach us that faith is the mean, Faith is
the only mean to fasten us to Christ, and obtain his righteousness.
which is necessary to obtain not only righteousness, but also the adoption of
children, the undeserved favor, and blessing of our God, and generally all the
benefits of Jesus Christ. And altogether like as we apprehende coullors by the
sight, and soundes by the ear: even so we apprehende by Faith Gods promises,
in which he offreth life unto us and all other his graces. S. Ambrose.
As Ambrose says: Faith is such a virtue and of so great strength, that it
obtains all that God has promised us we believing in him.

But when we speak so of Faith, we understand not by this name a bare opinion
which we may have of the truth or a simple persuasion and consent, What that
justifying Faith is.
whereby we allow all that is contained in the scripture: but we understand by
this Faith a lively apprehension of the truth of Gods promises, and an
assurance of his grace and favor in Jesus Christ. Also, a full confidence that
is sufficient to bear all the tentations, that can be laid upon us, and to
beat down death, the devil, and all the gates of hell, and further to set it
self against wrath, in the judgment and malediction of God, the which it
turns from us as a tempest and storm when we are threatened. Now when we
erst said that the law contains the promises of God, and in them his
vnderserued favor and grace, as the eye does the color, and the ear the
sound, and the other senses their proper object: we understand this of the
assurance and certainty only, and not of any carnal feeling. For the
things that we believe, they can not be felt with the hand, nor seen with
the eye, nor by any reason, or other sense of man be comprehended, and yet
nevertheless they are more certain, then the things that we feel, because our
senses may be deceived. As the eye which will judge a piece of wood in the
water to be crooked, although it be very straight: But Faith when it is once
grounded, and rests it self upon the word of God, it is assured of all that
is therein taught, and specially it embraces Jesus Christ and draws from him
everlasting life.

And albeit that oftentimes, considering the estate and disposition of those
matters, it seems to us that all things go quite backwardes, contrary to
that which God has promised unto us: yet notwithstanding, in this case we must
believe, Romans 4. 18.
(as S. Paul says) in hope against hope, and in no wise doubt, but his
promises shall be accomplished. For sooner shall heaven, earth, and all the
world perish, then the least jot of that which God has promised us, and
which is proceeded from his mouth, faill to be fully and wholly accomplished in
his time. When our reason then, or sense will doubt of that which God has
said, or vnsaye and murmr against it, or any manner of way, distrust his
promises, we must resist and set our selves manfully with all our might
against it, as Abraham did: and stay our selves (as he did) wholly upon this,
that God always has both will, and might to perform what soever he has
promised.

And when we come to consider the corruption and vice of our nature, the
rebellion of our will against the will of God, our infirmities and
imperfections, our distrust also that we have oftentimes of his love, and other
doubts that we make of his providence, How we must behave our selves in
te^tations.
we must not then doubt, but that our faith is mightily assailed, and that we
have to fight wonderful sharp and dangerous combats: but that we may avoid
them, it is needeful (as in all other tentations) to keep our selves always
to the word of God, and to make it a buckler against all that the devil, our
reason, and sense can allege against his will, and those promises that he has
made unto us. S. Augustine
We must (as S. Augustine says) shut our eyes from all that we may see,
and from all considerations that may turn us away or fear us: and open our
ears, only to hear and meditate upon that which God says. And if on the
one side considering the things that are present, we perceive our selves a
falling, and ready to be cast headlong into any distrust, we must on ye other
side for to comfort our selves, behold Jesus Christ, of whom we are members
and sheep of his pasture, and we must oppose his righteousness against our
vices, his life against our death: his obedience against our rebellion, his
favors and rich grace against our wretchedness and poverty, his satisfaction
against our debtes, his mercy against our misery, his strength against our
weakness and te^tations, his merit and intercession, against all the
accusations and informations which the law, our conscience and the devil
himself can bring forth and allege against us: always thinking, that where
sin abounds, there grace yet more abounds, and has far more strength
to save us then sin has to condemn us. A similitude.
We must do, as they that go up into an high tower, who looking downewardes and
seeing the depth are afraid to fall, and that they may be the more sure they
lay hold of the railes: even so must we always lean upon the righteousness
and death of Jesus Christ, and strengthen our selves in that, to the end we
may be preserved from falling down.

Now having spoken of the mean whereby a man may lay hold of the
righteousness of Christ, Three questions depe^ding of the former point.
and of the quality of Faith that apprehends the same: it remains yet,
that we speak of three things. The first, whether that for the laying hold
upon that righteousness, it be necessary that Faith be perfect. Then
afterward, whether it must be, that it must be clean from all vices: and
lastely whether, it having been once received in our hearts, we can loose it
afterward, and be deprived of it.

As concerning the first point, 1. To wit, whether faith must be perfect for
the apprehending of Jesus Christ.
to wit, of the perfection of the law, it is impossible that ever we can
attain it: in as much as we are compassed about with a mortal body, which is
so gross and so slavish, and which fights without ceasing against the
spirit, when it would lift up it self into any heavenly meditation:
moreover, having such an heap of darknesses and false opinions in our senses
and understanding, it is impossible that ever we should have any perfect
knowledge of God, what diligence, pain or travel so ever we took to get it:
having in like manner a heart entangled with so great passions and lusts which
drives us hither and thither, to all vain affections, in such sort, that by
reason hereof, we can not love God perfectly and so consequently have any
perfect confidence in him: because confidence follows love, even like as love
follows knowledge.

The knowledge therefore and confidence that we have of God being imperfect,
which are the two parts of Faith, it follows hereof, that it can not be
perfect, and that we have need continually to beg at Gods hand, that he
will augment it in us, and day by day stir us up in the meditation of his
promises, which is the true mean to nourrish, increase, and augmente Faith.
And whereto serve exhortations, prayers, Sacraments, and such other exercises,
if our Faith could be perfect here? seeing that all these are not ordained and
fostred in the Church, to any other purpose, then to fortify, and increase the
knowledge, zeal and affection of the faithful.

Now let us come to the second point. 2. Point whether Faith must be clean
from all vices.
Seeing that our Faith is never perfect in this world, but is always mingled
with an infinite number of infirmities which always remain in us, in such sort
as there is none can say his heart is clean from all sin: and that we have
need in respect of this, to beg of God in our prayers, that he will pardon
us our offenses, and making the confession of our Faith, to say: I believe the
remission of sins: Notwithstanding all this that, as yet our faith is very
weak and defiled with many imperfectio^s, nevertheless it cease not, to lay
hold upon that, that it shall please God to bestow upon it. No otherwise (for
examples sake) the^ as a little child who with his little hands, A similitude of
the force and strength of Faith.
or a poor man with his rugged, and scabbie hands refuse not to take bread
and other alms, that a man will bestow upon them, as well as if they were
greater and whole. Altogether like as diseases that are universal through out
the whole body, An other similitude.
(as is a burning agewe) though they weaken all the parts of the same and
specially the stomach, more then all the rest: yet nevertheless hinder not
but that it may take a medecin, yea rather the disease is an occasion unto it
to provoke it to take it: even so also it ought to be so far of, that the
weakness of our Faith should keep us from embracing righteousness and the other
benefits of Jesus Christ, that it must prepare and dispose us to the
contrary: Luc. 5. 35.
According to which Jesus Christ says to the Pharisees who thought them
selves to be righteous, that he came not for their sakes, but to call sinners:
adding the reason, to wit that they that are sick have need of the
physician. And even like as our diseases and infirmities let not but that our
faith, be it never so weak, is yet capable of the graces of God, and of all
the righteousness of his son: even so the littlenes of faith makes it not
less capable to be able to apprehend and embrace that righteousness: An other
similitude.
And like as altogether the Aple of the eye which is so little, and yet, for all
that can apprehend the light of the Sun which is spread over all the horizon,
yea and the Sun it self which is far greater, and more ample then all the
earth: even so the eye of faith, albeit that it be very small, yet it cease
not to lay hold of the Sun of righteousness, together with his light, justice
and other gifts, which are as great and as many in number.

But now let us handell the last of the forsayde three points, 3. Whether
the elect can lose their faith.
that is to say: whether Faith being once received into our hearts, we can
utterly afterward loose, and forgo it. For if having once received it, we
can not be assured to keep it constauntly to the end, we shall always be in
doubt of our salvation. But if we be once persuaded and resolved in this point,
that having been inspired by the spirit of God in our hearts, it will still
there abide, and dwell there for ever: this persuasion will always keep our
spirits quiet and contented, and they shall always be ioyefull, yea in the
midst of all tentations that may assail us. Wherefore it is very necessary
for us to mark, and diligently to imprinte in our minds, all the places of
the holy scripture, in which God has assured us of the continuance and
perseueraunce of his grace and favor toward us, and of keeping us in the
faith, and giving of all the other gifts that he will communicate upon us. As
in the first place, this testimony of S. Paul would be marked, Romans 8.
which says: that Faith is joined with election, and so by consequence
founded upon the counsel and will of God which is everlasting and immutable:
Then afterward that place of the Romans where it is said: Romans 11. 29
That the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, that is to say,
irreuocable, when he has once given them unto us. Also, Mat. 13. 12
that which is said in S. Matthew: That to him that has, it shall be given. If
then, we have by Gods grace, Faith and the gifts of the spirit, let us be
certain that they shall remain still with us, and look by the self same
grace that they were freely bestowed upon us, by the same they shall be keept
and increased. Also there is an other place of the Apostle, Romans 8. 30.
that all they which were predestinate to life shall afterward be called,
justified, and in the end glorified: If these four points, wherein is
contained the whole sum of the salvation of God his children be so chained in
order one to the other, by an immutable decree of God: we must conclude, that
as our election is sure, stable and permanent, so also are the other effects
that do necessaryly follow it: Also that which S. John says in his first
Epistle: 1. John 5. 18.
that he that is borne of God sins not, and the wicked touches him not,
Also: that goodly protestation that the Apostle makes for him self and all
the faithful, Romans 8. 38.
with so great assurance. I am (says he) certain, that there is neither
death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor things high, nor things low, nor any
creature, that shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Jesus Christ our Lord. John 14. 23.
Also, that which Jesus Christ says to his disciples: If any man love me he
will keep my word, and my father will love him, and we will come unto him and
dwell with him. Whereupon we may note that he says not, We will visit him,
and so depart again, as many times we see freindes do visit one an other:
but he says, we will abide with him: which is as much to say: We will hold
our selves to him, and dwell continually with him, without ever departing from
him.

By all these places, and many more which might be rehearsed out of the
scripture, it appears plainly that faith being once given us of God, it shall
never be quite taken away from us, and so by consequence neither the grace of
God, which always follows it. And although it seem oftentimes for dead, as
it was in David, when he committed so great and heinous sins one after an
other: yet for all that, there remained always in his heart, a certain
remnaunte of it, which for a time was hid as fire is under the Ashes. And
like as when it is raked up it shows not his brightenes nor heat outwardly,
until it be vnraked and kindled in a flambe: even so, it oftentimes falls
out with our faith, which is hidden and covered with many vices, which ye most
holiest Saints of God them selves do many times commit (even as to fall
into diseases) the which continues, till it please God to stir us up a new
by his spirit, and to light us again, even like as when a candle is put out.
We must judge then of our faith, as of a tree, which in wiuter seems to be
dead, because it has no fruit nor leaves nor any outward appearaunce of life:
and yet notwithstanding it cease not to live, and shows that life, that was
hidden within, outwardly, in the spring time, bringing forth flowers and
leaves, and taking again his goodly hew: in so much as the sap and strength
which keepte it self enclosed in the root during the time of the cold,
spreads it self throughout all the branches, to make them green and fresh
again: Even so likewise is it of Faith, which seems oftentimes to be quite
dead in us, when it brings not forth any sense or feeling neither of God, nor
of his promises, nor of his commandments or threateninges: And shows not it
self by any other wonted effect. Notwithstanding this, it is alive in us, and
the life of it has his being in Jesus Christ in whom it is ingraffed and
planted. And as the strength of this root can neither be frosen nor dead:
even so neither can the Faith of a Christian which is so deeply grounded
within be altogether extinguished and dead being the root of all
immortality, from whence it fetches his life.

But before we end this matter, How the righteousness of Jesus Christ may be
distributed to all the faithful.
it is needful to consider one wonderful thing, to wit, how the
righteousness of Christ, which is one only, may be also entierly distributed
to every one of his members, without being divided and sundred in any respect.

To answer this point, a man may say of it, as certain Philosophers have
said of the soul of man, A similitude of the soul.
which is wholly throughout the whole body, and in every part a like: even so
is the righteousness of Jesus Christ, wholly in the body of the whole church,
as the soul, to give it life and to maintain it. Then is it altogether, in
every of the particular members, to make them strong, whole, stowt and of
courage to do all their offices and duties. The which thing a man may
understand by two similitudes, one is of the voice, which being heard of a
great many persons, is in such sort received of every one of them, Similitudes
of the voice and the face.
provided that they be attentive, that the same is wholly understood, without
being divided or sundred in any respect. The other similitude is of the face
which may be received in many glasses, and wholly represented to all, without
any division or separation of the same.

Let us conclude then that a faithful man through faith embraces the whole
righteousness and all the fructes of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ: and that,
for this cause he can not be condemned or accursed before Gods judgment, no
more then his head with whom he is in separably knitte and united. When any
man is fallen into the water where he is up even to the chin, if he cannot be
hurt, as long as his head is above the water: although that all the members and
parts of his body be drowned and foundred: so also we cannot be stiffled or
hurt in the deapths of death, A similitude.
seeing that Jesus Christ our head, is always lift up above those deapths,
and for that upon the life and health of him dependes the health and salvation
of all his members.

Now it is time to show by what signs and marks we may know, How we may
know whether Jesus Christ dwell in us or no?
whether we possess Jesus Christ, and whether he dwell in us and we in him. S.
Paul says to the Romans: that being justified by Faith, we have peace in
our souls: Romans 5. 1.
which is an undoubted token that Christ dwells in our hearts, that is to
say: when we feel there tranquillity and rest, and that we begin to be
peaceable in our consciences: torments, bytinges, anguishes, terrors and
distrustes there ceasing: and when in the sted of all these, there comes in
place, joy, pleasure, consolation, and as it were a common feast where all
rejoice. For then Jesus Christ lives in us and we in him: to wit, when all
our thoughts, our meditations, our works and our delights, do carry us to
him, as to the mark: And when we set him out to our selves, to be our only
glory, honor, riches, treasure, and the ground of all our hopes: and that we
hold him as our chief and sovereign good, that is to say: when we neither
know, desire, or seek after any other but him: and that we are enlightened,
by his light and spirit, are made wise through his wisdom, and strong
through his strength, and rich through his blessings, and righteous through
his innocence, and blessed through his grace and favor: and when we will have
no other master to teach us, nor other light to lead us, nor other sight to
direct us, nor other truth to deliver us, nor other life to quicken us, nor
other king to govern and defend us, nor other mediator to reconcile us, and
make us at one with God, nor other aduocat to plead our cause in his
judgment, nor other gate to enter in at to his kingdom, nor to make us there
rejoice of the perfect and full felicity, which he has reserved and keept for
his elect. And in general, when we neither seek, nor will have other
fountain to quench our thirst, nor to satisfy our desires. See then how
Jesus Christ lives in us and we in him.

It is very true that the feeling, The perplexities and doubts that are in
the spiritual life of the faithful.
which we have of all these things, is not always a like and the same in us.
For as much as we are not always a like disposed, at one time as at an other:
and we have not always a like desire to see or to hear the word of God, or
to read it, or to confer with our brethern, which are more advanced in the
knowledge and zeal of the service of God then we are. And likewise the spirit
of God does not touch and stir us up always a like. And this is the cause
that in our faith, as in all other qualities, there is some time more and some
time less, and that oftentimes it is more strong and lively, and then some
times again more remiss and fainte. A similitude.
For altogether like as we see that water is more hot or cold, according as
it is near or far of from the fire: even so is it with us, according as we
are more or less exercised in the word, and driven by Gods spirit, we have
more or less zeal and affection. And altogether like as the disposition of
the body follows the quality and temperature of the air, elements and
exercises, to which we give our selves: even so according to the places where
we live, and the nourishment that we there take, is the estate of our souls
and consciences. But be it that water be sometime hoate and sometime cold, and
that it change his qualities, sometimes one way, sometimes an other, yet is
it always water: even so the man that is elect after his regeneration, is
always faithful, how so ever in that he is the child of Adam, he be
sometimes inclined to evil, and that his faith is not always in one and the
self same estate, and that he is not always accompanied with the like zeal
and affection. For oftentimes it comes to pass that we feel Jesus Christ to
stir and move him self in us, and by and by after, we have no manner of
feeling at all: but therefore he cease not to dwell in us, no more then our
souls do to dwell in our bodies when we sleep, although in sleeping we
neither feel them, nor any of their operations. A woman who has conceived and
bears in her womb a young child, feels it not always stir,
notwithstanding when she has felt it once or twice, she doubts not but she
is with child: even so it comes to pass that we have not a continual
feeling of Jesus Christ, to assure us that he dwells in us and we in him: but
it suffizeth that we have him when occasion serves.

There are some also that feel and taste in some sort the righteousness of
Jesus Christ: but on ye other side they have a far greater feeling of their
sins, which oftentimes makes them to fear that they are not in God his
favor. Concerning this point we must note, that we more feel that which is
evil, then that which is good. For as we see by experience, we feel the
calamities and miseries of war more then the fruicts and pleasures of peace,
and the griefs of diseases, more then the quietness of health, and the hardenes
of poverty, more then the profits and commodities of abundance and riches:
by reason whereof we ought not much to meruell, if we feel the stinginges and
pricks of sin a great deal more then the consolations of the righteousness
of Jesus Christ: seeing that sin dwells in us and not righteousness, which
thing is in cause that the one is more sensible then the other: Notwithstanding
for all this we must not think, that sin is greater and stronger then
righteousness, or that it can in any respect be compared unto it, or can be
more able to condemn and destroy us, then the righteousness of Jesus Christ
and the grace of God is, A similitude.
to justify and save us. We have some times in the top of a finger, some
pain or grief, which we feel a great deal more then the health that is all
over the rest of the body, yea though it be much greater then the pain of
our finger. Wherefore we must not esteem the greatness or the strength, whether
it be of righteousness or sin, according to that feeling we have: because the
one is always more sensible then the other: and specially for as much as we
embrace righteousness only by faith which is of those things that are not
outward and sensible.

There are others also that feel nothing else but their sins: A remedy
against the ^entation of the continual feeling of our sin only.
and therefore they live in continual fear and distruste, where out they can
not wind them selves, having no taste at all of the grace and righteousness
of Jesus Christ, nor of any other mean, whereby it is granted unto us. Which
thing (of a truth) is very dangerous: and they which feel them selves in such
case ought earnestly to pray unto God, that it will please him to quicken them
up, and to warm them through his spirit. And on their part it behooves that
they give the^ selves oftentimes to read and to meditate upon his promises,
and that they frequente the Church, and hear exhortations, with the greatest
attention they can, for as much as Faith is engendered by hearing. And although
it come to pass that they do all these things without any great affection, A
similitude showing that we must not be discouraged though we find not always
in our selves that good desire and taste that we ought to have, of the word of
God.
yet must they not therefore think, that they are altogether unprofitable unto
them, no more the^ a man that takes bread and meat when he takes and eats
it, without any great appetite. For although that he have not such a pleasure
in eating, as if he were well an houngred: notwithstanding, that which he
receaueth, cease not to profit and sustain him, as we see in sickness: even
so do prayers and other Christian exercises, to which such cold persons do
give them selves. And how so ever they make them without any great zeal, yet
for all that they cease not to profit them. And in every thing that comes
to pass, how soever it be that they feel their sins, they declare thereby
that they are not altogether dead, nor utterly deprived of life, and that
therefore it only remains for them to search the means how to encourage
them selves, and to do even as a man would do to fire, when it is out, which
when he will kindle again, he blows it, or to a lamp to which a man puts
oil when the light is going out.

There are other some which neither have feeling of righteousness nor of their
sins, A remedy against the spiritual blockishnes or lack of feeling.
and these are altogether blockish, not thinking any whit of their safety, nor
regarding to hearken unto anything that is spoken, taught or showed to them for
their help and recovery. Such diseases are very dangerous as are to man's
body Apoplexies, Apoplexia is a disease engendered of cold humors, that takes
away a man's senses and feeling.
the falling sickness, Palseyes and such other which are altogether cold,
killing the natural heat, and choking all the senses. All that we can do for
these, is to pray unto God to heal them, as he did the man sick of the
Palseye, and that he will restore to them the use of their senses, that they
may feel as well the burden and wait of their sins, as also the consolation
of his grace.

The last point, The last point is of the effects of this righteousness in
us after regeneration and that co^teineth 4. parts.
that we have to entreat of is of the effects, that this righteousness
brings forth in us after our regeneration: whereof there are four principal
parts.

The first is of the mortification of the flesh: The second of the confession
of Faith. The third of prayers: and the last, of charity.

Mortification of the flesh consists in this, that we suffer not sin to
reign in us: but courageously fight against all the concupiscences thereof, 1.
The mortification of the flesh.
obaying the spirit of the law of God, and groaning continually under the
burden of our infirmities, crying to God without ceasing, that in this case he
will make an end, and provide for us.

Confession consists in this, 2. The confession of Faith.
that we publish the means of our salvation, and that we witness it openly
and evidently by our works and words, at all times when occasion is offered
unto us: without being hindered through the fear of any danger what soever.

As concerning prayers, 3. Prayers.
it is necessary that evening and morning, before and after meat, and in the
beginning and ending of all our works, we pray unto God and praise him,
begging that in our prayers which he has commanded us to axe, and promised to
give unto us, with full Faith and assurance to obtain them: which we must
ground upon his grace and promises, and upon the merit and intercession of
Jesus Christ our alone Mediator.

As touching love, 4. Charity.
first of all it is required that we love God with all our heart, with all our
strength and with all our understanding, and then our neighbor as our self,
the which love of our neighbor that it may be right it must be referred to
that love of God in such wise that it be the rule and measure thereof, and
likewise of all other our affections.

Now in observing of these four poinctes, we must first take heed that we be
not dull and slothful to do our endeavor therein. The which thing that we may
avoid, we must seek out with all diligence every occasion to apply our
selves thereto, and take heed to avoid those things which may turn us
away from it. Then afterward we must beware that in no wise we distruste the
grace of God, nor the service that we offer up unto him, but that we be
certainly persuaded, that we together with our works, shall be acceptable unto
him, through grace, That having this persuasion we may go faithfully and
cheerfully forward in our vocation.

And finally, that we take good heed to our selves, We must avoid
presumption and an opinion of our selves.
that above all things we be not presumpteous. And to the end, to keep us
from it, it is not enough, that we have no opinion of our selves nor of our
works: but as it is written in the Psalm: we must not desire any thing that
is to high for us, Psalm. 131. 1
but be content with that portion and measure of grace, that it has pleased
God to bestow upon us, and we must apply our selves according to that power
and mean that he has given us: As S. Peter says: 1. Pet. 4. 10
Let every man as he has received the gift, minister the same one to an other
as a good housband and steward of the graces and gifts of God. For if we have
received but two tallentes, and will make as great traffic with the^, as he
that has received five, this is a presumption before God, who has measured
out and proportioned his gifts to our capacity, and requires of profits and
gains according to the quantity of those graces and gifts which he has
bestowed upon us.

We have said in the beginning that the second judgment whereto we must
answer concerning our righteousness, The second judgment where we must
answer concerning our righteousness.
is that of the law, which is no other thing then the seat of Gods
righteousness, to which it is impossible for us of our selves to satisfy, and
we have neither works, thoughts, words, nor affections but they are to be
condemned of God, if process be made out there for us, and we be to be judged
in this court: Gal. 3. 10.
as S. Paul says that all they which are under the law, 2. Cor. 3. 7.
are under the Curse: and in an other place, Psalm. 143. 2
he calls the law the Minister of Death. And David speaking to God says:
Enter not into judgment with thy servant: For no man living shall be justified
in thy sight: Psalm. 130. 3
Also in an other place he says: O Lord if thou look upon our iniquities,
who shall stand in thy judgment? For as much as this judgment is so entier,
where all things are examined, in such sort, from point to point, that the
brightenesse and light of the moon and stars, the righteousness and
innocence of the Angels, shall hardly escape from being rejected and
censured, Job 25. 5.
as Job says. How then shall we be able to answer there, Job 4. 18.
and what means shall we allege for our justification, that we may escape?
Romans 2. 12.
S. Paul says, They that have sinned without the law, shall perish without
the law. But seeing that they shall be condemned by the law, who have
transgressed it: what shall we do then? we can answer and allege many
things for our defense.

First we can avoid this judgment and rid our selves from it demanding to
be sent before the throne of Gods mercy: The way how to be delivered from the
judgment and malediction of the law.
forasmuch as being free and delivered, we are not any longer under the law,
but under grace: so as Moises is not now any more our Judge but Jesus Christ:
to whom the father has given authority and judgment. Galat. 4. 7.
Moreover mercy (as S. James says) is above righteousness: John 5. 22.
which is as an inferior and lower court, Iam. 1. 13.
from which we may appeal to that high and great court of God his mercy:
wherein Jesus Christ is set down and keeps the highest place as chief
presidente. And as it is he that is our advocate, so we are assured that he
will give us a discharge in our favor. Wherefore if the law, Moises and the
righteousness of God do condemn us, we must not therefore be afraid:
forasmuch as this is such a simple sentence, as we may at all times appeal
from it. To conclude, the law is as a receauer, which takes account of our
debtes, which is so hard and rigorous that by no entreaty it will remitte and
pardon any thing of that we owe, and will make us to pay to the uttermost
farthing: But the Lord is he that stays and closes up the count, to wit
Jesus Christ, being (contrary to the law) good, gracious and liberal,
entreating us with all gentleness, neither demanding any thing of us but that
which we be able to pay, and furnishing us him self with that which we lack,
and acquiting us of his mere liberality of the overplus, so that presently it
may be supplied in him.

Furthermore we may yet allege in this judgment, that the law can not make
our process: but Jesus Christ, and the mercy of God be our assessours, who
moderate judgment in such sort, that not only it can not be hurtefull unto
us, but very healthful for us. As the judgment of the woman taken in
adultery, the figure thereof: John 8. 3. An allegory of our exemption from the
judgment of the law by Jesus Christ.
who being threatened before Jesus Christ, by the Pharisees, who maintained
that by the law of Moises she ought to be stoned to death, was notwithstanding
all that they could allege, sent away by Jesus Christ, without her
accusers, or any others that were in their company, once interposing to hurt
her in any sort what so ever: Only Jesus Christ says unto her, that hense
forward she must take heed that she sinned no more: and so that condemnation
which the ministers of the law had pronounced against her, was by Christ,
turned into a simple admonition and instruction. A thing that ought well to be
marked, The use of the law toward the faithful.
to the end we may understand what ought now a days to be the true use of
the law toward the faithful: which condemns them no more to death as it
was wont, but teaches and enstructeth them of their deutie, exhorts them to
that, and reproves, and procures, by all means so to direct, and bring them
on, as they may be sufficiently enabled to go to the school of Jesus Christ.

The law and Jesus Christ in like manner are as a Physician and surgeon, A
comparison and difference of the law and the Gospel.
coming to a sick man to heal him. The surgeon opens the vein, and takes
away blood from him, not to the end to make him to dye, but as a remedy,
appointed for the recovery of his health and sauetie. The law also peirceth
our impostume, and sometimes makes a great hole in it: but neither to the end
to kill us, nor to hurt us: but to bring us into a good order, to the end we
may be the more easily healed. Those sentences then, that the law pronounces
against us, they are profitable for us, for as much as they awaken us and make
us to look to our selves and to our affairs, and to be more diligent to
search out the means whereby to bring us into good order.

The last bulwark that we can set against the judgment of the law, The third
mean, or defense against the judgment of the law.
is that Jesus Christ has fulfilled the same for us, as he him self
witnesses: that he came not to abolish the law, but to fulfill it. Which thing
S. Paul also confirms saying: Mar. 5. 17.
that Christ is the accomplishmente of the law in righteousness to all
beleuers. Romans 10. 4.
Wherefore we be not, in any wife subject to death, nor to the curse, that the
law has pronounced against them, that have transgressed it, seeing we are the
members of Jesus Christ, and that we have keept and fulfilled it in him. And as
in Adam we were made sinners through disobedience: even so being incorporated
into Jesus Christ, we are righteous through his obedience: and so consequently
exempte from the jurisdiction and power of the law: which can not exercise the
authority, it has to condemn us, but against them, that transgress, and
are rebellious against it. When therefore we endeavor our selves, to do our
deutie, to mortify, through his spirit the works of the flesh, there is not
any condemnation to us, nor to all them that are in Jesus Christ, who are by a
lively Faith united to him, Romans 8. 1.
ingraffed and incorporated into his righteousness.

The third kind of judgment whereof we spoke in the beginning of our division
is the judgment of men: The third judgment against us, to wit, the
judgment of men and of the remedies of the same.
which commonly is more corrupt and unjust, by reason of their ignorance and
false opinions, which they conceive and frame in their own understanding: and
likewise because of their passions and desires, which often times drive and
carry them hedlong contrary to their will. Wherefore we must not trouble our
selves much to satisfy that, especially in matters that appertain to religion
and conscience. As in the doctrine of salvation, which we must not take from
any other, but from the spirit of God, nor search for it any where else but in
the law and the Gospel: where all is taught by the writings of the Prophets
and Apostles. Wherefore there is no other rule of our Faith and obedience, but
the only will of God, that is to say we ought not to believe any thing, as
concerning our salvation, but that which he has promised in his holy Gospel,
nor do any thing for his service, but that which he has commanded and
ordained in his law. And when so ever it be found, that men will be so rash
either to add, Our faith must not depend upon others.
or to diminish, or to alter any thing in the word of God, there a man may
judge, and surely persuade him self of such, that they are false teachers and
prophets: and so likewise of them that believe and submit them selves unto
such by whom they are abused and deceived. This is the reason why S. Paul
says, that if he would please men, he should not be the servant of Jesus
Christ. And in an other place: If an Angel from heaven should teach any
other Gospel then that Jesus Christ and his Apostles have published, Gal. 1.
8. 10
that he would account him accursed. It is therefore needful to be taught
that in these things, belonging to the honor and service of God, and to the
salvation and rest of our souls, we rest our selves altogether upon the
scripture, and thereto bend our selves as to the only mark, that we neither
have to much forward, nor lagge to much behind. And further that we hang not
upon the judgment of men, as whereby we may either be justified or condemned.

Saint Paul writing to the Corinthians says: 1. Cor. 4. 3. 4. etc.
I pass little to be judged of you, or of the judgment of men, no I judge not
my own self: forasmuch as I know my self not to be culpable in any thing,
yet am I not thereby justified: but he that judges me is the Lord. Therefore
judge not before the time, before the Lord come, who will bring all things
to light, manifestinge the things that are hid, and all the counsels and
affections of the heart: the^ shall every one be praised of God. Hereby he would
teach us not much to esteem the judgment of men be it in good or evil,
because they are vain of their own nature, and if they praise us, this ought
not to puff us up, or to increase the opinion we have of our selves. Also if
they dispraise or condemn us, we ought not therein to discourage our selves
having the spirit of God, his word and our own conscience, to sustain and
justify us.

We are at this day excommunicated of the Pope, and condemned and rejected from
his presence and of the most part of men: and principally of them, who are in
greatest estimation and credit of knowledge and wisdom, notwithstanding
concerning the Pope, we ought to make no reckoning of him nor of all ye
sentences that he can pronounce and thunder out against us. For he is the
enemy of Jesus Christ, and consequently Antichrist: and an enemy of the
light, forasmuch as all his works are evil: and of the truth, being the first
Ambassador and minister of lying: and to conclude, an utter enemy to the
salvation of men, and of the honor of God. Also he is the son of perdition,
to cast away and to destroy all those, which will depend on his authority,
and will be brought to his opinion touching the estate and salvation of their
conscience. Is not this he which bears the name of blasphemy upon his
forhead, Apoc. 13. 1.
to show that he would be the protector? It is not therefore to be meruailed
at, if he condemn and hold those for heretics, which love the honor of
God, and employ them selves to advance the kingdom of Jesus Christ.

As concerning the great and wise men of this world we ought not also to
discourage our selves, if they set them selves with all their strength
against the truth, whereof they have no knowledge as Jesus Christ says: Mat.
11. 25.
that his father has hid from the great and wise of the world, the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, and has reueiled them to little ones.
According to which S. Paul says: 1. Cor. 1. 23.
that he preached Jesus Christ crucified, which was an offense to the Jews,
and foolishness to the Grecians: alleging that which is written in Esaie:
Iasy 29. 14.
I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will cast away the
understanding of the prudente. And adioining that same question. Where is the
wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this world? Has not God
made the wisdom of this world foolishnes? Jeremy says also, Iere. 5. 5.
seeing the people to make no account of his word: I will get me unto the
great men, and will speak unto them. For they have known the way of the
Lord, which the people knew not. But these also have broken the yoke, and have
banded them selves together to speak against the word of God, as the others.
All these places serve to show unto us, that God has chosen the foolish
things of the world, to confound the wise. And hereof it is, that we see now
a days that the greatest men and they that are of most reputation in the
world, do most obstinatly resist the truth: and show by word and effects,
that they are most blind in God his matters, taking darkness for light, sower
for sweet, and sweet for sower.

Now as the greatness and authority of men ought not to astonish us, nor any
whit to move us, so also, neither the number and multitude of them. Mat. 7. 13.
Forasmuch as the way that leads to destruction is broad, and is chosen of
the greatest number of persons who enter there, and go on in it because that
men are naturally inclined to embrace errors and lies, and their is none, but
the elect of God which believe and love the truth: who are a little number (as
Jesus Christ says) in respect of the reprobate.

We conclude then, that to the end we be righteous it is not needful that we
satisfy men, nor conform our selves to their judgment, in matters that
concern the honor and service of almighty God, and the estate of the
conscience: wherein oftentimes they err, because they leave the word of God
which is the only way whereby by a man may well and rightely judge and define
of these two poincts, and betake the^ selves to the judgment and definition of
their own opinions and phantaseis, which are for the most part fond and
ridiculous.

There are two things in which we may apply our selves to man's judgment, Of
the use of civil and politic things.
that is to say, to things merely civil and politic, and to things
indifferent. For it must not be that a faithful man be partial in policy,
neither that he violate the public peace, as long as he may keep it and
maintain it without offense to God, or trouble to the quiet of his conscience.
But it behooves that he obaye the ordinances of the Magistrate, and keep the
statutes, laws and customs of the country where he dwells, carefully
watching that he give no occasion of offense, nor suspicion that he will
innouate or alter any thing in the estate and policy of the common wealth.

As concerning things indifferent, Of the use of things indifferent.
we must follow the counsel of S. Augustine writing to Ianuarius: S. Augustine
that when the thing that is commanded of men is not contrary to Faith, nor
to good customs, we must hold them for indifferent, and not gain stand in any
thing what so ever: to ye end to keep peace with those with whom we are
conuersaunt. For which cause Vitcor Bishop of Rome, was sharply reproved by
Ireneus and other ancient fathers: because that for ye diversity of
ceremonies, which they kept in the celebration of Easter, he had separated his
Church from the Communion of the East churches. The which thing was attributed
unto him for great presumption and arrogancy, that he would go about, to
subject all Churches to the Customs and ceremonies which were observed in his:
and for having renounced the common confederation, in which he ought to have
abidden united and fast knitte, and not to have broken the chain of charity,
which ought to have locked together alike all the members of the universal
Church.

The last indgement to which we must answer, The fourth and last judgment,
which is that of the conscience.
is that of our conscience, which either ministers unto us great consolations,
or else great torments, according as it is either evil or well disposed. For
we may say that a pure conscience, is a paradise, which we may have in this
world: A good conscience is a paradise in this world.
forasmuch as there is not any thing which can bring us greater peace and
contentmente, be it in prosperity or in adversity. Even like as ye body when
it is in good health, is strong and able to bear the great storms and cold
of winter, A similitude.
and likewise the excessive and intemperate heat of the summer: even so a
conscience that is whole, and fully resolved, can bear stowtely all accide^ts,
without yielding or shrinking under the burden and weight of any thing what so
ever may happen unto it. An evil conscience a hell.
Co^trarywise an evil and sick conscience is a very hell, and there is
nothing in ye world that may more vex and tormente us. And as a good
conscience is as sugar to sweeten and mollify all our affections: even so ye
other is as sharp vinegre, which sowreth and troubles all our joys and
consolations: And moreover as the one is sufficient to resist all tentations:
even so ye other is soft, cowardly and vanquished as soon as it is assailed. It
is necessary therefore that as we are curious in looking to the health of our
bodies, observing for that purpose, the diete and government that is delivered
and appointed by the physician unto us, and co^trarywise abstaining from all
those meats, and excess which may offend and alter our health: even so that
we have the same desire and care to preserve that health of our souls, marking
diligently all the rules and ordinances of good life, which God the most high
and sovereign physician has appointed us, and taking heed on the other side,
to avoid and shun that, which he has prohibited and forbidden us.

Let us consider a little, what great pleasure and joy a man may have, who
returning home after a long iornie into his own house, finds there his wife,
who comes to take him about the neck, and embraces him, kissing and making
much of him: does not this make him by and by to forgette all his travel which
he has endured in his journey? as contrariwise, if he should find his wife
after his return brawling, riotous, froward, and who in sted of comforting
him, would all manner of ways vex and torment him, would not this increase
and double his pains and torments which he has suffered by the way? Even such
is ye estate of the conscience. Although that our enemies commit a thousand
outrages, violencies and villainies against us: If we returning from our selves,
and entering into our own conscience, find there one with a chereful and merry
countenance, which does comfort and content us, it makes us in a momente to
forgette all our enemies. But on the other side, if it be naught, it weryeth us
in such sort, yt we shall not find any house worse then our own, nor any place
where we may worse quiet our selves, Isai 28. 20.
then with our selves. Isaie says: yt an evil couscience is as a streighte
bed, A fine similitude.
in which a man can not stretch him self, nor turn him self at pleasure. It
is an hard thing for a man there to sleep well and to rest quietly: Likewise a
man which has a festred conscience, he can not find any place or condition to
content him, and which is not altogether to streighte for him. This is the
cause that David so often prays to God that he will set his imprisoned heart
at large, Psalm. 4. 2.
yt is to say, that he will show him this favor, that he may always have a
sound and upright conscience.

Now to ye end we may have such a conscience, The way to have a good conscience.
it behooves that it be will founded: and that it may be well founded, it is
requisite that ye only word of God be the foundation thereof: so as we make no
conscience, but to do those things that God has forbidden and to leave undone
those things that he has commanded. For as much as he that will stretch out
his conscience beyond this, knows not how to save him self, but that ranging
beyond the bounds of Gods word, he must have infinite scruples, which shall
vex him continually. And to be short, there is nothing in ye world more
pernicious, nor more to be feared, then to confound ye conscience about such
imaginatio^s, or about the commandments and traditions of men.

But here must be noted that the conscience and the peace of conscience are
things diverse, A difference betwixt the conscience and the peace of
conscience.
and that they have diverse foundacions. For the conscience (as has bin
already declared) is ruled by the law, that is to say, by the commandments,
and forbiddings of God. But ye peace of conscience, has for his foundation ye
Gospel, Jesus Christ only has satisfied the judgment of our conscience.
ye promises, the grace of Jesus Christ and his righteousness. And as there is
no other mean to answer to ye judgment of God, but ye righteousness and
innocency of Jesus Christ: eue^ so is it he alone which can stand us in sted to
satisfy ye judgment of our co^scie^ces. For if we look unto our works we
have our consciences streighte way vexed and disquieted with fear and distrust
of not having done our deutie, in not obaying God, nor keeping of his
commandments, as we were bound: which was the cause y^ S. Paul said, 1. Cor.
4. 4.
that he felt him self not culpable of any thing, but yet for this, he
thought him self not justified: to give us to understand: that there is
nothing yt can pacify our conscience, but ye only righteousness of Jesus
Christ, and not our own, which is always imperfect and defiled with many
filthes of our co^cupisce^ce, and by reason hereof cannot content our heart, nor
make us to take any pleasure in many of those things we have done or left
undone: but the blood, wounds and death, and the side of Jesus Christ opened
(as S. Bernard says) is that, which pacifieth the conscience, when as it would
thus torment and persecute us: Behold the freedom and refuge we have, where we
may retire to sauetie. To conclude then and here to make an end of this
treatise, the righteousness of Jesus Christ, is the only mean, whereby we are
justified before the judgment of God, of the law, of men, and of the
conscience.

FINIS.

