Heaven and Earth, Religion and Policy, OR, The maine difference between
Religion and Policy. Written by C. L.

Etiam and Sol.

Printed by H.B. for Ieffrey Chorlton, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
great North door of Paul's Church 1608.

The Contents of the Chapters.
1 Of Religion. Page 1. 2 Of Policy. 8.
Of their diverse workings:
3 In respect of the Cath. Church. 16. 4 Of the Clergy. 32. 5 Of State. 48 6
Of the Sovereign of State. 56 7 Of State Governors. 66 8 Of Subordinate
Governors. 75 9 Of Honor, Military, Of Honor, Courtly. 86 10 Of prosperous
Fortune. 100.
TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER in God, RICHARD, by divine providence Archbishop
of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, Chancellor of the
university of Oxford, and one of his Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
May it please your Grace:
I Humbly present you this Tract of Religion and Policy, wherein I acknowledge
the disproportion between the matter and the manner I give it. Yet because it
is a service of duty, it may therefore please your Grace to accept it.

The reason of my undertaking it, is the duty of Christian conscience, which
binds every man to some profitable performance. And because God has not yet
been pleased to give me particular place of service, wherein I might employ
his talent with more advantage, I (therefore) endeavor my self in such
travel wherein God may receive his part of honor, his servants their parts of
profit, and my self the discharge of Christian duty, all which respects are
the laws and restrictions of every lawful work.

The reason of dedication is the reverence your Grace does merit from all them,
who profess learning. In which number, though I be the meanest (in respect
both of Nature and Fortune) yet being bound with others, I (like them) both
declare and direct my self to your Grace in my labors of best performance.

Again, the fitnes of your place with this argument, does challenge the
dedication, because the execution of your high calling, is a continual
exercise of Religion and Religious Policy; the weapons and provident armor
whereby both Church and State are secured from ungodly practice: the which (as
your Grace best knows) has bin that murdering gunshot bent against the
truth of Religion, and the peace of Christian States.

For these respects I have both writ, and given this travel to your Grace,
humbly acknowledging my duty, and the meandness of my deserving.

Your Graces In all duty and humble service, Christopher Lever.


To the Reader.
IT is the common custom to entreat favor from courteous Readers: the
custom is not good, and therefore I use it not; for if the matter merit, or the
men be courteous, the suit of favor will be easily granted; if otherwise, it
is but a needelesse shame to beg a commendation where it is not. And therefore
I (willingly) leave to every man the liberty of his judgment, and expose this
Tract to general censure.

Faults escaped are corrected in the last Page.

Heaven and Earth, Religion and Policy. OR The maine difference between
Religion and Policy,
OF The undivided Nature of Religion. CHAP. I.
THE best Policy is Religion, and the best Religion is not politic, but
simple, pure, and without duplicitie. For as the uniting of many persons in one
Divinity, is the highest understanding of Gods Nature: so in the service of
God (Religion) unity is the best demonstration of the truth thereof. There is
but one way to heaven, bebecause but one Christ in heaven, by whom (and by whom
only) there is happy passage. This holy travail is called Religion, in whose
practice the choice of Gods creatures exercise their gifts of grace, the
induments of Gods sacred spirit.

2 Religion then is the holy exercise of Gods sacred worship, whose precise
form is appointed by God in the witness of holy Scripture. It is an exercise
for the pleasure, and for continual practice. It is holy, because God is the
object: the form is precise, for the singularity, and it is judged by the
Scripture, because they are the best, and the only witnesses of the will of
God.

3 As God is, so is Religion, one, and but one. For as plurality of Gods, so
plurality of Religions is Idolatry. For God being above all in every sense
of dignity, will have his service special, and peculiar to himself, by
himself appointed, and distinguished from all other orders of service.

4 The diverse names of Religions, are but names, and not Religions: as the
diverse names of Gods were not Gods but Idols. And this is worthy of note, that
these fabulous gods of the heathen were all of them (in their kind) servants
to the most supreme God, the Lord Jehovah. The Planets in their Spheres, the
Elements in their Nature, and all heavenly and earthly powers were servants to
the will of God, moving at his pleasure, who by their motion and influence,
did faithfully execute their offices whereunto they were assigned.

5 For there is a sense of Religion in the Nature of all creatures; who (though
they want instructions) will by their natural instinct apprehend the general
understanding of a God, and according to their discretions, frame such service
and ceremonies, as may please that supposed Deity. And from hence does arise
the number of fabulous superstitions and strange Religions, from the blind and
unlearned devotion of men merely natural: who being taught by the wisdom of
Nature, there was a God; would by a consequence of Reason conclude there must
be a Religion, a serving of that God: which they not understanding nor able to
comprehend without diuiue teaching, erred in their blind constructions, and so
believed and taught that for religion, which was most irreligious and ungodly.

6 Of all the creatures of God only man has failed in the knowledge of this
high mystery, who though his soul be of a substance most divine, and his
understanding more apprehensiue then many the rest of Gods creatures: yet he
(and not they) has failed in this weighty performance; and they (and not he)
have observed the law of Nature, which to them is the law of God, and the
exercise of their Religion. The heavens cast their influence upon earth, for
the generation of all creatures: the Elements perform their assigned offices,
who, though they have disagreeing Natures (the hot and cold, the moist and
dry, interchangeably fighting) yet (in this service of their God) they
conspire and friendly conioyne, and give both their natures and substances to
continue in the world a succession of living creatures. In like manner the rest
of Gods creatures, every thing in his order and Nature, performing the will of
God who made them.

7 The learning of Nature then can teach us the necessity, (and the undivided
Nature) of Religion: For the natural creatures deny all diversity in the
order of holy Religion. For in all the Creatures of God (save man) their Nature
is their Religion, against which they are not moved but by violence.

8 Again, uniformity in the order of Religion, is confirmed by the sentence
of every man's judgment. For though the world be at this day (and ever was)
divided into infinite number of opinions, every time, and every place of men
differing in their opinions of Religion: yet never any would defend plurality
of Religions: every man damning all diversity to that he himself maintained.

9 And therefore it is both the judgment of Nature, of Sense, and of
Divinity, that the true, ancient, and Catholic Religion, is of the same
nature with God, one, most absolute and sufficient, which needs no second,
neither can admit plurality.

Of the diverse natures of Policy. CHAP. II.
THE general name of Policy (like the double face of Ianus) respects two
several objects; the better has regardful eye to honesty, and lawful warrant
only, the other beholds all things with indifferent eye, not respecting
lawfulnes, but conueniency in every practice. The better is the care of good
men, the worse the care of evil men; the one does merit no allowance, the
other the best allowance of our favors; the one deserves to be damned, as a
violence to the order of good government: the other to be esteemed lawful and
most convenient in a Christian state, being a most godly providence, and a
strength without which no State can stand in the flourish of prosperous
fortune.

2 For a Christian common weal (and a Christian Church also) has often times
very needful use of Policy: the which may most lawfully be used, the Policy
being lawful and proportionable to the rules of Religion.

For Religion is like the Sun in the firmament, from which all living
creatures receive light and heat; and Policy may be compared to the Stars,
whose borrowed lights serve the necessities of men in many weighty occasions.
And as (at night) the Sun does leave us to the direction of the Stars: so
according to the necessity of time, we ought to resort to the Policy and
directions of wise men; especially then when our directors (like the Stars)
order us not by their own light, that is, by their own wisdoms, but after
the square of holy Religion; the which like the Sun is the body and
storehouse of all light, that is, of all truth and lawfulness.

This is not the common understanding of Policy, which is ever taken in the
evil and worse sense: whereby the name of lawful Policy does often times
receive much injury. For the evil shiftings of leaud men are called Policy,
not that they are so; but because their evil instruments are commonly men very
cautulous, of deep apprehension and great spirit.

For spirit, and the gifts of Nature, (in any one not gracious) cannot be
withheld from most dangerous and high attempting,: their spirits make them
bold, and their prompt understandings able to travel with dangerous fortune
in the affairs of highest state.

4 The abuse then of evil men, makes that have evil name, whose Nature is not
evil. For the providence of God is a most divine Policy, and the cares of
holy and good men, are likewise politic preuentions: whereby they both
lawfvlly and to good purpose exercise their wisdoms, ever observing that their
means and end where to the work be honest and allowable. Against this policy
I except not, but commend it rather, as the most necessary providence in the
best and wisest sort of people.

5 But from this I must distinguish that common exposition of Policy,
ungracious and dishonest contriuements, wherein the great politicians of the
world have proceeded so far, and with such variety of precept and example,
as would require more time then a man's life to understand them. In which sense
the whole world (almost) is become politic, some of every place, and of
every quality, coveting to be thought judicious, and of more then common
knowledge in this secret and forbidden Art; wherein it were much better to be
ignorant: insomuch as both the base and the ambitious Spirit, travel alike to
be learned in this kind of policy. And in the meanest and most unworthy
trades, there are many principles of this secret Art, whereby the base
professors (many times) raise themselves, and fortunes to a wonderful degree
of estimation. And this their speedy rising cannot be by honest and allowable
means; therefore by this Art of Policy, which howsoever they would craftily
excuse as the lawful secret of their trades (by themselves called crafts) yet
is that but a crafty cosening of their consciences, and a politic enriching
of their crafts.

6 And this is that unlawful Policy which in this place I understand: when the
subtle wits of crafty men contriue their subtilties, for the better
compassing of their unlawful purposes, or when men pursue lawful ends by
unlawful and dishonest means. And this in men of great place, and hie
attempting is called Policy. In the baser sort, cosenage or craft, the diverse
subjects giving diverse names to that which is of one Nature, wheresoever it be;
and that is sin, wickedness, and villainy.

7 It is therefore the circumstance in Policle, that makes the maine
difference in the Natures thereof. Policy being judged good, or bad, according
to the working means, and not according to event and prosperous fortune, an
opinion (not of Religious, but) of damned Policy: For it is not possible that
a good cause should produce a bad effect, but it is possible and very common,
that evil means do often reach their desired ends, which in the judgment of
profane Policy is commendable, but in the wisdom of Religion, it is
damnable and most unjustifiable.

8 Thus then I divide this name of Policy, into these disagreeing Natures.
Holy, and Profane. Holy Policy, is that which is justifiable by the law of
God: Profane is that which respects neither Religion, nor honesty; but
imbraceth the most base mean, if it may advantage the desired end. The better
policy is a servant, the worse is an enemy to the state of holy Religion. The
one does make Religion the level of all that purpose whereto it aymeth, the
other makes it a colorable means to reach other ends less godly. And these
two arein continual faction, the one offending, the other defending the state
of Religion.

Of the contrary workings of Religion and Policy, in respect of the Catholic
Church. CHAP. III.
IT is most true, that there is no excellency on earth, which does not suffer
wrong by the envy of evil. For though virtue cannot be suppressed by the
opposition of vice, yet is it many times much obscured by so bad a
neighborhood: and like the Sun in his eclipse withheld from glorious
appearing. And this is natural in the natures of all evil things, to malign
the prosperity of goodness in what special subject soever it be. This may be
also a special observation from the Nature of all things, that whatsoever is
virtuous, is directed by rules, and by lawful directions: and whatsoever is
vicious is not thus directed, but helps it self by the cunning workings of
Policy, and bad practice.

2 For God (in the first creation) made the world, and the infinite variety of
his creatures like a consort of so many conspiring parts: yet has the curse of
sin interrupted that universal harmony, whereby the world is now in
disagreeing parts and discord.

3 For before that sin made this alteration in the state of things, there was
no opposition but all things conspired the glory of God, with general consent
and acclamation: and then virtue was not bounded between two extremities,
neither had good any opposition of evil, there being neither vice, nor evil
in the frame of Gods creation. But with sin has this opposition entered, and
in the fullness of time, and not before, it shall be ended.

4 From this first cause is derived the wicked trade of evil Policy, wherein
many men exercise their best: and most forcible endeavors with such appetite
and pleasure, as if the practice were honest, holy, and meritorious. Neither
do these men travel less in these vanities then the most painful in their
exercise of holiness and Religion; yet with much unequal success, and with
much diverse workings.

The maine difference is in their ends, whereto they direct their labors*
Religion respects Heaven, Policy the Earth. There is great difference also
in their means by which they work, and compass their ends: the one being
tied to a necessity of justness; the other not limited by any law, takes
liberty upon all occasions. And to one of these two do all the understanding
men in the world apply themselves, either to Religion, or to Policy, either to
be good, or to be great, in the little number of their days here on earth.

5 And though Gods sacred worship be ordered by most certain directions from
God himself; yet have men dared to touch this holy Arc with their profane
hands, and to intermeddle their folly with the wisdom of God, altering the
most allowable forms of holy order, whereby they judge their Judge of
indiscretion, and contradict the spirit and power of him who made them.

6 These ungodly workings are caused by the vainglorious spirits of men, who
affecting popularitie and greatness have not spared to violate the most holy
ordinance of God, whereby to advantage them in their evil ends. For the whole
world is a general free-schoole, wherein al Sciences, and every Art is both
taught and learned. The highest learning in this school is Divinity; the
whole number of the professors whereof, make the militant Catholic church,
where there is continual teaching, and living in the rules of holy Religion.
Against this learning has the world opposed it self: and according to the
order of schools begun their envy with sophistry and cunning disputation.
And this was in the first years of the primitive Church, the which opposition
being but weak, yet valiantly resisted gained the Church a greater reputation,
though that enemy could never yet be silenced.

7 The second attempt against the Catholic Church was persecution; and this
was in the time of the Tyrant Emperors, the which was continued with such
vehemence and fury, as if the sacred fire of Religion had been extinguished,
and the face of the Catholic Church for ever defaced. These times were like
the time of Ahab King of Israel, when as Elias thought the whole body of the
Church remained only in his particular life. A most wonderful distress that
the most sacred spouse of Christ should for security fly to the holy Temples
of the holy Ghost, and there take Sanctuary, and live in the persons of some
few particular men only. It had been most wonderful had not the Lord Jesus
himself done more wonderfully, and suffered a greater extremity, even death,
and a cursed death upon the Cross; even so Lord Jesus, because it was thy
pleasure. But this extremity did vanish with time, and then again the Church
obtained the Garland.

8 But the nature of evil which cannot be satisfied, would yet again attempt
against the Catholic Church: and whereas before neither persuasion, nor force
could prevail, the last and strongest practice is policy, where with these
evil ministers have prevailed more, then by all other manner of attempts
whatsoever. This is that secret injury, who as K. David says, eats his
bread at his table, yet seeks to destroy him. For so do many of these
Politicians who live by the profits of the Church, yet betray the Church and
spoil her of her highest ornaments.

9 And though I be most far from that damned opinion of Athiesme, that Religion
is nothing but a Policy, whereby the liberty of men is restrained from the
violence of their natures, yet I am most certainly persuaded, that in the
common exercise of Religion may be learned the highest understanding of most
dangerous practices. And that the Catholic Church of God, (which in it self
is most holy and without imputation) has endured the greatest violence that
can be in any men of place and dignity in this holy order, being men least
affected to holiness of life, but most dangerous and deep practisers in this
forbidden Art of wicked Policy.

10 Neither ought this to hinder the true worth and reputation of Gods Church,
that evil men work their bad dessigne under the pretense of so sacred a
presence. For we know that the very deity of GOD is not free from men's
presumptions: the proud and the ambitious men of the world having dared to
create many deities, and many Gods: sometimes the stars sometimes stones,
wood, and metals, sometimes the figures of beasts, and sometimes (a matter
more vile,) themselves a deity worse then beasts: all which though they were
most horrible and damned in such as wrought them; yet did not their impieties
(any whit) detract from the Majesty of God, which cannot receive violence from
any man's evil practice.

11 So the state of the true Catholic Church, though men have dared to offer
injuries to the most holy orders thereof, to misinterpret and misapplie her
most divine mysteries, to intrude among her sacred teachings, positions, and
doctrines, not only diverse, but adverse to her orthodoxall and most ancient
true principals: nay to obscure (as much as man may) the very divinity of
that mother of us all, that true Jerusalem, by making the state of that most
sacred State, the travel of Policy, and the exercise of most ungodly designs:
yet ought we not for this to condemn or judge the Church: but evil men, who
are the cause of these profane injuries, the holy Church being of like divine
nature as Christ Jesus, her most holy husband, whom though his enemies place
with thieves and malefactors, yet was he most just, most innocent, and most
meritorious. And though the most precious metal of Truth be intermingled with
dross, and gross metals, yet the Spirit of wisdom can divide them, and the
trial of holy Scriptures (like the touchstone) will discover all
sophistication, and distinguish Truth from Error, and Religion from Policy.

12 Catholic Religion is the base or foundation whereupon the Catholic
Church consists: the Religious Policy is the supporter of that body of
Religion: but politic Religion is an enemy most adverse, both to Religion and
religious Policy. And this is a grounded and a most familiar judgment to
distinguish these different Natures by their denominations. For religious
Policy is most lawful, most convenient, but politic Religion is most
unlawful and inconvenient.

13 The necessary use of Religion in the Catholic Church is not disputable,
being a truth of general grant: for as our natural bodies cannot live or move
without our souls, so the sacred body of the Church cannot be the living
Spouse of Christ, if she be not inspired and moved by Religion the soul of
the Catholic Church, whereby, and wherein every member of that mystical body
does move to his perfection.

14 The lawful use of Christian Policy in the Catholic Church, is
prevention: for whatsoever is required of a christian to do, is prescribed in
the rules of holy Scripture: but the rules of preventing evil, is rather left
to the advised judgment of Christian Policy, there being no other rules for
that but honesty and lawful warrant, because of the much variety of men's
practices, which require variable and many diverse preuentions. And therefore
has the wisdom of God left this care without rule to the wisdom of men,
with this restriction only: that the purpose and means of every work be
conformed to the judgment of Religion against which there is no excuse or
exception.

15 Religion, and Religious Policy then are not only of conueniency, but of
necessity in the Catholic Church. Religion does direct how we our selves
should do well; Religious Policy, does likewise teach us how to prevent the evil
deeds of our own, and Gods enemies. And these are the two needful hands (not
only of the Church, but of every particular holy man in the Church,) whereby
good works are wrought and evil works prevented; and whatsoever conspires not
with these, conspires against God, against the Catholic Church, and against
the lawful use of Christian Policy. There is also a policy in the Church, and
not of the Church, and this is enemy to the former; the which two (like
children of diverse fathers) live in one house with implacable displeasure; and
this is made known by his effects, for by his working means it is not easily
discovered by reason of dissimulation and false pretense, which in this
politic regard is most regarded.

16 This has precedent in those churches of Christian name, whose integrity
is either lost or defaced, and whose discipline is made a mixture of holy and
profane posititions, where the pretenses and purpose utterly disagree; men
shawd^ing their ungodly ends with most fair and holy intendments. And this is
the error of those politic Christian Churches; that whereas there is but one
object of all divine Service (which is God) they have many objects, and many
ends, for their directions; making vile purposes to share with God in the
exercise of his Service.

17 And from this one ground is the cause of every inconvenience in Christian
Churches, when the glory of God is not principally, but respectively
considered; whereof proceeds, that canons, ordinances and the decrees of
Ecclesiastical States look with double eyes upon two several objects,
greatness and goodness, the first of choice, the other for conueniencie, or
necessary circumstance, whereby they would conioyne these in participation,
which are most different both in their natures and in the order of Nature. For
as the distance between Heaven and Earth, so (and much more) is the difference
between God and this world; Truth and Error, Religion and Policy.

18 Therefore in the Catholic Church, Religion is of sovereign necessity.
Religious Policy is likewise necessary and of much conuenience. But politic
Religion is not only unuseful in the Church of God: but of necessity to be
excluded from all holy exercise.

In respect of the Clergy. CHAP. IIII.
THe word of God (divine Scripture) is subject both to false construction, and
misapplicatio^. The church of God is not free from the enemies both of truth
and peace: the officers in the holy orders of the Church are not free from
their stains and inputations, whereby they debase the dignity of their
reverend places, and expose their estimation to common reproach; therefore (as
in all) so in them also and in their profession, there are these two diverse and
disagreeing natures of Religion and Policy.

2 Every man is bound by his Christian place, to the duty of Region; but
Clergy men are more strictly bound, being men of special choice, select and
dedicate to God and his service only, and therefore is their obligation double,
and their condition restrained from that liberty, which either is lawful, or
not so faulty in others as in them.

3 For (as the holy offering, so) these holy offerers, ought to be unspotted,
vnblamed, and vnbleamisht, even the fairest and the best of all Gods creatures,
to whom he has assigned offices of highest estimation; making them mediators
to his only mediator, and cotinuall waiters in his presence: by whom he does
confer his gifts of grace, and the hope of heaven.

4 Such ought all to be (and such are many) in this holy order, whose lives
conform the condition of their calling; who not regarding earthly
considerations, fix their eyes only on God, attending all occasions to
demonstrate their duty and diligence in their high and chargable calling. For
howsoever (in the base estemation of most base people,) that reverend place is
disgracefully reputed, because profane men judge a holy cause, enuiously, and
not deseruingly, yet in true understanding it is much otherwise, they being
inferioures to no degree or dignity on earth; (save the supreme authority of
the Prince which represents the majesty of God; and (by much,) exceeding al
in the worth of their labors, and in the purpose of their holy business.

5 Men of holy order thus affected, are the very mappes of Religion, and
Religious Policy, from whose lives may be learned what Religion is, whose
examples may serve for the rules of holiness, and for demonstarions, to point
out the direct passage to everlasting happiness.

6 For there is this difference between divine and humane offices; all humane
service is tied to attend conueniencie and the opportunity of times; but
divine service has employment at all times, and upon all occasions: and
therefore is a strict holiness of life required in Churchmen, because their
lives must persuade and teach Religion, that what they deliver at once in their
preaching, they may always example it in their living, whereby their divine
office is held in continual practice, benefiting the Catholic Church at all
times, and upon all occasiones.

7 And this is that Religious duty required in men of Religious place, to
which strictnes every man in holy orders is bound of necessity and more then
others: For as in the affairs of earthly state, such as are nearest the person
of their prince in favor and place, and attend those state offices of higest
consideration, do take that charge and those honors with solemn oath and
protestation, to be assured and diligent in the trust commended to them; so in
these spiritual affairs of greater consequence, there is no man has
entertainmet in such business, before he protest and vow his continual and
utmost indeauor, whereby he does solemnly indent with God, and bind himself
to the due execution of his Christian office.

8 Religion then in Religious men, is not of conueniencie only, but of
necessity; necessary in all degrees of men, but of double use in the Clergy:
for (besides the particular profit which redounds to him that is religious,) it
gains much reverence, and great authority from general reputation; and
gives good testimony of the truth of such doctrine as from such men shall be
delivered. For there is no better way to gain credit to what we persuade, then
by conforming our works to our words, fetching example from our own lives to
confirm our own doctrine.

9 To be thus affected is the necessary condition of every pastoral office,
whose directions must tend only (and always) at the glory of God; without
affecting the glory, or the profits of this life: yet may religious men be
(lawfully) the owners, both of wealth and dignity, but with purpose only to
make them serve a more necessary service, and supply the occasions of holy
purpose.

10 For God has made all things for his own glory; neither does the having of
Gods earthly blessings, hinder any in his holy resolution, if he himself be
holy and resolute. For if his resolution be holy, and his purpose resolute,
there is nothing able to remove such constancy, and then prosperous fortune
does not hinder but forward a Christian resolution. For wealth and the dignity
of high place, are the gifts of God, wherewith he does reward the services of
men, and therefore good men enjoy them of right; but evil men by usurpation.
There is this difference also in the owners of earthly blessings; that good men
have them given, but evil men take them, either by force or fraud, the latter
sort make them their utmost desired end whereto they aspire; the former make
them serviceable means only, to attend and forward better purposes. In the
better they are but servants to Religious service, in the worse they are
instruments of evil Policy.

11 And these prouocations are so powerful in man's nature, as that every
degree of humane life has received some infection from that poison: even the
holiest rank of men, whose places are (and ever have been) of most reverend
estimation, men of religious name and place, who have abiurde the vanities of
this life, and have dedicate themselves and their endeavors to God, and godly
cares only; even many of these men lose their lawful aim and shoot at such
marks they ought not to level at: making Religion but to shadow Policy, and
their good place to countenance their bad practice.

12 This affection in these men is dangerous, and a most desperate
inconvenience in many considerable respects. First the service of God is
thereby prevented. Secondly their pastoral function is neglected, whereby the
souls of many thousands are in danger. Thirdly their reverend profession does
receive scandal. Fourthly the peace and prosperity of State is interrupted.
Lastly the most desperate hazard of their souls, is desperately ventured: which
assuredly must answer all neglect and all colorable practice, in the strict
observance of their religious office.

13 And though the danger be most certain, and the threats most terrible,
denounced by God himself against al offenders in that kind; and though (in
respect of their knowledge) they have best understanding, what the dangers is
of such offense: yet so strong is vile sin in man's nature, that these vowed
and professed enemies of sin, are oftentimes vanquished by these mean
temptations; and suffer their spiritual courage to be daunted with base
encounter.

14 And this is most wonderful, that such as know this danger, will
notwithstanding run desperately to most assured destruction: damning themselves
with their own consent, and with the judgment of their own knowledge. That
such as be Gods Ambassadors, and bear the message of eternal life; Such as
stand in Gods presence to mediate and to make atonement for the sins of many,
yet forget themselves in a care of most importance; such as dispose the
spiritual favors of Gods mercy, breathing abundance of grace with their holy
teaching, yet themselves barren of all grace, and of all such particular
application. The cause of this contrary disposition of name and nature in many
of Religious place, is not to be found in the search of reason; being an
inserutable secret in the secret will of God.

15 Such unfortunate men are they, who having undertaken the most serious of
all services, (the service of the Almighty) binding themselves in a double
obligation, their vow of Baptism, and the vow of their profession; dare, (and
do) notwithstanding infringe their serious promise, and fall off from the
service and charge they have undertaken. And such are all they who enter
religious place, and assume that reverend form, for any by-respect, either of
profit or preferment, or for any other cause, then such as may directly
conspire the glory of God, and the advancement of his Church, which is the
utmost end of every Christian office.

16 Such men do not proportion the reverence of their place, neither can merit
the recompense of their service. But as their name and nature utterly disagree;
so their place and merit shall have no proportion: for God will discover their
hypocrisy; and judge them according as they are, and not as they seem to be:
for howsoever they bear the name and forms of Religious men, yet have such
nothing of Religion but the name: they themselves being in their purpose
wicked, and in their Religion politic.

17 This unlawful and wicked Policy in men of Religious name and dedication,
is in their purpose, in their practice, and in their preaching* in all which
many men offend and declare themselves Politic and not Religious. Policy in
the purpose of Clergy men, is either when they compass those reverend places
by indirect means; or when they propose private ends, or ungodly purposes. The
first sort are all they who intrude themselves into that sacred calling by
favor, friend, insinuation, or base barganing: all which enter uncalled, and
therefore want the promise of divine assistance. The latter fort are such, who
undertake that serious charge (not with purpose to discharge the duty of the
place) but only to gleane the profits which from thence arise; whereby they
enjoy plenty and easy life; wherein they place felicity: and wherewith their
base desires are satisfied.

18 Policy in practice, is when men abandon the care of their Religious
offices: to travel in the affairs of politic State: and of this sort there
are hot and cold practitioners. The cold are they who continue a general
estimation of holiness, with which mist they blind the common eye, covering
their politic designs with the mantle of holiness and fair pretense. The
hot politician Priest shames not to discover himself, and his politic
intendments; entering the field of disputation, to conclude by argument the
lawfulnes of his most unlawful trade of life. And such are all they, who
travel (not in the consultations of State) but in the plotting, attempting,
and finishing of State designs: whereby murders, asasinates, and the most
desperate attempts against Christian States, and Christian Governors of States,
are by them both invented and attempted.

19 Policy in preaching, is when such labor has not Religious but Politic
ends: and this is either in false doctrine or false purpose. Policy in false
doctrine, is when men in their preachings maintain false positions, such as
being credited of the vulgar may gain them their unlawful end: whether it be
profit, pleasure, reputation, or the envy of others: all which respects have
had place in the holy seats of Pulpits. And those reverend places are by evil
men thus used, because of the great authority they have to persuade the faith
and force of all men. The Policy of false purpose in preaching, is when men
deliver truth of doctrine, but with false intention, having regard to private
ends more then to public profiting. And such is that plausable teaching,
wherewith the giddy people are wonderfully delighted, when men affect a
singularity, and proud themselves in the vanity of popular favor, with which
poison many learned and diligent preachers have bin tainted.

20 All these (and every one of these) in their kind fail in the maine
execution of their Religious office, whose precise rules lead men to Godward
by direct lines, and not by circular. Thus we see that the ways from God are
many, but the way to God is but one; happy are they who tread that path: for
though the world busy it self about many things, there is but one thing
necessary: that is Religion.

In respect of State. CHAP. V.
IT is needful we distinguish Heathenish from christian States, because of
their disagreeing forms of government. It is needful also to distinguish
christian States, as they are divided, and to understand such a Christian
Commonwealth, as lives in unity with the Catholic Church of God, and in the
exercise of true Religion: because such a State does square out her form of
government by religious rules, and not by the judgment of sense and politic
advice only; for the States of infidels are directed by politic reason
only, because they respect greatness without goodness. The States of Politic
Christians, are ordered by the rules both of Religion and Policy, compounding
their government of this unequal mixture: but the States of best Christians,
have only one director, (who is God) by whose revealed will they are in every
circumstance of State commanded.

2 And though Religion be the Mistres in every true Christian State by whose
directions the whole government is ordered: yet there is a lawful and a
Christian Policy, which is Hand-maide and faithful servant to this Mistres; by
whom she is faithfully attended in many needful considerations: Whatsoever
policy (therefore) is conform to the judgment of Religion, is not to be judged
an enemy, but a servant in a Christian State: but if at any time that servant
Policy offend the mistress of the house, which is Religion, Policy then (with
Hagar) must be banished the house of faith, (and with her evil fruit) travel
the wilderness.

3 And by this only rule we may discern all true Christian States from all
diversity, for if Religion be the mistress and command the State, that state is
(undoubtedly) the true form of Christian government; but if Policy be either
the Mistress and command Religion; (as in heathen States) or that Policy be a
fellow wife with Religion as in many Christian States, it is not possible that
state can have true Christian government: For Religion is like God, who can
admit no competitor, and though it could, yet where sovereignty is divided to
two equals, there is continual occasion of quarrel, and a continual slaughter
of peace. For the confusion of order does (of necessity) arise from diversity
of directions.

4 Religion then must in all true Christian states solely command; Policy
likewise is to be admitted in Christrian Sates if it be Religious: If not,
there is no consideration can make it lawful; but ought by all possible means
to be avoided; as the poison of a State, and as the capital enemy to Religion
and Religious Policy.

5 But from hence may seem to rise a doubt of much difficulty; by what
special rules the lawfulnes or vnlawfullnes of Policy may be judged; because
that many Christian* States utterly disagre in their judgment of lawful
Policy, every commonwealth and every kingdom, defending the lawfullnes of
such Politic practice, as is then in profitable use, whereby the advancement
of their prosperous fortunes, is any way furthered, or the spoil of their
enemies occasioned.

6 To this I answer, that howsoever the practices of all times, and of every
people have had some defense to give them a coulorable show of lawfulness: and
though in our times the most damned politic proiects, have found friends to
excuse them, approving most damned conspiracy, in canonising the conspirators:
yet is such Iudgementrespectiue, and not truly delivered, such being corrupt
judges, who behold these monstrous crimes with favorable eyes, and sparing
judgment.

7 Therefore to avoid all partiality, let the infallible rule of Gods word
determine this controversy. Yet even in that there is doubt because of the
variable constructions of that sacred authority, every man giving Gods word a
sense to his own liking, whereby the doubt is less resolved, and the truth
wrapped up in the folds of much controversy. It is therefore the best and the
most impartial judgment, to judge every cause by his effect, and these
Policies by their ends to which they level; for if to goodness, they will then
proportion their Policies to honesty and lawful warrant: but if to greatness,
or to any other sinister respect, their Policy is evil; and will be apparently
judged by Religious judgment.

8 There is also this wisdom in the wisdom of Christian States; that
howsoever the limbs of unlawful Policy ought not to have being in the body of
any Christian State, because of the dissimilitude and aduersenes between that
and Religious Policy, yet it is most needful that Christian States be
furnished with such choice instruments of State, as may have understanding in
the most secret knowledge of every State practice, how unlawful soever; for
that evil cannot be prevented which is not known, and men may safely know
that which they may not practice: for evil may be in the knowledge of any man,
but it is only in the practice of bad men.

9 Therefore in all consultations of State, Religion must be our Star, from
which we must receive our direction: and by whose judgment we ought to
understand what is convenient or lawful, and what is not in a Christian
Commonwealth. Religious Policy also has most needful employment in Christian
States; and therefore the best, and the best ablemen in kingdoms and States
have that provident care assigned them, being a wisdom above the reach of
common capacity: wherewith God is pleased, his Church advanced, kingdoms
continued in reputation and greatness: which without such providence would (like
vnrepiared building) rotte and ruin in their decay.

10 But all the tricks of evil Policy (like so many. Traitors to God, to his
Church, and to all Christian society) ought to be banished the confines of
every Christian place, and to be excluded the consultations of reverend and
honorable Senators, and to have place only in their knowledge, but never in
their consent and practice.

In respect of the Prince of sovereign of State. CHAP. VI.
T The Prince is the Sovereign or principal of every State: by whom the laws
have authority, and the life of execution. And therefore these respects are
most considerable in his person: on whose good or evil disposition the good or
evil fortunes of a kingdom depends. Every Prince in his kingdom, being the
helm by which the whole body is moved and enforced to move as he is moved.
For Princes are the precedents of God in respect of universal power and
general obedience. For as God the King of all the world, does move all
occasions in the world at his pleasure: altering, translating, and
establishing, according to his divine wisdom: even so kings here on earth,
(the petite resemblances of God:) alter and confirm (at their pleasure) within
their own liberty and jurisdiction: bineding their subjects to conformity and
general consent.

2 And for this cause they are called Gods: because (like God) they have
general power over the States of all their subjects. And as the dignity of a
Prince does worthily challenge a prerogative over all degrees of men: so in
them there is a natural descent of noblenes and pregnancy of spirit, whereby
they are made fit to manage those weighty and great occasions which are common
in the care of their government.

3 Therefore in them there is most sovereign use of Religion and Religious
Policy, without which they cannot discharge the duty of their kingly office to
God, supply the necessities of their kingdoms, nor support their kingly
reputations. All which necessary service has been the practice and pleasure
of all Religious Kings of former times, and will be in the race of holy Kings
for ever.

4 If then I be demanded what is first and principally required in the person
of a Prince, I will answer, Religion: if what is next, I will answer,
Religion: if I be still further urged, I would still answer, Religion; for
that must be the first, the middle, and the last of all his cares, and that
principal whereupon his kingly building can only have sure foundation.

5 Religion then is the necessary in the person of every Christian Prince; all
other cares being but seconds and subordinate to this one most absolute: for
therefore are kings, Potentates, and Superiors ordained of God, and therefore
have they authority of superintendance over multitudes of people (not for
themselves or for their own glory, but) for the service of their master and
supreme sovereign, who has given them these dignities for the service of holy
Church, that by their authority men may be forced to the obedience of holy
Religion; and that the disobedience of their people may be reduced under a
Civil and a Christian government: and therefore are Kings and Queens called
the nurse-fathers and mothers of the Catholic Church, because their National
Church and every child of grace in that Church lives under their tuition and
their protection: for which they are countable before Gods tribunal.

6 Again Religion is not only of necessity in the person of a Prince, but of
Religious Politic consequence also; for that Prince or Potentate who is
truly Religious, has not only for his recompense the rewards of heaven
(which notwithstanding does abudantly satisfy more then any man's desert) but
also all other temporal blessings do (of necessity) depend upon the fortunes
of him that is Religious. And therefore peace, plenty, honor, victory, all
these, or as much of these as in the wisdom of God is thought convenient for
their happiness, are always found in the fortunes of holy Princes: to whom God
does apply himself and the largenes of his bounty, when they apply themselves
to God, and to the service of Catholic Religion. And this is conform to that
Judgment of divinity: First seek the kingdom of God, and all other blessings
shall be cast upon thee.

7 As Religion is most necessary, so Religious Policy is much required in the
person of a Prince, because every Christian kingdom consists of two States,
Ecclesiastical and Civil: the which like a body and a soul are united and
made one State under the government of one absolute Prince. And as the natural
body and soul of a man, live not by one and the same means, though both
participate their several blessings: So in the State of Christian kingdoms,
the Church is the soul, the State is the body, whereof is compounded a
Christian kingdom. And therefore is it a special wisdom in the discretion
of Princes, to order this soul, and this body of State by proper and peculiar
directions. For many things are needful in the Church, which are not in the
State, and many things lawful in the State, which are not in the Church, the
State having (by much) a greater liberty in her directions.

8 For the State then it is needefully required, that the Prince be Politic,
and have understanding in secrets of most curious search; wherein he must be
moderated by his Christian judgment, that no unlawful Policy enter further
then his knowledge, whereby his Kingly reputation should be stained with
ungodly practice. And therefore whatsoever is evil must be only known: and
whatsoever is good must be only practiced: especially with Kings, whose seats
are above all men, because they ought to be nearest God in sanctimonious life,
being nearest him in place: and because, all men's eyes are upon them, and every
man's desire is to fashion them.

9 For me to advise a Prince and to give directions, would assuredly be thought
presumption, because flattery, and fear, have corrupted the writings of many
men: most men applauding the fortunes of the present times, how unfortunate so
ever: and flatering the Prince under whom they live in the exercise of much
unlawfulness. Whereby such writers deny God, deny their acknowledgement of
Truth: and deny that service to their King and Nation, whereby both King and
kingdom might be benefitted; of which base fear I will ever be innocent. And
therefore I would boldly declare my judgment even in this particular; but that
the Christian labor, of a Christian King has prevented me: whose learned
judgment and kingly experience has made him better able to advise (in all
such directions) then my self, or then any man (I think) this day living.

10 These things ought a Prince to do. Now what he ought not to do, must be
considered, which briefly is but this; that his proceedings in the
administration of his kingly office, be not unjustifiable before God and
Conscience, that in his consultations of State; and in the exercise of Arms,
(wherein there is inevitable necessity of Policy, and stratagemes) there be not
admitted an unlimited liberty of all Policy, whereby the cause without the
effect, and the effect without the cause is barely considered: but that God may
be still in the eye of all such business; and that the judgment of Religion
may determine all State consultations, what is, or what is not lawful in every
work of State.

11 And therefore (of ancient it is) that in the State counsels of Christian
kingdoms, Religious men, either Archbishops, or Bishops have had, (and have)
precedence in all such honorable assembly of States men, because their
judgments might determine the lawfulnes or unlawfulness of such Policies as in
that assembly of Senators were propounded. Therefore in every action, and in
every consultation of State, wherein there is necessary use of Policy, it is
most needful that the Prince declare himself Religious; and that he judge
every practice; and every Policy by lawfulnes and not by conueniencie only.

In respect of State Governors. CHAP. VII.
IN this particular of State Governors, it may seem that not Religion but
Policy is most considerable; because in their common business of State (wherein
they have continual travel) they commonly encounter with many Politic and
desperate designs in the secret practice of their State enemies. Against which
practice, their wisdoms advise upon such Politic preuentions as may best
frustrat the evil purpose of their enemies. And therefore it may seem that
the service of their place, does challenge a liberty in the use of all Policy,
being to encounter with politicians, and practices of all Natures.

2 To which I answer, that there is no such necessity of evil Policy, in
these worthy Senators of States, for evil is not to be resisted with evil,
but with goodness: neither is Religious Policy so defective, as to be supplide
with ungodly practice, or not of it self to furnish the wisdoms of men with
sufficient strength against al unlawful attempts and all pestilent
contriuements.

3 And therefore (as all men, so) Statesmen are bound within the limits of
honesty and lawful warrant, beyond which there is no Policy or practice can be
lawful. This strictnes of lawful Policy, is the square wherewith every
Religious Statesman in the world does fashion all his Policies; in which
conscionable consideration, there is both piety, and Policy: piety in
conforming obedience to holy rule; and Policy, in observing such order in their
counsels as may make the practice fortunate and assured; because that God does
ever forward the lawfulnes of proceeding, but does often oppose his power
against injurious and unlawful Policies.

4 Neither is it of any persuasion, that the great Politicians of the world,
not only practice, but publish unlawful Policies, framing arguments of
conueniency to conclud against the testimony of God, and Religion, because such
men (howsoever of Christian name) were notwithstanding of heathenish judgment
and of devilish disposition; in whom and in whose judgment may be observed
this most gross error; that whereas all the travels of State, are only
services done for the State of Religion; they would have Religion with all
other occasions, serve for the advancement of State. By which most injurious
and wicked judgment, they would depose the King to advance the subject, and
divorce the wife to marry the maid: but as themselves, so their reason is
wicked and senseless; for as the soul does exceed the body in the dignity of
their Natures, so does the Church the State, and so does Religion Policy.

5 It is also very worthy of note that the ancient Romans, (a people most
famous for civil government) in the time of their Aristocracie, being
governed by Consuls and Senators, had (in all their great affairs of State) a
precise regard to honesty; and that no dishonorable practice might ever
disgrace the trophy of their victories. And this scruple they were taught by
the wisdom of nature, and by their great experience in civil government. And
therefore in them it was strange and worthy, that having no divine law, but the
law of nature (only) to instruct them, yielded themselves notwithstanding to
this obedience, whereto they were not forced, but only by their own election.
And this their natural devotion to the law of nature, may judge and condemn
all dishonorable and dishonest practice in the Christian world.

6 And though the Christian world be full of example which have devised and
practiced proiects of most fearful remembrance; and though many of these
practisers have been men of State in Religious States: yet is that of no
persuasion to corrupt the noble and Religious affection of Religious governors
of States, because discreet men live not by example but by rule, for rule is
ever constant and certain, but custom and examples are not, but shift their
fashion according to men's diverse dispositions. And therefore such examples are
like Sea-markes, which allure not the provident passengers to approach, but to
shun them rather; and by these evil examples of bad men are good men
admonished, and resolved in their honest and godly resolutions.

7 Therefore in the strictnes of conscience, every Counselor of State, and
every politic instruction of every Counselor is bound with certain
limitations, beyond which they cannot go without offense. For if the Policy he
advises respect the Church and the State of Religion; such Policy must either
directly, or by necessary consequence intend the glory of God; otherwise the
Policy is bad practice, and the Politician wicked.

8 Again, if the Counselor advise in matter of State and civil government,
in such advice there must be charity, lest for some ungodly respect they advise
not the profit, but the calamity of many thousands: such was the Counsel
Rehoboham had given him by his young politicians.

9 Lastly, if the counsel we give concern our enemies; yet there is a mercy
even in that respect: for in every man of godly disposition, there is a
gracious pity which will dissuade (not the damage, but) the destruction of our
enemies. The want of this pity was punished in that devilish politic
counsel of Hammon, who because his revenge was bloody; had therefore God for
his enemy and his destruction.

10 In respect of Governors of State then, Religion and Policy are most
considerable: Religion being the utmost end, whereto they direct their lawful
Policies: and good Policy, the means whereby their Religious States stand and
flourish in prosperous reputation. And undoubtedly the truth of Christian
Religion (in all christian States) may be argued from the observation of their
State practice; and from the lawful proceeding of Politic government.

11 For if the Politic State be found guilty of dishonorable practice; it
lays an imputation and jealousy on the State of Religion: but if the
politic State be justifiable in her proceedings, it argues the iustnes and
truth of the State of Religion: because where the State is not tempted to
evil, which is much more subject to such temptation; it is of great
likelihood that the Church is untainted, and in the State of truth and holy
discipline.

12 And in this respect has God been favorable to this Nation beyond
comparison: having given it such Sovereigns of State, and State governors as
no Christian Nation can out-glory it; descending still a succession of both
sorts of Governors, principals and secondaries; whereby both States of Religion
and Religious Policy flourish in this kingdom in their lawful and Religious
exercise.

Of Subordinate Governors in the common affairs of State. CHAP. VIII.
SVbordinate Governors in the State, are Judges, Justices, and their inferior
officers, who by reason the executions of their offices depend upon certain
Satutes and State directions, are therefore bound to a strictnes of justice,
from which they rightfully cannot wander, and therefore in the just discharge
of their offices, they have nothing at their own election: but are tied by
necessity to judge and determine as the law shall lead them. Therefore in them
there is little use of Policy, because the service of their place is execution,
and not invention: to do as they are directed, and not to direct how to do.
For the wisdom of Policy is direction, but the life of justice is execution.

2 For as every action of our bodies receive directions from the soul how to
move, how to speak, how to work; and according to such direction is every
action formed: so the subbordinate Magistrate, does nothing of himself but as
his superiors direct him, they giving him rules and proportions to command and
restrain him.

3 For the King is the head of every body Politic; his Counselors of State,
are those divine faculties in the head: reason, understanding, judgment, etc.
By whose directions the whole body is ordered and disposed: the isntrumental
parts, such as the eyes, the hands, the feet, etc. resemble subordinate
officers, who administer and execute, as the head directs them. The truncke or
bulk of the body is the vulgar, who communicate the profits of the whole body;
yet in respect of government, they are merely passive, having divine and
humane laws, (and their officers) to order them, in every circumstance of
their life.

4 Thus ought every body Politic to be disposed, every difference of degree
observing just proportion, as God, as Nature, and as Order has disposed them.
Therefore in subordinate officers of State, there is a duty of conformity,
which commands them as they command inferiors: whereby the liberty of evil
affected men is restrained from much injurious violence, which authority would
give to bloody, or ambitious Natures.

5 For in men not rightly affected, there is no Heaven, no Hell, no wound of
conscience so powerful to correct and withhold from injury, as penalty and
severe law, because they are but doubtfully, but this certainly believed, and
therefore is it a special providence of State, to limit all subordinate
authority; and to leave nothing to liberty and common discretion, wherein
would be disorder and confusion, but to give authority with limits and
restrictions commanding both the matter and the manner of every lawful
proceeding in a Commonwealth.

6 In inferior magistracy then, there is not that needful use of much
policy, as in Sovereign and State authority, a faithful diligence being
principally required in their service to do only that which they are directed.
And this was seriously regarded in the Roman Government, where inferior
officers might do nothing (not only not against, but not) without superior
authority, where such neglect was punished with death; even in them who had
deserved nobly.

7 Religion and Conscience then is principally and solely required in such
magistracy, the which duty in them discharged, where in all controversies of
titles, or executions of justice, the true end and purpose of every law is
barely considered; no partial regard had to friend, or friendly favors,
whereby the sentence and judgment of laws may destroy their justice, and
sincerity.

8 And from whence do arise infinite of inconueniencies, the greatest enemies
of peace and justice, the calamity of a Christian State, and the distroyers of
many wealthy States; all which evils would be avoided, if law-controuersies
were decided without frivolous protractions, and and with a conscionable
understanding of the law, the reverend sages of the law, delivering the true
sense of every Statute, and the true worth of every title, with single eye and
without partial affection: whereby the swarms of contentious wranglers, might
want argument of strife, and employ their pains in more conscionable services;
and whereby the Commonwealth should not want the profitable employment of
honest and painful men in their callings; who often times lose their whole
estate by attending the law defense of some little part thereof. Therefore in
these officers and in this authority there is most needful use of
conscience; and that no Policy but only Religion may give them and their place
direction.

9 This is the common duty, but not the common practice of subordinate
officers, who (notwithstanding their little use of Policy, yet) many times use
Policy, and bad Policy more then conscience and Religion: whereby the reverend
and worthy place it self, is held in jealousy; and the common reputation
disgraced, by the base usage of some particulars.

10 But it were a bad argument, to conclude against a general profession by
particular instance, or condemn the abused, because of the abusers; for among
all degrees of men, and in every place and profession there are ever some
guilty of dishonest, and ungodly practice. If Christ choose twelve, there is on
devil, and therefore in our elections among twenty there may be twelve devils.
And undoubtedly it is no wrong to report, that in all estates, degrees, and
professions of men, the worse part is by much the greater: for as the way to
Heaven, so the way to honesty and upright dealing is hard, and the passage
narrow, and few there be that enter that path; but most happy are they
whosoever they be, who refuse to be unfaithful, despising the vanities of
this life, because their hope and confidence does repose in the trust of Gods
providence.

11 Whosoever then has place in these subordinate affairs of State, (whether
it be in the course of law or in the course of common justice) if he decline
from the rules of equity and honest proceeding, his practice is but Policy, and
the use he makes of Law is most unlawful; for howsoever it is but reasonable
that the profits of every man's place, (that has employment in the State)
should support him, and gain him such proportion of maintenance as the
countenance of his place requires; yet he that applies the service of his
place, to his own profitable uses (only) is most unjustifiable in the
judgment of conscience, because he fails in the maine purpose of his
calling, which is the common good and not his own good; the prosperity of
State, and not the thriuing of his own state.

12 And herehence it is, that such as by these means raise their base
beginning to an extraordinary degree of fortune, have their conscionable
dealing much suspected; because the lawful profits of their place, cannot so
speedily nor so highly raise them. And therefore let every man in such place be
assured, that as the conscionable discharge of his office is a matter of high
merit, a Religious care, and a service very grateful in the eyes of God: so to
be withdrawn with the persuasion of any by-respect, from the true purpose of
his office, is a practice of evil Policy, whereof the service of his place
has no need, and whereof he ought to be altogether ignorant.

13 And let no man encourage himself in these vanities with the hope of
prosperous fortune, or with the love he has to the glory and profits of this
life. For at the instant of dying, all the profits and all the pleasures in the
world cannot give a man that comfortable farewell, as al such have who die with
the witness of good conscience: for good conscience sweetneth the sorrows of
death, and makes the pangs of death pleasurable: whereas oftentimes the having
of much causes the love of much, and a loathnes and extreme sorrow to leave
our heaped pleasures. And therefore in the discharge of every duty, let a man
love conscience rather then profit, and Religion rather then Policy.

In respect of Honor, Military, Courtly. CHAP. IX.
THE names of Honor are the rewards of virtuous deeds, or the gifts of princly
favor. They are given men for distinction, that by them may be known who are
gracious, virtuous, or of honorable merit. And therefore do all men greatly
desire these titles of honor, because they give men special reputation; and
persuade the world that such honors could not be had without special
deserving. And among the honorable there are none more noble then such, as
aspire the degrees of honor by the steps of virtuous reputation: because they
pursue (not the name but) the nature of honorable action, hazarding themselves
(through many dangers and difficulties) to attain so fair a name.

2 And this was the cause that in the old world the most forward and valiant
spirits (howsoever of noble or princely birth) thought themselves dishonorable
and but of common worth, before they won their honorable name by some brave
adventure; neither would those tims inuest men with dignities of honor, that
were not either brave in action, or grave in consultation, either Senators or
Soldiers; because such men are the only weapons and armor of a kingdom,
whereby the enemy is both resisted, prevented, and vanquished.

3 And as those times, so these times make it the general aim whereto they
level al their honors: though there is no King or State but does often miss
in many particulars. And therefore in respect the Nobility are of best
estimation, and commonly of best merit, these respects of Religion and Policy
are very considerable in them, their affection to good or bad, being of great
consequence in a kingdom, having authority and interest in the hearts and
estates of many.

4 If we should reduce to memory the honorable and famous men of former times,
and should number up their memorable victories, what charge, what care, and
what travel they have spent for the honor of Christendom and the Christian
Religion: it will appear that never any had better zeal to fight Gods
quarrel then they, many of them vowing the whole service of their lives to
those holy wars, the which they maintained with so much resolution and
valor, that their renown is (like their happiness) eternal.

5 Again, if we search the records of time and inquire after the most worthy
and famous Stats-men; we shall find their names in the rank of honorable
personages; who in their counsel chambers, have prevented conspiracies, and
overthrown huge Armies of resolved enemies. For (besides their gifts of
Nature,) they are extraordinarily fitted for these affairs, by special and
painful education.

6 And therefore the great Empires of all times have had care to elect such
choice particulars from among their nobility as were of best sufficiency; upon
whose wisdoms the strength and State of the whole Empire reposed. Such was
Ulysses, amomg the Geekes, and Quintus Fabius, among the Romans: and such has
our Nation had, (and yet has) many upon whose vigilancie, and trus^, the
affairs of greatest State do principally depend.

7 To understand these titles of honor I will distinguish them: They are
either derived, or given; derived honors are such as descend by inheritance in
a succession of untainted blood. Honor by gift, is when any one for his
honorable deserving has such command or place given him, as for his own, life
makes him of honorable estimation: the which honor, though it descend not
(like the former) to posterity, yet is it of very noble deserving, and does
conclude the worthiness of him so honored.

8 There is an honor also without name, unknown and unregarded, which (being
hid in the darkness of adversity and poor fortune) cannot appear to knowledge,
nor raise itself to deserved dignity. For in many men who have the forms of
baseness and contemptible fortune, there is a brave and noble disposition,
whereby they are fitted for all honorable exercise: the which though it want
the employment of honorable action, whereby their worth would be both known
and honored, yet there is no power of fortune can depresse their generous
spirits, or disgrace them in their own understandings.

9 And therefore some are honored by nature and not fortune, as these poor
ones; some are honored by Fortune and not Nature, as many rich ones: and some
are honored both by Nature and Fortune, and such are both good and gracious in
the eye of the world.

10 To consider then how these import this purpose of Religion and Policy, we
must again divide the degrees of honor into Military and Courtly, because
their diverse employments have great dissimilitude. And first for military
honor, the which in the Christian world has had such noble exercise, as that
the prosperity of Religion may seem to have marched under the hope of their
victorious colors.

11 And this is evident in the view of former times when Religigious zeal did
incense the noble spirits of generous and brave gentlemen, to spend both their
substance and lives in the service of Religious wars, against all the
profane enemies of the name of, Jesus both Turk, and every other
mis^beleeuer, by whose victorious hands the enemies of God were kept back from
the spoil they intended on Christian Religion.

12 And among these many, may be specially remembered, such as by special
obligation, did bind themselves to intend these holy wars only, and such
were those knights of Rodes, of Malta, and Jerusalem, and others: who
notwithstanding their knowledge (in the true sense of Religon) did wander from
the line of Truth in many particulars; yet in respect of their maine execution
they were very noble and worthy personages, and such as have well deserved an
honorable remembrance.

13 Besides these professed Religious warriors, were there many others of
honorable name: whose valors have won much honor in the Christian wars:
many of them (and some of this Nation) out-truding the barbarous and profane
people from the holy land, made famous by the birth and temporal life of
Christ Jesus. To reckon up the particulars, either of their names, or of their
noble deeds (in this kind) would require much labor and large circumstance,
the which I carefully avoid; because they are already made famous in writings
of much more learned sufficiency.

14 These and such as these who have (for Religious respect only) entered these
quarrels and exercised their valors, for the advancement of Catholic Religion
only, without all private direction to any by-respect whatsoever, have been
moved and ordered in their honorable attempts by Religion, and not by Policy,
because they intended (not their private but the general care of Christendom.

15 But if I should strictly examine the poceedings of these latter times, and
make curious search of every cause and purpose of our Christian wars, it may be
doubted that not Religion but Policy does both occasion, and direct many of
them: and that not the good of Religion, but the greatness of Empire is
principally regarded, Religion being only a pretended cause, whereupon to
ground some colorable excuse, to make such practice seem honest and
commendable, which in truth is dishonest, and not allowable.

16 Therefore in every honorable exercise of arms among Christians there must
be a just and no pretended cause to move offense: for he that labors to
color his purpose, does thereby conclude his own guilt, and the unlawfulness
of his practice, which if it were honest would not need any false color to
make it seem so, for Truth and lawful proceeding are justifiable of
themselves, neither does Truth ever mask her face, or shame at her open
apperance. Therefore all such colorable practice is not warranted by Religion,
neither does it labor Religious cause; but by Politic means it reaches and
principally intends a Politic end.

17 In respect also of Courtly honor, are these respects of Religion and
Policy, of much consequence; because the most honorable in Princes Courts,
have the highest cares in Commonwealths, and because they are near the person
of the Prince, who commonly is either better or worse, according as his
honorable company is affected. For the best indowments of Nature are many
times corrupted by society, which has a greater power of persuasion, then
instruction or argument: therefore is it most needful that the honorable in
Courts fashion the whole passage of their lives by Religious rules, and shun
all dishonorable and dishonest contriuements: because of their near
familiarity with the Prince, by whom he is advised, ordered, and exampled.

18 And such (no doubt) there are many, in many Princes Courts who proportion
all their proceedings by wisdom and Religious judgment: serving God and
their Nation in the conscionable discharge of their high offices; and bettering
the disposition of their Prince, by their virtuous examples, which provoke a
Princely mind to imitation, that cannot be better taught then by example. And
these honorable paterns are most worthy, and most Religious, who double the
recompense of their reward, being obedient in so high a calling.

19 There are commonly in all Courts, others of much diverse nature, who when
they have obtained those names of honor, disproportion their practice to their
honorable names, proving not only vile and base in the ungodly behavior of
their life: but very pestilent to their Nation, and a very poison to their
Prince, by whom he is withheld from godly purposes and flattered in vice and
misdemeanors.

20 And such are those Courtparasits, who feed their Princes appetite with
variety of evil, applying the command of his regal authority, either to his or
their own ungodly purposes; whereof all times have example, and whereof this
kingdom has had a woeful experience. And these howsoever they attain the
names of honor, and live in the number and fellowship of Christians, yet the
exercise of their life is base and most ignoble; and their Religion is nothing
but a wicked trade of damned Policy.

21 Therefore, (as in all other affairs) so in all honorable affairs, there
is a duty of holiness, which limits every passage of their life, which (being
observed) it gives a gracious luster to their nobility, and makes them
honorable in the presence of God, and to live in the rank of his servants,
(then which there cannot be a greater honor,) But whosoever shall disgrace or
despise this duty of conscience, God will repute him base, and disgrace the
glory of his nobility.

Of Religion and Policy in respect of prosperous Fortune. CHAP. X.
PRosperous Fortune is in every man's care, because all men travel to attain
such Fortune, wherein they place prosperity. And from hence may be considered
the wonderful variety of men's pleasure, from the variety of their desired
fortunes, every man coveting content, but with much disagreement in their
election, insomuch as that which is painefully sought by one, is carefully
avoided of another, and that which is hateful to one, is to another most
delightful.

2 And this does not only happen in the diverse Natures of good and evil, but
both good and evil have this variety in their delights: Every virtuous man
preferring the exercise of some one virtue before all other (whereto his Nature
is most inclinable) and every vicious man, preferring (in his choice election)
some particular vice, more then other, whereto his sensual appetite is most
affected.

3 This variety does reduce it self to these two beginnings: either to good or
evil; and therefore though the particulars very much disagree, yet in their
general aim, they all direct themselves to one of these two ends, Virtue or
vice, Religion or Policy.

4 And here hence it is that every man (in the purpose of his life) is either
good or bad, framing the whole disposition of his life, according to his
election of these two ends. For in men well affected, their consents never
yield to any ungodly practice, though the infirmity of their Nature force them
to much unlawfulness; and therefore though they do evil, it is not of choice,
but of infirmity. But of the contrary, men resolved in evil, enlarge the
corruption of their Nature; giving both will and desire to forward and assist
them in their unlawful delights. In the former there is a sense of sorrow, and
a desire of amendment, caused by the persuasion of conscience: in the latter
there is no remorse, though the conscience both judge and condemn, and
therefoe they refuse to apprehend the knowledge of their own misery* and
silence the^ offended consciences, which would both correct and reform them.

5 Thus (in their several kinds) are men affected: the good (...) good in
their intention, though they fail in many particulars of their life: the bad
ever bad both in act and purpose. And to one of those two does every man
conform his life; either to virtue or vice* either to Religion or Policy; for
this distinction is in all estates of men, and in every quality and profession
of people, from the Monarch to the meanest of all men, every man (in his estate
and degree) pressing to one of these two ends, the which he aspireth with
strong purpose, and with all forceable endeavor.

6 And because that prosperous fortune does seem to be the utmost end of every
badde man's practice; therefore is in of moment to consider the diverse natures
of Religion and Policy in men of prosperous Fortune * for it is not of
necessary consequence that because evil m^n affect only the prosperity of
this life; therefore prosperous Fortune is altogether to be despised or
neglected, and to be altogether out of the cares of good men; for good men may
care for that which evil men care for, but they may not (like evil men) care
only for that, but that God may be the main purpose of all their cares; and
that all other things be only so farreforth cared for, as may administer to a
man's Christian necessity.

7 If I should descend to particulars, and examine the several degrees of men,
their estates, their offices or whatsoever advancement of their fortunes* If I
should search the secrets of Arts, of Trades and mecha^icall labors, whereby
base and small beginnings in things swell to (...) mons^^^^^ largenes (...) I
should inquire ^^terallable means of advancement and ^inde my self to declare
the lawfulnes* and unlawfulness of every particular, I should (not only) weary
my self with ^uch business; but offend the well disposed with the knowledge of
much misery. Therefore I will sparingly deliver my judgment in this large
theme: being rather content to offend my self with silence, then others with
unprofitable knowledge.

8 Prosperous fortune, if by honest and allowable means obtained and with
regardful moderation spent and used, is a blessing from the hands of God, which
has some little resemblance to eternal happiness* though in comparison of
their worth there is no proportion. But if temporal blessings be either
unjustly got, or ungodly spent; they then nothing benefit their owners, but
are servants of their shame, and earnest causers of everlasting torment.

9 With this understanding may men of all degrees judge themselves and examine
the particular of their own Fortunes. For the severity of conscience gives no
dispensation or liberty to any one, but with one and the same eye beholds
all men, and every action of every man, without all personal respect. The
Prince (whom men dare not judge) is judged by conscience; and the meanest and
most dejected (whom men despise) is regarded of conscience; there being but one
law of conscience for all sorts of men.

10 And by this judgment are men taught to know themselves, and to have true
understanding of their estates, whereby they may know their present condition,
and (thereafter) either hope or fear the event of future times. This judgment
also can best determine the difference of Religion and Policy in prosperous
fortunes; their lawfulnes or not, and whether Religion or Policy has had
pre-eminence, in the getting, or in the dispending of our fortunes.

11 For it is needefully required in the fortunes of every good man, that he
both purchase lawfully, and spend honestly: for men may not challenge interest
in any part of Gods blessings without some manner of desert: neither (when he
has the^) may he use them at his pleasure, but so dispose them as the great
Master of all has commanded; because men of great fortune are but Gods
officers, to whose trust he has pleased to commit the employment of some part
of his benefits.

12 Therefore both in the winning and wearing of temporal blessings, there is
a duty of conscience, which binds all degrees of men, with impartial and
like severity. The Prince may not ariue his soueraignetie either by power or
Policy; if he have not just cause and rightful claim. Great men ought not
purchase honorable name with dishonest action; but rather win the garland of
honor by their noble deserving. The rich ought not to pursue the possession of
wealth with such vehemence and strong appetite, embracing the exercise of every
sin that may advantage, but rather to possess wealth with fear; because
that God will require at their hands a just discharge of their stewardship: and
so in every other degree of fortune, there is a lawful proceeding to be
regarded; whereby may be known; whether men aspire their prosperous fortunes
by good or evil means, by Religion, or by Policy.

13 The like care is required in the disposing of temporal blessings; that such
(to whom God shall please to give them) may so employ them, as that Gods
husba^dry be not idle, but in profitable imploiment: and that seeing God has
made them Stewards and ouerseeres in the world (which is Gods house) and has
given them place and authority over the rest of their fellow servants, it is
most reasonable that they spend Gods gift, to Gods glory, and like men faithful
and provident, supply to all such Christian necessities, as may any way
distress their fellow servants; lest otherwise the Master of the family (God)
call them to a rekoning, and so both deprive and discharge them.

14 And let all men remember, how great, how rich, or how noble soever they be
that it is better to be good then to be great: and that holy men (how poor
soever) have a higher place in Gods favor, then the most mighty on earth (if
they be not holy) for these are but stewards and servants, but the other are
children and inheritors of the kingdom of God, for whose sakes the world is
made rich with temporal blessings.

15 Let them remember also that if God give them the blessings of his hands,
honor, riches, prosperity, etc. he has also given them duties, and lawful
employment for their gifts, of which they must be careful, and only
careful; avoiding both improfitable and dishonest expense.

16 But (before all) let them most carefully remember, that God is a father of
many children, and that his sons and daughters here (in his earthly house)
pass their time through many difficulties, and many hard extremities; and that
God has made the noble, and the rich his officers and household servants, to
distribute his temporal blessings in convenient proportion to all, but
especially to the children of Faith: and therefore - how detestable to God,
would their negligence be, who seeing the children of God endure the
extremities of hard Fortune, and (sometimes) the very cause of God (Religion)
disgracefully reputed, are notwithstanding content to be lookers on, and rather
to load the burden of their miseries, then any way to supporte or ease them:
whereby the true owners are deprived the benefit of their own, and whereby the
Treasurers of Gods wealth purchase to themselves a grievous damnation, debasing
and impouerishing the sons and daughters of God, to raze and enrich their own
bastards, (that is, their wicked and base affections.)

Therefore in all the degrees of prosperous fortune there is a duty of
conscience, with binds all men to God in strict obligation; the which bond
whosoever shall forfet, does dangerously hazard the destruction of his soul,
and does declare against himself that he is not Religious, but merely
Politic.

The Conclusion.
THVS I have (according to my understanding) delivered the true natures of
Religion and Policy, how they may, (and how they never can) conspire in any one
particular; which is only then, when they meet in the line of Truth, and both
of them intend one purpose in their passage. For lawful and unlawful
practices, are like Heaven and Earth, between which there is an immense space,
and a most full opposition of Nature. For neither can the Heavens and the Earth
join their substance before the general destruction of the world: neither can
Religion and unlawful Policy, conspire friendly in any one act, but where
there is a destruction of truth and a persecution of orderly proceeding. But
(like the enmity of fire and water) these enemies Religion and Policy, quarrel
wheresoever they meet, and triumph in the spoil of one another.

This knowledge I have thought good to publish to every man's understanding,
because of the general abuse of lawful Policy, grown common in the traffic
of most base employments, men of all sort and of every disposition of Nature
(save the best) making unlawful Policies the steps of their reputation;
whereby they ascend the dignity of high place, and prosperous Fortune, and
whereby they use those temporal blessings of God to most ungodly purpose, even
to the dishonor of God who gave them, and to the disgrace of Religion, (Gods
cause) and the Religious (Gods children) to whom all the gifts both of Grace
and Nature do (most properly) belong.

I have forborne to give particular disgrace to any man, or to any profession
of men, because I would not offend, but rather admonish and remember all men
what that duty is, which is almost forgot to be a duty: for to make particular
application is not my office, but the office of conscience, which has a
greater authority; and does persuade and prevail in every man's affections,
that has the least-indument of grace. To whom I only direct my self in this
charitable office: and for whose good (my Christian name) shall ever make me a
servant, which has made me enemy to godless and wicked people, and to their
unlawful and damned Policies.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 11. lin. 18. r. they. p. 22. l. 20. r. enemy. p. 23. l. 15. r. many. p.
27. l. 12. r. are. p. 40. l. 23. r. danger. p. 79. l. 23. r. hence. p. 93. l.
18. r. Rhodes.


