A TREATISE OF THE AVTHORITY OF THE CHVRCH.

The sum whereof was delivered in a Sermon preached at Belfast, at the
Visitation of the Diocese of Down and Conner the tenth day of August 1636.

BY HENRY LESLIE Bishop of the Diocese.

Intended for the satisfaction of them who in those places oppose the Orders of
our Church, and since published upon occasion of a Libell sent abroad in
writing, wherein this Sermon, and all his proceedings are most falsely traduced.

Together with an ANSWER to certain Objections made against the Orders of our
Church, especially kneeling at the Communion.

1. COR. XI. 22. Do ye despise the Church of God? AUGUST. Contraratiorem nemo
sobrius, contra scripturas nemo Christianus, contra Ecclesiam nemo pacificus
senserit. CIC. lib. 2. De Not. Deor. Vestra solum legitis, vestra amatis,
caeteres causa inc^gnit^, condemnatis. DVBLIN, Printed by the Society of
Stationers, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. Anno Dom. 1637.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORD VISCOUNT WENTWORTH, Baron of
Wentworth-Woodhouse, Lord Newmarsh and Oversley, Lord Deputy General of the
Realm of Ireland, Lord Lieutenant of the County of York, and Lord President
of His Majesty's right Honorable Council established in the North of England,
and one of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
SOCRATES reports, that there happening a terrible fire in Constantinople,
which consumed a great part of the city, and fastened on the Church, the Bishop
went to the Altar, and falling down upon his knees, would not rise from
thence, till the fire was quenched, and the Church preserved: So when I entered
into my charge, (whereunto I was called by your Lordships gracious favor) I
found a great fire kindled in that Church, which though it was but Ignis
fatuus, proceeding from inconsiderate zeal; yet it threatened the destruction
of our Church, and the utter abolishing of all good order: wherefor l
endeavored to bring diverse buckets of water out of the Sanctuary for
quenching of that flamme, albeit as yet I have not found either my pains or my
prayers to be so effectual.

At first the Apostles Quaere took a deep impression in me, ^. Cor. 4.21.
Shall I come unto you with a rod or in love, and in the spirit of meekness?
And therefore I begun with gentle persuasions, suspendens verbera, and producens
ubera, 2. Tim. 2.25.
(as the fathers speak) even in all meekness instructing them who are
contrary minded; as having such a charitable opinion of them as Salvian had of
some Arian haeretickes in his time, Salv. de Cube^n l. 5.
Errant, sed bono animo errant, and Euthymius of others, E^thym. in Luc. 14.
Quidam Pharisaei semi-mali; But I found that I had to do with men
praeoccupyed with praejudice and partiality, and so wedded to their own wills,
that they were resolved to receive no information, making good the saying of
Maxentius, Ap. B^gn. in Biblioth. T. 4^
Men's contentioni indulgens, and non sanari fed vincere cupiens, aversa ab eis
quae recte dicuntur, tantum intenta est in hoc, ut inveniat quod pro partibus
suis loquatur. A contentious mind desiring victory, and not truth, takes no
notice of that which is truly spoken, and devises only how to elude the same,
and find something to speak for his own part.

VVhereupon I altered my course, and finding by the symptoms of their disease,
that it is a head-paine, or rather heady; I remembered that when the Shunamites
child cried my head, 2 Kings 4.1^.
my head, his father bid carry him to his mother; So I thought it the best
course to carry them unto their mother the Church, and show them both her
authority to injoyne those orders which they oppose; and her power to censure
and correct such as are disobedient unto her constitutions. But for all this,
They persist in their errors, grow more resolute in their opposition, and more
diligent to draw disciples after them, Revel. 12.12.
like unto him of whom it was said: He is come down unto you having great
wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time. So that it may be
said of them, as the Prophet of the hard hearted Jews, Ierem. 5.3.
Lord thou have stricken them, but they have not sorrowed, thou have consumed
them, but they have refused to receive correction, they have made their faces
harder then a stone, and have refused to return. And this is no new thing for
haeretickes to be confirmed in their errors by their sufferings; It was
observed in ancient time, that not only Christianitas, but even haeresis
mortibus crescit.

And surely I have many times wondered how those men who are none of the
learnedest, should be able to draw such a faction after them, and bewitch the
minds of the people: for every one of these Presbyteriall Dictators is more
esteemed then the whole Church of God, they take upon them to teach their
mother to give suck, the people have plucked out their own eyes, and given to
their teachers, being now able to see nothing but through their spectacles,
unto whom they do ascribe more then Papal Infallibility. But I find that it
has been so in former times, that in a faction neither the learnedest men,
nor the best, but the most factious are regarded. Primianus and Maximianus were
the heads of the two factions of the Donatists, and says S. Augustine: It was
well for them that faction fell out, else Primianus might have been
Postremianus, and Maximianus, Minimianus: But now in schism either of them was
a jolly fellow, and the head of a party: So faction gains these men more
esteem, then otherwise they could either have, or deserve in Gods Church.

And besides their forwardness to lead a faction, I have observed diverse
other means whereby they have won the affection of the people unto a general
liking of their cause; I. A great show of holiness, like the Encratites of
old, who termed all other Christians that lived not in like austerity
Psychicos, that is, carnal: And yet even in this they come far short of that
mortification, which was either in Pelagius of old, or is at this day in the
Socinians, whom I may justly term sentinam haereticorum, the worst of
haeretickes. II. Their diligence in preaching, which yet in them is, rather the
labor of the lungs, then of the brain, and (I thank God) many of the
conformable Clergy, are as painful as they. III. To tax the faults of men
in chief place, and the present government, which the multitude (being ever
prone to innovation, and dislike of the present Laws) are apt to approve, as
Nazianzen observed in his time, he is thought the holiest man that can find
most faults, and the greatest zelot for the truth, who is pleased with
nothing, but what proceeds from his own devising. Are not these they whom S.
Peter describes that should arise In populo, II. Pet. 2.
amongst the people, despisers of government, back-biters of them that are in
dignity, speaking evil of those things they know not, who promise unto
themselves liberty? That is the thing at which they aim [liberty;] for
howsoever they seem to except only against our Laws, yet the thing they would
have, is a freedom from all Laws, and that it may be lawful for every man to
apparel Gods worship in what fashion he pleases, and to do what seems
good in his own eyes, as though there were no King in Israel: whereby they do
wonderfully please the factious people, Et hoc ipso placere cupiunt, quod
placere contemnunt, They seek to please the people by displeasing of
authority. IV. They give unto the people both by their doctrine and example
encouragement to commit two sins, whereunto of all others they are most
inclined, Usury and Sacrilege: Wherefore S. Jude describing those murmurers,
and complainers whose mouths speak proud things, says, ver. 16.
They have men's persons in admiration because of advantage, And that we may all
know whom he means, he adds, ver. 19.
These are they that separate themselves. By whose divinity, men (as I said)
have these two advantages, one that they may lend their money upon usury:
Another that they may safely rob God of his tithes, and devour all manner of
holy things: This last was the aim of some Politicians in the kingdom of
England, they set on discontented men, to cry out against the government of
the Church, hoping by that means to prey upon Bishoprics and Cathedral
Churches, as they had done before upon the Abbeyes. V. This their snow-ball of
popularity has gained no small access by their lying: They traduce those who
are not of their faction, as men either of scandalous life, or mainetayners of
false doctrine, and such as seek to draw us back again unto Popery: They
tell the people of their own victories in disputations and conferences, how
they have put others to silence with the strength of their arguments, when
indeed they have not spoken one wise word: They boast of the inward testimony
of Gods spirit assuring their consciences of the truth of their doctrine.
Ludov. Viv. de verit. fid. christ. l. 4. page 178.
And this (as says a learned writer) is Tutissimum mentiendi genus, The
safest way of lying is for men to entitle God to their own dreams. Lastly,
But the sp^ciall means whereby they have advanced their faction, is by
insinuating into the weaker sex in whom there is least ability of Judgment. By
this means the Serpent overcame mankind, he first tempted the woman, and by
her seduced Adam: By this means the Philistines overcame Sampson, Judge XIV. 18.
They ploughed with his heifer and so found out his riddle. And this indeed
has been the common practice of all haeretickes: Act XIII. 50.
the Jews stirred certain devout and honorable women to resist Paul. These
new Gospellers make use of such instruments to oppose the Church, and for the
most part their Proselytes are of that Sex, as if their generative virtue were
so weak that they could beget none but daughters. Now to search a little into
the cause of this: Besides the weakness of their Judgment to discern
between truth and error, and the natural inclination which is in women to
pity; two things especially make them in love with that religion, one, It is
natural unto the daughters of Eve to desire knowledge, and those men puff them
up with an opinion of science, inabling them to prattle of matters of divinity,
which they and their teachers understand much alike: Insomuch that albeit S.
Paul has forbidden women to speak in the Church, yet they speak of Church
matters more then comes to their share. The other is a desire of liberty and
freedom from subjection; for these teachers allow the^ to be at least
quarter masters with their husbands, insomuch that I have not observed that
faction to praevaile but where husbands have learned to obey their wives, and
where will and affection wear the breeches. There is a civil constitution in
the authentickes against women, Non percipientes sacrosanctam and adorabilem
communionem. that would not receive the holy and adorable Communion; that they
should lose their douries or Ioyntures, which if it were in force in this
kingdom, I think some of our Ladies would not be so stiff-kneed, choosing
rather to go without that blessed Sacrament, then receive it kneeling.

By these means have they assayed to batter the orders and whole fabric of
our Church, which like Caesar's bridge, Caes^de bello Gall. lib. 4.
the more it is oppugned the stronger it stands; yet they themselves are not
all agreed what form of Policy they would have, and I think if it were left
to their own choice and frame, they would prove as wise as Hermogenes Apes in
the fable, who would build houses, and live after the manner of men; but when
they went about it, they had neither tools nor skill to effect the work: In
the mean time they labor to bring all men in dislike with the present
government, like Platoes Euthyphro who accused his own father, and like that
ungracious fellow Lamprocleus who slandered his mother. Xenoph de dict. and
fact. Secrat.
The Romans did nourish in the Capitol certain dogs, and geese which by their
barking and gagling should give warning in the night of thieves that entered
in: But if they cried in the day time when men came in to worship, then their
legs were broken, because they cried when there was no cause. Those men have
given a false Allarum, crying, barking, gaggling against us, against their
mother, their brethren, as though we were all thieves, when there is no other
cause, but that we desire to worship God reverently, which they cannot endure.

It has grieved my very soul to see my flock thus straying in the
praecipices of error and schism, and I have endeavored by all means to
reduce them unto the unity of the Church, whereunto I was rouzed up by your
Lordships commands, and therefore I presume to offer unto your Lordship this
small account of my labors. The cause which I maintain is just, the thing
which I plead for, is order, and whether should I then go for Patronage, but
unto him who is the admired pattern of Justice, and Patron of order. Besides,
If any thing could proceed from my meannesse, worthy of your Lordship, it is
already deserved by your favors unto my self, and by your kindness unto Gods
Church, which is such, that we were all most unthankful, if we did not
acknowledge that your Lordship is next under his sacred Majesty, Instaurator
Ecclesiae Hibernicae, and so a lively Image of him who is the true Defender of
the faith upon earth. But I forbear to give your Lordship your deserved
praises, lest I be thought like Psapho his bird which sung the praises of him
who nourished her. Besides as Alexander would be painted by none but Apelles,
graven by none but Lysippus, one an excellent Paynter, the other an excellent
Carver: So your Lordship deserves a worthyer pen to express the glory of your
actions, and I hope such a one shall be found to perpetuat your memory unto the
worlds end. In the mean time I shall pray God that this kingdom may be long
blessed with your happy government, and that your God may remember all the
kindness that you have showed unto his House: My Lord, this is the constant
prayer of

Your Lordships most humble servant, and daily Orator HEN. DVNENSIS.

In Tractatum pro Authoritate Ecclesiae, per Reverendum in Christo Patrem
HENRICUM providentia Divina Episcopum DUNENSEM.
A Gnosco incessumque gravem, grunnitum, et ocellum
Totum albugineum, tensas ad sidera palmas,
Foemineam linguam and tardam: frontisque Catones.
Quo Vide collatio nem Putitani and Donatistae page 38.
Donate ruis? Quaete Medea sepulchro
Evocat, and pestem nostris infuderit oris?
Bella tibi Praesul, tibi bella parantur, O vili
Instat, and oppugnat caulas sub vulpe lupellus.
Hic Zelus furor est: haec sancta superbia Matris
Contemptus, quin arma capis ruit ocyus ordo.
Haec pari tas fratrum tollet vestigia Patrum.
At frustra moneo; per te Sanctissime Praes^^
Evigilas, structas in coelum destruis arces,
Audacemque hostem, sociosque potentibus armis
Vltra Sauromatas, aliosque repellis in orbs.
En Argos puritanica.
navem Arcadica properantem merce; gravatam
Mole sua: miratur onus Neptunus, and undis
Insolitum prohibet pecus, atque remisit, and una
Ruditus veteres, vetus in mendacia virus.
Et quasi lusa istis divina potentia nugis,
Majus in opprobrium, velis invexit eisdem
Quos simulant, ipsos per anomala dogmata, Haec navis genuicos etiam asinos ex
secundo partu e Gailia nobis effudit.
Asellos.
Dignus eras praesul quercu meliore, sed idem
Hic tibi cum Paulo communis ab host I. Cor. XV. 32.
triumphus.
TO. MAXWELL, Archidiac. Dunens.

A TREATISE OF THE AVTHORITY OF THE CHVRCH.
MATTHEW. XVIII. 17. But if he neglect to hear the Church; Let him be unto thee
as an heathen man, and a Publicane.
THESE are the words of our blessed Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, Sect. I.
containing a Direction unto the Church, for censuring her disobedient
children, and an injunction to all you who profess CHRIST, to take notice of
her censures, accounting no otherwise of all those who despise her
admonitions, then as of heathen men and Publicanes, If he neglect to hear the
Church, Let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a Publicane.

There is one word in the Text, Sect. 2.
as it is expressed in the Old Translation [ also] which being a Relative,
sends us back to the words going before, to find out the occasion of this
speech. I find that our Savior in this Chapter, does exhort his Disciples,
and in them all Christians, to a conscionable care, of the salvation of their
brethren, and that first, by giving no offense, whereby they may be
scandalized, Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones, ver. 10.
and before, Woe unto that man by whom offense comes. and secondly, by patient
bearing of such offenses as come from them, and laboring to restore them that
are fallen, and to bring them to repentance. ver. 15. If thy brother shall
trespass against thee, etc. Where before I come to my Text, it will be
expedient that I inquire of four things. 1. To whom our Savior speaks? to
his Disciples. 2. Of whom? of a brother, If thy brother trespass. 3. Of what
offenses? If he trespass against thee. 4. What is the rule prescribed in this
case? Go and tell him his fault between him and thee. If he shall hear thee,
thou have gained thy brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take with
thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word
may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the
Church.

I. Sect. 3.
Christ speaks unto his Disciples, as may appear by the whole discourse from
the beginning of the Chapter, but he speaks not unto them as they are
Apostles, and chief Pastors in his Church, but simply as they are Disciples,
that is, Christians; for all the followers of Christ were called Disciples,
Ioh. VI. 66. The not distinguishing of these two, what was given in charge to
the Apostles, as they were Apostles, and chief Pastors; and what as they were
Christians, has occasioned many misprisions. I will instance only, in two
particulars. Our Savior in the celebration of the Sacrament of the Supper,
says to his Disciples, Drink ye all of this: The Papists understand this to
be spoken to them, as they were Apostles, and Ministers of the Church, and so
deny that the people have any right to the Cup. whereas it is evident, that in
that first Supper, they did bear the person of Communicants, and so that
benefit belongs to all Christians. Again Christ says unto them, Matthew. 20.25.
Mar. 10.42. Luke 22.24.
The Kings of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them -- but it shall not be
so amongst you. Our new masters, who seek to pull down the Orders of our
Church, take this as spoken only unto Ministers, and from thence condemn all
Superiority and Jurisdiction of Bishops: whereas it is evident, that this
precept does alike concern all Christians. For 1. the occasion of that
prohibition, was the ambition of the sons of Zebedee, who dreaming of a
temporal kingdom that Christ should have in this world, desired to sit, one
on his right hand, the other on his left; that is, to be the greatest in that
kingdom: They did not desire Jurisdiction over Ministers only, and place
above Apostles, but also above all Christians; And they conceived hope to
obtain it, not out of any privilege they had by their Apostleship, but out of
a relation they had to Christ according to the flesh, being his kinsmen.
Therefore this prohibition is given, not to the Apostles only, but to all
Christians. II. Christ in the XXII. Chap. of S. Luke, immediately before these
words, and presently after, using this word [you] and speaking to his
Disciples, and none but them, speaks unto them, as representing not only
Ministers, but all Christians. As verse. 19. This is my Body which is given for
you, verse. 20. This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood which is shed for you,
verse. 29. I appoint unto you a Kingdom. In these places (I hope) by [you] ye
will understand all true Christians, else none but Ministers have interest in
Christ's Blood, and right unto his Kingdom. And then, why not also in the
words interjected, verse. 25. It shall not be so among you, by [you] should we
understand all Christians. III. Compare that place with Matthew. XXIII. 8. which
place is alleged, to the same purpose as the former, against titles of honor
in the Church, But be not ye called Rabbi. Our Savior speaks to all
Christians, as is evident, verse. 1. Then spoke Jesus to the multitude, and to
his disciples. So does he also in the other place, which is alleged against
ruling. IV. It cannot be denied, but that the Apostles did (during their life)
exercise Jurisdiction over all other Ecclesiastical persons. So did their
successors who are styled Rulers: Therefore ruling is not forbidden the
Apostles. yea, our Savior in the same place intimates, that among them, some
should be greater than others, saying, Let the greatest among you, be as the
least, and the chiefest as he that serves. Finally, the opposition between
Gentiles and you, does evidently prove, that that precept is given to all
Christians. The Kings of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them -- but it
shall not be so amongst you. If his intent had been to forbid ruling in
Ministers only, he would not have opposed them to the Gentiles, but to
temporal men in Christian Commonwealths, or rather to the Priests under the
Law, saying: Amongst the Priests of Israel some rule over other: but it shall
not be so among you. But to say, it is thus with the Gentiles, it shall not be
so with you Ministers, is no good opposition. And, it is thus with the
Gentiles, it shall not be so with you Christians, is a full and a fit
antithesis, often used in Scripture. Matthew. VI. 7. But when ye pray, use not
vain repetitions, as the Gentiles do. Matthew. VI. 31. Take no thought, for
after all those things seek the Gentiles. I. These. IV. 5. Not in the lust of
concupiscence, as do the Gentiles. Still Gentiles opposed to Christians,
nowhere to Ministers. And therefore in that place nothing is forbidden to
Ministers, but what is unlawful to all Christians. Not superiority,
authority, dominion, Lordship, but the ambitious affectation of the same, and
the tyrannical usage thereof. So that (my masters) If you will make use of
that Text against our authority, you must turn plain Anabaptists, and
condemn not only Ecclesiastical authority, but Civil also: for Christ
speaks there to his Disciples, not as Apostles, but as Christians, and so he
does in my Text, If thy brother trespass against thee; for the duty here
required, is not proper to Ministers, but such as concerns all Christians, to
bear offenses patiently, to desire the salvation of our brother, and to that
end to admonish him privately, or (if need be) to defer the matter to the
Church. And therefore it is to be observed, how in the next words, speaking of
a power proper to the Apostles, and their successors, he changes the number,
to show the change of the person, though he be still speaking to his
Disciples. For while he speaks of those duties, which concern all
Christians, he uses the singular number, if he trespass against thee; and,
if he will not hear thee, even thee, whosoever thou be, that art my disciple.
But when he comes to speak of the power of the Keys, which was given only
to the Apostles, and their successors, he uses the plural number, Whatsoever
you shall bind, even you, who are the Pastors and Rulers of my Church, in earth.

In the next place, If thy brother trespass, one that professes Christ; for
this course which our Savior prescribes to admonish our brother, and if need
be to convent him before the Church, is not to be taken with those who are
altogether without the pale of the Church, as the Apostle shows 1. Cor. V. 9.
I wrote unto you not to company with fornicators, yet not altogether with the
fornicators of this world -- for then must ye needs go out of the world -- If
any man that is called a brother be a fornicator -- with such an one cate not.
For what have I to do, to judge them also that are without.

In the third place, If he sin against thee. And so Peter understood it,
verse. 22. where he says, Master, how often shall my brother sin against me,
and I forgive him. Yet by Analogy we are to understand it of all sins, and
the same course which is here prescribed, is to be observed with a brother,
that sins against God only; that is, we are to admonish him; and if need
be, Convent him before the Church. For Christ here exhorts us to charity;
that which he will have us principally to seek, is not satisfaction for the
wrong done unto us; but as it is called in the Text: the gayning of our
brother, that is, his Salvation. If our Savior had respected only the wrong
done to us, he would never command us to complain; for he compelles no man
to sue for satisfaction when he is wronged: albeit he permits us to use lawful
means to right our selves; Yet he would be well pleased, if we would sit
down by the wrong. I am sure the Apostle who was inspired by the spirit of
Christ, advises this as the best of all. Why do ye not rather take wrong?
etc. I. Cor. VI. 7. But here he commands us to convent our brother offending,
before the Church, if he will not hear us, and therefore that which he would
have us aim at principally, is, his salvation, which is in danger, if he be
not recovered by repentance, not only when he has wronged us, but also when he
has offended God in any sort. Again, we ought to be so zealous of God's
glory, that we should account sins against God, to be against our selves.
God is so sensible of the injuries done unto us, as if done to himself: In all
their troubles he was troubled, says the Prophet Isay, LXIII. 9. And God
himself, Zach. II. 8. He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye.
When Saul did persecute the members upon earth, the Head cried from Heaven:
Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? In like manner should we be sensible of
the injuries done to God, accounting them as done to our selves, as was David,
who says, The rebukes of them who rebuke the Lord, have fallen upon me. In a
word, as an offense done to thy neighbor, is a sin against God, in regard of
the breach of his Commandment: So an offense against God, is a sin against
thy neighbor, in regard he is scandalized by thy bad example. Finally, in
other places, the like course is prescribed in other offenses, besides private
injuries. Levit. XIX. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother -- but plainly
rebuke him. Tit. III. ver. 10. A man that is an heretic, after the first and
second admonition, reject. So that not only private wrongs are to be brought
before the Church, but other offenses also, for it is not likely, that Christ
would have the Church to censure offenses against our neighbor, and to neglect
the sins committed against the first Table. But Christ mentions only
private injuries, because he is exhorting to Patience, and Charity. And we
are most sensible of those offenses, whereby we are hurt: he therefore
restrayneth us, where we are most forward, knowing well, that if we can be
kept from the violent prosecution of those wrongs which are done to our selves,
we will be slow enough, in taking notice of other sins, committed against
God, and our neighbor.

And now, having found out both the persons, If thy brother shall trespass
against thee. It is a Recipe, for curing an offending brother, wherein our
Savior will have us to deal like tender Physicians, who first use to try
gentle remedies; and if that will not do, they minister stronger pills, that
are more offensive to Nature. So should we do; for, the Cure here prescribed,
is fourefold. The I. Private admonition, Tell him his fault between thee and
him; that is, Correptio Amoris. II. Reproof before witnesses, If he will not
hear thee, take with thee, one, or two more, that is, Correptio pudoris. III.
Public accusation, If he will not hear them, tell it unto the Church; that
is, Correptio timoris. IIII. Separation, If he neglect to hear the Church,
let him be unto thee as an heathen. and that is, Correptio tremoris. The first
is mylde, the second sharp, the third bitter, the fourth desperate. The first,
is but a preparative, the second a potion, the third a Corrasive, the fourth
abscision, or cutting off. Now we must not think, that all these degrees can
be observed at all occasions, and as often as our brother offends. Sometimes
the offense is so light, that it is better to pass it by, then to take notice
of it. Sometimes, though the sin be great, yet it is committed so privatelie,
that it is to no purpose for thee to tell it unto the Church; for if he deny
it, thou can not prove it. Sometimes the offense is so notorious, and
scandalous, that the Church takes notice of it, no private admonition going
before, ^^ Tim. V. 20.
no accusation being made. Concerning such sins, the Apostle prescribes a
rule to Timothy, Them that sin, Rebuke openly. And so Paul reproved Peter
publicly, Gal. II.
without any private admonition, because his offense gave scandal unto many.
Sometimes it falls out, that he who offends, is of so desperate a froward
disposition, that to admonish him of his fault, is but to cast pearls before
swyne; In this case Solomon his rule is, Prove. IX. 8.
Rebuke not a scorner. Sometimes it may be, thou can not use private
admonition, for want of opportunity of time, and place, or by reason of the
quality of the person offending: Or it may be, that there is danger in delay,
and some great hurt like to happen, if the matter be not presently declared
unto the Church. Many such cases may happen, wherein, all these proceedings
cannot be observed; but the matter comes before the Church, persaltum. We must
therefore remember, that this being an affirmative precept, does not oblige at
all times; but only then when the observation of it is convenient, for the end
for which it was appointed, which is, the amendment of our brother.

And now, But if he neglect to hear the Church, etc. Which being a
conditional proposition, has two parts, a Supposition, and an Inference.
There is a fault supposed, If he neglect to hear the Church; And a censure
inferred, Let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a Publicane. He
supposes the fault only, he says not, There are, who will not hear the
Church, but he puts the case only, Si non audierit; yet we know by woeful
experience, there be such: Christ's [If] proves to be no [If:] There are many
here who account it the point of highest perfection, to disobey the Church, and
despise her wholesome Laws: Verse. 11.
And so (as S. Jude says) perish in the gainsaying of Core. Number. 16.
Now Core's sin, was disobedience to the Church. he would have a paritie
amongst the Levites, and would not be subject to Aaron, appointed his
Superior by GOD: And albeit he with his Accomplices went down quick unto hell,
yet he has left his seed amongst us: Many who will not be subject unto
Aaron, who will not hear the Church. Now, that we may know what sin this
is, not to hear, or obey the Church, I will show you first, what is meant by
the Church: Secondly, wherein the Church must be heard.

By the Church here, Church has power to bind and loose, given them in the
next words; And the power of the Keys was not given to the multitude, but to
the Pastors and Rulers in the Church. Amongst the Jews, who were God's Church,
under the Old Testament, sentence was never given by the Common people, but by
certain Judges appointed. What do I speak of the Jews, whose government
was always Monarchical, or Aristocraticall? Even amongst the Grecians, where
the government was Democraticall; as in Athens, Judgment was never given by
the people, but by certain Judges chosen by the people. How much less in the
Church, whose government no man in his right wits, will say, is
Democraticall; shall this power to judge, be given to the people? It is not
likely, that GOD who is not the Author of confusion, but of order, would give
this power to the people, who by reason of their ignorance, multitude, and
variety of affections, would never agree upon a sentence, neither were it
possible for any Controversy to be composed, if the voices of all the people
must be expected; for, there would be nothing but faction, distraction,
confusion, division, and endless delays.

II. Church here are we to understand the Synedrium of the Jews, which was
their Council of LXX. Elders (as some men of great name have conceived) for
our Savior never honors that Court with the name of the Church, Luc XXII. 66.
but it is called (...) in the Gospel, he did not commit the power of the
Keys unto them: but having instituted a government in his Church, he gave
them a bil of divorcement. Neither is it likely that Christ would send his
disciples to complain to those who were professed enemies to him and his; I.
Cor. VI.
contrary unto S. Paul his rule, who will have us to be judged by Saints, not
by Infidels.

III. Church here are we to understand the Christian magistrate; It is the
conceit of Erastus, but one so wild as needs no Confutation: for we know that
the Church, and the Civil Magistrate have diverse Consistories, God having
established two distinct powers upon earth; the one of the Keys committed to
the Church, to work upon the conscience, by binding or loosing the soul, that
is, retaining or remitting of sins: the other of the sword, committed to the
Prince, to work upon the outward man, laying hold on the body and goods. And
neither of these is to intrude upon the execution of the others office. When St
Peter who had the Keys committed unto him, ventured to draw the sword; he was
commanded to put it up, Matthew. 26.52.
as a weapon that belonged not to him. So when Vzziah would execute the Priests
office, he received the like check, It pertains not unto thee Vzziah to burn
incense unto the Lord, ^. Chron. 26.28.
but to the Priests, thesonnes of Aaron that are consecrated. The magistrate
therefore, is not to take upon him to weild the Keys, which are here committed
to the Church. If thou complain to him of an Injury done by thy brother, he
will punish him; And that is not it, that Christ aims at: he will not have his
disciples, so careful of the repairing of their wrong, as of the amendment of
their brother: In a word, he gives not precepts Oeconomicall or political, but
prescribes a Law unto the Conscience, which is, that if thy brother amend not
after private admonition, to Convent him, before the Church.

IIII. Sect. 11.
Neither by the Church are we to understand S. Peter and his supposed
successor, of whom the Jesuits say, Papa est Virtualiter tota Ecclesia. for our
Savior spoke unto Peter, and Peter answers him verse. 21. How often shall my
brother sin against me. Now if Peter be offended, he is to go to the Church,
that cannot be himself. Besides, Peter may be the man, who gives the offense;
if he did not, I am sure the Pope does: And shall we complain of himself, to
himself? We are like to have an ill hearing.

Finally, Sect. 12.
nor by the Church are we to understand a General Council. That can not be
called, so often as one offends, and is to be corrected. And therefore it is
foolishly done of the Papists, to allege this text for the infallibility of
the Church: Lib 3. de ver. Dei cap. 5. observandum hic quidem Dominum loqui de
injurijs, quas unus ab aliquo patitur. Lib. 4. de Romans pont. Convenient omnes
Catholic^ posse Pentificem, etiam ut Pontificem, and cum suo coetu
consiliariorum, vel cum generali Concilio errare in Controver^ijs facti.
for they themselves do not ascribe infallibility, to any particular Church,
but only to a General Council confirmed by the Pope, of which this Text can
not be understood. Besides, that which is here referred to the Church, is a
matter of fact, not of faith. So Bellarmine does acknowledge that Christ
speaks of personal injuries. And that in deciding of such Controversies in
matters of fact, which depend upon information and testimonies of witnesses;
The Pope may err even with a General Council at his elbow, he says, is
confessed by all Romanists. And then how this Text used by all their writers to
prove the infallibility of their Church, can serve their purpose, no reasonable
man can see.

By the Church then we must understand the Governors of the particular
Churches wherein we live, except the person to be corrected, Sect. 13.
be in that place, that he cannot be Judged, but by a higher Court, in which
case the Church we are to go unto, is a provincial or National synod. So St
Chrysostom, and with him the general consent of all doctors, expounds it of
the prelates and chief Pastors of the Church, who have Jurisdiction to bind
and loose such offenders in the words following. So a learned Schooleman,
Parisiensis de sae. ord. c. 10.
Potestas Iudiciaria est ipsius Ecclesiae, Cujus minister ad hancrem Episcopus
est constitutus. As they who govern in the Commonwealth, are called the
Commonwealth, so they who rule in the Church be called the Church, because they
hold the chief place in it: As the body is said to see, when it is only the
eye that sees, So the Church is said to hear that, which they only heard,
who are (as it were) the eyes of the Church: All the company of believers, are
called Saints: And yet the Apostle gives this title unto some, who were in
authority, above the rest, for composing of controversies. I. Cor. VI. So
albeit the whole multitude of believers be called the Church; Yet in a special
manner this title is given to them who are chief in the Church for authority
and power. St John wrote his Epistles to the Angels of the Churches, that is,
the Bishops; And yet he concludes, Let him that has an care hear, what the
Spirit says unto the Churches: So that the rulers are called the Church, not
only by our Savior, but also by St John, because they did represent the
Church whereof they had charge. And in the Old Testament, the Hebrew word Eda
which signifies the Church, is sometimes used to express not the promiscuous
multitude, but the assembly of Judges, the Council of the Rulers, Psalm.
LXXXII. 1. God stands in the congregation of gods. So that this acception of
the Church, is not without precedent, as some have alleged.

And now having found the Church, Sect. 14.
let us see, wherein, the Church is to be heard. The necessity laid upon us,
to hear the Church, presupposes a power in the Church to direct, yea, and to
command, though not in her own name, yet in the Name of GOD, who committed
this power unto her. That the Church has a power, I think, no man will deny;
All the Controversy, is touching the extent of this power; which I will reduce
unto certain heads, neither with the Papist, deifying her power, nor with the
lawless Libertine, vilifying her authority. Be pleased therefore to
understand the Churches power, for Instruction, for Ordination, for
Determination, for Direction, and for Correction. First, it belonges to the
Church, to keep and propound the sacred Oracles, and to apply them by
preaching and administration of the Sacraments. II. To ordain Ministers,
appoint them their Stations, and direct them the manner how they are to
discharge their duty. III. To decide Controversies in Religion. IIII. To enact
Laws, not only to contain men in obedience to the Law of God; but also for
Circumstances and Ceremonies in the outward administration of Gods worship. V.
To censure offenders. Of the first three, but briefly.

First, Sect. 15.
the Church is to keep the holy Scripture as a depositum, that which has
been committed unto her, wherein she is as a faithful Register or Notarie,
that keeps the Original Records from corruption. Deuteronomy XXXI. 24.
When Moses had finished the Book of the Law, he gave it to the Levites to be
kept in the side of the Arc: from them, must the King receive his Coppie,
Deuteronomy. XV II. 18. The Apostle says, Unto them were committed the Oracles of
God: Therefore Epiphanius proves, Epiph. de men^. and pond.
the Books of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus, not to be Canonical, because they
were not kept in the Arc: And S. Augustine calls the Jews, our
Librarie-keepers, who are so zealous of the Old Testament, that they will
rather loose their life, then one line of it: So careful also has the
Christian Church been of both Testaments, that many Martyrs have chosen to
give their Bodies, rather then their Bibles to be burnt. Neither does it only
belong to the Church to keep the holy Books, but also to discern between
true Scripture and false: And so she is the Defender of the Scripture, to
which purpose the Spirit of Christ is given unto her, whereby she knows the
voice of the Bridegroom. Here the Church of Rome has abused her power, and
betrayed her trust, inserting into the Canon, diverse Apocryphal books, which
were not written by divine inspiration, nor received by the Church in S.
Ieromes days. And as she is the keeper and maintainer of the holy Records; So
she is, as a Herald and Common-cryer, to publish, notify, propound, and
commend these Records, as the Word of God, unto all men. For this cause, is the
Church called, the Pillar of Truth, because she bears up the Truth by her
public ministry, and shows us the holy Books: So that the Testimony of
the Church, is an excellent means to know the Scripture to be from God, even
the first motive and occasion of our faith; The Key which opens the door of
entrance, into the knowledge of the Scriptures; The Watchman that holds out the
light in open view, and presents the shining beams thereof to all that have
eyes to discern it; The guide that directs and assists us, to find out those
Arguments in Scripture, whereby the Divinity of it, is proved: And so like the
morning star, introduces that clear light, which shines in the word it
self. But the testimony of the Church, is not the only, nor the chief cause
of our knowledge, nor the formal object of our faith. As the Samaritanes at
first believed, for the saying of the woman, Ioh. IV. 39. but afterward because
of his own word, saying, Now we believe, not because of thy saying; for we
have heard him our selves: And as Nathaneel was induced to come to Christ, by
the Testimony of Philip; but was persuaded to believe, that he was the Messiah,
by what he heard from himself, as may appear by his confession, Rabbi, Ioh.
I. 45.4^.
thou art the son of God: so men are first induced to believe, that this
Book is the holy Scripture, by the Testimony of the Church; but after they
receive greater assurance, when their eyes are opened, to see that light which
shines in the Scripture. To use a more familiar similitude: If a man bring you
a letter from your father, and tell you, he received it out of his own hand,
you believe him, but are better assured when you consider the seal,
subscription, form of Characters, and matter contained in the Letters: So are
we persuaded of the divinity of the Scripture. The Scripture is an epistle sent
unto us from God our father, The Church is the messenger, and tells us that
she received it from him: We give credit unto her Report; but when we peruse
it, and consider the divinity of the matter, the sublimity of the style, the
efficacy of the speech, we are fully persuaded that the same is from God
indeed. In a word, the Church commends the Scripture to be Gods word not by her
own authority, but by the verity of the thing it self, and arguments drawn
out of Scripture, which proves it self to be divine, even as the Sun
manifests it self to be the Sun, a learned man proves himself to be
learned, and as Wisdom is justified of her children; for which cause, the
Scripture is called a fire, a hammer, a word that is, lively, mighty in
operation, a light shining in a dark place; All which shows, that it has a
certain inbred power, to prove and manifest it self, without any outward
testimony. And therefore the Authority of the Scripture in respect of us, does
not depend upon the voice of the Church: And yet, is the Church bound to give
testimony to the Scripture, and we are bound to hear her Testimony.

Further as the Church is to propound, Sect. 16.
so to expound the Scripture, and apply them by preaching and administration of
the Sacraments. We are all of us so blind in heavenly mysteries that we may
say with the Eunuch of Ethiopia, Act. V^ll. ^^4
How can I understand, except I had a guide? God has appointed us guides, to
expound unto us the Scripture, and to apply the same for doctrine, for
confutation, for Correction, for Instruction. These be the uses of Scripture
II. Tim. III. 16. and it is The man of God, that is the minister and Pastor,
who is to expound the Scripture and apply it unto these ends. In the II. of
Haggai verse. 12. the Lord says, Ask now the Priests concerning the Law. And
Malach. II. 7. The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should
seek the Law at his mouth. To them it belongs to teach, preach, labor in the
word, divide the word, exhort, confute, rebuke, as the Apostle directs his two
Sons, Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus Bishop of Creta. When Christ was
to remove his bodily presence, he established his ministry upon earth, when he
ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto men, He gave some to be Apostles; and
some Prophets, and some Evangelists: and some, Pastors and teachers. Ephesians.
IIII. 11. He sent forth his disciples with the like commission, as he received
from his father, saying, As my father s^^t me, even so I send you. And again;
Go teach all Nations baptizing them etc. Matthew. XXVIII. 19.20. That this is
the office of the Pastors, is manifest and acknowledged by all, but they must
remember that they expound Scripture by Scripture, and according to the meaning
of the Lawgiver, comparing spiritual things with spiritual things, and
adding nothing of their own. Herein the Church of Rome has abused her power,
assigning unto Scripture what sense she pleases, even that which will make
most for her own turn. This is ingenuously confessed by Cusanus, Apud Illy^*
Clav. Script. p. ^. Tract. 7.
that the Church may expound the Scripture one way at one time, another way at
an other time, still fitting the sense of the Scripture to the practice of the
Church; As they have done touching these words in the institution of the
Sacrament. Drink ye all of this, which by the ancient Church (says he) were
so understood that even the people were to receave the cup; By the modern
Church in another sense. But howsoever they have betrayed their trust, let us
not despise the Judgment of the Catholic Church in expounding the Scripture.
For, as the Scripture is the perfect rule of faith: so the Judgment of the
Church, is a special means to direct us in applying this rule. Every man does
challenge some trust in the Art he professes: And is there any that has
studied the Scripture so well as the Bishops, Pastors, and Doctors of the
Church in all ages? Besides, they have a calling to expound the Scripture, and
are therefore called Guides, Rulers, Lights, Spiritual Fathers, Teachers,
Ambassadors of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. Finally, they have
not only a calling, but a promise of the assistance of the spirit; Matthew.
XXVIII 20.
Lo, I am with you unto the end of the world. By virtue of which promise it is
certain, that all the Pastors of the Catholic Church in all ages, did never
err dangerously; and therefore their Judgment to be preferred, before the
opinion of any private man; for God has commanded us, to hear, and obey them.

II. Sect. 17.
The Church is to judge of the abilities of men, and who are fit for the
Ministry, to confer Orders, appoint them their Stations, and direct them in
the exercise of their Function. This power was committed unto Timothy and
Titus, and must continue in the Church until the end of the world. For as now
we are not to expect new revelations, so neither extraordinary missions; And
therefore, he that will take upon him the Office of a Minister, not being
called by the Church, Ioh. X.
is an Intruder, and a Thief that comes not in by the door, but climbeth up
another way. What will you say then to some Dominees here amongst you, who
having no Ordination to our calling, have taken upon them to preach, and
preach, I know not what, even the foolish visions of their own heart. As they
run when none has sent them, 11 Sam. XVIII 23.29.
and run very swiftly, because like Ahimaaz they run by the way of the
plain; So like Ahimaaz when they are come, they have no tidings to tell, but
doleful news. They think by their puff of preaching to blow down the goodly
Orders of our Church, as the walls of Jericho were beaten down with sheep
horns. Good God! is not this the sin of Vzziah, who intruded himself into
the Office of the Priesthood! And was there ever the like heard amongst
Christians, except the Anabaptists, whom some amongst you have matched in all
manner of disorder and confusion?

III. Church to decide controversies in religion, The Apostle says: Oportet
haereses esse; There must be heresies, So there must be a means to discover,
reprove, condemn those herisies, and pronounce out of the word of God for
truth against heresy. Deuteronomy. XVII. 8.9.10.
Under the Law the Priests assembled together, had authority to give sentence
in matters of Controversy. The same authority, did our Savior give unto the
governors of his Church, when he gave them the power of the Keys, and
commanded others to hear them, for that their sentence is the sentence of
God: Titus is commanded to reject an heretic, and so he had power to Judge
him. Do we therefore make the Church an absolute Infallible Judge of faith? No,
Only God is the supreme Judge, of absolute Authority, because he is the
Lawgiver, And in all Commonwealths the supreme power of Judgment belongs to
the Lawgiver; Inferior magistrates are but Interpreters of the Law. Therefore
in Scripture, these two are joined together. Esaias XXXIII. 22. The Lord is our
Judge the Lord is our Lawgiver, And James IV. 10. There is one Lawgiver able
to save, and destroy. His throne is established in heaven; but in earth we may
hear his voice in the holy Scripture, revealing his will to the sons of men,
whereby, he speaks to us; for God now speaks to us, and teaches his
Church, not by any extraordinary voice from heaven, not by Anabaptisticall
Enthusiasmes; but by the mouth of his holy Prophets and Apostles, whose
sentence is contained in the holy Scripture, Lib. V.
that we may say with Optatus Milevitanus, De coelo quaerendus Iudex: Sed ut
quid pulsamus ad coelum, cum habeamus hic in euangelio testamentum. The Judge
is in heaven: But we need not go so far to know his sentence, when we have
his will expressed in the Gospel. So Moses Deuteronomy. XXX. v. 11.12.13.14.
This commandment which I command thee this day, is not hidden from thee,
neither is it far off. It is not in heaven -- neither is it beyond the sea --
But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou
may do it. This word being lively, and accompanied with the power of the
Spirit, does illuminate the minds of men with the knowledge of the truth,
reprove, convince and condemn error, and therefore is said to accuse, judge,
condemn, Ioh. v. 45. VII 5. XII. 4.8.
by our Savior himself. And so though properly the Scripture be not the
Judge, but rule of faith, yet we call it the Judge by a Metonymie, because God
who is the Judge speaks in it, and by it. Poli^. lib. III. c. 16.
So the Philosopher says, The Law is the Universal Judge, and that
magistrates are but Ministers and Interpreters of the Law, to apply it to
particular causes and persons. That which the Magistrates do in Civil
matters, the chief Pastors of the Church, are to do in matter of Religion. If
a controversy arise, they are to hear the reasons on both sides, compare
them, try by the Touchstone of the word, weigh them in the balance of the
Sanctuary; And so, that which the word has defined in general; they are
according to the rule of this word, to apply unto the particular cause and
controversy, pronouncing for truth against error. Yet so as they swarve not
from the Rule, whereunto God has tied them, Esaias. VIII. 20. To the Law, to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, there is no light in
them. So that the Church does Judge and determine controversies, not as an
absolute infallible Judge, but as a public Minister and Interpreter, by a
subordinate power, which yet is more to be esteemed, then the Judgment of any,
yea of a thousand private men. She is not the Judge, but interpreter of
Scripture. She does not Judge of the verity of Gods Law, but of the truth of
private men's Judgments. And that especially, (if the matter in controversy
be of weight) when the Bishops are assembled in Council. When there was a
Controversy touching Circumcision, the Apostles and Elders assembled at
Jerusalem for composing the matter Act. XV. The godly Bishops in the primitive
Church, following their example, did at all occasions assemble in Counsels,
for determining Controversies, condemning of heretics, and clearing the Truth
by their joint suffrages; even in time of persecution under Pagan Emperors,
they did celebrate diverse Provincial Synods, as at Antioch, at Casarea, at
Carthage. And in that famous general Council of Nice, wherein Arrius was
condemned, the Fathers saw such a necessity of this Synodicall Judgment for
preserving the peace of the Church, that they ordained, that in every Province,
once every year, the Bishops should assemble in Council. The same afterward
was enjoined by the Emperor Justinian. And so it was observed in the Church,
and by the sentence of Counsels general or particular, all heresies arising
were condemned. Those Assemblies being lawfully called, and proceeding orderly,
are great and awful representations of the Church Catholic, the highest
external Tribunal which the Church has on Earth, their authority is
immediately derived and delegated from Christ; their decrees bind all persons
within their Jurisdiction, to external obedience; And it is not lawful for
any private man to oppose his judgment to the public. He may offer his
contrary opinion to be considered of, so he do it with evidence of Scripture,
and reason, and very modestly: But if he do factiously advance his own
conceit, and despise the Church, so far as to cast off her communion (as many
of you have done) he may be justly branded and condemned for a Schismaticke.

In the IV. Churches power for making of Laws, to direct us in the order, that
is to be observed in the outward administration of God's worship. This is the
thing which I must principally endeavor to prove: for, if the Church may make
Laws of things Indifferent, and appoint matters of Order, Decency, and
Polity; then are you bound, even for Conscience sake, to submit your selves
unto the Orders of our Church, which you now so violently oppose, I will
therefore join issue with you in this point; and prove (as I hope) by
arguments unanswerable, that the Church has such a power.

I. God, are not expressed in the Scripture, as says Tertullian, Harum and
aliarum ejusm^di disciplinarum, si legem expostules Scriptu rarum nullam
invenies. De Corona ^^il.
If you look for a Law in Scripture, for these and such other like matters of
discipline, you will find none. And therefore certainly, they are left to be
ordered at the discretion of the Church. Do we therefore derogate from the
perfection and sufficiency of Scripture? God forbid! You shall understand,
there is great difference between matters of Faith, and matters of Order. The
Apostle has distinguished them, Col. II. 5. Beholding your Order and the
steadfastness of your Faith. T.C. first Reply, p. 26.
Your great master Cartwright, compares matters of Faith, unto garments, which
cover the Churches nakedness; matters of Order, unto chains, bracelets,
rings, and other Jewels to adorn her, and set her out, which no man will say,
are of that necessity, as the former. Now, matters of Faith, and whatsoever is
essential in the worship of God, are plentifully set down in Scripture; but
besides, there are other matters of Order, concerning the circumstances of
Time, Place, and Person, and the outward form of Gods worship, all which, are
not expressed in the Scripture; for albeit these things be not altogether
omitted in Scripture, yet are they not taught so fully as the former: Matters
of Faith are so perfectly taught in holy Writ, that nothing ever can need to
be added, nothing ever cease to be necessary. But as for matters of Order and
Polity, both much of that which the Scripture teaches, is not always
needful, and much the Church of God shall always need, which the Scripture
teaches not. And this does nothing derogate from the perfection of Scripture.
For we count those things perfect, which want nothing requisite to the end for
which they were ordained, Now; the end for which God delivered the Scripture,
was to be the Canon of our Faith, and guide unto salvation; within the
compass whereof, those matters of Order, Ceremony, and Circumstance do not
come; for they respect not Credenda, but Agenda, or rather modum agendi; Not
points of doctrine, but matters of practice, or rather the manner of performing
of outward duties. And as it is no disgrace for Nature, to have left it to the
wit of Man, to devise his own attire; no more is it any disgrace for
Scripture, to have left a number of such things free to be ordered at the
discretion of the Church: But indeed, it is a great commendation to the
Scripture, to have omitted those things which neither needed, nor could be
particularly expressed. They needed not, because they are so obvious: And they
could not, both because they are so numerous, and because so chaungeable.

I. They neded not; to all men, by common sense? As a great counselor of
state, whose wisdom in weighty affairs is admired, would take it in scorn
to have his Council solemnly asked about a toy, which a poor plowman could
resolve: So the meannesse of these things is such, that to search the Scripture
for ordering of them, were to derogate from the reverend authority and dignity
of the Scripture. The Apostle speaking of a matter of this kind, touching being
bare or covered in Church assemblies, using long hair, or being shorn; he
brings an Argument from Nature, Does not even Nature it self teach you. II.
Cor. XI. 14.
As nature, (that is, Custom, which is an other nature) had taught the
Corinthians, that it is not comely for a man to have long hair: So nature it
self does teach us, that when a man comes to present himself, before the
Lord by prayer, he should do it, with all humility of mind, and humiliation of
body, as the Psalmist says, Ps. XCV. 6.
Worship and fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker. So likewise, when
we make confession of our says, or lift up our voices to praise God; that we
should use a gesture suitable, to express our resolution. And diverse things of
this kind has the Church appointed ex ductamine rationis; for albeit the
substance of the service of God being above the pitch of natural reason, may
not be invented by men, as it is amongst the heathens, but must be received
from God himself; yet in matters of lesser moment, especially concerning
outward behavior in performance of Church-actions, De Resur. carnis. Luminis
naturalis ducatum repellere, non modo stultum est, sed and impium. Lib. IV. de
Trin, c. VI.
we may be directed by natural reason, as says Tertullian, We may even in
matters of God, be made wiser, by reasons drawn from the public persuasions
which are grafted in men's minds. And St Austin, It is not only foolish but
impious, to refuse the guydance of natural light. And if nature direct us in
any thing: then certainly in this, what gestures are fittest for Gods
worship; for gestures are natural, in so much that one of your own Authors,
speaking of gestures, Treatise of Divine worship, p. 30.
says that Nature stands sn stead of a direction, and that they are not to be
esteemed humane inventions, but Gods Ordinance, because they be natural
circumstances of Worship. II. They could not well be expressed, in the
Scripture, and that first because they are so numerous. Ioh. XXI. 25.
All things that Jesus did are not recorded, because our Bible should not grow
too big for us, and was it fit then the Scripture should record all things
that are or may be lawfully incident to the particular service of God? So it
should have swollen in quantity, above the Popes Decretalls, whereas the Canon
of our faith should be brief, that all may peruse it. III. Because they are so
chaungeable and diverse, according to the diverse conditions of the Church,
they could not be commanded by an unchangeable Law, but were to be taken up by
occasion. Therefore the Apostle having instructed the Corinthians in matters of
faith and godliness, puts off these other matters till his own coming, that
he might see what was most expedient, 1. Cor. 1^ 34,
Other things will I set in order when I come. In which words he promises to
appoint things belonging to outward Order and Polity, Aug 1. epist. ad Ianuar.
chrysostom. in Loc. Muscul. in Loc. Calvin in Loc Baeda, Aretius, Beza, Whitaker
de perfect. Script. Quaest. VI. c. 6. and 10. Moulin Buckler of faith. p. 46.47.
or as St Austin calls it ordinem agendi, (as I proved unto you at large at our
last meeting, both from the notation of the word (...), and from consent of all
writers.) Now we know that he never came unto the Corinthians after that: who
then, think you, did order those other things, but the governors of the
Church? And yet the Church of Corinth being a particular Church, and so to be
governed by one Law, one would think that the Apostle might have prescribed
unto them a complete form, for outward Order and Polity: But he foresaw in
his wisdom, that the Church would not always be in the same condition; and
that those Orders, that were agreeable for her Infancy, would not suite so
well with her afterward, when she was grown unto ripe years. Therefore he
puts off these other things till his coming; which being prevented, the
Governors of the Church had power to determine of these things.

Now, Orders will not serve one Church at all times, Tert. de cor. mil. Basil,
de S. sanct. cap. 27. Con. Toll. IV. c. 5.
how was it possible for the Scripture to express all matters of Order
belonging to the Catholic Church? We know, that which is fit for the Church
in one Nation, is not so fit for another; And that which is fit at one time, is
not so fit at another. The Church is sometimes in prosperity, sometimes in
adversity; sometimes has to do with Pagans, sometimes with Heretics, and
those diverse, by reason whereof, the Church has been occasioned to change
her Rites, as namely, dipping in Baptism, which she has changed from thrice,
to once: and again, from once, to thrice: So has she changed many other
Ceremonies, laying some down, and taking others up. And how could she
otherwise do? for who can imagine, that one and the same fashion can accord
unto the Church in her Infancy, and fuller growth; persecuted, and in Peace;
flying into the wilderness, and resting, as the Dove in the Arc; at one time
dwelling in Jerusalem, a City built at unity, within it self: at another,
diffused over the whole world? You may as well shape a coat for the Moon, to
fit her both in her waxing, and in her waning; in the full, and in the want, as
to set down one manner of Discipline, for all Churches, at all times. The
internal beauty of the Church, is always the same; Ps. XLV. 13.
but her outward garment is of diverse colors. And requisite it is, it should
be so; for, if in these things there were no alteration, Ceremonies would be
taken to be matters of substance: As Calvin has well observed, saying: As
concerning rites in particular, let the sentence of Augustine take place, which
leaves it free unto all Churches (understand National, Respons. ad medias.
not Parochial Churches) to receive their own Customs, yea sometimes it
profits, and is expedient, that there be difference, lest men should think,
that Religion is tied to outward Ceremonies. Tertullian's rule therefore is
infallible. Lib. de Virgin. veland^
Regula sidei immobilis, irreformabilis, caetera disciplinae and conversationis
admittunt novitatem correctionis. Thus it is clear, that these things are not
expressed in Scripture, but are to be ordered by the Church.

My II. Church has authority to make Laws for matters of Order, and outward
Polity, and to appoint Rites and Ceremonies, to be observed in the worship of
God, and that al men who are within the Communion of that Church, are bound to
give obedience unto these Laws. Neither was there ever any learned Divine of
the Reformed Churches, who did deny Ceremonial Traditions, or indeed any
Traditions, but such as do cross either the verity, or the perfection of the
sacred Scripture. Here it were easy for me to hold you till night, only in
delivering the suffrages of Divines, for confirmation of this point; but I will
content my self with a few. The reformed Church of France, in her Confession
published in the year 1562. says: We confess, Fatemur tum omnes, tum etiam
singulas Ecclesias, hoc jus habere, ut Leges and Statuta sibi condant ad
Politiam communem inter suos constituendam -- Ejusmodi porto statutis
obedientiam deferendam esse -- Qui hoc detrectant cerebrosi and pervicaces apud
nos habentur.

Apud Calvin. in opusc.


that all and every Church has this power to make Laws for establishing
Common Polity amongst her own members. -- And that obedience is to be given to
these Laws. -- and those who refuse to obey, are accounted with us obstinate
and brainsick. And so they are indeed. M. Calvin, whose judgment you profess
to honor and follow, has most judiciously determined this Question of the
power of the Church, in appointing of Ceremonies and outward Orders to be
observed in the worship of God; whose judgment I will deliver in these
propositions following. I. In externa disciplina and ceremonijs, nonvoluit
sigillatim praescribere quid sequi debeamus, quod istud pendere a temporum
condition praevideret; neque judicavitunam saeculis omnibus formam convenire.

Lib. IV. Instit c. X.. 30.


In external Discipline and Ceremonies, Christ would not particularly
prescribe what we should follow, because he foresaw, that would depend upon
the conditions of the times, and he thought that one form, would not be
agreeable unto all ages. II. Si enim velut in medio positae singulorum arbitrio
relictae fucrint, quoniam nunquam futurum est; ut omnibus idem placeat; brevi
futura est rerum omnium confusio. Ibid. 23.
That yet these rites must not be left free for every man to use what fashion
he pleases, but must be established by Law; otherwise for as much as the same
orders will never please all men, there will follow great confusion in the
Church. III. Prout Ecclesiae utilitas requirit, tam usitatas mutare, and
abrogare, quam novas instituere conveniet.

Ibid.. 30.


That it is lawful for the Church, when she finds it convenient, to change
and abrogate old Ceremonies, and to institute new in their room. IV.
Christiani populi officium est; quae secundum hunc canonem fuerint instituta,
libera quidem conscientia nullaque superstitione, pia tamen and facili ad
obsequium propensione servare, non contemptim habere, non supina negli, entia
praeterire: tantu^ abest, ut per fastum and contumaciam violare aperte debeat
-- Quod siquis obstrepat, and plus sapere hic velit quam oportet, videat ipse
qua morositatem suam ratione Domino approbet. Nobis tamen illud Pauli
satisfacere debet; nos contendi morem non habere neque Ecclesias Dei.

. 31.


That it is the duty of every Christian, not to contemn, or neglect such
constitutions, but to keep them without superstition, with a free conscience,
and with a pious and facile propension to obedience: And if any will oppose
them, and be more wise then is needful; let him look to it, which way he will
approve his morositie unto God; for that of S. Paul should satisfy us, that we
have no custom to contend (namely about such matters) nor the Churches of God.
V. Neque tamen permisit Dominus vagam effraenamque licentiam, sed cancellos, ut
ita loquar circumdidit. And a^gaine, Confugere hic oportet ad generales quas
dedit regulas. See.. 10.
That God has not given his Church unlimited power to establish what
Ceremonies she lists, but has bounded her within certain rules; So that here
we must have recourse unto the general rules laid down in the Scripture.
Now, the general rules be especially these: Let all things be done decently,
and in Order. I. Cor. XIV. 40. Do all things to the glory of God. I. Cor. X.
31. Let all things be done to edifying. I. Cor. XIV. 26. follow those things
which concern Peace. Romans XIV. 19. Of which kind, many more might be gathered
out of Scripture, which are the very Rules and Canons of the Law of Nature,
written in all men's hearts, which we are bound to observe, though the Apostle
had not mentioned them: for they were not delivered in the Law of Moses, and
yet the Jews observed them unwritten, as being edicts of Nature, and thereby
framed such Church-Orders, as in their Law was not prescribed. So the Christian
Church in all ages, having respect unto those general rules, has established
Laws, for the outward form and administration of God's worship, See harmony
of the confess. Sect. 17. Zarich. in 4. ptaecept. Martyr epist. ad Hooperum,
and a Cloud of witnesses alleged by Archdishop Whitg. ft, in the defense of
his Answer, and O^ Forbesse in his. Irenicum.
as I will show in the next place. I will not trouble you any more with
quotations; but refer you to the confessions of all the reformed Churches,
and to the Books of all learned Protestants, who have written of Traditions,
Rites, and Ecclesiastical constitutions!

Thirdly, this has been the practice of all Churches, to make Laws of things
indifferent, and to appoint certain Rites in the administration of God's
worship. The Apostles did it: They appointed some which we read of, and yet
hold not our selves bound to observe, as abstinence from blood and strangled,
the kiss of Charity, Widows to be employed in the service of the Church:
And many more, which are not recorded, as is confessed by the learned Whitaker.
Deperfect. Script. q. VI. c. 6.
The Apostles (says he) did in every Church, institute and ordain some Rites
and Customs, serving for the seemlinesse of Church-regiment, which they have
not committed to writing. The Primitive Church did both institute new Rites,
and abrogate some, used by the Apostles, as (I think) you will confess. Yea,
even the Church of the Jews did institute many things, without any special
warrant: Four set Fasts, whereof you may read in the Prophecy of Zachary:
Zach. VIII.
and by the authority of Judas Maccabaeus, the Feast of Dedication, which our
Savior sanctified with his blessed presence. The Music of the Temple that
David brought in, we read it approved; we never read it commanded: The
appointment of the hours for day lie sacrifice, the building of Synagogues
throughout the Land, See T. C. Reply, p, 35.
the erecting of Pulpits and Chaires to teach in, the order of Burial; The
Rites of Marriage are not prescribed in the Law, but taken up by themselves: So
I may say, for the form of administration of the Sacraments; it was not
prescribed who should be the Minister of Circumcision, in what place it should
be ministered, with what kind of knife, after what manner, the Child should be
presented; what gesture should be used, either by the Minister, or the people,
what words should be used. As for the Passover, though the form of it be more
particularly prescribed; yet it is certain, that the Church after, changed
some things, and added many things to the first institution. The gesture used
in the first Passover, may appear by many circumstances in the Text, to have
been standing, and yet ((I think) you will confess, that they changed it
afterward into sitting or lying. And they added many things which were not
commanded, as washing of their feet, after they had eaten the Lamb; and
after that, a second course of Sallets (in which the soppe given to Judas, was
dipped): The dividing of the Bread into two parts; the reserving of the one
part for a while, under a napkin, and at the end of the Supper, dividing it
into so many parts, as there were persons, and delivering it unto them: The
form of blessing which was used; all which are set down particularly by Beza,
Beza in Matthew. XXVI. 20.
who professes that he collected the same out of Paulus Burgensis, Tremellius
and S^aliger. And for all these, they had no direction in the Word, but they
were appointed by the Churches discretion. Now, if the Church of the Jews had
such power, much more the Christian Church: for, Agar was in bondage, Gal. IV.
25.26.
with her children; but Jerusalem, which is above, is free. For, in God's
worship they were bound unto many circumstances of Time, Place, and Person,
which no man will say we are, under the Gospel. And indeed, they (being a
National Church only) were to be governed by one Law, and all things incident
to the worship of God amongst them, might be expressed in that Law. But the
Christian Church, being spread far and wide over the face of the Earth, does
require Laws for government so diverse, as could not be expressed in the
Gospel. So that Churches both under the Law and the Gospel, have exercised
this power; And (I hope) you are so charitable, that you will not condemn all
Churches that ever have been.

IV. But say, Churches, and account nothing pure, but what is used in your
Conventicles, I dare join issue, even upon that, and appeal unto your own
practice. Do you not practice and appoint many things in your own
Congregations, which are in themselves free; as not being expressly commanded
in the Word? What warrant have you for Pulpits, Pewes, Bells? What for the
outward form and administration of the Sacraments? What for the form of
Excommunication, and receiving of Penitents? Finally, what particular direction
have ye for the order of God's service, as when you are assembled, whether the
Minister should begin with praying or preaching, with reading or singing of
Psalms, whether the Celebration of Baptism and Marriage should be before or
after Sermon? All these things are ordered by your own discretion, and that
diversely in diverse Congregations, according to the humor of the Minister. And
will you not allow so much power to the Church, as every one of your selves
does usurp, as a Pope in his own Parish?

V. Communion, and that those Laws are to be observed, though they be of
matters enjoined to be performed in God's service; As if a Master of a Family,
should direct his children and servants, how to demean themselves in the
Church, commanding them strictly to kneel at prayer, especially at their
coming in to crave God's blessing upon themselves, and to stand in time of
Sermon, that they may hear more attentively, and to turn to their Bible, as
often as any place is alleged by the Preacher, for the confirmation of his
doctrine; they were bound to obey him, and he would call them to account, if
they did not observe his directions. How much more has the Church power to
make such Laws, binding all that are within her Communion, to obedience?
Surely, as the Lord convinces the disobedience of his people, Ier. XXXV.
by the obedience of the Rechabites to the commandment of Ionadab their
father; so may I justly accuse your disobedience to the lawful Orders of the
Church, by the obedience of your children and servants unto you. For shall the
householder command in his house, and be obeyed, and not the Rulers in the
Church? Shall the Mayor make Laws in a Town, and not the King in his Kingdom?
Or, were it not strange, that God himself should allow so much authority to
every poor Family, for the ordering of all which are in it; and yet the
Church, which is the City of the great King, the House of the living God, the
Spouse of Christ, the New Jerusalem, have no authority to command any thing,
which the meanest of her children shall, in respect of her constitution, be
bound to obey?

Finally, Church has lawfully repealed Laws, made of things indifferent, as
the Law of abstinence from blood and strangled, enacted by the Apostles, II.
Cor. XIII. 14. II. Tim. V.
without any limitation of time; The same might be said of the kiss of
Charity, commanded by the Apostle; And of the Widows who were appointed to
be entertained by the Church, for the service of the Saints; As also of the
Love Feasts, used in the days of the Apostles: All these were abrogated by
Ecclesiastical authority. Therefore the Church has power to make Laws of
such matters: And these Laws being made, are to be observed. Yea, if there be
no law to direct us in these things, then ought we to follow the custom of
the Church wherein we are, In ijs rebus de quibus nihil certi siatuit serij
tara, mos populi Dei and instituta majorum, pro lege tenenda sunt. Epist. 86.
according to that golden rule of S. Austin, In these things which the
Scripture has not determined, the custom of Gods people should be unto us a
Law. He shows that this was his own practice, touching fasting, and the like
observations: when he was in Rome, he followed the fashion of Rome: And when
he was in another place, he conformed himself to the custom of that place.
And he says, he learned this from S. Ambrose; who, when he had asked his
Council touching fasting on the Sabbath day, returned him this answer; When I
come to Rome, Cum Romam venio, jejuno Sabbato; cum hic sum, non jeiuno: sic
etiam tu, ad quam forte ecclesiam veneris, ejus morem serva, si cuiquam non vis
esse scandalo: nec quenquam tibi -- Ego ^cr^ de hac sententia etiam atque etiam
cogitans ita semper habui, tanquam eam coelestioraculo susceperim -- sensi --
perturbationes fieri per quorundam fratrum contentiosam obstinationem and
superstitiosam timiditatem -- tam litigiosas excitant quaestiones, and nisi
quod ipsi faciunt, nihil rectum existiment, Epist. 118. ad Ianuar.
I fast the Sabbath: when I am here, (namely in Millain) I fast not: So also
thou, keep the custom of the Church whereunto thou come, if thou would
neither offend, nor be offended. And he says, he never thought upon this
advice, but he esteemed it as an Oracle from Heaven. And this same advice he
gives to every man, touching his carriage in matters of this kind; Eo modo
agat quo agere viderit Ecclesiam ad quam devenerit. And those that do
otherwise, he charge them with contentious obstinacy, and superstitious
fear, raising strife, because they account nothing right, but what themselves
do. Now, would to God that you who came out of Scotland, had followed this
advice, and so conformed your selves unto the Orders of this Church, and not
sought factiously to bring in amongst us the customs of the place from whence
you came, and such customs too, as even the Church of that Kingdom has most
wisely repudiated.

We find that the Apostle himself did defer much unto the custom of the
Church, when there was a question in Corinth, touching the behavior of men in
public assemblies, as whether men should pray bare, women covered, or
contrary; he resolves the whole matter into the Churches custom, he does not
leave every man free to do what he will: but will have the Churches custom to
be observed. If any man be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the
Churches of God. The Apostle had used sundry reasons to prove, that men should
pray bare, women veiled: As I. from the signification, verse. 3. The man is the
woman's head. I. cor. XI. 16.
Whence follows, that wives should be subject to their husbands, and testify
their subjection by this significant Ceremony, in coming always to Church
with their heads covered. II. From Comeliness, verse. 4. 5. 6. for it is even
one very thing (namely for a woman to be bare-headed) as though she were
shaven -- And if it be shame for a woman to be shaven, let her be covered. and
verse. 13. Judge in your selves: Is it comely that a woman pray uncovered? III.
From nature verse. 14. Does not nature it self teach you? But he saw the nature
of the question would affoard no Arguments, but such as a contentious spirit
would elude: Therefore to make short work, he finally resolves all into the
Churches custom: If any man be Contentious, we have no such custom, nor the
Churches of God. As if he should say: If any man be so contentious, that he
will not be satisfied with these reasons, Let him know, that the Churches
custom is otherwise. We have no such custom etc. Whence we may infer,
first, that the Church has her customs, and had them even in the Apostles
days; for this Negative [Wee have no such custome] includes an affirmative: A
Custom they had; but no such Custom, as that men should be covered, women
bare, but the contrary, II. That the Church may allege her Customs, to stop
the mouths of the contentious. III. That custom is warrant enough for a Rite,
as whether to be covered or bare; whether to sit or to kneel, whether to wear
a black garment, or a white, in the administration of God's service. IV. That
whosoever opposes the Churches customs in matters of Order, are to be reputed
contentious, as hazarding the Churches peace for matters of no more weight.

Thus have I proved at large, Church has power in things Indifferent, to make
Laws, and appoint Orders to be observed, in the administration of Gods
worship; And that obedience is due unto such Laws; or if there be no certain
constitution, that the received custom of the Church has the force of a Law.
But here, I know what you will say; that the Church may appoint Circumstances,
not Ceremonies. This was your Plea at the last visitation, and a very strange
one. For this distinction is unknown unto the Schools, not used by any
Protestant divines, except some late Libellers against the government, whose
unsavory books I never thought worthy of my reading. Sure I am that your
chief advocate, Not that we say, as you charge us, that no Ceremony may be in
the Church except the same be expressed in the word of God: but that in making
Orders and Ceremonies of the Church, it is not lawful to do what men list. T.
c. Reply p. 27.
Mr Cartwright (the only learned man who ever lifted up his hand, against the
Orders of our Church) did not deny all Ceremonies; but excepted against ours,
that they are not agreeable to the simplicity of the Gospel, and to the
practice of the Apostles, that they are borrowed from the Papists, give
scandal to the weak, and are different from the Orders of other reformed
Churches. And when these silly exceptions have been answered to the full: his
wise followers have devised a way to cut the Gordian knotte, to-deny all
Ceremonies, except the Sacraments, which are of Christ's Institution. And since
that is the maine ground of your opposition, I will take some pains, to
discover unto the world the weakness of it.

And first, I think it will puzle you all, Circumstances, Determinatio divini
cultus pertinet ad ceremonia^. Aquin. 1^ 2ae. q. 103. Art. 1. ^on.
and Ceremonies. If you say that a Ceremony determines the manner of Gods
worship; a Circumstance only the time, place and person, to be used in Gods
service, which are of absolute necessity, in regard that his service must be
performed at some time, in some place, by some person: This distinction will
not hold, for it falls out often, that in the choice of one time rather then
another, and of one person too, there is something Ceremonial, I am sure that
some of the Reformed Churches, See harmon. of confess. Sect. 17.
amongst the Ceremonies which they retain and approve, reckon festival days,
and set Lessons, which are circumstances, but Ceremonial circumstances.
Secondly, as it is necessary, that there be some place, and time appointed for
Gods Service; So also, it is necessary, that there be some outward form,
(besides what is expressly commanded) used in the Service of God: And albeit
the substance of religious actions be prescribed by God himself; yet the
outward form required to the decent administration of the same, and for the
greater solemnity of the action, is not expressed in the Scripture; As for
example; Christ has commanded us to baptize with water, in the name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost: here is both the matter and the form, wherein
the essence of baptism consists; but what other words and actions we should
use in the administration thereof, we have no direction; And yet if one should
do no more but sprinkle water upon a child, and pronounce the words of
baptism, howsoever the baptism were good, yet the action would seem bare,
and the Sacrament quickly grow into contempt. Therefore the Church has
appointed prayers, Lessons, interrogatories, exhortations and some visible
signs also to be used, in the administration of that Sacrament. These outward
expressions of Gods worship, whether by words or actions, which are not
essential unto the duty, as not being expressly commanded; we call
Ceremonies, without which, no public action can be rightly performed: for as
the flesh covers the hollow deformity of the bones, and beautifieth the body
with natural graces; So Ceremonies cover the nakedness of public actions,
both civil and religious, and procure reverence and esteem unto them, in so
much that no nation in the world did ever suffer public actions which are of
weight, whether civil or sacred, to pass without some visible solemnity; So
that there is a ground in nature for Ceremonies in general; for all nations by
natural instinct, have observed them: and for some Ceremonies in particular;
for Nature does teach us, that God is to be worshipped, not only, with the
inward devotion of the heart, but also with the outward reverence of the body;
And therefore all men by the indictment of reason, have used to bow themselves
to the ground, in token of reverence, at the sensible signs of Gods presence,
or when they have received any message from the Lord. It is therefore an error
to think Ceremonies in the general, to be things merely indifferent: for
howsoever every particular Ceremony be indifferent and alterable; yet that
there should be some Ceremonies, is absolutely necessary, forasmuch as no
outward work in God's worship can be performed without Ceremonial
Circumstances, some or other, more then a body can be without dimensions. And
since some Ceremonies must be used, it is also necessary, for preserving
serving of Order and uniformity in worship, that there be some constitutions
about them, otherwise if they be left arbitrary, every Parish, yea every
Priest, will have a fashion by himself, as his humor leads him: So there
shall be, Quot capita, tot schismata (says Hierome.) And what will follow
thereupon, but infinite distraction, confusion, and disorder in the Church, as
I observed before out of Calvin? S.. 23.
III. As Ceremonies are necessary for outward expression of Gods worship, so,
(if they be of good choice, as ours are) they are of singular use; for they
tend to edification, they nourish piety, and are helps and furtherances to
Religion. They inform the understanding, as having a clear signification of
some duty required of us, As for example, imposition of hands in Ordination of
Ministers, Does put the party ordained (say your own Authors) in mind of his
separation to the work of the Lord. Eccles. discip. fol. 51.
And so all the Ceremonies of our Church, serve to put us in mind of something
fit to be observed; As thrice dipping in Baptism, puts us in mind of the
Trinity, and once, of the Unity of the Godhead: so the black garment may
admonish the Minister of gravity, the white, of purity. Again, they work
upon the heart, stirring up in it affections suitable to the action in hand,
namely reverence, devotion, humility, confidence, attention: As when we pray
kneeling, by the bending of the knee, we express the bending of the heart; and
when we confess our faith standing, we manifest boldness and resolution. But
especially, they help the memory; for as the eye is of all other the most
apprehensive sense; so things that are seen, make the deepest inpression.
Words spoken are many times but as wind, they go in at one care, and out at
another, and so vanish in the air; and so the memory of them is not so
durable, as is the memory of visible signs, which being not so common, do
more strongly moove the fancy. In a word, Ceremonies serve to preserve
religion, as salt does meat, or the bark the tree; or the leaves, the budd:
Therefore are sacred actions, clothed with Ceremonies, that the outward
Majesty which they carry, may procure unto them the greater reverence. They
distinguish public actions from private businesses; and sometimes Christians,
from those that are aliens from the Church: Therefore Epiphanius writing
against all heresies, rehearses all the Ceremonies of the Church, as certain
marks, whereby she was then distinguished from other Sects. The learned
Schooleman Aquinas, 1^ 2ae. q 103. Art. 4. Con.
calls the Ceremonies of the Church, Protestationes fidei, protestations of
our faith; Lib. IV. Instit. c. X sect. 27.29.
And the judicious Calvin terms them, exercitia pietatis, exercises of
piety, and Nervi Ecclesiae, the very nerves and sinews of the Church, without
which it needs must be dissolved.

In the next place, Ceremonies, almost as many as the Church injoynes, and some
of them of a very bad choice. First, Sitting at the Communion, must be a
Ceremony, if kneeling be; for all gestures are of one kind. Yea, you have
made sitting a significant Ceremony. The authors of the admonition say, See
Whitgift, p. 599.
Sitting at the Communion signifies rest, that is, a full finishing of the
Ceremonial Law, and a perfect work of redemption wrought; that gives rest
for ever. Others have given it a worse signification, saying, that it imports a
Coheirship, Communion, fellowship, equality with Christ. And I pray you shall
it be lawful for you to appoint a Ceremony, yea a significant Ceremony in
Gods worship; And shall it not be lawful for the whole Church to do the
like? But you will say, that sitting is a Ceremony of Christ's Institution: So
some of your unworthy Authors, have said, that sitting is even a part of the
Sacramental sign. Repl. partic. to Bishop Morton, p. 36.
Wherein, first you forsake your standard bearer; Mr Cartwright could not find
it within the compass of Christ's Institution; T. C. Reply, p. 165. 166.
for he says, It is not necessary that we should receive the Communion
sitting. And again, I admonish the reader that sitting at the Communion is not
holden to be necessary. II. You condemn all Churches, that are, or have been,
as breakers of Christ's institution, and depravers of the Sacrament; sitting
never being allowed in any Church, except amongst your selves, not in France,
not in Geneva, not amongst many of your own brethren in England, who receive
the communion standing. And lastly, You do shamefully abuse the world, by
pretending Christ's institution, when there is neither commandment, nor
example, binding us to sit. There is no commandment, for the using of any
gesture: Christ bids us in the institution, eat Bread, and drink Wine in
remembrance of his death, but he bids us not receive these Elements sitting.
And St Paul who delivered unto the Corinthians, whatsoever he received of the
Lord, touching this Sacrament, has delivered nothing touching sitting. Neither
is there any gesture commanded as necessary in any of the Sacraments, either
under the Law, or under the Gospel; But all of them left free; And what
gesture was used in Circumcision, and in Baptism, no man can tell me. And
albeit God has sometimes enjoined other gestures, upon occasion to be used in
some acts of his worship: yet he did never upon any occasion, command the use
of sitting in any part of his worship. And as there is no precept, so there is
no example for sitting. Here that it may appear, how vainly you do pretend
the example of Christ; I will examine the grounds, whereupon you build, and
make it evident, both that Christ did not sit in the celebration of this
Sacrament, And also, that albeit Christ had used sitting, yet this gesture does
not bind us to imitation.

As to the former, God, so much as a probability, to induce men to think that
Christ sat at the ministration of the Sacrament; and on the other part, I
find it most probable, that he used another gesture, and for your
satisfaction, I offer unto you these considerations, which I beseech you to
weigh in the scales of unpartiall Judgment, and God grant you understanding
in all things. I. There is no mention in any of the Evangelists, of the gesture
Christ used in the Eucharisticall Supper, wherein I cannot but reverence the
good providence of God, and wisdom of his Spirit; which of set purpose, has
omitted his gesture, to show, that we are not bound to follow it, more then
any other. As God hid the body of Moses, least the Jews should abuse his grave
unto Idolatry; So has he concealed the gesture which he used in the first
Supper, as foreseeing that you would make an Idol of it. Possible and easy it
was for the Evangelists, to mention Christ's gesture; as well as in other
services so many times in the Bible, the gesture is mentioned. And the gesture
which he used in eating the Passover, is expressed by all the Evangelists, and
that at three several times: as at his first going to Supper, Matthew. XXVI. 20.
So when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve. The like is Luke
XXII. 14. Then after washing his Disciples feet, sitting down again to eat
the second course of Sallets, Ioh. XIII. 12. Lastly, upon occasion of Christ's
foretelling of Judas treason, Mark XIV. 18. As they sat, and did eat, Jesus
said, Verily I say unto you, one of you shall betray me. and yet Christ's
gesture in the last Supper, is not so much as once mentioned by any of the
Evangelists. II. It is neither necessary, nor so much as probable, that the
gesture which Christ used in the Pasch all Supper, was continued in the
Sacramental: Not necessary; for the Scripture many times recording diverse
actions of the same kind together, expresses the gesture of the former; yet
will it not follow, that the same gesture was used in the latter. Paul with his
companions, sat down beside a river, and he preached unto the women, amongst
whom was Lydia, who was converted, and baptized immediately after; Acts XVI.
13.14.15. Now, because it is said; that they sat while Paul preached, and the
baptizing of Lydia followed immediately after, and no mention of any change of
gesture; will you therefore conclude, that they sat still in the
administration of Baptism. It is said, that Ezra and all the people, stood up
at the reading of the Book of the Law, Nehem. VIII. 4-5.7.8. and he continued
reading for a whole week, verse. 18. will it follow, that the people who stood
up in the beginning, did stand all that while? No, they made boothes, and sat
down under them, verse. 17. So it will never follow from Christ's sitting at
the Passover, that he sat at his last Supper. Yea, it is not so much as
probable, that the gesture used at the Passover, was continued in the
ministration of the Sacrament, which will evidently appear; if we consider,
that there was a good space between the two Suppers, and that diverse acts
intervened, which might occasion the change of the gesture. Matthew. XXVI. 26.
for albeit S. Matthew says, As they did eat, Jesus took the bread; yet this
must be expounded, After he had done eating, Luke XXII. 20. 1. Cor. XI. 25.
(so both S. Luke, and S. Paul say expressly, that he ministered the Sacrament
after Supper) And if after he had done eating, why not also after he had done
sitting? We know that the Evangelists many times record diverse things, which
at the first view, would seem to have fallen out together, which yet upon exact
examination, we find to have been severed in time; And so were the two
Suppers: for diverse acts did intervene; he rose from Supper, to wash
hisdisciples feet, Ioh. XIII. 4. and albeit it be said, verse. 12. that he sat
down again, yet it was not to minister the Sacrament (whereof S. John makes no
mention) but to eat the second course of Sallets, wherein the sop was dipped,
which was given unto Judas, verse. 26. and to preach that heavenly Sermon, which
is recorded in that Chapter, and besides the washing of their feet, and
preaching of that Sermon, which did require a good space of time, there was (as
M. Calvin thinks) a solemn thankesgiving after the finishing of the
Passover, albeit the same be not recorded: for that being the last Passover
which ever they were to eat, it is likely that our Savior took a solemn
farewell of it, and so buried that legal ordinance with honor: And this
thankesgiving might occasion the change of gesture: After the finishing of the
Passover, he proceeded to the Institution of a new ordinance, he took
bread, he brake it, or gave thanks, he pronounced the Sacramental words,
whereby these Elements were separated from a vulgar, unto a sacred use;
admonishing his disciples of the end of that action, which is the commemoration
of his bitter death and passion: These might well occasion a change of gesture,
and it is likely that this being a new action, was performed with new
expressions; especially if we remember that the bodies of Christ and of his
Disciples, as they were fully satisfied with the Paschall Supper, so they were
sufficiently rested with lying upon their couches; and that the sacrament of
Bread and Wine, as it was not ordained for the feeding of their bodies, so it
did not require a formal sitting, or an easy repose of the body, the same
being performed in so short a time. III. Albeit I should grant unto you that
which can never be proved, that the gesture which Christ used in eating of the
Passover, was continued in the ministration of the Sacrament, yet that would
advantage your cause nothing; for it is certain that the gesture which Christ
used at the Passover, was not sitting, but either standing, or (as the word
signifies) lying upon beds: some men of great authority; as namely,
Chrysostom, Chry Hom. 82. in Matt. Theo. in Matt. XXV. Euthim. in Matt. XXVI.
Philo de sacrificijs A^el etc Cain.
Theophylact, Euthimius, Maldonat, and Lucas Burgensis, do think that Christ
and his disciples did eat the Passover standing, because that Philo Iudaeus,
who best knew the practice of the Jews, and is of great credit amongst
Christians, reports that to have been the custom, to stand at the Passover:
And the law of the Passover seems to favor that opinion, for albeit standing
be not expressly mentioned, yet the circumstances of the Text seem to imply
it: for they were to eat it with their loins girded, their shoes on their
feet, their staves in their hand, and to eat it in have. Exodus XII. 11. And
(say they) it is not likely that Christ, who did many things which he needed
not, because he came to fulfill all righteousness, would break the Law of the
Passover in the least jot, and therefore he did eat it standing: I know you
will cry out against this, that all the Evangelists make mention of his
sitting, or rather lying at the Passover; You shall therefore understand, that
sitting and standing in the Scripture do not always express the particular
gesture or certain position of the body, as it is contradistinguished from
other gestures: for I sind that sometimes two gestures are confounded together,
as standing and kneeling II. Chron. VI. 13. Solomon stood upon the scaffold,
and kneeled down upon his knees, where standing is expounded by kneeling:
sometimes I find that one gesture is put for another, as Luke. VII. 38. It is
said that Mary stood at Jesus his feet; and yet that standing must be either
kneeling, or falling down upon the ground, else she could not have kissed his
feet, and washed them with her tears, and wyped them with the hairs of her
head: Luke X. 38. Verbum sedendi significat prostratos humi jacere, quod
miseris ad luctum testandum convenit, sicuti ex compluribus Prophetarum loc is
patet. Calvin in Luc. X.
So when our Savior says, that if the miracles which were done in Chorazim,
had been done in Tyrus and Sidon, they would have repented sitting in
sackcloath and ashes, Calvin interprets that sitting to be prostration or
lying along upon the ground, as a gesture most convenient unto them who are in
misery, to testify their grief; So when it is said of Job, and of the King of
Nineveh, that they sat in ashes, we are to understand that they did lie
prostrate upon the ground Job. II. 8. Ion. III. 6. And sometimes standing or
sitting does not express any particular gesture of the body, but only in
general does note the action it self, and a presence and continuance in that
place; as when we say, an army sitts down in such a place, our meaning is,
that it pitcheth and rests there, So when it is said that David sat before
the Lord and prayed II. Sam. VII. 18. Interpreters tell us, that was no
sitting, but the word is used to note his presenting himself before the Lord,
Luke (...). 13.
The Publican stood afar off in the Temple, and prayed, that is, he came into
the Temple, for it is not likely that he who durst not so much as lift up his
eyes to Heaven, would-stand upright; but rather cast himself down upon the
ground, as the manner was of all penitentiaries: It is said that Paul sat at
Corinth a year and six months. Act. XVIII. 11. That is, he continued there,
and thence came the name of Bishops seats, from their abode in that place. So
it is said, that Christ sits at the right hand of God in Heaven, this sitting
does not import a certain position of his body, but his dwelling and remaining
there: for if Christ were bound to sit still, that were no part of his triumph,
but some kind of punishment unto him, like that expressed by the Poet; --
Sedet, aternumque sedebit
Infoelix Theseus.
Even so when it is said of Christ, discumbebat, he sat down; or rather did
lie down with his disciples to eat the Passover, the meaning may be no more
but this, that he went to Supper or presented himself to the table. Thus you
see it is maintained that Christ stood at the Passover, by many learned
writers, who are of age to speak for themselves; but I will not stand upon
their opinions, because I love not to go from the literal sense of the words,
where there is no necessity to enforce me, as here there is none; yet give me
leave to make this use of it: it is certain that if Christ did not stand, then
he used not the gesture observed in the Passover, from the beginning: whence
will follow that no gesture is essential to any Sacrament, but that all
gestures are changeable; for there was never any gesture prescribed to be used
in any Sacrament, except only standing in the Passover; And if that was
changed, without any special direction, (as it was long before Christ's time)
how much more, shall the gesture in other Sacraments, for which there is
neither command nor certain example be changeable, at the discretion of the
Church? And this I hold to be the more probable opinion, that the gesture of
the Passover, long before the days of Christ was changed from standing, unto
lying in beds; and that this was the gesture used by our Savior in cating of
the Passover, may appear by the words which the Evangelists have used to
express the gesture, which are [(...)] Matthew. XXVI. 20. and Mark XIIII. 18.
and [(...)] Luke XXII. 14. John. XIII. 12. Now both these words in their
radical signification express lying; And so are they used in other places of
Scripture, as namely Mark V. 40. It is said, Jesus enteredin, Where the
damsel was [(...)] lying; for I hope she was not sitting upright, she being
then dead: and so they signify in all those places, where mention is of the
gesture used at the Passover; for unless they had lain along upon beds, how
could John have leaned upon Jesus breast, as it is said, Ioh. XIII. [he was
(...) verse. 23. (...), verse. 25,] in Jesus bosom; I hope, you will not read
it, he sat in Jesus bosom: so it is plain, that their gesture was a lying
along upon Beds round about the table: The foremost having his feet behind the
back of the second, and the second leaning into his bosom. And this gesture
was as far from your sitting, as it is from our kneeling, and you your selves
would not think it decent to be used at the Sacrament.

But here you will say, and absurdity of that groundless conceit. I desire you
to consider first, that lying or leaning, was not the common table gesture
amongst the Jews at all times, for Scaliger shows out of the Jews ritualls,
P^arth assem page 3^.
(as he is cited by one of your chi^fe guides) that the Jews in other nights
did eat, sometimes sitting upright, sometimes lying along, but in this night,
namely of the Passover, they did only lie. Quam diversa haec nox a caeteris
noc^ibus? De ^mend. ^^mp. lib. 6.
quod in alijs noctibus semel tantum lavamus, in hac autem bis -- Quod in
reliquis noctibus tam edentes qua^ bibentes, vel sedemus, vel discumbimus, in
hac autem omnes discumbimus. II. In the institution of the Passover, God had
no respect to a table gesture, for he commanded them to eat it in haste, and
with staves in their hands, which is very far from the fashion of a feast,
and albeit afterward they did use a table gesture, yet the same was never
commanded by God, but taken up by themselves. III. The Passover being a full
Supper, as it did ask a large time; so it might require a table gesture, or an
easy repose of the body: but there is no need of this in the Communion, where
every one receives but one bit of Bread, and one drop of Wine, the same not
being ordained for feeding and pleasing of the body, If any man be hungry, let
him eat at home. I. Cor. XI. 34. IV. The Eucharist is but improperly called a
Feast, a Banquet, a Supper; but it is truly and properly, a part of Gods
worship, and a chief part, and therefore it is more fit to use a worship
gesture, then a table gesture. Sometimes we pray, and give thanks sitting, as
before and after meat, being occasioned to do so, by our sitting to eat; and
I am sure there is as much reason to kneel in religious eating for worships
sake, as to sit at table in prayer, for civil eating sake. V. No gesture can
be so unfit for Communicants, as a table gesture; for we should put a
difference between the Lords table, and a Common table, between this holy
Ordinance, and a common Feast; unless we will. Coelo terram, terra coelum,
sacra prophanis miscere, confound heavenly and earthly things together, as you
do, who stand so much upon the prerogatives of a Table, and privilege of
guests. To sit in prayer, has always been held an unreverent and unchristian
behavior: Tertullian says, De ^rat.
factum istud irreligiosissimum est. And one of your own authors says, that
sitting in prayer, Disp. page 12.
is an undecent and unreverent gesture, if we may conveniently kneel. but the
receiving of the Sacrament ought to be accompanied with prayer and
thanksgiving, yea the whole action is a real thanksgiving; in so much that
whosoever in the act of receiving, has not his heart lifted up both to pray
and to praise God, does receive unworthily. VI. Albeit it may be lawful in
some case, to receive the Sacrament sitting, where there is no constitution to
the contrary yet you who make sitting necessary and essential to the
Sacrament, cannot be excused from the breach of the second Commandment, by
will worship, wherewith you do most falsely charge us: for we count not
kneeling to be either necessary or essential to the Sacrament, neither do we
place any worship in it, but think it a fit expression of worship, and the
most decent behavior of Communicants: whereas you hold sitting to be
necessary and essential, and that without any ground either in Scripture, or
reason, only upon the idle fancy of the privilege of guests. The Apostle
condemns them who place religion in meat or drink, Romans XIIII. 17. The
Kingdom of God consists not in meat and drink; or in outward observances,
such as, Touch not, taste not, handle not, Col. II. 21. You can never free your
selves from that condemnation, who place religion in a tablegesture. That is
will worship in the highest degree. VII. Neither is sitting the only table
gesture, In Mus^^via they have no table, nor do they sit at meat, and in our
Countries, many do eat their meat standing, some kneeling, or bowing, as
when they have no table, but the ground; And if a man did always kneel,
either voluntarily, or upon necessity, as if he were not allowed to eat,
except he would receive his meat kneeling, he should not sin in so doing,
more then did Gideons soldiers, who kneeled down upon their knees to drink
water; Judge. VII. 6. Nor yet would he be so obstinate as you are, to choose
rather to want meat, then to stoop for it. Yea if any of you should receive a
morsel of meat or a cup of drink, from out of the kings own hand, I think
you would not plead the privilege of a table gesture, but kneel down to
receave it: Behold in the Sacrament the King of glory reaches forth his
Son, as it were, with his blood about his ears, shed for our redemption, and
will you stand so much upon a table gesture, and the privilege of a guest,
that you will rather be without the comfort of the Sacrament, then bow your knee
to receave it. VIII. As it is the general custom of our Country to sit at
meat, so it is the custom of our Church to kneel at the Sacrament, neither
ever had the Catholic Church, any such custom, as to receave sitting. And
shall not the custom of the Church, of all Churches, be as much regarded in a
Church-action, as the custom of the Country is in a civil matter. Finally,
If there be a necessity of sitting, because it is a table gesture, the
privilege of a feast, and the prerogative of guests; there must be the like
necessity of other deportments used in civil eating, which are as proper to
the nature of a feast, and the prerogative of guests, as sitting is: And then
why do ye not receive the Sacrament in your dyning rooms? for the Church is
not a fit place to eat and drink in: Why do you not salute and welcome one
another before you sit down, as the manner is at Civil Feasts? why do you
not use trenchers, napkins, knives, as well as stools? why do you not eat a
full meal, feed heartily, drink oftener then once, and pledge one another?
for all these do belong to a liberal and honorable intertainement, such as
your authors say must be in the Sacrament; I am sure it is as far from
honorable intertainement and the prerogative of guests, to receive but one bit
of Bread, and one drop of Wine, as it is either to stand or to kneel. Why do
you not intertaine discourse one with another? And especially why do you not
keep on your hats, as at other Feasts, that so you may be every man
jacke-fellow-like with Christ in your sociall Communions? I am afraid it will
come to this at last, by that time your people have learned all the mysteries
of your religion: Disput. p. 27.
For your Authors tell us, that whatsoever liberty or prerogative a table of
repast has, for those that partake thereof, the same have communicants at the
Lords table. And again, that no gesture is to be used which does impor^ our
dissellowship with Christ, or inferioritie, and abasement: But I subsume;
guests at a table of repast, have a privilege to cover their heads, and the
keeping off of our hatts at the Sacrament, does import our inferioritie to
Christ. This is your own divinity, I pray God to bless all Christians from
it.

Thus I have clearly proved, Christ used in the institution of this Sacrament,
was not sitting: for either he used the same gesture in the Evangelicall
Supper, which he did in the Legal, or he used another: if he continued the
same gesture, it was not sitting, but either standing, or rather lying: if he
used another, you your selves know not what it was, and I dare boldly say, that
it is more likely to have been either kneeling or standing, then sitting; for
that gesture as it was never commanded in any act of Gods Service; so it was
seldom or never practiced, but only occasionally. Now I will proceed further
to show, that albeit it were certain that Christ did sit; yet were not his
gesture exemplary to us, nor we bound to imitate him in that circumstance,
which I will prove by these reasons. I. Christ's gesture not exemplary. I.
Reason.
Whenever the example of Christ is propounded unto us for imitation, it is
only in moral and necessary duties, as in meekness and humility, Matthew.
XI. 29. Learn of me that I am humble and meek; In love Ioh. XV. 12. Love one
another as I have loved you; in patience, I. Pet. II. 21. Christ also suffered,
leaving you an example etc. But we are no more bound to the example of Christ
in ceremonies and circumstances, then we are able to imitate him in his
miracles. Christ wore a seamelesse coat, christened in rivers, preached in the
fields, answered nothing for himself before the Judge, when he was
questioned: I hope none of you holds himself bound to follow his example in
these things: Mat^h. XIV. 19. c. XV. 35.26. Mat VI. 40. Luke XXIV. 30.
Christ always caused the people to these things: Christ always caused the
people to sit down, before he blessed the meat; And yet you commonly stand in
blessing, especially before meat. Yea if we were bound to imitate Christ in
the gesture which he used in holy duties, we should be bound unto
impossibilities: for Christ in the same duty used diverse gestures at diverse
times, he kne^^ed down and prayed, Luke XXII. 41. He fell on his face and
prayed, Matthew. XXVI. 39. He caused the people sit down and prayed for a
blessing, Matthew. XIV. 19. All these gestures he has sanctified in that
Ordinance, and commended unto us by his example; yet we can not use them all in
one act, at the same time; therefore we are free to pray in any gesture,
provided we have respect to decency, conveniencie, and peace. Now if we be
not bound to Christ's example in any ceremony, circumstance, or gesture, were it
not strange if we should be tied to imitate the example of his gesture in the
Sacrament? Christ sat at the Sacrament, it was only once, Matt. XXVI. 55.
but in preaching, he sat often, as he says, I sat daily teaching in the
Temple, and yet you hold not your selves bound to preach sitting. Now were it
not strange, if Christ's once sitting, in one ordinance, should be exemplary,
and not his often sitting in another? Sacrament, either under the Law, or under
the Gospel; for we know not what gesture was used in Circumcision, and in
Baptism; and it is manifest, that the gesture of the Passover, was varyed
from standing, to lying. I say further, there was never example of gesture in
any ordinance, or holy service, which bound the Church absolutely, but so as it
might be changed upon occasion. We have examples in Scripture, of all gestures
used in praying, in thanksgiving, in hearing of the Word, in offering of
sacrifice. And I do here challenge you all, to show me but one example of
gesture in any Sacrament, or any other part of God's service, that did
absolutely bind the Church, under the Law, or under the Gospel, to the
imitation thereof; and I will yield that Christ's gesture in the Sacrament,
binds us to imitation: but if none such was ever known, then you must show
some reason, why the gesture used in the Sacrament, should bind us to
imitation, rather then in any other Sacrament, service, or worship: for it must
seem strange to any reasonable man, that one only gesture, and that of all
others the most unfit, in one only ordinance, God has fully expressed, what is
necessary to be observed in any of his Ordinances: But in all the Book of
God, there is not one word expressing what gesture we should use in the
Sacrament: all the Evangelists are silent in this matter; so is S. Paul, though
he profess to deliver all things necessary and essential to the Sacrament:
And on the contrary it is very probable, that our Savior had no intent to
honor us with the gesture of sitting at the Sacrament, for even while he sat
with his Disciples at the Passover, he schooled them for looking for honor
in sitting at the table, Luke XXII. 26. Let the greatest among you, be as the
least; and the chiefest, as he that serves; for who is greater, he that
sits at table, or he that serves? Is not he that sits at table? and I am
among you as he that serves. Now you do press us to show express warrant
out of Scripture, for things which we acknowledge to be in their own nature
free, and indifferent, and so need no particular warrant of the Word, they
being left to the discretion of the Church; And yet you press sitting at the
Communion, upon the consciences of people, as a thing necessary, and are not
able to show for it any warrant in the Word, general or particular. If you
say, that you have the example of Christ and of his Disciples, that will not
serve your turn; for you know not what gesture they used; and albeit we were
certain that they had sat, as you do, yet that would not bind us to
imitation, without some other direction; for doubtless, if Christ had meant,
that his gesture in that Sacrament should be exemplary unto us, he would have
put upon it some mark of immutabilitie, considering that from the beginning of
the world, no gesture in any Sacrament or service was obligatory unto God's
people by example. V. If the gesture which Christ used in the ministration of
the Sacrament, was sitting or lying; the same was occasion all from the
Passover, as were many other circumstances, which you your selves do not
observe. Indeed, if Christ had ministered that Sacrament, without the
conjunction of another meal, and had purposely made choice of sitting, rather
then of kneeling or standing, then there might have been more force in his
example, and yet no absolute necessity of imitation. But seeing it is
manifest, that if he used that gesture, it was to conform himself to the
custom of the Jews, as he did in many other ceremonies and circumstances; no
reasonable man can think that gesture to be exemplary to us.

In the VI. place, Christ, in many other circumstances, which are of as great
consequence, and some of them greater too, then is the gesture. Christ
ministered the Sacrament only unto twelve, or rather Eleaven, you give it unto
the whole congregation. Christ gave it only unto men; Christ gave it were all
ministers; you give it unto the people. Christ instituted the Sacrament at
night, Christ ministered the same in a private chamber; you in a public
Church. Christ used unleavened bread: Christ was the sole minister of the
Sacrament, blessing and distributing both the Elements: you commonly have one
to assist you. Christ blessed the Elements severally, Christ and his Disciples
too, Disciples, in receiving, and not the gesture of Christ in blessing. Christ
and his Disciples put of their shoes when they went to Supper, as the manner
of the Jews was: you do not so when you come to the Sacrament. put on his
upper garment, after he had washed his Disciples feet, before he celebrated
the Sacrament: yet you will not be persuaded by that example, to put on a
Surplice; and I am sure it is as easy, from Christ's upper garment, which he
put on when he went to the Sacrament, to conclude for a Surplice, or a Cope
either, as it is from Christ's gesture, to conclude a necessity of sitting at
the Communion. and his Disciples leaned one in another bosom; so do not you.
Christ and his Disciples had their heads covered: you as yet have the manners
to sit bare: In all these, you swarve as much from the example of Christ, as we
do by kneeling: for as these were changeable circumstances, so is the gesture
changeable, and inferior to many of them. For they are expressly mentioned in
Scripture: but there is not one word of the gesture. Some of them were
circumstances of choice, as namely^ Christ's blessing of the Elements apart: But
the gesture (if it was sitting or lying) was only occasional. Some of them
were continued in the Church many hundred years, and namely the circumstance
of time, the Sacrament being celebrated after Supper, according to Christ's
example, (and in many places of Afric they observed the very day, even the
first day of the week) till the sixth Council at Constantinople did appoint
the Sacrament to be celebrated in the morning, when men are most apt for
devotion: But you are never able to show, that the gesture (if it was sitting)
was used in any Church. I might add many other things wherein you follow not
the example of Christ, because you know it not. We know not what form of
Bread Christ used, what kind of Wine, what fashion of Cup, what manner of
Tablecloath, what words he used, in blessing and giving thanks, after what
manner he brake the Bread, and powered out the Wine into the Cup, what
quantity of Bread and Wine they did receive, and how long they were about that
action. All which are of greater importance, then the gesture, which (as I have
showed before) was never immutable in any Ordinance, but always free.
Therefore you shall do well, for shame, (if not for conscience sake) not to
take the holy name of Christ in vain, by pretending his example, for sitting
at the Communion, seeing you do not imitate his example in many other things,
more material then the gesture.

In the last place, Christ and his Disciples, in the first institution, was
sitting, we ought not to imitate it. For there is great difference between
the estate of the Apostles then, and ours now: between Christ's estate of
humiliation, and his estate of exaltation: between his presence in humility,
Matthew. XX. 28.
and his presence in glory. In his first coming he came not to be served, but
to serve: Ioh. XV. 15. Luke XXII. 27.
He made himself familiar with his Disciples, used them as his friends and
companions, and he himself was amongst them, as one that serves. And
therefore they did never kneel down to him in their ordinary prayers, nor
pray unto God, particularly in his name, as he says, Ioh. XVI. 24. Hither to
have ye asked nothing in my name. It is certain that the Disciples did pray
unto God, and did pray in the name of a mediator in general, else their
prayers could not have been heard: But at that time, they did not make express
mention of him in their prayers, in regard their knowledge of his Godhead, and
of his Mediatorship, was but obscure and imperfect, and they then did not
think, that he who was daily conversant with them upon earth, was also
present with the Father making intercession for them. Yea at that time Christ
did not desire, to be worshipped as God, Coeternall, Coessentiall and
Consubstantiall with the Father, for he commanded his Disciples to conceal the
glory of his Godhead, Matt. XVII. 9.
which they saw in his transfiguration till after his resurrection. And he
charged his Disciples to tell no man that he was the Christ. Matthew. XVI. 10.
I find that some did worship him in the days of his flesh, but it is a
question, whether with a civil or with a divine worship; And besides it was
not in their ordinary prayers, but upon extraordinary occasions, as the working
of a miracle. Mark. XIV. 33. Luke. V. 8. Or when they had some special suite
unto him, as Matthew. VIII. 2.9.18. XX. 20. Or when he was pleased graciously to
reveal himself, as unto the blind man whom he healed. Ioh. IX. 38. This is
certain, that while he dwelt on earth, he was never worshipped, in any
public ordinance, after a solemn manner, as the common object of joint
adoration: Nor yet expressly as the Mediator between God and man; Hebr. VII.
^.
for says the Apostle. The way into the holiest of all was not opened, while
as the first Tabernacle was standing. That is to say, under the Old Testament,
which was the first Tabernacle, Christ who is the way unto heaven, was not
clearly manifested, nor known unto men: But now the first Tabernacle being
remooved, and the Veil of the Temple rent, this way is opened, and Christ is
known to be both God, and Mediator between God and man: for he was declared
mightily, Romans I. 4.
to be the son of God, by his resurrection from the dead; he was exalted at
the right hand of God, far above principalities and powers, Phil. II. 9.
And God has given him a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bow. Then the Apostles, Act. VII. 59.
who before were rude and ignorant, did preach him openly, and pray unto him by
name, and that upon their knees. Now, if the Apostles, after his resurrection,
when they were filled with the Spirit, did pray unto him kneeling, which they
had not used to do before; why may we not think, that then they also received
the Sacrament kneeling, albeit before they did sit with him at table, while he
was pleased to use them as his companions, and when their knowledge was but
rude and unperfect. Sure I am, it does not become us now for to challenge to be
so familiar with him at his table, as were his Disciples in the days of his
flesh. Thus have I clearly proved, both that it is most unlikely, that Christ
and his Disciples sat in the institution of the Sacrament; and also that
though it were certain they did sit, yet the example of their gesture does not
bind us to imitation. But I have forgot my self to insist so long upon this
Argument. My purpose at first was only, to give an instance of your sitting at
the Communion, as a Ceremony used by you in the service of God, without any
special warrant: but when I considered, that this is the very Diana for which
you strive, and the wall of separation between you and the Church; I thought
fit to enlarge my self upon this point, to manifest unto all those who love
the truth, that sitting has no more ground in Christ's Institution, then
kneeling.

And now to proceed, Sect. 36.
I will show you other Ceremonies used by you in Gods worship, without any
special warrant. The next to sitting at the Communion, is sprinkling in
Baptism, for which there is no warrant, but the custom of the present Church:
for the ancient Ceremony in Baptism, was not aspersion, but immersion, which
Ceremony was sanctified by the Baptism of our Savior, Matthew. III. 16. Mark.
I. 10.
for the Evangelists say, When he was baptized, he came out of the water, and
therefore he went in into the water. The same was used by the Apostles, and
thereunto the Apostle alludeth, showing that the mortification of sin, the
increase of that mortification, and the vivification of the new man, are
signified by the Ceremony of Baptism, for the dipping in Baptism had three
parts, their going down into the water, their continuance in the water, and
their coming up out of the water. The going down into the water, figureth the
mortification of sin by the power of Christ's death, for all we (says the
Apostle) which have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into
his death: The continuance in the water, notes the increase of that
mortification, by the power of Christ's death and buryall; We are buried with
him by Baptism into his death: The coming up out of the water, ratifieth our
rising again unto newness of life; Like as Christ was raised from the dead,
to the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newness of life, Romans
VI. 3.4. This Ceremony was continued in the Church for many hundred years,
and to that purpose in ancient times, they had places in each Church for
dipping, called Baptisteria and Lotiones: neither was sprinkling generally
practiced in the Church, till 1300. years after Christ; when (to use your own
words) Antichrist was in his full height. Now can you show me any reason, why
you may leave a Ceremony which was certainly used by Christ, by his Apostles,
and the whole ancient Church, and was of singular use for fignification; and
in stead of it, take another not so significant, brought into the Church by
Antichrist? And that yet it shall not be lawful for the whole Church, to lay
down another Ceremony, (to wit, sitting at the Communion) whereof there is no
certainty nor likely hood, that ever it was used by Christ, or his Apostles, or
any Church in the world; and in place of it, to use another, which is a great
deal more decent and comely. Thirdly, you use to injoyne penance, and to
receive penitents in a white sheet: and I am sure, that if a Surplice in Gods
Service, be a Ceremony, so is a white sheet in public penance and
absolution, and there is no more warrant for the one, then for the other.
Fourthly, you use a Ceremony in Marriage, by joining of hands, and pronouncing
of words, which are not commanded. Fifthly, I could tell you, that the time was
in the days of the Presbytery, when that Church, whose orders you so much
approve, did use a Ceremony in Ordination, and a very strange one: It was not
imposition of hands, but shaking them by the hand, to bid them welcome into
their Society, because forsooth, they were loath in any thing, to have a
conformity with the ancient Apostolic Church. Sixthly, you profess to honor
the Church of Geneva, as a fit pattern unto all other Churches, and yet they
use the Ceremony of godfathers in Baptism, and wafer Cakes in the Communion,
against which one Ceremony, I could say more, then can be said against all the
Ceremonies of our Church. Finally, the lifting up of the eyes to Heaven, the
spreading out of the hands, the knocking of the breast, sighing and groaning in
Gods service, are Ceremonies, used by none so much, as by your selves; And yet
I confess, that if they proceed from a sincere heart, they are lawful
expressions of devotion. By this time you do all see, that whereas you deny
Ceremonies in Gods worship, which are not commanded, you are evidently
convinced by your own practice.

I think that I have said enough, Sect. 37.
to overthrow that ground which you have laid, that no Ceremonies ought to be
used in Gods service without a special warrant from the word. Now for the
conclusion of this point, I will appeal unto the confessions of the reformed
Churches, and the suffrages of divines. You profess to approve the Articles of
the Church of England, as containing nothing but truth, (though not so many
particulars, as you account to be matters of faith) and those Articles do
ascribe such a power to the Church to ordain Ceremonies, as you may see in the
XX. Article: The Church has power to decree rites or Ceremonies. and again in
the XXXIIII. Article, Every particular or National Church, has authority to
ordain, change, and abolish Ceremonies. The same you may read in the Articles
of Religion of the Church of Ireland, which were printed in the days of Queen
Elizabeth. As for the Judgment of other Reformed Churches I shall refer you
to the Harmony of Confessions, and the writings of their learned Divines, where
you may learn. I. That it is not only lawful, but expedient and requisite, to
use Ceremonies in Gods worship. II. That those Ceremonies should be
significant. III. That it is not necessary that the same Ceremonies be
observed in all Churches, at all times. IV. That we are not bound to observe
all those Ceremonies, which were used by the Apostles, and the Primitive
Church. V. That we may retain some Ceremonies used by the Jews, namely
Ceremonies of order, not of prefiguration. VI. That we may use some Ceremonies
used by the Pagans. VII. That we may retain some Ceremonies of the Papists.
VIII. That the governors of the Church have power to make choice of Ceremonies,
to change and abrogate some, and to ordain others, as they shall see occasion.
Finally, That we are bound to observe all Ceremonies, which are enjoined by
lawful authority, provided that they be qualified with these conditions
following. Instit. lib. IV. c. 10.. 14.
Mr Calvin requires three conditions: That they have, In numero paucitatem, in
observatione facilitatem; in significatione dignitatem. I. For number they
should be few; for when the Church is pestered with the multitude of them, it
makes the estate of Christians to be more intolerable, then the condition of
the Jews, as it is in the Church of Rome, whose missalls are larger then the
book of Leviticus, whereof Gerson, Polydore Virgill, and others did complain
in their time. II. They should be easy for observation. III. For
signification they should be grave, decent and comely; not foolish and
ridiculous, as are the apish gesticulations in the Mass, and many other
Ceremonies used in that Church, as their manifold crossings, kissings,
kneelings, whisperings, washings, anointings, spittings, blowings, breathings,
and a number of the like. Unto these three conditions, I will add two more. I.
Ceremonies must not be enjoined, as things in themselves absolutely necessary,
and wherein Gods worship does consist. II. We must not ascribe unto them
spiritual effects, as the Papists do, who say that their crossing, and
sprinkling of holy water, are effectual to purge away venial sins, drive
away devils, and sanctify the parties. Now the Ceremonies enjoined by our
Church, have all these conditions. For number, they are few, as ever was in any
Church; for observation, easy; for signification, worthy; for quality, grave,
decent and comely; for antiquity, reverend; The worship of God is not placed in
them, neither are they pressed upon the consciences of people, as things in
themselves necessary, like the Commandments of God: we ascribe no merit,
remission of sins, nor other spiritual effects unto them. Finally they are
purged from the dross of all Popish superstition. And therefore you are bound
in conscience to observe them, they being enjoined by lawful authority.

And now I am come to the last thing wherein the power of the Church is to be
considered, Sect. 38.
and that is for correction. The Church has authority to censure her
disobedient children, whether they be Heretics or Schismatickes, or
inordinate livers; And on the other part, upon their repentance, to restore,
release, and absolve them. Like a good Mother she has both Vbera and Verbera,
a d^g to feed, and a rod to whip her unruly children. This power was always in
the Church: I find that there was amongst the Jews three degrees of censures,
Ioh. IX. 22. XII. 42. XVI. ^.
The first was called Niddus, a separation, or casting out of the Synagogue:
The second they called Herem, which is Anathema, when an offender was cut off
from his people by the sentence of death, Deuteronomy. XVII. 12. And that man that
will do presumptuously, not harkening unto the Priest, -- or unto the Judge,
that man shall die. The third was Shammatha, or Maranatha, which was a
peremptory denunciation of Judgment, delivering the obstinate malefactor (as
it were) unto everlasting death: for the word signifies as much as Dominus
venit, The Lord comes. This last is not mentioned in the Law; but as it
seems was brought in by the Priests and Scribes, after that the Romans had
taken from them, the power of life and death: neither can the Church now use
that censure, unless we knew certainly that a man had sinned against the Holy
Ghost. The second, which is the sentence of death, belongs only unto the
civil Magistrate, who to that purpose has the sword committed unto him. So
that the censure which properly belongs unto the Church now, is only
separation by excommunication. And there ever was and always must be, a power
in the Church, to impose that censure, upon contumacious offenders. We have the
first example of it from God himself: he cast Adam out of Paradise, which was
a type of the Church, and banished him from the tree of life, which was the
Sacrament of immortality: he cast forth Cain from his presence, that is from
the place appointed for his worship, wherein Adam and his family, used to meet
for the service of God. Afterward when the Church of the Jews was
established, their Council of Elders called the Synedrium, had power to cast
men out of the Synagogue. Yea under the Law those who had contracted any bodily
uncleanness, must not eat of the Passover, till they were purified after the
manner of the Law: How much more ought they who are defiled with sin, be
barred from the Communion of our Sacraments, seeing the pollution of the soul
is more odious in the sight of God, then bodily uncleanness? When our Savior
did institute the Church of the new Testament, he gave such an authority unto
his Apostles, and their successors, in the words following my text, Whatsoever
ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: And whatsoever ye loose on earth,
shall be loosed in heaven. Which he expounds after this manner, Io: XX. 23.
Whosoevers sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them. And whosoevers sins
ye retain, I. Cor. 5.
they are retained. The Apostle did exercise this power upon the incestuous
Corinthian, I. Tim. I. ^0.
and upon Hymenaus and Alexander. The same power he committed unto his two
sons, Timothy and Titus. The governors of the Church are reproved, for
neglecting this censure, Revel. II. 20.
as the Angel of the Church of Thyatira, for suffering the woman Iezabel to
teach and deceive Gods servants. And the Angel of the Church of Ephesus is
commended for his zeal in censuring offenders, Thou can not bear them which
are evil, and thou have tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not.
Revel. II. 2. Finally the censure of excommunication was of frequent use in the
Primitive Church, especially against heretics, and disturbers of the public
peace, Tert. in Apol. Cypr. epist. lib. I. ep. 3.
as both Tertullian, and St Cyprian do testify. And I find that this censure
had two degrees, the first was Suspension, called Abstentio, whereby men were
barred, some from the Communion of the Sacrament only, others from the
Communion of certain prayers also, and some from entering into the Church;
which they built upon the Commandment of our Savior, Matthew. VII. 6. Give not
holy things to dogs, neither cast your pearls before swine. The other was
Excommunication, whereby a man was cut off from the body of Christ, as a rotten
member, cast out of the Church, and delivered into Satan, who reigns without
the Church: wherein the Churches sentence is rather interloquutory, then
definitive; And yet the same no ways to be contemned, because when it is done,
Clave non errante, Apologet. cap. XXXIX.
the same is ratified in Heaven: Therefore Tertullian truly calls this censure,
summum futuri Iudicij praejudicium. The former of these censures, may be called
the Apostles rod, shall I come unto you with a rod: I. Cor. IV. 21. The other
is the sword Apostolical, Gal. V. 12. Abscindantur, Let them be cut off that
trouble you. This latter is that which is mentioned in my Text, Let him be
unto thee as a Heathen man, and a Publican; and in the words following, it is
called a binding or retayning of sin: for, as the Church has power to loose
such as are penitent; so to commit others unto the Lords prison, binding their
sins upon their back, until their amendment, or binding them over unto the
Judgment of the great Day, if they shall persist in their pertinacie. The same
by S. Paul is called, a delivering up to Satan. The end of Excommunication is
threefold: I. The glory of God; for when men are suffered in the Church, to do
what seems good in their own eyes, without control, God is dishonored, and
his Name blasphemed amongst the Gentiles: Whence it comes to pass, that
sometimes for the sin of one man, God is angry with the whole Church,
because of her connivence. But when the Offender is exemplary punished, then is
God glorified, and his wrath turned away from Israel. II. The amendment of the
party, even that he being destitute of the society of the faithful, may be
ashamed, and so confess his sin, and desire reconciliation. I. These. III.
4. If any man obey not our saying, note him, and have no company with him,
that he may be ashamed. III. The preservation of others from his infection.
For, says the Apostle, speaking of the Incestuous Corinthian, A little
leaven, leaveneth the whole lump: purge out therefore the old leaven. I. Cor.
V. 6-7. We know that a member of the body being putrified and gangrened, must
be cut off presently, else it will infect the whole body: so must all
irregular persons, especially teachers of false doctrine, and disturbers of
public order, be cut off from the body of the Church, Devi^^ contempl. lib.
II. c. 7.
that the infection spread no farther, as Prosper says, Qui corrigi nolunt,
tanquamputres corporis parts, ferro excommunicationis sunt abscindendi. They
that will not amend, as rotten members of the body, must be cut off by the
sword of excommunication. It is true, a good Surgeon will try all other
means before he cut off a leg or an arm from a man; but if there be no
other remedy, Then -- Immedicabile vulnus
Ense resecandum est.
So weehave tried all manner of fair means to reduce you to the unity of the
Church, by admonition, exhortation, conference, instruction. Our first coming
was in love, and in the spirit of meekness; but now I must come unto you with
a rod, yea with a Sword to cut off all that trouble the Churches peace: for,
Melius est ut pereat unus, quam unitas; It is not the life of any man, nor of
many men, that is to be compared with the peace of the Church.

Besides the general censure of Excommunication, Church are subject, both the
Pastors and the Flock; there is an other censure for restrayning of turbulent
teachers, called (...), a removing of them from the exercise of their function,
by deprivation, suspension, or otherwise; that their word fret not as a canker.
II. Tim. II. 17.
This power was given to Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, he is not only to charge
the Clergy under his jurisdiction, that they do not (...): I. Tim. I. 3. but
also to discharge them that do it. I. Tim. V I. 3.5. If any man teach
otherwise -- from such separate thy self. He must stay profane and vain
bablings. II. Tim. II. 16. Put away s^^lish questions, which engender strife,
II. Tim. II. 23. He had authority to receave an accusation against an Elder,
as his Judge, to rebuke openly, to put him in fear. I. Tim. V. 19.20. The like
authority was committed to Titus Bishop of Crete. He must redress things
amiss. Tit. I. 5. If there be any disobedient vain talkers, and deceivers of
minds, he must put them to silence, Tit. I. 10.11. Reprove them sharply: Tit.
I. 13. Convince with all authority; Tit. II. 15. Reject him that is an
heretic. Tit. III. 10. This has been the practice of the Church in all ages
to remove turbulent teachers, who did oppose the decrees, and constitutions of
Counsels. And this is that censure, which I fear some of you by your
opposition to the lawful orders of our Church, will draw upon your selves. The
Apostle says, They that resist, shall receive, Romans XIII. 2.
or acquire condemnation. It is not our desire to proceed to censure against
any of you, but you will acquire it unto your selves, and so receive thereward
of your folly. Our Church has borne with you a long time, with all patience,
and long suffering, opening her lap to receive you into her Communion; but you
have made no other use of this forbearance; then to confirm your selves in
your errors, proceeding from evil, to worse; from timorous scrupolositie, to
resolute opposition; II. Sam. XX. 1.
drawing a number of Disciples after you, and like Sheba the son of Bichri,
blowing a trumpet to sedition; whereby a fearful rent is made in this Church,
and greater dangers like to ensue, if they be not prevented. The Anabaptists at
first, for the great humility, zeal and devotion, which seemed to be in them,
were only pitied in their error, and not much witestood by any: Luther made
request to the Duke of Saxony, that within his dominions, they might be
spared, for that (their errors excepted) they seemed otherwise very good men:
by means of which merciful toleration, they gathered such strength in few
years, that they were like to overthrow the state both of Church and
Commonwealth in Germany. Your proceedings has been very like to theirs: we
have reason therefore to suspect them, and to give a check to your madness
before you go any further. Surely as the Lord taxes the Angel of the Church
of Thyatira for suffering the woman Iezabel to teach and deceive Gods servants;
So may he reprove the governors of our Church, for suffering this feminine
heresy so long, they of that sex, being the greatest zealots, and chief
abbetters of the sect, by whom many simple people are deceived, and led from
the wholesome pastures of the Church, to wander in the precipices of error, and
schism. This must not be suffered any longer. But you will say, the
differences is only about small matters, and it is a pity to deprive
ministers who are painful and laborious, for a Ceremony. For answer I shall
desire you to consider. I. That they do not only oppose the Ceremonies, but
the whole Liturgy of the Church, wherein the soul of Gods public worship
does consist. Besides their doctrine is not sound: for they have taught that
the Order of Bishops is Antichristian, which we know to be Apostolic: That
our Ceremonies are damnable, which we can prove to be both lawful and
decent: That our Service-booke is a heap of errors, which we can justify to
be the most absolute Liturgy, that any Church in the world has: That the
sign of the Cross in Baptism, and kneeling in the act of receiving the
Communion, is plain idolatry, then which hell it self could not have devised
a more shameless calumny: That the Eucharist being a Supper and a Feast, no
gesture should be used at it, but a table gesture, to express our coheirship
and equality with Christ, which if it smell not strong of Arrianisme, I have
lost my sent: That all festival days, besides the Lords day, and all set
fasts are Jewish, and contrary to our Christian liberty; which is the condemned
heresy of Aerius. Epiphan. haer. 75.
They have cried down the most wholesome orders of the Church, as Popish
superstitions, namely Confirmation of children, absolution of penitents,
private baptism of children in case of necessity, the Communion of the sick,
and almost whatsoever has any conformity with the Ancient Church. If I were
not weary to dig in this dunghill, I could show you many such portenta
opinionum, which these new masters have vented, to the great scandal of the
Church, and hinderance of Religion, that I may complain with the Prophet, Iet.
XII. 10.
Pastores multi yea and Stulti, Many Pastors have destroyed my Vineyard. There
is crying out against dumb dogs of the Clergy, who cannot preach, for whom
I think no man will plead, but that lawless fellow called necessity. Yet I
know not whether it be more hurtful for the Church, to have Canes non
latrantes, or Catulos oblatrantes: The ones silence, or the others untimely
barking. In teaching is not so much good, as there is hurt in teaching such
doctrine, when with the good seed of the word, the tares of error and schism
are sown, and the children of the Church brought in dislike with their mother.
Prove. XXX. 17.
Solomon says, The eye that mocketh his Father, and despises the instruction
of his Mother; The Ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young
Eagles shall eat it. What then shall become of his tongue, who slandereth his
Mother? shall not David's imprecation against Doeg fall upon him? Psalm. LII. 4.5.
O thou deceitful tongue, God shall destroy thee for ever. If you have
slandered your neighbor, you are bound in conscience to make him satisfaction;
what satisfaction then can you make unto the Church your Mother, whom you have
slandered with no less then whoredom? Whereas even strangers have given her
this testimony that she is of all Churches this day, for doctrine, most pure,
for discipline, most conform unto the primitive and Apostolic Churches: for
learning, most eminent: for good works, most fruitful: for Martyrs, most
glorious. II. Albeit their strife were only about Ceremonies; yet were it nor
safe for the Church, to wink at such persons, though they contend but for
trifles: for if the contentious humor be not let out, it will fester, and
spread like a gangrene; Contention will grow a schism, and a schism will
prove an heresy. So it was with the Corinthians, I. Cor. XI. Where the Apostle
complains, first of their unreverent behavior in the Church. v. 16. Then of
schisms. v. 18. After that of heresies verse. 19. If men be suffered to
disgrace Ceremonies, they will proceed further to contemn and profane the
Sacraments, as in Corinth, when they had sit covered at prayer, they grew as
unreverent and bold with the Sacrament, eat and drunk, as if they had been
in their own houses, verse. 22. It is therefore good, to quench the spark when
it is first kindled, lest it increase unto a great flame; and burn up Church,
Religion and all. III. Consider, that al^eit in Churches of diverse kingdoms,
the unity of faith may subsist, with diversity of Ceremonies and orders,
according to that saying of Gregory, In una fide nil officit Ecclesiae sanctae
consuetudo diversa; yet in the same national Church, we must labor, not only
for unity in faith, but also for uniformity in discipline, otherwise order can
not be maintained, peace cannot be preserved, when every man has a fashion by
himself, there will follow infinite distraction and confusion. Therefore says
the Synod of the Belgic Churches: Articuli hi mutari, augeri, and minui,
postulante ecclesiarum utilitate, possunt and debent, non erit tamen privatae
alicuius Ecclesiae id facere, sed dabunt o^^nes operam, ut illos observent,
donec Synodo aliter constituatur.
These Articles (namely concerning outward order and Polity) may be changed,
augmented or diminished; yet it belongs not unto any private Church to do
that, but they must all labor to observe them, until the Synod shall
otherwise app^ynt. Finally, I pray you to remember, that when those men had
the government in their hands, there was never any. Church more zealous to
vindicate her orders from contempt, nor more forward to inflict severe
censures, for small offenses then they were; And so much they did profess. The
Church of Scotland, in their constitutions, which were printed with their
Psalm Books say; A small offense may justly deserve excommunication, because
of the offenders contempt and contumacy. And again, Any sin may be pardoned,
rather then contempt of wholesome admonitions, and lawful constitutions of the
Church. Now shall they enforce others to the observation of their orders, and
punish the disobedient with the severest censures; And shall not the Kings
Majesty, and the governors of our Church, enforce them to the observatio^ of
our orders, which have been established by the whole Church in a lawful
Synod, and confirmed by Act of Parliament, and by his Majesty's Royal
authority? Oh my brethren deceive not your selves, think not that the Church,
the King, the State, the Law and all, will stoop to your fancies: No, if you
will not obey the constitutions of the Church, you must feel the weight of her
censures; If you will not submit your selves unto the Church as to your Mother,
she will not own you for her children, but cast you out as Hagar and Ismael
were cast out of Abraham's house, for their mocking and proud disobedience. Thus
have I spoken at large, of the Churches power for instruction, for Ordination,
for determination, for direction or making of Laws, and finally, for
Correction or censuring offenders. In all which the Church is to be heard, for
if he neglect to hear the Church, Let him be unto thee etc.

And so I am come to the second part of my Text, the inference, Let him be
unto thee as a heathen man and a Publicane. In which words, one thing is
employed, and another thing expressed: The censure of the Church is employed; for
if we must account such men as Heathens and Publicanes, then the Church by her
public sentence, must declare them to be such, else how shall we know that
they refuse to hear the Church. Again obedience to the Churches sentence is
expressly commanded: for in these words all the members of the Church are
enjoined to take notice of her sentence, accounting no otherwise of all those
who despise her admonitions, then as Heathen men and Publicanes. For sit tibi,
is a word of command, you must hold them for such. And that you may the
better conceive the meaning of this phrase, you must understand that our
Savior alludeth unto the custom of his own time, and the practice of the
Jews: as St Paul borrows a phrase from the Jewish Church, ^. Cor. XVI. 22.
when he uses that fearful imprecation, If any man love not the Lord Jesus,
Let him be Anathema Maranatha: So our Savior here borrows a speech from the
custom of the Jews, to express the condition of those, who should be
excommunicated by the Christian Church, Let him be unto thee as an Heathen man
and a Publicane. Matthew. IX. 10.
We know that Heathens and Publicanes, were aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, Luke. XV. 1.
they had no interest in God, no fellowship with the Church: In the Gospel
commonly Publicanes and sinners be joined together, and sometimes Publicanes
and harlots: And the Apostle opposes sinners of the Gentiles to I^wes by
nature. Matthew. XXI. 31. Call. II. 15.
They were avoided in common conversation, in the fellowship of the private
table, in so much that Christ was often taxed by the Pharisees for eating with
Publicanes; Matthew. IX. 11. XI. 19.
And especially they were secluded from the Communion of Gods worship: and in
that there was a difference put between the Heathen man and the Publicane: The
Heathen might not so much as enter into the Temple; if he did, it was polluted,
Act. XXI. 28. He has brought Graecians into the Temple, and has polluted
this holy place. But the Publicane might enter into the Temple, and pray, Luke
XVIII. 10. But he must not partake of their service and sacrifice. Whereupon in
the ancient Church, they had two degrees of excommunication; a lesser, which
was like the Publieanes separation; and a greater, like the Heathen man's
separation. In the same case should all excommunicate persons be amongstus, we
should not admit them to the Communion of our Sacraments, and public prayers,
nor converse ordinarily with them, nor have any fellowship with them, as the
Apostle commands, I. Cor. V. 13. Put away therefore from among you that wicked
man, II. These. III. 6. Withdraw your selves from every brother that walkeeh
inordinately; and verse. 14. Have no company with them. This is to esteem them
as Heathen men and Publicanes. But there are some that are worse to persons
excommunicate, then either to Heathen men or to Publicanes, who hate them,
deprive them of the society of those, who are tied unto them by natural and
civil obligations, make a prey of their goods, lands, life and all, and
adjudge them unto hell: yet Christ says only, Sit tibi sicut Ethnicus, not
sit tibi plut, aut pejore in loce, quam Ethuicus, Let him be unto thee as an
Heathen, not let him be unto thee worse then an Heathen. Whence will follow. I.
That we are not to hate such men, as we should not hate Heathen men nor
Publicanes, but pity and pray for them. It is true we shun the company of
that which we hate and abhor, so our Savior will have us to shun the
company of contumacious offenders, as if we did hate them, but not to hate them
for all that; for says the Apostle, yet count him not as an enemy. II. These.
II. 15. II. That we are not barred from all commerce and society with
excommunicate persons; not in cases of necessity; not upon occasion of trade;
(for the Jews did traffic with Publicanes and Heathen) but especially not to
give them good counsel, and to exhort them to repentance. This last is
required by the Apostle, admonish him as a brother. II. These. III. 15. The
fellowship then that is forbidden us with such persons, is a Communion in Gods
worship, lest it be profaned by them: as also entire familiarity, and
needless society. III. And some sort of persons, cannot be barred from
entire familiarity, and daily conversation with them, by any sentence of the
Church, as all those who are tied unto them by natural and civil obligations,
as the wife to her husband, children to their parents, servants to their
master, subjects to their Prince: for the Apostle commands the believing woman,
not to depart from the unbeleeving husband, I. Cor. VII. 13. But to be subject
even to their husbands which obey not the word. I. Pet. III. 1. and servants to
count their masters, (even them that believe not) worthy of all honor, I. Tim.
VI. 1. Caesar himself was Heathen, when Christ instituted this censure, and yet
he commands to renderunto Caesar the things that are Cesars: All kings were
Heathen, when the Apostles exercised this censure, and yet they conimaund all
obedience to be given unto them, Romans XVI. 1. I. Pet. II. 13. The Christians in
the Primitive Church upon all occasions took arms, at the command of a
heathen Emperor, and St Augustine commends them for their faithful service, to
Julian that Apostate Emperor: for, that they were bound unto him as subjects.
Hence it will follow, that the Church, though she had never so much strength
and power, yet ought not, can not excommunicate the King for heresy,
Apostasy, or any other crime: for, that the maine end of excommunication is,
that the party being deprived of all society of the faithful, may be
ashamed: But the King can not be deprived of the company of any one within his
kingdom, all of them being his subjects, and owing service and allegiance
unto him. So much a Popish Doctor does acknowledge, Radulph ardens in hom^
Domin. 1. post Pasch.
Reges ne excommunicare possunt sacerdotes excommunicatione majore, propter
publicam personam quam sustinent: Priests cannot excommunicate Kings with the
greater excommunication, because of the public person which they sustain.
We find indeed that St Ambrose did bar the Emperor Theodosius from the
Sacrament; but that was only the lesser censure, called suspension, Lib. V.
epist. 28. ad Theodosium.
as may appear by his own words, Causam contumaciae in te nullam habeo, sed
habeo timoris, offerre non audeosacrificium, si volueris assistere. He found no
cause of contumacie in him, (which only deserves the greater censures of
excommunication) but he was afraid lest the sacrifice might be profaned by his
presence, before he had by repentance, expiated the guilt of blood which he had
contracted. And yet even in this I think, that the Emperors humility was more
to be commended, then the Bishops zeal. howsoever it is most certain, that
the ancient Church, never offered to excommunicate any King, though never so
wicked; That was a later practice of that man of sin, Who exalts himself
against all that is called God. Finally, if contumacious persons, be in no
worse case, then Heathen men and Publicanes; then the Church by her censure,
cannot deprive them of goods, lands, or life: for the Jews did not so either
to Heathen men or to Publicanes: And besides, such a punishment, do^th not
belong to the Church, but to the civil Magistrate. It has been therefore an
intolerable tyranny in the Popes, to depose Kings excommunicated, give away
their crowns, dispose of their kingdoms, and to arm, not only strangers, but
also their own subjects against them, to take away their lives: As if that
Christian kings, did far the worse for their baptism, and profession of
Christ, and held not their crowns upon so secure terms, as Pagan princes do.
This were to put them in a worse case, then are Heathen and Publicanes, which
our Savior never intended: for as Crowns are not founded in faith, so they
are not lost by insidelitie; When a King, of a heathen becomes a Christian, he
loses not that temporal right which he had, but acquires a new right in the
spiritual goods of the Church: so, if afterward of Christian he become
Heathen, he loses the new right which he had acquired, in the benefits and
privileges of the Church, but not the old temporal right which he had unto
his Crown. So Bernard told the Pope. In criminibus, non possessionibus
potestas vestra, The Church has power to censure offenses, namely with the
sentence of excommunication, not to take away possessions.

But I might have spared this labor: Sect. 41.
for you are not the men who ascribe too much to the censures of the Church,
but indeed too little, and set them all at naught: If a man for his faction and
disobedience be cast out of the Church, you think him so much the nearer
heaven, as one who has witnessed a good confession, and is very zealous for
the truth, then you account him most worthy of your company, as if our Savior
had said, If he refuse to hear the Church, Let him be unto thee, as a
faithful brother. So little do you regard the sentence of the Church, which
our Savior has commanded you to obey, saying, sit tibi, Let him be unto
thee, as a Heathen man and a Publicane, for which he gives a reason in the
words following, saying, Verily I say unto you, What soever ye bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven; that is, the sentence pronounced by the Church, is
ratified by God himself. Here I cannot dissemble the injury that is done unto
the Church, by you in those parts: for her Instructions are not received; her
Ordinations are neglected; her determinations despised; her orders contemned;
her laws trodden under foot; her censures derided; In nothing she is heard:
And these who refuse to hear her, ye are so far from accounting them As
Heathens and Publicanes, that you esteem them as Saints and Martyrs; and
account us no better then Heathens, Publicanes, and persecuters: you open
heaven only to those that are of your faction, damn all that approve not your
fantasies, and so condemn all Churches, that are or have been, except your
own Conventicles; That it is a wonder to me, how you can profess to believe
The holy Catholic Church; for never any ancient Church observed these orders,
which you seek to obtrude upon the world, as the discipline of Christ, and the
seepter of his kingdom: And never any Church since the Apostles days, wanted
our orders which you reject as unlawful and Antichristian: So that, that which
you account the true Church, is not Catholic, and that Church which is
Catholic, is not holy: Thus have you lost one article of your Creed. It was so
with the Donatists in ancient times, and almost in every thing, their courses
were so like unto yours, that as often as I consider your opinions, and practice;
I do remember them, and think it is, Vetus fabula pernovos histriones, as
though by a Pythagorean transmigration, their souls had taken up their mansion
in your bodies. Which I will instance, in some particulars. The Donatists did
not only separate from the Catholic Church, but most arrogantly esteemed
their own faction, to be the only true Christians, in whose assemblies
salvation was to be found: Beelesia una est, eam tu frater Parmeniane apud ^os
solos esse dixisti. Optat, lib. 2. and post. Nitimini suadere hominibus apud
vos sotos esse Ecclesiam.
So have you appropriated unto your selves, the styles of Brethren, Good men,
Professors; As if all others who favor not your faction, had no brotherhood in
Christ, no interest in goodness, made no true profession of the Gospel. The
Catholics acknowledged the Donatists to be their brethren, loved, pittyed,
and prayed for them; Velint, nolint, fratres nostri sunt. Aug in Psalm. 32.
Concordate nobiscum flatres, diligimus vos; hoc vobis volumus, quod nobis. Id.
Ep. 68.
But the peevish schismatickes, requited their love with hatred, esteemed them
no better then Pagans, and disdayned to salute them: Isti qui dicunt, non es^is
fratres nostri, Paganos nos dicunt. Aug in Ps. 32. Vos odio no^ habetis,
fratres utique vestros* auditorum animis infunditis odia, and docentes ne Ave
dicant cuiquam nostrum Optat. lib. 4.
So albeit we have reached forth unto you the right hand of fellowship; yet
have you answered us with disdain, terming us formalists, time-servers,
worldlings, Papists, Arminians, limbs of Antichrist and no better then
reprobates. But for my own part, I pass very little to be judged of you: for
all your malice, you shall have my pity, and my prayers. The Donatists thought
all things polluted by the touch of Catholics; and so washed their Church
walls and their vestiments, broke their chalices scraped their Altars: d
Rasistis. Altaria, fregistis calices, lavastis pallas, parie^es and inclusa
spatia salsa aqua spargi praecepistis. Optat. lib. 6.
So these men think that our service-booke, our Ceremonies, our Churches and
all, are polluted with the Papists (though they descended unto them from the
ancient Church, and we have better right unto them then they had) And
therefore, where they had power, they did not wash the Churches, but in a
sacrilegious fury, pull them down to the ground; burnt the vestiments, broke
the chalices, or converted them to private uses, and razed the Altars;
esteeming a beggarly cottage, fitter for Gods service, then a magnificent
Temple; much like the officers of Julian, who when they saw the holy vessels
of the Church, cried out, En qualibus vasis ministratur Mariae filio? What
stately plate is this for the Carpenters son? The Donatists taught that the
efficacy of Sacraments depends on the dignity of the Minister, and so would
not receive the Sacrament from any, but such as they esteemed just men, that is
to say men of their own faction: De Baptismo dicere solent, tune esse verum
baptismum Christi, com ab homine Iusto datur. Aug. Ep 167.
And are not some of you of the same mind, who refuse the Sacrament, though
they might have it after their own fashion, only because the minister has
conformed himself unto the orders of the Church. The Donatists taught that the
Church ought not to tolerate evil persons in her Communion; that Communion
with such persons polluteth and profaneth the Church; And that therefore all
the Churches of the world were perished, because they communicated with
Caecilianus: Donatistae -- pertinaci dissensione, in heresin schisma verterunt,
tanquam Ecclesia Christi propter crimina Caeciliani, -- de toto terrarum ^^ be
perierit. Aug. cont. ^pist. Parmen. l. 3. Id. de haeres. ad quod vult cap. 69.
And was it not upon the very same ground, that your brethren the Brounists did
run both out of the Church, and out of their wits? they built their
conclusions upon your premises, and put your speculations in practice: And (as
I hear) some of you are about to follow them, God knows whither. The
Donatists had no true ground for their scparation, but their own wills: Their
rule was, Quod volamus, sanct^m est: Aug. cont. ep. Parmen, lib. 2. cap 13.
It is so with you; for all your reasons has been answered to the full, in so
much that all wise men can discern, that it is not true reason that makes you
stand out, but will, Passion, a desire to please the people, and (as you are
pleased to term it) your conscience. August. Pasim. Optatus.
The Donatists did glory much in their sufferings, challenge unto themselves
the honor of Martyrs, whereby they did confirm the hearts of simple people in
their errors, and rend the Church with schisms and divisions: you have boasted
as much of your sufferings, as ever they did, albeit very few of you, have
been as yet touched, and those that were questioned, deserved a greater
censure then was imposed: I will say no more of your sufferings, Qui resistit
potestati, Dei ordinationi resistit; qui autem resistunt, sibiipsi judicium
acquirunt -- gravius perse^ quitur siliu^ patrem male vivendo, quam Pater
filium castigan^^^ and gravius ^n illa Saram persecuta est per iniquam
superbiam, quam came Sa^a per debitam disciplinam. etc. De Vnitat. Eccles. and
Tract. in Ioban. Matthew. V. 10.
then S^ Augustine did unto the Donatists, that they that resist, draw
punishment upon themselves, for resisting the ordinance of God: That the son
persecutes the father more by his dissolute living, then the father does the
son by chastising him. That Agar the handmaid did persecute Sarah her
mistress more grievously, by her proud disobedience, then Sarah did her by
just correction: That Ismael was cast out of Abraham's house, for Isaacs sake,
and yet the Apostle calls not Isaac, but Ismael the persecuter. And often he
repeats this saying, Non poena, sed causa facit martyrem. So it is only the
cause that puts a difference, between a Martyr and Malefactor, I shall
therefore entreat you, to look before you leap, and consider well the cause
for which you suffer: for as it is a blessed thing to suffer for righteousness
sake, so if ye suffer for evil doing, you have no cause to rejoice. Esse
Martyr non potest (says Cyprian) qui in Ecclesia non est: Adregnum pervenire
non poterit, qui eam quae regnatura est derelinquit. It is a sin to resist a
lawful ordinance; to suffer for your disobedience, is a greater sin: but the
greatest of all is, by suffering to confirm simple people in their errors,
intertaine faction and division, and rend the bowels of the Church.

Here in the last place, Sect. 42.
I shall beseech you who profess to make a conscience of all sin, to
consider how by your standing out against the orders of the Church, you involve
your selves into the guilt of many great and grievous crimes, As I.
Disobedience to lawful authority: for we are bound in conscience, to obey our
superiors in all things, that are notcontrary to the word of God. This is the
confession of the Church of Scotland, printed in the beginning of their Psalm
books, and it is grounded upon Gods word: Our Savior commands us to hear the
Church. Matthew. XVIII. 17. Romans XIII. 1. Mebr. XIII. 17. I. Pet. II. 13.
The Apostle to be subject to superior powers, and to obey them that have the
oversight of us. S. Peter, To submit our selves unto every humane Ordinance.
But to subsume, these things you refuse to confent unto, are commanded by
lawful authority, and are not contrary to Gods Word, but things in their own
nature merely indifferent, as has been not only proved, but even confessed
by foreign Divines, who live under another Church-governement; insomuch, that
Bishop Hooper, who was the first that I know, who opposed the Ceremonies of the
Church of England, especially the Surplis, and the Cope, was convinced by the
strong arguments of Bucer, and Peter Martyr, and advised by M. Calvin to
conform himself even for obedience sake: for it ill becomes those who
should teach the people obedience, to be themselves examples of disobedience.
II. Perjurie: for all of you have received, both the Oath of the kings
supremacy, and of Canonical obedience: and there is nothing required of you,
but what the King may lawfully command, nothing but what the Canons of the
Church do injoyne, and what your selves when you entered into the ministry,
knew that all ministers of this kingdom were bound to observe. Consider I pray
you, whether your proceedings be correspondent to your oath, And how you can
excuse your selves from perjurie. Did you swear with a mental reservation?
that is but the trick of a Jesuit, and will prove but a poor defense before
Almighty God, who is the Judge and avenger of an Oath. III. You cast a
reproach upon the Church, as if she did injoyne things unlawful and
Antichristian, you disturb her peace, and rend her unity, shedding the blood
of war in peace, and as it were dividing Christ's seamlesse coat, which is a
sin as great as worshipping of Idols: for the time was when it was said,
Dionys. Alexandr. apud Niceph. Eusebius. hist. eccl: lib. 6. cap. 38.
Non minoris est laudis non scindere Ecclesiam, quam Idolo non sacrificare. And
again, Op^rtuerit etiam pati omnia, ne scinderetur Ecclesia Dei^ If you ought
to suffer all things rather then the Church should be rent, then certainly you
ought to suffer your own wills to be controlled by the Judgment of the
Church, in matters of outward ordor and decency. IV. The loss of your
ministry, which should be dearer unto you then your lives, must be in you a
sin. What will you answer unto the Lord in that great day for suffering your
selves to be deprived of your ministry, and drawing back your hands from the
plough, only for wilfulness? you may be sure that he will not Judge, that you
suffered for well doing, but that you perished in the gainsaying of Core, We
know that the Apostles did become all unto all, even practice themselves, and
advise others to practice Ceremonies as evil and inconvenient in number,
nature, use and evil effects, as ours are even in your judgment, yea and such
Ceremonies too, as they had preached against, and this they did for to avoid a
less evil then deprivation, even to get a door of utterance opened unto them
in one place; V. Behold and see how this your opposition brings a scandal upon
the conformable Clergy, as though we were all but time-servers; And gives
advantage to the Papists; for our discord is there music; The Scripture
speaking of the debate between the servants of Abraham and Lot, does add that
the Canaanites dwelt in the land, Genesis XIII. 7. To signify that though their
contention was evil in it self, yet it was worse, because the enemies of God,
where of the land was full, would rejoice at it. So your contentions are evil
in themselves, but the worse, because the Papists are in the land, who from
your strifes take occasion to blaspheme our religion. VI. Your opposition
hinders the work of the Gospel, and the edification of Gods people: for many
of them who admire you, make these things wherein we differ, their greatest
study, and think they have Religion enough, if they be but upon your side, if
they can hate a Bishop, and abhor a Ceremony. Thus the weightier matters of
the Law are neglected, Matthew. XXIII. 23.
while we contest about Mint and annise and Cummine, matters merely
circumstantiall. This indeed is Tragoedias agere in nugis. I have heard of a
man who came to a Physician to complain of the whit-law in his finger, and the
Physician looking upon him, espied death in his face; for the man was in a
deep consumption, whereof he was nothing so sensible as of the pain in his
finger. So it is with you, you complain grievously of Ceremonies and orders
established, and are not sensible of a dangerous consumption, even the loss of
Charity, which is the life of religion. Finally, consider unto what dangers
you expose your selves, and what shall become of you, when ye are cut off from
the Communion of the Church: Ab arbore frange ramum, De Unit. Ecclesiae.
fractus germinare non poterit: (says Cyprian) A font pracide rivam,
praecisus arescet. As a branch cut off from the tree, must needs wither, and a
stream divided from the fountain must presently dry up: so those that are cut
off from the mystical body of Christ, must wither and dry up, as wanting the
vital influence of Gods spirit, and the watering of the dew of grace, which is
a fearful judgment, expressed elegantly by the Apostle by the word (...),
Romans IX. 1^. Heb^. III.
from the verb (...), which signifies properly to dry up, and wither. It is
said that when Cain was cast out from the presence of God (that is from his
Church, and the place of his worship) He went and dwelt in the land of Nod: so
you when you are cast out of the Church, are preparing to go and dwell in the
land of Noddies, and it is strange if the sides of one ship can contain them,
who cannot be kept within the pale of the Church.

All these things deserve your consideration, and may give you occasion to
repent hereafter when it will be too late: I thought it therefore my duty to
warn you, Genesis XLII, ^^.
as Reuben did his brethren, beseeching you for gods sake, if there be any
bowels of compassion in you toward the Church your mother, your brethren,
your friends, your flock, your selves; that you would yet lay aside all
prejudice and partiality, and the spirit of contradiction, and compose your
selves to peace, unity and love; Psalm. CXXVI. 6^7^
O pray for the peace of Jerusalem, Let peace be within her walls, and
prosperity within her palaces. Think not that you are wiser then the Church,
then all Churches, 1. Co^ XIIII. 26.
as if the word of God had come only from you, or to you, and to none besides:
but remember that you are men, and so may err; that better men have erred, and
have thought no shame to acknowledge the same, and retract their error. In this
life we shall never be resolved of all doubts, therefore the Jews had wont
to say, Elias cum venerit solvet dubia. The safest course is, where you doubt,
especially about matters of this kind, concerning Order, and Church polity,
to submit your selves peaceably to the Judgment of the Church; and then, Phil.
III. 15. Romans XV. 5.
If ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even the same unto you. Now the
God of peace and consolation give us that we may be like minded one toward
another: I. Cor. I. 10.
That we may all speak one thing, and that there be no dissentions amongst us,
Ephesians. IV. ^.
but that we be knit together in one mind and in one Judgment; endeavoring
to keep the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of Peace. Amen.

AN ANSWER TO CERTAIN OBJECTIONS MADE AGAINST THE ORDERS OF OUR CHVRCH,
ESPECIALLY KNEELING AT THE COMMUNION.
I Was at first somewhat perplexed and doubtful, whether it became me to tkae
notice of a late Libell, the foolishest that ever was spread abroad, in
writing, praetending to set down a relation of a certain Conference between
my self, and some unconforme Ministers of my Diocese, or whether like a
noisome snuff to let it dye out of it self, as unworthie the treading upon.
Herein I took counsel of the wisest of men, even of Solomon, but he left me
(upon the matter) as irresolute as he found me. Proverb. XXVI 4.5.
Answer not (says he) a fool according to his foolishness, lest thou also
be like him. And yet immediately thereafter, Answer a fool according to his
foolishness, lest he be wise in his own conceit. The reasons are forcible
on both sides, but I have followed the later advice, not because in Solomon,
secundae cogitationes were saniores; but because it fitliest jumpeth, both with
the exigencie of the time, and humor of the men whom I am to encounter, lest
the fools grow more wise in their own conceit.

When I first met with this Libell, I expected somewhat savouring of wit, (for
I dare pronounce them not guilty of much judgment) but found it a mere
fardle of lies. And so much has been confessed by all men of quality, who
were present at the Conference. Yea, and by some too, neither disaffected to
their persons, nor cause. All the most material things which I spoke, are left
out, many things fathered upon me which I never thought, just as it pleased the
Libeller to forge and frame them, for his own advantage, and to serve his
Reply; Chimaeras sibi fingens qua^ jugulet, sed alijs Chi^aris oppositis. Not
unlike the fellow in Martial: Quod tibi vis dici, dicere Fusee foles. Violating
therein, (to omit his incivilitie) the praescript of humanity, and common
honestiet being formerly admonished to transmit unto my self their Arguments
in writing, and in like manner to receive my answers; that thus by his or their
good allowance, I might have acted my own part, in my own person; not under
the larve of such a puppet, as out of their malice in general, and the
particular fatuitie and ignorance of the Libeller, they have thought fit to
bestow upon me. for albeit he were indeed an Impartialist in his own cause,
(which no wise man will believe) yet were it impossible for him, either to
remember my words, or express my thoughts, so fully as my self. But he found,
that having an ill cause, he stood in need of all helps; And this sort of men,
(as is well known to the world) though it be but the sign of a profligate
and desperate cause, make no small advantage by their lying: were it indeed
God's, (as they bear the world in hand) it would not need such props as those
to support it. Will thou make a lie for God (says Job) a one does for a man, to
advantage his neighbor? The Apostle proves the resurrection of Christ, by
this inconvenience which would follow if Christ were not risen* 1. Cor. XV. 1^.
Then we are found false witnesses of God, for we have testified of God, that
he has raised up Christ. If the Apostle had been of these men's mind, this had
been no Argument; for that testimony which they gave of the resurrection of
Christ, was a special motive to draw men unto the faith: And so conduced unto
their cause; but for all that, if it had been an untruth, they should have been
found false witnesses, which God cannot endure, though done with an intent to
advance his own service. Amongst the six things which the Lord does hate,
Solomon reckons a false witness, that speaks lies, and him that raises up
contention among brethren. And again. Prove. VI. 16. XIX. 9.
A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall
perish. Yet have these men so accustomed their tongues thereunto, that now, Ab
little ere pallida veritas fugit.

But it is ordinary with these men to belie their Ordinary; I wish their
malice, their madness had here stayed. But as though the burning of one Temple
had not been enough to make them famous, L. Bishop of Derrie.
they have most shamefully traduced a Reverend and worthy Praelate of our
Church, who came in but by accident; making him to rave throughout their whole
Libell; whereas it is well known, if he had entered the lists of disputation
with them, (which he did not, speaking but very little, and that not unto them,
but unto my self) an army of such Pigmeyes could not have stood before him:
To repeat the passages wherewith they basely belie him, were but to cherish
credulity in the reader; All who were present, testify they never heard him
speak any such words. And besides, a Qui perdere vult faenum, emat Asinum. A
pul^
If any will lose so much hay, as to entertain that Ass, or time as to read
that barbarous Libell. They shall find such unworthy and sordid trash to be
far from, both the candor of his style, and gravity of his Judgment. But it
may be said of these men (as St Hierom of some in his days) Existimant
loquacitatem esse facundiam: Lib. contra Helvid.
and malodicere omnibus bonae conscientiae signum arbitrantur. They had
sufficient experience of his ability in this kind, about two years before
that in the same place, where he so baffled them with the strength of his
Arguments, that, their mouths being stopped, they were evidently discerned to
speak through the nose, Insomuch that afterward, to save the poor remnant of
their repute with their followers who were present, and perceived them to be
both confuted and convinced; they had no other excuse, but that they were
daunted by the authority of his place and person. A miserable subterfuge and no
better then that which Foelix the Manichee made for himself, when in a
public dispute, he was triumphed upon by St Austin (but withal unwilling to
confess his ignorance) Terret me apex Episcopalis. Act. cum Foe. lice lib. I.
And yet it is well known that these men do not use to defer so much unto a
Bishop, as that haeretique or other heathen Philosophers in their conferences
and letters, did unto that learned father.

This contumelious and unfaire dealing did once persuade me, not to answer the
fool according to his foolishaesse: But to contemn these Annals Volusi
cacatas chartas. The subject I have to do with, is so base, the parties so
unworthy, that Vinco, seu vincor, semper Ego maculor; And therefore perceiving
them to be fallen out of one brainesickenesse, into another, that is, from
babbling to scribbling, as desirous to be press't as well as suspended: I had set
up my rest with the Epigrammatist Allatres licet usque nos, and usque, Mart.
lib. V. Epig 61.

Et gannitibus improbis lacessas:
Certum est hanc tibi pernegarefamam,
Olim quam petis in meis libellis,
Qualiscunque legaris ut per orbem.
Nam te our aliquis sciat fuisse?
Ignotus pereas miser necesse est.
Non deerunt tamen hac in urbe forsan
Vnus, vel duo, tresve, quatuorve,
Pellem rodere qui veli^t caninam.
Nos han a scabie tonemus ungues.
But since they have sung an Io Paean to their victory, where they have little
cause, Prove. XIV. 15.
and by that means have seduced a number of simple people (as the foolish will
believe every thing) insomuch that many especially of the female sex, have
refused to receive the holy Sacrament for fear of Idolatry: I will take some
pains briefly as the have of the press, the importunity of mine own
affairs, and present indisposition of my body will give me leave; to remove
these scruples, that the poor people who have been misled by these blind
guides, may be reduced unto the unity of the Church, which is the thing in this
world I most desire; That I may truly say with S. Cyprian, Opto equidem, ut si
ficri potest, nemo de fratribus pereat, and consentientis popull Corpus unum
gremio suo gandens matter includat. I desire, (if it be possible) that none of
the brethren perish, but that the Church like a glad mother may receive them in
her bosom, being all of one mind.

This was the only cause which moved me to hear their objections. I did not
admit disputation to call the present laws in question; but in all meekness
to instruct them that were contrary minded: and to settle their unresolved
consciences; believing them to be the men they profess't, desirons of truth
rather then victory, and that if they might receive satisfaction to some few
doubts, they were ready to yield that obedience which is required: And both to
conform themselves unto the present government, and to draw their people unto
conformity also. And in this I followed the example of S. Augustine, who
admitted Foelix the Manichee, unto a public conference in the Church before
the people: wherein the haereticke, (though stiff to maintain his error) yet
gave the Bishop the reverence due to his place, which these men would not
afford unto me, and after long babbling at last yielded unto the truth. I was
not so happy in the success, in regard of the difference, betwixt his auditors
and mine; his making conscience of the truth, and accounting it Religion to
reverence their Bishop, and to believe him as Gods messenger: but mine resolved
never to forsake their opinions, though the truth were made never so evident
unto them, having Judgments forestalled with praejudice, against whatsoever
should be spoken by a Bishop, whom to despise they account it the highest
perfection of Religion. Besides the weakness of their understanding is such,
that they were not capable, either of Arguments or answers, but transported
with the opponents sighs, groans, lifting up of his eyes, and spreading out
of his hands; being the best Arguments which ever these zelots learned in the
Schools: And indeed of no small weight with the common people; As the Orator
well knew, when being in a certain defense prevented of his usual and
lamentable conclusion, by the tears, and more lamentable conclusion of
Horsensius, he cried out as one half undone, Surripuisti mihi ornamenta
Orationis meae. Is it then any wonder that my conference which was only begun,
and so rather intended, then acted, had not the desired success? yet I dare
say that censure which Erasmus past upon that conference betwixt S. Augustine
and the Manichee, may be as truly applied unto ours: Which is this; (and not
impertinent to the present purpose) In his actis nescio quid potissimum
admirer, Aug. Tom. 6. de act. cum Foel. fol 363. edit. Basil.
Foelicisne impudentiam qui provocarit ad publicam disputationem, ad quam adeo
non fuit instructus, ut vix Asinus possit insulsius argumentari; An populi
tolerantiaw, quae delirantem beluam citra tumultum auscultarit; An Augustini
stomachum invincibilem, qui tam indoctis ineptijs tamdiu tanta lenitate
responderit. In these Acts I know not what chiefly to admire, the impudency of
Foelix who did appeal to a public disputation, for which he was so
unpraepared, as no Ass could have spoken more absurdly; Or the lenity of the
people, who without tumult heard that raving and doting beast, or the
invincible patience of S. Augustine, who with much mildness, did so long
answer to such unlearned fooleries. Though I could not come near that eminent
Bishop in learning, yet I labored to imitate him in patience, whereof I will
yet give a further proof by revising that Libell, and making a full answer to
those objections which the Disputer (being instructed by the rest of his
brethren what weapons to use (made against the Orders of our Church, at lest as
many of them as keep off the people from Conformity. And yet I find the
Libellers relation so void of sense, that I should blush, to set down his own
words, lest the Echo might be taken for the voice: But I hope the reader
shall find, that albeit I set not down all his words yet I have neglected
nothing therein material; And by this my hafty answer, Quam non meditor, sed
effundo, all men may receive satisfaction, who are capable of instruction; And
wherein if my style be homely, nay, abject, I desire the reader to remember
what sort of people I have to do with: how I apply my self to their
capacity; And perhaps the very reading of that Libell has infected my pen
with barbarism.

At first our Disputer did only dally with our Translation of the Psalms,
Apocryphal Lessons, and Collect for Christmasse day, wherein he intended only
Velitationem quandam, tanquam levis armaturae; sending forth his light horsemen
rather to view the advantages of the ground, then to fight; whom I shall not
need to encounter, in regard the Auditory was generally weary of these peevish
and poor exceptions: And the Disputer himself has confessed (as I am
credibly informed) that it was against his will, he did moove those first
scruples, even in his own judgment so apparently frivolous, but that he was
wrought, and in a manner enforced thereunto, by one of his brethren, who
praesumed much upon his skill in the Hebrew.

Besides those exceptions, all that was objected for orders sake, I shall
reduce unto three heads: for in the Libell there is neither method nor sense.

First, he desired a warrant from Scripture, to justify our Ceremonies;
whereunto my answer was: That if they meant a particular and express
commandment for every Ceremony and Church-constitution, I had sufficiently
proved in my Sermon, that it could not be expected, neither are they themselves
able to produce such a warrant, for such orders as they themselves injoyne and
practice in their own Congregations: But if they meant a general warrant, our
Church has as much as they, or any other Church yet ever had for their
constitutions: Even that warrant of the Apostle, Let all things be done
decently, and in order. 1. Cor. XIV. 40. Which is that great Apostolical
Canon, Calvin in locum.
by which all other Canons must be squared, the true Touchstone to try
Ceremonies, and the Balance wherein all Church-Orders should be weighed. And
whereas some Ceremonies seem decent unto some, which unto others, seem
otherwise; Those whom God has made Governors of his Church, (and not any
private man) are to judge of their decency. If private men appoint orders to
be used in the public worship of GOD, (as these men do in their
Congregations) they must show their Commission, otherwise we must take that for
decent in things indifferent, which seems decent in the eye of public
authority; And those things which they were required to practice, were in
themselves things indifferent, no ways repugnant unto the Word of GOD; had
been esteemed by the Church in all ages, to be not only decent, but of
singular good use; And are now enjoined by lawful authority: And therefore
they were bound in Conscience, to submit themselves thereunto, having for the
same, a warrant in Scripture, in all those places which require obedience to be
given unto our Superiors. Romans XIII. 1. Let every soul be subject unto
Superior powers. I. Pet. II. 13. Snbus it your selves to every ordinance of
man for the Lord's sake Hebr. XIII. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you.

Now, what says the Libeller to this? he struggles like a fish on the hook,
and utters such pitiful stuff, that I am ashamed to relate it. He tells
us, that the meaning of the Apostles words, is; Let all things ordained by God,
be done decently and in order; Be it so: The Sacrament is ordained by God,
and therefore to be received decently: Now, I have fully proved in my Sermon,
that God has not in Scripture, either by precept or by example determined,
what particular gesture should be used in the Sacrament: And therefore the
same is left to be appointed at the discretion of the Church: The Church has
appointed kneeling, which is a decent gesture, as afterward I shall show. I
have also declared, that Kneeling is no humane invention, but a natural
gesture, and so ordained by God, which has been, and may be applied to every
part of Gods worship. He further says, That rule must abide the trial of
other rules of Gods word; This is strange Divinity: Will he question a rule of
Gods Word, call it to the bar, and try it by a surie of its fellows? But I
think his intent was, (if he could have written sense,) to say, that Kneeling
at the Communion, must abide the trial of other rules: And so it shall; even
of that rule which he has mentioned, Abstain from all appearance of evil. As
I shall show in the proper place. In the mean time I tell him, that their
sitting at the Communion will not abide the trial of any of the rules of Gods
word. I have proved in my Sermon, that it is an undecent and unreverent
behavior in Gods worship, that it was never commanded, and seldom or never
practiced in any act of Gods service, but only upon occasion: It carries an
appearance of evil, a show of profaneness, irreverence, pride, and
presumption: It is flat contrary unto that rule of the Apostle; Romans XIV. 19.
follow these things which concern Peace; for by it the Peace of this Church
is disturbed, her Unity rent: It gives offense unto all sorts of men, to their
brethren, to the Magistrate, to the whole Church of God. And therefore it does
not tend to the glory of God, and aedification of his people.

The second Class of the Disputers Arguments were taken from Christian
liberty, and the care we should have to avoid scandal, to which purpose he
alleged Romans XIV. 3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not,
etc. ver. 15. Destroy not him with thy mea^ for Whom Christ dyed, I. Cor. VIII.
13. If meat offend my brother, I will eat no flesh while the world stands.
Unto all which I gave a full and satisfactorie answer: Albeit he has not the
honesty to set it down; for it seems he saw that he had neither strength to
overthrow it, nor so much ingenuitie as to yield unto the truth when it is
declared unto him. I showed that there was a great difference between their
case and ours in two particulars; first, The things whereabout they did differ,
(namely eating or not eating of things sacrificed unto Idols) were merely
indifferent, not only in their own nature, but even for use; it being free and
arbitrary unto them to eat or not to eat, forasmuch as there was no law
either to command, or to forbid the use of these meats; And therefore the
believing Romans, and the Corinthians not only might, but also ought,
sometimes to abstain from such meats, for the avoiding of scandal. But it is
not so with our Ceremonies, albeit they be indifferent in their own nature, as
neither being particularly commanded, nor forbidden in Scripture: yet they are
not now indifferent unto us, for the use, nor left unto our choice, the
observation of them being enjoined by lawful authority, (and that the
Magistrate has power to make Laws in things indifferent none will deny but an
Anabaptist) And therefore now, though never so many should be offended at our
Ceremonies, yet we can not forbear to use them without a greater scandal in
open disobedience to lawful authority. Before that Apostolical constitution,
Act. XV. It was lawful for a man either to eat, or not to eat things
sacrificed unto Idols, as he found in his conscience most expedient for
aedification, there being no law divine, or humane, to rule his conscience, but
only the Judgment of his own mind and the general law of charity: But
after that constitution was made, It was not lawful for him to eat, though in
the presence of converted Gentiles, who would perhaps be offended at his
forbearance; because now though the matter be indifferent in its own nature
yet it was not free and arbitrary for use, at lest to those Churches, for whom
the constitution was made, of Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia: for it seems that
the eating of things sacrificed to Idols, was in some sort permitted the
Church of Corinth, if no man did challenge it. I. Cor. X. 27. Whatsoever is set
before you eat, asking no question for conscience sake. A second difference I
observed between their case and ours, that those whom the Apostle will not
have us to offend by the use of our Christian liberty, in things indifferent,
were weak brethren, as shall appear in all the places alleged by the
Disputer, Romans XIV. 1. Him that is weak in the faith receive unto you, v. 2.
One believes that he may eat of all things; And another which is weak eats
herbs. Whereupon follows immediately, Let not him that eats, despise him
that eats not. Chap. XV. 1. We which are strong, ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak. I. Cor. VIII. throughout the whole Chapter, ver. 7.
Their conscience being weak, is defiled; and so ver. 9.10.11.12. They were
weak as being newly converted unto the faith, and as yet neither having
means, nor leisure, to be fully instructed in their Christian liberty, and
therefore much was to be yielded unto them, lest coming newly from Iudaisme,
where they had learned to be zealous of the Law of Moses, if they should see
Christians not observe that Law, they might be offended at the Christian
Religion. And withal it is to be praesumed, that those to whom the Apostle
graunts such Indulgence, were willing to be instructed in the right way. But
those who take offense at our Ceremonies, are not now to be esteemed weak:
They think themselves the only illuminates, even the very Gnostiques of this
age, in comparison of whom, all others, who are not of their faction are very
Ignaroes, whose minds the god of the world has so blinded, that they are
destitute of heavenly knowledge. Besides, they have had a large time allowed
them, to inform their consciences, and all means have been used to give them
satisfaction. But a fool despises his fathers Instruction. Prove. XV. 5. And
why? The way of a fool is right in his own eyes. Prove. XII. 15. So that those
brethren, whom the Apostle would not have others to offend, in the use of their
Christian liberty in things indifferent, were only weak; Ours are wilful;
They timorous, Ours obstinate; Their offense proceeded from simple ignorance,
arising from the want of time, and means of Instruction; But the offense which
our men take at the Ceremonies, proceeds from affected error, from pride,
prejudice, singularity, and the spirit of malice and contention. And therefore
I dare say, that albeit his Majesty, and all that are in authority over us,
would dispense with the present Laws, and leave it to our own choice, whether
to use, or not to use the Ceremonies, for fear of giving them offense: Yet
were we bound in conscience not to yield unto them in one jot by our
forbearance, in regard that thereby we should but bolster them in their error,
and confirm them in their obstinacy and opposition against the Church. I am
sure this was the practice of the Apostles; At first they yielded much to the
weakness of Jewish Converts, doing and forbearing many things, to avoid their
offense: But when they did pertinaciously persist in their error, calling our
Christian liberty in question, the Apostles resolutely maintained it, not
regarding their offense at all. So S. Paul who circumcised Timothy, to avoid
the offense of the weak Jews, would not circumcise Titus, to please others
who were perverse despisers of our liberty; And he who did purify himself to
gain a good opinion of the weak Jews who were zealous of the Law; Act. XXI.
v. 20. and 26. Gal. 11.1^5.
yet when certain false brethren crept in privily to spy our liberty, he gave
not place unto them by subjection for an hour. And whenas S. Peter for fear
of offending the Jews at Antioch, forbear to eat with the Gentiles, he
reproved him for it to his face, interpreting that fact of his to be an
effectual seducement, albeit he did not preach Iudaisme, Why compellest thou
the Gentiles to Iudaize? ver. 14. As he would not yield to any thing to
displease those who were wilful despisers of our liberty, no more should we to
please those men, who are resolved never to be satisfied. I am sure the
tenderest hearted man amongst them, will not forbear the eating of a fat Capon
upon Good Friday, for fear of offending a Papist. And why should we forbear
either Surplis, Cross, or Kneeling, because they are offended at it.

In these two particulars I showed in the Court, the difference between the
things whereof the Apostle speaks, and our Ceremonies, so plainly, that it
was thought sufficient to satisfy any, but those in whom affection and
partiality have put out the eye of reason. And upon these two cases I dare now
venture the cause. first, that we are nowhere commanded to forbear the use of
a thing indifferent, even where we are left to our own choice, for fear of
offending the wilful despisers of our liberty; but only to avoid the offense
of weak brethren, who are willing to learn the right way, and have not had
leisure and means to be informed. Secondly, that if the Magistrate interpose
his authority, commanding the use of a thing in it self indifferent; we are
not to forbear the doing of it, for fear of offending any whatsoever they be,
whether wilful, or only weak. And that it is so, shall appear unto him who
reads these two Chapters, whereunto the Disputer did appeal, and studies not
the syllables, but the sense of them. And to make this same yet more manifest,
I will recommend unto the Reader that is desirous of satisfaction, these
considerations following. I. When the Apostle charge us to avoid the offense
of our weak brother, he gives this reason, that we should not please
ourselves, but our neighbor to aedification, Romans XV. 1.2. Whereby it is
evident, that he speaks only of these things which are not commanded, but left
to our own liberty to do or not to do, in which case he will have us to please
our neighbor, if he be a weak brother, rather then our selves: But if the
Magistrate have interposed his commandment in a thing indifferent, then as we
can not forbear it to please our neighbor, if he be a weak brother; so we
do it not to please our selves, but to please him, whom God has commanded us
to obey, not only for wrath, but for conscience sake. II. A thing in it self
indifferent, being enjoined by lawful authority, becomes necessary unto us
for the use; So the Apostles speaking of things in themselves indifferent, as
abstinence from meats offered to Idols etc. When once they had made a
constitution touching them, call them Necessary things Act. XV. 28. And the
Apostle says (...). Romans XIII. 5.
It is necessary that you be subject. And surely there is nothing wherein we
can show our obedience unto the Magistrates authority, but only in things
indifferent, which God has left in our power: for, those things which God has
commanded, we must do, whether the Magistrate command them or no, yea albeit
he should forbid them: And those things which God has forbidden, we must not
do, whether the Magistrate forbid them or no, yea albeit he should command
them: so that there is no scope left, either unto the Magistrate to command, or
unto us to obey, but only in things indifferent. III. If we should not obey
the Magistrate in a thing indifferent, when some men take offense at it; then
we shall never obey him at all, there shall be no order, no constitution; for
there can be no public action, order, or constitution, which some men will
not dislike. IV. Obedience to the Magistrate is a greater duty then the
pleasing of a private person, and consequently the evil of disobedience,
greater then the evil of scandal. V. If our obedience to the Magistrate in a
thing indifferent, offend any, the evil is not in us, but in him who is
scandalized: for as Tertullian says, Res bona neminem offendit, nisi malam
mentem. It is scandalum acceptum, not datum, he ought not to be offended, being
bound to obey the Magistrate as well as we: now were it not a strange, if I
should forbear to do my duty, because another man is resolved not to do his.
VI. As it is a sin to disobey lawful authority, and no sin in us, if
another be offended at our obedience: so there is far greater danger, both
to our selves and to all the whole Church, in disobedience, then can be in the
offense of a few brethren. Lastly, If we refuse those things that are
enjoined, we cannot avoid disobedience; But if we observe them, we may prevent
or remove the offense that is taken at them, by informing the people aright,
that they are things in themselves indifferent whereunto Christian liberty does
extend, and that the Magistrate ough^ to be obeyed in these things. But our
brethren are so far from teaching such doctrine, that they teach nothing else
but disobedience, II. Sam. XX. ^.
like Sheba the son of Bichri blowing a trumpet to sedition; insomuch that
some who are now questioned for frequenting their conventicles, being examined
upon Oath, could not remember any, one point of Christian Instruction, in all
their Sermons, but that they preached against keeping of Holy Days, and
kneeling at the Communion. If so much pains had been taken to teach them
obedience to lawful authority, the scandal might have been removed long
erenow. Whosoever will be pleased to consider these particulars shall find,
that what the Apostle has spoken of Christian liberty, and of giving offense,
makes nothing against our Ceremonies, but every way for them. Besides those two
differences which I have observed, between their case of whom the Apostle
speaks, and ours: It were easy to show many other things, wherein they are
most unlike; namely the eating and not eating of meats, are private actions,
in a man's own power to do or not to do: But our case is concerning the
public Ceremonies of the Church, which no private man can dispense with. The
Apostle by forbearing flesh did prejudice none but himself: But we in
refusing the Ceremonies should prejudice the authority of the Prince. The
Apostles for bearance did further the course of his ministry, and therefore he
became all unto-all; But our refusal of the Ceremonies should loose us the
liberty of ours, and that most justly for our disobedience. Finally, amongst
the Romans some were offended at the eating of those meats, but I do not
read that any was offended at the not eating of them: It is otherwise with
us, where one is offended at our Ceremonies, ten wiser then they would be
offended if we did not use them; And far more if we did follow their fashion
in the manner of Gods worship.

The case being clear, that the Orders which our Church injoynes, are neither
contrary to Christian liberty, nor to that care we should have for to avoid
offense; In the next place I will labor to find out the cause of this gross
mistake in the brethren, which certainly is this, that they do not rightly
consider the nature of Christian liberty, whilst they set it upon
tenter-hookes, and stretch it further then the nature thereof will bear;
seeking not only a liberty of mind and conscience in things indifferent, but a
freedom also in their outward actions, which is not Christian liberty, Calv.
Inst. lib. III. cap. 19. Sect. 10.
but licentious immunity, contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel: for S. Peter
exhorting all men to be obedient unto Magistrates, I. Pet. II. 16.
he warnes them not to use their liberty as a cloak of maliciousness,
Namely, In casting off the bridle of government. It is proper to the liberty
of the Creator alone to be unlimited; but all lawful liberty of the creature,
is and must be bounded, not only by the Law of charity, (which these men will
acknowledge) but also by the law of loyalty; for if all restraint of the
outward man were contrary to Christian liberty; then were it not lawful to
obey the Magistrate in any thing; Then if the King should be pleased to
confirm the Orders, (or as they term them the circumstances of worship) which
have been used in their congregations; They were bound to forsake them, for
the zeal of their Christian liberty. And what is this else, but to bring flat
Anabaptisme and Anarchie into the Church, to overthrow all Government, and
dissolve the bonds of subjection and obedience to lawful authority. You shall
therefore understand, that the Magistrate by his Laws may moderate or
restrain the outward actions, wherein the external use of our liberty
consists; The inward liberty of conscience before God, notwithstanding
remaining intyre. He may injoyne any action which in Gods worship may be used
lawfully; So that no opinion be put upon the conscience, which takes away the
full respect of its indifferency. And this is that which St Peter says; We
must obey the Magistrates, as free, that is, as being persuaded that the thing
commanded in it self, and to Godward (as Calvin speaks) is indifferent, and
whether we do it, or not do it, in it self it commends us not unto God,
otherwise then that by obeying of the Magistrate, we do also obey God, who
has commanded us to be subject unto him. Which will better appear if we
consider that Christian liberty is inward and spiritual, which may stand with
the outward servitude of slaves (as the Apostle shows. I. Cor. VII. 22.) much
more with the obedience of free subjects: It is seated in the mind and
conscience, and respects nothing, but what is between God and us: It
contenteth it self, if there be no opinion put upon the conscience of the
necessity of these things, which God has left indifferent: if they be not
obtruded as divine Laws: if no Religion be placed in them, nor they pressed as
immediate parts of Gods worship. It is only the subjecting of the conscience
unto a thing indifferent, I. Cor. VI. 12.
(which the Apostle calls, The bringing us under the power of a thing) which
overthrowes our Christian liberty: not the necessity of obedience unto lawful
authority; but the doctrine or opinion of the absolute necessity of the thing
it self. In a word Christian liberty is not taken away by the necessity of
doing a thing indifferent, or not doing; but only by that necessity which
takes away the opinion or persuasion of the indifferency of it: As may appear
by this, whenever the Apostle condemns the practice of Jewish Geremonies, at
that time when there was some dispensation and indulgence granted unto
Christians, till the Synagogue should be buried with honor; It is manifest
that he condemns not so much the use, as the doctrine and opinion which they
had of them; because they were urged and used, not as things indifferent, but
as necessary unto salvation. For we know that he himself many times did use
them, which he would not have done, if they had been then simply evil: he
circumcised Timothy; and many Christians who gave their lives for the
Testimony of Jesus Christ, were circumcised at that time, even after their
conversion unto the faith; And yet when the false Apostles did urge the
necessity of Circumcision, he said, If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing, Gal. V. 2, That is, If you be circumcised with an opinion of the
necessity of that Ceremony, as if it did avayle unto justification, so he
expounds himself, ver. 4. Whosoever are justified by the Law, (that is, seek
for Justification by the Law) are fallen from Grace. That it was only the
doctrine and opinion they had of Circumcision at that time, which he condemns,
may appear further by this, that those Ceremonies were not praescribed by a
Civil Magistrate, who has power to command the outward man in the use of a
thing indifferent, but only by seducing teachers, who had no power of bringing
a necessity in the outward practice, but by persuading and possessing men's
minds with an opinion of the necessity of these things, After the like manner
does the Church of Rome at this day tyrannize over the consciences of men,
equalling her constitutions unto the Word of God, Council. Trid. fess. IV.
placing Religion in them, and ascribing unto them a divine necessity and
effectual holiness. But our Church is far from such an usurpation, she does
place no Religion in them, ascribe no holiness unto them, nor obtrude them
upon the conscience as things necessary in themselves, like Gods
Commandments: but only requires obedience unto her constitutions, thereby to
reduce all her Children to an orderly Uniformity in the outward worship of God,
And to this purpose she has sufficiently declared the innocence of her
meaning, in the Articles of Religion, Artic. XX. The Church ought not to
enforce any thing besides the holy Writ to be believed of necessity for
salvation: And in the Pre face before the Book of Common Prayer, The
Ceremonies that remain, are retained for a discipline and order, which (upon
just causes) may be altered and changed, and therefore are not to be esteemed
equal with Gods Law. So that I can not but wonder at the impudency of the
Libeller, who changes our Church, as Christ does the Pharisees, that she makes
the commandments of God of none effect by her traditions: Whereas the
Pharisees did equal and prefer, their own traditions unto the commandments
of God, which is the thing for which they are condemned, as shall appear unto
any that reads the Text: But our Church is far from such presumption, as may
appear by her doctrine published, which I have alleged, as also by that
which follows in the same preface. In these our doings we condemn no other
nations, nor prescribe any thing but to our own people only. For we think it
convenient, that every Country should use such Ceremonies, as they shall
think best to the setting forth of Gods honor and glory, and to the reducing
of the people to a most perfect and godly living without error or superstition.
Now I have proved in my Sermon by Arguments unanswerable, that the Church has
such a power, to ordain Ceremonies, and to make Laws of things indifferent,
for decency and orders sake; And that obedience ought to be given unto her
constitutions; Especially considering that therein our Church was not only
assisted, but authorized by the Kings most excellent Majesty, as the supreme
Governor upon Earth, In all causes within his highness dominions. And
therefore I shall entreat my good brethren, if they will neither deceive
others, nor be deceived themselves, that in this point of Christian liberty,
they would have always one eye fixed upon the nature of things indifferent,
and the other upon the duty of a subject to his Sovereign.

And now having vindicated our Church from those aspersions cast upon her of
infringing Christian liberty, and giving offense by her constitutions: I will
in the last place, turn the Disputers weapon against himself, and cut off the
head of that Philistine with his own sword; showing that he and his fellows,
of all others are most injurious unto Christian liberty, Rem. XIV. 16.
which is (...), as it were the common good of Christians: And also that they
are scandalous to all sorts of persons. And first Christian liberty as it
respects things indifferent, is not only a freedom from the yoke of bondage;
but also a right or power to do many things which they could not do, who were
under the Pa^dagogie of the Law, which by the Apostle is called (...), I. Cor.
VIII. 9. This power or liberty, is extended both to Magistrates, and to
subjects. The Magistrate has this liberty, that he is not tied to any
particular Laws which determine all things incident unto the outward form, of
Gods worship, not mentioned in Scripture: But as the Judicial Law
being-abrogate, it is lawful for him to ordain civil Laws; so the
Ceremonial Law being abolished, to establish ecclesiastical constitutions,
such as are not repugnant unto the word of God. These men deprive him of this
liberty, they will not allow him to appoint any thing, to be used in the
outward form and administration of Gods worship: And if by the consent of the
whole Church, he do establish a form, though never so decent, they are
resolved not to observe it. Again, the liberty of the subject is, that being
freed from the Mo^aicall Law, he may with a free conscience, observe all other
Laws which are established by lawful authority, and are not repugnant unto
the word of God: I. Cor. VI. 12. Tit. I. 15. I. Pet. II. 13. and. 16.
as knowing that All things are lawful, and To the pure all things are pure.
This freedom S. Peter magnifies, when he exhorts us, To submit our selves to
all manner ordinance of man -- As free, that is, knowing that we are not bound
to those particulars, as things in themselves necessary; but using them with
free consciences, as being indifferent, and therefore such, as whereunto our
Christian liberty extends. And is not this a goodly freedom, that a
Christian having liberty of many things, he can make use thereof in one thing
rather then in another, to please and ^ati^fie him (unto whose power God has
subjected him) without offense to his conscience. These men deprive us of this
liberty likewise; for they will not allow men to obey Magistrates, civil or
Ecclesiastical, in any constitution established, touching the decent
administration of Gods worship: And as though they were Judges at Law, they
have sent forth a prohibition against all the Canons of our Church. Now a
negative precept is a restraint of Christian liberty, as well as a Positive:
the false Apostles who labored to subvert Christian liberty, col. II, 21.
did it by forbidding things in themselves lawful, saying, Touch not, ^aste
not, handle not; And our brethren speak almost the same language, Kneel not,
Cross not, wear not; And indeed the Church has not more positive precepts,
then they have negative: But this is the difference, The Church has authority
to command; they have none to forbid: The Church commands only the use of these
things, and lays no obligation upon the conscience, by pressing them as simply
necessary in themselves: but they make their negative restraints absolutely
necessary, place religion in them, binding their followers in conscience, not
only to refuse, but also to despise our Ceremonies. Whereby they do not only
overthrow Christian liberty; but also are guilty of the breach of the second
Commandment, by will worship. Lastly, As they take both from the Lawgiver and
the subject, that free power which God has granted unto them: So they deprive
themselves of all true liberty, while they cherish in their own minds, doubts
and scrupulous opinions, of the lawfulness of these things which are
commanded, and allege their unresolved conscience, as an excuse for their
disobedience. So our Disputer as he is acted in the Libell, God allows every
man to be fully persuaded in his own mind of what he does. Romans XIV. 5.
Which privilege I crave to my self and all others doubting of kneeling. I
have showed before, that the Apostle in that chapter, as also I. Cor. 8.
Speaks of things left to our own choice, and not determined by any Law
civil or Ecclesiastical, In which case this is a safe rule for the
conscience. Let every man stand fully persuaded in his own mind, that he may
do or not do that which he intends, without the offense of God or his
neighbor: But when the Magistrate does interpose his authority, to command or
forbid the use of a thing in it self indifferent; If any man shall plead that
he can not obey, because he is not persuaded in his own mind of the
lawfulness of the thing commanded; he does but excuse one sin by another,
which S. Peter calls, having the liberty for a cloak of maliciousness; for as
he ought nor to disobey, so he ought not to doubt; I. Pet. II. 13. and 16.
But (as I said before) submit himself unto all manner ordinance of man -- As
free, that is, as being persuaded of the indifferency of the thing before God,
and so that he may lawfully therein obey his superiors. And indeed if a man's
doubts and fears were a sufficient excuse for disobedience, the Magistrate
should be obeyed in nothing; for there can be no order nor constitution so
just, but some scrupulous mind or other will dislike it. And as they are
enemies to Christian liberty, so they give just offense to all sorts of men: To
the Kings Majesty, but their disobedience to his Laws; To the Church, by foul
aspersions, and seditious practices: They charge her with will worship and
Idolatry, which is as much as to call their mother whore: Besides it cannot but
grieve her to be bereaved of her children, many of whom she sees following
those b^ind guides, through the praecipices of error and schism. They give
offense unto all moderate and well affected Christians, by forsaking their
Communion, for no other reason, but because that others, even the King, State,
Church and all, will not follow their fancies, and be squared by their wills.
They give great scandal unto the Papists, who observing their practices, and
mistaking their Tenets for the doctrines of our Church, charge us that we are
newfangled, not carried so much with zeal to the truth, as with hatred to
them; abhorring almost every thing that is used by them, and departing further
from them, then they have from the Primitive Church; Insomuch that I dare say,
the violent courses of these partial Divines, whose souls hate peace, is not
the least cause of the Papists separation from us. They lay a stumbling block
before their own followers, a number of simple people, who by their example,
are animated, or (as the Apostle speaks) edified without ground, (...). I.
Cor. VIII. 10.
to contemn authority, and from that contempt many do proceed either to open
separation, or to some degree of disloyal coffeehouse. Finally, they give
great offense to the weaker sort who are not well grounded in the faith: for
when they see them who are the greatest zelotes in Religion, to make more
conscience of a harmless Ceremony; then of lying, slandering, backbiting,
cosenage, Usury, Sacrilege; And to urge sitting at the Sacrament more then the
duty and comfort of the Sacrament it self, for their humor to forsake their
ministry, and for trifles, to set all Gods ordinances at six and seven: They
take occasion from thence to mislike all forwardness in Religion, esteeming
zeal but hypocrisy, and so either rest in outward civility, or turn
altogether profligates. So many ways give they offense, Deuteronomy. XXVII. 18.
And Cursed be he that makes the blind go out of the way, And let all the
people say, Amen.

And now having discomfited the Disputers forlorn hope; I come to grapple with
his many forces, even with his Draconary milites, which he sent to assault the
reverent gesture, which we use at the receiving of the Sacrament. Where, though
his Arguments seem unto those who look upon them through the vapor of
affection greater and goodlier then they are: yet if they would dispell the
mists and clouds of partiality, then those reasons which seem Giants in their
eyes, would appear like little dwarfes. In this Conflict, I confess, my
Answers were very brief, denying only that Proposition which was false, and
sometimes giving instance to show the absurdity thereof: Intending to let the
Disputer run his wits out of breath, and then (if I had not been prevented
by being put in mind of the danger of that public disputation) to resume the
sum of his proofs, and make the Auditors sensible of the vanity of them. In
the mean time I was forced to follow, or rather go along with him in his
wyld-goose-chase, through a rabble of intortuled Syllogismes, which to relate I
should even blush in his behalf; And indeed the third part of them that are
set down in the Libell, were not used in the Court, but have been framed since
by the Libeller, as are also the Answers fathered upon me, whereupon he builds
the whole frame of his senseless discourse, fighting against his own shadow;
therefore I can not build upon these Answers which he has framed for me; but I
must take the matter anew into my hands, culling out every medium, which he
used to enforce his Conclusion: and waighing them severally in the balance of
reason. And besides his bold alleging the example of Christ's Institution
(whereof I will say nothing now, Sect. 31.32.33.34.35.
having so fully disproved it in my Sermon; that he and his fellows may be
ashamed for ever to abuse the world with so false a pretense:) All his
Arguments may be reduced unto these four. I. That kneeling at the Communion
has been abused unto Idolatry. II. That in using it there is danger of
Idolatry. III. That it has an appearance of Idolatry and will worship. IV.
That to kneel at the Sacrament is Idolatry, at least (as the Disputer was
pleased to speak, without any president from the School which he never read)
Corporal Idolatry. These four he confounded together, skipping from one to
another, and back again to the former, like a man distracted of his senses. But
I must play the Chemist, to extract them, and put them in their several boxes,
for the Readers better understanding.

The first exception against Kneeling is, That it has been abused to
Idolatry. What then? If that were a sure rule, that all things which have been
so abused, should be abolished, we should leave our selves nothing which could
be safely used: for there is none either of all Gods works, or of the works
of man, but it has in some place or other, been some way or other abused to
Idolatry. How then could our consciences be assured of the lawful use of any
thing which we use, whenas we are not sure, whether the same thing in some
other place be not made an Idol? If there were any force in that Argument, it
would conclude more strongly against the Sacrament it self, which has been
made an Idol; then against Kneeling, which never was the object, but the
natural expression of worship, commonly and indifferently used, in true
worship and in false, by the servants of God, and by Idolaters. But here the
Disputer tells us, that, The bread in the Sacrament is a holy and necessary
thing which cannot be removed, Implying that Kneeling is not so. Here I will
ask this wise man, whether before the Institution of the Sacrament, it was not
free for our Savior to have ordained the same in other Elements then bread and
wine? I think he will confess that he might have appointed other things to
be the outward Elements in that Sacrament: So, then these Elements were
neither necessary nor holy; yet did our Savior make choice of them,
notwithstanding that he knew how they had been profaned by Gentiles in their
Idoll-service: a Justin. Martyr. Apol. 2. (...) etc. Matthew. XV. 2. Mark. VII. 3.
As he did also appoint water to be the Element in the other Sacrament, albeit
it was at that time superstitiously abused by the Pharisees in their Lotions.
Whereupon it necessarily follows, that the idolatrous or superstitious abuse
of a thing, makes it not altogether unfit for Gods service. But he will say,
These were the creatures of God, and in things ordained by God, the abuse only
should be taken away, and the use remain; But not so in things ordained by
man, which have been and are abused to Idolatry. Here it were sufficient to
overthrow all that he has said, to tell him, that albeit bread and wine be
Gods creatures, yet at this time whereof I speak (namely before the
Institution of the Sacrament) they were not ordained to be holy mysteries; And
being before that time notoriously abused to Idolatry, (if his opinion were
true) howsoever they might have remained unto us for common use: yet they ought
not to have been applied to any sacred service, nor used in Gods worship. But
because be builds upon a distinction between the creatures and ordinances of
God, and the inventions of man; that the former being abused to Idolatry, the
abuse only is to be taken away, and the thing it self to be retained: But the
latter being so abused, use and all is to be abolished; And of this latter sort
he accounts Kneeling at the Communion. I will therefore take pains to examine
this ground, and let him see upon what a rotten foundation he builds his house;
first, The creatures and ordinances of God, have not always that privilege,
that though abused to Idolatry, they are not to be destroyed, as may appear by
the brazen serpent, which was Gods ordinance: And by Agags sheep, I. Sam. XV.
Deuteronomy. XII. 2.3. Esai XXX. 21. Genesis XXXV. 4.
which were Gods creatures; so were the groves, the coverings, and ornaments of
Idols, Jewels worn in their honor, and meats sacrificed unto them, all
which God commanded to destroy. And on the other part, some things devised by
men, and abused to Idolatry, have been employed in the worship of God; Peter
Martyr tells us out of S. Austin, Pet. Mart. E. pist. ad Hooper.
and other ancient writers, That not only the Temple of heathen Idols, were
convtrted into the houses of God; But also their Idolatrous revenues dedicated
to their plays, to their Vestals, nay to their Devils, were converted to the
maintenance of Christian Ministers. And yet those Idolatrous Temples and
revenewes were men's inventions, erected not only without any warrant, but also
directly against Gods commandment, who had tied his worship unto Jerusalem.
And Calvin is not so strait laced, but that he allows historical Images,
which are men's Inventions, and have been notably abused to Idolatry: Instit.
lib. I. cap. 11. sec. 12.
for says he, Neque tamen ea superstitione tencor, ut nullas prorsus imagines
ferendas censeam, I am not so superstitious, as to think that no Images are to
be endured. And immediately after he gives his reason, Vsum in docendo vel
admonendo aliquem habent, They serve to teach and admonish. Beza goes yet
further, Colloq Montpelg page 410. 411. 414. etc.
allowing not only historical Images, but also symbolicall; not only painting
of holy histories, but also of holy visions, as namely that of Esaias chap VI.
1.2. and that of Daniel chap. VII. 9.10.13. And he thinks that by the help
of such Images, the Text it self may be illustrated and better understood. And
further he holds it not necessary, that the same Altar which has been abused
unto Popish Idolatry, should be altered; but that it may serve as well as a
Table, for the use of the Sacrament. In which judgment, Fox Page 1843.
diverse Martyrs in Queen Mary's days concurred, who were content to use the
same Surplices and Chalices, which had been used in the Popish mass. So far
were they from thinking that the abuse of one individual thing corrupts the
whole kind, that they think not the same Individuum to be corrupted, when the
abuse thereof is removed. So that it is no certain rule that the inventions of
man being abused are to be abolished; But not the creatures and ordinances of
God.

Secondly, It is a miserable error to account kneeling the invention of man;
for all gestures, as other bodily abilities and performances are natural, And
so from God, In whom we live, move, and have our being; Albeit the intent and
respect, whereon such actions are carried, may be man's devising; yet it was not
man that devysed civil gestures, but God in nature has disposed and ordained
our bodies unto them, and has sanctified them for his own service, before
ever they were employed in any Idolatrous use; But especially kneeling which is
required in Gods worship in general, Psalm. X^V 6.
Come let us Worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our maker; And
has been and may be lawfully used in every part of Gods worship in
particular. And so much our Disputer may learn from one of his own Authors,
who speaking of gestures says, Treat of Divine worship. p. 30.
That Nature stands in stead of a direction, and that they are not to be
esteemed humane Inventions, but Gods Ordinances, because they be natural
circumstances of worship.

But for all this they will say, Kneeling as the Sacrament was devised by the
Papists. Surely, and if it were so, yet were not that a just exception against
our gesture: for we borrow many good Laws from the Pagans, And as some
flowers may grow in the wilderness, so some things may proceed from
haeretickes, and yet be convenient for the Church of God. Sozom. lib. 6. cap.
26.
The Eunomian haeretickes devised once dipping in Baptism, to cross the
doctrine of the Trinity, yet it is now used generally in all Churches.
Sprinkling of water in baptism (the ancient Ceremony being dipping) was not
practiced in the Church till about 1300. years after Christ, and so devysed by
the Papists; yet these men do use sprinkling and not dipping. S. Austin having
followed S. Cyprian in expounding a place of Scripture, and afterward finding a
better exposition in Tyconius the Donatist, Retract. lib. 2. cap. 8.
thought it no discredit to revoke his former opinion, and follow that. He also
commmends others for doing the like, Patres nostri saluberrimam consuetudinem
tenuerunt, ut quicquid legitimum in aliqua haeresi vel schismate integrum
reperirent, approbent potius quam negarent. Our fathers observed a most safe
course, that whatsoever they found good in any haeresie or schism, they did
approve it rather then reject it. And why should not we carry our selves so
toward the Church of Rome? If among the filth of their haeresies there be found
any good thing, as it were a grain of good corn in a heap of darnell, that
we willingly receive, not as theirs, but as the Jews did the Ark of God from
the Philistines. Peter Martyr says well, Epist. ad Hooper.
Non mihi persuadeo Papatus impietatem esse tantam, ut quicquid attingit,
omnino reddat contaminatum, quo bonis and sanctis usui pio non possit concedi.
Albeit the Church of Rome be very foul, yet not like the unclean bird in the
Poet, -- Contactu omnia faedat, she defiles not all she lays her claw on:
for as all evil is not in her, so all that is in her, is not evil; And if
she have any thing that is good, they have better right to it who are better,
and will use it well, then she who abuses it. Yet is it most certain that
kneeling was not devysed by the Papists, except only at the elevation of the
consecrated host, which was decreed by Honorius, the third and wherein they
especially commit Idolatry with their breaden-god, rather then when they
receive the bread into their mouths; for it is against the rule in the Church
of Rome, for the people to worship any thing that is not higher then
themselves. But what is that to kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament,
which was in use in the Church of God many hundred years before Popery was
hatched, as is evident to all those who have read the fathers, there being few
of them which do not mention the receiving of the Sacrament with adoration:
And we know that the word adoration both in Scripture and in the
Ecclesiastical writers, is commonly used for outward worshipping. I shall not
need to labor to prove this, for these men with who^ I have to do, esteem
kneeling the only gesture of adoration, and upon that ground do reject it, so
that if they did receive adoring, they did receive kneeling. And that they did
receive the Sacrament with adoration S. Austin does testify, Aug. in Psalm. 98.
Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 61. Lib. de poenit.
Nemo aute^ carnem illam manducat, nisi prius adoraverit. To the same purpose
S. Chrysostom, Adora and communica. And before them both, Tertullian tells us
that Christians should come unto God by weeping, wailing, fasting, and per
adgeniculationem ad Arar, by kneeling down before the Altur. I shall not need
to trouble the reader with many quotations to this purpose, if he desire
further satisfaction herein, I refer him to that learned discourse of the BP
of Rochesters, where the practice of the ancient Church is cleared by a cloud
of witnesses. Let this suffice for the present that M. Beza, though he like
better of another gesture, then of kneeling, yet can not deny that it was used,
and used profitably in old time, at the receiving of the Sacrament: Epist. 12.
page 100.
for he says speciem quidem habet piae and Christianae venerationis, ac
proinde olim potuit cumfructu usurpari. And Erasmus who knew the practice of
the ancient Church better then all the disciplinarians who ever lived, tells
us, Erasm. de amab. Eccle. concord. enarr. Psalm. LXXXIII.
that In ancient times, the people did not gaze upon the Sacrament, but praised
God for their redemption, prostratis humi corporibus, animis in coelum erectis.

It is true indeed, that in the first Council of Nice, there is a decree for
standing at prayer on the Lords days; But that was an exception from the
general rule of worship, upon a special occasion, which did not extend unto
all ordinances, as may appear by the end why it was ordained, namely to
confirm their Catechumeni in the faith of Christ's resurrection. Therefore
howsoever they did stand at prayer, during that service, which was called Missa
Catechumenorum; yet not at the other, which was called Missa fidelium, wherein
they received the Sacrament, their Novices being dismissed. And surely it is
absurd to think, that because they stood at prayer, therefore they stood at the
Sacrament; for their standing was used for commemoration of Christ's
resurrection, but the Sacrament is ordained for the commemoration of his death.
Now, as the one requires a gesture to express confidence, so the other
requires a gesture to express humility. But if I should grant, (which is
most false) that when they did pray standing, they did receive standing; yet
that was only on the Lords days, and on the feast of Pentecost, and we know
that they did frequently assemble and receive the Sacrament on the week days:
Besides before the decree of the Council of Nice, for above 300. years,
kneeling was in common practice in Gods worship, as the Canon it self
declares, and as it was used in prayer, so in receiving of the Sacrament.

If any man shall ask me, When Kneeling began to be used by Communicants,
seeing Christ did institute the Sacrament in another gesture: I say, that I
hold St Austins rule to be most certain, that whatsoever the Church has
observed generally in all places, at all times, and was not decreed by any
General Council, the same did proceed from the Apostles: But such is
kneeling at the Communion, It has been used in all places, at all times, and
was not decreed by any General Council; and therefore did proceed from the
Apostles. As after Christ's resurrection, his Disciples prayed unto him
kneeling, which they used not to do before; so it is more then likely that they
received the Sacrament kneeling, the same being a real prayer and
thanksgiving, and the highest part of Gods outward worship. If the gesture
which Christ used with his Disciples, was Accubitus, lying: It was certainly
occasioned by the conjunction of another meal, which did require an easy
repose of the body; But when the other meal was removed, and the Sacrament
celebrate apart, there was no more use of that gesture, but the fittest gesture
for the Sacrament was that; which is accounted most decent and reverent in Gods
worship. Now we know that the Apostle forbids the conjunction of other meals
with the Sacrament, Have ye not houses to eat and to drink in; I. Cor. XI.
22.
And consequently that gesture that was used at civil meals; wherein
doubtless all Christians generally did yield obedience. But as it is a hard
thing to overcome an evil custom, so it seems, that in some places they
continued for a while, both the use of their Love Feasts, and of their couches
to lie in, during the time of their feast; for which cause the Council of
Laodicea, as it forbade Love feasts in the Church, so also accubitus, the
gesture used at feasts, Non ^cortet in locis dominicis. vel in Ecclesijs, Can.
28.
eat quae dicuntur Agapas facere, and in domo comidere, and accubitus ^^eruere.

This that I have said is sufficient to satisfy any moderate man, that
kneeling at the Sacrament begun in the Apostles days; But if it did not, and
was only afterward ordained by their successors; yet can it not be esteemed a
humane invention: for it is a natural gesture whereunto man is disposed by his
creation; And as all gestures are from God, so the liberty of gestures in Gods
worship, is his ordinance, for he appointed that liberty of purpose, and not
forgetting (as man does many things in making of Laws) to make mention of
them, insomuch that no particular gesture in any Sacrament, under the Law, or
under the Gospel, nor in any other ordinance, was made necessary unto us by
God, either by praecept, or by example: But the accommodation of the gesture to
several parts of Gods worship, left altogether to the liberty of the Church.
And the Church has thought Kneeling the most decent and comely gesture to be
used in the Sacrament, wherein her determination is not to be esteemed a mere
humane constitution: for if an Ecclesiastical Canon be made (as this is) of a
thing indifferent, in a lawful manner, to a lawful end, by lawful authority,
according to the general rules of Scripture; The same is approved in the sight
of God, as not merely humane, but in some sort divine, as is confessed by M.
Calvin in these words; Calv. in I. ad Cor. XIV. ult.
Golligere promptum est has posteriores (ecclesiasticas) non esse habendas
prohumanis traditionibus, quandoquidem fundat^ sunt in hoc generali mandato,
and liquidam approbatione^^ habent quasi ex ore Christi. And in another place,
he gives an example of Kneeling in Gods solemn worship, Calv. Inst. lib. IV.
cap. 10. Sect. 30.
and moves the Question, Quaritur sitne humana traditio, whereunto he answers,
Dico sic esse humanam ut simul sit divina. Dei est quatenus pars est decoris
illius, cujus cur a and observatio nobis per Apostolum commendatur. Zanch in
compend. loc. 16. Se^. Epist. 24.
And to the same purpose we have the judgment of Zanchi^ of Beza, and indeed of
all judicious Divines. Has not the Disputer then a face of brass, or (as the
Scripture speaks) a whoores forehead, who calls Kneeling, a needless humane
Ceremony?

I have now proved both that all humane inventions, which have been abused, are
not therefore to be abolished; (which I shall have occasion to manifest further
hereafter) And also that Kneeling at the Sacrament is no humane invention: In
the third place, I will make it appear, that our Kneeling was never abused to
Idolatry: for, as it was not devised by Papists, so we received it not from
them. To let pass the Church of Scotland, where that gesture was intermitted
for the space of above forty years, till all memory of former superstition was
past: Even in the Church of England; the gesture of Kneeling was not continued,
for, in the beginning of King Edwards reign, there was an intermission for a
space, when all gestures were free: But the Church afterward perceiving the
inconvenience thereof, thought fit to reduce all her Children to an Uniformity
in Gods worship, by ordaining one gesture to be used in that Ordinance: And she
made choice of Kneeling, not out of a desire of conformity with Papists, or out
of an honorable respect to their worship; But having a liberty of gestures
allowed her in Gods word, she did judge Kneeling of all others, to be most fit,
decent, and comely. But say that we had received that gesture from the Papists,
(as we did Ordination, Baptism, and many other good things) yet it cannot be
imagined, how they could abuse that, which was never in their power to use: for
the gesture which we use is our own, the Papists never had the command of it.
And, Tit. 1.15.
Unto the pure (says the Apostle) all things are pure. Surely there cannot be
a more senseless dottage, then to think, that the Papists by their Idolatrous
kneeling, have infected ours, when their gesture and ours is not the same. Apud
Plutarch.
Heraclitus said, that it is impossible for any man eundem fluvium hi^ intrare:
I may say as truly, that it is impossible for any man, eandem actionem ^i^
peragere; for though the man be the same, the knee the same, the end the same,
yet the Action repeated is not the same: for to make an action (such as
kneeling is) the same, all these things must concur, Idem agens, Idem agendi
modus, finis, tempus, locus, All which are impossible to concur any oftener
then once: So that it is certain that our kneeling at the Sacrament, is not
Individually and Numerically the same, with that which is used by the Papists.
I will now proceed further, and show that it is not so much as of the same kind
with theirs, being distinguished from it by two or three substantial
differences. The first is taken from the Agents, their kneeling is the gesture
of Papists, ours of Catholics: Now if Papists and Protestants be two diverse
kinds of worshippers; (which I think the brethren will acknowledge) then their
actions of worship, must be as different in kind, as be their Agents. The
second difference between their kneeling and ours, is taken from their
different ends and objects, (which makes them yet more distant) for Actiones
distinguuntur finibus, gestures and actions are principally distinguished by
their objects and ends: They in kneeling at the Sacrament, worship their
breaden-god; We detest that abominable bread-worship, and worship only the
great God of heaven and earth, in his own Ordinance, and his Son Jesus Christ
who sits at the right hand of the Father in heavenly places. From these two
differences there arises a third, that their kneeling is formally evil; Ours
good and commendable: so that if any man for the abuses of their kneeling,
shall condemn ours, it is all one injustice, as if ye should condemn an
innocent man for the crime of a malefactor; Esaias. V. 20. Proverb. XVII. 1^.
and so he falls directly under the curse of the Prophet, Woe be unto them
that call good evil: And of the wiseman, He that Justifies the wicked, and
he that condemns the lust, they are both abomination unto the Lord: for as S.
Austin says, Peccat, Lib. IIV. cap. 15. de lib. arb.
qui damnat quasi peccata, quae nulla sunt. And those men condemn our kneeling
for sin, which is none, but an expression of many virtuous affections. And
for this I am sure they have no warrant; for whenever God commands his people
to destroy monuments of Idolatry, the commandment is to be understood of the
same Individua, which have been abused, not that the whole Species for their
sake is to be destroyed. Deuteronomy. VII. 5.
They are commanded to cut down the groves of Idols; yet they did not cut
down all groves, for then they should not have left one tree growing: They are
also commanded to overthrow the Altars of Idols; yet the Israelites did not
think themselves bound by that commandment, to overthrow the Reubenites
Altar, though it were erected without any warrant, and in show had some
repugnancie with Gods commandment: for as you may read Josh. XXII. When the
Tribe of Reuben, Gad, and the half tribe of Manasses, erected an Altar, upon
the passages of Jordan, the other Tribes were so offended that they were about
to destroy both it and them imagining that it had been for sacrifice: But when
they were truly informed, that it was only for a memorial, that they had a
part in the God of Israel, they were well pleased, they blessed God, and
Phineas said, This day we perceive the Lord is among us, because you have not
done this trespass ver. 31. I wish that our brethren who are offended at our
kneeling, and other Ceremonies, upon an erroneous conceit of Popery and
superstition, were as apt to be informed of the truth; and then perceiving the
innocence of our Church, which has been so often manifested, and that she
observes these things only to retain a Communion with the Ancient Catholic
Church, that it may appear that she has a part in that God whom they
worshipped. They would not persist to accuse her, but with Phineas bless God
that she has not done that trespass. And yet we have a better warrant for
kneeling at the Communion, and a more necessary use of it, then the Reubenites
^^ed for their Altar; It being a uaturall gesture which God has sanctified for
his worship, and which these men themselves use in other ordidances. And here I
would be beholding unto the brethren, if they would show me a true reason, why
it should be lawful for them to kneel in prayer, and not at the Communion,
which is a real prayer and thanksgiving; When that gesture has been
Idolatrously abused by the Papists oftener in prayer then in receiving of the
Sacrament, a thousand times for one. Can the Popish abuse of kneeling, make it
unclean to us in one Ordinance, and not also in another, where it has been
more defiled? Let them wynd themselves out of this if they can.

I thought I had sufficiently taken away the first exception, That kneeling at
the Sacrament has been abused to Idolatry, by showing that all things so
abused are not to be abolished, albeit the inventions of man; That kneeling is
no invention of man, And that our kneeling neither was nor is abused to
Idolatry: But perusing the Libell again, I find some Scripture alleged by
the Disputer to prove his assertion, with as much fidelity, as the devil did
allege Scripture in the Gospel. Yet I will stay to examine it. The place is
Deuter. XII. 4. Ye shall not do so unto the Lord your God, and ver. 30.31.
From whence he labors to infer that it is unlaw full to kneel at the
Communion, because in so doing, We serve our God without warrant, as Idolaters
serve their God contrary to that Commandment. Where this clause (without
warrant) is inserted by him, only to make way for an escape: But he will find
his passage stopped, if he will be pleased but to observe what he may learn,
from what I have already said, especially in my. Sermon, namely, that in the
word of God, without relation to any Ecclesiastical constitution, there is as
much warrant for kneeling at the Sacrament, as for sitting, standing, or any
other gesture, and more for kneeling then for either of them, the same being
more suitable unto worshippers: And that now the Church, (according to that
liberty which God has allowed her to determine such circumstances) having
ordained that gesture, we have not only a warrant, but also a necessity: laid
upon us to observe it; forasmuch as it is necessary to obey authority,
necessary to maintain the Peace of the Church, necessary to preserve the
liberty of our ministeries, necessary to receive the holy Sacrament: And as the
case stands, unless we kneel, we disobey authority, disturb the Churches
peace, lose the liberty of our ministry, and the comfort of the Sacrament. Let
us see then whether kneeling at the Sacrament, come within the compass of that
prohibition, ye shall not do so unto the Lord your God, namely as the nations
did. And certainly that precept concerns not kneeling: for the nations bowed
unto their gods, yet must we bow unto the Lord our God; for that Negative in
the second Commandment, Thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them,
includes an affirmative. Thou shall bow down unto the Lord thy God, and
worship him: Besides, if we must not use any of these gestures, which Idolaters
have used in their Idol-worship, then we must not worship God at all; for if
you take away all gestures, you must take away all the outward worship of God,
forasmuch as it is not possible for us to worship God, but in some position of
body: And take away one gesture upon that ground, that it has been used in
Idol-worship; Then take away all: for all gestures have been abused by
Idolaters in their Idol-worship, and are common to them and us, in our service
of the true God; They kneel, so do we; They stand, so do we; They sit, so
do we. And because the Disputer says, A man cannot commit Idolatry sitting; I
shall desire him to consider what the Apostle speaks of sitting at Table in
the Idols temple, I. Cor. VIII. 10.
and what he may read in profane writers, how that sitting was commonly used
at the sacrifices of Hercules. Macrob Saturn. lib. III. c. 16.
But it is not heathenish Idolatry that offends these men, but Popish, and that
not so much in any other Ordinance, as in this of the Sacrament. Let them
therefore know that all maine gestures, have been applied by the Papists unto
their Sacrament of the Altar, standing, sitting, kneeling; The Priest stands,
the Pope sitts, the people kneel. Now, shall it be unlawful for us to use the
gesture of the people, and not also unlawful to use the gesture of the Pope?
So that if that Commandment forbid one gesture used by Idolaters, to be used
in the service of God, it forbids all, and makes more strongly against them,
then against us.

But indeed, neither that commandment, nor any other in the Word of God, can
be extended unto gestures, or any other actions which are lawful in
themselves, as shall easily appear, if we take a view of the places. Deuteronomy.
XII. 2.3.4.5. Ye shall utterly destroy all the places, wherein the nations
which ye shall possess, served their gods upon the high mountains, and upon
the hills, and under every green tree. And you shall everthrow their Altars,
and break their pillars, and burn their groves with fire, and you shall hew
down the graven linages of their gods, and destroy the names of them out of
that place. Ye shall not do so unto the Lord your God. But unto the place
which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes, to put his name
there, even unto his habitation shall ye seek, and thither thou shall come.
And again ver. 30.31. Take heed to thy self that thou be not snared by
following them, after that they be destroyed before thee, and that thou enquire
not after their gods, saying; how did these nations serve their gods? even so
will I do likewise. Thou shall not do so unto the Lord thy God: for every
abomination to the Lord which he hates, have they done unto their gods; for
even their sons and their daughters they have burnt in the fire to their
gods. In which places four things used by the Idolatrous nations, are
forbidden and made unlawful unto Gods people. I. Their Idols and Images of
their gods, which must be destroyed, you shall hew down the graven Images of
their gods, and destroy the names of them out of that place: But what is this
to our gesture of Kneeling at the Communion? Will any man reason from the
abolishment of a substantial Idoll-object of worship, to natural gestures,
which have ever been, and ever will be common to the worship of damnable Idols,
with that of the true God? II. He forbids the heathenish and idolatrous manner
of worship, such actions and performances as were only applied to false
worship, and are in themselves simply evil, and so cannot be used to God. And
hereunto only the latter place which is alleged has relation, as is evident
in the Text, enquire not after their gods, saying; How did these nations serve
their gods? even so will I do likewise. Thou shall not do so unto the Lord
thy God: for every abomination to the Lord which he hates, have they done unto
their gods; for even their sons and their daughters they have burnt in the
fire to their gods. Now, will any man say, that these actions have any Analogy
with our kneeling unto God in any of his Ordinances, which was used in the
worship of the true God, before ever it was given unto any Idol? III. The
places of Idol-worship must be abolished, for which there was a special reason
unto the Jews, which does not concern us, God having made choice of mount
Sion, to place his Name there. And thereunto especially the first place has
respect, you shall burn their groves with fire, -- ye shall not do so unto
the Lord your God, that is, you shall not serve him in Groves, or upon high
mountains, But unto the place which the Lord your God shall choose out of all
your tribes, to put his Name there, even unto his habitation shall ye seek,
and thither thou shall come. I hope no man from thence can infer the
abolishing of a natural gesture, always used in Gods worship. Lastly, he
commands them to destroy the instruments and appurtenances of Idolatrous
worship, you shall overthrow their Altars, and break their Pillars, of which
sort also are the ornaments of the Idols, expressly condemned Esaias XXX. 22.
Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven Images of silver, and the
ornament of thy molten Images of Gold. Thou shall cast them away as a
menstruous cloth, Thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence. From whence no man
can prove the unlawfulness of our gesture at the Communion, more then he can
of the Sacrament it self. For I. These instruments and ornaments were
artificial things; Our gesture is natural, and so Gods creature, or an
ability whereunto man is disposed by creation; It is Gods Ordinance which he
has sanctified for his own worship, as may appear both by precept and
president in Scripture: And therefore according to their own divinity, cannot
be abolished, albeit it has been abused by Idolaters. II. Those instruments
and ornaments were the same Individualls which were abused: so is not our
kneeling at the Sacrament, the same with the kneeling of either Pagan or
Papist, as I have formerly proved. III. These instruments and ornaments did not
first belong unto the service of the true God, and were from thence applied
unto the service of an Idol. But were devised and invented for the
Idol-worship; But all gestures, and especially kneeling, did from the beginning
belong unto the service of the true God, and were from thence transferred from
Gods worship to Idolatry, by plain theft, and unjust alienation of his title
and interest. Now, can there be an Act more just, then to give unto God that
which is Gods, restoring the gesture of kneeling unto the true use, which
Idolaters had sacrilegiously usurped. Ezra I. 7.
Nebuchadnezar defiled the vessels of the Temple, and put them in the house of
his god; yet the same being restored by Cyrus, were (notwithstanding of the
abuse) employed in Gods service as before: In like manner, why should not
kneeling which at first belonged to the service of God, though it has been
abused at the Mass, be thought fit to be used at the Sacrament. Finally, those
instruments and ornaments had no other use but for the honor of the Idol: But
our gesture of kneeling, as it is not used in honor of the Popish Mass, so it
has a needful use in Gods worship, and in this very ordinance, as after I
shall declare. By this time (I hope) any man who has the least spark of
understanding, may perceive to how little purpose the Disputer did allege
that place of Deuteronomie: But I will go further, and direct him unto all
those places in Scripture which condemn either monuments of Idolatry, or
communion with Idolaters, such as are Genesis 35.4. Exodus 23.13.24.32. chap.
34.12. Levit. 18.3. chap, 19.19.27. Numb. 33.52. Deuter. 7.2.3.5. chap. 9.21.
chap. 14.1. Josh. 23.7. 2. Kings 23.4.6. etc. 1. Chron. 14.12. 2. Chron. 33.15.
2. Cor. 6.16.17. Revel. 2.14. Let him now examine all these places, and he
shall find that all which is condemned, is either one of these four things,
which before I mentioned in that place of Deuteronomie; or else meats
sacrificed unto Idols; (which yet are allowed out of the case of scandal, 1.
Cor. 10.27.) or communion with Idolaters in their false worship: Or making of
covenants and leagues of familiarity, especially marriages with them: Or
finally, civil uncleanness, as making of baldness upon their heads, marring
the corners of their beards, using mixtures of cattle of diverse kinds, and
of linen and woollen in the same garment, which did belong unto the
Ceremonial Law, whereby Gods people were severed from other nations, in many
outward observances: But in all these places, or in any other place of
Scripture there is nothing forbidden, which can by the least Analogy be
applied unto our kneeling at the Sacrament, or unto any other gesture which we
use in any of Gods Ordinances. In a word as the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
which have been notoriously abused to Idolatry, can not be destroyed, partly
because they are out of our power, and partly because they are of durable
neceility: Even so for the same reasons, gestures which have been abused,
cannot be abolished, because such gestures as have been already abused by
others, are out of our reach; and all gestures are of durable necessity to
mankind for ever.

Now have I made it as clear as the Sun, that our kneeling at the Sacrament,
is not to be reckoned amongst those things which have been abused to Idolatry,
and therefore is not to be abolished: But because they use this Argument
against other Ceremonies of our Church, I will look more nearly into the true
meaning and intent of that Law, which God gave unto his people, for destroying
the complements of Idolatrous worship, that thereby all men may judge how far
we are bound by that Commandment, to abolish things which have been
Idolatrously abused. And I find it most evident, that the strictness of that
Law in respect of many things which were to be destroyed, concerned the Jews
only, as may appear by these considerations following. I. God directs only his
people what they should do in the land of Canaan, as may be seen Deuter.
VII. 1. When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land whether thou go
to possess it etc. The like is Deuter. XII. 1.2.3. It was in the land of
Canaan they were to do thus and thus, even to destroy every thing that was
defiled: But God gave them full liberty of taking all the spoil of vanquished
forrainers, as Deuter. XX. 14. Instructing his people how to behave themselves,
when they made war against any City, he says, All that is in the city, even
all the spoil thereof, shall thou take unto thy self, And shall eat the
spoil of thine enemies: so before that, he gave them the spoil of Midian,
Numb. XXXI. 22. Numb. XXXI: 50.54.
And it is said that They brought a present unto the Lord, of Jewels of gold,
bracelets, chains, rings, eare-rings, which the Midianites did wear in honor
of their gods: And this same was put In the Tabernacle of the Congregation. II.
They were commanded to destroy not only the Instruments of Idolatry, Deuteronomy. VII.
2.
but also the Idolaters themselves, Thou shall smite them, thou shall utterly
destroy them: yet this is no warrant for us, to slay either Papist or Pagan,
Ioshuah by virtue of that Commandment, slew one and thirty kings, and Achab
was condemned for sparing Benhadad; yet were it not only lawful, but also
commendable in us, to spare the life of a Popish or Pagan prince, taken captive
in war. III. They were commanded to destroy the places of Idolworship, as
their groves, Altars, and high places, Deuteronomy. XII. 2.3.
for which there was a special reason unto the Jews, God having then tied his
worship unto the temple of Jerusalem; But the Christians in the Primitive
Church, thought not themselves bound by that Commandment, to destroy the
Idoltemples of the Pagans, but converted them unto the worship of God; The time
being come whereof our Savior spoke unto the woman of Samaria, when neither on
mount Gerizin, Ioh. IV. ^^.
nor at Jerusalem, but every where, the true worshippers should worship God.
And all the reformed Churches in Christendom, ( Scotland excepted) did imitate
their example, in using without scruple, those Churches which were polluted
with Popish Idols. And so M. Calvin says, Neque nobis hodie religio est,
templarctinere quae polluta fuerunt Calv. expos. in Exodus
Id^lis, and accommodare in usum meliorem. I wish that the Lords of the
Congregation, (or rather dissipation) in Scotland, had been of that temper;
when being led by the principalls of these fiery Divines, in a sacrilegious
fury, they pulled down so many goodly Churches: A fact so abominable, that it
made their reformation stink in the eyes of the whole world. IV. That
Commandment was not so general, but it did admit a dispensation; for
sometimes they were allowed to employ some of those execrable things, both to
their own private use, and to the service of God. Josh, 8.2.
The Lord gave unto them the spoil of Ai, and the cattle thereof for a prey:
All the mettalls of Jericho were reserved for the use of the Tabernacle,
notwithstanding their abuse in that idolatrous City, Josh. 6.19. Numb. 16.39.
wherein it is more then probable; that no little part of them was molten into
Idols. And so before that, the censers of Korah were made plates for the
covering of the Altar. Gideon did sacrifice unto the Lord an Ox that was
dedicated unto Baal, and burn it with the wood that grew in the grove of Baal.
Judge. 6.2^.


By all which it is manifest, that we are not bound to the letter of that Law,
but only unto the aequity of it, and that we may learn how far that
extends, I would first before I interpose my own judgment, recommend unto the
brethren, Aug. ^pi^^. 154.
that Epistle which S. Austin wrote unto Publicola, (if it could stand with the
course of their studies to read any of the ancien^s) where he does of set
purpose handle this question: The sum of whose determination, I will digest
into these propositions following. I. That we may make use of things abused to
Idolatry, as we do of the fruits of the earth, whence some part has been
taken for a sacrifice unto devils; And as we use these fountains, whence water
has been drawn for the use of their sacrifices; (I will add, that it is
lawful to baptize a child with the water of the fountain which has been
consecrated unto Idols) And as we breach into that air which has received
the smoke of their sacrifices. Vtitur mundis reliquis fructibus unde illa
sublata sunt (ad sacrificia Daemoniorum;) sicut fontibus utimur, de quibus
haurire aquam ad usum sacrificicrum certissime scimus. Neque spiritum deducere
de aere dubitamus in quem scimus ire famum ex aris om^ibus and incensis
daemoniorum. And after he adds, that the fruits which grow in any ground, are
his who created it, because the earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof;
And every creature of God is good. Olus vel quilibet fructus in quolibet agro
natus, ejus est qui qui creavit, quia Dom us est terra and plenitudo ejus. Et
omnis ^reatura Dei bona est. And again, If we may not eat of these things
which grow in the garden of an Idols temple, then the Apostles ought not to
have eat any meat, while they were in Athens, because the whole city was
dedicated unto Minerva. Si putaverimus non vescendum olere quod nascitur in
horto templi Idoli, consequens sit ut existimemus uon debuisse Apostolos apud
Athenas cibum sumere, quia civitas cra^ Min^rvae ejusque numini conse rata. He
further tells us, that sometimes they did sacrifice unto the water it self;
(And yet for all that we may use it) for we refuse not the light of the sun,
because Idolaters did sacrifice unto it. Aliquando autem sic mittuntur
sacrificia in aquas, ut ipsis aquis sacrificetur, non idea utique sol^s hujus
luce non utimur, quia ei sacrilegi ubi possunt sacrificare noncessant. II. That
we must not use any of those things so abused, unto the honor of strange gods,
or by our using of them animate others for to honor them Vnde apparet illud,
esse prohibitum, ne in honor^m alienorum Deorum aliqu^ re utamur, aut cos qui
nostrum animum ignorant ad hac honoranda ^dificemus. III. That temples, Idols
groves, and such like may be destroyed by them who have authority; Cum templa,
Idola, luci, and si quid bujusmo ^i data potestate evertuntur: And in this
point he is more large in another place, where speaking of the fact of Ezekias,
he says that he destroyed the brazen Serpent by his public authority, Aug De
(...) Dei. lib. X. cap. 2. Calv. in Exodus page 286.
and not by any private fantasy: he did Religiosa potestate Deo servire. And
Calvin upon the second Commandment, expounding that place Deuter. XII. 2.3.
Which we had now in hand, commends the judgment of S. Austin, who says, that
this Commandment was not given unto private men, but unto the public
Magistrate. And to the same purpose Wolphius handling this question of purpose,
10. Wolph in lib. II. Reg. cap. ^8.
says, P^ivat^s hominibus ut haec agant, pius ac sapiens author est nemo,
That no good nor wise man, will allow private men to destroy the monuments of
Idolatry. IV. That being so destroyed we ought not to reserve any thing of them
to our private use: Ideo tamen in usus nostros privatos duntaxat and proprios
non debemus inde aliquid usurpare, ut ^ppareat nos pietate ista destruere, non
avaritia. V. That yet they may be applied unto public use, yea, and not only
to common uses, but also to religious uses, even to the honor of God, as he
proves by two Instances, the mettalls of Jericho laid up in Gods treasury, and
the grove of Baal cut down for Gods sacrifice. Hoc Deus intelligitur docuisse
illis testimonijs quae ipse proposuisti, cum de luco alienorum Deorum jussit
ligna ad Ho^ocaustum adhiberi, and de Hicricho ut omne aurum argentum, and
aramentum inferretur in thesauros Domini. VI. That the reducing of such abused
creatures unto a better use, is all one (in effect) with the reducing of a
wicked man unto a better life. Cum vero in usus communes, non proprios ac
privatos, vel in honerem Dei convertumtur, hoc de illis fit, quod de ipsis
hominibus, cum ex sacrilegis and impijs in veram religionem niutantur.

Mr Calvin is of the same judgment: Calv. lib. IV. lost cap. 10, Sect. 30.
for, speaking of abolishing things established by reason of their abuse, he
says, fa^^or equidem non temere nec subinde, nec levibus de causis ad
novationem esse derurrendum. In changing of such things we must use great
deliberation, as namely, I. We are to consider whether the things abused, the
abuse taken away, have any profitable use in Gods service; If they have none,
then like salt that has lost his savor, they are to be cast into the dung
hill. This is the true cause why the brazen serpent was destroyed, for many
hundred years before Ez^kiahs days it had no use at all; And on the other
part the censers of Rorah, and the metals of Jericho were retained, because
they were useful in Gods service. II. We are to consider whether the evil in
these things which have been abused, be separable from the thing it self, or
no: If it be inseparable, Esaias. XXX, 22.
then we are to cast it away as a menstruous cloth: but if the thing it self
be curable, and the ablise may be taken away, then is that a good rule which
the Orator gives us, Cie lib. II. Epist ad Attic. ep. 1.
Non minus probandam esse medicinam quae sanat vitiosas parts, quam quae
exsecat. That these rules should directus in abolishing or retayning things
abused to Idolatry, may appear by the reasons why God gave commandment unto
his people for abolishing of Idols and all their complements, which as we may
gather out of the Text, are three. The first was, to the end no honor might
remain unto Idols by the remembrance of them Deuteronomy. XII. 3. Abolish their names
out of that place. So that the appurtenances of idolatrous worship may be
retained, so that no honor at all be imparted or conveyed unto the Idol,
thereby. As for example, If a stranger after Jacobs time coming unto that
place, should have found the care-rings which he bid in the ground, doubtless
he might lawfully possess the same, being either ignorant of their former use,
or a despiser of the Idol whereto they served. A second reason why God
commanded his people to destroy these things, was; lest they should be a snare
unto them, and they fall in love with them, as Rachel did with her fathers
Idols, and so they be entised unto Idolatry, Deuteronomy. VII. 25. The graven Images
of their gods shall y^e burn with fire -- lest thou be suared there with.
Thirdly, to restrain men's greedy and covetous desires in converting them to
their private uses, as in the place above cited, Covet not the silver and gold
that is on them, nor take them unto thee. S. Austin having alleged this Text,
Aug Epist. ad Public. 194.
gives us this commentary, Satis apparet aut ipsos privates usus in talibus
esse prohibitos, aut ne sic inde aliquid inferatur in demumut houoretur. It is
either the honoring of these things, or the applying of them to our own
private use, which is forbidden. I wish that the Edomites of my Country had
remembered this, when they pulled down the Churches, sent the Organs. Copes,
Bells, Leads, into France to be sold; and built hou^es unto themselves with the
stones and timber of the Churches: Habak, 2.11.
But since, The stone haiheryed out of the wall, and the beam out of the
timber has answered it.

Now let us apply these rules unto kneeling at the Sacrament, and the rest of
the Ceremonies of our Church, and we shall find that they have a good and
profitable use in Gods service, as I have sufficiently proved in my Sermon: And
that the Popish abuse is not only separable, but altogether separated from
them: They are not used to the honor of any Idolatrous worship, but to the
honor of the true God: They neither are nor can be snares to any; for a snare
is that which is made of purpose to catch something: And God condemns only
those things which are snares by their institution and nature; for the best
thing in the world may become a snare through the corruption of man. And
finally, Our Ceremonies do not express a covetous desire, but a bountiful
affection unto G^ds service; for some of them are very costly unto us: But
these men reject every thing which is glorious and magnificent in Gods service,
out of a peuurious and covetous affection, esteeming any thing too much to be
bestow d^upon God. And now having answered all the Objections, which eicher
have or can be brought against Kneeling at the Sacrament, from the Popish abuse
thereof: I will conclude all in this Syllogism: That which is no humane
Invention, which never was abused to Idolatry, and has a profitable use in the
service of God; ought not to be abolished:

But our kneeling at the Sacrament is no humane Invention, was never abused to
Idola^^^, and has a profitable use in God service.

Therefore it ought not to be abolished.

I will also invert the Disputers Argument upon himself after this manner,
That which is devised by man, and is abused to Idolatry, ought to be abolished:

But sitting at the Sacrament is devised by man, yea by the man of sin, and is
by him notoriously abused to Idolatry:

Therefore it ought to be abolished.

And again, That which was devised by man, has been abused unto Idolatry, and
has no profitable use in Gods service, but is an hinderance thereunto; ought
to be abolished:

But all Impropriations were devised by man, yea by the man of sin, have no
use in Gods service, but are a notable hinderance thereunto:

Therefore they ought to be abolished.

Our brethren might do well to make use of their Argument against
Impropriations, which they might do more truly then they can against kneeling
at the Sacrament, or any other of our Ceremonies: but they are so far from
it, that they encourage both their Patrons and people, to devour all manner of
holy things, whereby they may be more able to be beneficial unto them: Even as
the Friars in this Country, persuade the people, that they may with a safe
conscience defraud both the Minister, and the secular Priest of their tithes,
so that they make a Compensation unto the fathers.

I have insisted so long in the last point, that I must be very brief in the
rest, that I may answer the importunity of the Press; and the rather because I
am sure, that the grounds which I have laid already, partly in my Sormon, and
partly in this discourse are sufficient, if they be duly considered, to cut
off all the objections, which either have been, or can be made against
kneeling at the Sacrament, or any Ceremony of our Church.

The second exception is, that in kneeling at the Sacrament, there is danger of
Idolatry, or that it may be an occasion of Idolatry, insomuch, That a Papist
newly converted, not having his understanding cleared from his old error, has
opportunity left him to commit Idolatry as he did before. Here first I will
recommend unto the Disputer a necessary distinction used in the school: Aquin.
2^ 2ae. q. 88. Art. 4. ad 2um.
Quando periculum (says Aquinas) nascitur ex ipso facto, tum factum illud non
est expediens: sed si periculum immine at a nostro defectu, non desinit propter
hoc esse expediens: alioqui opor^eret cessare ab emnibus bonis quae etiam (per
accidens ex aliquo eventu) possunt esse periculosa. Or to make it more plain,
A thing is dangerous, and so an accasion of evil, either ex Natura sua, of its
own nature; Or only by accident, ex defectu nostro, by our corruption, the
same being abused by us, who can easily abuse the best of all Gods creatures
and Ordinances, and make them occasions and provocations to evil. It is only
the former occasions which are unlawful, and to be avoided: And so whenever
the Scripture condemns occasions of evil, it speaks only of such things as
are evil in themselves, if they were no occasions; as chambering, wantonness,
gazing upon strange beautic, Idleness, the haunting of evil company. But as
for the other which are only occasions of evil, and so dangerous by accident,
by reason of our corruption, if we should avoid and abandon them; we could not
freely use the best and most holy actions; which yet are not to be intermitted
for such fantastical fears, as S. Austin has observed, Absit ut ea quae
propter bonum ac licitum facimus aut habemus, si quid per haec praeter nostram
voluntatem cuiquam mali acciderit nobis imputetur. Alioquin nec ferramenta
domestica and agrestia sunt habenda ne quis eis vel se vel alter^m interimat.
Nec arbor aut restis, ne quis se inde suspendat. Nec fenestrafacrenda est, ne
per hanc se quisque praecipitet. -- Quid enim est in usu hominum bono ac
licito, unde non possit etiam pernicics irregari? Ep. 154. There is nothing in
this world which sinful man cannot make an occasion of evil. for after this
manner, the hope of Heaven may be, and has been occasion of Idolatry. Romans 7.8.
The Law is an occasion of all manner of concupiscence; The Gospel a
stumbling-blocke, and Christ himself a Rock of offense. The Israelites by the
long use of Manna, were not only put in mind of the flesh potts of Egypt, but
also provoked to lust after them: Shall we therefore condemn Manna, Aelian.
lib. 10. de animal. c. 28. Ps. 106.20.
and not rather them? They had seen the Ox worshipped for the greatest god of
Egypt, under the name of Apis, and they themselves had worshipped the image of
an ox: But yet, because the image of an ox was not naturally or necessarily
an occasion of Idolatry; but only casually and accidentally: Therefore Solomon
did not think himself bound by such an acidentall danger, 2. Kings 7 ^5.
but that he might lawfully set the images of twelve oxen in the very Temple.
Now to apply, kneeling being in it self a holy gesture, is not dangerous in
its own nature; but accidentally through the corruption of man, who abuses the
best actions in the world: It is no otherwise an occasion of evil, then is the
Law, the Gospel, the Sacraments, Christ himself, the Israelites Mannae, or
the Images of the oxen placed in the Temple: yea there was no such necessity of
the oxen, as there is of kneeling in Gods worship, the same being a natural
gesture which belonged first to Gods service, before it was applied to any
idolatrous worship: Besides it was never the object of worship, as was the
Image of an ox, but the gesture which always was, and ever will be common to
true worshippers and false. Next, if our kneeling at the Sacrament, be an
occasion of Idolatry; Then so is their sitting bare, which they use not to do
in the exercise of the Word: And why may not the people, perceiving them to
give more reverence to the Sacrament, then to the Word, take occasion from
thence to worship it, as well as from our kneeling: for uncovering of the head
is an expression of worship, as well as kneeling, and (as I proved before) A
man may commit Idolatry fitting. Again, the error of the mind is the true
occasion of Idolatry, and not kneeling; If in time of our public prayer, some
superstitious persons kneel, with secret reference to Saints departed (as they
may do) will any man affirm that their kneeling is the occasion of their
Idolatry, and not rather their minds, which being leavened with superstition,
makes them use that gesture accordingly? So, it is not the Papists kneeling,
but their erroneous doctrine that is the occasion of their Idolatry: first, the
false doctrine of the Sacrament corrupted their minds, and their minds becoming
Idolatrous, made their kneeling such. Now the doctrine of our Church concerning
the Sacrament is sound, and does sufficiently acquit us from giving any
occasion of Idolatry; and doctrine is it which in all Religions determines the
end and use of all gestures. But here the Disputer tells us, It is better to
close a pit wherein people may fall, then (leaving it open) to set one to bid
people go about it. O acumen Aristotelicum! he should first have proved that
kneeling is a pit, I have showed that it is not, but surely his heart is a
deep pit of error and deceit: It is no block to stumble at; but the block
is in his head, Ps. 14.5.
which makes him fear where no fear is. This is superstitiosa timiditas, as
S. Austin Epist. 118, ad Ianuar.
truly censures it: It is indeed to fear superstition, with a superstitious
fear: Finally, sitting at the Sacrament is as much occasion of unreverence,
and profaneness, as kneeling is of Idolatry: And albeit I have so charitable
an opinion of the brethren, that I think they use not sitting of purpose to
expose the Sacrament to contempt; yet if any from thence take occasion to
profane it, putting no difference between that supper, and a common supper;
They cannot be excused, because they did appoint that gesture without any
lawful calling, contrary to the commandment of their Superiors, and the
custom of the Church: But if any man should superstitiously abuse kneeling, we
are not to be blamed, not only because we teach men to worship God, and not the
Elements; But also because we have a lawful calling to kneel, the
commandment of authority. And since some men will turn all gestures into
sin, it is enough for us, that the Word allows them, we have a calling to
use this gesture, and if we should refuse to use it, we should occasion worse
effects, the disturbing of the Churches peace, the loss of our Ministry, and
of the comfort of the Sacrament; As these men do by their disobedience. So to
turn to the Disputers Argument against himself, That which is an occasion of
unreverence, profanation of the Sacrament, disturbing the Churches peace,
loss of our Ministry, and the comfort of the Sacrament; is to be avoided,
as well as that which may be an occasion of Idolatry.

But sitting at the Sacrament, and refusing to kneel is the occasion of all
these, Therefore to be avoided.

I come to the third exception, that Kneeling is an appearance of Idolatry, and
will worship, and so contrary unto the word of God, I. These. V. 22. Abstain
from all appearance of evil. Surely the brethren content themselves with the
sound of Scripture, and As the fool think^th, so the bell clinketh. They never
search into the sense and meaning of it. If they should expound that Text so as
if the same were to be extended to all appearances of evil whatsoever, without
any manner of restraint or modification: Then may we not do good duties at any
time, if the same have an appearance of evil unto others: Then must we
condemn diverse actions which are approved in the word of God: As Lacobs
laying of rods before the cattle, had a manifest appearance of fraud; The
Reubenites Altar had an appearance of defection from God, and of separation
from their brethren; Ruths going to the bed of Boaz, had a manifest appearance
of unchastity; Eziekiahs asking of a sign, had a show of diffidence, and
David's dancing before the Arc, of levity, Obadiah his falling on his face
before the Prophet Elijah, had an appearance of Idolatry: The Apostle Paul's
shaving of his head and purifying of himself, was a show of Iudaisme; And his
pleading that he was a Pharisee, to put dissension betwixt the two sects, might
seem dissimulation and worldly policy. Therefore it is certain that the
Apostles precept must be understood with some limitation. To help them then to
the understanding of that Text, I say. I. That howsoever that precept may be
applied unto matters of practice, yet the Apostle speaks there only of matters
of doctrine, as M. Calvin observes, following therein S. Chrysostom and S.
Ambrose, and as is evident by the words going before, Despise not prophesying,
try all things, and keep that which is good, And then Abstain from all
appearance of evil. Where he teaches us how prophesying or preaching shall be
profitable, Calv in. loc. Docet qualiter nobis utilis futura sit prophetia
citra periculum, nempe si attenti erimus ad omnia probanda, and si^evitas and
festinatio aberit. -- And, Quum nondum ita comperta est doctrinae falsitas, ut
merito rejici queat, sed tamenaliqua haeret sinistra suspitio, and timetur ne
quid veneni lateat -- -- Vbi autem subest falsi metus, aut men's dubitatione est
implicita, pedem refer vel gradum suspendete convenit.
and without danger unto us; namely, If we be careful for to try the doctrine,
as the Bereans did by the rule of Gods word, And then embrace that which we
find to be good, reject that which is manifestly false; But if any thing be
doubtful, neither so evidently true, that it ought to be embraced, nor so
manifestly false, that it ought to be rejected; We are to keep off from it till
we have more thoroughly proved it. This is to abstain from all appearance of
evil, or (as the word bears) all evil appearance. And would to God that
these men's disciples had followed this advise, then should they not have been
so much infected with the poison of their doctrine. II. The appearance of evil
which we are to abstain from is not in respect of others, but in respect of
our selves; We should abstain from that which appears to us, after due trial
and examination to be evil* for it is every man himself that is to prove all
things, that is all doctrines, and not others for him: And he is to keep that
which is good; not that which appears good unto others; But that which he
himself, after trial evidently finds to be good: And so he is to abstain
from that which after trial appears evil unto himself, whatsoever it
appear unto others. And so this is all one with that which the Apostle
requires Romans XIV. 5. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. But
then if any man should apply this rule; to the practice of things indifferent,
he must extend it no further, then to those things, which are in our own
choice, as not being determined by any constitution civil or Ecclesiastical.
III. If the precept be extended unto those things which appear evil unto
others, then those others are only men of sound Judgment, recte sentientes, to
whom nothing seems evil but what indeed is evil: And so nothing is
forbidden, but what is evil, (As the Syriack expresses it Abstain from all
kind of evil, or from every evil thing) As namely, entire familiarity with
wicked persons, and Communion with them in evil, which is not only an
appearance of evil, but evil it self. And so this precept is all one with
that of the Apostle Jude, who borrowing a Metaphor from the Ceremonial
pollution of the Law, bids us Hate even that garment which is spotted by the
flesh ver. 23. Also the unseasonable practice of holy duties without regard to
the circumstances of time and place comes within the compass of that
prohibition, as for a man to kneel down and pray in the market place; And for
the brethren to keep their exercises in private conventicles, and at
unseasonable hours: This is not only an appearance of evil, but evil,
because it is contrary to that discretion which God requires, appointing every
thing to be done in due season, and in lawful manner. But what is this to
kneeling at the Sacrament? It cannot come within the compass of the Apostles
prohibition: for it is not evil in it self, and it appears not evil to us,
we being fully persuaded in our conscience, both of the lawfulness and
expediency of it; Neither does it seem evil unto any Judicious men, but only
unto humorous fools, whose heads are crazed in the principles of
understanding; for whose sakes we ought not, nor can not abstain from it,
considering first that the public doctrine cleeres our practice, from all
evil and appearance of evil: And if it were not for the doctrine of the
Church, there is no gesture we could use in Gods worship, but it would carry a
show, both of heathenish and Popish Idolatry, forasmuch as all gestures have
been abused by them. Again we have a lawful calling for to use it, The
Commandment of authority; And it is not a show of evil in a thing
indifferent, that can make it unlawful to him who has an honest calling to
use it. Finally, if we should refuse this gesture for the pretended show of
evil, what other gesture can we use which has not a greater appearance of
evil? If we use sitting, it has a manifest appearance of unreverence,
profaneness, contempt of the holy Sacrament; And refusing to kneel being
commanded, has more then a show of arrogance, pride, presumption, of faction
and disobedience. But for any to refuse so far, as rather then kneel, to
lose their ministry, and the comfort of the Sacrament is not only an
appearance, but a pregnant evidence of vile hypocrisy, while they strain at a
gnat and swallow a Camel, refusing the greatest good, for avoiding of that,
which is but by misconstruction, a show of evil, to some few people only, whom
they themselves have deluded. But the Disputer will prove our kneeling at the
Sacrament to be an appearance of Idolatry, And how? He tells us The body goes
as farte as it can go, if it would commit Bread worship (pardon me good Reader
for presenting thee such nonsense) And again that When we kneel, our outward
behavior is as like the Idolatrous kneeler, as can be; so that none can tell
whether we worship God, or the bread. And that A Magistrate can do no more
(for his heart) when he would suppress Idolatry, then curb the outward
expressions of it; for the heart no man can know whether it be committing
Idolatry or not, but by the outward acts. This miserable man is so blinded,
that he is a fitter object of pity, then subject of instruction: for he will
not consider, that all gestures are common to true worshippers and false: That
kneeling did first belong unto Gods service, and albeit it be now used by
Idolaters by unjust alienation, yet it is fit that we should give unto God that
which is his own, he having said: Unto me every knee shall bow: That unless
we use these gestures in the worship of God, which are used by Idolaters, (And
so our behavior be as like theirs as can be) we shall use none at all: And
take away all gestures, then take away the whole outward worship of God: That
it is not the outward gesture which distinguishes betwixt a true worshipper,
and an Idolater, but their Doctrine and Profession. I will now further tell
him, that our kneeling at the Sacrament is no liker the Papists kneeling, then
their sitting is like unto the Popes, except only that they have not so great a
show of devotion. And as a Magistrate can do no more when he would suppress
Idolatry, then restrain the outward act: So our Kings Majesty, when he would
bring these men to an orderly form in Gods worship, he can do no more but
injoyne the outward expression thereof by a decent and reverent kneeling; he
can not root out of their hearts, unreverence, profaneness, arrogance, pride,
praesumption, and hypocrisy; which are the only true cause of their
opposition. Now as to his other aspersion, that kneeling is an appearance of
Will Worship. I shall need to say no more, then I have already, when I treated
of Christian liberty, namely that we do not place either Worship or Religion
in that gesture, nor lay any opinion upon the consciences of people of the
necessity thereof: But such is his ignorance, that he can not distinguish
between these things, Quae spectant ad cultum, which belong unto the worship of
God, and wherein it consists; And those things Quae conducunt ad cultum, which
only conduce unto Gods worship, as the changeable circumstances of time and
place, and the outward form and order of Administration, of which sort is our
kneeling at the Communion, but a changeable circumstance, albeit of all other
gestures, the most decent expression of worship. And so not being esteemed by
us to be worship, it can not be called Will Worship. Besides, we have a warrant
from the Word, both by precept and president, to kneel in Gods service. But as
for them who make sitting necessary and essential unto the Sacrament, as a
part of Christ's Institution, without any warrant from the Word; And who bind
the consciences of their people by their negative precepts, to refuse our
Ceremonies; I have proved both in my Sermon, and in this discourse, that they
are guilty of willworship in the highest degree. So that the Disputer alleged
that place Col. II. 23. against will worship, in an ill hour to his own head:
for these men whom the Apostle charges with will worship, did not urge the
necessity of doing any thing which God had not commanded, but the necessity of
abstayning from some things, which God had not prohibited, as may appear by
the words going before, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not: So that there may be
will worship, in making conscience of abstayning from a thing that is
indifferent, as if it were in it self unlawful; as well, as in placing
Religion in the observation of it. This is indeed the brethrens case: They bind
the consciences of men under pain of sin, not to kneel, not to cross, not
to wear a surplice, and in a word not to observe any thing enjoined in our
Church: whereby they are as guilty of willworship as the false Apostles were;
And besides their will worship, they are guilty of disobedience, which the
false Apostles were not: for there was no commandment to injoyne Touching,
Tasting, Handling; But they were things left unto their own power; whereas our
Ceremonies are enjoined by lawful authority. And now to turn his weapon
against himself, That which carries a greater appearance of unreverence,
profaneness, contempt of the Sacrament, arrogancy, pride, praesumption,
faction, disobedience and hypocrisy; then kneeling does of Idolatry: Is to be
avoided.

But such is sitting at the Sacrament, and refusing to kneel when they are
enjoined. Ergo etc.

That gesture should not be used in the Sacrament, which is used by the Pope:
Nor our behavior like his, for avoiding the appearance of Idolatry: But such
is sitting. Ergo etc. They who place Religion in a thing indifferent, and lay
an opinion upon the consciences of people of the necessity of it: As also they
who teach men to place Religion in abstayning from things indifferent, albeit
commanded by lawful authority, are guilty both of will worship and
disobedience: But the brethren do so, as I have even now declared. Ergo etc.

I am now come unto the last exception, That kneeling in the Act of receiving
is Idolatry. Here the Disputer does not speak, but mutter: he dares not
directly charge us with Idolatry; (for any thing I can find in the Libell) yet
he labors to insinuat so much unto his credulous disciples, giving this as a
reason of their refusing that gesture. Lest it be the inducement or very act of
Idolatry. Which is, (as I observed before) Superstitiosa timiditas, A fear
where no fear is. Again he tells us, That Christ used not kneeling (namely in
the Institution of the Sacrament) to prevent all Idolatry. This is a bold, yea
an impudent assertion: for he knows not what gesture Christ used; Neither
does it appear unto us, that Christ himself did receive the Sacrament; But
that he ministered the same unto his disciples: And if they did not kneel, it
was not upon that ground, to prevent Idolatry; But, (as I have manifested in my
Sermon) because this Sacrament was celebrated with the conjunction of another
meal, which did require a gesture of ease: And because he did in a manner
conceal the glory of his God head, till after his resurrection, insomuch that
in the days of his flesh, his Disciples did not in their ordinary prayers
kneel unto him as the object of joint adoration. Besides, the forbearing of
this gesture cannot prevent Idolatry; for I have formerly proved, that a man
may commit Idolatry sitting as well as kneeling. But here the Disputer tells
us, A man cannot commit [Bodily Idolatry] sitting, which he may do kneeling.
By which very Phrase, all men may see that these men take upon them to coin a
new divinity: for I have read of material and formal Idolatry; But I dare
say that the distinction of Corporal and Spiritual Idolatry was never heard
of, (at least in this sense) till these Empyrickes did invent it. But I will
pardon him his ignorance, as I have done many greater offenses: for I find by
another place in the Libell, what misleades him: He says There is an outward
worship as well as an inward, And therefore he thinks there should be an
outward, or (as he terms it) Bodily Idolatry. But he is not so learned as to
know the difference between (...) from whence comes Idolatry; And (...) which
signifies to worship: The former does express the spiritual duty of the Soul
and all the affections thereof, which is due only unto God, whereof the gesture
of the body is but an outward expression: The body being no more capable of the
attribution of this worship, then the ground it self whereupon we kneel, but
only as it is acted by the Soul which understands and wills. But the other
word (...), as also the Hebrew Schachah and Histachav^h, and the Latin word
Adorare. signifies properly the bowing of the body, and commonly does express
outward worship, not only religious, but also civil. We find it used to
express both in one verse I. C^ron. XXIX. 10. They worshipped the Lord and the
King. But it were a pity that the Disputer should lose the benefit of his
Invention, which is but the first part of Logic, when there is no hope that
ever he will attain to the second part which is Judgment. I will therefore make
good the distinction: There is a Corporal and Spiritual Idolatry, not in
respect of the Act; (as he understands it) But in respect of the Object, or the
thing worshipped, which may be either corporal or spiritual: And so if the
Papists be guilty of Corporal Idolatry in worshipping of Images; The Puritanes
are guilty of Spiritual Idolatry in worshipping their own Imaginations: for
indeed there can be no greater Idolatry, then for men to magnify their own
fancies, (as they do) and for the honor of that babble, to break Laws,
despise authority, trouble the Churches peace, and forsake their Ministry. So
that the Libeller speaks more truly then he is aware, and like Balaams ass,
to the understanding of others, though not to his own; when he brings in B.D.
saying, There is no Idolatry but in thy brain I dare say.

I thought to have insisted long on this point, to prove that it is not only
lawful, but also expedient to worship God before a creature occasionally,
whether consecrated or not consecrated, of holy signification o^ otherwise; But
especially when the thing before which we worship is a sign of Gods presence,
and token of his love toward us: provided always that no religious worship be
transferred unto the creature it self, nor it made any ways the object of
adoration, neither Objectum qu^d, nor objectum per quod, nor objectum in quo.
But I may spare my pains, till I hear the Disputers Arguments; for in all the
Libell, there is not one Argument to prove kneeling in the act of receiving to
be Idolatry, but only bold assertions such as this. When he was told that a man
may lawfully kneel down and worship God before his bed, and that not only
casually but occasionally, having a respect unto that rest which he desires to
receive in his bed, under the protection of the Almighty: And that it is no
other ways we worship God in and before the Sacrament: He says That the
bread in the Sacrament is an Idolizable object, and when men kneel before
their bed they do it not in reverence of their bed, and they k^^cle before
that wherewith never Idolatry was committed; But when we kn^ele before the
Elements, we do it in reverence of the mysteries, and before that which has
been committed Idolatry with. I will now briefly refer unto his wiser
thoughts these considerations following. I. That there is nothing in this world
which is not (to use his own: Phrase) Idolizable, even a man's own bed: The
Apostle speaking of Epieures, says Their belly is their God: So it may be said
of some voluptuous men who glut themselves with ease, sleep, and fleshly
pleasure; Their bed is their God. II. There was a time when the Sacrament had
never been abused to Idolatry, namely before these 800. years he speaks of,
and if it was lawful then to kneel in receiving, it is still lawful unto us;
for I have proved at large that the abuse of kneeling by others, makes not that
gesture unclean unto us, the same being a natural gesture which God has
sanctified for his own worship. I will go further and justify that if a man
were cast into Groanland, where for diverse months he wanted the light of the
sun, afterward upon the first return of the same, it were not unlawful for
him to fall down upon his knees, and praise God for the comfort of that light,
albeit the Sun of all other things has been made the greatest Idol, and is
the same Individual body which has been so abused. III. If there be any
force in that Argument or rather assertion, it makes more strongly against the
Sacrament it self, then against kneeling in Gods worship: for it was the bread
which was made the Idol, and not kneeling, which being a natural gesture,
always was and ever will be common to true worshippers and false. IV. It is a
shameless calumny in the Disputer to charge us tha^ we kneel in reverence of
the mysteries. Lerit. 19.30.
We profess indeed to reverence them, for there is reverence due to all holy
things, which for distinctions sake we call not worship, but Veneration: yet
that is not the ground or cause of our kneeling; but a consequent that issues
from the gesture: our kneeling (...) directed unto God alone, who vouchsafes to
communicate himself unto us in these Elements; yet out of that gesture
directed to Gods reverence arises to the Elements, we coming to God so
reverently when we do receive them: (...)
But to speak properly, the veneration of the Elements stands not in special
gestures directed unto them, but only in comely and decent using of them. V.
Albeit we neither kneel to the Elements, nor in reverence of them; yet we
worship God receiving the Sacrament, with a religious respect unto the same, as
unto that which ministers unto us the present occasion of worship. And that
this is most lawful may appear by the common practice of Gods people in the
like cases. They did fall down and worship God being occasioned thereunto by
some such object either audible or visible: sometimes when they heard his
voice: Genesis 17.3. Matthew. 17.6. Sometimes when they received a message from him:
Genesis 17.17. Ex^d. 4.31. Chap. 12.27. Sometimes when they saw some visible sign
of his presence, as the Clowdie Pillar, Ex. d. 33.10. The glory of the Lord,
(that is, some excellency visible to the eye) 2 Chronicles. 7 3. The Arc of the
Covenant, I^sh 7.6 1. Kings. 8 54. The Temple, Ezra. 10. 1. Psalm. 5.7.138 2.
His holy ^ill. Ps. l. 99 9. His holy Oracle, Psalm. 28 2. His footstool, Psa 99
5. Psalm. 132.7. The fire that came down from heaven and consumed the
sacrifices, Levit. 9.24. 2. Chron. 29 28 29. Micah. 6 6. All these things were
occasions of their worshipping, and in worshipping they had a religious respect
unto them: so are the Elements in the Sacrament to us, as being more lively:
testimonies of Gods presence then any of the former, and therefore we have good
cause to worship God with a religious respect unto them for as Athanasius
says, ^p. ad Adelph.
Sirecte fecerunt Iudaei etc. If the Jews did well to adore the Lord where the
Arc and Cherubims were, shall we refuse to adore Christ where his body is
presents shall we say, Absis^e a corp^re, (or a Sacramento corporis) ut te
adoremus: Keep thee from the Sacrament if thou would be worshipped. But that
which misleades the brethren is; they do not distinguish between worshipping
a creature, De heat. Sanct. ^b. 1. ^ap. 11.
and worshipping before a creature: Even as Bellarmine would prove that it is
lawful to worship a creature, because we are called to worship God at or
before his footstool: So would they prove that we unlawfully worship the
Sacrament, because we worship God at or before it. But these two must be
distinguished, The former never was, is, nor can be lawful: But the latter
namely, to worship God in his own Ordinance, and so before a creature
occasionally, is not only lawful, but sometimes necessary, as the former
instances do sufficiently declare. But here I know they will say, They had a
special warrant for what they did, which we have not. To let pass what I have
manifested before in this discourse, that we have warrant both by precept and
president to kneel in any part of Gods worship, and consequently in receiving
of the blessed Sacrament: I will desire them first to consider, that if to
worship before a creature, were all one as to transfer adoration unto it, (as
they understand the matter) then no warrant could make it lawful: it is so
necessarily repugnant unto the eternal Law, that God could not command it: for
God cannot deny himself, and he says: Isa. 42.1.
My glory I will not give unto another. Again there was no Commandment for
Ioshuah and the Elders of Israel to fall down before the Arc, nor for any
other before David's time, yet they did it as lawfully before as after: no
Commandment to worship before the Clowdie pillar, nor before the glory of the
Lord which came down upon the house, nor before the fire and the sacrifices:
no Commandment for the people to fall down and worship, when they heard the
word of the Lord from Moses, Aaron, and Iehaziel. So though we had no
particular warrant, yet were it lawful for us to kneel at the Sacrament, as
it was for them upon these occasions I have now mentioned. I will yet clear
the matter by other instances. The Apostle speaking of a sinner convinced by
prophesying says, That falling down on his face, I. Cor. 14.25.
he will worship God, and report that God is in them: The ministers are the
occasion of his worshipping, and in the act of worshipping he has a religious
respect unto them who preach unto his conscience: So that it is not unlawful
for a man even in hearing of the word, when his affections are strongly moved,
to kneel down and worship God; And yet the hearing of the word is not
properly and immediately a part of Gods worship, as is the receiving of the
Sacrament. A minister being to be ordained, kneeles down before the party who
is to consecrate him, and takes the book of God in his hand, yet he neither
worships the Bisho? nor the Bible; But God in whose name he is ordained, and
with a religious respect unto his ordination. A Poenitentiarie who is to
acknowledge his offense publicly, and satisfy the congregation which he has
scandalized, kneeles to God purposely before the minister and congregation, and
with a respect unto them; namely, that they may join with him in prayer,
forgive his offense and after his repentance receive him into their Communion:
When we present a child to Baptism, we kneel down before the font, and pray
God to receive that child as a member of his Church, with a religious respect
unto tha^ Ordinance. In a word our dull affections are not stirred up to
worship God, but either by the contemplation of his works, or meditation in
his word, or consideration of his holy Sacraments: So that if we take away all
occasional worship before a creature, we must needs destroy all Religion.

VI. I desire the Disputer and his fellows to remember that many of their own
faction in England, though they kneel not in the act of receiving, yet they
do kneel in blessing of the Elements and giving thanks: And they themselves
use to stand, and exhort the people to humble themselves, and to pray unto God
for a blessing: here is worship before the Elements, with a religious respect
unto them; for which they have no more warrant either by commandment, or by
the example of Christ's Institution, then we have for kneeling in the act of
receiving. And of the twain it seems rather to be Idolatry, to worship in
beholding the Elements, then in receiving of them; for no man can be so mad, as
to worship that which he is tearing with his teeth. VII. They sit uncovered
before the Elements, with a religious respect unto them, which they use not to
do in hearing of the word: Now uncovering the head is a gesture of worship, as
well as kneeling; If the one be Idolatrous, so is the other; neither have they
any more warrant either by commandment, or by the example of Christ's
Institution, for the one then we have for the other. Besides, they use diverse
other expressions of worship, as lifting up of the eyes and hands unto Heaven,
which is daily used by the Priest in the Mass; And sometimes weeping, which
has been abused to Idolatry, as by the women whom the Prophet saw mourning for
Tammuz, Ezekiel. 8.14.
a Prophet of an Idol, for whom there was a solemn mourning once a year in
the night: yet have I seen many of their disciples, not only lift up their
eyes and hands unto Heaven; but also weep when they received the Sacrament,
and that, (as I charitably believe) out of a godly sense of their own misery,
and of Gods mercy. Now were it not strange if our kneeling only should be
Idolatrous, and not also those other gestures, which are expressions of
worship, and have been abused to Idolatry, as much as kneeling. Finally, I
desire him to remember what I have often said, that all gestures being common
to true worshippers and false, it is only the public doctrine, and received
opinion, that determines the use and end of all gestures, and puts a difference
between the servants of God, and worshippers of Idols; Insomuch that, (as I
told him in the Court) If the first Reformers of our Religion, had only
changed the gesture from kneeling to sitting; and not the doctrine touching the
Sacrament it self; Idolatry would have remained. But the doctrine of our
Church sufficiently cleeres us, that we worship not the bread, either directly,
or indirectly; Mediately, or immediately; permanently, or transiently;
relatively, or absolutely: To which purpose I will here set down that
Declaration published in the first Book of Common Prayer Anno 1552, which was
approved by all the Divines of the Reformed Churches, and which was publicly
read at my visitation to have given satisfaction to these men: And whereof I
shall desire the Reader to take special notice, because some of that faction
have slandered our Church with an Idolatrous intent, saying. This gesture
seems to be enjoined even with a superstitious intent, ^^ridg. page 6^.
and meaning to adore the Sacrament it self. What the intent was shall appear
by this Declaration following. Out of the Book of Common Prayer, Imprinted by
Edward Whitchurch. MDLII Cum privilegie.


Although no order can be so perfectly devised, but it may be of some either
for their ignorance and infirmity, or else of malice and obstinacy
misconstrued, depraved and interpreted in a wrong part. And yet because
brotherly charity wills, that so much as conveniently may be, offenses should
be taken away: Therefore we willing to do the same, Where as it is ordained in
the Book of Common Prayer in the Administration of the Lords Supper, that the
Communicants kneeling should receive the holy Communion: which thing being well
meant, for a signification of the humble and grateful asknowledging of the
benefits of Christ given unto the worthy receiver, and to avoid the
profanation and disorder, which about the h^ly Communion might else ensue.
Lest yet the same kneeling might be thought or taken otherwise, we do declare
that it is not meant thereby, that any adoration is done, or ought to be done
either to the Sacramental bread or wine there bodily received, or unto any
real and essential presence there being of Christ's natural flesh and blood.
For as concerning the Sa^ramentall bread and wine, they remain still in their
very natural substances, and therefore may not he adored, for that were Idolatry
to be abhorred of all faithful Christians. And as concerning the natural body
and blood of our Savior Christ, they are in Heaven and not here For it is
against the truth of Christ's true natural body, to be in more places then in
one, at one time.

This is the Doctrine of our Church, against which no man in his right wits can
except. And that the Reader may see the opposition between light and darkness. I
will give him a taste of their doctrine, as I have gathered it out of their
unworthy authors, which is such as (I hope) all Christian ears will abhor.
Repli. part. to B, Morton, page 36.
Sitting at the Table of the Lord is a part of the Sacramental sign: whereby
they condemn all Churches (which either kneel or stand) of the breach of
Christ's Institution, and are guilty of will worship, as I have proved. The
principal work (namely of a Receiver) is meditation upon the Analogy between
the signs, and the things signified: Perth Assem. page ^02.
which a very reprobate may do. Survay page 75.
It seems not warrantable by the Word, that in the action of ministering the
Elements, the Minister should minister to Christ and the Church both. When it
is his Office to stand between God and the people, and minister unto both.
Disput. page 27.
Whatsoever liberty or praerogative a table of repast has for those that
partake thereof, the same have Communicants at the Lords Table. Whereupon it
would follow, that they may cover their heads, eat liberally, drink oftener
then once, and discourse one with another. Disput. page 14. and 20.
Worship to God, and receiving of Christ preached to us in the elements, are
two such opposite employments, that the one cannot but frustrate the other: We
cannot banquet with the second person, and yet intertayne holy important
negotiation with the first. Where besides that he makes it unlawful to pray to
God so much as mentally, in the act of receiving; no haeretick could have said
more to divide the Persons of the Trinity. Disput. page 6. etc.
Kneeling imports inferiority, therefore it is contrary to the person of coheirs.
And many more speeches are in that Author, pressing an aequality with Christ in
the Sacrament, then which no Arian could speak more blasphemously. The Actions
of the Sacrament are consecratirg, Disput. 126.127.128.
breaking, distributing, beholding, applying, etc. none of which can be called
properly Eucharisticall, in as much as we present nothing to God. Which
doctrine both destroys the nature of the Sacrament, and is flat contrary to
the words of the Institution. (...) (says the Evangelist.) And Christ himself,
do this in remembrance of me. It is not a bare historical remembrance which
he requites; but a remembrance of faith and thanksgiving; so that the whole
action is Eucharisticall. I could present the Reader with a great deal of such
stuff: If I did love to rake in such noisome sinks as their books are.

Thus have I answered whatsoever was objected, and also laid such grounds, as
may serve to overthrow whatsoever can be alleged against the reverent gesture
of the Sacrament. But I had almost forgot his last Argument, ^. Sam. 26.8.
whereof he seems to be as confident as Abishai was of his spe^re, Let me
smite him once with my spear to the earth and I will not smite him again: yet
has it not so much strength as a bullrush, That which Christ avoided in the
Sacraments of the old and new Testament; We should avoid: But all adoration
before the Elements Christ avoided in all the Sacraments etc. What, did not
Christ adore when he blessed the Elements and gave thanks? But it may be by
adoration he means kneeling^ Be it so, Yet are both the parts of his
syllogism false: The proposition* for as we are not bound to use the gesture
that Christ used in any Sacrament; so neither are we bound to avoid that
gesture which he used not, the same being commanded by lawful authority: It
being evident, that no gesture, in any Sacrament, under the Law, or under the
Gospel, was ever made necessary unto us, either by precept or by example: And
so likewise there is neither precept nor example binding us to forbear any
gesture. Again his assumption that kneeling was avoided in all the Sacraments
is either uncertain, or false, or both, for he himself cannot tell me what
gesture was used in any Sacrament either under the Law, or under the Gospel,
except only in the Passover, and in that too, the gesture was changed from
standing to lying, without any special direction from God. And as for Baptism
it is more then probable, that the gesture used by Christ, and others in that
age, was kneeling: for they went down into the water, and their whole body
head and all was immersed in the water, which could not have been if they had
stood upright, without danger of drowning: They must needs therefore kneel or
bow their body, adorationis in modum, which is all one. Besides, all who came
to be baptized ( Christ excepted) did confess their sins, call upon God, and
tender a real homage unto him: Now what gesture is so fit for confession of
sin, prayer and performing of homage; as is kneeling: Lib. de Baptism^.
Therefore Tertullian requires in him that is about to be baptized, preces,
jejunia, geniculationem and confessionem omnium peccatorum. And it is no
question, but if now men of age came to be baptized, it would be thought most
fitting, they should present themselves upon their knees. I will therefore
invert the Disputers Argument after this manner. That which was not avoided in
the Sacraments under the Law and under the Gospel: We should not avoid:

But adoration was not avoided, nor kneeling either, for any thing that
appears. Ergo etc.

Again, That which God ^ath not determined in any Sacrament of the Old or New
Testament; is left free to be ordered at the discretion of the Church:

But such is the gesture Erg^ etc.

Now I entreat the Disputer and his brethren, to ponder these things which I
have said; in the scales of unpartiall Judgment: And I charge them in the name
of that God whom they profess to serve, that they shut not their eyes against
the light; But bring minds praepared te embrace truth and forsake error. It is
a great glory for a man to correct his own judgment, when he has been
mistaken: So holy Job esteemed it, Behold (says he) I am vile, what shall I
answer thee? I will lay mine hand upon my mouth, Once have I spoken but I will
not answer: yea twice, but I will proceed no further. S. Austin never got more
honor by any book which he wrote, then by that of his Retractations. He who
was the ringleader of the separation in England, from whom they were called
Brownists, did afterward return, conform himself, and for many years
after, enjoyed a good benefice: so also he who was the chief penner of the
book called the Abridgement, after a few years deprivation, acknowledged his
error; And the Church like an Indulgent mother, received him into her bosom,
and conferred upon him a far better living then that which he lost. I could
instance in many more of the better and wiser sort of that side, who after long
opposition did submit themselves to the Judgment of the Church. Whitgi^t page
184.
Yea Me Cartwright himself did not condemn^ our Ceremonies as absolutely
unlawful, but only inconvenie^t, and would have no man forsake his m^nistry in
regard of a Surplice. I wish from the bott^^e of my heart, that our Disputer
may follow their example and advise: for I profess before him who knows the
secrets of all hearts, that I love the man; And if he be not most unthankful,
he will not deny that (notwithstanding the wrong he has done me) he has
reaped diverse fruits of my favor. But if he have so hardened his heart, that
he is settled on his lees, and become incapable to return: yet I beseech those
who love the truth, and desire resolution, that they would not suffer
themselves to be led away with such weak shows, as are his Arguments: But
that they try the doctrines whether they be of God or no. Here I am sure they
will find an Autidot against what either has or can be objected against
kneeling at the Communion. And for their better remembrance, I shall desire
them to take along with them, these brief rules of direction. I. That all
gestures are natural and so from God. II. That all of them are both religious
and civil, according to the occasion whereunto they are applied: As kneeling
being applied to a civil use, is a civil gesture, as when we kneel in
kissing the Kings hand, so sitting being applied to a religious exercise, is a
religious gesture. III. That all gestures have been both abused to Idolatry,
and used in the true service of God, though some more, some less, and indeed
sitting seldom or never but occasionally. IV. That one gesture may be more
decent and convenient then another, by reason of the nature of the service in
hand, and of the occasion which may direct us unto it. V. That no gesture was
commanded in any Sacrament under the Law or under the Gospel; nor made
necessary in any of Gods Ordinances, either by precept or example. Whereupon
follows. VI. That it is in the power of the Church, to appoint what gesture
shall be used in the Sacrament, or in any other Ordinance: And our Church
following the example of the Primitive Church has appointed kneeling. VII.
That it belongs not to any private man to judge what gesture is decent, what
not, But unto the Governors of the Church, who are not bound to give an account
unto their inferiors of the reason of their constitutions, made of things in
themselves indifferent: yea, though they offend in appointing things not so fit
and convenient; yet so long as they are not contrary unto the word of God, the
subject is bound to obey, for avoiding a greater evil. B^^^ in Vit. calv.
M. Calvin was of this judgment: The wafer cakes of Geneva se^med to him
inconvenient; yet he advised his friends not to make any tumult for a thing
indifferent. The like advise he gave unto Bishop Hooper, Epist. 120.
and he professes that he mislikes the frowardness of those men, who for light
scruples depart from the public consent; Epist. 370.
yea he goes further speaking of a thing imposed which in it self is
indifferent, Epist. 379.
Licet malam caudam trahat, quia tumen perse verbo Dei non repugnat, concedi
potest: Albeit it draw a foul consequence after it, yet because in it self it
is not repugnant to Gods word, it may be admitted.

Lastly, yet our Church has not used such a magisteriall power, but has often
manifested unto the world, and is still ready to declare, the innocence of all
her Ceremonies, and particularly, that kneeling at the Communion, is of all
other gestures the most decent and most comely, Exemplum sit in ge^iculatione
quae fit dum sole^nes habentur precationes. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 10. sect. 30.
Sed illud nobis decorum erit, quod ita erit ad sacrorum mysteriorum
reverentia^^ aptum, ut sit idoneum ad pietatis exercitium: vel saltem quod ad
ornatum faciet actioni cong^aentem. ibid. sect. 19.
which shall easily appear if M. Calvin may be admitted Umpyre, he says that
kneeling at prayer is a part of the Apostles decency, And in another place he
gives us three notes to try what is decent. That (says he) shall seem most
comely to us, which shall be fie for procuring of reverence to the holy
mysteries; Be an exercise apt to show and stir up piety; and an oruament to
the action in hand. Now to apply these notes unto kneeling at the Sacrament:
what gesture can be fitter to procure reverence unto the holy mysteries, then
that which is an expression of humility, and is a sign of reverence even in
civil worship? or what to stir up piety, more then that which has been
commonly used by the godly in all their devotions? And what can be a better
ornament unto the Sacrament, then that gesture which imports the excellency of
it, while we worship God by abasing of our selves at the receiving of the same?
I will add, that since the beginning of the world, kneeling was never esteemed
undecent in any divine action, there being an instinct in Nature, as to worship
God, so to express it by bowing or falling down before him, whose face we
apprehend to be both present and glorious. This consideration of the decency
of the gesture, was sufficient warrant for our Church to injoyne it at the
Sacrament. But besides, there are diverse other motives to persuade us to
kneel, albeit the same were free and left to our choice what gesture to use:
If we will but consider, both what the Sacrament is, and what we are, and with
what affections we should come unto it. As for the Sacrament, it has four
considerations, which do enforce kneeling. I. It is a sign of Gods presence:
and (as I she wed before) the people of God used to bow themselves, or fall
upon their faces at the visible signs of his presence, as namely before the
Arc: But behold in this Sacrament are the signs of Gods presence more
glorious then was the Arc. Ambros de spir. sanct. lib. 3 cap. 12. Aug. in Ps.
9^.
The Arc was called Gods footstool, and this both S. Ambrose and S. Austin
applying unto the Body of Christ in the Sacrament: Per scabellum terra
intelligitur, per terram caro Christi, quam hodie quoque in mysterijs adoramus.
II. It is a part of Gods worship, a chief part, there being no other means
nor Ordinance, wherein a devout soul does with sense and comfort draw so near
unto God, as in receiving of the Sacrament. And all men know that kneeling, of
all other gestures, is most fit and decent for Gods worship, and has been most
commonly used, insomuch that it is often put for the whole worship of God, as
Esaias 45.23. Every kaee shall bow unto me. And Psalm. 72.9. They that dwell in
the wilderness shall kneel before him. Now, were it not strange if that
gesture which does express the whole worship of God because it is or may be
used in every part thereof; should be incompatible with Sacramental worship.
III. It is our Christian sacrifice, even a lively repraes^ntation of the
all-sufficient sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, and the means to make us
partakers of the fruits and benefits thereof. And therein we resign over
ourselves unto the service of God, and so offer up our bodies a living
sacrifice, by killing our sinful lusts and affections: for the Sacrament is
not only a testimony of divine grace toward us, Testimonium divinae in nos
grariae externo signo confirmatum, cum mutua^ nostrae erga ipsum pietat^s
testificatione.
confirmed by an outward sign, but also a mu^uall testification of our service
toward him. In the Sacrament we offer unto God our faith, our prayers, our
thanksgiving, our almsdeeds, with a contrite and a broken heart; all which
are spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. Now, if we
were to perform our homage, or tender our service to the King, Calv. Inst.
lib. 4. cap. 14. sect. 1.
we would dot it upon our knees: much more unto him who is the King of Kings,
as the Prophet Micah instructs us* Wherewith shall I come before the Lord,
Chap. 6.6.
and bow my self before the high God? Finally, it is the conduit-pype of Gods
graces, the casket wherein a rich Jewel is presented unto us from our heavenly
Father: for in the Sacrament God offers unto us his own Son, in whom dwells
the fullness of all grace; he is pleased to seal and deliver unto us the
Charter of our Redemption. And will not a malefactor be content to receive his
Pardon upon his knees, 1. Sam. 9.8.
or a less gift from the hand of his Prince? When David allowed M^phibosh^th
to eat bread at his table, he bowed himself: Behold Christ has provided a
better Table for us, feeding us with that Bread of Life which came down from
Heaven, and is it not fit that we should humble our selves even unto the dust,
Genesis 17
in thankful acknowledgement of so great a benefit? When Abraham received the
promise of the blessed Seed, he fell on his face: And shall we think it much to
k^eel when we receive the performance of that promise, even the blessed Seed
himself? All these considerations may move us, to put a difference between
Christ's Supper, and a common supper, even in our gesture and outward behavior,
when we partake of that holy Banquet. Again, if we confider what our selves
are, besides the respects arising unto us from the consideration of the
Sacrament, as namely, That we are in Gods presence, worshipping him, offering
unto him, receiving from him inestimable benefits: We shall find that in the
Sacrament, we sustain the persons of Poenitentiaries, petitioners, praysers.
First, Poenitentiaries for we have before our eyes a lively representation of
the bitter death and passion of our Blessed Savior, whereof our sins was the
cause, and we our selves as guilty as Judas, Pilate, or the Jews; which must
needs breed in us sorrow and bitter lamentation. The Passover was eaten with
bitter herbs, Exodus 12.8. 2. Chron. 30.22.
and with confession of their sins: So ought we to eat this New Passover
with the sour sauce of sorrow and contrition for sin. For if Christ for our
sins did sweat water and blood, yea, shed his hearts blood; should not we
our selves shed bitter tears, should not our hearts bleed for them? Chap.
12.20.
This was foretold by the Prophet Zachary, They shall look upon him whom they
have pierced, (as we must needs behold him in this Sacrament crucified before
our eyes) and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son.
Now nature it self, and the common custom of all countries teach us that
kneeling or prostration, is the fittest gesture for Paenitentiaries who come to
acknowledge their offense. The Syrians came in before Achab with sackcloath
upon their loins and rapes about their necks in token of their guiltiness,
1. Kings 20.3^
because that they heard that the Kings of Israel were merciful: Even so
should we present our selves before the Lord in the Sacrament, wherein we
celebrate the remembrance of Christ's death for our sins, with all manner of
submission: Next, In the Sacrament we are Petitioners, and it is a wonder unto
me, that they who stand so much upon a civil custom, and urge sitting at the
Sacrament, because it is the gesture used at civil meals; will not remember
that kneeling is the gesture used by petitioners, if it be unto the King, much
more in our prayers unto God, as is evide^t by the practice of the godly
throughout the whole Scripture. And in the Sacrament we are petitioners praying
unto Almighty God, that we may have an Interest in that precious death, the
remembrance whereof we then celebrate. The Disputer says, It is not our maine
action to pray (namely in the Sacrament) but to meditate upon the passion of
Christ; As if these two were opposite, whenas meditation is a mental prayer,
and true prayer always joined with meditation. Take away the intention from
prayer, it is no prayer, but the sound of words, and what is intention but
meditation? Meditation and prayer are of such as^inity, that one Hebrew word
comprehends them both: Genesis 24.63.
Isaac went out to the field to meditate, Or (as others render it) To pray: The
Hebrew word Lashuach bears both. Finally, In the Sacrament, we praise God, for
the work of our redemption, yea the whole action is a real thanksgiving: And
kneeling is a gesture which has been commonly used by them who give solemn
thanks. In the 95. Psalm the Prophet calls us, To sing unto the Lord, to come
before his pre^ence with thank^giving; And a little after he shows what should
be our deportment, O come let us worship and bow down, Let us kneel before
the Lord our maker. Abraham's servant worsh^pped the Lord bowing himself to the
earth, Genesis 24 52.
in thankful acknowledgment of the good success God gave him in his journey.
Exodus 4.31.
The people When they heard that the Lord had visited the children of Israel,
and that he had looked on their affliction, then they bowed their heads and
worshipped: And that was but upon the report of their approaching deliverance
from corporal thraldom: But in the Sacrament we receive a pledge of our
spiritual deliverance, from sin, Satan, hell it self, by the death of our
blessed Savior. When Ezra blessed the Lord the great God, Nehem. 8.6.
All the people -- bowed their heads, and worshipped the Lord with heir faces
to the ground. Solomon kneeled down upon his knees before all the
Congregation, 2. Chron 6.13. 2. Chron. 7.3.
and gave thanks unto God. The children of Israel -- bowed themselves with
their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped and praised the
Lord. ^. Chron. 29.28.
All the Congregation worshipped, and the singers sang, Luc. 17.16.
-- And bowed themselves. The Samarimne fell down on his face at Jesus feet
giving him thanks. Revel. 4.10. Chapter 5.8 Chapter 7.11. Chapter 11.16. Chapter 19.4.
The four and twenty Elders fall down before the Throne singing praise and
Allelujahs, unto him who sits on the Throne. And never was there such an
occasion of thanksgiving as is offered unto us in this Sacrament. Now let us
take all these considerations together, That in the Sacrament are the signs of
Gods presence; That therein we worship God; offer our service, yea our selves
unto him, receive wonderful benefits from him, confess our sins with
poenitent hearts, pray unto God for his grace, and praise him for his
wonderful mercies: And it will appear that humility should be the maine
affection of our souls; It is Immility that praepares us to come to the Lords
Table, And humility must present us at his table: Humility is required in all
Christian actions, but especially in receiving the holy Sacrament, for at the
Institution of that Sacrament, Christ gave unto his disciples a lesson of
humility, by washing their feet: And were it not strange, If he would have us
to express humility one toward another in the Sacrament, and not also toward
himself, considering that he is represented unto us in this Sacrament as
crucified for us? And if there should be humility of the soul, why not also
humiliation of the body?

Here I have alleged many motives, the least whereof were sufficient to
persuade us to kneel, though we were at our own choice what gesture to use in
the receiving of the Sacrament. But as the case stands, there is a necessity of
kneeling, if we will receive the Sacrament; for the Church will not minister
the same unto those who contumaciously despise her wholesome Orders. And how can
it stand with the peace of a man's conscience, to spend and end his days
without the comfort of the Sacrament? Shall this be a good plea before the
Tribunal of Christ at that great day; Lord I did not ease at thy supper,
because I could not be permitted to receive it as I do my ordinary meals?
Will not Christ answer them as Samnel to Saul, Has the Lord so great delight
in civil fashions or gestures, as in obeying the voice and ordinance of the
Lord? We are commanded to eat and to drink, but there is no Commandment for
any gesture; And will any man lose the substance for the Ceremony? If he do,
not only Gideons soldiers, but even Abraham's camels shall condemn him, Genesis
24.11.
who kneeled down for to drink water: And in the Sacrament is the water of
life, which some will rather never drink, then bow for it. I beseech them to
consider how to the disturbance of the Churches peace, and great prejudice of
their own soul, they contest about trifles. There are other things wherein
they may exercise their zeal. Contending for the faith which was once given
unto the saints, striving to enter in at the strait gate, to go one before
another in goodness, fighting against the lusts which war in their members,
beating down the pride of their own hearts, and wrestling against
principalities and powers. This were a strife worthy of a Christian: But as for
Ceremony or no Ceremony, kneeling or sitting, a white garment or a black; The
kingdom of God consists not in these things, Romans 14.17.
But in righteousness, and peace, and Joy in the holy Ghost. As many (says
the Apostle) as walk according to this rule, Gal. 6.16.
peace shall be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. And let us
mark the rule, even that Circumcision is nothing, nor uncircumcision, that is,
Ceremony nor no Ceremony, But the substantial, a new creature. Now The God
of truth and peace open the eyes of them that are out of the way, and restore
peace to his disturbed Church, that as there is one sheep heard, so we may all
become one she^^fold, worshipping the only true God, through his son Jesus
Christ in the unity of the spirit, and in the bond of peace.

AMEN.
ERRATA.
Page 36. in marg. l. 4. contendi read contendendi. p. 51. l. 24. this gesture
read his. p. 54. l. 29. he brake it read he blessed it. p. 67. l. 6. in the
Sacrament read in this. p. 80. l. 7. Niddus, read Niddui. p. 96. l. 21. far
read fare. p. 123. l. 9 (...) read (...). and l. 34. were it not a strange
read were it not strange. p. 133. l. 14. many forces read maine p. 144. l. 33.
if ye should, read if he etc. p. 155. l. 11. est qui qui, read est qui. p. 163.
l. 24. to turn to the, read to turn the. p. 173. l. 33. to Gods, read to God.
p. 179. l. 25. would follow, read will. p. 182. l. 5. te. read to.


