(...) OR An Answer to the questions of a Gentlevvoman (a professor in the
Antichristian Church of England) about Hearing the Public Ministers: where
it is largely discussed and proved to be sinful and unlawful.

ALSO A Just Apology for the way of Total Separation (Commonly but falsely
called Brownisme) That it is the truth of God, though lightly esteemed in the
eyes of the blind world.

With A Challenge to Dispute with them publicly before King and Counsel: to
prove whatsoever J said at the Pillery against them. Viz. That the Calling of
them all is Jure Diabolo: Even from the Devil himself.

By me JOHN LILBURNE. Close Prisoner in the Fleet for the Cause of Christ.

JOHN 10. Ver. 27.5. My Sheep hear my voice. For they know not the voice of
strangers. Printed in the year of hope, of ENGLANDS purgation, and the
Prelates dissolution. ANNO 1639.

The Publisher to the Reader.
COURTEOUS READER:
IT pleases the Lord in this latter age of the world to give us sundry helps,
whereby the man of sin, (with all that bloody Crew) is more and more
discovered: and Gods elect lead (as it were) by the hand out of Babylon.

Jf any therefore (shutting their eyes against the light) remain
notwithstanding under the yoke of Antichrist: they must make account to feel
for it, the sorer and heavier wrath of God.

Touching this Treatise what it is, I shall leave it to thy trial and censure,
and as thou find profitt by the reading thereof, so bless God for it, and
be ready to communicate the good which thou receivest, unto the profitt of
others. Farewell and pray for me.

Who is thy truly loving friend and Countrie-man.

Alvvayes give praise to God, and let him have the glory of all.
KInd and Loving Christian Friend; J kindly salute you in our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, Beseeching him, that his enlightening spirit, the Spirit of Truth,
may both now and ever be with you, and remain with you, and all those that
desire to serve and worship God, in all his commandments, according to his
revealed will, and not according to men's precepts and devices, which is odious
and abominable to him; Math. 15.9. Col. 2. Gal. 4.9.10. Esaias. 66.3.

But now to give an answer to that which you desire, J say, and that in the
words of truth, that the thing, as it is to me expressed, is very false, and
therefore I have wrong done me by them that do report it; and I would desire
you to know of my respected Friend the party that told you who they are that
did report it.

It seems they say, that I have said, that I would as soon hear the devil,
as Doctor Stoughton, or M: Walker, which thing is very false, for I never said
it, nor meddled with any particular persons; But yet thus much J have said, and
still do affirm and maintain, and will at all times be ready to make it
good, and seal it with my blood: That the Prelates all of them are Limbs of
the Beast, spoken of Rev. 13 2. and also, that all those Officers and
Ministers, that are made by them, are all of them Antichristian; the best as
well as the worst; And we have as good warrant to hear or give ear to the
worst, as well as the best; For I proved in my speech, that the best of the
Ministers calling is as bad as the vvorst of them; for they are all sent by the
Prelates, Christ's professed and known enemies, and they do preach by virtue
of their instituting of them, into the Office of Preisthood, unto whose power
they submit and take an Oath of Canonical odedience; And this do the best
among them, (as well as the worst) that take upon them a Parochial chardge,
for they are not sent from Christ, to preach the Gospel, or by virtue of his
power, which he has left in the bodies of his particular (not National)
Churches, to choose or ordain Officers to preach the Word; But by virtue of
Antichrists power and authority, from whom they have as really their calling
and power given them to preach, as those Officers that were ordained and
instituted in the New Testament to preach Christ's Gospel, had their power from
him; and this ere long you shall see fully proved, though I be never hereafter
able to set pen to paper.

Some thing concerning this I said in my speech, as in it you may read, but it
was but a little for the maine thing and strength of my Argument, was behind,
which I could not make known, by reason of the Gagg; But J look and expect to
come there again, or to a worse place; and by the strength and might of my
God; I will, come life, come death; speak my mind freely and courageously;
for I am studying to fit my self for it, and I doubt not but by the might of
the Lord of Hosts, who is my strength and refuge, to read them such a Lecture,
that shall make the Beast roar, and blaspheme the God of Heaven for madness,
though I be hewn in pieces when I have done; For I fear neither the Devil,
nor his Agents the Prelates, in this cause of my God, and the Lord has
sheltred me under the shadow of his wings, Psalm. 91. under whose protection I
am secure and safe from all danger and harm, for though it seize upon me, yet
shall it not overcome me, therefore will I not fear what man can do unto me,
for God is my salvation, I will trust, and not be affrayde, for the Lord
Jehovah is become my salvation, Esaias. 12.2. Exodus 15 2.

I have in part, in a brief way, since I was whipped, declared my mind and
judgment to some friends, because I did fear false reports, and I am always
ready, according to the command of the Holy Ghost, to give an answer to every
man that shall ask me a reason of the hope that is in me, with meekness and
fear, 1 Pet 3 15.

And J now desire to impart a little of my mind unto you, but for my own part
I will persuade no man to believe me, nor no man whatsoever, but only to
believe Jesus Christ, speaking in the Scripture, it being the entire and
absolute rule of Faith, and that unerring touchstone, that is able to try gold
from dross, neither would I have any to take upon them the profession of that
way, the truth of which I am fully convinced off; and am able to any man
breathing for my judgment to give a reason, and grounded answer; But for
others my advice is to them, as one wishing well to the souls of all my Fellow
Brethren and Sisters, Fellow heirs of the same Kingdom with me, that they
would not take up things lightly and slightly, but labor to get inward
principles in their own souls.

And to get a ground and bottom for their own spirits, for these things they
profess and hold, that so they may not build upon the sand, but upon the
unmovable Rock, the Lord Jesus Christ, that shall never be shaken, that so
they may, though all the power of darkness set themselves against them, yet
that they may cleave close to God, and our Savior Christ, and the purity of
his Gospel, for we must look for fanning and sifting, and for the fiery
trial; therefore let us sit down and reckon, what it will cost us, and if we
be not willing to lose all for his sake, yea and to hate all even Father and
Mother, riches and life, etc. if they stand in our way to keep us from him, we
are not worthy of him. Math. 10.37. and 16.24. Mark. 8 34. Luke 9.23.24. and
14.26.27.

And for my own part, the Lord himself has so firmly by his own
enlightening Spirit so fully convinced me, and settled my soul so unmoveably in
his truth, that I assuredly know, that all the power in Earth, yea and the
gates of Hell it self shall never be able to move me or prevail against me,
for the Lord who is the worker of all my works in me and for me, has founded
and built me upon that sure and unmovable foundation the Lord Jesus Christ,
and I know if ten thousand deaths for my conscience and the cause of my God,
(for which with courage and rejoicing I now bear witness to, and am close
prisoner in bonds, lying day and night in Fetters of Jron, both hands and
legs) should be inflicted upon me, I should sing, rejoice and triumph in them
all; For my God makes me glory in my tribulation, and my soul is filled so
full of that sweetness and joy, that it finds in my God alone that my tongue
and pen is never able to the full to express and utter it, (to his praise I
desire to speak it,) and I do believe, that it is not possible for any man in
any condition whatsoever (whose neck in the best does stoop to the yoke of
Antichrist) to have his heart and spirit elevated and lifted up above it self
in that high degree, with spiritual joy and comfort, divine and heavenly
strength and supportation that mine is, for the Holy Ghost says, they have no
rest night nor day who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receives
the mark of his name; And I do believe it to be true, as I am able to speak
by my own experience; For they may have some spirit of rest and peace, and
sudden Flashes of joy and comfort, but when a storm or Tempest does arise,
they are so possessed, with base and cowardly fear and distraction of spirit,
that they are like men without hearts, and are ready to run into every hole,
to hide their heads from the face of man, a poor worm, being ready to say
(when a tempest arises) with them in the 6. Rev. 16.17. Let the Mountain and
Rock fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne,
and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who
shall be able to stand; When as on the contrary, the Righteous is as bold as a
Lion, though the wicked fly when none persueth, Prove. 28.1. and 18.10. The name
of the Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous runs unto it and are safe.

And Psalm. 91. he that dwells in the secret place of the most high, shall
abide under the shadow of the Almighty, and he shall be safe from the fear of
all danger, as the Holy Ghost there does declare; So that we see the fear and
terror that possesses the hearts and spirits of all those whose necks are
either in part or in whole under the spiritual yoke and bondage of the Beast;
And also the rest and peace, and holy security that they are in that submitt
alone to the Lord Jesus Christ, for their spiritual Lord and King; And are
willing to follow him, whersoever he goes, not loving their souls to the
death, Rev. 12. but keep close and hold fast the name and faith of Christ,
even where Satan has his Throne, Rev. 2.13. for he has said and promised unto
his people that keep close to him, because thou have kept the word of my
patience; I will also keep thee from the hour of Temptation, which shall come
upon all the World, to try them that dwell upon the Earth, Rev. 3.10. And this
have I found by experience, since the Lord in great mercy and rich loving
kindness, by his strength and power enabled me to withdraw my soul totally
and finally from the greatest spiritual yoke and bondage, that ever any
mortal man groaned under, namely the spiritual yoke and bondage of the
Beast, or Roman State, unto which, whosoever is hated of the Lord, and does not
belong unto him, do submitt and yield, Rev. 9.4. and 12.7.9. and 13.8. But the
Lord from all eternity has loved me with his everlasting love, has delivered
my soul from it, and set me at liberty, and in a large place, and has given
me rest and ease, and has put a song of prayer and thanksgiving into my mouth,
unto the Lord of glory and the Lamb that sitts upon his Throne, who is blessed
for ever and ever, and my God has filled my soul so full of Heavenly matter,
that had I but a current vent, I could ex tempore write an hundred Sheets of
paper to you, filled full of Heavenly expressions of the Lords goodness,
faithfulness, loving kindness and Truth, for my soul is ravished with that
fullness, sweetness, aimeablenesse, and beautifulness, that I find in my
God; Oh that my soul were altogether with him, that I might be satisfied with
his fullness, and might solace my soul face to face, which I most confidently
know I shall in his due time; But, Oh I say again and again, that J were with
him, for he has crucified the World, and all things here below unto me, and
has enabled me to account and esteem all things besides himself, as dung and
dirt, not being worthy of casting any affectionate eye upon them, Philip.
3.8.9. and he has pitched my soul upon himself, as a naked and a single
object, in whom alone the quintessence of delight, beauty, and satisfaction is
to be had, enjoyed, and possessed, and for my shackled condition that I am in,
it is most sweet and (...) I am as merry, yea more cheerful, then ever I was
in any condition in my life, and can sleep as soundly in my Boots and Irons,
as Peter did between the two Soldiers, when he was in prison, who when the
Angel of the Lord came to him, to deliver him; He was feign to smite him,
before he awaked, Acts 12.6.7. And I do sing Psalms, and J am as merry as
Paul and Sylas were, when they were in the Stocks, and in prison, who sung
Psalms and Praises at midnight, so that the Prisoners heard them, Acts
16.24.25. for the Lord has so strengthened me with divine power and strength,
for the Lord of Hosts is my confidence; And in the Lord Jehovah there is
everlasting strength; And there is no torments, that the greatest Tyrans in the
World can inflict upon me, that can make me miserable, sad, or discontented,
for I know all my torments make but way for a greater degree of glory, which I
am confident one day I shall be possessour off, and J long with Paul to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, not out of any trouble or burdensomenesse,
that I find or see in my present afflicted distressed condition, (according to
the flesh) but to me it is sweet and joyful in the Lord, and I know when the
Lord has fully tried me, and done his good pleasure with me, and by me, I
shall come out of the Furnace purified and cleansed from my dross filth and
corruption, Job 23. for the Lord already in part has refined me, but not with
Silver, for he has chosen me in the furnace of affliction, Esaias. 48.10.

This by way of Preface or Apology for my self; And now J come to the matter.

And for my own judgment, it being matter concerning the glory and praise of
my God, although I know it will be very unpleasing unto the Pallets of many,
yea of my near and dear friends, from whom I have received expressions of
love and kindness, whose loving affection, it may be, may be turned to a
distaste to my person, and my suffering, which if it be, J shall patiently
bear it, for the sincerity of my heart is known unto God, who is the searcher
of the heart, and the tryer of the reins, Rev. 2.23. Ier. 11.20. and 17.10.
And I will call him to record, and to bear witness, that the glory of his
great and holy name, is the single object of all my actions, undertakings, and
proceedings; And if I shall incur hatred therefore from my friends, J shall
comfort my self with that which my savior has said, which is that he came
not to send peace on Earth, but a sword, for I am (says he) to set a man at
variance against his Father, and the daughter against her Mother, and the
daughter in Law against her Mother in Law, Math. 10.34.35. Luke 12.49.51.53.
and with that which Paul comforted himself with, if he could approve his heart
to God, he did not care what man said of him, for says he, do J seek, to
please men, for if J yet please men, I should not be the servant of Christ,
Gal. 1.10.

But now for my judgment, for my own part, if I should never hear a Sermon
while I live, yet I should never dare to hear one from any man, good or bad,
that is made a Minister by the Prelates, or any of their Creatures, or by
virtue of any of their muddy Antichristian Laws, neither dare I have any
spiritual communion with them; so long as they stand in their calling, in
regard I am persuaded that he that hears them sins, having no warrant out
of the book of God to do it, and by undeniable consequence I will prove it,
that whosoever hears them so long as they Officiat by virtue of their calling
and power, which they have received from the Bishops, to preach, does hear the
Devil; for the Holy Christ says, Rev. 13 4. the subjects of the Kingdom of
the Beast worshipped the Dragon, (that is to say the Devil, which gave power
unto the Beast, and they worshipped the Beast, saying, who is like to the
Beast, who is able to war with the Beast.

Now, let us not think that they did fall down to the Devil himself, and do
homage to him, face to face, for we never read of any that did this, but the
Holy Ghost does here declare, that all those that stoop or yield in the least
to the Laws of the Beast does worship and serve the Devil, from whom he has
received his power.

But all the Ministers do stoop unto is Laws, which none of them are able to
deny, there o^e they are as really his servants and subjects, all the time they
do so a they can be.

And we have no ground out of the Scripture to judge better of them;

As they are not the subjects and servants of Christ, that intyrely do not
stoop unto his Laws and Scepte^^; For is he, or can he be said to be a
subject to the King of England, that stoopes, submi^ts, and yields to the Laws
and Scepter of any other King, his greatest and professedst enemy upon the
Earth.

No, without doubt; But they do stoop to the Laws of Antichrists Kingdom,
who is the greatest and professedst enemy that ever Jesus Christ had in the
World, as I will be ready to prove to the faces of the best of them in any
public disputa^ion.

Therefore they are real and truly his servants; for his servant you are to
whom you obey.

Now, Jesus Christ says to his Disciples, he that hears you, hears me, and
he that hears me hears him that sent me.

So on the contrary, he that hears the Ministers, hears the Prelates that
made and sent them. And he that hears the Prelates, hears the Pope, that
authorized and gave them their authority; And he that hears the Pope, hears
the Devil, that gave him his power; So that I say we can not partake with them
in hearing, or in any administrations of Gods sacred things, but we must of
necessity partake of their calling and institution, by virtue of which they
officiat and administer; And that J prove from Paul's words in the first of the
Cor. 10.18. Are not they which eat of the Sacrifice partakers of the Altar;
Even so I say, are not they which partake of their administration, partakers of
their institution? Yea without doubt or question. Now, for their institution,
it is not from God (as J will maintain against them all) therefore we are not
to hear them, nor in the least to partake with them or their administration.

And for your better satisfaction seriously read and weigh the 10. of John:
And to me it seems so clear and plain, that I do not doubt but that we are
not to hear any Ministers but those that are made by virtue of the Laws and
power of Christ, which he has left to his Church, in his last will and
Testament, which Laws are unalterable and unchangeable to the end of the
World, Acts 1.3. 1 Timothy 6.13. 2 Timothy 13.14.15.17. Heb. 3.1.2.6. Math. 28.19.20.

But they are not made by virtue of the Laws and power of Christ, but by the
Laws and Authority of Antichrist, and therefore we are not to hear them, for
says Christ, my Sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me,
and a stranger they will not follow, but will fly from him, for they know not
the voice of strangers; Here you see Christ lays it down, as a sign and a
mark to know his Sheep by, that they will not hear, nor give ear to false
Shepherds.

But so are all the Ministers, for they come not in by the door, but by a false
power and Authority; namely, by the power of the man of sin, Christ's
implacable enemy.

Therefore it is not Lawful for any of Gods people, to hear them; For when
the Prelates by virtue of his power, bids them, and Authorize them to preach,
they do preach; And when they command them to hold their peace, they are
silent, and let their flock run at random, when as a good and true Shepherd
lays down his life for his Shepherd.

Object. But many object and say, it is true, that their calling as it comes
from the Prelates, is unlawful, but they have an inward calling, for they are
fitted for the work of the Ministry.

Answ. To which J answer and say, I read of no inward calling, that any of
those Officers had, that Christ or his Apostles did institute in the New
Testament, for the Apostles had their calling from Christ, and the other
Officers had their calling from the Churches, where they themselves were
members, and over which, by the Laws and power of Christ, they were made
Officers.

But if the Ministers of Antichrist have an inward calling, I desire to see it
proved by the Scripture; And as for their qualifications and fitenesse for the
Ministry. J deny, and say, that they are not qualified according to the
command of Christ, by Paul to Timothy and Titus; And I do affirm and will
maintain it, that no man ought to be Elected for the work of the Ministry,
unless he have all those qualifications that is by the Holy Ghost set down in
the 1 Timothy 3. and the first of Titus.

Now, there is none of them, yea the best among them, that has the
qualification for a Bishop, a Pastor, or an Elder, which is all. One must not
be a Novice, least being lifted up with pride, he fall into the condemnation of
the Devil. Also he must hold fast the faithful word as it has been taught,
that he may be able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and convince the
gainesayers; But none of them have either of these, for they are so far from
being able to convince gainesayers by sound Doctrine, that they are but novices
in many things, and either wilfully or ignorantly are blind of the naked ways
of God, being darkened with the smoke which came out of the bottomless pit,
Rev. 8.2, and J will justify it to the faces of the best of them, that they are
enemies to the Kingly Office of Jesus Christ, and the right government of his
Church, both in practice and in judgment; and therefore are not fit (take them
at the best) to be Pastors over Christ's Sheep; Neither can any of them say as
Paul did, Acts 20. That he was clear of the blood of all men, in that he
ceased not to declare unto them, the whole Counsel of God, which every
faithful Pastor ought to do; but none of them have done it, nor are able, for
as I said before, they are ignorant, of it, and are enemies to it, as they do
witness in their Pulpits, where they preach against the naked and pure ways
of God, and the Professors of it, but none of them dare to enter the list of a
Public set dispute.

Object. I but say others they preach the Word of God, and that cannot be
corrupted by their calling, but remain the Word of God still, therefore we may
Lawfully hear it from them.

Answ. I answet, they preach the outside of the Word, it is true, but the
marrow and pith of it, they meddle but little with, for the best of them are
yet ignorant of the marrow, of many choice Truths of God, for their
understandings are so overspred with the Foggie Mists of the dark and black
Kingdom of Antichrist, that they want spiritual eyes to see it; And behold it
until the Lord in mercy if so he please to open their eyes; And what though
they do preach the Word, they have no authority from God so to do, if they
have, let them stand up and show it, and prove it; Not with human learning, but
by the authority of the Scripture.

It is true, the Devil himself preached Christ, and made a glorious
confession of him, saying: I know that thou art Jesus the Christ, the Son of
God, Mark 1.24.

This if it had come from one of Christ's own servants, it had been most
acceptable, and well pleasing to him, but in regard it comes from the Devil,
he will not own it, but commands him to hold his peace.

It is very true, the Word of God is good and sweet, and a comfort to the
souls of his servants, if it be preached by any that has authority from
Christ, we are bound to hear it; But the best of the Ministers have no
authority or warrant from Christ to preach the Word, nor we to hear it from
them, John. 10.2.3.5. Hoses 9.4. Psalm. 50.16.

But to the wicked says God, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or
that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth.

Now, look upon all of them to be such as God here speaks off, in regard of
their institution and standing, being visible members of Antichrists Kingdom;
I do not, nor will not meddle with their persons, nor no man's else, but only
with their sinful and wicked station and standing; Which as I am a subject to
Christ's Kingdom, and a prisoner in bonds and fetters of Iron, for his cause, I
am bound in conscience for to do it, Judge. 5 23. Curse ye Meroz (says the
Angel of the Lord) yea curse ye bitterly the inhabitants therein, because they
came not forth, to the help of the Lord against the mighty Yea the Spirit of
God says; That they are blessed and happy that takes Babels Bratts, and dash
them against the stones, Psalm. 137.8.9.

But they are all Sons and Children of Spiritual Babell or Babylon, Rev.
11.8. and 14.8 and 18.2.

Now, by virtue of their being members of his Kingdom, we have no ground or
warrant out of the Word of God, to hear them, for it is impossible to be a
servant and a subject both to Christ and Antichrist; But they are subjects to
Antichrists Kingdom; Therefore cannot be said truly to be subjects and
servants to Christ.

For is not he properly a subject to the King of Spain, that submits to his
Laws, and bears Office under him, by virtue of his authority; And can such
men, while they do so; be said and truly to be esteemed to be subjects to the
King of England, unto whose Laws they do not submit; Without doubt they
cannot. Even so can the Ministers or Priests (for so is their institution) who
submit unto the Laws of Antichrist, and bear Office under him, and execute
their Office by virtue of his power and Authority, and therefore are his
Servants and Subjects, and cannot truly be said to be the Servants and
Subjects of Christ, unto whose Laws they do not submit.

Therefore we are not to hear them, or to have any thing to do with them,
Rev. 18.4. 2 Cor. 6.17.

Again, Mount Sion, that is to say, the Church of God is the place which God
has chosen, and has promised his presence and blessing, Psalm. 132.13.14.15.
and 88.17. 2 Cor. 6.16. Now, I would know where any of his people has any
warrant to seek his presence and blessing any where but where he has promised
it; But he never promised it in the visible Assemblies of Antichrists Kingdom;
Therefore we have no ground or warrant to seek it there, or come there at all;
Much more concerning this I have and am able to say, but I am above measure
straightned, for want of a fitting opportunity; And therefore for your further
satisfaction, repair to the perusal of a little thing, called a declaration,
where the people of God are to seek his presence and blessing, only in Mount
Sion, the City and Church of God, Psalm. 46 4. and 48.1.2.8. Esaias 60.14. and
62.11.12 and not in the Assemblies of Antichrist, being Cages of unclean
Birds, Rev. 18 2. Esaias. 13.21.22.

Again, I see no ground or warrant, that any of Gods people have, to have any
spiritual communion with them, in regard God has commanded his people, at all
times, very strictly, that they shall have no communion with Idolaters, nor
their Idols, as the whole Book of God does declare; and I desire you to read
the seventh of Deuteronomy: and there you shall see Gods strict command to that end.
But the Ministers all of them are Idolaters, yea Idols themselves; Therefore we
must have no communion with them. Now, that they are Jdolaters, is as clear as
the Sun, that shines at noonday; And that they are Idols, I am able to prove
it to their faces, For an Idol is nothing else according to the Scripture but
a Creature or Creatures set a part, or instituted to worship God with or by,
which he himself never ordained for that end and purpose; But such are all the
Prelates Ministers, for they were never of his ordaining or instituting, but of
his greatest enemies, the Pillars of Antichrists Kingdom, by virtue of whose
power they officiate. Therefore they are Idols, whom all Gods people, that are
faithful Soldiers and liege Subjects, ought to be a means, and a help, to
root up and pull down.

Now, this definition of an Idol is not only according to the Scripture, but
is given by the foundest Nonconformists themselves, as you may read in their
Books, where they have strongly proved the Surplice, and the Cross in
Baptism, and kneeling in the Act o^ receiving the Communion; And the rest of
the Prelates instituted sacred Ceremonies, as they call them, saying in their
Reasons before the Common Prayer, for the retaining of some Ceremonies, and the
abolishing of others, that they are apt to stir up the dull mind of man, to
the remembrance of some duty to God, by some special signification, whereby he
might be edi^yed.

Now, if you read the Scots Dispute, which was printed at Leyden, in Holland,
the last Summer, you shall there find strong reasons, to prove the Ceremonies
Idols; and his maine Argument is, because they are not of Gods institution, but
of sinful man's ordaining.

Also that No^le and worthy Doctor (whom I so much honor and respect) Doctor
Bastwicke in his Book, called The Vanity and Impiety of the old Lettany, does
prove it to be an Idol, yea and calls it a damnable soule-murthering Jdoll;
And that upon the same ground, because it is not of Gods us of man's
institution, without any ground or war^ant from God; and therefor is an Idol,
and is to be detested as an abominable Idol. Now, what they say of the
Ceremonies, and of the Service, the same I say o^ the Prelates, and all the
Ministers that are made by them and have their calling from the Bishops, they
are Creatures set a part to worship God with or by, but were never of his
instituting, or by virtue o^ his power, but by man's institution, and by virtue
of the power of the greatest enemy that ever Jesus Christ had, or his Kingdom
ever had on Earth, namely Antichrist, or the Kingdom of the Beast, Rev. 9
3.7.10.11. and 13.6.7.16.17. and 12 6.7.15.17.

And therefore they are Idols, whom so long as they stand in their places and
callings under the spiritual Antichristian authority, which they all submit to
and subject themselves to, I shall not dare to have any spiritual communion
with them, either in public or private, for what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness; Or what communion has light with
darkness; And what Concord has Christ with Beliall? Or what part has he that
believes with an Infidel? Or what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols? Surely, none at all. Wherefore come you out from among them, and be you
separate, says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you,
and will be a Father unto you, and you shall be my Sons and Daughters, says
the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.14 to the end. Esaias. 62.11. Ier. 51.6 7 Rev. 18.4 5.

Besides this, though J am, and do respect them as men, being the Creatures of
God, and do reverence them as they are privy Counselors, and Head-members of
the State; though it be not suitable in the least to their false pretended
spiritual calling. But as they are Bishops and Officers in the Kingdom of the
Beast, my knee and submission and reverence, shall by the strength of my God,
be as little to them, as Mordecay was to proud Haman, who was King Abashueros,
Chief Favorite, being above all the Princes that were with him, Hest. 3.1. Y^
Mordecay would not so much as bow to him, or do him any reverence, verse the
3. though it do procure me as much wrath from the^, as it did Mordecay from
Haman of whom the Holy Ghost says he was full of wrath, seeing Mordecay would
not reverence him, Verse. 5.6. Neither will I ever give bail to them, or part
with any money, either to them or any of their Creatures, for any thing
whatsoever, unless it be merely for Temporal and Earthly things, in regard I
do believe it is the duty of all Gods people, who desire to glorify him in
their lives and conversations, and to shine as so many burning Lamps in the
midst of a perverse and crooked generation, as they ought and should do;
Neither to bow finger, knee, or hatt unto any of them, or to do them any
reverence, as they are Bishops and Chief Pillars in the Kingdom of
Antichrist, for by virtue of their calling and Office, they are the deadly and
implacable enemies of God, and are so many pernicious and damnable Idols (by
which God is exceedingly dishonored) set up by the Devil in the Kingdom of
the Beast, Rev. 9 3 and 13.2.4. and 16.13.14. And I can prove it, that it was
as Lawful for the 3 Children, to worship or bow to Nebuchadnezars Idol, as
for Gods people to bow and do homage to them.

And for my own part, if they require of me any such, my answer shall be to
them, as the 3 Children was to the King. Dan 3.16.17.18. Be it known to you
Bishops and Doctors, I fear you not; or the God whom I serve and fear, is
able to deliver me out of your hands, and from your Tyrannising cruelty; But
if he do not, be it known unto you, Oh ye Prelates, that I will not serve
you, nor worship you, nor yield nor submit in any spiritual things unto you;
And if I were at liberty, I would profess those Truths of God surely without
fear, which he himself has made known unto me; And if J were at any time
taken by any of their Officers, I would not go to prison with them, unless
they carried me by force; Yet if it were the meanest Officer in the Kingdom
that took me, that were made an Officer by virtue of the Kings Authority and
power, I would submit unto him, and go with him, whether he would have me, for
I know the Kings Authority is from God; And if I should disobey it, I should
disobey God, and sin against God, and break his Command, Romans 13. And
therefore I will obey him, his Laws, and all those that bear his Authority,
in all things they command or enjoyne me; without any the least resistance at
all, heartily from my heart, either actively or passively; for if they command
me any thing that is not contrary to the Word of God, I will obey them
actively; But if they command me any thing that is dishonorable to God or his
Truth, I dare not in the least obey them actively, but say with the Apostle,
whether it be fit to obey God or Men, judge ye, for we ought to obey God
rather then Men, Acts 5.29. Yet I will submit my body to them, and suffer
cheerfully, without any grudging any thing they shall inflict upon me, for I
do hold it unlawful for any of Gods people, in their greatest Oppression by
the Majestrate, to rebel or to take up any Temporal arms against them,
whether the Oppression be in Spiritual or Temporal things, but only to pray
and make use of Gods two edged Sword, Heb. 4.12. Rev. 19.15. and wait upon
with patience for redress and deliverance, and to seek unto him for strength,
that they may willingly and courageously suffer any Terrors or Torments that
they will inflict upon them, for standing close to God, and his naked Truth and
cause.

But to the Kingdom of the Beast, these members of which the Prelates are,
will I never stoop by the might of the Lord of Hosts, nor have any spiritual
communion with them, for the Lord has expressly commanded me and all his people
to have nothing to do with Idols, nor with Idolaters, 1 Cor. 10.14. 1 John
5.21. Exodus 23.32. Deuteronomy. 7.1.2.3.4.5. and 12.3. Now, they are the greatest
Idolaters that ever were in the world, and the most pernicious Idols, that are
upon the Earth. Rev. 9.20. and cap: 17. for they have a golden Cup put in their
hands, it is full of abomination and filthiness, and with it they dazzle the eyes
of the world, and make it to commit close and hidden fornication, and
Idolatry, which is the greatest and most dangerous Idolatry that is, for they
cover their wickedness and deceiveablenesse over with the Name of the Lamb,
but for all that do the deeds of the Dragon. Rev. 13.11. John 8.44. But if
they professed Idolatry openly to the eyes of the World, the people would
detest them, but they do it closely and covertly, and therefore are not so
easily discerned, but deceive very many, Math. 24.5. And therefore the Beasts
Kingdom is called, as it is indeed, the Mystery of iniquity, 2 Thessalonians 2.7.

Now, J will maintain it, that the Kingdom of the Beast is the greatest Idol
that ever was in the World, and the greatest plague that ever God sent into the
World, as the Revelation of Saint John does declare, and as appears by the
expressions of the Spirit of God, in the 8. Chapter, where we may read, that
when the 4. First Angels had sounded their Trumpets, mighty and horrible
plagues then followed them, worse and more great were to come after, as
appears by the vehement expressions and calling out of the Holy Ghost, with a
loud voice, Verse the last; Saying, Woe, Woe, Woe to the inhabitants of the
Earth (reitterating 3 times together) by reason of the other voices of the
Trumpet of the three Angels which are yet to sound. For why the fifth Angel in
the first Verse of the next Chapter sounded, then followed a mighty and
horrible plague to all the inhabitants of the world; The like whereof was never
heard off before, and that is the smoke that came out of the bottomless pit,
which was that horrible darkness, and spiritual blindness and sottish
ignorance that seized upon the World, dureing the time of the Beasts Kingdom,
which was so great, that the visible face of a Church of Christ could not be
found upon the Earth, for the heavens departed as a scroll together, Rev. 6.14.

And out of this smoke or darkness came the Locusts the beasts officers or
Clergy, which are a multitude in number, there being in the Kingdom of
Antichrist at this day above an hundred several Officers; Whereas in the
Kingdom of Christ there is but 5. Namely, Pastor, Teacher, Elder, Deacon, and
Widow, Romans 12.7.1. Ephesians. 4.11. Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.1.2. and 5. Titus 1.5.7.

Again, the Spirit of God pronounces another woe to the inhabitants of the
Earth and of the Sea, for the Devil is turned down unto you, having great
wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time, the like expression we
read not of in the whole Book of God, nor that there were any such plagues
since the beginning of the World; As those were which came along with the
Kingdom of the Roman Beast, as the Stories of all ages, since his beginning,
is able to witness and prove, for men worshipped the Devil, and committed
such horrible wickedness, for which God sent such mighty plagues upon them, as
the like before was never heard off before in the world, as the whole Book of
the Revelation does witness; Therefore of all Idols that ever were in the
World, Gods people have most cause of all to detest, abhor, and abominate the
Idolaters and the Idols in the Kingdom of the Beast, and whosoever the Lord
loves he will deliver from them, Rev. 20.4. But those that are his enemies, and
hated of him, shall continue in subjection to it Rev 9.4. and 13.8. and
14.9.10.11. and 19.20. Pro. 2.18.19. and 5.5. and 7.27. and 9.18.

Now, the time of the reign and durance of the Kingdom of the Beast, in the
11. Rev. 2. is said to be 42 months; and in the 12. Rev. 14. it is called a
time times and half a time, which is three years and a half; And in the
first Verse of this Chapter, it is termed to be 1260 days, which is just 42
months, reckoning 30 days to every month, and it makes also three years and
a half, accounting 12 Months to every year; and this is the time of the
Reign of the Beast, or the durance of Antichrists Kingdom; Which if we reckon
each day for a year, as the Lord himself in Scripture does, as we may read
when the Spies that went from the Tents of Israel, at the Lords command, to
search the Land of Canaan, which they were a doing 40 days; And at their
return they gave out an evil report of it, which made the people to sin and
rebel against God, and not to give credit to his word, Oath and promise, which
was to bring them into the Land of Canaan, to give it to them, notwithstanding
the greatness and potency of the Heathen, for the Lord himself had promised
to cast them out, but because they believed him not, but rebelled against him,
fearing the strength and power of the Heathen, the Lord would make them to
wander in the barren and desert Wilderness 40 years. For says he, after the
number of the days, in which ye searched the Land even 40 days, each day for
a year, shall you bear your iniquities, even 40 years, and you shall know my
breach of promise, Numb. 14.34. Ezekiel: 4.5.6. where God says thus to the
Prophet: J have laid upon thee the years of iniquity, according to the number
of the days, three hundred and ninety days, so shall thou bear the iniquity
of the House of Israel; and when thou have accomplished them, lie again on thy
right side, and thou shall bear the iniquity of the house of Judah 40 days, I
have appointed each day for a year. So that if we expound the 1260. by these 2
places of scripture, reckning as God him self does each day for a year; which
I verily believe is the right meaning of the Holy Ghost; We shall find that
the Beasts Kingdom shall endure from the beginning to the end 1260. years;
For I see no ground that these places should be expounded literally for three
years and a half, and no more, for it is impossible that Antichrist should
do all these strange things, in so short a time, that is said, he he shall do
and fulfill, therefore without doubt it must be expounded each day for a year,
for the man of sin was a working in the Apostles time, but the Emperor who
let him, kept him out of his seat till he was taken away, 2 These. 2.7. Now,
during the time of Antichrist, the Holy City, or the true Church of God, is
to be trodden under foot, Rev. 11.2. and to be in a sad and afflicted
condition, and to be persecuted by the beast, and the members of his state and
Kingdom all that time, Rev. 13.7.15. and Chapt. 12. though now and then she
should have some breathing and refreshing times; And when Antichrists Kingdom
grows to an end, (which blessed be God does hasten apace,) the Foggie Mists of
darkness, blindness and ignorance, which is the smoke that the Holy Ghost
says, came out of the bottomless pit; Rev. 9. shall in some measure be
dispeld, and the Beams of Truth and spiritual light, shall break and shine
out, as is plain in the 10.14, and 16. Chapters; for then the Book of Life
the Holy Scripture is opened, which in former ages lay altogether hid, and in a
manner shutt up in obscurity and darkness, as appears plainly out of the 11.
Chapt. Therefore let us not wonder, nor think it strange that the eyes of
spiritual understanding, (which is to know, see and embrace the naked Truths
of God,) is opened of so few of the great and famous men, in the eye of the
World, but continue still enemies to the bare and naked Truths of God, for the
Kingdom of the Beast is not yet destroyed, and the smoke of the bottomless
pit has so darkened the Sun and the air, that the spiritual eyes of few
men's understandings, are opened to see and take notice of the intyre Truths of
God; yet notwithstanding let us take heed, that we be not offended and stumble
to our destruction; Luke. 20.17.18. 1 Pet. 2.8. at the naked ways and clear
and pure Truth of Christ, because they are but few and mean in the estimation
of the World, that does embrace them and profess them, for the Church of
Smirna, though she were but poor and mean in the eye of the World, yet she
was rich in Gods account, because she kept close to his naked ways and Truths,
Rev. 2.9. whereas on the contrary proud and haughty Laodicea, who was full of
outward riches and treasures; And wanted nothing that might make her glister
and shine in the eyes of the world, yet notwithstanding is odious in the sight
of God, because she was luke warm and neither hot nor cold, for he threatens
to spew her out of his mouth; do you your self make the application; Likewise
let us take notice of that thanksgiving, which Christ gives to his Father: J
thank thee oh Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hidd these
things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to Babes, even so
Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight, Math. 11.25.26.

The naked purity and Truth of the Gospel of Christ, is too homely a thing,
for the great learned Doctors of the world, to embrace, stoop and submitt
unto; for Christ has said, that the professors of it shall be hated of all
men, yea of their parents, kindred, and Friends, Luke 21.16.17. Mark 13.12.
and are accounted as Sheep to the slaughter, all the day, 1 Cor. 4. whose
condition is to be afflicted and persecuted here by the men of the world, John
15.18.19, and 16.2.^.33. Heb. 12.4.6.7.8. for there must and will be to the end
of the World enmity between the seed of the woman and the seed of the
Serpent, Genesis 3.15. and therefore false Teachers and seducers, though they come
in the name of Christ, and preach part of his Gospel Math. 7.5, and 24.5. yet
they are enemies to Christ, the purity of his Truth and people, though they
make a flowrishing show in the flesh, yet because they love not the Cross of
Christ, which always goes alonge, and is inseparable from the zealous and
strict profession of him and his Truth, Prove. 3.11.12. Heb. 11. Rev. 3.19. nor
will they part with their ease pleasure and fatt morsels, Esaias. 65.10, 11, 12,
nor suffer persecution with the people of God, for the Truth of God, as Moses
did, Heb: 11: 25. Therefore they will neither embrace the purity of the Truth,
nor willingly let those that would, Gal: 6: 12. Yet for all that though they
will not, yet all those that desire to approve their hearts and spirits unto
God, and to glorify him both in their lives and deaths, must not forsake his
Truth, for fear of persecution, or losing of their kindred, or Friends, Gal:
5: 11: Math: 10:33: Mark 8: 34: 38: Luke 14: 26: for here Christ himself
says, that he that loves Father or Mother, or his own life, or any thing
else more then him, shall never possess nor enjoy him, neither here nor
hereafter; For he says: He that denies him or his Truth before men, him will
he deny before his Father which is in Heaven. Therefore in regard the Gospel
of Christ, in the strict profession of it, is so mean, contemptible and
burdensome a thing in the blind and dark eyes of the World, and lies under
the reproach and ignominy of the men thereof, the great Rabbis do stumble at
it, and do not embrace it, 1 Cor: 1: 19: 20, for it is written says God, I
will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to naught the
understandings of the prudent, where is the wise, where is the scribe, where is
the disputer of this world: has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world
Isa: 29.14. and 33, 18. Oba: verse 8. Therefore in regard the great Doctors of
the world do not embrace the ways of God: the multitude stumble at them,
likewise, being ready to say with them Io: 7, have any of the Rulers or of the
Pharisees believed on him, but this people who knows not the law and are
accursed. Even so say men in these days, of the naked truths and ways of God:
do any of the Rulers or Nobles, or do the great and learned Doctors and famous
Divines: embrace and practice these strict and rugged ways, but only a
company of Brownists, who are the base and obscure fellows of the world, and
a company of foolish singular people, contemning and censuring all besides
themselves, as though none should be saved but they only.

To you: Oh ye spiritual blind people, whose understandings are darkened with
the smoke of the bottomless pit, and whose brains are intoxicated and
drunk with the glittering and gilded Cup of spiritual fornication and
abomination, of the scarlet whore Revel. 17.

To you J answer, and know you that the way to heaven is narrow and strait,
and Christ's fold and flock, but a small and little company in comparison of
the world, Math: 7.14. Luke 13.24. Also know that God has not called many wise
men after the flesh, nor many mighty, nor many noble, but God has chosen the
foolish things of this world, to confound the wise, and God has chosen the
weak things of this World, to confound the things that are mighty; and the
base things of the World, and things which are despised, has God chosen, yea
and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are; And he himself
gives the reason of it, that no flesh should glory in his presence, 1 Cor.
1.26.27.28.29. And James tells us, that God has chosen the poor of this
World, rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to
them that love him, James 2 5.

And what though the Rabbis and great Doctors be learned, yet it is but
Earthly and humane learning, which Paul had before his conversion, for he was a
Pharise brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, a great learned Doctor of the Law
had in reputation among all the people: Acts 5.34, and 22.3. But yet when he
came to the true spiritual knowledge of true spiritual learning indeed, which
is taught to all Christ's Scholars, less or more, that are brought up in his
School, he renounced his humane Schollership, and accounted it no better then
dung or dirt, Phil: 3.5.7 8.

But besides him, we read of none of the Apostles, that were learned in that
learning, which the blind world accounts learning and Schollership, for they
were all or most of them poor men, brought up in obscure and base callings
many of them being no better then poor Fishermen; yet when Christ called them,
he endued them with spiritual learning, which is the true learning indeed;
Acts 2.1. etc. And those in the new Testament, that are commended for their
learning, it was because they were filled with the gifts of the Spirit, and
were mighty in the Scriptures, John 7.38.39. Acts 18.24. 1 Cor. 12.3.7.8.10.
and 14.

By all which places of Scripture we see, that the learning which made the
Apostles famous, was not human learning, (for none of them had it but Paul, and
he renounced it,) but it was heavenly learning, which came from God, being the
gift of his Holy Spirit. And for all the rest of those which they ordained (by
the power and Authority which they had from Christ) to officiat in the
Churches, and to administer the sacred and holy things of God, to his chosen
and sanctified ones, (for none but them have true right to Christ's ordinances,)
it was spiritual knowledge, divine learning, and insight into the Scripture,
which are the gifts of the spirit of God, as is before proved; which made them
fit for those Offices, that they were chosen to by the Church, and ordained by
the Apostles, for they were not to be Novices in the Mysteries and ways of
God, but sound in the Faith, and also of a holy and Godly life and
conversation, which the Apostle calls a good report, and to have the rest of
those qualifications, which he lays down in 1 Timothy 3. and 5. Chapters, and
Titus 1. And whosoever have not these qualifications, are not fit (according
to the Apostles command there) to bear Office in the true Church, which is the
spiritual Sion, City, and House of God; Psalm. 87.2.3. and 132.13.16. Esaias.
3^.20.21. and 52.1. Heb. 12.22. Rev. 20.9, and 12.2.

Now, that Heavenly learning, and gifts of the spirit, which the Lord under the
time of the Gospel, does bestow upon his chosen and holy ones, does fulfill
the Prophesies of the Prophets in old time, who Prophesied of the same things,
Esaias. 44 3.4, and 54.13; Ier. 31; Joel 2.28; saying: And it shall come to pass
afterward, that I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and
your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your
young men shall see visions, and also upon the handmaids in those days will I
pour out my spirit.

Oh! the simplicity, sweetness and pleasantness of the ways of God, if we
had but enlightened spiritual understandings, to see, behold and look into
them, which if we had, they would ravish our souls, rejoice our spirits, and
fill our hearts full of gladness; But they are sealed and will be hid from us,
till the Lord in his rich mercy and loving kindness, be pleased to anoint our
eyes with spiritual Eye Salve, and take away these Foggie Mists of darkness
and scales of ignorance that hang upon our understandings; 1 Cor. 2. Oh! that
the Lord would be pleased to deal so graciously with us, that we might be
fools and Idiots empty and vile in our own eyes, that so we might nakedly lie
at the footstool of Jesus Christ, and seek for wisdom and spiritual
understanding, from him, and him alone, according as it is our duty and the the
command of wisdom; Prove. 1.4.8, and 9. Chapters. But alas, alas, we have
haughty hearts and proud spirits our own, and seek to be something in
ourselves, and do not labor to be weaned from all things, in our selves, as
is our duty, for we should nakedly go out of our selves; and this we shall
know to be true if ever the Lord come truly and thoroughly to instruct and
teach us in his spiritual, heavenly wisdom; It is the grief of my soul, to
see people take such pains, for that which will not profitt; And to lay out
their silver for that which is not vvorth the buying; Esaias. 55.2. Being very
zealous in professing the seeming way of God, and yet are full of ignorance and
blindness, in the true ways of God, wanting that true spiritual sanctified
knowledge, and clear insight into the Scripture, which is taught by the spirit
of God, that being true of them, which is said in Esaias. 59. That they grope for
the wall like blind men; yea and grope as if they had no eyes, stumbling at
noonday, as in the night, being in desolate places, as dead men, not knowing
that a deceived heart has turned them aside; being not able to say, that there
is a lie in their right hand, as the Prophet in another place speaks: But unto
all such in the words of the spirit of God, I say, behold all you that kindle a
fire, that compass your selves about with sparks, walk in the light of your
fire, and in the sparks that you have kindled; But says God, this shall you
have of my hands; Ye shall lie down in sorrow, Esaias: 50.10.

Because that it is a shame even in the eyes of the World, for a man to be of
no Religion; Therefore people take upon them the outward form of Religion, but
are destitute of the inward power of godliness, going on in a formal way of
Religion, with muddy, earthie, and unsanctified affections, but do not strive,
studdy and labor, as they ought to get inward principles, and true grounds in
their own souls, that so they may be built upon that sure and unmooveable
foundation, that never can be shaken; But build upon sand, hay and stubble; as
the Apostle speaks; And therefore that building will come to ruin, when
storms and Tempests does arise, as too true experience, has, does and will
manifest declare, for when men are not soundly settled in the true ways they
cannot possible have that true inward peace, which God has promised to his
faithful ones; But their spirits and hearts are full of fears and
distractions, in time of danger and calamity, I appeal even to the hearts and
spirits, even of people themselves that are not as yet convinced and settled in
the right and true ways of God.

Sure I am, I am able to speak it by my self, and do speak it in the
presence of my God, who knows my heart, and tries my reins, Rev: 2.23. that
I have found it true, by former experience; for the Spirit of God says, there
is no peace to the wicked, Esaias: 48.22, and 57.21. Now, while a man is out of
the true ways of God, and is in the by-ways of sin and wickedness, he
cannot truly according to the revealed will of God, be termed any otherwise,
then a wicked man; Though notwithstanding his soul may be precious to God; But
we are not to judge according to the secret will, but only to judge according
to the revealed will of God, for secret and hidden things belong to God, but
revealed things to us and to our children, as Moses says.

But all those that are members of the Kingdom of Antichrist, (as all that
submit to the Prelates and their Laws are) are out of the true ways and
paths of God, and are in the bye and crooked way of sin and wickedness; And
therefore we have no grounded warrant out of the Scripture, the revealed will
of God, to judge or esteem of them any otherwise but as wicked men, who in
that estate cannot be possessours of that true and settled peace and spiritual
comfort and joy, that God does bestow upon his faith sevants.

Now as for the proof of this argument, it is every branch and part of it proved
in the foregoing discourse; but on the contrary I can truly speak it, that
my soul had never before, that true rest, quietness, and sweet inward
spiritual peace: that I have been and am still possessour of, since my God
gave me strength, might and power, to shake of that Antichristian yoke, and
all communion with his laws and subjects. And my soul is filled so full of
true rest and peace, that all my torments and sufferings, and the greatness
and potency of my adversaries, the chief of which is the Devil the prince of
this world, (working in and by his son the Prelate of Canterbury) does not in
the least terrify or trouble me, but I am merry and cheerful in the midst
of the veriety of my sufferings, for the Lord makes me to triumph over them
all, and I know and believe: that if all the Devils in hell, and all his Limbs
upon the earth: do bend themselves against me to overthrow me, yet they shall
never make me sadd, for the Lord has given me a cheerful and merry heart,
which whosoever has, Solomon says, has a continual Feast, Prove: 15.15, nor
make me fear or be affrayde of them, for God is my salvation, I will trust add
not be affrayde of them, for God is my salvation, the Lord Jehovah is my
strength, and my song, he also is become my salvation, Esaias. 12 12. And though
the youths do fainte and be weary, and the young men utterly fail, yet they
that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with
wings as eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk and
not be faint, Esaias. 40.30.31. For the Lord is a strength to the poor, a
strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from
the heat, when the blast of the terrible one is as a storm against the Wall,
Esaias. 25.4. and the spirit of God says: that he will keep him in perfect peace
whose mind is stayed on him, therefore in the Lord will I trust for ever. For
in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength Esa: 26.3.4. and the Lord says, he
keeps his Church and will water it every moment least any hurt it, yea J will
keep it night and day says he. Now I am a true member of it, and therefore
have right and share of the benifitt of this promise, and assuredly know that
the Lord will so keep me (though I be in the midst of the fire) that mine
enemies shall not prevail nor hurt me, and though all men forsake me, yet he
will take care of me and provide for me: the young lions shall want and suffer
hunger, but they that love and fear the Lord, shall want no good thing.

But my loving friend, am I become your enemy (because in public) I have
spoken the truth, let not your anger and displeasure be further incensed
against me, when you have read this that is here written; J hope you would not
have me, who have begun in the spirit, to be made perfect in the flesh; Oh God
forbid that ever I should so much as entetaine the least thought of that, and
therefore know that this is my settled resolution, which the Lord has wrought
in my heart. And for this I will spend and be spent, and be pulled in ten
thousand pieces: before I will in the least deny my God, and his naked truth,
or the least tittle of that which he himself by his holy spirit has made known
unto me 1 Cor: 2.10.11.14. And further know that all my kindred according to
the flesh, has deserted and forsaken me, in my present condition. But if all
my friends (yea and Christian Brethren also) in the the world, should be
offended with me, for sticking close to my good cause, and if they should all
forsake me and leave me naked to the world, yea though I starve and rott in
Prison, (as I know I shall not) for as long as there was a piece of bread in
the bakers street, Jeremiah wanted not in his distresses, and I know Ieremiahs
God is my God, and will do the like for me as he did for him, if need require.
But if J should be like to starve in Prison, yet will I never in the least, by
the strengh and might of my God, fear my enemies, or love my friends: so much
as to deny the least of his truths, for their threatenings or cruelty, or for
their faunings, flattering, and deceivable persuasions, for I know if my
friends do leave me and forsake me: yet the Lord will stand by me, support,
and uphold me, in the midst of the greatest of my trials, distresses and
afflictions, and in due time deliver me from the mouth of the Lion, for he did
thus with Paul, when he was to answer before Nero, for his and Doctrine, at
which time all forsook him, yet the Lord stood by him and delivered him, 2 Timothy 4 16.17.18. And I know he will do so for me too, for he has filled my
soul so full of his strength, to strengthen me in my greatest trials; and of
his presence and comfort, to comfort me in my present afflictions, that I know
I can live by faith in every condition, whether in hunger of nakedness in want
scarcity, in prison or in dungeon, or exile or in banishment. And in my present
afflicted and chained condition, I have and do possess all that my soul can
desire: for I have God and Christ and his holy spirit, and have rest, true
peace and ease, and though I be in bonds and fettered with Irons, locks and
chains, yet I am at liberty, for my heart and spirit is mightily enlarged,
also I have full satisfaction, contentednes, yea the world and all, 1. Cor:
3.22.23. and for my outward condition, I have not a troubled thougt about it,
for it does not in the least molest me; for I can truly with Withers, in the
beginning of his Motto; say; Nec habeo, Nec careo, Nec curo. I neither have,
nor want, nor care for.

When I have the least, then I have a feast; and I having that, I know God will
continue it, and for my own part, I neither long for, nor earnestly desire more
dainties and varieties then there is at a feast, and I feast every day; and
therefore have no want of good things, yea did but my enemies truly know in
how rich and plentiful a condition I am in, they would bite off their fingers
ends, for to hear of my prosperous and happy estate, in the midst of their
cruelties, for I have found and got such riches since J came to Prison, that I
think the like is not to be got abroad in the world. And of all conditions
under heaven, in my judgment (a prison and an afflicted condition, for the
truth and cause of Christ, and the testimony of a good conscience) is the most
happy and rich condition: for then Gods holy ones grow in I grace and
Godliness, like tall Ceadars in Libanon, and get great and large experience of
Gods goodness, faithfulness and kindness, as I am able to speak it, by
grounded experience. And though my Adversaries are learned in the Phariseicall,
Philofical, deceiuable learning of the world Act: 5.34. and 22.3. compared with
Phill: 3.5.8. Coll: 2. and have studdied and beat their brains, in their
Universities and else where, for many years together, yet in one six months,
in a Prison and fettered condition: I have got more true spiritual learning
and and knowledge, in the mysteries of Godliness, then is amongst them all;
therefore when they sent me to Prison, they did more for me, then if they had
given me ten thousand pounds, for they have sent me to a heaven upon earth: for
so J have found it. And so far I am from being overcome, by their unheard of
cruelty (to submitt and make a base recantation, as they would have me) which
they have and do still exercise upon me, in a high degree, that I am ten times
stronger then I was at the first, and the next act of cruelty that they shall
inflict upon me, will make me twenty times as strong as I am, and the next act
of cruelty after that, will make we as immovable as Mount Sion; which cannot
be moved, but abides for ever Psalm: 125. 1. Pro. 10.30. And as the hatred and
dispeasur of my friends (which is the greater trial of the two) which J have
incurred from them by reason of my judgment and Conscience, I will carry my
self by the help and assistance of my God, like an innocent and harmless
lamb of Christ; yet will I never in the least, either for their love or
displeasure, forsake or renounce the least Truth, that the Lord in great mercy
has manifested and made known unto me; since I came to prison. For before J
was not only a Novice, but a very Idiot in the right ways of God, having muddy
affections, but wanted inward principles, having fiery zeal, but it was
without grounded spiritual knowledge; But now the Lord has made known to me,
by his spirit, the way wherein to serve and worship him; And he has made me by
his power and strength as unmovable as an Iron Pillar, or a Brazen Wall; And
if they do not in matters of Religion return unto me, J shall I hope fulfill
that command of God given unto Jeremy in the 15. Chapt: 19. that I shall not in
the least return unto any of them, though I be ever accounted by them as an
allien and stranger to them.

Again, I desire to let you know, that upon the pillary I challenged all the
Bishopps in England to dispute with them, upon this proposition, to prove the
Popes power and authority from the Devil, and that their power, authority, and
jurisdiction and calling, in which they stand at this day, is from the Pope,
and so originally from the Devil as well as his.

But these Episcopal Rabbis, who are Chief members of the Kingdom of
Darkness, had no other Argument to convince me with, then to put a Gagg in my
mouth, least I should have shaken the foundation of their Antichristian
Kingdom, publicly at the Pillary, and least the people (forsooth) should be
infected with my speeches, which in their account and estimation, are no better
then scandalous, factious, and seditious; when as indeed they were the words of
nothing but the naked Truths of God, and did not in the least meddle with the
persons of any, or with any temporal state matters, with which I have nothing
to do and say unto; And therefore they could neither factious, nor seditious,
unless the Book of God be faction and sedition, which were blasphemy once to
think; But indeed with the Prelates every thing that is said or written
against their spiritual Babilonian wicked Kingdom, is counted faction and
sedition; for indeed they have no other arguments, to maintain their tottering
and languishing Kingdom, but Clubb Law, that is to say, tyranny,
blood-thirstinesse and cruelty; But take that Argument and Weapon away, and
then a Child will disarme them, and bear them, and take away their Weapons
from them; And then to ruin and destruction will their decaying Kingdom come,
and also the Weapons that J exhorted and persuaded the people of God, to draw
out against the Prelates, those Spiritual Adversaries of the Kingdom of the
Lord Jesus Christ; was not any temporal sword or Weapon, but only the two
edged sword of Gods Word, spoken off Hebrews 4 12. And they are more described
in the sixth of the Ephesians. Also the next day after my sufferings, by Mr. Ingram
the Warden of the Fleet, I sent this Challeng in particular to the Bishop of
Canterbury, and earnestly entreated him, to deliver is to himself, that I
would dispute with him before all the Nobles and Peers of this Kingdom; And
if I were not able to prove that his calling and power is from the Devil, I
would be willing to lose my head. But I pray you, take notice of his great
learned Arguments, which he used to confute me, and defend himself, which were
these:

Let him be locked up close prisoner, in the basest place in the Wards of the
Fleet; for so run the words of the Order; and let none come at him, least he
should infect any of the people with his errors, and so be a means to bring
ruin and destruction upon his spiritual Kingdom.

Oh! Scholasticall Arguments indeed; Alas! poor man, are your eyes so sore,
that they cannot endure to look upon the Sun, or your back so gawled, that
you cannot endure to be touched; it seems they are, or else you would never
have been affrayde to have met a young man in the open field, to have tried
out the goodness of your cause, who desires no other Weapons against you but
the Bible, the Word of Life, and infallible judge of all Controversies, and the
Liberty of my Tongue, to speak freely without any gagging; And yet you are
affrayde, and dare not mere me in a public dispute; As poor, weak and
feeble men, let me speak in the words of the spirit of God unto you, Ier: 12.
if you have run with Foote-men, and they wearied you, then how can you
contend with Horses; And if in the Land of peace, wherein you trust, they have
wearied you, how will you then do in the swellings of Jordan; That is to say,
if you be affrayde of me a young beginner in the ways of God; Or if you dare
not venture in the Land of peace, where you have the Temporal power and sword
at command, to encounter with me a stripling, that never studied Philosophy,
Logic, Rhetoric, nor ever was at any University, to learn any Lattin,
Greek, or Hebrew. How will you do in the swelling of Jordan, when your
temporal power shall be taken away from you, and strange men of great parts
fall upon you, and make open spiritual war against you. Surely, you will
never be able to stand, for already your Pillars that hold up your Kingdom,
are grown so rotten; that they cannot endure to be roughly handled or touched;
And therefore without doubt ere long your building must needs fall, and
therefore look to your heads, and take notice, that I have given you warning
of it, least you repent when it is to late.

Again, upon Thursday, the 17. or 18, of May last, I was had before Sir John
Bancks, and Mr. Littleton, the Kings Attorney and Soliciter General, to be
examined what J said at the Pillory, before whom I expressed my mind so
freely, that they were willing and desirous that J should hold my peace, and
labored with me by fleshly Arguments, as Peter did with Christ, to save my
self.

But before them I made this challenge, and desired them to tell it to the
Bishops, that I would dispute with them all before my Dread Sovereign, (whose
faithful, loyal, and humble subject I am) to prove their calling so far
from being of God, (as they affirm it is) that is is from the Devil; And if I
were not able to prove it, (or if I delivered any thing in the proof of it,
that deserved death,) I would not refuse to dye, or if J held any errors, if
they could by the Authority of the Scripture, confute me, I would publicly
recant them. But their Arguments and replicatio^ to this my challeng, was: Lay
him fast in Iro^ chains, Arms, and Legs, coupled together: And let him lie in
them night and day; And let neither gold nor money, nor books, nor writings,
nor any other thing be brought unto him, from his friends; And let none come to
him, to speak with him; And if any come to ask for him, take notice of their
name and place of habitation, that so we may overcome him with cruelty and
Tyranny, and make him submit, for if we do it not by these means, he will
hardly be brought unto it; And therefore Warden of the Fleet look to it, have
a special care of him, that none come to have any talk with him, or give him
any thing, that so we may by Tyranny, Cruelty and Torments, overcome him, for
he leads away a multitude of people, and causes them to follow him; And he is
of such a lofty high spirit, that if he go on in the way, he will spoil our
tottering Kingdom; And therefore put to your best assistance, to see if by any
means you can overcome him, to get him to submit. This was the effect of their
speech.

Oh! Brave Episcopal Arguments indeed. But J pray you, did ever Christ or his
Apostles, or any of his Servants, use any such Arguments, to overcome or
convince those that were opposite to them in judgment? No verily; in the whole
New Testament, we do not read that any of Christ's servants, for spiritual
things, used any such Weapons, or Clubb Arguments as these; for they used
nothing but spiritual Weapons, to overcome there enemies; And with the sharp
two edged sword of Gods Word; Heb. 4.12. Rev: 19.15; they fought against their
Adversaries, by this and by this alone, they did overcome them; And Peter with
this one Weapon did strike down three thousand of them at a blow, and made
them yield subjection to the Kingdom of Christ; Acts 2. And we never read of
any temporal Weapon that they made use of to defend themselves against their
Opposites; For, says Paul, the Weapons of our warfar are not carnal, but
mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, and casting down
imaginations; and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into captivity every thought into the obedience of Christ;
2 Cor. 10.4.5.

These be the Weapons, and these alone of the servants of God; But on the
contrary, the servants of the Devil, their Weapons are Tyranny, cruelty, and
shedding of blood, Rev. 9. and 11.7.8. and 13.7.15.16.17. where the Holy Ghost
says, that the Beast (the chief members of whom the Prelates are) should make
war with the Saints, and should overcome them; and cause them as many as
would not worship the Image of the Beast, should be killed; and that none might
buy or sell, save he that had the mark of the Beast, or the number of his
name; And whether the Prelates do not in every thing make good this portion of
Scripture (for I know some that are excommunicated by them, and that they must
neither buy nor sell, nor eat nor drink with any man) let their constant
cruel unheard of blood-thirstie practices, declare, witness and manifest; and
therefore, Oh you Prelates, you do plainly show whose sons and servants you
are; namely, the sons and servants of the Devil himself, as Christ himself
does prove and declare who has given a lively and true description of the
childred and servants of the Devil, saying unto the Jews, who sought to kill
him, (as the the Prelates do his faithful people and servants,) who boasted
that they were Abraham's sons and Children; But, says he, if you were the
Children of Abraham, you would do the works of Abraham, but ye are of your
father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was a
murderer from the beginning and abode not in the truth, because there is no
truth in him, when he speaks a lie he speaks of his own, for he is a liar
and the father of it; John 8.39.40.

Here (Oh you Prelates) Christ does show how his people and servants may
assuredly know you to be sons and servants of the devil; for he describes and
sets you forth by two marks; first, the Devil is a murderer, so are you;
therefore you are his sonns, and he is your father, for have you not taken away
the lives of Gods faithful people and servants. Witness those that went to
Tiburne by your procurment and means, in Queen Elizabeth's time, who were
neither Traitors nor Rebels, but faithful subjects, and servants to her
Majesty; but only they were opposite to your Antichristian and Babilonian
Kingdom, and therefore you caused them to be murdered; and more you would have
murdered, but her clemency and mercy was such, that she would not to the full
satisfy your blood-thirstie murdering desire. Also have you not kept others in
prison, till you have undone them in their outward estats, and means, that you
have made them to pine away with hunger and want; which the Holy Ghost says,
is a torment worse then to be put to death by the sword; Lament. And some have
lost their lives by your means in prison; And also have not ye, even ye, shed
the blood of those three worthies of the Lord only for spiritual things, who
were neither Traitors nor Rebels, (but faithfuller subjects then your selves,
as they have proved in their crosse-bill against you) and did write nor teach,
neither treason, sedition, nor rebellion, but only opposed themselves against
your ungodly wicked Kingdom; The memory of that unpareleld act of cruelty, is
yet fresh both in your eyes and ears, the like whereof in any Christian state,
where the gospel has been professed, was never heard of in the world; I know
others have had too deep a hand in, being your assistants, and have
condescended too much to your wicked desires; But with them I will not, nor do
not in the least meddle, nor have nothing to say to them, but pray, and desire
God to open their eyes, and to give them true repentance for their sin, if it
be his will and pleasure, and so I leave the^.

But you and you only have been the original fountain and true cause of all
the righteous blood that has been shed in this land or Kingdom, for matters of
Religion and conscience, ever since the days of your first predecessor,
Austin the Monk, (even unto this present hour,) who came from the bloody
City of Rome, Rev. 17. with Antichrists Authority and Law, the foundation of
his and your Kingdom, with exceeding much blood, as we read in Francis
Godwins Cattalogue of Bishops, from the 37. page to the 48. And it has been
by you and your forefathers maintained and upheld by Tyranny and blood, ever
since to this very time, as I will justify it and maintain it before your
faces, age after age, even unto this very day.

And the foresaid Author in that Book, who was a Bishop, and one of your own
Creatures, for his book of Meeters does in part prove it; and therefore know
assuredly, that the Lord will require the righteous blood of all his Saints and
servants at your hands, which you and your murdering Predecessors, have spilt
in abundant manner.

And to me that am but a poor, weak and young stripling, little above 20.
years of age, who you have cast into prison, for a thing I was not guilty
off, as I declared before the faces of the Chief of you; and yet you have
condemned me upon two false oaths, in which the party, as I am able to prove,
has sworn flatly against himself; for in his first Oath he swears, that I
and Mr. Wharton had printed Doctor Bastwicks Books together; and then in his
second Oath he swore, that I did them alone; And upon these grounds you have
exercised upon me such unheard of acts of cruelty, that the like whereof Paul
himself among all those tyrants and strange Beasts, Heathens and Pagans, with
whom he had to deal, had never exercised and inflicted upon him, though he was
the greatest sufferer, 2 Cor. 11. that ever I read off; but only Christ, who
for the sake and the salvation of his elect, underwent the wrath of God
himself, which no abstracted Creature was able to stand under.

But first, in all Paul's sufferings, I never read that ever his mouth was
gaged, but you have gaggd me, for speaking neither lies, faction, nor sedition,
but only the naked Truth; (the space of an hour and half) whereas if I had
uttered any errors, or untruths, you being (as you say you are) spiritual
Fathers, you ought there publjckly to have confuted me, in the presence of the
people, you cannot say but you heard of it, for two of the Chief of you were
in the Starr-Chamber at that time, being hard by where I stood.

Again, the Heathens and Pagans would not condemn Paul, as you may read Acts
25. till his accusers were brought face to face, to justify and prove their
accusation; but you have caused me to be condemned, and my accusers were never
brought face to face, to justify any thing against me.

And you William Laud, Prelate of Canterbury, for so I call you, and will not
in the least revile your person, by calling you out of your name; You, I say,
know very well, that in the making of my defense before the honorable Lords, I
to your face did silence you in the presence of the open Court, that you had
not one word to say unto me, but sat down as it seemed to me, in a great
chafe and rage, your face being as redd as the face of him, whose countenance
did declare, your heart thirsted after my blood, and part of it you have got,
but you are never the better for it, nor I nothing the worse for leaving of it,
but much the better; for it has been a means the Lord working with it, to
purge my soul from a great deal of corruption, and dross, has mightily
cleared up my understanding, that I have got a more true insight by many
degrees, into the true ways of God then I had before; for I was very ignorant
of them before, the stripes purged out my ignorance; for the eyes of my
understanding were like the eyes of the man in the Gospel, who when Christ had
opened them, did see men walking as trees afar off; even so, and no better
did I, for I saw the truths of God but darkely and afar off, in a hidden
manner; but since that the Lord has taken away the scales of ignorance and
blindness that did hang upon my understanding, and has anointed my eyes with
true and spiritual eye salve, so that I see very much clearer into the pure
ways of God, then I did before, for they were hidd from my eyes, but now the
Lord himself has revealed them unto me; but know ye that the Lord will one
day in flaming and burning fire (if you repent not, but I think some of you
are past it, Matthew: 12.31.32. Mark: 3.29.) render you a recompense, for your
blood-thirstie Tyranny, inflicted upon me, his poor, young and weak
servant; But unto him I committ my self and my cause, knowing that vengeance
is his, and he will repay it one day upon your heads and pates.

Again, Paul when he was a prisoner in the Custody of the very Pagans, that
had nothing but the light of nature, to guide them in the ways of God; yet
notwithstanding Felix the Governor gave command to the Centurion, who kept
Paul, that he might have liberty, and that he should forbid none of his
acquaintance and Friends to come to him, and minister to his wants and
necessity; Acts 24.23. also when he was going to Rome, prisoner, Julius the
Centurion, in whose Custody he was, yet though he were but a Heathen, gave him
liberty to go to his friends, to refresh himself; Acts 27 3. Yea when he was
come prisoner to Rome, yet the very infidels had so much humanity, courtesy and
mercy in them, as not to lock up Paul close prisoner, in a base and obscure
place, so that none might come to him, to speak with him, or bring him any
thing; And yet Tertullus the Orator (one of the Prelates Brethren had accused
him for a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition among all the Jews
throughout the World, and a ring leader of the Sect of the Nazarens; Yet they
let him dwell by himself, with a soldier that kept him, two whole years, in
his own hired house, where he had liberty to receive all that came unto him,
Acts the last Chapter.

Oh! Paul, it was well for thee, and happy wast thou that thou had to deal
with Pagans, in whose eyes I am sure thou did find more favor and mercy,
then if thou wast alive, and were now in England in the like case, should
find at the hands of those that are Christians, in name and boast; And say of
themselves, that they are thy successors, but are indeed and in truth, the
Disciples of the Devil and Antichrist, as I have already proved, for thongh
all the Prelates in England were not able, having no grounded ca^e to make such
an accusation against me as Tertullus did against Paul; Yet for all that have
they caused me to be laid in fetters and locks of Iron, in a close room locked
up close prisoner, from the society of any; Commanding that none should be
admitted to com to me, to speak with me, nor to bring me any thing; Also they
are so far from letting me to have liberty to go and see my friends, as
Paul had; That they will not so much as with a Keeper suffer me to walk a
little in the prison-Yard, to take a little air for my refreshing; my health
being impaired for want of air, and stirring my self, which I cannot in the
least do, without much trouble, by reason of my Irons; And I have been locked
up close prisoner about 4 Months, and not suffered in the least to stir out
of my lodging; but when they had me forth before the Majestrate; Yea the Warden
of the Fleet has denied me penn, ink and paper, only to write a short
petition to the Lords of the Counsel, (in the presence of my Keeper) that J
might have but so much liberty as to take a little air in the narrow Yard, in
the common Iayle, for my refreshing.

Oh! all you Christian ears that hear of these things, stand amaized and
wonder at the blood-thirsty, unparalleled cruelty and tyranny of the Bishops,
which they have caused to be inflicted upon me, and had no grounded cause
originally for to do it, but only hearing that I set my ^ace toward Sion, as
one of the Lambs of Christ: therefore these devouring wolves Math. 7.15. and
crafty subtle foxes Cant. 2 15. Ezekiel. 13 4. have hunted and thirsted after my
blood, part of which they have got and yet are not satisfied, but long to
pick my carkeises and bones. Now we do not read of the like cruelty inflicted
upon any of the Apostles or their followers, in all the New Testament, by any
of those (Tirants, Pagans, Infidels and Heathens) that persecuted them, which
they have caused to be inflicted upon me; whom they are not able justly to
accuse, of the breach of the least Commandment or laws, of God or the King;
though I do confess with David, that J have secret sins Psalm 19.20. and
with Paul that I have a body of sin within me Romans 7.23.24. Yet I can say in
the presence of my God, and speak the words of truth, that I do desire and
labor to be cleansed from them all.

Also I have challenged them to dispute with them for my life, before the King,
to prove their Calling to be from the Devil, and if I were erroneous, and if
they by Gods word could confute me, I would recaunt publicly.

But their surest pley and infallible Arguments to convince me, was Clubb-Law,
that is to say, take him Iaylour, and lay him in Irons, in the obscurest and
basest place in your prison, and let the stone Walls and iron grates convince
him, for we dare not meet him in the plain field, in a public dispute,
though he be but an unlearned youth; And if it be possible, keep him in
darkness and obscurity; And if you can do it handsomely, that the World can
take no notice of it, starve him, for we command you to let nothing be brought
unto him.

Oh! you Satyrs, Vultars, Owls, and Scritch-Owles, for so the Holy Ghost calls
you, Esaias: 13. two last verses. Esaias: 34.14.15. Rev: 18.2. The Roman spiritual
State, being that Cage of filthiness, that holds you, who are, as the Holy
Ghost there speaks, a Company of Dragons, Devils, and foul Spirits.

Oh! you Night-Owles and Birds of Darkness, and uncleanes, that dare not come
to show your crooked faces in the bright Sun-shining light and clear Crystal
glass of Gods sacred and unspotted Truth; It shows and demonstrateth to all
the World, that you are a Company of deformed Creatures, and Sons of
Darkness, impiety, wickedness and ungodliness; Or else you would lay aside
your Cowardly Clubb-Arguments, and come into the face of the open Sun, that
there you may be seen, whether you be rotten or sound, or whether you be true
gold or nothing but dirt and dross, which is good for nothing but the
dunghill, or whether your Kingdom be the Kingdom of Christ, or the Kingdom
of the Devil, for of necessity it must be one of these, for there is no more
spiritual Kingdoms in the world but these two. Or whether you your selves be
servants of Christ, or the servants and true subjects of the Devil. But your
hating of the truth and blaspheaming of it, calling it the Refuge of
Heritickes, as you did in your open Court, at the Censure of that worthy
Doctor, Doctor John Bastwicke. And also your hating and bloody persecuting of
them that love it, does vndenyably declare and manifest what you are, and of
whom your Kingdom does depend. For Christ says every one that does evil hates
the sight, neither comes to the light, least his deeds should be reproved
John 3.20. Truly you plainly show, that you are men of darkness, and
workers of wickedness and iniquity, for you cannot endure the light, for it is
too clear and too bright for you, to come nakedlie and openly and show your
selves before it; because you are men of darkness and evil doers, and
therefore you hate the light; but if you were men that were workers of
righteousness, and walked in the ways of truth, you would not be affraide to
be tried by the light of it, but would desire to be brought unto it. And in the
former place Christ says, he that does truth comes to the light, that his
deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God; and therefore to
conclude this point, I will say no more then Christ says, you may know the
tree by the fruit, for a bad tree does not bring forth good fruit, nor a good
tree corpupt fruit Math. 7.18. Luke 6.43. But to go back again to John 8. In
the second place, Christ says, The Devil abode not in the truth, because
there is no truth in him, when he speaks a ly he speakth it of his own for
he is a liar and the father of it. Here Christ shows that the Children of the
Devil abide not in the truth, but have their souls filled with lies. And
whether you the Prelates be not such, I appeal even to your own writings,
sayings and doeings, the most of whose writings are stuffed with many untruths,
having almost as many lies in them as pages. And for the untruths delivered in
your Court Sermons, Worthy Doctor Bastwicke in the third part of his Letany,
has painted out in there colors, yea what damnable Doctrines are there taught
(saving some few) agreeing with the Filthy Whore and Strumpet of Rome, as that
forenamed Doctor does prove in the second part of his Letany, with which he
does most truly parallel you, that you are in a manner both of one corruption,
yea among all the rest he there proves; that you hold and maintain that
monstrous and horrable Doctrine of Transubstantiation, that is to say: That the
Body of Christ, is reallie, corperallie, and essentiallie in the Sacrament of
his Supper. And this also may be proved out of the great Prelates speech, made
before the honorable Lords, at the Censure of the three late worthies. Yea
whole Vollumes may be made, of those damnable Doctrins that you hold, and are
not ashamd to publish them to the view of the whole world (Cum Privilegio)
especialy in your late printed Books. By all which you prove and make good
this portion of Scripture; that you are of your father the Devil, because you
do not abide in the truth, but speak, preach, write and maintain false lies,
wicked and damnable Doctrines.

Thus have I by the strength of my God, a little deciphered you in a brief way.
But it may be, you will be like a nest of Wasps, which being stirred will fly
about my ears, with your Scorpion stings, but if you do, it will manifest you
to be part of those Locusts (as you are indeed and in truth) that came out of
the bottomless pit Revel. 9.2.3. of whom the Hoy Ghost says; that they had
tails like Scorpions, and there were stings in there tails, and they had
power to hurt men verse 10. But be it known unto you, that I am not in the
least afraid of you, for I neither fear an Axe at Tower hill, nor a Stake in
Smithfield, nor a-Halter at Tyburne, nor Whipping at a Carts-arfe, nor a
Pillary in the Pallice-yard nor Gagging, nor Cutting of ears and nose, nor
Burning in the forehead or cheeks, nor yet Banishment with John to Pathmos. For
I verily believe if you should send me thither, I shall there find Christ,
which by his spirit will unfold the Revelation unto me, and then J would write
it and send it abroad into the world, and it would vex you as ill, as Sampson
did the Philistims, and prove as fatal to your decaying, tottering, spiritual
Babilonian Antichristian Kingdom, as his Foxes with firebrarnds at their
tails, were to the Philistims Corn. And therefore as you love your almost
ruinated Kingdom, look to it, and know that the faster you kick, the harder
I will spur you, and the more you fling, the closer will I stick and cleave
fast unto you; for you are plants (which I groundedly know) the Lord never
planted, and therefore undoubtedly he will pluck you up Mat. 15.13. And
therefore by the might, power and strength of my God, Psalm 118.14. Esa. 12.2.
who is the worker of all my works in me and for me, Esa. 26.12. For I am
resolved come life, come death, seeing you by force and cruelty have called me
to it, to show my self valiant for the truth of God, Ier. 9.3.

I already made three Challenges to dispute with you, but you are so
Cowardly, that you dare not to come into the plain and open field, but you
fight with tyrant-like weapons, namely: with cruelty. And therefore to see
whether you have any manhood in you or not, J make and send forth this fourth
Challenge, to you Bishops and Prelates, which is this.

That I will (if you please) dispute with you all, face to face, before the
King and State, for life and liberty; upon these ensueing Propositions.

First, To prove that the Popes Power is from the Devil.

Secondly, That your Calling, Power, Authority and Jurisdiction, is from the
Pope.

Thirdly, That all Gods people, are bound under pain of eternal damnation, to
withdraw their spiritual obedience and subjection, from your spiritual law
and Kingdom.

Now vnpon these propositions will I dispute with you all, and venture life for
life, before the King and State, upon these terms.

First, That you shall lay aside Club-Arguments, which is take him Iaylour, and
lay him in Irons, and lock him up close Prisoner, and keep him in safe
custody.

Secondly, That the Book of God, which is an infallible truth, shall be the
sole Judge of the Controversy

Thirdly, That J may have liberty, without being Gagged, to speak my mind
freely and boldly.

Fourthly, That J may have the use of some books which I shall choose. And if
you dare grant me these 4 things, if I be not able to prove all the fore said
Positions, by demonstrable and undeniable arguments, that you shall not be able
in the words of truth to gainsay or deny the^. I will be willing to lose my head
and life, therefore take notice of what J have now the fourth time said and
challenged you to your faces, (for I intend to send you this) that in the
presence of the King and Nobles you will make it good, and therefore if you be
not Cowards, fit yourselues to come into the open pitched field face to face.

Also be it known unto you, that I will at Paul's Cross, dispute with all your
Priests and Deacons, upon these Propositions.

First, That they are all of them, Servants and Ministers of Antichrist.

Secondly, That in the place and standing they are now in, at this present,
they have no authority from God to preach his word, nor administer any of his
sacred ordinances to the peole, nor the people any ground or warrant out of the
word of God, to hear the word from, or partake with them.

Thirdly, That the Church of England as at this day it stands, is
Antichristian, both in Power, in Matter, in Ministry, in Form and in
Woshirppe.

Fourrhly, That all Gods people are bound in duty and conscience, to separate
away from it, and to have no communion with it.

All which things, if J be not able to prove against them all, laying aside (as
I said before) all Club law, and letting the word of God be the sole Judge of
the controversy; I will be bound to preach a Recanting Sermon in every City
in the Kingdom.

JOHN LILBURNE.

FINIS.

