THE LIVES OF ALL THE ROMAN EMperors, being exactly Collected, from Julius
Caesar, unto the now reigning Ferdinand the second. WITH THEIR BIRTHS,
Governments, remarkable Actions, and Deaths.

LONDON: Printed by N. and I. Oaks, and are to be sold by George Hutton at the
sign of the Sun within Turning-stile in Holborne 1636.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL, MY MOST honored PATRON WILL. STONOVR Esquire.
SIr, Quae a primis pubertatis annis radices egit amicitia eofortius meliusque
floret quo fuerit longaevior. By which (...) boldly infer an excuse for my
presumption, in presenting unto you the first fruits of a tree so long growing
up. It is the nature of some trees not to bring forth fruit until they come
to be provect, and such fruits are ordinarily more solid, and not so soon apt
to be corrupted. For me to commend the fruit, were to bring my self upon the
public stage of ostentation and folly; neither need I when the pleasantness
thereof ( viz. the argument) is of ability sufficient to commend it self.
Nobiles nobilia decent, and so the noble Caesar's now seek unto your noble self
for a protection, and to be patronized as being all brought into the straights
of this epitomicke volume: and in entertaining them being in number one hundred
fifty six, I hope you will not exclude their Conductour, but reflect so upon
him with a favorable, though a different respect, who was over most studious
to honor and serve you, as

Yours most obsequious, R. B.

To the Reader.
REader, I cannot say with the Poet Materiam superabat apus, who in a
description commended the art and worke-man-ship beyond the matter whereon it
was shown, as the statue of Hercules, the matter whereof being but stone, yet
for the curiosity of art therein expressed, is held at an inestimable rate and
value: no, but the contrary: for here Materia superatur opus, the workmanship,
(style and language (...) mean) comes far short of the matter: Yet being
judicious, thou may portray the whole Hercules having found but the length of
his foot: and withal, I having a guess at thy humor which rather love
brevity (the minion of delight) than the taedium of pleasure in folio, would
rather comply with that of thine, then mine own, and present to thy view great
personages to the life, in small draughts and pieces, and give thee only light
touches of their virtues and vices: which touches if I have overshadowed with
that of brevity, and thereby have procured thee an appetite of a larger
satisfaction, I must of necessity refer thee to the hazard of a taedium: for
as some stomachs at the sight of a large table well furnished, instantly loose
the edge of hunger, so might thine at the sight of the bulk of a Church-bible.
Wherefore I have provided thee a little and dainty, variety and plenty, short
and sweet: but not a crumme for that Curre that must be content as well with
the bones as the meat, whose snarles I fear not, nor esteem his impertinent
commendams, but refer me to thine impartiality, who (if thou art a good
fellow) wilt accept a bit with a friend without grumbles and accept his welcome
better then his fare: then Reader, Welcome to thy friend.

R. B.

A table of the names of the Roman Emperors
ADrianus. 36 Antoninus Pius 39 Alexander Severus 69 Arnolphus 294 Aurelianus
27 Arcadius 197 Anastasius 220 Anastasius alias Artemius 264 Adolphus 344
Albertus, the son of Rudolphus 347 Albertus, Duke of Austr^ay 371 Aurelius
Verus 41
B
Bassianus Caracalla 59
C
Charolus magnus, Charlemaine 280 Charles 2 290 Charles 3 292 Charles 4 361
Charles 5 377 C. Caesar Caligula 10 Claudius Caesar 12 Cocceius Nerva 30 C.
Piscenninus 53 Clodius Albinus 55 Commodus 46 Valens Hostilianus 85 Constantius
Clorus 138 Carinus 131 Caelius Balbinus 81 Crispus 156 Constans 162 Constantius
164 Constant Magnus 153 Constantin. 2 210 Constantinus 3 248 Constantinus 4 251
Constantinus 5 271 Conradus 1 298 Conradus 2 310 Conradus 3 323
D
Didius Iulianus 50 Diadumenus 65 Decius 92 Dioclesianus 133 Domitian. 28
Decent. 169
E
Aemilian, 102
F
Florian. 122 Flavius Claud, 113 Fred. Barbarossa 327 Freder. 1 329 Freder. 2
337 Freder. 3 352 Eerdinand. 1 379 Ferdinand. 2 387
G
Gallienus 107 Gordianus 77 Galerius 110 Gratianus 185
H
Heraclius 1 239 Heraclius 2 245 Heraclion 246 Hen. 1 300 Hen. 2 309 Hen. 3 314
Hen. 4 317 Hen. 5 319 Hen. 6 330 Hen. 7 350 Helvius Pertinax 48 Heliogabalus 67
Honorius 200
I
C. Julius Caesar 1 Justinius 223 Justinian. Mag. 226 Justin. Minor. 229
Justinian. 2 254 Iul. Verus Max. 75 Julian. Aposta. 171 Iovinian. 175
L
Licinus 149 Lotharius 1 285 Lotharius 2 321 Ludovicus Pius 382 Ludovicus 2 287
Ludovicus 3 296 Ludovicus 4 538 Leo 1 212 Leo 2 215 Leo 3 268 Leo 4 274
Leontius 257
M
Martian. 209 Mauritius 234 Maximilian, 1 237 Martinian. 152 Magnentius 161
Maximus 72 Max mian. 136 Maximian. 141 Maxentius 147 M. Ant Gord. 83 Mar. Inl.
Phil. 1 87 M. Iul. Philip. 2 90 Mesius Decius 95 Marc. Aurel. 16 Mar. Sil. Otho
19 Maximin. 188 Maximilian. 2 381 Mathias 385 M. Aurel. Carus 127 Marc. Clod.
Pupien. 79
N
Numerian. 129 Nero. 14
O
Oct. Caes. Aug. 4 Opil. Macrin. 63 Otho Magnus 302 Otho 2 304 Otho 3 322 Otho
4 335
P
Phil ppus 333 Philippicus 262 Probus 124 Posthumous 111 Phocas 237
Q
Quintilius 115
R
Rupertus 366 Rudolphus 1 341 Rudolphus 2 383
S
Septimius Severus 57 Septimius Geta 61 Salonin. Valerian. 109 Sergius Galba 17
Severus 145 Sigismundus 369
T
Tiberius 2 231 Tiberius 3 p. 259 Theodosius 1 19^ Theodosius 2 20^ Theodosius
3 266 Tacitus 119 Tiber. Nero, Caesar 1 Titus 26 Traianus 33 Trebonian. Gal. 97
V
Vespasian. 23 Volusian. 100 Valerian. 104 Valentin. 1 176 Valentin. 2 119
Valentin. 3 206 Valens 132 Vinceslaus 364 Vitellius 20
Z
Zeno. 217
THE LIVES OF all the Roman Emperors, being in number 156.
1. Caius Julius Caesar.
After the foundation of the City of Rome Anno 706.
portrait of emperor Caius Julius Caesar C. CAESAR DICTPERRTVO


JVlius Caesar a most noble Roman, was borne after the foundation of Rome 654.
He was the first that made himself sole Emperor: He overcame the Swissers and
Tigurines; he overthrew the Almans, chasing them out of France; he subdued all
France, and after passing over the Rhene, made himself Lord of Germany: thence
he came into England, (which at that time was unknown) and added it to the
Roman Empire: But at length not obtaining of the Senate what he often sued
for, after he had made himself sure of Ariminum, he went with so great^ power
to the gates of Rome, that Pompeius the great much fearing him, and forsaking
Italy, was by Caesar utterly overthrown in the famous battle of Pharsalia.

He subjugated Ptolomaeus in Egypt, Scipio in Affricke, and Iuba King of
Mauritania, the sons of Pompetus i^ Spain: In the end supposing (...) (after
much greatness) to live in ^^cure peace, was cruelly (...) the Senate House,
receiving (...) twenty several wounds by the hand o^ conspirators at his age
of 56, the 15 of April, with many prodigies before and after his death. In him
it was questioned whether Clemency or the Sword obtained him most honor: For
by the first he t^ed his potent enemies to be his friends: witness his
Commentaries every where: But by the Sword he won the Empire, which before was
a Consulate. His saying was usually in judging of men's natures: Baro. page 300.
Rubicundos a^^o, pallidos timeo: I love the well colored (...), but fear the
pale: which was proved in Cassius that gave him his first wound in the
Senate House; but loved Brutus, whom when he saw also to second Cassius in that
Treason, with (...) tu sili? surrendered his life.

2. Octavianus Caesar Augustus.
In the 41 year of his reign our Savior Jesus Christ was borne.
portrait of emperor Octavianus Caesar Augustus SER GALBA IMP. CAES. AVG


Octavianus Nephew of Julius Caesar, of the family of the Octavy a Roman, by
his Mothers side descended from the race of Kings departed out of Macedonia,
and came into Italy upon the immature death of his Uncle, and changing his
name, would be called Caius Caesar, the son of Caius Caesar; and being
arrived at Rome, he was created Consul at the age of 20 years. He was a
Soldier good enough: he routed Sextus Pompeius: he was called Pater patriae,
because he adorned the City with Laws and Edifices: wherefore there were
Temples and Altars erected in his Honor.

He overthrew M. Antonius, he conquered Spain, Hungary, and Slavonia. In the
time of his reign all the World being then in peace, our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ was borne. He governed this Universe absolute Caesar 44 years,
and 12 years with M. Anto^ius: and in the 76 year of his age, within one
Month and five days he dyed at Nola by poison, to the grief of all.

Macrobius testifies this of Augustus, Macrobius lib. 2. Sar. 4.
that when he heard of the slaughter of the children under two years, which
was commanded by Herod, continuing his tyranny almost a whole year, amongst
which Herod's son was one, Augustus said thus, Melius est Herodis porcum esse
quam filium: It is better to be one of Herod's hogs, than one of his sons.
So impartial is a spirit possessed with cruelty, that as it makes no
difference of the act; so neither of persons. He may and is justly called The
murderer of Innocents: and so to keep his Act in memory, the Church does
keep the day Festival, called Innocents day, in memorial of that bloody
command.

3. Tiberius Nero Caesar.
In the year of Christ 16.
portrait of emperor Tiberius Nero Caesar

AFter the excellent, and of famous memory Octavianus, An. Dom. 16.
succeeded the wicked and cruel Tiberius: And although that in his
predecessors time he had done notable exploits in War, yet he was esteemed as
the wickedst man alive. He seemed unwilling to accept or undertake the Empire,
the more to endeare them unto him which were against it: and therefore in the
beginning of his government he carried himself indifferently well: but a while
after he showed himself again in his colors, stern, most cruel, and as one
complete in all unspeakeable filthynesse and vice: And it was questioned
whether lust or cruelty in him were most eminent, or gluttony; all being vices
unworthy the name of a Prince. St. John Baptist and our Savior Jesus Christ
suffered in his time. He was no great enemy of the Christians; but he proposed
it in the Senat-house, That Christ should be adored as a God. Finally, he dyed
near unto Naples by the Treason of his Nephew Caligula, after he had governed
22 years, and of his age 78:

What he was, Seneca expresses, as Illum a rerum natura editum, ut ostenderet
quid summa vitia in summa fortuna possent. Also Dyonisius Areopagita, who lived
in his time, seeing the strange Eclipse of the Sun and Moon at the instant
hour of our Saviors passion, said, Tacit^^ Suetonius Dec. vid.
^ut Deus natura patitur, aut mundi ma^ina dissolvitur: The God of Nature
^^rely suffers this day, or else the whole ^orld is dissolved.

One Longinus amongst other soldiers, (...) recorded to have pierced our
Saviors side with his Spear, out of whose Wound came Water and Blood: And
Authors do report, that the same Longinus in the very perpetrating of ^he Act
was stricken with blindness, and being recovered to his sight by the said
water and blood applied to his eyes, ^id afterward repent for this cruel act,
and was made Bishop of Cappadocia.

4. Caius Caesar Caligula.
Anno Domini 39.
portrait of emperor Caius Caesar Caligula

THe election of Caligula was most pleasing to the Senate; so much the more,
An. Dom. 39.
because in his first entrance to the government, he endeauored with great
subtilty to gain and win the good will of all men: only seemingly just,
noble, and generous; with pleasing carriage and behavior courting the
Nobility. He ordained sports, feasts, pastimes, Stage Plays, and other
entertainments to ^ontent the people. But in the process ^f his government he
fell into such ex^crable villainy and filthy wickedness, that he would be
called and adored as a God. He plained mountains, made ^allies hills, built
towers in the deep ^ca: and all this he did with such impu^ity and cruelty,
that many would ^ather murder themselves, than come ^or stay for the rigor of
his sentence.

Lastly, being become unsufferable ^o all the people of Rome, he was ^aine by
Cherea, receiving 30 wounds ^n the third year, and tenth Month of ^is
Imperial government, aged 29 ^eeres. He built the Colossus, and other works
of innumerable expenses: Spond.
His wife Casonia was run through with a sword, and her young daughters brains
dashed against the walls. He banished Pilate, and would have had Christ adored
as a God, but the Senate withstood it.

5. Claudius Caesar.
Anno Domini 43.
portrait of emperor Claudius Caesar

Claudius Uncle to Caligula, An. Dom. 43.
succeeded in the Empire as it were by mere accident: because the people of
Rome being freed from the terror of the times lately past, imagined to redeem
and keep their liberty, and utterly to extinguish all the race and family of
the Caesar's: and some making a head, and themselves masters of the Capitol,
gave an occasion to Claudius (by nature a fearful and heartlesse man) to hide
himself. But ^^ing found out, and encouraged by a ^ouldier, and between fear
and hope ^as nevertheless at the last made Em^eror. In his beginning he was
most ^ercifull, although he put Cherea to ^eath. By his command and appoint^ent
the Water-worke called Aqua ^audia was made: He caused the Lake ^ucinum to be
drawn dry by the day^^ labor of thirty thousand worke^en within the space of
two years. ^e built the Haven of Ostia: the last ^^rtner with him in the
Empire was Agrippina, who through fear of him, ^ad to secure her son of the
successi^n, poisoned him with a dish of Mush^mes, and so he dyed the 13 of
October, (...) the age of 64, whereof he reigned ^4, and had sepulture at Rome.

In the eighth year of his reign he ^ustred the City, Baroni^^.
and had to the num^er of three score and nine hundred and ^orty four thousand
Citizens.

In the 6 year of his reign the Virg^^ Mary departed this life at the age^ 72
years.

6. Nero.
Anno Dom. 57.
portrait of emperor Nero

Claudius being dead, the Se^^^ not only gave the Imperial government to
Nero, An. Dom. 57.
but also swore him fealty. At the first he gave such good satisfaction to all,
that they said, He was ordained for them by the express commandment of God:
But proceeding in his government, he fell into much inso^^cy and cruelty.

He had Seneca the Philosopher for his teacher and instructor, but ill
requi^ed him; for he commanded him to choose his death, for dye he must. So^eca
desired his veins to be opened to ^et out his life. He took all the Plate and
Jewels out of the Temples; he cau^ed his own Mother Agrippina to be ^laine,
and her body to be ripped open, that he might see the place wherein he ^^y. He
slew Poppaa his wife with a ^^urne or kick: he studied Magic, and called all
the Magitians to his fa^our: but being deluded by Simon Magus, that promised
that he should fly, ^e expelled them the City. Lastly, forsaken of all men
but only his Spado, whom he had formerly caused to be ^ut, so that he might
use him at his pleasure; and only he following his Master to the end, in so
much that Nero being closely pursued, gave his sword to his Spado, and bad him
dispatch him, which he refusing, Ner^ said, Ergo Nero nec amicum nec ini^icum
habet. Some write that he sell into a vault of a common Jakes, other that he
slew himself.

He set fire on the City, and from a high Tower beheld and laughed at the fire:
and in the repairing thereof he caused the Edifices to be called Neroniana. He
overcame the Parthians, and subdued the Britans: he greatly persecuted the
Christian name, and besider the putting the Apostle St. Peter and St. Paul to
death, he caused also an infinite number of Christians to be slain. He made
Wars upon the Jews, and in the end being insupportable to God and man,
amongst the rebellious seditions of many Provinces, and the Serate having
publicly proclaimed sentence of death against him, and flying out of the
City, stabbed himselfe^ to the joy of the whole World, in the 32 year of his
Age, and fourteenth of his Reign.

7. Sergius Galba.
Anno Domini 70.
portrait of emperor Sergius Galba SER GALBA IMP. CAES. AVG


AFter the wished death of Nero the cruel, An. Dom. 70.
Sergius Galba of the City of Rome by birth, was cre^^ed by the Army, and by
the Senate ^^nfirmed Emperor: who was no less ^^temperate, dogged, and
fiercely cru^ll than his predecessor He was not ignorant in the Arts liberal,
and well read in the Laws. He was much hated of all sorts, and it was a
wonder, had he not reigned so short a time, that he lived so long, because
every man slew him in conceit daily, though not in effect; judging him far
unworthy such a degree, giving himself over wholly to idle and wicked
conceits. In the sedition of Otho his head was struck off in the marketplace
by a Soldier, and his body left in the power of the people, and was buried by
a slave without any Ceremony at all, at the age of 73 years, having governed
seven months, whose death was not lamented of any, because it was not known
that ever he did good to any man.

His reign being short and vicious, (...) no other memory to posterity but
commemoratives of his detestable cruelty and other vices: who lies ingrav'd
(...) the Imperial City wherein he fir^^ drew breath.

8. M. Silvius Otho.
Anno Domini 70.
portrait of emperor M. Silvius Otho

OTho of a very honorable family in Rome, a man of great valor, An. Dom. 70.
of an able wit, son of Lucius (...) Consul, succeeded Galba in the ^pire,
and gave great hopes both to (...) Senate and Co^monalty by his gra^us
abbearing and carriage of a re^sse and reformation of former dis^^ts, and
grievances given them by his ^^ecessors, which indeed would have followed and
issued so, had not the shortness of his government prevented and cut off this
hopeful expectation: For at the same time that he was created Emperor in the
City of Rome, Vitellius was proclaimed Emperor in Germany: And neither willing
to give place to the other, resolved to decide and end it in the field: and
after many battles Otho being worsted in despair of the recovery of his
Crown and Dignity, slew himself, to the infinite grief and sorrow of all the
Commons, in the year after Christ 72, and of his age 38, after the 3 Month
and 5 days of his Empire, and dyed at Veliteme: the brevity of his reign
prescinded many and great hopes of his good government of the whole Empire.

9. Vitellius.
Anno Domini 71.
portrait of emperor Vitellius

OTho being dead, An. Dom. 71.
every man converted his applause to Vitellius, which being so in general, was
confirmed by the Senate, and he comes to Rome in great triumph, bravely
attended by his noble Army. This man although he was munificent and liberal,
yet he was of a most cruel disposition. Wherefore Vespasian being employed in
the wars of the Jews, was by the army created Emperor of Rome, and joining
battle with Vitelliu, took him prisoner, binding his hands behind him, with
a halter about his neck, the soldiers buffetting him about the face, with
infinite dishonor, disgrace, and scorn was led about in public, and at the
length with many wounds was deprived of life in that very place where he had
caused Sabinus the brother of Vespasian to be miserably slain: and together
with him were slain his own son, and his brother, and all thrown into the
River Tiber.

I find likewise no other notable thing or quality in this man, but much
accused for cruelty, of a slow and dull spirit, and given excessively to
gluttony, insomuch that all Gluttons to this day pass under his name. He
lived 57 years, having reigned little more than 8 Months.

10. Vespasianus.
In the year of Christ 72.
portrait of emperor Vespasianus

UEspasian a Roman borne, An. Done 72.
although he were not of so noble a blood, he deserved nevertheless for his
true worth, and excellent qualities of the mind, to be created Emperor. And
having taken possession of the Imperial Seat, he embellished and beautified
the City with Amphitheaters, Temples, and Statues: He was in all his actions
courteous, affable, and benign to all. He raced and utterly destroyed the
famous City of Jerusalem, verifying that Prophecy of our Savior, which was,
That there should not be left one stone upon another.

He was most temperate in his diet, and very polite, neat, and complete in
his person: He made many countries tributary to the Empire: Not any one vice
could be imputed to him but avar^ce, although he acknowledged it with this
excuse, because that he found the Empire very bare of moneys, by the reason of
the extraordinary excesses of his Predecessors. He dyed of a Flux in the
year of our Lord Eighty one, in the Ninth year of his Reign: aged 69.

In his time was put to death in Rome Linus, the first Bishop of that See, to
whom succeeded Cletus, the first Bishop of that name, and the second of that
greatly boasted Succession from Saint Peter the Apostle. Suetonius records
this, that before the death of Vespasian, there appeared a Comet, and as his
Friends gave him notice, that it portended his Death: Scipio du Pleix.
he slighting it, and not any way discouraged thereby, said, That it threatened
not him, but the Kings of the Parthians that wore long hair, as the Comet had;
yet nevertheless Vespasian dyed not long after.

11. Titus.
Anno Dom. 81.
portrait of emperor Titus

TItus was of no less goodness and virtuous morality than his father
Vespasian had been before him. An. Dom. 81.
He was well learned in the Greek, and Latin tongues, and most excellent in
writing: But in Arms he exceeded the glory of the precedent Emperors, because
he tryumphed for the overthrow of the Jews. In his government of the Empire he
was so circumspect, diligent, and especially liberal; that he was called The
Idol of Nations: and he esteemed that day to be lost wherein he had not done a
courtesy: And therefore he said once to his brother, (that conspired his
death) That he need not attempt that by sratricide which he without it might
obtain by favor. But because the Romans were not worth (perhaps) so complete
and just a Governor, by the secret judgment of God he was taken from the
world by a malign Fever, which in few days ended his life in the Country
near to Rome at the years of 41, and of his Empire the second, two months
and twenty days. And lies buried at Rome, having by his valor and wisdom
made the Roman Eagle to triumph over Jerusalem.

Josephus largely describes the Hierosolimitan Wars and passages, Append.
Josephus.
and affirms that whatsoever thing could be found of any value, was by him
transported to Rome. He was so amiable and affable to all, that he was called
Amor and delicia generis humani: but as it is thought, he dyed poisoned by his
brother Domitian, who succeeded him in the Empire.

12. Domitianus.
Anno Domini 83.
portrait of emperor Domitianus

DOmitianus succeeded the good Titus his brother, An. Dom. ^3.
who in the beginning was likewise affable, merciful and just^^^e did not much
addict himself to wars, although he triumphed, and was victorious in all
those wars which he undertook: but took great felicity in shooting in a long
bow, and became so dexterous in it, that he hazarded thereby the lives of many
men, yet never hurting them. But he in the progress of his government became
so cruel, unjust, and covetous, that upon the least occasion he put many men
to death, usurping their wealth, saying, Himself was next heir. He was a
great persecutor of Christians, because in his time many very holy men were
slaughtered with exquisite and new found torments. In the end by the conspiracy
of Stephanus, the Steward of his household, and others he was murdered in his
Palace in Rome at the age of 45, and in the 15 year of his reign, and was
buried in the way that now leads to the Lateran Church. The second persecution
began now against the Christians: Eusebius terms him Haerede^ Neronianae
saevitiae. And it is not to be wondered that he should so much be given to shed
blood, and devise torments for men, who used in his study privately to practice
all punishments upon Flies and Gnats.

13. Cocceius Nerva.
Anno Domini 99.
portrait of emperor Cocceius Nerva

AFter Domitian, (...) Dom. (...)
Cocceius Nerva being the 13 Emperor, and the first Italian by Nation, was
judged the fittest man to succeed in the Empire, who was nobly descended, and
chosen in the year of Christ 99, being of age 66.

This man was so merciful, benign, and liberal, that all the world admired
him. He recalled all the Christians from exile, and mitigated their troubles:
He caused the children of the poor to be brought up, and educated at the
public charge: he purchased many lands, and distributed them to the poor
decayed Citizens. And to bring these matters to effect, he was constrained to
sell his own Plate of Gold and Silver, with the rest of his houshold-goods:
And reflecting upon his end, he elected Traianus, a man very nobly descended,
and of an ancient family, to succeed him. He dyed in the tenth Month, and
ninth day of his Reign, of a conceit he took against a Senator called
Regulus, to the great lamentation and sorrow of the whole City, which had now
lost a true Patron of the poor, and was buried with all the Ceremonies of the
ancient Romans in the Temple of the Goddess Fortune.

The charitable disposition of this Caesar to strangers and poor people, got
him not unworthily the title of Pauperum Patronus: Charity being then scarce
known, and little practiced of the Heathen Governors.

14. Traianus.
In the year of Christ 100.
portrait of emperor Traianus

TRaianus being the first Emperor of Spanish blood, An. Dom. 100.
was the honor as well to his own Nation, as also to the Emperors precedent.
instantly having taken possession and government upon him, he began to re^orme
the corruption of the Laws, ^dministring true Justice unto all. He was
wondrous good to the ^oore: He caused all the poor men's ^hild ren both of the
City and country of Italy to be brought and trained up in good Literature and
Discipline. In peace and war he was most judicious and just; but being
seduced by the Devil, (although afterward he became more temperate) he
persecuted the Christians, putting infinite numbers of them to death, and
during his reign was that third famous persecution of the Church. He subdued
Dacia, Mesopotamia, and made Armenia tributary: he took in Soria, Babylonia,
and Chald^a. In his returning back to Italy, being arrived in Cilicia, fell
dangerously sick, and in Selencia (...) dyed, whose ashes were brought (...)
Rome, and in an Uine placed on the top of a Column which the Roman Citizens
erected to the memory of him, who so worthily and so long had managed the
Empire: he reigned twenty one years, six months, and 15 days.

In this Emperors reign the City of Antioch by an Earthquake was utterly
ruinated. Dio Casilus speaking much in his commendations, dashes them all with
an extraordinary affection to Wine and Boys: but others have cleared that
aspersion, and do largely praise this Caesar for his incomparable endowments
of mind and habilities of body. And certainly such worthy achievements had
their original from an excellent qualified spirit. But if we seriously
consider his weighty and daily employments, any will easily confess, that he
could not spare time for such idle toys, having all his spirits continually
otherwise employed.

15. Adrianus.
An. Domini 121.
portrait of emperor Adrianus

COod Traianus being dead, An. Dom. 221.
Adrianus his Nephew a Roman, was chosen to succeed, who followed the steps of
his Antecessor, and gave great content and joyful expectation to the whole
City. He visited in person the whole Empire, and all the wars he undertook,
succeeded fortunate. He was not very severe (...) the Christians: he gave
himself exceedingly to the knowledge of all manner of Arts and Sciences: and
any man whatsoever was expert in any knowledge, he called him to Rome,
forbidding all that were not Proscssors, to seem to profess any their Art or
Science, unless they were Masters indeed, and well able fully to instruct
others in them. Falling into an inourable disease, he attempted oftentimes to
kill himself, and offered rewards to any man that would kill him; and many
times he solicited many with threatenings to murder him. Finally, the
Physicians seeking to give him content, persuaded him to forbear eating and
drinking, and so he did, and dyed at Baiae in upper Gall at the years of
seaventy two, and five months, and seaventeene days, in the two and twentieth
year of his reign, and was conveyed to Rome.

He continued the persecution against the Christians, and afterward slackened
it by a remiss way. He builded Temples, and dedicated them to his own
honor: He profaned the holy places about Jerusalem, and being tired with an
incurable Dropsy, ho^ would feign have dyed, but could (...) He suffered for
his effusion of Chriffian blood: Lastly, he dyed through voluntary famine.
This being such a tedious and irksome disease, wrought such a strong
impression in his conceit, that death was rather to be enjoyed, than a life so
diseased and miserable.

16. Antoninus Pius.
Anno Domini 139.
portrait of emperor Antoninus Pius

ANtoninus succeeded Adrianus ^y way of adoption, An. Dom. 139.
in which lignity he lived upright and virtuously. There were not many wars
in his time, because by his vigilance he made himself beloved and feared,
keeping all Nations in due subjection. There came Ambassadors daily to Rome
from all parts of the world to obtain graces and privileges for their
countries, to whom he gave audience very courteously, advising them before
they speak, saying, Demand that which is just, and ye shall obtain: And
furthermore, he entertained them all in such sort, that they all continued his
most faithful and obedient subjects. He was called the Father of the virtues,
because he was so just, courteous, liberal, and good, and above all, a lover
of all good men: neither was there any one vice found in him. Being at his
Villa or Countreyhouse, being of the age of seaventy he dyed of a Fever,
having governed the Empire 23 years. Whose death was lamented of all, the
Empire being deprived of such a Governor, and Father truly pious. He was
inurn'd in Rome toward the Eastern gate.

The name of Pius was given him, because when he came to the Imperial
Dignity, he pardoned all Delinquents, (...) Non oportet ab his rebus
principatus exordium ducere. In the fifteenth year of his Reign he by a
special Edict restrained the persecution against the Christians.

17. Aurelius Verus. M. Aurelius.
Anno Domini 162.
portrait of emperor Aurelius Verus. M. Aurelius

AFter the death of Antoninus Pius, An. Dom. 162.
Aurelius Verus together with Marcus Aurelius the Philosopher, both being
adopted by Antoninus, began their government. Aurth^^ Verus was the son of
Aelius Verus and Comitia Calvilla. This man becoo^^ himself to Soria, and was
taxed for being extraordinarily addicted to all manner of lust: And returning
to Rome, he added to this vice many more, as sports, toys, deceipts, and so
many other villainies, that he showed himself to the full in all his actions an
imitator and follower of Nero and Vitelli. us. All which passages his companion
Marcus Aurelius dissembling, because his vices might not publicly be notified
to the City, very wisely, and to this man's satisfaction, sent him against the
Parthians which were now in rebellion, whom he overcame with many other
Countries.

Coming back to Rome he brought with him all sorts of infamous, lewd, and
vicious persons, with whom he betook himself to his Mosque, whom (...) now
called Turks, have ^mitated for this stately sort of builling, and within a
little after dyed ri^ing in his warlicke Parthian Chariot, ^o refresh himself
by the pleasantness of the place. These were called Divi Fratres, because they
were both adopted by (...) to the Empire: But because (...) was the elder
brother, and more fa^ous, he so carried himself, as if he had been rather a
Father than a Brother to his younger Brother Verus: under these a fifth
persecution was raised against the Christians.

16. Marcus Aurelius.
Anno Domini 162.
portrait of emperor Marcus Aurelius

MArcus Aurelius a Roman by blood, An. Dom. 162.
continued his government after the death of his companion Verus, being adopted
with him by Antoninus. This man was replenished with so great goodness and
virtue, that deservedly he was surnamed The Philosopher. In his time there were
wars, dangerous Earthquakes, grievous floods (...) ^^dations, terrible
dearths, and most fearful plagues. The Church suffered great tribulations by
his persecution. He was little fortunate in his wife; and although he knew
her to be dishonest, yet nevertheless he would not dismiss or divorce her,
affirming her dowry to be the Empire, which dignity amongst men was esteemed an
unvaluable portion: And therefore it could be no wisdom in him to go about
to lose it. This Emperor being in the wars of Germany, dyed of a grievous
sickness called by latter Physiti^ans the Hemeroids, at Beud^bone in Germany,
having reigned 19 years; whose death the whole Empire deplored, to which he
had been so good a Mec^na^, and most excellent Patron; and by the will of some
of his Counselors, and as ^it is thought, by the approbatio^ of most of the
Senate, had his body in great solemnity brought to Rome, and with all the
^funerall Rites tryumphantly interred close by the Capitol.

19. Commodus.
Anno Dom. 182.
portrait of emperor Commodus

COmmodus a Roman, An. Dom. 182.
wicked and vicious, succeeded his good Father Aurelius: who because he was the
son of to great a man, was without any difficulty, and with great applause of
all in general proclaimed Emperor. Being in possession he addicted himself
to all wickedness and vice: Whereupon he gave occasion to (...) to conspire
against him, which he discovering, he made a fresh subject of exercising his
cruelties. He was ^onderous active of body, and admi^able in throwing a Dart:
He dyed ^ost miserably by the means of Mar^ia his concubine, who having found
(...) book wherein were written the ^ames of those which were condemned ^o
dye, and she finding her self amongst the rest, poisoned him: and after as
he was reaching or striving to ^omit, as it was appointed by her, he was
stabbed in diverse places, dying at the age of thirty two years, having reigned
thirteen, leaving no notable memory of himself to posterity.

He caused the Sacrifices peculiar to Hercules, to be offered unto himself,
favoring the Christians, he unwittingly exercised a persecution upon his own
Gentiles. He led a life most ex^orbitant and lewd, and to equalize Nero every
way, he intended to fire the City of Rome: But being hindered of his cruel
intendments, was in his I^periall City strangled, as is generally thought, by a
Parthian slave, whom formerly he had redeemed from death. He was buried in Rome
with Torches by night close by Campus Martius.

20. Helvius Pertinax.
Anno Domini 194.
portrait of emperor Helvius Pertinax

COmmodus being dead, An. Dom. ^94.
Pertinax a Ligurian by Country, although he was meanly descended by
parentage, yet he ascended by his valor (which he chiefly professed) to the
state of the Imperial height. He was the son of a quonda^ Slave or
Libertine, and studying in his youth, he was a Doctor in the Laws: Afterward
he took such felicity and complacency in a military life, that he was noted
to be of a more than ordinary wisdom, and infinite valor in all his actions:
insomuch that by the conspirators against Commodus (now dead) he was assumed
to the Imperial Crown. He so behaved himself, that envy (which is always
the side-mate of virtue) repined; so that a while after some emulous persons
distasting his good government, desirous of novelties, with many wounds
deprived him of life, to an universal grief, being of the age of 66, who
reigned only 7 months, and 27 days, with so great benevolence to all, that
the Senate determined to annumber him to their Deities, and for his honor to
succeeding ages, with all funeral pomp was buried in the Fane of the Goddess
Ceres, lying close to to the now impregnable Castle of Saint Angelo.

21. Didius Iulianus.
Anno Domini 194.
portrait of emperor Didius Julianus

JVlianus of the Dukedom of Millain^ by birth, An. Dom. ^94.
seeing that the Roman Empire was as it were sold according to the will and
affection of the Soldiers, had a great desire concur or compound with the
^oone-in-law of the late deceased Em^eror, making him believe, (that which
indeed afterward came to ^sse) that the Soldiers would not ^^ve chosen
Pertinax his some-in-law, ^at he might not have power to re^nge the death of
his Father-in-law: ^^d for this cause they chose Didius Iu^anus, who being
confirmed against ^e will, and in despite of the Senate, ^^d of the people
also; he reigned not ^ng, because Septimius Severus (a ^an of great valor and
power) being (...) Germany General of the Legions, ^^thought himself upon
this occasion ^^w he might make himself Lord of ^e Empire; and coming within
the ^hole Army to Rome, was by the Se^te acknowledged Emperor: Who ^^ing to the
Palace of Iulianus, (where (...) was in great sorrow and grief) cau^^d him to
be murdered, he having ^^ld the Scepter only two Months, and five days, at
the age of fifty six years, in whose Reign not many actions of worth are
recorded, it being short and troublesome: He wa^ buried in Rome, (not with any
great pomp, because of his Adversari^^ power and malice toward his
confederates) as is supposed, in an obsc^^^ place on the west side of the City.

22. Caius Pescennius.
Anno Dom. 194. This Emperor is not nominated by some, because he was
suddenly slain.
portrait of emperor Caius Pescennius

AT the self same time that Severus was created Emperor, An. Dom. 194.
Pescennius of the Province of Thuscany, being in Soria, was by his sol^iers
saluted likewise Emperor: And whilst both were elected, each put ^imselfe in
the best security and power that he could to sustain their obtained Dignity.
Pescennius passed to Constantinople with his Army, and took in many Towns and
Countries adjacent thereabouts, the better to enable himself against Severus,
who came against him with great forces and power. The Armies both meeting, and
giving each other battle, Pescennius was routed and enforced to fly; and
flying disguised came to Antioch, but being at length discovered, his head was
taken off, and put upon a pole, and carried about by his enemies. His sons
together with their mother were banished, and a few days after flaine. This
Pescennius was a brave soldier, and excellent, a singular Tribune, a valiant
Captain, a famous Consul, but an unfortunate Emperor. He reigned but the
space of one Month, and left this life at Antioch, being indeed cut off by the
^^nds of his persecuting enemies, and (...) conveyed toward Rome by his
sons, but they also were slain by his foes, and his corpse left unburied.

23. Clodius Albinus
Anno Domini 195. This Emperor likewise is not nominated in some Writers,
because he never really had possession.
portrait of emperor Clodius Albinus

CLodius Albinus a Roman, An. Do^ 195.
a man well experienced in war, and valiant, for his prowess deserved by
Commodus to be graced with the name of a Caesar: which title he refusing, was
by Severus created the Primus Consul, and not long after was made fellowpartner
in the Empire. But in after time repenting himself (perhaps) of his too large
liberality and bounty, he sought by deceipts and treacheries, and by most
cunning, fraudulent, and subtle stratagems to make sure of his partner
Severus: but being not able to bring his fetches about, and compass his
unworthy designs, he discovered himself to be his enemy, and with a great
army advances against him: And being now come to handigripes of battle, after
many renewed combats and fights the forces and army of Albinus were worsted
much, and routed, and himself taken prisoner. He was presently brought to
Severus, who caused him to be beheaded, and his head carried all about (...)
^^on a pole, with great contempt (...), and his body thrown to (...)

24. Septimius Severus.
An. Domini 195.
portrait of emperor Septimius Severus

SEverus the son of a noble and powerful Roman, An. Dom. 195.
very conversant both in the Greek and Latin tongues, was created Emperor,
with the good liking, and general applause of all men: In the government
whereof, over and above the many and great satisfactions which he generally
gave, was this, that he was peculiarly open to grant audience to any, and
showed much clemency and goodness toward them. He had an es^ciall care that
the City should be w^ stored with corn and grain of all so^^ and all
necessaries: And being man times assaulted with powerful Armi^^ and enemies,
he nevertheless wi^^ great valor and courage made bra^^ and honorable
resistance, remainin^ always victorious. He had an inte^^ to nobilitate the
City, and be pleasin^ to all, although in his time the f^^ persecution of the
Church began. H^ dyed in the Castle of York, whilst he was in his wars of
England, having governed the Empire to the great content of the world for the
space of eighteen years.

He had not the name of Severus without a cause; for he severely commanded 40,
or thereabout of the Nobility to be cut off, and many more v^lg^^^ because they
said in way of jest, Ver^^^ (...) etc. He dyed at York (as some (...) through
grief of his some Caracallas wickedness, than of any other malady; and had a
Monument Imperial erected to him at Ments in Gormany.

25. Bassianus Caracalla.
Anno Domini 212.
portrait of emperor Bassianus Caracalla

BAssianus was the eldest son of Severus and Martia, An. D^^ 212.
and by the reason he was well beloved in his youth for his virtues, he was
est successor to the Empire. After the death of his Father, changing his
nature, he became so cruel, that like another wicked Nero he slew his own
brother Geta most miserably and cruelly, excusing himself to the soldiers,
that if he had not providently slain him, Geta would have done the like to
him. Not content with this, he put to death a great number of the most repute
and greatness in Rome, being all friends of his dead brother Geta. In fine
finding himself to be in disesteeme, yea, odious and hateful to all, he left
the City, pretending to visit the Empire: in which voyage he did so many base,
vile and brutish acts, that he was deprived of his odious life by the means of
Macrinus, having reigned 6 years, in which space all his actions were such,
that he seemed rather a Stage Player than a^ Emperor. Dio writes, that when
many Presages foretold this Emperor of (...) at hand, he betook himself to
(...) Invocation of devils, thereby to avoid it: and it is to be much admired,
that a man so affected toward all manner of extremes in wickedness, tempered
himself from slaughter of the Christians.

26. Septimius Geta.
Anno Domini 218.
portrait of emperor Septimius Geta

GEta the son of Severus, An. Do^^ 218.
was borne at Milan: This man because he was learned, a lover of good and
virtuous men, of a mild disposition, affable, and courteous to all, was after
the death of his father, by the Army called Prince of the Empire: which Dignity
he managed with so great a wisdom and satisfaction of the people, that he
was by them reputed as a God. Caracalla his brother, envying this his brothers
universal honor and respect, he being a bloody and most wicked man, not
enduring him to be in his company and presence, resolved secretly to poison
him, and having used diverse ways and means, but being not able covertly to
effect it, he slew with his own hands the innocent young man whilst he was
with Iulia his Mother, and Mother-in-law to Caracalla, to the great discontent
of the whole Empire. Being younger brother to Caracalla, was but as a
Co-emperor; but Crowns hardly admit the compartition even of a brother: And
this Geta thought to have undertake^ (...) (...) life, but by his brother was
deprived of his life, and was interred (...) Pruna, as Levinus Hulseus records.

27. Opilius Macrinas.
Anno Domini 218.
portrait of emperor Opilius Macrinas

OPilius Macrinus an Affricran Negro, An. Dom. 218.
having murdered Caracalla, was chosen Emperor by ^e Soldiers, although he
was by ^irth ignoble: Having taken the go^ernment upon him, he made preparation
to go against Artabanus Kin^ of Persia, who to right himself forth wrongs
done him by Caracalla, cam^ toward Rome, but in the way under standing of the
death of his enemy, (...) came into a League with the Roman^ This Macrinus was
so cruel, fierce* and vicious, that he was called of many Of the Latin word
Macellu^ a sha^bles, or butchery.
Macellinus, his house being a Butchery of men by him murdered upon no
occasion at all. At last Heliogabalus by the industry of a crafty old Beldam
wa^ made Emperor: Macrinus being now put to it to defend his Crown and Empire,
was forced to try it out by Arms but being in flight, and shifting for him
self was murdered by the Souldie^ together with his son Diadumen^ whom he
had chosen companion (...) him in the government, having reign only one
year, and two months, a^ was interred at St. Denis in Gaul.

28. Diadumenus.
An. Domini 218.
portrait of emperor Diadumenus

BAssianus being slain by the Army, An. Dom 218.
Diadumenus an Affrican succeeds in the Empire, together with his father, who
was defirous that this his son should take upon him ^he name of Antoninus,
the better to se^ure him from the Soldiers, and had ^any friends of the
Kindred of An^^ninus Pius who were in great num^er, and potent in the City of
Rome: but his dignity continued not long, because in the wars against
Heliogabalus, having governed and commanded his Arm discreetly, and to his
best advantage, and fought with fingular testimonies of undanted courage and
valor, nevertheless dyed in the place, together with his father, to the great
lamentation of all; because the people highly honored him, in expectation of a
great future to them, a conformable to the greatness of spirit, which they
knew and admired in him, grieving the more the loss of him, because the
brevity of his reign permitted him not to leave any memo^^^ (...) hind him to
posterity, having g^^^ned one only year together with (...) Father. He was
buried in Panuovia, (...) as others say, in a place where is now (...)
Monastery erected in Austria.

29. Heliogabalus.
Anno Domini 219.
portrait of emperor Heliogabalus

THe two aforesaid Emperors being slain, An. Dom. 219.
Heliogabalus of Roman descent, immediately lays hold on the Empire. He was
borne in Phenicia of a Concubine of Caracalla's, and being a youth, he was made
Priest of the Sun, and called Heliogabalus, which in that Language signifies
Priest: In which dignity growing on in years, he bettered himself much in
wisdom, fortitude, and other virtues and qualities: insomuch as being created
Emperor, by a great slight he entered into a league with the Parthians: but
after he fell into a life so libidinous, that he had to do with his own
Mother. He ravished Vestall Virgins, and in his Palace he kept Wenches and
Whores, and men of wicked, lewd, and debauched life, upon whom he conferred
the offices of principal note and honor in the Court, with greatest graces
and entertainments possibly he could. Finally, a great tumult amongst the
people being raised against him, he was together with his impious Mother,
having enjoyed the Empire four years, slain at Ratisb^^ in Germany, and
buried at Howtingis: and how far this Emperor exceeded all his Predecessors
in villa^^^ Dio and Herodian makes menti^^^ large, and Capitolinus affirms, he
filled the whole Empire with luxuries, turpitude, riotting, pride, and cruelty.

30. Alexander Severus.
Anno Domini 223.
portrait of emperor Alexander Severus

ALexander Severus a Roman, An. Dom. 223.
was borne in Soria, and was adopted by Heliogabalus: he took upon him the
possession of the Empire Anno Domini 223. In his succession the Roman
Commonwealth began to take breath, by the reason that this Alexander was very
benign, affable, courteous, merciful, and a lover of wise and good men, and
also of the learned men, and men of quality, by whose hands he would have
public matters rightly carried and administered. In his Wars he was most
fortunate, beginning them always with good advice and d^^cretion. He tryumphed
solemnly for his Eastern Conquests, to the great content and satisfaction of
the Rom^n people. He tolerated the Christians to live peaceably, and without
molestations, following the words of the Gospel; Do not that to another,
which thou would not another should do unto thee. Finally, at the
instigation of Maximinus he was slain by the Al^^ soldiers, having his eyes
put out, together with his Mo^^^ ^ who was also a wel-willer and (...) of the
Christian name) upon his birthday, at 29 years of his age, having governed
the Empire thirteen years, six months, and seven days, and his Mother
lies buried at Ratisbone.

Mammaa was a wel-disposed Lady, notwithstanding her great care of his
instruction and education, yet when he came to the Empire, some of his Tutors
(famous men) he put to death, and some he exiled: She favored Origin much,
and often sent for him to her at Antioch, that she might hear from him the
Exposition of the Scriptures.

31. Maximinus.
Anno Dom. 237.
portrait of emperor Maximinus

MAximinus a Thracian by blood although he were ignobly borne, An. Dom. 237.
nevertheless for his agility and nimblenesse he was greatly beloved of many
Emperors, and therefore was made Tribune, and Captain of the fourth Legion of
Alexanders Army, of which he was held in such (...) esteem and repute, that
he was (...) ^ultitude of Soldiers created Emperor anno Domini 237. But after
this election he grew so wicked, that he unjustly put all the friends of
Alexander to the sword. After that he flew upon the Christians, and invented
new and unknown tortures for them. The sixth persecution of the Church of
CHRIST began in his Reign: briefly, he was so horrible, that whilst he was in
the Wars of Germany, the whole Empire rebelled against him. Last of all,
flying with all violence toward the City of Rome, he was cruelly slain by
the Roman soldiers, together with his son, whose heads were carried to Rome,
with incredible joy of all men, he having reigned 3 years.

In his thought he was persuaded, Appendix.
that he could not continue in the Empire but by cruelty: He was first a
Shepherd, and came to the Empire by force of Arms, and the love of his
Officers which then swayed so much, that none could prevail against them: The
Senate was so much in awe and fear of him, that they their wives, and children
privately, and sometime publicly offered Sacrifices to their Idols, that they
might never see his return to their City, whenever he was drawn out upon
any affairs: This Emperors body was Inhum'd at Fulda in Germany, renowned for
the famousnesse, of the Abbey, with the Bishopric belonging to it.

32. Julius Verus Maximus.
portrait of emperor Julius Verus Maximus

BY hereditary right Julius Verus Maximus succeeds his Father Maximnus in the
Empire, and was by nature of so great beauty of person, that very many fair
Ladies loved him in extreme manner, and coveted his company, that they might
have children like him beautiful: to whose suites he as easily and facily
co^descending, and enabled by youth, giving himself wholly to vanity, began to
oversway better thoughts (perhaps) with those of brave clothes to set himself
forth, supposing by that way an impossibility of resistance to be made him by
any Woman whatsoever, were she never so beauteous. He was most temperate in
his drink, but for his belly he was an extraordinary treacher-man, insomuch
that he thought himself able to convey any Parasite whatsoever into his belly
at a meal. Lastly, reposing himself with his Father, was with him slain by
his own soldiers at 18 years of age, the soldiers saying, that it was not
fit one sprigge should be left of such a tree. (...) as other Authors write, he
dyed of a Dropsy, and had funeral rites of sepulture performed to him at
Quendelbourgh, not far from Fulda, the place of his fathers sepulture.

33. Gordianus.
The History makes no mention of the year of his reign, wherefore I affige it
not.
portrait of emperor Gordianus

GOrdianus a most noble Affrican, by the reason he was very virtuous and
temperate in his actions, with great reputation goodness and Justice he
administered all those honorable offices and degrees which the Senate conferred
upon him. This man being Vice-consul in Affricke, was much against his will
created Emperor: Which Election being heard of all over the World, wa^ accepted
by the City, and in particular accepted, reverenced, obeyed, and honored as
Emperor all Italy over, together with Gordian, a son of his very young. Who
upon this their election, made war upon other new Emperors, in which with an
infinite mortality on all sides Gordianus the younger was overthrown, and
slain, which the Father understanding, stabbed himself to the great grief of
all. He reign was but of little continuance, ye^ remarkable enough, the time
and dare of it not exceeding 40 days (...) also departed at Quendelbourgh, a^
had his obsequies celebrated at Nagdebourgh, which of late was massacred, and
almost subverted by the Imperialists Army under Pappenheim.

34. Marcus Clodius Puppienus.
Anno Domini 289.
portrait of emperor Marcus Clodius Puppienus

CLodius Puppienus was ignobly borne, An. Dom. 289.
yet of a Roman extraction, and noble in his actions, and a Soldier of high
esteem and valor; so that he acquired many governments, wherein he carried
himself with more than ordinary prudence, Justice, and dexterity. And
Maximinus being proclaimed an enemy of the Country, Clodius was elected
Emperor by the Senate, together with Balbinus, upon this agreement and
condition, that Belbinus should attend to the government in the City, and
Clodius abroad with his Army should stand for the service of the Common good of
the Country. He fought against Maximinus, performing singular and admirable
service, and remaining victorious he came back to Rome, governing together with
Balbinus rightly and justly. Finally, each of them intending to go, the one
for the Eastern parts against the Persians, and the other against the Germans,
they were both taken by the Pretorian soldiers out of their own Palace, and
c^^ryed through the City, and in the way unjustly slain; and had burial close
to the Quirine Mount in Rome.

35. Celius Balbinus.
Anno Domini 239.
portrait of emperor Celius Balbinus

CElius Balbinus was of an ancient family and Nobility, An. Dom. 239.
and for his virtues chosen Emperor by the Roman Senate, as (...) man of
singular parts and goodness. He showed great liberality, justice, and
clemency toward all ^en: he studied always to preserve and continue the peace
of the Commonwealth, and to the incredible satisfaction of all men, he kept
the people in quietness, whilst Clodius Puppienus fought with Maximinus, in
which interim, had not the prudence of Celius prevented it, there had been a
wonderful mutiny and tumult in the City of Rome, Maximinus having therein such
powerful friends. And Puppienus after that battle returning to Rome, they
both together (as is mentioned before) governed with an universal
satisfaction; but impious fortune envious at their quiet, so brought about,
that they both were slain by (...) Pretorians, as the life of Clod^^s
^^stifieth, which is as much concern^^ this, as this him promiscuously.

36. Marcus Anthonius Gordianus.
Anno Domini 240.
portrait of emperor Marcus Anthonius Gordianus

AFter the death of the two fore-men good Emperors, An. Dom. 240.
Gordianus a Roman by pa^ntage, was elected by the Preto^ans, and the Senate
perceiving ^hey could not remedy these passa^es, approved this election
never^^elesse with great applause, because ^e was well beloved of all in
gene^all. He had to wife the daughter of a great learned man, whose advice
concerning the Empire was held in great estimation. He recovered Thracia from
the Goths; he fought against that powerful Sapores King of Persia, and came
off with great honor victorious: He recovered Antioch, and passing further,
he took in the great Cities of Carr^ and Nesibo, in which voyage the Grand
Counceller his Father-in-law dyed: in whose place he chose Philippus, who
became so prou^ and insolent for the degree and honor he received, that
utterly contemning Gordianus, esteeming (...) now no more Emperor, caused (...)
to be slain at 20 years of his age and of his Empire the fourth: he received
his death at Nola, and (...) burial at Bambergh.

37. Caius Valens Hostilianus.
This Emperor although he is unknown to some Historians, yet thus much notice
is found of him.
portrait of emperor Caius Valens Hostilianus

OF this Valens Hostilianus because the Historiographers make little or no
mention, it is thought that his Parents were unknown, and consequently, little
or nothing can be said of him: And yet it is true that some affirm, that after
the death of Gordianus, there was a certain Marcus chosen by the Senate, of
whom there is not any essential relation found out, but only this, that he
dyed suddenly, and that in his place this Hostilianus was created by the
Senate, and that by a sudden pride, elation, and conceit of joy falling
sick, dyed suddenly: although some say, the above said Marcus yet living, he
was allotted him as fellow Emperor, or partner and colleague in the command, and
that Hostilianus was saluted by the Title of Augustus, But it is credible, that
both of them dying suddenly as it is supposed, left no great note behind them.

38. Marcus Julius Philippus.
Anno Domini 246.
portrait of emperor Marcus Julius Philippus

JVlius Philippus an Arabian borne, An. Dom. 246.
a man of a coorfespun thread by descent, but in Arms of a finer worth and
hue, was by Gordianus made Captain General against the Persians: And by
little Gordianus became disesteemed of the soldiers by this man's means,
commanding them to kill him, and proclaim Philippus Emperor: And making peace
(although much disliked) with the Persians, marched toward Rome, where he
made his son Philippus a Colleague in the Empire. He instituted those plays
called Saeculares, in the memory of the first foundation of the City. At that
time making Decius General against the Goths, the soldiers called their
General Emperor; against whom Philippus marched with a powerful Army; but
being hated of all by reason of his too imperious command and government, he
was by them wounded at Verona, but dyed at Vtrect Anno Domini 250, and was
buried at Spiers a famous Imperial City in Aquitaine. This Emperor was a
Christian, and the first that received Baptism: he reigned 5 years.

In his time the famous Cyprian flourished, and was made Bishop ^^^^^rthage.
Apollonia the Virgin, after her jaws were broken, and ^eeth pulled and knocked
our, Josephus. Baronius. Spondanus:
) by ^he command of this Emperor, who ^id behold the action) would rather
^oluntarily cast her self into the ^^re prepared for her, then speak
^lasphemy: and after some other ^ruelties committed by this Emperor, was
converted and baptized a Christian.

39. Marcus Julius Philippus.
Anno Domini 246.
portrait of emperor Marcus Julius Philippus

MArcus Julius Philppus son of Philippus and Severa, An. Dom. 246.
was made Caesar and Colleague of the Empire by his Father at seven years of
his age: at which time he became a Christian, being baptized by his Fathers
appointment, together with a great number of his nea^^st and dearest friends
and servants. (...) holy and salutiferous action being performed by the chief
Commanders of the Roman Empire, was an occasion that many came to the knowledge
of the truth, and fixed their eyes upon the true light of Jesus Christ our
Redeemer. This Emperor was by nature so melancholy, that no man living could
make him once laugh, although many did their best endeavors by slights and
inventions. This youth having reigned 7 years, and being at the age of 14, at
the report of his fathers death all over the City, by the Pretorian soldiers
was suddenly and cruelly slain: but by his special friends, and those that
favored him for his Christianity, his corpse was conducted to Spiers, and
there inurn'd, not far off from his Father.

40. Decius.
An. Domini 250.
portrait of emperor Decius

AFter the death of the Philips, An. Dom. 250.
Decius an Austrian, succeeds without any resistance or difficulty, but was
vi^^ voce elected by the whole Senate, and was called Imperator Augustus,
because he was a man endued with great virtue and valor, very wise and
prudent, and well experienced in most offices and Magistracies, discharged by
him with singular dexterity and wisdom. Briefly, he was of a goodness, that
he might worthily have been enrolled amongst the good Princes, had not the
Church suffered so great tribulations and afflictions under him, being an
Infidel and non-credent, which was the seventh perfecution which the Church of
God endured. He was victorious against the Goths, and joining a fresh
battle with them, by the treason of Trebonianus Gallus his Captain General
he was overthrown. And at the report of the death of his son Decius, putting
spurs to his horse, and giving him the reins, wilfully precipitated, and
cast himself into a deep pit without hope of safety, and to the loss of his
life, at the 50 year of his age, and of his Empire the second, and anno Domini
252, and buried at Spiers. In the heat of his persecution he commanded is
certain young man, a Christi^^, to be bound, and lie upon his back, and an
harlot to be sentus him, to provoke him to lust, which he perceiving, and
feating to be overcome with pleasure, ^it off his tongue, and spit it in her
(...) as she was kissing him; so that the greatness of that pain overcome
the sense of lust.

41. Mesius Decius.
Anno Dom. 250.
portrait of emperor Mesius Decius

OF no less goodness and valor than his Father was this Decius even in his
youth: An. Dom. 250.
wherefore he was chosen as partner in the Empire, and by the Senate confirmed
Caesar, and successor to Decius his father, with whom (as a brave soldier) he
went to the wars of the Cothes, which was so bloody and terrible, that the
greater part of the Roman Army was slain, and put to flight, and Decius the
youth was mortally wounded by an arrow through his very heart, where in the
sight of his Father he suddenly fell down dead from his horse, moving not
only his own soldiers, but even his enemies to compassion, having reigned
two years, together with his father Decius. The which news being understood by
the Senate, much afflicted them, not so much for the slaughter and loss of so
many vanant and noble Romans, as for the unfortunate end of both the Emperors:
his reign being (...) absolute, but with his fathers a (...) bation, the
Senate and City lost not only a good Tree, but also an hopeful fruit.

42. Trebonianus Gallus.
Anno Domini 252.
portrait of emperor Trebonianus Gallus

AFter the great and terrible slaughter of the Roman Army in the battle with
the Goths, An. Dom. 252.
Trebunianus being by birth a Gaul, borne at Delean, by the surviving
soldiers was elected Emperor: which when it was understood, the Senate also
confirmed the election, and the title Augustus was granted unto him. Seeing
himself now in this greatness, being very desirous to go to Rome, to the
great detriment and impairing of the imperial dignity and Crown, he
concluded a peace with the Goths, making the Empire tributary and pensionary to
them, and as it were in their subjection: For not long after, the Goths broke
the peace, and greivously troubled Asia, and a part of Italy. In these so great
calamities Emilianus Captain General under Gallus, obtained one sole victory
against the Goths, for which he became so insolent and proud, that he
labored by all means to win the good will of the southers, insomuch that he
was by them elected and sworn Emperor. Which Gallus understanding departed
from the City of Rome, together with his son whom he had already pu^lished
and declared to be his companion in the Empire: and coming to try it out with
Emilianus, he with his son were slain in the second year of his government
at Verona, and was buried in Saxony.

The persecution now slackned for a time, so that the exiled returned each to
his home: in these times a Plague taking its beginning first in Egypt, was so
vehement, that it infected generally the whole world, and lasted for the space
of 10 years.

43. Volustanus.
Anno Domini 252.
portrait of emperor Volustanus

Caius Vibius Volusianus was by his Father Trebonianus Gallus made companion in
the Empire, An. Dom. 252.
and in an excellent warrelike order marched against the Goths to defend his
Fathers dignity now disturbed by Emilianus, who for a notable victory against
the Goths, was by the soldiers elected Emperor in the time of Gallus and
Volusianus. Whereupon the Armies both meeting, and both endeavoring to gain
the best advantage of ground to facilitate and secure the victory: In the first
assault and brunt being for saken of his soldiers, was together with his
Father miserably sl^^no at Bambergh in Germany, but was conveyed to the City of
Lorychium, as is above related, in the life of Trebonianus. Wherefore we cannot
write any more of him to the satisfaction of the Reader which is a true lover
of History, but give him this only touch in this succinct manner and brevity
(...) ^^^ning the lives of them, both (...) and son.

44. Aemilianus.
Anno Domini 254.
portrait of emperor Aemilianus

TO the two precedent Emp^^tors Aemilianus succeed, An. Dom. 254.
by birth an Afrcean, bo^^ in Mauritania of an obscure and altogether unknown
parentage, but raised himself by continual diligence in the services of
war; being grown in some years, he served in diverse degrees in the
Cavallery, or Horse, and by Decius was made a Captain General of the confines
of Samaria, where he became in so great esteem with the Soldiers, that by
them he was to the incredible joy of all saluted Emperor, and accepted to be
so by the States of the City. Against whom a General of the Army at that time
upon the Alps, Valerianus a noble man, and in great repute and power, not
willing to consent that this Aemilianus should enjoy so great a dignity, openly
explained and declared himself, unto whom even the soldiers of Aemilianus
adhering, being moved with the great estimation they had of Valerianus,
confirmed the election, and with common consent slew Aemilianus in Sapole^^
(...) his age of 40 years, after the (...) month of his reign.

But concerning the place of his death, others write that it was in a City in
Armenia the less, and that this Emperors funeral was kept (...) Tire in
Greece.

45. Valerianus.
Anno Domini 255.
portrait of emperor Valerianus

UAlerianus the son of Val^^^ Flaccus, An. Dom. 255.
of a most noble family among the Romans, attained to the Imperial seat by
his valor and gracious behavior, as is abovesaid, and confirmed Emperor,
both within and without the City with as great an applause (...) ^^ver any. He
had two sons, the eldest of them called Galienus, who was by the whole City
called Caesar and successor in the Empire; the second, Valerianus by name, was
by his father likewise named and made Caesar.

The father was a great friend of the Christians, but at the persuasion of a
Magician he used them with great cruelty, and his was the al^th persocution of
the Church. For which sin it came to pass, that going with a great Army
against Sapores King of the Persians, Valerianus was taken prisoner, and
amongst other disgraceful contempes (...) to him by Sapores, this was a
chief, that when he was to take horse, he made the Emperor lie down upon the
ground, for the King to set his foot upon his neck. Afterward his eyes were
boared out, and dyed thereof although some Writers are of opinion, that he was
flead alive and lived in that misery and servitude seven years.

Valerianus was held by some learned men to be that Antichrist which is spoken
of in the Apocalypse, he^ was so wicked and cruel: Saint Laurence suffered
under him, Cyprian likewise. This Emperor dyed in Persia, and because he fell
into the hands of his enemies, as is to be thought, not but by divine Justice,
he wanted not only Imperial sepulture, but also his corpse was hung upon
poles in the view of all (...) own soldiers, and left rather (...) scorn
than pity.

46. Galienus.
Anno Domini 256.
portrait of emperor Galienus

GAlienus succeeds his Father Valerianus, Anno Domini 256.
who by the Senate was made Caesar, and by his Father Augustus. He was yet a
youth when he took upon him to govern, yet he carried himself very
respectively, giving singular good examples of behavior and perfection of life
and conversation. But afterward, his Father being taken prisoner by the King
of the Persians, he did not only not endeavor to redeem him, but (as it
were altogether forgetting him) gave himself to a life no less careless than
dishonest, and in all things contrary to his first beginnings, fruitlessely
spending his time in banquets; baths, wantonness, lust, shows, and Pageants;
sometimes bloody and cruel, and sometimes ridiculous and pleasant. By whose
life the Republique was not a little debilitated and weakened, and the Empire
was (...) into thirty Tyrannies, to the (...) slaughter of the Roman Ci^^^^ And
in the end going against Aur^^lus Prince of Sclavonia, he was slain in the
battle, having governed eight years absolute, and seven with his Father.

Claudius being ashamed of Gali^nus his laziness, began to affect the
government, whereby he might revenge himself of the tyrannies of some: which
Galienus perceiving, sought him (but in vain) by donations to desist.

47. Saloninus Valerianus.
Anno Domini 261.
portrait of emperor Saloninus Valerianus

OF this Emperor there is little or no mention made in History, Anno Domi^^ 261.
and therefore it may be called none at all; because he was murdered being a
of ten years of age by the French: not so much for his own particular cause,
(as it is likely in respect of his childhood not apt to make him odious) but
for his fathers, by whom he was suffected in the place of his elder brother
Cornelius Valerianus, who likewise dyed in his minority. He was the son of
Licinius Galienus and Salonia, from whom many would have him take his name: and
others strongly affirm, not without good reason, because he was borne in
Salonia. But be it as it will, it imports not much; it suffices that nothing
i^ written of him worth the while, but only this, that by his example the
miseries of those times may be reflected on, being it was held the greatest
infelicity and misery to be an Emperor.

48. Posthumous.
Anno Domini 261.
portrait of emperor Posthumous

BY birth Posthuinius was a Roman, a man really just, An. Dom. 261.
and adorned with excellent quality and virtue, of an irreprehensible behavior
and carriage: wherefore he was by Galienus so highly esteemed, that he gave
him the charge of his son, and by the means of his valor and counsel in
War, he overthrew all the Tyrants of the Roman Empire to his glory, and
terror of the whole Universe. After the death of the aforesaid Galienus, he
was by the French and the whole Army elected Emperor: In which government his
works and actions were so admirable, that with goodness and dexterity he gave
complete satisfaction to all. Lastly, when he thought himself most secure in
his government, he was by the French murdered, together with his son. By
whose death those which are too considing to the goods of For^^^^, may make
useful consideration because in the ten years wherein (...) reigned Emperor,
he well experienced the many mutabilities thereof

49. Flavius Claudius.
Anno Dom. 269.
portrait of emperor Flavius Claudius

THe 49 Emperor was Claudius, being a Goth by birth, An. Dom. 269.
and the second of that name, who was created Emperor in the year of the 262
Olympiade, who reigned only one year and 9 months, being crowned to the
great joy and content of the whole Senate of Rome: And so soon as he was
confirmed in the Imperial dignity, with just cause, and upon very good grounds
he made war upon the Goths, who had now for the space of 15 years wasted,
robbed, pillaged, and sacked all the Country of Sclavonia, and that of Macedon
a by their wars and inhumane cruelties and having gloriously overcome them, for
so remarkable and famous an act he deserved to wear a Crown of massive Gold
even in his Palace for his greater Majesty and Magnificence. After that falling
sick, he dyed suddenly at Smyrua, ^^i^^ilius his brother supplying his pla^^
a man no way inferior to (...) valor, wisdom, and goodne^^.

It was not without the Divi^^ providence, that Claudius should find the
Empire so beset with en^mies, that he might not put in practice those cruelties
which he intended against the Christians, wh^^ he hated above all.

50. Quintilius.
Anno Domini 271.
portrait of emperor Quintilius

WE said that Quintilius was the brother of Claudius not only in blood; An.
Dom. 271.
but in his behavior, valor, and goodness; and therefore upon the death of
his brother, by the Senate he was deservedly called Caesar Augustus to his
infinite praise and perpetual memory. But because Aurelianus was ^t the same
time created Emperor by the Army, and perceiving himself to be in great
inequality of force and power to resist the strength and power of so valiant a
Commander, (called to that dignity and degree with the general consent of so
many most potent soldiers) fell into so deep a melancholy and ill conceit,
that he coveting solitude bent his whole intention to what means or way he
might preserve himself Emperor, and not finding any, he voluntarily after the
seventeenth of his Empire, opened (...) veins in Aquileya, and dyed (...)
infinite grief of those who (...) ^lected him: and had his (...) Rites
performed in a glorious ^^^ner, according to the custo^^ (...) the Romans, and
was (...) Smyrna.

51. Aurelianus.
An. Domini 271.
portrait of emperor Aurelianus

AVrelianus was borne in Dacia, An. Dom. 271.
and succeeds in the E^^pire after the death of Gla^bus. being a young child,
he was ^rought to (...); where he became ^o learned, that had be not been
stained with blood and cruelty, (...) had not come short, but equalled even the
best of his Predecessors in ^audable memory: because he was not only in
learning very knowing but also in Arms most expert (...) valiant; so that
taking the government upon him, he made war upon the Gaths; and overthrew
the^ horse and foot. He overcame i^ Asia, and took the Queen Ze^^bia. He
conquered the Catelan^^ and recovered France; and returning to Rome he
pompously tryumphed. After that he repaired the City-walls, adorned it with
Temples and Altars, and beautified (...) with edifices. Finally, by ill
counsel he persecuted the Christi^^ with most rigorous execution (...) ding
out Edicts and Pro^la^^^^ to that effect all over the world, (...) an express
order to appre he (...) put them to death. Lastly, (...) ^laine suddenly in
the way betw^^ Constantinople and Here^^ia.

This Emperor would (...) ^^y Co-partner of the Digni^^y (...) ^^periall, but
was wont to say, that Herecules was his Co-emperor, as it appears in an old
insculption: Herculi Aug. Consorti D. N. Aureliani Invicti Aug. Respub. Pis,
etc.

52. Tacitus.
Anno Domini 276.
portrait of emperor Tacitus

THE Fifty second Emperor of the Romans was Tacitus, An. Dom. 276.
and borne in Poland, who after the Death of Aurelianus, took upon him the
Helm of ^^vernment, and ruled only (...) Months. He was a singular man,
replenished with eminent sinceri^^ and had as much as could be wished or
desired to be in man, and principally in all Heroical acts that ought to be in
all good Princes that govern their subjects peaceably, and in a way of gaining
a love without flattery, and a fear without malice: He being known to be
thus, was by the common acclaiming consent both of the Senate and people chosen
to this dignity. So soon as he was elected Emperor, reflecting upon the
deserts of his Antecessor Aurelianus, he erected him a Statue of Gold, and
placed it among their Gods, causing all those to be flaine that were any ways
accessory to the death of Aurelianus. The ^^nate by the election of (...),
thought all things restored, and to be rectified by the exemplar puoimment of
his Predecessors: he caused all persecution to cease. He was murdered by the
treason of his Soldiers, although some affirm that he died of a Fever, at
the years of 66. He reigned 6 months.

It is found in Flavius Vopiscus, and other Authors, that in Terni their
Country, which was a Territory of the Romans, famous for Nobility and Gentry,
there were Tombs erected to him and his brother Florianus, and Monuments by
the Greeks called Caenotaphia, and by the Latins, Honoraria Sepulchra; whose
Monuments were (...) the gate of Terni, which is (...) called Spoletina, it
having (before) the name of the gate of the three Monuments, hear the
suburbane Orchards of the Marquess Castelli.

53. Florianus.
Anno Domini 277.
portrait of emperor Florianus

FLorianus was the brother of Tacitus, An. Dom. 277.
being also a Polander by birth, both sprung from the Claudian line, a most
potent family and Imperial: of which lineage as ancient recording memories yet
extant do testify, one branch extended it self into V^bria, and took a
root of residence at the City of Terni, which even to the times of our now
Grandsires has been the Mother of the most famous and invict Commanders and
Captains. This succeeds his brother Tacitus in the Empire neither by the
election of the Senate, nor by the choice, good liking, or consent of the
soldiers, but mera regnandi cupiditate, for the mere defire, nay, greediness
of the rule and government, as true heir, and so by irreption takes it upon
him. But this his greatness lasted not long; Mole ruit sua, sinking
voluntarily under the burden: because having heard the news that Probus (a
man for his singular quality worth the Empire) was elected Emperor by the Army,
and seeing himself not any way able to resist his power, which was
irrepugnable, fell into an cutreame melancholy, which proved incurable; but by
the opening his veins to let in death: Although though some say, that he was
slain by his own Guard near the City of I harsus, the third month of his
Empire: And his funeral obsequies were richly solemnized at Rome, but has a
Monument erected at Syrmio^ he dyed at the age of 23 years.

54. Probus.
Anno Domini 278.
portrait of emperor Probus

IF this Emperor had not had this Nomen of Probus, Anno Domini (...)
being a native Polander, he might justly have had it given him as a Cognomen.
He was the son of Maximus the Tribune: He was borne in the City of Sirmio
as some affirm, in the Country of Hungaria. He made most noble imp^^sses in
Arms under Valerianus, Decius, and Aurelianus, and for (...) worth and valor
being much beloved of the Soldiers, he was by the whole Oriental Army elected
Emperor Anno Domini 278, and lay the S^^^^ (...) with a general J^bi^^^ joy,
(...) p^^a^se of every man: He was honored wi^^ (...) of Caesar Augustu, and
Pater Patria. No sooner had he entered into the possession of the Empire, but
he recovered France newly overrun and maistrised by the Barbarians. He took
Saturninus which molested the Eastern parts, and Procolas, (men well
experienced in Wars) and for those victories tryumphed. But although he were
a man w^^thy all humane greatness, nevertheless by his own Soldiers he was
most cruelly murdered in ^^land his native soil, in the 75 year of his age:
he governed the Empire five years, and for the love he get of the Christians,
they erected stately Monument in Syrmio to cre^nall fame. It is thought, that
because he suffered the Christians so live in peace, God gave him so many
tryumphant victories against the Barbariaus, of whom he slew in o^^ battle
above 40000.

55. Marcus Aurelius Carus.
Anno Domini 282.
portrait of emperor Marcus Aurelius Carus

CArus was an Illyrian by birth, An. Domini 282.
whose admirable valor and for his general knowledge in Learning and Min^^ary
Art, was an occasion for his great honor and repute, that he was made
Prafectus Prat^^^ under Probus, to whom he succeeded in the E^pire in the
year of Christ 282, and instantly with great rigor revenged the death of his
Antecessor Probus, and governing with Charinus and Numerianus his sons, he
made many noble and mavelous impresses in Arms, to the glory and exaltation
of the Roman Empire, and particularly in Mesopotamia: after that he sacked the
great Cities of Seven and Cte^phon: for the which conquests in a short time he
gloriously gained the name of Tremendus, (the terrible) having terrified all
these Nations which as yet had not been subdued by him. Finally, by the wound
of an Arrow he (...) the River Tigris in the 43 (...) his age, having governed
(...) pire one year and some months.

Some Authors who lived in h^ Reign, write, that he was slain (...)
Lightning, and inhum'd at the famous City called Syrmio in Hu^g^ry.

56. Numerianus.
Anno Domini 283.
portrait of emperor Numerianus

TO Carus succeeds his son Numerianus, An. Dom. 283.
being an Illyrian; who was both so eminent and excellent a Poet and Orator,
that the Senate erected him a Statue in the Vulpian Library. In the wars ^e was
also most valorous; he went with his Father to the wars against ^he Persians:
after which he was ^oth by the Army and people of Rome saluted Emperor anno
Domini 283. And his father being dead, as we said before; he fell into such a
bitterness and depth of mourning, that by the abundance of his tears he lost
his fight, whereupon he was brought back to Rome in a Litter, remaining
victorious over all Asia. And supposing himself safely arrived (being somewhat
comforted with a hope of ruling and governing the Empire, not by eyesight, but
by understanding) by a most unjust stratagem was slain by his Father in law in
his Sedan or Litter, (...)
having governed together with his Father and brother one year and some
months, and in the 20 year of his age; and was buried by his father^^ the
aforesaid City on the East Side in which place his Effigies was set (...) in
Brass, as it was taken in his life time by the whole Senate and the Consuls
for a memorial to all age^ for his sweet Elocution and Language.

57. Carinus.
Anno Domini 283.
portrait of emperor Carinus

TO Carus, An. Dom. 283.
Carinus was the second son, being of the same nation, who departing from his
Father, took upon him the government of France and Britany, as also of Italy,
and (as it were) of all the Western parts: In which government he defiled his
life in such sort with brutish and bestiall enormities, that his father would
not acknowledge him for his son, and took from him the style of Caesar
giving it to Constantinus.

After the death of his father and brother, he fell into a greater
licentiousness than ever before: and in his time Ruffians and lewd men were
possessed and estated in places of greatest dignity and honor. Harlots and
Jesters, and such like were residenciaries in his Palace: But in the end
advancing his forces against Dioclesianus, who was by the Army elected Emperor,
and giving him battle, in the last assault he was taken in Dalmatia by the
soldiers, and brutishly slain in the prisonhouse by the express command of
Dioclesianus, having reigned a small time, and in the eighteenth year of his
age, and had little or no funeral Rites bestowed on him, but was buried in
Syrmio by night.

58. Dioclesianus.
Anno Domini 284.
portrait of emperor Dioclesianus

DIoclesianus a Dalmatin borne and of a noble Family, Anno Domini 284.
a a man of a sharp wit, and in Martial affairs very valiant, was by the
whole Army chosen Emperor. Being possessed of the government, with his own
hands he revenged the death of Varro. He declared and appointed wars in
diverse places, and remained victorious in all. There were nevertheless wars
made against him by sundry Princes, and being of himself not sufficient for
resistance, he took Maximinian^^ to be his Co-emperor: and his enemies
multiplying every where, he was at one time molested in the East, in Affricke
and in Egypt; wherefore he chose for his better assistance Galerius and
Constantius brothers, as Emperors, giving each of them a charge of defending
the places offended. He much persecuted the Christians. Lastly, all the Empire
being pacified by his industry and quiet, he voluntarily resigned the Crown,
and retyring him self in Salona, he there ended his life by poison, at the age
of 68 years, and had funebriall Rites at Milan in Italy.

This Emperor had a virtuous Lady to Wife called Serena, who secretly professed
herself a Christistian, and much cherished and favored the Christians, and
persuaded those that were her Attendants to be constant to death, but withal
privately: This Emperor caused a whole Legion, 6666 of Thebean Chrjstian
soldiers to be decimated, that is, every tenth man cut off, and then by the
whole Army slain, for refusing to sacrifice to the Ido^^, by the plot of
Manimilianus his Ge^^rall.

59. Maximianus Herculius.
Anno Domini 287.
portrait of emperor Maximianus Herculius

AMongst all impious and w^^ked men this Maximia^^^ a Polander borne, (...).
was the worst, and a most subtle inventor of mischief, and especially in the
persecution of the Christians under Diocletianus: But he was in War most
valorous, and of an exquisite judgment and discourse upon that subject,
whereby he obtained many victories by battles, for which returning to Rome
he pompously tryumphed. At the length by the entreaty of Dioclesianus he
betook himself to a private life a long time in Milan, where he sojourned in
quiet and very peaceable tranquillity. Afterward he retired himself to
Marselles, where he fell into such a terrible and grievous disease in his
entrails and bowels, that he could not find any cure, and by the just
judgment of God he deservedly dyed, being not only hateful to himself, but
even to all men, and was interred at Milan without any funeral ceremonies in
the 68 year of his age.

60. Val. Constantius Clorus.
Anno Domini 291.
portrait of emperor Constantius Clorus

COnstantius Clorus a Roman borne, Anno Domini ^91.
was the son of ^^tropius a most noble Roman, and of Claudia the daughter of
Clasdius Augustus; for his noble valor, good behavior and carriage was by
Maximinianus made Caesar. The aforesaid Princes being voluntarily resigned the
government of the Empire, he considering the greatness of the weight and
burden, refused all other government whatsoever, but only that of France:
Which he furnished with things necessary, salutiferous, good Laws and customs
more than ever any his Predecessors had done: which are yet an ornament, yea, a
Majesty to all the ancient Nobility of that Kingdom. He subdued Britany to a
then general content and satisfaction of our Nation: He molested not the
Christians, and under his government every man was incredibly content and
satisfied. Finally falling sick at York, he dyed in the 13 year of his
Imperial dignity, and at his age of 63.

61. Constantius Galerius.
An. Domini 304.
portrait of emperor Constantius Galerius

ALthough this Galerius were ignoble by blood, Anno Domini ^04.
being an Hungarian by birth, he was nevertheless so famous for warlike
enterprises, that Dioclesianus adopted and made him Caesar. After his victory
gotten against Narseus, he was created Augustus, and he adopted Maximianus and
Severus, Caesar's: and Severus dying he gave his succession to Licinius. He was
bloody and most cruel against the Christi^ns: but falling into a dangerous
^icknesse, he imagined that it came upon him for the martyrizing and ^annishing
of the Christians: wher^ore recalling them, he carnestly in^reated them that
they would pray and intercede for him to their God: and commanded further, that
no affliction should be inflicted upon them. Whose prayers (peradventure so
was the Divine Will) nothing avayled him, but his evil rather increased, and
his torments augmented so, that he dyed like a beast of a most cruel and
filthy disease, having reigned two years absolute, and sixteen in the company
of other Caesar's.

This Constantius showed himself favorable toward the Christians, and had
many of his Household servants Christians: He told them, that unless they
would sacri^^^^ to the Gods as formerly they h^^ done, they should not serve
him, but be gone. When he saw that they went away, rather then they would
forsake their God, he recalled them into his service, and turned away his
Pagan Servants, as likely to prove perfidious unt^ him, who preferred honors
before Religion.

62. Maximianus.
Anno Dom. 304.
portrait of emperor Maximianus

MAximianus an Hungarian borne, An. Dom. 304.
was Nephew to Galerius, wherefore he was by him adopted, and after that
although he were ignoble, yet he became to be Augustus. He was nevertheless
noble in his behavior and gesture, in virtues likewise; so that he might
equally parallel any Sovereign or Prince whatsoever. He honored much the
learned, and familiarly embraced them, taking infinite pleasure and complacency
in any noble Science or Study. He was of a very quiet and temperate
disposition, but very amorous, and a great lover of wine, by which being many
times overtaken, he most imperiously commanded, and like a madman: wherefore
he deferred matters of state and moment unto audience and Judgment. He
greatly persecuted the Christians, and the Church at that time suffered no
small detriment. Fighting a certain battle he was worsted much, together
with Licinius his Co-emperor; and not willing to come into the hands of his
enemies, he strangled himself; but as some report, he stabbed himself in
Tharsus, having governed 7 years, and had sepulture in Dacia with small
ceremonies, being obscurely buried.

63. Severus.
Anno Domini 304.
portrait of emperor Severus

Hoar for the cruelty against the Christians, An. Domini 304.
than for nobility of descent, or degree of honor, this name agreed to this
Severus, his Nation being unknown; having barbarously invented strange,
exquisite, and new manners and ways of persecutions against the Christian
Religion, and its humble servants; whose constancy in the holy faith made the
Tyrant amazed, astonished, and mad with himself. He was by Galerius called
Caesar and Augustus. Whilst he was President in Afric and in Italy, the
Pratorian soldiers by a seditious mutiny created Maxentius Augustus, who was
the son of Maximianus: against whom Severus marching with a powerful Army,
came before the City of Rome. But within few days perceiving his soldiers
inclining rather to Maxentius than to him, and questioning his own person and
life he fled into Sclavonia, which being (...) the soldiers mistrusted, they
(...) took him in Ravenna, and by them was there most milerably murdered in
the second year of his reign, being respectlesly interred where he was slain.

64. Naxontius.
Anno Domini 306.
portrait of emperor Naxontius

BY the reason that Maxentius was the son of Maximianus, An. Dom. 306.
an Hungarian by descent, he was by the greater part of the Senate elected
Emperor: In his government he followed the steps of his Father in persecution
of the Christians, yea, even with a greater rigor he would exceed and go
beyond him, appremiating those which could propose newest and cruellest ways
of martyrdomes and afflictions. And amongst the rest of his cruelties which he
used, (not by the instigation of any man, but out of his own invention and and
furious brain) this was one: That (being a Necromancer) he slew Christian
women being great with child, and took the children yet unborne out of their
wombes, the ashes whereof he used in his execrable art, to make himself
greater in authority and power: All which availed him nothing; because that
fighting with Constantinus the Great upon a Bridge, he was by him thrown and
drowned in the river Tyber, which happened in the fifth year of his reign,
having no other sepulture then the River.

This Emperor used to join the living bodies of men with other dead carcases,
and being chained mouth to mouth, he caused them to be tumbled up and down.

65. Licinius.
Anno Dom. 310.
portrait of emperor Licinius

LIcinius a Dacian borne, An. Dom. 310.
being a man known to be singular and rare in feats of Arms, was by Galerius
made Captain General, afterward Co-emperor. For wretched avarice and
bestiality of lust, he was known to be most dissolute, and he was so ill
bred, and extravagantly drowned in ignorance, that he became an enemy of all
litterate and learned men, terming them the skum and filth of men, endeavoring
by all means that men should shun and avoid them as a poison or a contagious
plague. He grew so insolent and proud for one only victory which he obtained
in the East, that he slighted and contemned Constantinus, and began to
increase his cruelty and tyranny against the Christians: Whereupon Constantinus
opposed himself, and they both joining battle, this Tiger was put to flight
in the Country of Pannonia, and intending to reinforce his cause, was in his
(...) camp by his own soldiers manacred in Thessalonica at the age of 50
years, and of his government (...) and was carelessly cast into a pit, having
no other respective funeral.

66. Martinianus.
Anno Domini 312.
portrait of emperor Martinianus

MArtinianus, Anno Domini 312.
a Sclavonian by Nation, a man meanly borne, but well experienced in the Art
Military, was for that cause made General of the Horse. He was created Emperor
and Caesar in Bizantium: but in a short time he lost both dignity and life:
because being taken in Thessalia with Licinius, by the express command of
Constantine they were both murdered by the Soldiers; and therefore not having
left any memorial behind him but this example, that we may see and know, that
many were raised to the Imperial dignity more by sedition, ambition, and
interest in their soldiers, than by any their just desert, claim, or title to
such a degree. But it is no wonder that in a manner all or most of them died
immaturely and unfortunately; being they had neither a mean, order, or regular
way of governing themselves, much less others; living for the most part
dissolutely, not reflecting on the Proverb, Qualis vita, Finis ita: Live well,
dye well.

67. Constantinus Magnus.
Anno Domini 312.
portrait of emperor Constantinus Magnus

COnstantine, An. Dom. 312.
a Britan by Nation, a man most valiant, and worthy in a manner of an Empire
more than any one of his Antecessors: after the death of his I suppose i^ is
meant Constantian Clor^^.
Father, he was elected Emperor. He overcame all the Tyrants of the Empire, and
recovered all rebellious Countries: wherefore he entered into the City of Rome
in wonderful pomp. He began to persecute the Christians, wherefore
(peradventure by the divine will and pleasure) he was so infected with a
Leprosy, that the Physicians left him as incurable. But the heavenly Grace was
his assistance; for being asleep in the night, he saw a vision telling him,
that if he desired to recover his health, he should recall Silvester the
Bishop, and all the Clergy from exile. Which thing he performing, and being
baptized, he was immediately cured. And increasing in devotion, he built many
Churches to the glory and hon^it of God. This Emperor would say in praise of
Age, that Age appeared to be best in four things: Old wood best to burn, old
Wine to drink, old friends to trust, and old Authors to read of. Moreover he
said, that there was but this difference between the death of old men and
young men: that old men go to death, and death comes to young men.

This Emperor built a City called by his name Constantinople, whither he
after translated the Imperial seat. And being at the age of 66 years he
passed to a botter life, to the great grief of all, and especially of the
Christians then living, whom he did entirely love and cherish. He obtained the
sole Monarchy of the whole Empire, and every where restored peace to the
Church. He was prolected (...) in all his wars: he exhorted (...) to
Christianity, but compelle (...). It was thought that he was poisoned of his
brothers at Nicomedia: in Greece, and had pompous sunorals worthy of so great a
Man, at the Gity of Constantinople which he had lately built^.

68. Crispus.
An. Domini 314.
portrait of emperor Crispus

ABritan by birth was Crispan, An. Dom. ^14.
who by his Father Constantiue was elected Emperor, and honored with the
title of Casar: he was a man so proper and complete in the beauty of person,
that Fausta his Mother in law sought by all means possible to allure and
entice him to her lust: unto whom he by no means willing to consent, by his
virtuous obstinacy converted her vicious love into an extreaunity of hatred,
insomuch that she accused him to his Father for a forcible violator of her
chastity: To whose words Constantine giving credit, caused the virtuous young
man to be miserably put to death at Pola in Histria. But not long after, this
sallacy of the Mother in law coming to light, and the innocence of the chaste
young man (worth an eternal memory) being manifestly discovered, the wicked
Step mother sought to excuse the incestuous malice with the pretense of her
plot, to wit, That Crispus should not be a hinderance to the honor of her
sons in the Imperial claim. But at length by the persuasion of Helena, (who
was infinitely grieved for the death of her Grandchild) the wicked stepmother
was put into a hot bath, wherein she breathed her last, and suffered a death
to^^ mild for such an impious and treacherous impurity.

This Emperor was taught and instructed in Learning, by the famous Lactantius:
It is evident that he was singularly qualified, valiant, and fortunately
victorious. Helena his Grand mother much lamented his immature death, which was
not only sudden, but mischievous, and grieved the whole Empire, who by that
means were deprived of so hopeful a Governor.

69. Constantinus.
Anno Domini 314.
portrait of emperor Constantinus

COustantine was the second of that name. An. Dom. 314.
After the death of his Father Constantine the Great, the Empire was divided
into many parts, but that of France, Spain, the Alps, England, and Scotland
did befall to his charge; but not contented with these, he pretended by
hereditary right that also of Italy and Afric, which here demanded by way of
Embassy; but not obtaining his pretended cause, he made War upon his brother
Constans Commander of those parts. And after many bloody battles he was
always victorious, with a grievous massacre and slaughter on both fides: But
at length Constans gathering new forces and supplies, came upon him with a
terrible assault, and routed him, putting his soldiers to flight, sword, and
prison, most of them cut in pieces: himself also was mortally wounded, and
falling from his horse, he was slain near Aquileya at the (...) of 25, of the
which he governed only three.

This Emperor by divine assistance overcame the Almans, Britans, and other
powerful Nations: he recalled Athanasius from banishment, and restored him to
his Bishopric of Alexandria, of which he was formerly deprived. Those Wars
which he raised concerning his right unto the government of Italy and Afric,
did mightily oftentimes disturb his mind: Whereupon he would usually say to
his Commanders of his Armies, Let there be no malice in the prosecution of my
cause toward my Brother used: for I grieve when I think, that we whom God
and Nature created for union, should by divellish ambition and covet ousnesse
be divided. Howsoever he continued his wars undertaken, though with a great
reluctance; as desiring rather to employ the soldier, than advantage himself.
This Emperor had a petition offered him diverse times by an old Citizen of
Rome, and still he was answered by the Emperor, That he had no leisure:
whereupon the old man said aloud; Why then give over to be Emperor.

70. Constans.
Anno Domini 314.
portrait of emperor Constans

THe division of the Empire being made upon the death of the Great Constantine
the Father, An. Dom. ^14.
Constans, one of the sons, takes upon him the possession of ^^ly, Afric,
and all the Isles of Solevonia, Dalmatia, Macedonia, and Achata. He fought
against his brother, and having slain him, in a short time he made himself
master of all France. In the beginning of his government he was a famous
Prince, and just: but afterward altering his life wholly, changed it into a
worse, giving himself solely to pleasures and solaces with such disorders,
which caused him insupportable pains in his limbs, and especially his joints,
whereby falling into a loathing and detestation of himself, and a general
hatred of the whole Empire, a conspiracy was complotted against him: and a
certain Magnentius being created Emperor, some to give Constans content, or
(perhaps at his own request) slew him, but lamentably, as he reposed himself
in his Pavilion at the foot of the Pyrenean Mountains, near a place called
Helena, at the age of 30, and of his government 13 years.

He governed after his (...) Italy, and many other Provin^^^ of the Empire, and
after his brother whom he slew, he writ menacing to his brother Constantius,
for the restitution of Athanasius, who lamenting the death of the Innocent
Crispus, doubted not to term him a Martyr.

71. Constantius.
Anno Domini 325.
portrait of emperor Constantius

COnstantius also the son of Constantinus Magnus and Fausta, An. Dom. ^25.
was created Caes^^ (...) the liew of the virtuous and innocent C^ispus
unjustly slain as is before mentioned. He was happy in his civil wars, and
wonderfully active in throwing a dart. In the division of the Empire the
Ensterne government was assigned him with the Seat at Constantinople. In his
time the Arrian Sect much flourished, whereby he was much assisted; whereupon
there was a Council called and held in Laodicea, whither Arrius came with many
of his adherents, and also many Christians, and many Bishops and Prelates
disputing concerning matters of Faith, were confined and punished by this
Constantius, himself being an Arrian. But by the death of his brothers, he
remaining sole and absolute in the Empire, he governed warily, and with
prudence: Nevertheless by the Roman Senate two Emperors were created, against
whom he declaring open waries in battle overthrew them, and therefore by the
Army he was entitled Augustus. And being 45 years of age, he sickened of a
bloody flux, and shortly dyed, being buried in Constantinople.

This Emperor put his Uncles and many of the Nobility to death, suspecting them
to have poisoned his Father Constans. He declined to the Arrian Sect, he
caused his Uncles sons Gallus and Iulianus to be brought up in good
Litterature: he inhibited Magic and Idolatry upon pain of death, and dyed
in the opinion of an Arrian.

72. Magnentius.
Anno Domini 350.
portrait of emperor Magnentius

COnstans the aforesaid E^perour raised this Magnentius of a youth, An. Dom.
350.
a French man by birth; and although he were vemeanely borne, nevertheless he
caused him to be trained up in the Military Art, inso much that he made him
General of his forces in Sclav^nia; in which government he was protected from
death by Constans, and in liew of requital he slew him most ingratefully, and
by subtilty creepes into the Imperial seat anno Domini 350, and coming into
Italy, he created his brother Caesar in Milan, and gave him the Alps in charge
to secure France. Magnentius afterward fighting a battle against Constantius
(who thirsted the revenge of his brothers death) was by him overthrown and
vanquished, with a great slaughter of his men, and mustering up the residue of
his Army he fled to Lions, where not finding himself secure, his life in
hazard, nor any hope of re^^^^^^ slew himself with a knife at (...) of 53, and
the sixth month of his government.

This Magnentius was spurd on only Regnandi capiditate, With the desire of
command, and seeing himself to fall short of his expectation every way
despairing, first slew his own Mother, then his Brother, and lastly himself,
(as I said before) and by much soliciting of his friends to the Captains
soldiers, interred at the place of his death.

73. Decentius.
Anno Domini 350.
portrait of emperor Decentius

DEcentius, a French man born, An. Dom. 350.
was created Caesar in Milan, as is before mentioned, and instantly commanded
to the Alp^^, for the defense and tuition of the matters of France which was
no^ to^^ering, and in a manner falling into an open rebellion against the
Empire, which perhaps would have so happened, had it not been curbed and held
in action in diverse parts at once, which dissipated their forces, and disabled
them for resistance and defense. This Eraperor either for non performance of
any laudable acts, as for the shortness of his life, has left not any
memorable thing to posterity, but only this, that having understood the
unfortunate and miserable end of his brother, taking it to the heart, and
fearing to fall into the hands of the enemies of Magnenti^s, intended his own
death, and as a (...) impatient and surious mad m^^^^ving not brought to
perfection (...) privated plots and designs, (...) a garter about his neck,
and without the help or hand of any man strangled himself.

74. Julius Apostata.
Anno Domini 356.
portrait of emperor Julius Apostata

JVlian being a man most learned in the Greek, An. Domini 356.
and admirable in the Latin to^g^^^^, and of a most strong and able memory, was
wondrous affable, courteous, and liberal to all, and as one aspiring greedily
to honor, prevailed far with Constantius the Emperor, that he was made by
him General of the forces in France, and always remained victorious in all
occasions of war. This man denied the faith of Christ, and therefore was
termed the Apostata, or Renegate, and renounced his Deaconship: He became an
Idolater, causing himself of his Army to be called Emperor. In which dignity
suppressing all virtue and justice, he impiously began to persecute the
Christians with extreme cruelty, putting them to most intolerable torments,
and infinite numbers slain, and many sent into exile. More^^er he wrote a
book against the Christian faith*

Eusebia, the wife of ^lim Constantius, her self being barren, envied that
Tulian should have any issue successive to the Empire, Theodo. lib. 3. Cap. 20.
frandulently persuaded Helena his wife to use such things as might cause
abortion. But when she had conceived, Spond.
and brought forth a son at Roan in France, Eusebia by feeing the Midwife,
caused the navell of the newborn Infant to be cut more than ordinary, and
thereby utterly destroyed it.

It is likewise recorded by Theod^ret, that as soon as Iubian felt himself
most miserably and grievously wounded in the left arm with a Persian Dart
which was infected with poison, he furiously, and in great anger took a
handful of his blood, and flung it upwards in the air, saying, Vicisti
Galilae? meaning our Savior Christ; as if he had said blasphemously, Othou of
Galile, have thou onercome me? and so most impiously dyed, railing against
Mars, that having promised him assistance, and failed him: against Apollo, that
had deluded him with false and vain promises: and lastly, against Jupiter,
because he had not his Thunderbolt ready to kill that party that flung that
Dart, and slew him; and so he dyed in Mesopotamia, and was intombed at Tharsus
in the 32 year of his age.

75. Iovinianus.
Anno Domini 363.
portrait of emperor Jovinianus

IOvinian was borne in Pannonia, An. Dom. 363.
and trained up in a worthy way and manner: and because every man had an
estimation and hopeful conceit of him, that at length he would grow great, and
valorous withal, being as yet but a youth was made General of the Army.

After the death of his Predecessor he was by the whole camp called Caesar
Augustus, which titles he absolutely refused, unless they would every man
become Christian, himself being first baptized, which was an act most
Christian-like: Which the whole Army did also put in execution after his
memorable example: and after that, they promised and swore him fealty and
allegiance. Hereupon to his incredible joy and comfort he accepted the Crown,
and redeemed many out of the tyranny of the Barbarians: his common speech was
thus, O that I might govern wise men, (...) wise men govern me. Afterward
he was enforced to surrender unto Saperes King of the Persians a great part of
Mesopotamia, and other places. And being now grown to the age of 39, falling
into a grievous disease of the weakness of his stomach, he passed to a better
life and dignity, having in all his Reign continued a professor of the
Christian faith, and restored it every where; straightly commanding the Temples
of the Idols to be shut up, Baro.
and forbidding all manner of Gentilitious sacrifices. He dyed at Rome, and his
funeral obsequies were in a most sumptuous manner celebrated in Pannonia,
though he was interred at Rome near to the Capitol, on the East side; for
they held it most for his honor to be so buried.

76. Valentinianus.
Anno Domini 364.
portrait of emperor Valentinianus

UAlentinian an Hungarian by birth, An. Dom. 364.
being Captain of the Targuetiers.
Scutaries in the City of Nicea, was by the whole Army created Emperor,
really against his own will or desire; knowing, that he should be as it were a
prisoner to his thoughts, as all good governors and rulers ought to be: and
therefore would rather enjoy his private liberty, than enchaine it to so great a
charge: And therefore he took Valens for his Co-partner in the Dignity, (a man
whom he highly esteemed) to who^ he gave the charge of the Eastern
government. He was wonderously addicted to Religion, and highly esteemed of
all the Christians, because he favored them: He restored to the Churches
their former privileges, liberties, and possessions which the other Emperors
had sold, or given away, (as Ammianus writes, and Sozimus) he brought under,
and kept in subjection all Gallia, Rhetia, Almaine, Saxony, Scots, and Britans,
the Affrican Moors, Thracians, and Armenians. Upon his gold coins were
engraven these words and characters, a Cross with the name of Christ cut in
it, and the Motto for the Emperor, Reipublicae Restitutor: his saying often
was, That Gold was tried with the Touchstone, and men with Gold. He also
forbad all Idolatrous sacrifices by Night, and all Magicians (as Zosimus
witnesses:) he restored all professors of Christianity, (whom Iulianus had
forbidden to teach or practice before) and recalled them honorably to their
places and preferment, and confirmed it by a Law in these words: Si quis
crudiendis etc. If any one that is fit, Bar. in vit. Val.
and willing to teach and instruct children and youth, and whose life it good
and just, let him get and procure his Auditory a new, or settle himself in his
old office. And after a while of his reign, by the persuasion and entreaty of
his wife, he made his son Gratian Emperor. Valentinian howsoever in Arms
and Military command, and in all other virtuous worth was very generous, and
overcame the Burgundians and Saxons, adding them to the Empire. This Emperor
viewing over the lives of the former Emperors, read the cruelty of Nero
Caesar, and amongst the rest, that he had a Boy cut, as if he would hare
transformed him into a Woman, and called him wife: This Emperor answered, It
was pity Nero's Father had not such a wife. Lastly, following on his Wars
against the Sarmatians, he sickened of a Flux, or (as others write) of a
sudden passion of anger, and shortly dyed, having governed one year, and
five months, and was interred at Constantinople.

77. Valens.
Anno Domini 365.
portrait of emperor Valens

VAlens was brother to Valentinian, Anno Domini 365.
and Uncle to Gratianus, with whom he governed four years, beginning his
government An. 365, He at first recalled Nazianzen and Bazil from banishment;
he was baptizedy by Eudoxius, but turned Arrian afterward, and persecuted the
Orthodox Bishops of the East, and sent by his Mandat Eusebius into banishment,
as also Pelagius Bishop of Laodicea, and Gregorius Nissenus was condemned by
the Arrians, at the command of the Emperor: He also caused 80 of the Christian
Ambassadors that were then in Constantinople, to be all sent to Sea in one
Ship, and then to be set on fire, which was effected; and not left unpunished,
for immediately after a most lamentable Famine raged through all Phrygia, and
in Constantinople. He continued the persecution against the Christians very
much, and made a Law, that all the Hermites of Nitria and Thebais should bear
Arms in the field, or else to be most cruelly beaten, which they rather chose
to endure voluntarily, than to abandon or forsake the deserts. Through the
avarice and imprudence of this Tyrant, the Goths began with great assaults and
fury to break in upon the Roman Empire, and remained victorious, having put
almost the whole Army to the sword: in which terrible conflict Valens himself
was mortally wounded, Tempore Gratiani.
and escaping with great fear and fright, he made to a little Village with
very few of his men, where he supposed he might lie hidd with safety: but the
Goths coming thither, and happening on him, burnt him, and barbarously like
themselves, left him without sepulture, to the prey of beasts and birds but as
others write, he was burnt at Adrianople.

78. Gratianus.
Anno Domini 367.
portrait of emperor Gratianus

THis Emperor Gratian being in controversy with another about the time of his
election, An. Dom. 367.
sent a message unto him that stood for it, and to some of the Citizens that
did adhere with him, that if they did not presently consent unto his desires,
he would bring such huge numbers of men in Arms over the Rhine, as their
horses should drink that River dry, that they should be able to pass it, and
not wet their feet: which threatening they feared, and with all joy received him
to be their Emperor, and he began his reign in the year of Christ 367. He
was borne in Pannonia, a man singular in Religion, and a brave soldier: for in
one battle against the Tuscans he slew above 30000 soldiers, that had
wasted and spoiled the Roman Country and Territories. He expelled out of Italy
all sorts of heretics, and all the people being reduced to the faith of Jesus
Christ, he caused all the ruined and demolished Churches to be re-edified. But
the Goths afresh renewing their wars against the Romans, the Republic fell
into great perplexities and agonies upon the outrages and barbarous cruelties
which the Goths daily infested them with: Whereupon Gratian chose for his
Coadjutor in the Empire Theadosius a Spaniard, an excellent Soldier, who in a
short time overcame the Tuscans, and made a League with the Goths, and other
Nations.

Gratianus in the sixth year of his Reign was slain at Lions, and passed to
a better life, leaving an exemplar testimony of his worth to the memory of all
posterity, and lies inhum'd at Constantinople, near the East gate of the City,
where there was a Chapel erected for some special Festival days and
meetings, at the Cities charge.

79. Maximus.
This man governed but a very short time in the days of Valentinianus, but was
a wise and excellent Orator.
portrait of emperor Maximus

THis Maximus the Great was borne of the most noble race and family of
Constantine, by whom he was made Emperor in England.
Britain, by the reason he was well experienced in War, and a singular
good Commander. His worth being accompanied, or rather enabled with an
Imperial power, was the cause that he with a facile easiness took in all
France, bounteously enlarging it, and honorably augmenting it. After that
departing thence, he took his journey toward Italy, with a wondrous great
Army every where complete, with intent to take in Rome, the head-City of the
Universe: which Valentinian (the younger) much fearing, fled with his Mother
Iustina to Constantinople, but finding a favorable and fortunate succor of
Theodosius, he returned back again over the Alps: and coming to Rome he
found Maximus in a confident quiet, whom he finding without defense, assaulted
and slew him in his Palace near the Capitol, to the great grief of all his
soldiers, the place of his interment being not certainly known.

This Emperor Maximus being demanded of one, What kind of man he esteemed most
fit and worthy to be a King, Such a one (says he) as neither glories in his
good fortunes, nor is daunted with adversity. At another time, when one
complained unto him, that the City of Constance in Almaine had not free use of
their liberties and franchises, he answered, If they had not great liberty in
the Town of Constance, thou which art one of that City, would not speak
unto me so liberally; for franknesse of speech is a sign of liberty.

He also said, That as God would be both loved and feared: so should Kings and
Princes be: for there can hardly be any true love, where there is no fear.
Moreover, says he, There be three degrees of persons who ought to be both
loved and honored; first, God above all, and in all places: Secondly, Kings
and Princes in their Kingdoms, and estates: and lastly, Parents and Masters in
their private families.

80. Valentinianus Junior.
Anno Demini 376.
portrait of emperor Valentinianus Junior

THis Valentinian the younger was elected Co-emperour by his Brother Gratianus,
An. Dom 376.
and charged with the government and defense of Italy: but being much in fear
of Maximus, (who as some said, had privately wrought the death of his brother
Gratian) he fled for aid to Theodosius, by whose rescue he overthrew and slew
Maximus, and without controversy, with an excellent judgment, and good
government every where he held the Empire in peace: after which victory he
would often speak with a merry heart, I have escaped the evil, and found the
good. This man not long after, to please his Mother, followed the most impious
Arrian Sect, notwithstanding the good advice of Theodosius to the contrary. He
persecuted the Christians very severely, not omitting, but taking all occasions
of utterly extinguishing them to his possible power.

In France he slew Victor the son of Maximus lastly, remaining in Vienna (as
he thought) secure in serene peace and tranquillity, Eugeni^^ the Tribune
secretly entering his chamber, there strangled him, and was inhum'd at Millan
with funebriall rites.

81. Theodosius.
Anno Domini 379.
portrait of emperor Theodosius

THeodosius was a man of excellent parts, An. Dom. 379.
for behavior singular, for virtue rare, for goodness to all, admirable, not
one^y loved, but reverenced with fear by every man; and wonderfully devoted to
our Savior Jesus Christ; wherefore he extinguished the heretics, and
overthrew the Tyrants. And amongst the rest of his virtues Humility was most
eminent in him. He governed the Empire always with a greatness, and majesty
convenient for such a state and degree. He would never judge, determine, or
give sentence against any man being in passion or anger, which hinders the
rectitude of sense, and true judgment in any man, but in such cases he went
discoursing upon some act of piety and virtue, thereby to quitt passion, and
clear his understanding. Moreover, this Emperor making preparations for war
against Eugenius, expressly for^^^ his soldiers to exact of their P^^trons
where they were to be bille^ted, or lodged any more than what came freely from
them: and also that whosoever of them should curse the Emperor, (viz.
Theodosius) should not be punished for it: saying, Quoniam si id ex levitate
processerit, contemnendum est: si ex insania, miseratione dignissimum: si ab
iniuria, remittendum est. Because if it proceeds of levity, it is not to be
regarded: if of madness, it is to be pitied: if from an injury or wrong, it
is to be pardoned in them. Soz. lib. 7. cap. 25.
Sozomenus relates, that in the year 394, and the last of Theodosius, that in
Epitus there was a Dragon seen of such a bigness, that being dead, eight
yoakes of Oxen could hardly have drawn him thence.

In the 22 year of this Emperors reign there were great losses by
Earthquakes in sundry places, as in the Imperial City of Constantinople, at
one time there fell down 57 Towers of the City-wall, though it was new built
up: And not only here, but also in other places, as Alexandria, and in
Antioch, as also famine and ill sents in the Air, by which many thousands of
people and beasts perished. This Earthquake endured six Months, constantly
overthrowing many fair and goodly Churches, and Fortresses in Constantinople,
as also in Chersonesus it did swallow up whole Parishes, it raged by Sea as
well as by Land, it devoured many ships, nay, whole Islands; but it raged most
in Bithynia, in Helespont, and Phrygia, and the Eastern Countries. The
Citizens of Constantinople, and the Emperor Theodosius, with the Patriarch
Proclus left the City, and remained in the fields, praying to God for
preservation, as says Nicephorus.

Lastly, this incomparable Prince to his age of 50 governed most virtuously and
victoriously, and then to the grief of his friends, and lamentable moan of
the whole Empire, he deceased in Milan in the presence of Saint Ambrose,
Archbishop of that See, and was honorably interred according to the Roman
manner.

82 Arcadius.
Anno Dom. 383.
portrait of emperor Arcadius

ARcadius began his reign after the death of his Father Theodosius anno 383,
An. Dom. 383.
and governed together with his brother Arcadius 13 years. Dividing the Empire
between them, Arcadius took all the Eastern part, and Ronorius the West, and
either governed his charge with singular prudence, temperance, and modesty,
overcomming all those difficulties as are wont to happen to all young beginners
in Magistracy; and in particular they suppressed the arrogant insolency of
their Tutors, appointed them by Theodosius their Father, they being as yet very
young, whom they put to death, because they pretended to govern as their fancy
served, contrary to equity. Nevertheless this Arcadius was a Prince so well
beloved, and ruled so well and commendably, that the Senate said of him, That
it had been good, either that he had never beent borne, or that he might
never dye. It was always his opinion, never to enterprise any Wars, except
it were upon great necessity; saying, That whatsoever Prince would live in
peace and quietness, he ought not in any case to entertain Wars slightly or
unadvisedly, for a Sword is soon drawn, but not so soon put up. Whenever
his choler grew to be inflamed, he would suddenly withdraw himself out of
company, and being alone would pronounce over all the Letters of the Alphabet
each after other with leisure, to the intent that in mean time his wrath and
anger might wax cold, and be assuaged; saying diverse times to his attendants,
That he that cannot subdue his choler by nature, must do it by art and
cunning. Finally, Arcadius having reduced the Empire to a peaceable
tranquillity, governing in great quiet, falling sick passed to another life,
to the general sorrow of all, at the age of 31 years.

83. Honorius.
Anno Domini 394.
portrait of emperor Honorius

AFter the death of the aforesaid Arcadius, ^nno Domini ^4.
Honorius takes the Eastern government upon him, and together with his Nephew
Theodosius, son of Arcadius he governed 15 years. In a very short ti^e he
overca^^ Constantine the Tyr^^t in France in the City of Arles, together with a
great number of his Accomplices ejusde^ farinae homines, men of the like cruelty
and condition. Whenever he appointed any one to be punished openly, he
caused the common Crier with a loud voice to pronounce this Sentence, Doc not
that to another, which thou would not have done to thee.

In his time the Empire was infested with most bloody and cruel wars, in
which always (by a discreet military order, and through the resolution of his
soldiers) he came off victorious with honor.

In the fourteenth year of this Emperors reign, at noonday a strange fire
from Heaven penetrating the great Church of Constantinople, fastened upon the
Bishops seat, and consumed it: Spond. in Hon.
Afterward growing up like a Tree, fastened upon the roof, and devoured it:
And lastly, passing through the midst of the people without hurting any, to the
great amazement of all, seized upon the Senate House, and burnt it to ashes.
Afterward the whole Empire being pacified by this worthy Emperor Honorius,
and the Senate House rebuilt, he fell into a grievous sickness, whereof he
shortly after dyed in Rome, after the fifteenth year of his Imperial command:
He had two wives which dyed both suddenly before the consummation of
Matrimony, and Virgins both.

84. Theodosius.
Anno Domini 402.
portrait of emperor Theodosius

HOnorius being dead, An. Domini 402.
his Nephew Theodosius took upon him the whole Imperial government, and
governed with Valentinianus, the son of his Aunt Placida 22 years. He found
the Empire in great disquiet: He lost Africa, and a great part of Egypt: and
in Hungaria, in Britannia, and other Countries by treason and fraudulent
dealing many Cities were taken from him. And because he foresaw it at his
first entrance to the Crown, he therefore gave the West to his Consort
Valentinianus. He was much puzzled in Africa, howsoever he by his valor and
singular prudence overcame all difficulties, yea, and through his great courage
recovered many Countries and Provinces usurped by one John, and confederate
with Hetius, who were a cause that the Hungarians came into Italy, and spoiled
it.

Moreover, there happened so great a famine in Rome, that of the barks of
Trees they made Bread, and the best Romans were forced to make Bread of
Chestnuts; yea, and some gave fifty pence for a pound of flesh: Joseph^^.
and it grew so scarce, that many were famished, and dyed with hunger, and
their bodies sold by their kindred at a high value: insomuch that the people
cried out to the Emperor sitting to behold the festival sports at that time
of the year, that he should impose a certain rate for man's flesh: his saying
was sometimes, That Emperors of all other men were most miserable, because
commonly the truth is concealed from them: And at this time the air being
corrupt, The odosius dyed without an Heir.

85. Valentinianus.
Anno Domini 426.
portrait of emperor Valentinianus

UAlentinianus, An. Dom. 426.
the son of Constantius and Placida, was entitled both Caesar and Augustus
by his Antecessor Theodosius, and by him sent to Rome against John an usurper
of the Empire, for which service he victoriously triumphed. He made truce with
Gensericus King of the Vandals: he warred against Attila King of the Huns, and
fought it out hear unto Tolosh: which battle was so cruel, terrible, and
bloody, that on both sides there fell more than an hundred and fourscore
thousand persons, besides an infinite number maimed and wounded; and Attila
himself fled half dead with a very small company that attended him. He slew
Hetuis, whose death was boldly revenged by his friends without any respect of
persons: For Valentinianus being in Campo Martio at Rome, was set upon by them,
wounded and slain, being not able to make any notable resistance.

In this Emperors time that famous and learned Doctor St. Augustine dyed, anno
430. St. Patrick the Patron of Ireland, began to convert that Country to
Christianity. In the year 446 the Picts invaded England, and the same year
there was such a terrible Earthquake continuing for the space of six months
together, insomuch that the people forsook their houses and Cities for fear
of the ruins, and infinite disasters which did happen both by Sea and Land.

Galla Placidia, the Mother of this Valentinianus, a singular good Christian,
and a woman of a great and wonderful solid judgment, dyed near the Campo
Martio in Rome, having been daughter, sister, wife, mother, and stepmother to
Roman Empeours.

86. Martianus
Anno Domini 450.
portrait of emperor Martianus

AFter the death of Theodosius, Anno Domini 450.
Martianus succeeded in the Empire, (who was supposed to be a Spaniard by
Nation) and governed seven years together with Valentinian. He was a good
Christian, and singular fautour of them: He married the sister of Theodosius:
In the time of his government Alemannia was lost, and Dacia, Spain and
Aquitaine likewise, together with Gascoigne, which could never be recovered.

In his time St. Vrsula, with eleven thousand Virgins were martyred by Attila's
soldiers. In the sixth year of his Imperial sway, Maximianus a noble Roman,
married by force Eudosia, which was already wife to Valentinianus, and
imperiously began to tyrannize and usurp the Empire: which being understood by
the Vandals, they immediately marched with a very powerful army, and came to
Rome, where they slew him, and cast him into Tiber, and having sacked the City,
They returned into Afric; carrying E^dosia and her daughter with them, who
was the cause of the death of his Emperor.

There happened in the fourth year of his reign, so great a famine in Italy,
that many slaves and poor peasants were enforced to sell their children for
money to buy Bread, and to pay their tribute: But Valentinian ordered and
commanded that they might be redeemed again at the same rate; likewise it was
followed with a vehement pestilence, which destroyed in short space many
thousands of people in those parts; it being not within the compass of humane
power to stop or hinder it, because sent from a supreme hand which is
unresistable.

87. Leo.
Anno Domini 457.
portrait of emperor Leo

UPon the death of Martianus, An. Dom. 457.
Leo (being by Nation a Grecian, of the City of Thebes) was chosen to succeed,
being a man indeed worthy of such a degree. About that time the Roman
Commonwealth was sorely perplexed by certain tyrannical usurpers, which
endeavored to encroach and arrogate the Throne, and in particular Gensericus
King of the Vandals, who came into Italy with a puissant army to that intent:
Which by Leo being perceived, caused him to be affronted with two several
armies at once, near Pupolonia, by whom Gensericus being overthrown, he
privately retired in a disguise home into Africa: After this Aspera man very
noble and powerful in Constantinople together with his two sons complotted,
and intended the death of Leo, and to murder him: but the treason not taking
effect, with their own deserved death, they meritoriously suffered that, which
to another they intended. In fine, Leo being in peace, with the Ostrogothes,
fell sick, and shortly after dyed at his Imperial City of Constantinople, and
there Inurnd, leaving his Nephew to succeed.

Marcellinus reports Anno 458, that Vesuvius a burning mountain of Campania,
Carcel. in ^hron.
did cast forth its burnt bowels, and covered the face of Italy, not only with
nocturne darkness in the day, but also with a small kind of dust and ashes,
which bred by the heat of the Sun such strange monsters, that is almost
incredible; such as Gesner an Historian justifies, and makes mention of both by
nature and figure.

88. Leo Junior.
Anno Domini 474.
portrait of emperor Leo Junior

THis Leo was Nephew to the before said Emperor, An. Dom. 474.
of the same Country, but not of the same City, for he was borne in Corinth in
Greece: He was replenished with all the qualities necessary for a wel-disposed
and good Prince, for which singularity of parts he was so highly prized and
esteemed of Leo his uncle, whom he could not endure out of his sight, in whose
goodness he took such complacency, and pleasure more then ordinary, (as he said)
and by him conceived the sole solaces, and contenting recreations in the
interims of the weighty affairs belonging to an Imperial Crown: Whereupon
falling sick, he immediately created this Leo, Augustus and successor. But
reflecting this to have been done in his fit, and feeling himself sick to
death, with his own hands crowned his own Father Zeno, and declared him
Emperor, entreating that he would be pleased to govern the Empire with the
greatest integrity, and good justice, as befitted a just Prince; which Zeno
promised: and Leo retired himself to the private life of a Christian, and
virtuous man; and paid nature her debt at Vienna, the Metropolis in Austria.

89. Zeno.
Anno Domini 374.
portrait of emperor Zeno

TO the virtuous son Leo the discreet father Zeno succeeds, Anno Domini 374.
a Grecian of the country of Cilicia, a man well beloved and reverenced of
all men. This good Prince understanding, and having news of the creation of a
new Emperor in Constantinople, rather chose to return to his former privacy,
than any ways disturb the Republicke or Common-good by any forces of his. But
Almighty God disposed these things otherwise for this dissension: For the
Constantinopolitan Burghers or Aldermen, being not able to endure the
insupportable injuries of the new Emperor Basilicus, (so was he called) betook
themselves to Zeno, and confirmed him their Emperor and Governor; who, the
affairs of the Empire being composed to the general good and quiet of all,
confined this Basilicus with his noble family into Cappadocia. He overthrew
Odoacer which much disturbed Italy: and afterward he instituted many most
wholesome and commodious Laws. But in the end many turbulent seditions being
raised in Constantinople to him irremediable, he dyed as some report with
grief: Appendix.
As others write, after he had reigned seventeene years and five months, he
dyed a death befitting such a man. For being surprised with a fit of the
falling sickness, which long hanted him: Euagrius lib. 3. cap. 29.
Or as Euagrius says, out of an excess of eating and drinking, or as dead
drunk, and being ordered as a dead man, was buried alive; but when he was
heard out of the Vault to implore his servants and guard most dolefully and
lamentably to let him out thence, not to govern the Empire any longer, but to
resign it, his wife Ariadna forbad them strictly to do it; so he miserably
perished.

90 Anastasius.
Anno Domini 491.
portrait of emperor Anastasius

THis Emperor was by Nation of Macedonia in Greece, Anno Domini 491.
and having taken possession, the better to confirm himself in that esse,
combined by a present and speedy course, and by donatives of great value, with
Clodoneus King of France, by whose meenes he wase. stablished in the Dignity
and State. He seemed a great lover of the Christian Religion: but afterward by
the persuasion of Acatius Bishop of Constantinople, a man tainted with the
heresy of Arianisme, began to follow and embrace it: for which being
reprehended by Hormisda Bishop of Rome, by the way of Ambassadors slighting
the^ with contempt, and dismissing them, saying, That it belonged to the
Emperor to reprehend the Popes, and the Popes ought not to reprehend
Emperors: and this answer he made with great indignity and supremacy. Whereupon
as Su^mario delle vite de gl^ Imperatore Romani, etc.
an Italian Author says, were it for so great an insolency and pride, or other
errors, in the presence of his Peers and all the Court, by the divine
judgment he was wounded with a Thunderbolt, and so dyed suddenly after he
had governed 26 years. Appendix.
A little before his death, says Baronius, Baro.
there were seen terrible earthquakes and other prodigies; and he was often
terrified in his sleep with fearful visions, amongst which this was one: A
man of a stern look, holding a book in his hand, saying, Ecce, ob
perversitatem fidei tuae, annos quatuordecim vitae tuae deleo: See, for thy
perverseness of belief, I put out fourteen years of thy life: And being
premonished by the Oracle that he should dye by fire, although he sought all
possible precautions and preventions thereof. Anno 518. 9 of July a most
fearful lightning with a clap of Thunder terrified his very heart so, that he
went from chamber to chamber, from couch to couch, and was carried into the
heathermost part of his Palace in a cave or cellar, where no light did appear:
yet for all that was struck dead with lightning at Constantinople, Annot.
Misc. 11.15. Zonar. Annot. part. 3
and no substance or moisture found in his body at all, but dried like a
pot-sheard, or a bone burnt in fire.

91 Justinius.
Anno Domini 523.
portrait of emperor Justinus

IVstinus a Thracian by nation, An. Dom. 523.
was called out of bondage to the Empire: He was really a lover and professor
of Christian Religion, and as it were a defender thereof: he opposed all
heresy, and banished all Arrians out of Constantinople: Whereupon King
Theodoricus a fautor of that Sect, being much disgusted, forced and constrained
Pope John with many of the noble men of Rome to go to the Emperor, to
persuade him to restore the Arrians, and recall them: otherwise, that he would
do the like, nay, worse to all the Clergy and Bishops in his Kingdom: which
through fear was by the Pope performed. And returning back with the Roman
Barons, the Kings demand being not performed, the Pope was immediately
imprisoned, and there starved through hunger. The good Emperor perceiving
this, and being now very aged, had no desire of revenge, but dyed with grief
as all Authors report, in his chief City of Constantinople, to the great
discontent of the Christians, having chosen his Nephew Iustinianus to be his
successor.

In the eight year of his Reign, on a Friday at Constantinople, 5 Calend
Iunij, at dinnertime there was such a sudden Earthquake, that with it and
other strange magical charms the Winds blustering every where in the house,
blowing the Kitching-fires about, bred a double destruction to the people, both
of ruins and fire mixing together: Euagr. lib. 4. cap. 5.
and Euphrasius, Bishop of that City, having at that time his head stricken off
by the disaster, was intombed in the fire.

92 Iustinianus Magnus.
Anno Domini 527.
portrait of emperor Justinianus Magnus

IVstiman, An. Domini 527.
an Illyrian by Nation, was a very zealous man in the Christian Religion, and
of a singular learning and wit rather Angelical than Humane. He reduced all
the Imperial laws into one volume, and to the Codex he inserted the Digests
and Authenticks, by the which the whole world is directed for the maintenance
and conservation of States. He overcame the Vandals, took the City of Sal^,
and freed all Italy from the tyranny and cruelties of the Goths. He subdued the
Moors which wasted and spoiled Africa, with whose spoils the famous Captain
Bellisarius built two stately Edifices in Rome, and founded a worthy Monastery
in the City of Oreti, and endowed it with sunicient revenues for the
maintenance of the religious, as also many famous Churches. By the example of
his Captain General this Emperor also in Constantinople famous all over the
world in the honor of the most holy Trinity and St. Sophia. And having to his
most honorable memory enlarged the Empire, he fell into a strange disease, and
became a stark fool, and so he dyed frantic, and was buried at
Constantinople in the year of his age 83, and of his Empire 38.

Anno 560, in this Emperors reign Clotarius King of France, having a son
Chramnus, who had often flowne out, and after some reconciliation had, having
forgotten his former promise and duty to his King and Father, fell into an open
rebellion against him, and after that received remission: At length he raised
Arms the third time against his Father in the lesser Brittannia, and being
taken alive, was by the command of Clotarius shut up in a cottage, together
with his wife and children, (by whose instigation he was spurred on to this
rebellion) wherein they were all burnt to death.

93 Justinius Junior.
Anno Dom. 566.
portrait of emperor Justinus Junior

QUite contrary to his worthy Antecessor was this most unworthy Justinius, Anno
Domi^ 566.
an Illyrian by nation, and a man most bitter, cruel, avaricious, unjust,
perfidious, fraudulent, a contemner both of God and man: he would often utter
these words, With whom shall we live at last? we kill armed men in War, and
the unarmed in peace: But by the divine Justice he lived not long in impunity,
defiling himself with sundry sorts of baseness, because dietings and the most
exquisite nutriments, nor Physic could afford him any assistance at all, but
grew continually from bad to worse. Whereupon because Sophia his wife (although
wise enough for a woman) governed the Empire until the time of Tiberius the
second: but being a woman she was not much feared, because in her time the
Longobards over-ranne and possessed all Italy: but before this Justinius
recovered, he adopted Tiberius as his son, and pronounced him Augustus. And
(as some say) he built a City in Istria, now called by his name Iustinopolis:
Again falling sick, his disease fell into his feet, whereof he dyed at his
Imperial City of Constantinople, not having any great pomp or state at his
funeral, all being rather glad in his death, than grieving for it; because of
his vicious conversation and government.

94 Tiberius.
Anno Domini 576.
portrait of emperor Tiberius

Tiberius being adopted Augustus by his Predecessor, An. Dom. 576.
succeeds in the Imperial dignity according to his worthy deserts: He was a
Thracian by nation, a man replenished with all splendour of virtues, and all
other excellent qualities beseeming a Christian Prince. He was most indulgent
to the poor, to whom he distributed the whole treasure of the Empire.
Wherefore (peradventure) Almighty God made him so abundantly wealthy, and
extraordinarily rich, that very shortly he became possessor of all the
treasures of Nar setes the Eunuch, which were of an invaluable esteem and
price. He recovered likewise Persia with many rich spoils, and ever protected
and defended the Roman state from all treacherous annoyances whatsoever: And in
particular he releeved it in an extreme famine and dearth. Perceiving himself
at last hastening toward his last day, by the advice of Sophia his Mother in
law, he left Mauritius his son in law successor in the Imperial throne,
which much advanced his greedy desire of governing, because Tiberius in few
days after passed to a better life at Constantinople in his Court usually kept
in that part of the City which lies next to the Sea, a place abounding with all
sorts of pleasures, as of exquisite Gardens, Fish Ponds, rare prospects,
curious walks and perambulatories befitting so great a Majesty's residence.

95 Mauritius.
Anno Domini 583.
portrait of emperor Mauritius

MAuritius son in law to Tiberius, Anno Domini 583.
was borne in Cappadocia, and in his tender age gave great testimonies of a
great spirit, making demonstrations of acts and qualities most Princelike.
Whereupon for his magnanimity, greatness of courage, and virtues he deservedly
ascended to the most invict degree of the Empire. And having taken possession,
to his great honor he recovered Armenia and Persia. Afterward he gave
himself over to a bad life, persecuting Gregory the Great, and animating the
people against him; and also persecuted greatly the Church. Wherefore by the
Divine Judgment he suddenly dyed, an Angel having visibly foretold it in
Constantinople, that the Emperor should be slain with a knife.

Mauritius dreamed one night not long before his destruction, Scip. du Pless.
that himself and all his issue were slain by one Phocas: and having made
diligent inquiry after such a man of that name, found that there was but one so
called in his whole Army, who being but a poor clarke of a band, slighted him.
Lastly, his soldiers seeing him in a miserable perplexity, and that he had
not duly given them their pay, they mutinied, and chose Phocas for their
Emperor, who persecuted Mauritius even to Chalcedonia, where he took him, his
wife, and children before his face, and to aggravate his sorrows, he slew
them, and lastly him in the twentieth year of his Reign, and was intombed at
Constantinople, in a Temple (as some report) builded by himself with admirable
cost and luster, as well for the materials, as also for the model, and
largeness of it.

96 Phocas.
Anno Domini 602.
portrait of emperor Phocas

THis Phocas being by Country a Gaul, An. Dom. 602.
and but a Centurion, was nevertheless by the whole Army created Emperor. He
was entertained in Constantinople with wondrous joy, and exceeding great
honor, and to confirm his greatness, there was a Statue erected to him in S.
Caesarius amongst the former Emperors. But not long after changing his
activenesse into a stupefying sloth, he became so idle, that Persia revolting
was lost, and many other Provinces to King Cosroes, which King sacked and
spoiled the City of Rome, imprisoning Zacharias Patriarch of Jerusalem.
Hereupon Phocas became more cruel, and by that means he lost still more and
more. Which the people of Rome being not able to suffer, not without great
reason they raised Heraclius against him, who being vanquished, was brought
manicled with Irons to Heraclius, who looking upon him, said, Th^^ wretched
fellow, have thou thus governed the Republic? To whom he answered, Thou may
govern it better: Upon which reply Heraclius speedily apprehended him, and
with great boldness and courage commanded some of his soldiers to cut off his
hands and feet, and then his members, causing a stone to be fastened to his
other limbs, and therewithal to be cast into the Sea: and as some Authors
report, the soldiers burned his body in revenge at Constantinople.

97 Hieraclius.
Anno Domini 611.
portrait of emperor Hieraclius

THis Emperor Heraclius, An. Dom. 611.
an Affrican by birth, was replenished with Heroical qualities, and in
particular in Chevalry, and other military knowledge, that all men admired him.
He had an ardent desire that the Christian Religion should be propagated and
enlarged: and to that end he sought to take in Persia, at that time grown a
Treasury of all manner of Riches, and there he repaired the ruined and
demolished Churches.

Chosroes the Persian King, after many overthrows he received by Heraclius, in
his last flight finding himself ill, and endeavoring to make his younger son
Mardesas King, Syroes the eldest understanding it, plotted with the Peers the
destruction of his father; and so pursuing his Father, at last overcame him,
and then put him to extreme usage, loading him with Ironfetters, and guives
about his neck and legs, putting him into the dark house which Chosroes had
newly built, and so by him termed, to lay the money and treasure which he had
got by Christian spoils: where he had a very little quantity of bread and
water, sufficient only to keep him alive; but was almost famished, that he
did eat his own flesh off his arms, or as far as he could reach with his
teeth: And likewise his son commanded these Peers which detested him, to abuse
and kick him, beat him, and spit upon him, bidding him eat his belly full of
that gold and silver which he had taken from the Christians.

Lastly, he took his younger brother Mardesus, and all the rest of his
brothers, and commanded them to be slain before his fathers face, and five
days after caused his father to be pricked to death with needles.

This Emperor Heraclius brought the Cross of our Lord back again to
Jerusalem, which had been violently, and by force of Arms transported by the
Parsians. At which time the feast of the Exaltation was instituted. Returning
to Constantinople, he retired him to his study and grave consultations; and in
particular he much delighted himself in the study of Astrology; by the too
much knowledge therein he became an Heretic, and by the divine will Antioch
and Jerusalem were taken by the Sarrazons and Arabians: Theoph. lib. 10. Card.
18. Hera.
whereupon he supposing to have lost his reputation, he grew into a fit of
extreme melancholy, and so into a Dropsy, and thereof dyed at Constantinople,
and was there inhum'd with great solemnity.

98 Heraclius 2.
Anno Domini 613.
portrait of emperor Heraclius 2

TO Heraclius the father, Anno Domini 613.
Heraclius the form succeeds, being of the same Nation, was elected and
created Emperor ^y his father Anno Domini 613, and Co-emperor. He was a great
lover and preserver of the Christian says, man replenished with such graces
and prerogatives as can be either imagined, or required in a Princely
governor, for which he was universally beloved of all men. But it oftentimes
comes to pass, that the good become more hateful than the nocent and culpable:
for this man was hated and abhorred by Martina his Mother in law, who sought by
treacherous devices to work his end, and accelerate his fate, but not able to
bring it to effect of her self, she acquainted her son Heraclion with this
her diabolical intent; who being instigated and spurred on with the desire of
so great a dignity, promised her to poison him without the knowledge of any
man: and so this unjust and impious brother performed it most cruelly at a
great and sumptuous Banquet in Constantinople, with a bunch of Grapes. This
villainous and heinous act was perpetrated not without horror of conscience in
the undertaker, and grief of the Soldiers. Which most inhumane impiety when
it was divulged, or generally known, his loss was much lamented of every man,
and in the end sufficiently revenged by those that affected his government, and
loved his person: for seldom have the indignities and injuries offered to
Princes, gone long unpunished upon the persons that were the perpetrators.

99 Heraclion.
Anno Domini 641.
portrait of emperor Heraclion

HEraclion, An. Dom. 641.
an Affrican borne, so soon as he had murdered his brother, he took the
Imperial sway and management upon him, and reigned together with his
perfidious stepmother Martina two years. Taking the possession he began to
live not like an Emperor, but like a most unworthy man, crowning himself with
gemmes of a thousand impieties and bestialities. This being talked and
discoursed on by the people man to man, every man wished his death, or at least
his deposing, which soon followed: for he handling the Senate and Citizens of
Constantinople with too great cruelty, they immediately revolted, and
apprehending his Mother in law Martina, they cut out her tongue, and his nose,
honoring them both in making them ride as it were in triumph for their indigne
memory, they both remaining deprived of those parts, and of the Empire, to the
general content of all.

100. Constantinus 3.
Anno Domini 643.
portrait of emperor Constantinus 3

THis Constantine the third, An. Dom. 643.
an Affrican by Nation, was Nephew to Heraclion, not much unlike him in
conditions: For he was a wicked and perverse man, an heretic, and a ruiner of
the Republicke: he was most basely avaricious with all men, and prime in all
manner of wicked actions. He made war upon the Lombardes, by whom he was
overcome, and in desperation came toward Rome with a great number of
soldiers; and coming to Puglia with incredible unjustnesse and without all
compassion he raced the City Luceria.

Afterward coming thence to Rome, he entered it with 20000 soldiers, wasting
and ruinating the primest and stateliest ornaments of that most famous City: he
also sacked, spoiled, and defaced the Churches. Departing thence, he went to
Syracusa, always accompanied with infinite vices, and in particular with that
of impurity and lust: Wherefore one day being in a Bath, he was murdered by
his own attendants, having governed 25 years, and was inurn'd in Syracusa
that renowned City, where Archimedes practiced his rare inventions.

In the twelfth year of this Emperors reign, (as is recorded by an ancient
writer) one of the seven Wonders of the World, Spondanus.
the Colossu^, alias the Image of the Sun, which was placed in the Haven of
Rhodes, which was of that hugeness, that standing (as it did) stradling, it
was 120 foot high, and being before disjected by an Earthquake, was at length
broken by Mahuvius Prince of the Sarazens, and sold to a Ie^^, who loaded 900
Camels with the brass whereof it was made.

101 Constantinus 4.
Anno Domini 654.
portrait of emperor Constantinus 4

BY the reason that this Constantine was a good Christian, modest, Anno Domin^
654.
and replenished with all moral virtues, succeedes in the Empire with the
beneplacitum, or good liking of all the Christians: In the government whereof
he took for his Co-reg^atore: or Co-emperors. Heraclius and Tiberius his
brothers. He re-edifled many Churches that were defaced and demolished by the
Heretics, and built many other most noble and sumptuous. He overthrew the
Sarazens which much annoyed and molested the Romans, and made them tributaries
and subjects in despite of them to his great honor, and to a general quiet of
their neighbors, before much infested and troubled by those barbarous and
cruel people. He returned afterward to Constantinople, to unite the Greek
and Roman Churches. He assembled at the instance of Pope Agatho the sixth
Council: in which it was permitted to the Grecian P^^^^^s to contract
Matrimony with a lawful woman. Finally, having lived most Christian-like, he
dyed Saint-like in the 17 year of his Empire at Constantinople.

In the tenth year of his Reign a vehement plague infested not only the City
of Rome, but many other Cities of Italy for three months, Paulus and
Anastasius are Authors. as Paulus adds moreover, that at Rome there visibly
were seen of many, a good Angel and a bad to go from house to house: Paul.
Diac. lib. Hist. Long. cap. 5. Anast. in Agathum.
the bad having a Javelin in his hand, and as many strokes as he gave at any
door, at the command of the good Angel, so many dyed out of that house the
next day. The Divine power has often employed Angels to be the executioners of
his just commands against wicked Cities and Kingdoms.

102 Iustinianus 2.
Anno Domini 686.
portrait of emperor Justinianus 2

JVstinian son to the aforesaid Emperor, Anno Domini 686.
and of the same Country by birth, was in his beginnings a man very
Christian-like, pious, and liberal: He enlarged the Constantinopolitan
Empire, and composed many most profitable and wholesome Laws, always highly
honoring the Christian Religion. But soon after he showed himself
inconstant and variable against God and man: because he broke the peace
already made with the Sarazens and Hungarians, by whom he was much distressed.
Returning to Constantinople, he made himself odious to all the Comminalty, by
endeavoring to disanull the aforesaid decree and order made in the sixth
Council aforesaid, which was celebrated in his Fathers time. And likewise he
sought to put Pope Sergius to death; whereupon the whole City arose up in Arms
against him, making Leontius Patricius their General, who immediately opened
all the prisons, and freed all that were condemned by Justinian, and chasing
him out of the Imperial command, he caused his nose to be cut off, and
banished him into Cersonia, an Island of Pontus. Being on the Sea in the way to
his banishment, and by tempests in extreme peril of casting away, was
admonished by a familiar friend of his, that he should make a solemn vow to
God, that if he recovered his Imperial Crown, he would forgive his enemies,
which if I do (said he) God sink me here in this place, which he performed,
having recovered it by entering into Constantinople by an Aque-duct, and every
one of them he could light on, found him heavy in his revenge.

103 Leontius.
Anno Domini 696.
portrait of emperor Leontius

LEontius, An. Dom. 696.
borne at Constantinople, succeeds Justinian, and governed three years very
peaceably. This Emperor having intelligence that Africa was revolted, arose
from Constantinople with an Army, every man well fixed, complete, and
powerful: and in the interim of this his expedition and voyage, news was
brought him to his great perplexity, that the Constantinopolitans had elected
Tiberius, a man of anancient and very noble family, for Emperor: Whereupon he
falling into an outrage and passion, by no means would endure this affront,
but presently retreating, he met his Antagonist in the field, where each
endeavored their utmost in a pitched battle, which was not without great
effusion of blood: but Leontius was taken prisoner by Tiberius, and had his
nose likewise cut off, as he had done the like to his Antecessor Justinian, and
was confined to a perpetual imprisonment there to live in misery, and in great
contempt, where he shortly ended his life.

104 Tiberius 3.
Anno Domini 699.
portrait of emperor Tiberius 3

Tiberius the third of this name, Anno Domini 699.
borne at Constantinople, was of anancient and very noble family, (as is above
mentioned) and through the sedition of the Commi^alty was made General for
Africa, and by his Army created Emperor Anno Domini 699. He did use to wear
his Seal of his Arms engraven in the pummell of his Sword: and he was wont to
say, whenever he set his Seal to any Letters of Edict, Ordinances, or
Commissions: See this Sword that shall maintain my Ordinances, and which shall
make War against those who shall contradict mine Edicts: His meaning was,
that it is not a matter of so great importance, to establish and make good
laws and decrees, as it is to cause them to be kept and observed.

This Emperor made his brother Heraclius a General, whom he sent into the East
against the Agarens with a powerful Army. He endeavored to put Justinian to
death who was now exulant in Cersonia: The same co^tradictions I find in most
Authors, as Heliodore, and the Italian Summary.
but notwithstanding all his plots to that purpose, he prevailed nothing, not
could he bring his intent to any effect. Whilst he returned toward.
Constantinople, Justinian was recalled as Emperor, who having understood that
his death was sought, and by all possible means wrought by Tyberius, he
suddenly caused him to be imprisoned, and not many days after, he not only
deprived him of his Imperial Dignity, but of his life also; commanding that in
the presence of all the people his head should be disgracefully struck off, in
the seventh year of his Sovereignty, his trunk or carcass being deprived of
funebriall solemnity and rites befitting the dignity and personage of an
Emperor.

105. Philippicus.
Anno Domini 712.
portrait of emperor Philippicus

THis Philippicus, An. Dom. 712.
a Constantinopolitan by birth, being the prime Favorite of the greatest
Potentates of the World, succeeds in the Empire, because he was a man of
singular courage and wisdom. He confined Cirus the Patriarch into the Isle of
Pontus, but with the good liking of all them of Constantinople: and this he
did, because he followed the orders of the Roman Bishop; in whose place
imperiously and boldly he placed a young Abbat, Arrian.
a pestilent Heretic, and sent him to Rome for his confirmation. Which moved
Constantine the Bishop of Rome to passion, who called a Council in Rome,
wherein he reprehended all elections made by the Emperor: and moreover
condemning all his opinions, he declared him an Heretic. Yet this man
persevering in his opinions, was by Anastasius chased out of the Sovereignty
with great disgrace and contempt, his eyes being first pulled out, he
afterward dyed without any note, and obscurely interred.

106. Anastasius.
Anno Domini 715.
portrait of emperor Anastasius

ANastasius, An. Domini 715.
otherwise called Artemius, whose place of birth is not certainly known,
having pulled out the eyes of his Antecessor, and also out of the Imperial
throne, impatroned himself in the Oriental government in the year of Grace
715. He was so good and just in every action, that he deserved more than the
only name and title of Emperor. He reedified many Churches defaced by the
Arrian Heretics. He wrott to the Bishop of Rome with great humility and
reverence, protesting that his will was ever to continue a defender of the holy
Christian faith. Whilst he had sent a great Army toward Alexandria, many
Princes either through malignity or curiosity turned the same Army upon and
against him, creating another new Emperor called Theodosius: whereupon there
grew infinite, troublesome, and pernicious seditions in the world every where.
Finally, after many insupportable discontents and troublesome tedious passages,
he was by Leo the third murdered, in the first year and third month of his
Empire: but as some write he was forced to undertake a Monastical life.

107. Theodosius.
Anno Dom. 716.
portrait of emperor Theodosius

THeodosius the third, Anno Domini 716.
borne at Constantinople, took upon him the administration of the Empire the
year abovesaid, but held it one only year. This man was of a very inferior
and mean Family, the servant of a Pagan Scrivener: But having attained to the
Imperial dignity, he was a wonderful lover, and zealous in the Christian
Religion; and to make it the more appear, and as a visible demonstration
thereof, he caused many Images of Saints to be pourtraicted, and in diverse
places erected them. But being every way pursued and persecuted by Leo, he
chose a better part, taking Priesthood upon him, and living Christian-like,
full of charity and Christian duty. After that he retired himself into a
Monastery, where he lived very exemplarly, and there he continually persevered
to his last day at Constantinople.

108. Leo.
Anno Demini 717.
portrait of emperor Leo

THis Emperor, Anno Domini 717.
an Isaurian borne, was contrary to his Predecessor, being a man infamous.
Seeing that he could not oppose the Bishop of Rome, he ordained that all his
Subjects should pull down the Images of Saints, and other Statues which were
in Churches, alleging that they were for no other use but Idolatry: The which
command Germanus the Patriarch not willing to obey, he was by him confined,
and Anastasius an Arrian was ordained in his place, who by a Council was
deprived, and by the same Council Leo was exhorted to recant this error, and
not to hinder good and pious men to use their devotions to the Images. But the
Emperor would by no means consent thereto, but grew more exasperate and
contemning: whereupon Gregory the Pope, and the whole Council sentenced him to
be deprived of the Empire, and he dyed at Constantinople in the fourteenth
year of his Empire.

Paulus Diaconus, together with Anastasius affirm, that within the City of
Constantinople there dyed of pestilence and famine above three hundred thousand
persons of all ages and both sexes, Anno. 719.

The Answer of this Leo to one that would be made a Gentleman.

This Emperor being at his Palace, a Citizen of Bologna, exceeding rich and
wealthy, but of base parentage, presented himself before the Emperor, saying,
May it please your sacred Majesty to make and create me a Gentleman: for I have
wealth sufficient to maintain the state and degree of a Gentleman: The Emperor
answered him, I can make thee much more rich than thou art, but it is not in my
power to make thee noble: for that is an honor which thou must purchase by
thine own virtue.

109. Constantinus 5.
Anno Domini 720.
portrait of emperor Constantinus 5

THis man, Anno Domini. 720.
being also an Isaurian by birth, following the steps of his Father, persecuted
good men exceedingly, and in what he could, he destroyed all good laws and
customs, bent himself to witchcrafts and enchantments, and to a thousand
infamies, and as a common enemy to Christian Religion, he followed the Arrian
sect of Athanasius, Patriarch of Constantinople, by whose persuasion he caused
many Priests to be put to death, with many Monks and good Christians:
Wherefore the Pope desirous to reform his errors, and to reduce him to better
courses, sent Ambassadors unto him, exhorting him to quitt himself of that
pernicious sect: but they and the Popes Embassy were not only slighted, but
contemned and scorned: whereupon he was excommunicated. Upon this he contracted
a new League with the King of Bulgaria, a man like himself in every quality
and condition. This man enjoyed the Empire very happily in respect of his own
person: but when, or where he dyed it is doubtful: but some do affirm that
he dyed at Adrianople.

When this Emperor was baptized, he defiled the Font with his ordure: whereupon
it was Prophetically conjectured, that much mischief would be by him
perpetrated: wherefore he had the by-name of Copronymus. He was called also
Caballinus, because this Monster of men was so much delighted in horse-dung,
that he wallowed or anointed himself in it, and commanded his Courtiers to
do the like. Theophanes and Theost^riscus in Nicet.

110. Leo 4.
Anno Domini 751.
portrait of emperor Leo 4

AT this time the Empire was much afflicted, An. Dom. 751.
because the Barbarians in this Emperors time possessed all the East: Whereupon
the Romans being much distressed, tired, and worn out of heart with continual
wars, were resolved to put themselves in the power and protection of the
French. Wherefore Leo intended to march with an Army into Syria: but perceiving
the enemies strength to be great, he retired with great fear, and in liew of
recovering the Provinces lost from the Empire, he betook himself to lust and
idleness, inventing every day new fashions of apparel, in the richest manner
possible to adorn himself: but above all, he greatly was taken with Jewels,
of which he made himself a Diadem, especially with those which were taken out
of the Church of S. Sophia, and wearing it continually, through the weight of
it he dyed with an extreme pain in his head at Constantinople, leaving his
wife Hirene to govern the Empire, together with his son, and was inhum'd
there.

One thing that was remarkable in the time of his Regency, was, Theophanes.
that in the second year of his reign, and in the Summer time, between the
Cyclades Isles, Thera, and Therasia, there appeared out of the Sea a vapor to
boil like the smoke of a chimney for the space of many days, which by little
and little growing thick and large, broke out into into a flame: afterward it
cast out whole rocks of Pumice, and transported great heaps of them all over
the lesser Asia, Lesbos, and Abydus, and all the maritine parts of Macedonia in
such sort, that the whole superfice of the Sea was covered with them: and in
the midst of so great a fire a new Isle grew suddenly up by the heaping of
the earth together, and joined it self to that Isle, which is now called Sacra.

111. Constantinus 6.
Anno Dom. 775.
portrait of emperor Constantinus 6

AFter the death of Leo, Anno. Dom. 775.
Constantine his son, whose place of birth is not probably nominated, took
upon him the Imperial government. His Mother Irene, with whom he ruled ten
years, was a cause that a Council of thirty and three Bishops was held, in
which many profitable laws were made, tending to the general commodity and
benefit. Afterward his mother perceiving that he would not be correspondent to
her expectation and will, being he abandoned himself to debauches and
lasciviousness, there grew a dissension between them, so that he deprived
her of all government, and himself governed absolute five years. He was a
most cruel man: for he caused the eyes of many noble Citizens to be pulled
out, under pretense of their conspiracy and treason against him. The people
seeing this, they recalled the Empress Irene, and taking Constantine they
imprisoned him, and in revenge they likewise plucked out his eyes, and so in
that extreme misery he concluded his fate, the place of his death or interment
being obscured.

In the year 780, in this Emperors regency, a certain man digging in a wall
of Thracia, found a stone coffin, wherein there lay the body of a man, and
Letters fastened to the coffin in brass, which made these words, Christus
nascetur ex Virgin Maria: Credo in cu^^: sub Constantino and Irene Imp. 8.
Sotiterum me videbit. Theophanes and all other Greek and Latin Historians
constantly affirm, Anno 793. Men's. December. the River Tyber overflowed the City
to the highth of twice a man's depth, so that they were enforced to help and
relieve one another by little skiffes and tubs. Anno 797. Theoph. writes also,
that for the space of ten days the Sun was darkened, that ships on the Sea
could not steer a right course, and that many perished by this strange
accident, being a thing against, and beyond nature.

112. Carolus Magnus.
Anno Domini 801.
portrait of emperor Carolus Magnus

TO the name of Magnus the greatness of this Carolus was every way
correspondent, An. Domini 801.
who was a man really virtuous, liberal, generous, and in Arms admirable,
being by nation a Frenohman. After the death of his father Pipinus, he
remained coinheritor with his brother Carolus of the Crown of France, but
after the space of two years he remained absolute in the rule and government,
in which he took in Aquitaine: He overthrew Desiderius King of the
Longobards, and restored again to the Church whatsoever Desiderius above
mentioned had taken away, and thereupon the Empire was put upon him, by the
general Council, and the Popes, and crowned with great solemnity and triumph.
Returning into France he overcame the Saxons, conquered Spain, he subdued
the Gascognes, Britans, and many other powerful Princes, whereby he got such
fame, that from all parts of the world Ambassadors came with rich Presents,
beseeching his gracious favor. At length falling into a fever, but as some
say, of a Plurisie, and other inward pains of his bowels, he dyed at
Aquisgrane, to the in^^unable grief of the Universe, and was buried very
honorably near the Capitol. Should I here undertai^ to relate his worth, my
unworthiness would come far short: wherefore for more satisfaction, I refe^^e
you to Spondanus, and other Authors.

113. Ludovicus Pius: Or Lewis the godly.
Anno Domini 814.
portrait of emperor Ludovicus Pius

THe Emperor Lewis, Anno Domini 814.
borne i^ France, succeeds the good Charlemaigne, and made (...) upon the
rebellious Gascoignes, and submitted them to the Empire. He ^u^bed the
boldness of the ^^^^aines and Englishmen: and having ^ell conformed the
Empire, he called a Council at Aquisgrant, at which he admitted his eldest
son Lotharius as Co-emperor, and made ^ipin his second son, King of
A^uitany, and Lewis his third son King ^f Bavaria. But not long after, because
he preferred Lewis his youn^est son before the other, there ^rew a great
enmity, dissension, and ^atred amongst them, insomuch that they took Lewis
their Father, and deprived him of the Empire, ^ost unjustly imprisoning him:
from whence they afterward repenting their so gross and unnatural error,
^^larged him, and restored him a^ine with great reconciliations to ^^former
possession.

This Lewis was a man wondrous clement and merciful, and alway^ a defender of
the Church and Empire. Lastly, he yielded to fate, and dyed near Moguntum, and
wa^ buried in the Church of St. Arnolph^ where his urne is still to be seen.

Cedrenus and the Annals of Fran^^ testify, that Anno 823, sundry and frequent
prodigies were both seen^ and heard by Earthquakes and strange Lightnings, by
fires falling from Heaven, rain of stone, pestilentiall mortality of men and
beasts: Barron.
and it was esteemed as a prodigy also that a young Girl about 12 years of
age, lived for the space of a whole year without any food at all.

114. Lotharius.
Anno Domini 823.
portrait of emperor Lotharius

LOtharius likewise borne in France, succeeds his Father. Anno Domini 823.
He made war against his brothers, and being by them overthrown, he fled to
Aquisgrane, and even there not resting in safety, he was enforced with his
wife and children to go to Vienna: where he also was pursued by his enemies,
insomuch that he only escaped. Sergius the Pope perceiving this, and being
moved to compassion toward him and the Empire, sent Ambassadors to reconcile
them. Whereupon it was concluded, that this Lotharius should have the
government of Italy, and a part of France called Romania with the title of
Emperor. Finally, finding himself aged, and willing to disburthen himself,
he resigned the Empire to his eldest son Lewis to succeed after his decease,
and he taking the habit of a Monk upon him, in a short time departed this
life in a Monastery, and was solemnly inhumed at Prunia.

Anastasius affirms, that An. 848. there was a Basiliske or Cockatrice in the
City of Rome, bred in a vault, that by his breath and aspect, or sight slew all
that saw him, or came near the place where he was. Although Pliny lib. 8. cap.
21. will have it, that those Animals breed but in one place, which he calls
Cyrenaica, in dry places, and not in moist: But when God intends to punish the
sins of man, all creatures whatsoever obey him, so that they breed when and
where his divine will is.

115. Ludovicus, or Jews.
Anno Domini 855.
portrait of emperor Ludovicus

LOtharius having retired him to a monastical life, Anno Domini 855.
his son ^ewis also by birth a Frenchman, grew arrogant, and himself came
near unto the City of Rome with a great and potent Army, and to dominere the
more, he committed outrages, rapines, and murders. The people of Rome seeing
this, they besought the Citizens and Aldermen to go to meet him without the
City-gates, and to entertain him with all submission. Which being done, he
was pacified, and immediately he went to visit Pope Sergius, who granted him
in his departure from Rome many privileges, and solemnly crowned him Emperor.
After that, he went to Pavia, and became very much devoted to the Roman Church.
He was much molested with his son Charles, who with his many plots of
treason, sought the death of his father: for which cause many Lords were put to
death in Gallia Cisalpina upon suspic^^^. And having well composed all things
concerning the E^^pire, he died in Milan, having governed 21 years, was buried
in great pomp after the Roman manner in Milan aforefaid. Matheus Westminster.
writes that Anno Dom. 870. the Danes coming into England, wasted and spoiled
the country, committing all manner of outrages, as ravishing women and maids of
all sorts and qualities: amongst the rest Ebba the Abbess of Collingham Abbey
hearing of their coming, called all her Nuns together, and with a razor cut
off her own nose, and upper-lip, persuading the rest so to do, rather then to
be abused by the Danes, which they instantly did. The Danes coming thither,
and seeing such a strange spectacle of martir'd faces; in a^age palpably
perceiving themselves deluded, set fire on the Monastery, and burnt them every
mothers child. They likewise took king Edmund, and binding him to a tree,
whipped him a long time with cords knotted in a most grievous manner,
afterward shot him full of arrows, and lastly cut off his head: This happened
in this Emperors time although nothing touching him, yet for the satisfaction
of some, I inserted as a thing worthy of memory Spon. in Lodovico.

116. Charles 2. surnamed Calvus.
portrait of emperor Charles Calvus

An. Dom. 876
CHarles the brother to the aforesaid Lewis began h^^ reign in the year of
grate, 876. Charles the third being called and crowned Emperor Augustus, and
this being perceived by the sons of Lewis, they took it as an indignity not
sufferable; and suddenly with all expedition they levied a great army, and came
into Italy with an absolute intent of depriving him both of Empire and life.
Now Charles gives order for his defense, and fortifies Ve^ona with great and
inpregnable for^ifications and strength, by all possi^le industry, there to
prohibit and ^oppe the passages of the enemies ^^rces near the City of ^rent.
But ^e fell sick in Mantua, and by an in^xicated medicine administered unto ^im
by Zedechias his Physician a Jew, ^e suddenly dyed at Mantua. This ^harles was
a very good christian, ^^d very devout: he built many chur^^es and monasteries
in diverse parts (...) the world, and enlarged the service (...) God, to his
best possibility and power. And with all due funebrial rites, was interred at
St. Denis his Church near Paris where he lies in expectation of a glorious
resurrection.

117 Charles 3 Crassus.
portrait of emperor Charles Crassus

THis Charles borne in France was surnamed the gross, Anno Domini 879.
h^^ was king of Germany and Fran^^ He was a good Christian, and (...) a very
good disposition, a great e^^ my to malefactors, and very seve^^ in punishing
such as transgressed (...) laws. He was crowned by Po^^^ John and pronounced
Augustus. After ten years he made war against the Ormans, and subjected them
in such sort, that Rodifr^dus their king, demanded peace with all submission,
promising moreover that he would beco^^e a christian, with all his court and
followers: to which demand Charles easily and willingly condescendes, to his
great content and satisfaction. And the more to confirm his love, he was
Rodifridus his Godfather in baptism. After many tedious and troublesome wars,
he became much impoverished, and was destitute and forsaken of all his nobility
and Peers, and deprived of the Empire. And being thus abandoned he died
miserably, and with small and no honor he was enterred in a poor sepulcher.

118. Armulfus.
Anno. Dom. 887
portrait of emperor Armulfus

THis Arnulfus being nephew to Charles and king of France, Anno Domini 887
in which country he was born, took upon him the Empire wherein he governed 12.
years. So called the beautiful.
Formosus being called to the aid of the Pope came into Italy, and being
entered into Bergamo, he slew Ambrose Count of the city. And being come to Rome,
he restored the Pope to his former dignity with great solemnity, and concurse
of people of most remote nations. After that the Pope crowned him with great
pomp and triumph, and by the reason of the infinite number of the people he was
enforced to retire into France. He fought with the Moguntius and overcame them.
He subdued the Ormanns which were now rebelled and fallen from the Empire. But
at length finding all peaceable and quiet, he gave himself over to his
pleasure and lust, and became so insolent and proud, that at last he fell from
the Church, and rebelled: whereupon peradventure through the divine justice be
fell into a long an incurable infirmity, whereof he miserably concluded his
days at Ratisbona, and was entombed at Hotings.

119. Lewis 3.
portrait of emperor Lewis 3

AFter the death of the Antecedent Emperor, An. Domini 901.
by the election of the Swizzer^ and the French, his son succeeds, in the
year 901, who was also by Nation a French man. About this time the Hungar^^ns
made cruel incursions into the co^fines of Christendom, and demo^ished all
the Churches in those parts i^ a most malicious contempt and inhumane
indignities. To whose violence this just, benign, and excellent Prince being
wonderfully desirous to resist and oppose, he sent an Army against them, who at
the first encounter were routed and overthrown. Afterward challenging his
Fathers Kingdom of Berengarius, in a battle overthrew him with marveilous
industry and courage: But the battle again renewed afresh, this Lewis was
worsted and taken, and imprisoned at Verona to the loss both o^ his eyes and
Imperial dignity. Lastly, being enlarged, he retired himself into Germany as
a private man, overloaden with disgrace, and overborne with grief he
surrendered his last breath, and had sepulture at Ratisbone.

120. Conradus.
portrait of emperor Conradus

THis Conradus borne in Francenia was a man so great, Anno Domini 912.
powerful, and generous, that he was created Augustus. In the beginning of his
governmet he found many Countries adverse: but afterward with a strong
confidence of his courteous clemency, and mercy of this singular Prince, they
voluntarily came in, and submitted without any molestation or mulct.
Nevertheless in the third Year of his Empire, the Hungarians entered into
Germany and sacked Bavaria with many other opulent and rich Countries. Against
whom this Monarch advancing, to the honor of the Empire he vanquished and
crushed them. And having performed many notable enterprises, knowing himself
to be near his end, assembling may Almain Lords, he exhorted them to live
well, and to a fealty toward the Roman-Church, intreateing them to create
Henry the son of Otho Emperor; which he having obtained, he laid down the
Imperial scepter, and after the seventh year of his reign, he departed to
another life dying in Germany being with due obsequies entombed at Fulda.

121. Henry 1. surnamed The Fowler or Falconer wherewith he was much delighted.
Auceps.
portrait of emperor Henry Auceps

BY the persuasion of Conradus this Henry a Saxon borne, Anno Domini 919.
was created Emperor, who was a man abundantly replenished with singular
graces, and sublime gifts above all men of his time, and he became a Monarch
so famous, that he was beloved, honored, and reverenced of every man. And
although many Dukes and Princes rebelled against him, he nevertheless with his
admirable prudence pacified them all. He suppressed the Saxons to his great
honor and reputation, and recovered a world of treasures and wealth from them.
He subdued many other Provinces and Cities with little or no difficulty, but
rather by his discreet meekness and gentle clemency, wherefore he eternized
his name to memory. Afterward being surprised with a grievous infirmity, (as
some write) a dead Palfie, leaving all quiet, he left his son Otho Emperor,
to whom he recommended true and incorruptible justice in his government; and
by little and little he yielded unto death at the age of 60 years, and 17 of
his government, being with great solemnity and pomp befitting so worthy a man,
inhumed at Quendeloburg.

122. Otho the great.
portrait of emperor Otho the great

THis was the first German Emperor, Anno Domini 936
being by birth a Saxon, and crowned by Pope Leo. He was a marveilous
Christian-like man, a defender and lover of the Church. He overcame Boleslaus
King of Bohemia, and Hugo Count of Paris. He subdued the Hungarian^, and after
so many victories and trophes, persuaded by some Cardinals against the
iniquity of Pope John, being moved with a godly zeal, he came into Italy with
a mighty Army, and took Berengarius with his son, and confined one of them
into Gracia, and the other into Germany. And being come Rome, he deturbed the
aforesaid Pope from the seat, and by the instigation of the people he made Leo
Pope. And for the commodity and good universal he determined and arbitrated
many litigious dissentions. In the end finding himself very aged, he elected
for his Companion in the Imperial dignity his own son Otho: and returning
into Germany his native Country, he dyed at Vienna, as others write, at
Quendelb^urgh, having reigned 12 years in the Imperial Majesty, and lies
interred at Magdeburg.

123. Otho 2.
portrait of emperor Otho 2

THis Otho, Anno. Dom. 968.
by Nation a German, took the Imperial Scepter in hand, and following his
Fathers steps he was most Christian-like, and an excellent propugnator of the
Church. In Germany he took Henry Duke of Bavaria, and with his own hands
Emperourlike he dispossessed him of that Signory. He fought against Lotharius
King of France, and overcame him who had spoiled and wasted many countries. He
subdued Dalmatia with great valor to his perpetual honor. But afterward
fighting against the Greeks, he was routed in such sort, that he lost his whole
army, and himself fled being disguised, and by sea was transported into
Sicilia: where being discovered, he ransomed himself, by infinite sums of
moneys. And being enlarged, of the Sicilians he was wonderfully reverenced and
honored by them, they themselves attending and conducting him to Rome with
exceeding great honor, where shortly after he died, leaving his son Otho to
succeed, himself having governed 17 years, and lies also entombed in Rome.

124. Otho 3
portrait of emperor Otho 3

OTho the third took possesson of the Empire with great difficulty, Anno
Domini 985.
because there was a great confusion about him, and Henry Duke of Bavaria: but
afterward the Electors all accorded to Otho, and this their election was
confirmed by Pope Benedict of those times. He was not any way different from
the conditions o^ his predecessors: for he was a great defender of the Church.
And in all his wars (which were many) he remained invincibly victorious,
having always a brave spirit, wherefore he was called the wonder of the world.
Finding all in quiet and peace he intended to go into Italy, which he did, and
came to Rome, and was crowned by Gregory the fifth with wonderful solemnity:
and being very desirous to return into Germany, he was poisoned by the
Romans, and died suddenly in Rome, the eightenth year of his Empire,
committing his body to his sons to be conducted solemnly into Germany, there to
be interred at Aquisgrane, and his ashes to be inurn'd, after the Roman
fashion. This Emperor married Mary the daughter of the king of Arragon, which
Mary often entised a young Earl (a man of a singular chastity, as being
himself also married) to the satisfaction of her lust; but being by him
repulsed, she complained to Otho, that the Earl had forced her to his desire:
Wherefore Otho commanded him to be beheaded. The Earls Lady taking up the head
of her husband, came and threw it before Otho as he was at that time in the
seat of Judgment, with many tears and word, charging him, that he was
guilty of innocent blood, which she proved by taking (before his face and the
rest of his company) a red hot Iron in her hand, (...) custom it ^as among ^^e
Romans, ^at whosoe^er did take a ^^d hot Iron (...) his hand, ^^d was not ^^rt,
wa^ held ^^nocent of ^^at act wher^^ he was ac^^sed.
which never hurt her: Otho seeing that, and the Lady thereupon insulting,
promised her his own life in satisfaction: But the Peers after much entreaty
somewhat pacified the Lady, and the matter being more seriously sifted, the
whole crime fell upon the Empress, whom Otho commanded to be burnt, and gave
the Widow 3 Castles, to her and her children for ever. Barro.

This Emperor also appointed diverse Offices in the Empire, as Chancellor,
Dapifer, Pincerna, and the like; adding those places as honorable to those
Earls and Counts, upon whom he conferred them, thenceforth to be irremoveable
for ever.

125. Henry 2.
portrait of emperor Henry 2

HEnry the second borne in Bavaria, Anno Domini 1001.
was by the Electors created Emperor in the year of Grace 1001, being at first
Duke of Bavaria. He was an excellent and Saint-like man, and had a Lady to his
wife, worthy and like himself, adorned with all complete perfections. This man
by the reason of serious occupations, concerning the Imperial affairs, could
not for a certain space come into Italy: but dispatching his businesses of
greatest importance, he came to Rome, not in a pompous manner, but with a
conveniet and due greatness, and was by Benedict 8 then Pope crowned Emperor.
Afterward he went toward Capua, against the Saxons, and stayed them out of
Italy, together with many Greeks which favored the Turks. At length having
well composed the Empire, and founded the bishopric of Bamberge, he matched
his sister in marriage to Stephen king of Hungary afterward falling sick, in a
short time died; I find it not recorded where, to the great grief of all men,
and lies enterred at Bamberg before mentioned.

126. Conradus 2.
portrait of emperor Conradus 2

NOt without great contention two years after the death of Henry this noble
and sublime Prince borne in Franconia, Anno Domini 1024.
was lawfully chosen Emperor, who immediately made war upon Elibrand Duke of
Milan, and besieged him; although out of his own clemency and noble mind, and
by the entreaty of the Archbishop of Colonia he raised his siege. Departing
thence he went to Rome, and by Pope John was crowned Emperor with great
solemnity and triumph. After some days departing from Rome, he warred against
the Sclavonians, and bravely overcame them. He ordained many most commodious
and profitable laws, amongst which this was one, That what Prince soever
violated the peace, he should lose his head. It is not found, nor certainly
known when, how, nor where this most Christian Emperor dyed: Nevertheless it
is credibly to be supposed that a good end concluded so good beginnings, and so
virtuous a life; but had ininterment at Spires.

Glaber amongst other Authors reports, that on the Feast of Saint Peter and
Saint Paul, the 29 of June, Anno Domini 1033, at six of the clock in the
morning the Sun began to be eclipsed, and continued until eight in a very
strange manner; the Suune seeming to be of the color of a Sapphire, being in
the upper part like the Moon in the last Quartile: and the countenances of men
seemed of the colors of the dead, pale, and wanne; and whatsoever was in the
Air, seemed of a yellow or Saffron color, to the terror of all men: so that
the greatest Philosophers and learned of those times could not give any other
reason, but that it portended mortality* and demonstrated a power
incomprehensible by humane nature and reason.

127. Henry 3.
portrait of emperor Henry 3

AFter the good Conradus, Anno Domini 1039.
Henry his son borne also in Franconia, succeeded in the Empire: In the
beginning of his Reign he fought very fortunately against Hurdericus King of
Bohemia, and made him tributary, so that he never after disturbed him. He
overthrew the Hungarians, and restored Solon to his Kingdom, of which he had
been deprived by Ladislaus. About this time there grew many ^issensions in
Rome amongst the Pre^ates concerning the Popedom, and ^^e with singular
prudence labored ^o pacify them, and caused a Coun^ell to be called, in which
Clemens ^he second was elected as true Pope, and by him was crowned Emperor.
After wards he made wars upon ^he Sarazens.

Returning into Germany, he built a ^ately and sumptuous Church in Samberge,
dedicating it to St. Gregory, and obtained it to be a Cathe^rall, with an
obligation of sending ^certaine quantity of Incense to the Pope, and a white
Horse with due Furniture.

Bertholdus reports this, That Hen^y beginning to loath and hate his wife, ^ho
was a most innocent and virtuous ^oman, committed her to prison, ^here he
compelled many to violate and ^orce her: he commanded his second son Conradus
to do the like which he refusing, being his step-m^ther, this Henry denied him
to b^ his son; and after some other inward infirmity besides his Apoplexy,
as peradventure jealousy, which many times breeds from a mere, but false
suspicion, and causes perpetual dissension, and debates, which by
continuance, alters the nature of love, converting it to a loathing and
hatred, oftentimes to the ruin of one or both parties. He died in Aquisgrane,
leaving his son Henry to inherit the crown imperial, and had his funeral
obsequies performed in a most royal and glorious form, and thus buried at
Spires.

128. Henry 4
portrait of emperor Henry 4

TOr the memorable goodness of the father, Henry the son, An. Dom. 1056.
the place of his birth being ^ot known, was elected Emperor, although he
were very young, who (...) the beginning showed himself ^ery forward to good,
and a great e^emy to vice. He afterward became ^roud and insolent, and a
contemner ^f religion, so that he became cru^l, whereupon sundry Popes
^roclaimed him heretic. But recanting at length his errors, he wa^ received
into the bosom of the Church. Not long after being a^ Pavia, he again fell
from the faith, and labored to deprive Pope Gregory of his seat. But the
Germans perceiving him in such a variable inconstancy and malice, deprived him
of the Empire, in whose place they chose Rudolphus Duke of Saxony. Whereupon
this Henry with great indignation put many both of the Clergy and layty to
death, and created a new Pope in his own Country. In the mean time this
Ruddphus the new Emperor gathered a great Army, and overthrew Henry and all
his adherents: and thus he dyed, leaving an ill savor beh^ode him, and was
buried at Spires.

129. Henry 5.
portrait of emperor Henry 5

HEnry, son to the former Emperor, An. Dom. 1106.
whose place of birth is nor mentioned, by the Divine will having pacified the
Empire, he came with a powerful Army into Italy, and to Rome, under pretense
of peace, and by a wile took the Pope Paschalis with all the Clergy, and
deprived them of their faculties. Whereupon the people of Rome slew an infinite
number of the Germans and chased them out of Rome, coming another time to
Rome, he was crowned by one Mauritius a bishop of his own making. Paschalis
being dead he was excommunicated by Calistus: Returning to himself, with great
hmiliation he renounced his former proceedings resigning himself into the
hands of the Pope; and promising thence forth to be a faithful man. Wherefore
the Pope moved to compassion, absolved him, and restored him to his former
dignity. Being returned into Germany, he shortly after surrendered his life at
Traiectum in Germany, and lies buried also at Spires.

130. Lotharius.
portrait of emperor Lotharius

AFter the death of Henry, Anno Dom. 1125.
the Emperor Lotharius was chosen by the Electors, he then being Duke of
Saxony, a man of excellent parts, and most prudent in in all his actions,
religious and a lover of true justice. He replaced Innocencius the third, and
restored him to the seat, by whom he was with many previledges and great
solemnities crowned Emperor of Germany: Returning into his Country with great
Majesty and State: he proclaimed wars against the Bohemians, and with
singular valor in a short time he supprossed their impudent boldness. After
that he pacified many dissentions of great importance in Italy, and of great
consequence concerning the Romans. He chased Rogero Duke of Calabria and Puglia
out of those parts, which he contrary to all Justice most unlawfully usurped,
and he relieved many that were oppressed and distressed. In the end having
composed all in quiet, he returned home, where he peaceably resigned his life,
and dyed at Verona, having governed eleaven years, and lies buried in Saxony.

An. Dom. 1124, the order of the Knight Templers was instituted by this
Emperor, and the charge likewise defrauded: Their habits were white, Tyrius
lib. 12. cap. 7.
and for the space of nine years here were no more but nine of them; but
shortly after their number grew ^^finite.

131. Conradus.
portrait of emperor Conradus

COuradus borne in Sweden, Anno Domini 1139.
was Duke of Bavaria, and Nephew to Henry the fifth, and was elected Caesar by
the entire ^onsent of the Electors. For his ^emency and piety he was great^^
beloved of Saint Bernard, which ^as an occasion that he with many other
Christian Princes went very powerfully against the Turks, and making a stay in
Iconium or Gracia, Emanuel the Emperor of the Greeks, promised him necessary
victualling for his Army: But the wicked man showed his Grecian malice, and
mixed the meal which was for the bread of the Christian Army with some
pernicious mixture, as chalk grownd into flower, by the which treason and
villainy most perfidious, an infinite number of the Army dyed, and miserably
perished; insomuch that such a mortality daily increasing worse, and more
vehement, the good Conradus was enforced to surcease his resolution and
impresse, and to march into Thracia: And before his Coronation having done many
notable, noble, and famous acts, he passed to better life, and dyed at Bamb^^
and had his interment at Lorchiu^^

Anno Domini 1150, acertaine great man called Hugo, built a Castle near the
house of Cluni, but being entreated to desist, he with a contempt rejected the
request; but six years after the said Castle by an Earthquake (the Earth
gaping under it) was swallowed up, and that place being filled with water,
became an abyssive Lake.

132. Fredericus Barbarossa.
portrait of emperor Fredericus Barbarossa

BY a surname this Emperor was called Barbarossa, Anno Domini 1152.
because he had a red Beard: he was borne in Swede, and his brother Conradus
being dead, he was elected. He come into Italy with an invincible army, and be
caguerd Tortona, and sacked it, he was by the Pope at Rome crowned Emperor of
the Germani. Returning thence to his own country he achieved many memorable
and worthy acts. But afterward upon some indignity conceived against the Pope,
became again, with a great army before the walls of Rome, and the citizens
having manned the walls for their safeguard and defense, it happened that some
soldiers of the Imperial army found a Hare, and with a great shout and
outcry, which they usually made at their first onsets in war, coursed her,
which ran directly toward the city, the soldiers pursu^g her. The city
soldiers supposing them to make an assau^^ through fear forsook their
station and retreated from the walls: Which the Emperor perceiving, presently
led on his army, and scaling the walls took in the City, and sacked it Fitzh.

And by the reason he fostered such a Schism, he was excolumunicated,
whereupon he in a rage took many things from the Church. He persecuted Pope
Alexander the third, of the house of l'andinelli Sanese, taking part with the
Anti-popes, and especially with Judas Cremascus. Making war against the
Venetians, he was by them overthrown, his son taken, and himself as it were
utterly affoibled. He with great submission, by the means of the said
Venetians was reconciled. He fought valiantly against the Turks, and gained
many notable victories. He conquered Armenia, and in that country swimming his
horse over a river, was drowned, and afterward was taken up, and his funeral
rites were performed at Tire.

There happened in the year 1169. on the fourth day of February such a vehement
earthquake in the whole isle of Sicily, moving the whole Island that it wa^
perceived in Calabria, and the stately a d^^ealthy City of Catana wa^ so
utterly shattered, that there was not one house l^ft standing, and there were
above fifteen thousand men and women with their children, ^^rt
oppressed with the ruin thereof, which was an accident to be deplored and
lamented all over the Christian world as an exemplar punition, by the
All-powerfull hand of the God omnipotent.

133. Henry the 6.
portrait of emperor Henry 6

Henry the son of the aforesaid Ferderick borne also in Swede after his
election went to Rome in great magnifiscence and triumph, An. Don. 1190.
and was there crowned Emperor by Pope Caelestinus. He fought with Tancredus,
and beleaguered him in Naples, took in the city, and the said Tancredus was
slain by the soldiers, and his son William with his two sisters were
carried away prisoners into Germany to the Emperor, who was already removed
for fear of a suspected plague. But they together with a great number of
Bishops and Prelates were most cruelly murdered: For which outrageous
cruelties Pope Caelestine excommunicated him: although afterward upon great
submissive humiliation he was again restored and absolved, and was made by
him King of Sicily. Afterward falling grievously sick in Mesan^a, and having
recommended his brother Philip and his own son Frederick to Pope Innocent,
he gave up the ghost in Panorma, and after the Roman custom was richly
entombed there.

In this Emperors time lived one Hugo Bishop of Lincoln, who in his
visitation coming to the Abbey of Godstoe, and entering into the Church to do
his devotion, and beholding a new Hearse covered with funeral ornaments very
richly adorned, asked whose it was, answer was made of Rosamunds; he presently
commanded it to be taken thence, and the corpse to be buried, not in the
Church, because she was an unchaste woman.

134. Philip.
portrait of emperor Philip

A Great dissension did arise amongst the Electors upon the death of Henry the
sixth, Anno. Dom. 1199.
because some stood for this Phillip Duke of Swede, and brother to the late
Emperor: an other some stood for Otho Duke of Saxony, who was Grandchilde to
Lotharius Emperor. Whereupon Pope Innocentius (in consideration that Frederick
and Henry, the ancestors of this Philip, had been rebelious to the Church)
declared Otho to be the right and true Emperor: Wherefore Philip being much
distasted, by the assistance of Philip King of France, he made war against
Otho. In the mean while Innocentius excommunicated Philip, together with all
his adherents, which either savoured or assisted him. Afterward there followed
a pacification, on condition that Philip was declared Emperor of Germany, but
he governed with great perplexity and molestations: Within a while after he
was murdered at Bamberg by Altigranus Prince of Turigia, and by that means
there ensued a general peace and quite: He was conveyed to Spire, and had a
stately funeral celebrated for him, with a monument there.

135. Otho
portrait of emperor Otho

IN the year 1199, Anno Domini 1199.
Otho borne a Saxon, and Duke of Saxony was elected Emperor: And having taken
an oath not to violate the Church, who not long after his coronation by Pope
Innocentius, he violated his oath, by ransacking many churches, for he was a
man more covetous than religious: and immediately after, he began to war
against the Romans, by whom he was chased out of Rome, and overthrown: but
being more enraged, he opposed himself against the Pope, and against
Frederick, son of the late Emperor, from whom he too^e with little or no
resistance, many lands and places: Which Innocentius understanding, called a
Counced in Rome, and deposed him of the Empire, and by the assistance of many
Princes against him, in the behalf of the Pope, he had such a great
overthrow, that he lost all his men. Whereupon the Electors accorded to elect
Frederick King of Siclia Emperor. For Oath returned again into Germany, there
to make all possible preparations for the defense of his Crown and dignity.
And having mustred up all his power and strength, pitched a battle against
Frederick, wherein he lost the day, together with his life; being wounded in
thirty several places in his body; and was interred at Brunswicke.

136. Frederick the 2.
portrait of emperor Frederick 2

OTho being deprived of the Empire, Anno Domini 1220.
Frederick (a Saxon borne) was elected, who was crowned by Honorius Pope, by
whose asistance he was restored to the kingdom of Sicily although that favor
was very ill requited, because he suddenly made open wars sacking, wasting, and
spoiling many places that did belong to the Church, wherefore he was
excommunicated and deprived of the Empire: but he slighting and contemning all
the Popes censures, became far more cruel against the Church, and the more to
injure the Pope, upon no occasion he slew many Prelates. Afterward the
Parthians, Guelfs, and Gibellines overcomming the country of Italy, upon this
oacasion, many cities were wasted, sacked, spoiled and razed. After this
returning to Fuglia a violent fever came upon him, and whilst he intented to
recreate and refresh his army, he was then by Manfred his bastard son
strangled at Taranto, and lies buried at M. Regalis.

137. Henry 7
portrait of emperor Henry 7

THis Henry son of the aforesaid Frederick and Constantia was at ten years
of age elected and crowned Emperor in Aquisgrane: and being come to age, An:
Domini 1^20.
he married Margaret the Daughter of Leopoldus Du^e of Austria. And remembering
his father stood excommunicated by the Pope, and thinking it was undeservedly;
he bent himself to revenge, and with an infinite number of soldiers arose
against him in open wars: but upon better advice, and doubtful peradventure
of the success, turned his forces against Otho: which made his father suspect
that he would in time be of sufficient power, (already knowing his boldness of
courage) and apt to deprive him of the Crown Imperial; whereupon he imprisoned
him with a strong guard over him, and with a strict charge of custody, in which
misery he at length dyed, having no obsequies at all confered upon him.

138. Rudolphus.
portrait of emperor Rudolphus

RVdolphus borne at Habsburg, Anno Domini 1273.
was elected Emperor in Lions, in the time that a general Council was there
holden in the year 1273. He was a man of exquisite valor, and most excellent
in all matters, very able of body, of a beautiful resemblance, replenished
with singular prudence and wisdom. The year after his election he went to
Rome, there to be crowned; and although (as some say) the Pope would not
condescend or grant him a coronation, nevertheless he obtained the Imperial
government of Germany. Anno 1282 an army of Frenchmen being in Sycily in
preparation for Africa, the Sycilians upon Easterday in the afternoon which
fell at that time upon the 30 of March, upon the ringing of the bells to
Even-song, set upon the French not dreaming of any such matter, especially on
Easterday, and slew them every man, woman, and child, to the number of 8000
persons: and those women which were with child by the French, were bowelled,
that not a sprigge might sprout from a French stock: the memory of this is not
extinct, for the French know les vespres de la Sycile The Sycilian Evensong.
Genebrard.


Returning back he moved war against Agesilaus king of Bohemia and so
subjected him, that he held him in servitude and slavery many years: but
afterward willing to satisfy the world, and express his magnanimity, he
voluntarily restored him his kingdom again, giving his daughter unto him in
marriage. And having reduced all matters to a general peace, he fell sick,
and dyed at the age of seventy three at Gemersheym, and was interred at Spires.

139. Adolphus.
portrait of emperor Adolphus

AFter the death of the good old man Adolphus, An. Domini 1292.
Marquess of Anassona borne ^n Nassau, attained to the Imperial dignity in
the year of the Incarnation 1292, with the unity of consent of the Electors.
This man was also adorned with all the riches of virtue, but very poor in
wordly estate, and weak in men of Arms. And although he were not crowned by
the Pope, nevertheless (peradventure by advice and council, or at that time
indiscreete, not reflecting that impresses of War should be performed rather
by superiority, (the better to secure the victory) than by inconsiderate
temerity and rashness he) labored with those small forces which he had, to
recover some places defected from the Empire. And fighting against Albertus
son of Rudolphus now Emperor in the Country of Spire, although he behaved
himself very valiantly, nevertheless through the small quantity of soldiers
he was by the same Albertus overthrown, and slain near Spires, and lies
buried there.

In this Emperors Reign, Anno Domini 1303, the Chair wherein the Kings of
England are crowned at Westminster, was brought out of Scotland by Edward King
of England, which the Scots called the fatal chair: in the year 1310. The
knight-templers in Germany, France, England, and other countries were all cut
off, and many of them burnt alive. Chron. Montford.

140. Albertus.
portrait of emperor Albertus

ALbertus, Anno Domini 1269.
the son of Rudolphus late Emperor deceased, borne in Nassau, a man most expert
in ar^^es, succeeding in the Empire, demanded diverse several times of Boniface
the Pope his coronation: who being against it, and repugnant, would by no
means condescend thereto. Afterward by the reason of jarres and discords
between Philip king of France and the Pope, he did not only crown, and
confirm him Emperor, but gave him also the kingdom of France, subjecting the
king to his Imperial government and command: which was an occasion of infinite
slaughters, discords, intestine and civil wars in Christendom. This man
having ever spent and employed the greatest part of his time in wars and
heroical actions, laboring day and night to recover the secure harbor of
tranquillity and peace: on a certain day disembarking himself, having passed
over the Rheine, he was slain at Rheinveld in Germany by anephew of his, for
certain dissentions between them which before had happened in Arabia, and has
his ashes inurn'd at Keningstadt.

In this Albertus his time lived that famous Doctor Ioannes Duns Scotus, who
died at Coloyn, being supposed to be dead, having only an accustomed fit, of a
Lethargy, which afterward was evident, when they that were his friends came,
caused him to be taken up again, having found him to be alive, by many bruises
on his face, and his flesh eaten off of his arms and shoulders, and many other
signs and tokens to thegriefe of many a worthy scholar.

141. Henry the 7.
portrait of emperor Henry 7

THis Henry was Marquess of Luxemburghe where he was borne, Anno Dom. 1368.
son to Henry and Beatrice, and elected in the year of grace, 1308, and
confirmed by Pope Clement upon this condition, that at the end of two years he
should according to the accustomed manner go to solemnize his coron^tion at
Rome, which he persorming was entertained with all pompous manner and
jncredible magnificence by the Citizens and Communalty, and after that was
crowned by 3 Cardinals: and there he appeased many dissentions which were then
afoote in the Country of Italy, many parts being taken. His return was by
Tuscany, where his soldiers did much mischief. Being arrived at Buonconvento
within 12 miles of Siena he fell grievously sick, and caused himself to be
carried to the Bath of Macereto, and that availing him nothing, he returned
again to Buonconvento, where his sickness increasing, and the best Art in
Physic working no good effect within few days after he dyed, and was
inhumed at Pisa.

142. Frederick 3.
portrait of emperor Frederick 3 The Popes chair was vacant two years, three
months, and seaventeene days.


THis Frederick was Duke of Austria, Anno Domini 1314.
where he was also borne; the son of Albertus Caesar, and elected to succeed
in the Imperial Throne. At the same time 2 Emperors were chosen by the
Electors, viz. this Frederick and Lewis, and both being crowned, there ensued
not only between them, but also all the world over, most cruel and bloody
civil wars: And each pretending his cause juridically lawful, enabled
themselves to their utmost possibility, with what forces they could for war,
the better to march whithersoever occasion should call upon them. Matters
standing upon these terms, each of them for his best advantage and security,
fortune brought them in process of time to a meeting, victory hovering over
the battle, which was not without great effusion of blood on both sides. But
in conclusion the Catastrophe fell worst upon Frederick to his utter ruin; so
he falling into a deep melancholy, was therein in a short time lost, passing
to another life, leaving his enemy Lewis to enjoy the seat Imperial: he dyed
in Austria, expecting his resurrection at Murbach.

A Fable of this Emperor Frederick propounded to the Ambassador of King Lewis
the 11. in the 6. year of his Reign.

Charles Duke of Burgundy having planted his siege before the City of Nuce,
which was succored by this Emperor, and the Almaines: King Lewis the 11 of
France (who sought nothing more than the ruin of the said Duke of Burgundy)
sent his Ambassador to the Emperor Frederick, to pracsise and persuade with
him to seize and consiscate into h^s own hands all those lands and signorie
which the Duke of Burgundy held of the Empire, and that he for his part would
do the like for the Country of Flanders, Artois, Burgundy, and other
dependants of the Crown of France: The Emperor upon this motion, made the
Ambassador this answer: Near unto a certain City in Almaine, did once haunt a
most cruel Bear, which did many mischiefs and displeasures to the
inhabitants adjoining: now (said the Emperor) it happened that 3 merry
companions, (a^ they were drinking in a Tavern, and having little money to pay
their shot) they agreed with their Host to venture upon the Bear, and to kill
him, and then make sale of his skin, and t^ pay him with the money: and for
the performance thereof, they prepared themselves presently to go and take
him: the bargain being made, and dinner ended, they put themselves in quest of
the Bear, and approaching to the cave where he was lodged, the bear issued
out upon them so fiercely, that being surprised with a sudden fear, one of
them fled away back tewards the town; the second saved himself by climbing
up a tree; and the third being overtaken by the Bear, fell down under him as
dead: and the Bear (without doing him any other hurt) did often put is mouth
to the ears of this poor fellow, who all this while held his wind, and
abstained from breathing: for the nature of the Bear is not to touch or offend
any dead body: Now the bear being gone, the man got up and went his way also:
after which, he that was aloft in the tree, came down, and having overtaken
his companion, demanded of him, what it was that the Bear told him in his
ear: marry (quoth the fellow) he bade me that I should never after use to
sell a Bears skin, till the bear were dead: By this the Emperor paid the
Ambassador with an answer; a^ if he sh^^^d have said Let us first be sure to
take the Dake, and then afterward let us dispose of his diminions.

143. Lewis the 5.
portrait of emperor Lewis 5

AS the more expert in arms this Emperor borne in Bavari^, Anno Domini 1327.
remained sole possessor of the Imperial scepter, whereupon he elated himself
with selfeconceite and pride, causing himself to be proclaimed Emperor without
any approbation of the Church. In his way toward Rome he Imperiously took in
the City of Milan. Now was he excommunicated by the Pope John, wherefore he
retreatd into Germany, and there made havocke of the Priests and Monks. Not
long after that, he resolved again for Rome, being accompanied with an
infinite number of soldiers, and entered the City, where by Stephanus he was
Crowned, thence returning into Germany, where he found Charles, the son of
Henry the 8 was elected Emperor: whereupon they meeting as it were by chance,
resolved to try it out in the field; but Lewis finding himself inferior was
overthrown, and by accident saved himself by flight; but in a short time
after died with grief; but as some write, his horse threw and flew him, his
interment also being uncertain.

Anno 1316, there was such a general pestilence and famine all over Europe,
that the third part of mankind was swept away, and in Poland the sons did
not abstain from eating their paronts own flesh, and also carrion. Trithem. a
horse artificially painted with St. George on his back upon the wall of the
Imperial palace at Constantinople, was heard to neigh by day and by night.
Which was like wise heard 117 years before so to do. Cregor.


144. Charles the 4.
portrait of emperor Charles 4

CHarles K. Aunno Domini 1346.
of Bohemia, borne in Austria, by the will of pope Clement was elected Emperor.
This man because he was a very good Christian and faithful to the Church:
surprised Nicholas the usurper a Tr^bune of Rome. He deprived Drachinus both of
lise and of the Kingdom of Naples: wherefore for his justice and virtue he was
generally beloved and feared of all men. Coming afterward into Italy he was
entertained of all Potentates with great honor according to his greatness;
and according to the custom of his Antecessors in Milan he received the
iron-crowne, and from thence advancing to Rome with great triumph and solemnity
he was crowned by two Cardinals. He ordained many matters concerning the Church
for the Empire, and for every man most commodious and useful, and afterward
he returned into Germany. Being grown aged, like a grave and wise man
(thinking upon his end) he resigned the Imperial scepter to Vinceslaus his
eldest son, and altogether quitting himself of the cares of this world, he
betook him to those of his soul, and in a while after he dyed in Bohe^^a, to
the general grief of all men, having his last duties and interment at Prague.

The Electors chose Edward the third of England for Emperor, but he giving them
thanks for so great an honor, contenting himself with his little England,
and France, which he had now conquered, refused to accept the Empire, by which
means it fell upon this Charles.

345. Vinceslaus.
portrait of emperor Vinceslaus

VInceslaus borne also in Austria, falsified that (...)
Proverb, Such Parents, such (...)
children: because he in all his actions was very ^uch unlike his good old
Father Charles the 4, being in particular, lazy, ignorant, and without all
ordinary prudence and discretion; neither did he any one action worthy, or
beseeming a degree of that Majesty and Greatness whereunto he was raised, in
Germany he spent his (...) wholly in idleness, sloth, and luxury, en ploying
his all self and cares in new fangled cates, exquisite rare delicacies of
diet: whereupon the speculative wits of those times abhorred him, and
generally all men. Therefore by a commission of Robert Duke of Bavaria for a
new election, he was by the Electors deposed, and hereupon he conceived so
great a disgust, and fell into such a rage, that he sickned, and and in the
space of 15 days or thereabout he passed to another life at Prague,
disrespectively there inhumed.

Tamerlaine at first a shepherd, Anno 1397.
afterward became a brave soldier, and growing powerful termed himself The
wrath of God, took Bajazeth the great Turk, and carried him about in an iron
cage for the space of 4 years: at length the Turk beat his brains out
against; he side of the said Cage.

146: Rupertus.
portrait of emperor Rupertus

RVpertus born in the County Palatine of the Rheine, Anno Demiui 1400.
Duke of Bavaria, and Count Palatine, upon the deposing of Vinceslans was
created Emperor in the year of grace 1400. who for his goodness, clemency and
justice was without any conditions voluntarily and freely crowned by Pope
Boniface. Anno 9. Bunif.
He in the assistance of the Florentines marched against Galle^tto Duke of
Milan, by whom he was overthrown, albeit he gave incredible testimonies of
his own valor in the battle. He by this means falling into these
streights, fled to Venice accompanied with some Lords and Nobility, where by
the Doge, (...) Co^mander of Venice.
and by the whole Senate he was most highly and magnificently entertained,
encouraged, and comforted; who promised him their assistance, both of moneys
and men.

From thence he returned into Germany, and applied himself wholly to the
government of his Imperial charge. Afterward leaving anople testimonies of his
worth to posterity, he fell into a very grievous infirmity, which deprived him
of life at Oppenheime, after he had governed 10 years, and had his last
obsequies at Heydelberg.

In his Reign a Water-woman or Mermaid was taken in the Lake of Putmer, by
those of Embden, naked and dumb, Annal^ Flan^^
which being sent to Harleim, was there taught to wear clothes, to spinne, to
eat bread, and white meats.

147. Sigismund.
portrait of emperor Sigismund

THis Sigismund, Anno. Dom. 1411.
the son of Charles 4, and borne in Austria, was a man of no less goodness
and gentile qualities than his late predecessor, and his father Charles the 4
King of Bohemia. He being King of Hungary at the instance of Pope John was
elected Emperor, and by him crowned. This Sigismund by his wisdom and
dexterity pacified the Schisms and dissentions then in Christendom. In
^ohemia he extinguished many heresies: Against him rose up in Arms Z^ska
Captain of the Hassites having often fortunatly fought, and never foiled
Sigismund: as he madly lived, so be likewise dyed, persuading his soldiers to
to take off his skin, and make a Drum head thereof, telling them that at
the sound of that Drum their enemies should fly. Aen. Silu. Cromer.


This Sigismund had diverse wars and conflicts with the Turks, and always
came off with honorable victories. This Emperor was a man of his person very
proper and beautiful, and of a generous spirit, able and strong of body, of an
aspect, gracious, wise, and a most beneficent acknowledger of virtuous men, and
a great maintainer of the Christian faith: he was a severe chastizer of those
that transgressed therein. Being in Hungary, and feeling himself declining in
age, in great tranquillity of heart, surrendered his soul into the hands of
heaven, in the 27 year of his reign at Znaien in Moravia, and with due honor
entombed at Varasin.

148. Albertus.
portrait of emperor Albertus

ALbertus Duke of Austria, Anno Domini 1438.
where he was borne, son in law to his Antecessor by the consent of all the
Electors was called to the Imperial dignity, being a magnaminous man, and of a
high spirit; a just, good, and merciful Prince. In battles he was bold and
forward, and by his valor he submitted to the Empire Moravia, Bohemia, and
Poland. He understanding that the Turks molested and assault, ^ed many Cities
of the Christians moved with a good zeal, went against them with a strong and
powerful army: but in the voyage he fell sick, and thought himself unfit to
prosecute his intention, or to bring it to his wished effect: wherefore he
returned to Vienna, where he found himself in small hopes of recovery, his
disease daily augmenting, made his last will and testament, and died near
Sergonium in the second year of his government, leaving his Lady great with
child, and lies buried at Alba Regalis. Other authors do affirm that he dyed
of surfeit taken by eating of Pompions.

149. Frederick.
portrait of emperor Frederick

Frederick Duke of Austria, Anno Domini 1440.
where also he drew his first breath, was created Caesar by the Electors.
Entering into Italy he was entertained with great solemnity and state, and with
an universal applause of all the people. He solemnized his nuptials with his
Lady in the city of Siena with the greatest triumph and possible magnificence,
as it is the ancient custom of that most famous City upon all occurent
occasions, to show themselves very noble in their entertainments. He was
afterward crowned in Rome, together with his wife. He fought against the
Turks, and obtained many famous and notable victories. Afterward some
dissentions growing between him and the King of Hungaria, he was much
afflicted, and lost Vienna the chief City of the German Empire. And being
aged, he retired with infinite treasures into strong holds, and places well
fortified, and breathed his last at Lyniz in Austria, governing always with
much trouble, but rests in peace at Vienna aforesaid.

150. Maximilianus.
portrait of emperor Maximilianus

MAximilian the son of Frederick, Anno Domini 1493.
by birth an Austrian, was created Caesar with a general consent, and carried
himself with such a prudent comportment, that he was held in admiration,
feared and reverenced of all the universe: And as he was a man most wise and
graceful, so was he also in person most perfectly beautiful; and in
particular, there shined such a majesty in his countenance, that he was by all
men most highly esteemed and honored. For well ordering an Army in battles,
none of those times could equal him, especially for onslaughts, and taking in
of strong Forts. He made wars in diverse countries, showing himself always
of an indaunted courage and heart, and went on, and came off triumphantly.
Being at length worn out and quite spent in the tediousness of his tire some
wars, he yielded his breath where he first drew it, at Velise in Austria, in
the year of Grace 1518, the 33 year of his government, and 63 of his age, and
had so^emne and pompous funebriall rites performed him at Newstadt.

151. Charles 5.
portrait of emperor Charles 5

THe most invict Charles the (...) of famous memory, An. Domini 1519.
by hi^ father being descended from the ancient Caesar's, and by his mother from
the Royal Antiquity o^ Spain, but borne in Austria, and for those respects he
was by the Elector chosen Emperor. The Graces, singular valor, and all
virtues in his contentiously strived to imbelli^ him, and make him appear (as
he was) a man replenished with all Heroical qualities. Being at the age of 33
years, he was crowned in Bologna by Clement 7. Afterward he began in his
Wars to make the whole world to tremble, and he was of a judgment so elevate
and sound, that he never undertook any enterprise of what difficulty soever
which he brought not with prosperity to effect, so that he were not opposed by
storms, winds, and cruel tempests of weather. He matched his son Philip
in marriage, and made him King of Spain, and his other Kingdoms. He resigned
his Scepter to Ferdinand his brother. Afterward he retired himself in Spain
into a religious house, where after he had lived two years, he resigned his
soul into the hands of his Creator, and lies buried in Spain, but I find not
the place certain.

152. Ferdinanud.
portrait of emperor Ferdinand

FErdinand the brother of Charles, Anno Domini 1558.
and Son of Philip king of Castile, was a man well learned especially in the
Latin tongue, and also in arms most expert and active, wherefore it was
doubted whether he were of more agility in Chevalry, or more eloquent and
fluent in the Latin, Italian, Spanish, High Dutch, Hungarian and Bohemian
languages. In the time of his Imperial government the Counsel of Trent was
held, which was so commodious and profitable to the general good of the world,
that it may serve for a certain rule both of government of states, and a
norme of good life. In which proceedings this Emperor showed himself very
forward and a great asistant. Afterward he sickned in Vienna, and finding
himself near to his desired end, he called his sons, and gave them grave
advices and wholesome admonishments, and giving them the blessing of a loving
and pious father, he in great peace and tranquillity departed at Vienna, where
he expects his resurrection to eternity.

153. Maximilian 3.
portrait of emperor Maximilian 3

FOr the goodness of the late Ferdinand, Anno Domini 1562.
the Electors thought good to confer the Empire upon his son Maximilian,
and so to the great satisfaction of the Germans and Italians he was created
Emperor: Who nothing degenerating or deviating from the steps and ways of
his good Father, comported himself in all his actions with all convenient
humane courtesy, dexterity and justice toward all men. He was an open enemy
to all turbulent men, perfidious or mutinous persons; and with great rigor he
quieted and composed many intestine and civil wars. He was most obedient to
the Church, and in the defense thereof, he fought against the Turks very
fortunately: Afterward falling incurably sick of the Retention and stopping
of his urine, he left Rudolphus his eldest son Emperor, himself passing to
a better life at Ratisbon, about the age of 50, or thereabouts, to the
coffeehouse of all Christendom, and lies entombed at Lintz in Austria.

154. Rudolphus.
portrait of emperor Rudolphus

THe Imperial Majesty as it were an inheritance of the noble house and family
of Austria, Anno Dom. 1576.
was after the death of Maximilian conferred by the Electors upon his son
Rudolphus King of Bohemia and Hungary, who was borne in Austria, who also
accepting the degree, which deservedly suited with his goodness, he always
carrying himself in his actions as a pious and just Emperor, and in
particular a defender of the Christian faith. He ordained in his Diets
excellent and holy laws. Continually (as it appears) he labored to reduce to
the bosom of the Church, both by his good example and power in Arms, all
those which by their own deficiency had fallen from it. He recovered (what
he could) things usurped by the Imperial enemies and adversaries to the
Christian Religion. It pleased Almighty God to grant him always victory, and
to hear the prayers of his subjects, and humble honourers of the great worth
of this great Caesar in the service of Christendom, and the glory of that
eternal Majesty, upon which all others do depend: but the manner of his death
and inhumation I read not of.

155. Mathias.
portrait of emperor Mathias

THe Emperor Rudolphus had given an intimation for an Imperial Diet in
Francfort, Anno Domini 1612.
with a preparation to go thither for an election of a King of the Romans,
although he were surprised with sickness, and deprived thereby both of Empire
and life, having reigned 36 years. Whereof Mathias King of Bohemia and Hungary
having intelligence, he went from Vienna to Prague, and there having solemnized
the funeral exequies of his late brother, and leaving good order and
directions for the interregne, he went to the Diet, where on the 13 of June.
1612. he was by the Electors chosen Emperor with a general applause, and
proclaimed, and solemnly sworn in the Church of Saint Bartholm^w: where also
upon the feast of Saint John Baptist he took the Iron Crown, to which
solemnity he rod with 10000 horse, by the reason of the concourse of so many
Princes, and Lords to so famous a spectacle. The next day he caused his wife to
be crowned Empress. This Mathias the first of that name, was a Prince of a
high spirit and a good soldier. He swaid the Empire only 6 years, 9 months,
and 7 days; and dyed at the age of 63, to the great grief of all men.

156. Ferdinand 2
portrait of emperor Ferdinand 2

THe Emperor Mathias being departed from Prage to Vienna where his brother the
Archduke Maximilia^ was. An. Dom. 1619.
And now there was a preparation for an Electorall Diet for the election of the
Archduke Ferdinando de Gratz to be King of the Romans, who was already chosen
King of Bohemia and Hungary: after which departure the Protestants in the
Kingdom of Bohemia rebelled, and upon the 20. of March 1619 the before said
Mathias departed this life. After that Moravia, Slesia, Lusaria, and part of
Austria, rebelled likewise through the sway of some powerful Protestant
commanders and Princes, who shrunk out of the collar of obedience, and refused
to perform homage in vigor of a cession made by Albertus the Archduke,
brother to the aforesaid Mathias, (Maximilian being lately dead) so that the
rebellion dilated it self in the Kingdom of Hungary. Now came on the prefixed
time for the Electorall diet to be held a^ Francfort, where some of the
Electors were present for the election of a new Emperor, and Ferdinand himself
as King of Bohemia and Hungary, one of the seven Electors stepped in although
the aforesaid Bohemia^ yet persisting in their rebellion, sought what possible
they could to prevent him. He was nevertheless by three Electors chosen
Emperor with an universal applause the 2^ day of August, being the festival
day of Saint Austin.

Ferdinand the second of that name, was borne the 9 of July, 1578. He was
always a stout defender and observer of the Roman Church: and upon the 8 of
November with a powerful Army and great slaughter of the adverse party,
recovered the City of Prague, which is the Metropolitan City of the Kingdom of
Bohemia, whereupon great hopes are conceived of his prosperity of government.

FINIS.

