A DISCOVRSE OF THE USAGE OF the English Fugitives, by the Spaniard.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Scarlet for John Drawater, and are to be sold at
his shop in Pater noster row, at the sign of the Swan. 1595.

THE COPY OF A Letter sent out of the Low countries by a Gentleman entertained
by the King of Spain in pension:
To a young Gentleman his Kinsman in ENGLAND.
MY very good Cousin, understanding as well by your Letters, as by the message
lately done unto me by the mouth of A. T. of the great longing and desire you
have to draw your self into these parts, and to employ your self here in
service of the Spanish king: and perceiving also as well by your said Letters,
as by the Gentleman that brought the same; and by the report of diverse other,
young Gentlemen of our Country there be many that are of your mind in that
point: Some thereunto, as I do guess, moved of a youthful and vain tickling
humor, to be wandering abroad in strange and foreign Countries: Others in
hope there to grow to great preferment, advancement, employment, and wealth:
Other some pretending matter of conscienee, seem to have sure confidence, that
there they may live with more liberty and ease of mind, then that within our
Country they inioye. I have thought good for the particular love which I
bear, and always have borne toward you, unto whom I wish as to my self,
but chiefly in respect of the sincere, faithful, reverent, and loyal
fidelitye and regard I have to the person of our sacred, renowned, and most
gracious Sovereign, the QVEENES most excellent Majesty, and to my natlue
Country and Countrye-men, to set down some notes and observations, which
by long and painful troubles and experience in this place I have gathered: by
which I hope I shall make manifest not only to you, but also to all others my
most dear Country men, if I may have the favor to have it published: in
which point I mean to labor by my best friends, to such of the greatest persons
as may permit the same, how greatly you and they that desire to repair hither
by any of the motions before expressed, or in any hope of good to be received
from the said King, do err and are deceived. I heartily and most earnestly
desire you, and all other that shall read the same, deepelye to judge and
consider of these points which I shall set down, which (God willing) I will do
with such fidelity, true meaning, and sincerity, as that no part of the same
shall be truly to be gaynsayd or refelled, and my self by the persons,
times, and places, and other circumstances shall make most manifest and plain,
to any that shall doubt of the truth of the same or any part thereof, and I
shall take great joy and comfort, if my self having undertaken an vntowardlye
and dangerous course, though with better success then has happened to many
hundreds, may be as a caveat to all the young Gentlemen of our Nation, how they
hazard themselves so dangerously. And that my painful experience may be to
you as a looking Glass, wherein they may behold the spots and errors of their
conceived fancies, or as marks set up for them, whereby they may avoid the
perilles and most dangerous rocks and shelfes, to them yet unknown, and
lying hidden under the smooth, fair, and delightful conceived and fantasied
pleasures forged in their imaginations.

THE METHOD OF the ensuing Discourse.
THE method and manner that I intend to use in this Discourse, shall be after
this sort, First, I will direct my speeches to the unexperienced Gentlemen,
desirous to serve here in Spain, showing them in what point of their hope and
expectations they do fail, and are deceived.

Secondly, to our credulous Papists at home, upon whose grosenes and
simplicity, our rebellyous traitors here abroad do build their chiefest
foundations of all their villainies, whom while they entertain with vain
expectations, in the mean time with spies, Priests, and traitors, which they
daily send over, they abuse with treacherous practices, to the irrepiable ruin
and overthrow of them and theirs. Thirdly, because many of our country men
living in great happiness at home, do yet in their conceits mislike,
surfeiting with ease, the blessed estate they live in, and what withal, the
manner of her Majesty's most gracious and merciful government, I have thought
it my duty somewhat to express these few things which have come to my
knowledge, touching the innumerable benefits and blessings with which it has
pleased God to adorn her royal Majesty, together with the flourishing estate
of that noble soil since the time of her Majesty's reign, so flourishing with
peace, prosperity, and abundance, in glory of wars, so renowned and
victorious in arts, so curious and excellent in justice, even to the very
enemy, so admirable, and (which surpasses all the rest) in the free, sweet,
and comfortable use of the true religion, so above all others blessed and
fortunate, that I have heard the very Spaniardes themselves say, they fear
Jesus Christ is become a protestant. Withal, I make some comparison between
this and the tyrannical government of the Spanish tyrant, his cruel and
inhumane usage of his miserable subjects, their abolition of their privileges,
and in fine, the unspeakable bondage, slavery, and desolate despair in which
they live languishing. A matter though far unfit for me to handle or treat,
but worthy of the most grave and experienced men of quality and highest
degree, yet considering I shall not presume to treat of matters of high state
or secrets, but such as every good subject may find and pick out of the
heroical actions of the one, and the tyrannical insolence of the other, both
don in the appearance of the world, I hope and so with all lowlynesse most
humbly desire her most gracious and benign Majesty to pardon me, if I come
far short of that which men fitter for the handling thereof could say or
entreat. And so most humbly also make petition, that I may therein be censured
according to the loyal zeal I bear to her most princely Majesty, and not to
the baseness and simplicity of my style or the handling thereof.

But to come to my Discourse, to the end that you and the rest of your opinion,
may clearly and plainly discern those things which hitherto your eyes blinded
with the veil of partiality, have not bin able to view. I will begin with the
good usage, honor and advancement that you and other Gentlemen addicted to this
service are here to expect, bringing unto you for example sundry brave and
worthy Gentlemen, Captains and soldiers, that have taken the like course
before you, whereby you shall perceive it is not all gold that glistreth, but
that whatsoever show the Spaniarde make unto us, yet in his heart he mortally
abhors us, and by all means possible seeks our destruction, ruin and
subuertion, as it evidently appears by his usage of troops and companies of
our nations that have served him. For example: at the siege of Antwarpe there
came unto him under the conduct of Norris and Cornish, a troup of six thousand,
the tallest and best appointed soldiers, that ever I remember to have seen in
all my life, their coming being the only cause that the town was so soon
delivered unto him as it was. For whereas the Duke of Aniou lay under the walls
of Gaunt, with sufficient force and most deliberate resolution to succor the
said town of Antwarp upon his mutiny, fearing further inconvenience, he
marched away with his whole camp, leaving the enemy now battering the town,
who seeing themselves frustrate of their expected hope, presently rendered the
same to the duke of Parma. But how were they recompensed? Within one year they
were let all to famish for hunger, which some of them seeking to relieve, by
foreranging out upon the Country, four and twenty of them were taken and
carried to Antwarp, of whose beginning they were the chiefest, and there
openly hanged in the market place. Whereas all other nations had liberty to
rob and steal, and do what they list. Another troop of them of thirtye,
being forth, and lying in a village near Poppering in Flanders, a company
of Spaniardes hearing of them, came into the village where they were, and after
friendly and soldierly salutation of each side, as they were all making merry
together, on a sudden the Spaniards took them at advantage unarmed, and most
trecherously and inhumanelye murdered them every one. Sundry complaint^s
were made to the Duke, by the friends of those that were thus murdered, and by
the Captains of the Regiment, but there could be no remedy nor justice
obtained. But to make amends, because they would be the cleanlier rid of
the residue of this poor miserable troop, the camp being then before
Winockberghen, they made them two little forts of purpose, in which they
willingly placed them in the utmost quarter of the whole camp, and nearest
confining to the town, to the end they might have all their throats cut, as in
deed they had very few nights after. At which time the enemy assaulting them
with great fury, and they defending themselves most manfully above the space
of an hour, in such sort, as the alarm passed through the whole camp, yet
they were never relieved with any succor at all, insomuch that the greatest
part of them being slain in defense, the enemy at last entered and put the
residue to the sword.

To rehearse unto you the sundry and several calamities that these poor men,
as well Captains as soldiers endured, during the small time of that their
unfortunate service, especially at Ganskecke, Ask. and Grauer, would seem (I
am sure) unto you for the unspeakable strangeness thereof, scarcelye credible,
for they never received all the time of their service any one months pay. I
have seen Lieutenants and Ensigns of them go up and down the camp begging
their bread, covered only with old mantles about their shoulders, and have my
self relieved some of them. Shortly after came Pigot, who brought with him Sir
John Norris his regiment, being well near a thousand, as tall and well
appointed men as were in Europe, whose service, how meritorious and beneficial
it was unto the Spaniards, I leave to their judgments that know the Country.
For by rendering of Alost unto him, they were the occasion that he got
Darmounde the Sasse, the fortes of Leiskins hook, Saint Anthonies, and Saint
Margarets, the best part of the land of Wast, and in manner Gaunt it self, as
the sequel showed. Notwithstanding all which service, they were within two
years space, what with hunger, the gallows, and rigorous dealing, consumed
and brought to nothing. And last at Stalbrooke, even against the yielding up of
Antwarp, when all other Nations were to receive their count and reckoning, they
only were infamously cashierd without any one months pay. And which of all
others is most monstrous and scarce credible, whereas some of the Captains, not
long before had made them of their own purses new and fair Ensigns, those
Ensigns were violently taken away from those that bare them and detained.
Which abuse and wrong though captain Tresham and the other Captains complained
off to the duke with great protestations, yet they could never obtain any
restitution.

Somewhat before this time, when the whole camp was at the siege of Dermound
paid two months, they only though of all others most traveled in the
trenches, wading every night bosom high to their wast, and having had more
men slain in that siege than any other regiment in the whole camp, could not
receive one penny, notwithstanding they had passed in muster with he rest, and
some of the Captains bribed the C^ommissarie, thinking thereby to make a great
hand. But in sted of money, when they showed the Duke, they were scornfully by
him turned of, to the Contadores, of whom they received the most base and
opprobrious speeches that ever were given soldiers, and were in fine rejected
without ever receiving one halfpeny. And lastly, when the Regiment was cast,
whereas the pay of a reformed Captain amongst them, of what Nation so ever he
be, is forty crowns, they give only to our English captains five and
twenty a month. Not long before it chanced that one of the Captains, whose
name was Edward Vincent, was taken in a skirmish by the enemy at Pernence, and
set at ransom at a hundred and fifty pounds, to make which ransom, his
father being then in Flanders, a poor old man of seventy years of age, fell
upon his knees before the Duke, weeping and imploring his help. But in sted of
yelding him relief, the Duke badde take away the old dronken fool: the
grief whereof struck the old man so to the heart, that he went home and dyed
within six days, and his son for lack of his ransom was shortly after
hanged at Perges. Pigot himself being some three years since taken, and
Barn, between Gaunt and Bruges, were never relieved with any one penny
toward their charges or raunsomes, Pigot was suffered miserably to end his
days in prison, and so had Barn also, but that his wife, by her solicitation,
found such favor among his private friends, that he got as much as paid his
ransom, but never could obtain one penny of the Duke, though she were an
importunate suitor unto him.

Lastly, came sir W. Standley and R. York rendering unto the King the Town of
Deuenter, and fort of Sutphen, the one with a Regiment of foot, the other with
a company of Lances. Let us see how the one and the other was used. First,
sir William Standley was confirmed governor of the Town he rendered, and his
Regiment left there in garrison with the receite of two months pay. For a
while he lived in the greatest applause that might be: Cardinal Allen was
written unto to set down Priests to instruct this religious regiment: he
informed the Pope thereof, who both wrote jointly to the King to be good unto
this regiment. Which being well and liberally entreated, as they had already
at Rhemes and Rome, a Seminary of scholars to pray and write for the
Catholyke cause of our Country: So this conducted by so worthy and Catholic
a Gentleman as sir William Standley was, might be a continual nurserie and
seminary of soldiers to fight for the same. Down came Priests thick and
three-folde, from France and Italy, many masses and much preaching there was:
Gentlemen from all parts drew down thither, in hope of this good payment, and
golden world that then was talked of. But what followed within short space, to
weaken their number, three of their companies under color of service, were
cunninglye drawn out of the Town by Verdugo Haaltephen, never from that time
after being suffered to return to it again: and within a while after sir,
William him self with the remnant, was commanded under the like color of
service, to come forth, being told that he should presently return into it
again. And by this fine means was eased of his government, and such goods as
he and his soldiers left, were spoiled and made booty of. And sithence that
time his seminary soldiers, with all their religion, were never trusted in
any town, nor never shall be I warrant them. From thence they were presently
drawn down into Brabant, where they wintered in the field without money, and
in such great misery and poverty, that ten weeks together their chiefest
food and sustenaunce in Turnolt, was vnpoudered acornes, which they found in
cellers: which diet the Priests not liking of, came to their Coronell to
Antwarp, who to avoid the lamentations and complaints of his soldiers, had
gotten him there a lodging, where you should never have found his table without
a squadron of priests. Some did wonder, so worthy a soldier could suffer their
indignities, which to avoid, some years since he went into Spain: partlye
to secure unto himself some estate of living, of which he now considering this
dealing, began to doubt: partly by the inuitation of the Jesuits, with which
order he is exceedingly enchanted, and to them wholly subjected: who dealt for
him in such sort with the Cardinal, that he presently sent Parsons away into
Spain, to inform the King of his worthiness, virtue, and experience of the
sea coasts of England, but especially of his intelligence about Irelande,
which in truth he presumes to be very great. Parsons plaide his part in
such sort, that sir William was presently sent for: who upon his ariuall, did
what he could, to persuade the king to send forces for Ireland: but belyke
there was not such credit given him as he expected, insomuch that he wrote
Letters to H. Holt the Jesuit in Brusels (which is one of those on whom he
chiefly relyeth) of great coffeehouse, signifieng, that his entertainment
was far colder than he expected. Within short space after, he was sent down to
the kings Navy, lying at Coconia, whereas yet he remains. In the mean time
his regiment began to drop and droupe away, in such sort, that what for lack
of sustenance, and what for ill usage, the number of them was melted to an
hundred and fifty: which base and villainous usage the grauest and wisest of
his Captains seeing, especially abhorring the treacherous practices of their
Coronell, made by secret means humble intercession to her most gracious
MAISTIE, to pardon their offenses committed, and to grant them liberty to live
in their Country: which of her most princely and royal benignity she
granted, so as now they live here in honest and good sort, and can testify
all this which I have said to be true.

Having gotten sir William out of Deuenter, yet York still remained a blemish
in their eye, who alwais, notwithstanding their base usage, still flourished and
bare his head aloft, ranging over the whole coun^rie with his Company,
bringing in daily many great and rich booties: Him therefore fairly on a day
at dinner, they caused to be poisoned, where likewise were poisoned with him
young Richard Souch, and Robert Fen priest: but he belike having swalowed the
best Boncon, they only met with the drams, so that he dyed miserably, and they
fell sick and brake out into many pustles and biles, yet afterward recovered,
and did give this testimony. His breath was no sooner out of his body, but
Fiorias a Spaniard, and Vandenberg, the new governor of Deuenter, rushte into
his lodging to break up his coffers, in which being withstoode by Yorkes
lieutenant Edward Boncer, and ^is brother, they caused their gards at no one
days to enter in upon them, and to murder them both in their own presence:
which done, they brake up his coffers, took out his jewels, plate, and money,
of which they found great store, appropriating the same to their towns use,
which he by Testament had given to a little youth his nephew, being now at
this present in England. Lastly, they chased his whole company out of the
town, and spoiled their baggage at the gates. The poor soldiers being thus
inhumanely deprived of their Captain and Lieutenant, and seeing them selves so
vilely dealt with, repaired to Verslugo for relief, who for recompense
presentlye cashierd them all without the receipt of one penny.

Afterward they gave out and published, that York was poisoned by
subornation of the counsel of England, but, if there had been no other proofs
(as there were infinite) yet the sequel of their doings, their murdering of
his friends, and their robbing of his treasure, showed by whom it was done, and
whereat they aimed.

If these examples be not enough* to serve the turn, but that perchance you
will say, he has dealt better with private men. If you can name me but any
one that he has raised or advanced to honor, or that lives richly or
wealthily in his service, I will name you an hundred, that being Gentlemen of
good houses and of worthy merit, have consumed, languished, and been brought
to nothing in his service, some of them perished and died for lack of
sustenance. You perchance will name Hugh Owen, and in good faith he is the
only man that ever I knew advanced, credited, or graced in his service. And
yet (God wot) all that he gets, is no more than to maintain him in a mean
estate and show, with a man only or two to serve him. Where on the other side
I will reckon you up of those that are only for want of things necessary,
and of pure poverty consumed and dead, M. Copley, L. Dacers, Michael Tempest,
old Norton, Tremaine, Stradling, Henry Carew, Edward Allen, Southwell, with
sundry others of good race and credit in their Country: Copley being sick
at Beuere, and in unspeakable distress and calamity, desired a Gentleman his
kinsman, one Lo. Lewkner, to beeseech Pedro de Olane, who then was Treasurer,
to pay him upon an assignation which he had, only five pounds, protesting
that at that present his life might there with be saved. The Gentleman
performed his request with all instance and fidelity, as he has often times
told me, but could not obtain one penny. Whereupon he moved the Duke, but
nothing would come, so that without finding any man that took compassion of
his distress, his own Countriemen being unable to help him, he ended his
life, though with patience virtuously and well, yet the state of so honorable
a Gentleman considered, most pitifully, and in great misery.

To recite unto you the names of those that do yet live so poorly and
uncomfortably in his pension, would be too long, and therefore take them all
in general (Charles Paget only excepted) and examine them one from another,
from my Lord of Westmerland downward, even to the very lowest: and if there
be in the whole world a more miserable and discontented troop of Gentlemen
than they are, let me never be credited in any thing else that I shall tell
you. And because you shall your self the better judge, I will tell you what
payment they have, of such pensions as the king has given them.

They had granted them at Bruges the first day of August, in the year one
thousand five hundred eighty and eight, a general Liberanca, to receive three
months pay a piece of their pensions, since that time they have followed the
Duke from Town to Town, making unto him sundry requests for the payment
thereof. But if they have until this present day obtained the same, then let
me not be credited in any part of the rest which I shall here entreat of.
In deed some small time past, Cosimo being wearyed with their importunities
and lamentations, addressed them to Baptista Spinola, a baker dwelling it
Antwarpe, giving them his Letter, and sending the same by one H. Haselwood,
requesting him to relieve those distressed English Gentlemen, and to buy their
Liberanca, which he doubted not but they would sell good cheap, greatly to his
profit: the whole sum was ten thousand crowns, which Cosimo promised him
should be allowed, and paid in the reckoning he had with the king. Haselwood in
the name of the rest, offered him the said sum for six hundred. But Spinola
utterly refused the same, saying he would not take it for two hundred, and
withal he desired that he might not medldle any more with the king, wishing
that he had not meddled with him so much. So that they were fain to return
pennilesse, and do at this instant live in so poor and pittyfull sort, that
truly my heart grieueth to see it, insomuch that I knew a Gentleman that sold
his part there, being four and twenty pounds, for three pounds. But
perchance you will say, he gives great pensisions, and entertaineth many of
our Nation: it is true in deed, in show he does so, and therewyth does bleare
the worlds eyes with a show of great liberality. But his payment and usage
considered, (God is my judge and witness) I speak unfeignedly, I account it a
far happier estate to be a doorekeeper in that your blessed soil, than to
be here a pensioner to the king of Spain, I leave the judgment of the truth
thereof, to those that have tried it: you have many amongst you, confer with
them, and examine them upon their consciences: as for my part, in good faith I
cannot imagine cause why he entertaineth us, unless it be to use us as stales,
to allure others, considering the hatred that he and his bear us, and so under
the dissembled color of a false affection, to overthrow us all at last.

Thus much I dare boldly say, because through the conference I have had with
them, I do know assuredly, that even those of our nation which do most serve
his turn, howsoever in outward appearance they seem for some particular causes
to magnify and extol his liberality, yet in their own secret conceits they
do imagine and know nothing in the world to be more reproachful, base, and
contemptible, than to be an Entertain do in the king of Spaines service. As for
example: you shall easily see what account is made of them. At such time as
preparation was made at Brussels for the voyage of England, when they all
expected to be made knights, coronels, captains, and conducters of the army,
and to be filled with crowns, they were so far from those matters with which
they flattered themselves, that in stead of being honored and advanced, they
were the only rejected and contemned people that followed the Court, all men
being relieved with some months pay (they only excepted) and which is more,
whereas they moved the Duke sundry times to know his pleasure, how he would
dispose of them in this journey, telling him besides, that upon the well usage
of them, depended much matter of importance, as the alluring and drawing unto
them other gentlemen of their kinsmen and friends, who upon hope of the like
good usage, honor, and advancement, would be able to do great service
upon their landing: where contrariwise, in seeing them come over so poor in
show, without credit, money, or arms, like lackies, for so were the words of
their request, it would be a cause to terrify them from undertaking any
such course. They were by the Duke scornefully and with derision rejected,
neither did he vouchsafe to give them any other answer, than only that he
would think upon it. But on the night that they thought to embarke, he
departed, leaving them all behind, not thinking them any way worthy to be
called upon, or to be taken with him. Whereupon the Lord Westmerland and
Paget, and sundry others, laid their heads together, and made their complaint
to the Duke of Pastraua, by whom they were as basely and scornfully handled as
by the other, insomuch that a great Spaniarde standing by, asked them whether
they thought the king of Spain not puisant enough to win England, without
them and their friends. Upon which answer the Lord Paget, that verily
thought he should have been made one of the privy Council, and now finding
himself to be had in so small account, conceived such an inward grief, that
from that time forward he never ioyed till his dying day. Sir William
Standley also took it in such heavy and disdainefull sort, that he was not
called to the counsel of wars, whereas he presumed, and so gave out, that
no man in the army knew more, or was better able in this voyage than himself,
that he sequestered himself from the Country, and came malecontent, and hired
an house in Antwarpe, where he lived a most melancholy life four or five
months, and oftentimes would burst out into such impassionate speeches, that
the world verily imagined he would have professed himself into a cloister.

Besides, the love the Spaniarde bears us, appears by the speeches he
daily uses in publyke assemblies concerning us. Once seeing certain
Englysh-men pass by, as they stood a great many of them in a ring, (as they
use) together upon the bridge in Antwarpe, they said, They wondered what the
king made with such vermin in his country, one of them swearing a great
oath, that look how many Englishmen there were in the Low countries, there
were so many spies and traitors. Another said, it were an alms deed to put
them all in sackes, and throw them into the river. I could recite a thousand
more such speeches, but that they are not worth the remembering. They are so
ielous and suspicious of us, that if any thing prove untowardly in their
service, they think it straight to be done by our especial means and
intelligence. As upon the taking of Axhil by that brave and worthy souldyer
Sir Phillip Sidney, of worthy memory, Mondragon presently imprisoned Paget
within the Castle, took away all things whatsoever that he had worth any
thing, and the rest he caused his men to rifle and steal, saying openly that
we are all traitors and spies. To confirm the confidence they have in us, tell
me what companies of English they have trusted within these ten years in
garrison? I am sure you cannot name one. And whereas sundry Gentlemen amongst
us have instantly sued to have their pensions granted them in the castle of
Antwarpe or Gaunt, because the payment is there somewhat better: No one has
hitherto been able to attain the same: so vile and base is the reckoning they
make of us. I could allege unto you many other examples, of sundry disgraces
offered unto our Nation, whereby we might (if we list) easily discover the
hatred they bear us, the suspicion they have of us, and the danger wherein we
stand, to have one day our throats cut. But this I hope, which I have
already rehearsed, shall suffice fully to assure and persuade you, that here
is no advancement, wealth, or reputation to be gotten, but poverty, peril,
jealousy, and disgrace.

Now let us see, touching the point of conscience, and repose in religion, if
the same be to be found here, such as you expect. In matter of religion, I
will not take it upon me to dispute, because it were to digress from my
purpose, and besides, I never studied divinity: only making comparison
between the comfortable freedom of the one, and the dispayring slavery of the
other, laying on the one side indulgences, pilgrimages, forged relikes,
fabulous devises, and auricular confessions: on the other side, the merits and
passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, the invocation of his holy name, and true
penitence proceeding from a contrite heart: on the one side men's traditions,
and on the other side, the sincere and holy word of our savior. I think the
choice is not hard to make for him whose heart is not hindered with obstinacle
and self-will opinion. But leaving this, and allowing your religion to be
good, let us com^ to the co^ten^ment which you might here receive in free
usage of the same, together with the conseruatio^ of such other your country
men which here do profess the same religion. First, I think you are not
ignorant of the broils, divisions, seditions, and factions, which are here
among them, some they call Patriots, some Jesuits, some over negligent and
careless in religion, other some over pure and hypocritical, some dunces
state men; but the notablest of all these factions, is that between our
Cardinal Doctor Allen, and D. Jews Bishop of Casane: on these two parties are
all dependant, and so must you be also, if you were here, or otherwise cleaving
to neither of them, you should be counted enemy to them both, and so within
short space might put up your pipes, for you should be sure to be put up for a
spy, or at the least so to be crossed in all your matters and pretenses, that
you would quickly, I warrant you, be weary of such entertainment: on the other
side, embracing the one, what envy, what defamation, what slander should you
not be subject unto? On the other side what oaths and solemn depositions
must you make? Finally, you would think there were no greater purgatory than
to live among these discentions, iarres, and tumults. These two factions I tell
you off, have sought to overthrow one another credit in the chiefest courts
in Christendom, tossing to and fro such foul and filthy defamations, that
all men almost cried out against them both. On the other side of the Cardinal,
are dependant Hugh Owen, with the Jesuits and their retinue of favorites. On
the other side the Bishop of Dunglane a Scottish-man, the Lord Paget whilst
he lived, Charles Paget, Thomas Morgan, the two Throgmortons, Ra. Liggins,
etc. The beginning hereof arose about the Cardinalshippe, to which both Allen
and Jews were comptitours: each one for the obtaining thereof applied his
friends to the uttermost, but at length thorough the instant pursuit of the
Jesuits, and of their faction, were for ever after mortally hated, all those
that had bin ways or fautors to Doctor Jews, but chiefly and among the rest
Thomas Throgmorton, who had been one of the earnestest in that pursuit. The
Jesuits since have had many a plu^ke at him, but Morgan being wise,
strengthened himself always with such friends, that they could never do
him any hurt, but rather secretly he galled them: the which they seeing, and
perceiving that that was not the way to be revenged of him, they took
another course, and that was this: One evening as he came from the Church,
they caused him to be assaulted by a young man called Gage, who giving him on
the sudden a grievous blow upon the face, presently made have away, and so
for that time escaped, but was afterward by my Lord Pagets means and
earnest pursuit apprehended. The Jesuits and their part seemed at the first
to deny that they had been the causers of that fact, but the sequel of their
proceedinges made it most apparent unto the whole world. For when Morgan, my
Lord Paget, and diverse of their part, labored very instantlye and with
often petitions unto the Duke, to have the rigor and severity of justice to
proceed against him, of whom they had received this great injury, they to
stop their mouths, and to prevent the mischief that might ensue, found no
better means than to accuse Morgan of treason, laying to his charge sundry
points of treachery touching the Queen of Scotland. Besides, they accused him
to have been a setter on of Gifford and his assistances, in such practices as
he had undertaken by sir Franc^s Walsinghams warrant, and to that end sent
Chryton the Scottish Jesuit, to Paris, to take Gyffords examination. And
withal, they made some of their adherents to take their oath before their
Auditour general, that in their conscience they thought Morgan to be a
traitor and a spy: unto the taking of which oath also, they labored
earnestly with sundry others, which (they not having their consciences so
saleable as some of them) had refused and utterly denied to do: yet in the
mean time while these things were in hand, with their forged accusations they
wrought so, that Morgan was apprehended and clapped up in close prison, whereas
yet he remains. But this broile has opened such foul matters, both of the
one side and of the other, that the whole Nation is therewith infamed, and held
to be tra^tors and spies, and in good faith, in my judgment, not unworthily.

Good sir, take it not in ill part, that I write thus boldly unto you: for as
near as I can, my endeavor is to let you know what hell, torment, and vexation
it is to live here, among this unquiet, troublesome, and traitorous crew. I
mean not this by them all, for there are among them some well disposed and
honest gentlemen, whom they use in such malicious and wicked sort, that they
make them in a manner weary of their lives. But the pretiest of all is, to see
how smoothly they handle the matter with you in England, and how they do abuse
your simplicity. They make you and other Catholykes of England believe, that
what practices and driftes so ever they take in hand, are all ^or the zeal of
religion and advancement of the Catholic cause, and the seely souls think all
they say is Gospel, whereas (God wot) religion is the least matter of an
hundred they think upon. The only point they shoot at, being lost Companies at
home; is to make them selves great here, and to make you hazard your lives,
reputation, and credit: and therefore they are alwais breeding of practices and
conspiracies both within and without the realm, caring not what success they
take: if they prove well, then they will have the praise, merit, honor, and
reward thereof: if otherwis^, then they say their good will must be accepted,
and therewith they think to win the reputation to be counted great
state-men, and contriuers of weighty matters, not caring in the mean time, for
the security of them by whom they work, as appears by the example and fall
of many brave Gentlemen of England, whom they by their treacherous practices
have brought to ruin and destruction. They very well knew, that when they
first began to set abroach the matter of Babington and his disloyal
confederates, that the effectation thereof was altogether impossible, as
Mendoza the Spanish ambassador told Ballard the priest, their instrument in
contriuing the same, when he was first brought unto him in Paris by C. Paget,
to desire him with all speed to inform the Kings his master of their
intention, and withal, that at a day appointed they might have some force and
assistaunce of men ready to corespond with them: but that was all one, so they
might be counted men of great reach, and dealers in such high state matters,
they spared not to proceed in enchanting those poor unexperienced young
Gentlemen, in such sort, as to the whole world is manifest, and need not to be
recited. Let all Gentlemen in England, especially papists, take heed and
beware of their mischievous brood of caterpillars, for they speak so
devoutly, look so smoothly, and write with such counterfeited gravity and
holiness, that it is hard for any man to eschew their deadly baits; unless he
thoroughly do first know their treachery, under which they do color and
shroude them. What has brought master shellie into these his extreme troubles
and peril of life, if her gracious Majesty of her great clemency and
merciful disposition had not regarded him with the eyes of pity? Likewise,
what has brought the late Earl of Northumberland into trouble and calamity,
and finally to that desperate and miserable end, but only these outlandish
practices, and their conference with counterfeit Mopo, I mean C. Paget, who
was sent out of France by this seditious troop, to undermine and overthrow
both the one and the other? What besides has been the cause of bringing so
many other Gentlemen to the loss of their lives and livings, that lived before
in ease, repose, and security of conscience: and which is more, were it not
that that plot contrived the death of the Queen of Scotland, by setting her in
continual practice one upon another, against the sacred person and royal
state of our most gracious sovereign Queen, so that of violent necessity,
her Majesty though unwilling and with great grief, at the general and
instant petition of all her Graces most loving and faithful subjects, whose
only weal and comfort depends upon her long life and prosperity, to
satisfy them, and to preserve the state of her noble and flourishing realm in
quiet, was constrained by cutting off that rankled and infected part, to
yield ease, remedy and comfort to the rest of the whole body. I say not
this only of my self, though I and all the world else do know it to be
very true: but these their dealings have made them hateful and destable even
to those of their own religion. For that a fresh Jesuit terms them all in
general in a Book, which he has written touching the Queen of Scotlandes
death, a viperous, mischievous, and faithless kind of people, treacherous to
those they deal withal, disdainful, arrogant, ambitious, and worthy to be
extermined out of the utmost bounds of the world. Besides many other such
goodly epethites, with which he beautifies them in their colors, his whole
book being nothing else but railing against English papists, wishing all
princes, noble men and Gentlemen whatsoever, to beware and take heed of them:
and that in such earnest, vehement, and inuectiue manner, that it is not
possible to be more.

But some man perchance may demand of me what their meaning herein may be,
or what credit, commodity or gain might have allured them to enter into
these before said, so wicked and detestable imaginations.

For answer heereunto: first I told you, that so they might be accounted
and reputed for great state-men, high spirited, and great of action, to
procure that reputation and estimation they care not whose estate they
indaunger. But besides all this which we have already spoken of, they have
also further meaninges and driftes, as those that do look deeplyest and
dilygentest into their actions, do verilye imagine, and have been by sundry
their procedinges evidently discouerd, amongst which, the chiefest is, that as
they are of all people living the most ambitious, so seeing this beggarly
service does not fit their humor, they do feed themselves with an
imagination of the time to come, I mean a Spanish or popish world in this our
country, at which time then they doubt not, the long time of their exile,
sufferance, and lack of living considered (for so is their phrase and manner
of speech) to become mighty and great men, and to have the principal rule,
sway dignity, and great authority in our country. Marry again on the other
side, considering that they are but base companions of births and living, and
that there are in England many gentlemen of great quality and houses of the
same religion, that would disdain to have such mates preferred before the^ in
race, quality or degree: they ^aue gone (by all means possible they can) about
by practice or colorable devises to root them out, so serving their turns
two ways: the one to win reputation of men of service: the other, to rid
themselves of other competitours. But (God be thanked) the chiefest harm their
conspiracies have done hitherto, has been to themselves, and they confounded in
their own devises. And yet for all this, so many tragical ends of their so
many traitorous proceedinges, are they not moved with any spark of
repentance. Neither has the ruin of so many of you their countrie-men
wrought and contrived by their practice, allurement, and persuasion, bred in
them any feeling of remorse of conscience, but rather are thereby animated and
encouraged to set new devises abroch, with meaning in deed by sowing seditions
among you, and by opposing you against the state, to make you the only
instruments of the others ruin, and so to make the way open to the Spanish
tyrant, to which end there is no week but they receive spies and spials from
you. Insomuch that (I speak upon good assurance) there are at this instant
among you above three hundred seditious beggerlye priests, sent over by them to
no other purpose. A little before the coming of the Spanish fleet, they sent
four priests and two Jesuits, in disguised apparel, thoroughly instructed to
sound the meaning of such Gentlemen, as they thought to be of their religion,
and to incline their minds to the Spanish cause, encouraging them to take Arms
against her MAJESTY, to which end they printed in English many hundreds of
books in Antwarpe, barrelling them up until such time as the Army should
have been landed, and then their meaning was to have dispersed them, full of
the most blasphemous speeches and proud traitorous menaces, as well against her
Majesty, as against you all in general, as never (I think) the like was
heard of.

Besides, they have obtained of the Pope, and of the king, that as many as had
their voices in the parliament house, at such time as the Queen of Scotland
was adjudged to die, of what degree so ever they were, should be deprived not
only of their lives and livings, but that their posterity also should be for
ever dis-inherited and disanulled. The like also they threatened in their books
to all such, as well noble men as others, that should after the landing of the
Spaniards army, persist in arms against the same. But all this by the
goodness of God has but served to discover their wicked intentions, and to
animate all true Christian Englishmen, to persist with the greater love, unity
and courage in their obedience to her Majesty.

But returning again my speeches to you, (O unnatural Englishmen) to those
whom you should obey treacherous and unfaithful, and of those that you do obey
contemned and made slaves! how can you endure to thirst after the destruction
of so sweet a country, in which you received your being, and that gave you
nuriture being young? What religion must that be, that animateth you to seek
subversion of so benign a princess and of so glorious an estate? The old
worthy Romans thought it the most heroycall thing that might be, to vow
themselves sometimes to death for their country, and even to spend their lives
in defense of their alters, temples, and monumentes of their Elders: and you
seek to see your Country bathing in the blood of your parents, kindred, and
friends, to see your cities, temples, and ancient monuments flaming in the
fire, to see your virgins defloured, and further, to bring the noblest nations
to perpetual slavery and servitude, yea, and that of the most base, wicked,
proud and cruellest nation that lives, a nation not yet fully an hundred
years since wholly they received Christianity, and as yet are in their
hearts a great number of them, pagans and moors, from profession of which,
they are only held by the severe bridle of the sanguinarye and most cruel
Heathen Inquisition.

But that Paganism of theirs, which in their profession they dare not show,
they do in their tyranie, blasphemy, sodomie, cruelty, murder, adultery,
and other abominations sufficiently discover. If the Nunamantines, Saquntines,
and Nessatiagis burnte their towns, slew their wives and children, and
family themselves, rather than they would receive the yoke of worthy and
virtuous Nations that invaded them, What should we then do, whom our virtuous
ancestors have left honored with the innumerable trophies of many
victories, rather than to endure the insolent, wicked, and tyrannous government
of that Nation, whom all Europe has in horror, leaving to our posterity
after us a perpetual servitude and bondage, and an everlasting memory of our
cowardice.

But leaving this until a fitter time, I hope this that is already said
shall be sufficient to make you clearly and plainly understand, that there
is not to be obtained the sweetness, liberty, and tranquillity of conscience
which you expecte and look for, but rather turmoile and grief of mind, with
a perpetual grudging and remorse of conscience, scandalized with infinite and
innumerable examples of ill life, impiety, sodomie, blasphemy, defamation,
and perjury. On the other side, toward her Majesty and the state of your
country, you shall be held and reputed as a traitor, and of those whom you
shall here serve, no better, who make no further reckning of any of us, than as
of base people, fugitives out of our cuntrie for debt, theeuerie, or some one
heinous crime or other, thinking it a matter impossible (howsoever we disguise
the same under pretext of religion) that any man being in his country of
honest calling or means to live, should be so senseless as to exchange the
same for a condition so base, beggarly, and infamous, as that which we do
here endure: And so did a Spanish Captain in plain terms signify ^o sir
William Standley, as they passed in the ordinary boot between Antwarp and
Brussels.

But now to the third point of my Discourse, concerning the mislike which
sundry of you have of her Majesty's government, and the state of your country
at this present, to seek to transport your selves hither as into a haven of
blis and security. I will by comparing the one with the other, as near as I
ca^, let you see the difference between the^ both, and so consequently, your
error, as near as I can guess, and by report of sundry coming thence
informed, this your disliking proceeds of two points: The one, that your
laws are too rigorously and severely executed against such as profess the
catholic religion: The other, that the adversary has buzzed a fear into
your heads, making you believe that the fortes of your state are too feeble to
resist so mighty and puisant an enemy as the Spanish king, whose mighty
treasures, many dominions, and armies of men they magnify to the skies, and
therefore perchance you covet to join betimes, with the party which you do
think most aduantagious for your future security and advancement.

First, touching the persecutions of Catholics, which our traitors here so
much exclaim upon, filling whole volumes therewith, and aggreuating the same
in terms most bitter and lamentable to foraine Nations. Let us see what
reason they have. I would feign demand one question, If ever they did read,
hear, or know of any one King or Queen, that did with greater mildness of
lenity tolerate or suffer within his or her dominion a sect of religion
opposite to the laws by him or her establyshed, especially the same having
sundry times rebelliously attempted against their crown, state, and dignity.

Let them look (if there be men of judgment) into the ages passed, even
amongst the Heathen, and into the present time among all the Princes of
Europe, and if there be not any to be found that has dealt with the like
lenity as her Majesty has done, why then do they so falselye slander her?
Do they not know that she is the sacred and anointed Queen appointed by
God to govern them? If they do, why do they not then with all penitencie and
humility, love, honor, and obey her, and praying to God to conuerther (seeing
such is their desire) and not by traitorous mischief seek to murder and
deprive her. They learned not that of the ancient Christians in the primitive
church. But they will say, she has executed many seminary priests: I
confess she has in deed by cutting them off preserved her realm from many
diseases that rankled within the same. But yet has she proceeded therein in
so gracious and merciful a sort, that she has witnessed sufficientlye to
the world, how loath she is to come unto blood, so long as there is any
other remedy in the world to be used. For her MAJESTY knows, her council
knows, you and I, and the whole world knows, that the coming of these
Seminaryes, priests, and Jesuits, to reconcile men, as they term it, to the
obedience of the Roman church, is directlye and absolutely to alienate and
diuerte their minds from her Majesty, and to incline them to be ready to
assist any enemy either within or without the Realm, that shall color his
cause under the pretext of religion. Her Majesty, I say, and Council, and
all good subjects knowing this and foreseeing the danger that might thereof
ensue, forbadde by Act of Parliament these Seminaryes to enter into her Realm,
or to use or exercise any such seditious doctrine, limiting there withal a
time to such as were within the Realm, to depart out of the same. But this
sufficed not, these good fellows think no laws good or to be obeyed, but
such as they make themselves.

In they came as fast as before, great numbers of them were taken and
imprisoned, whom though her Majesty deservedly and with great justice,
(especially the daily mischief stirred up within the Realm by their
seditious practices considered) might have executed as traitors and rebels,
yet the greatness of her princely clemency and compassion was so loath to come
unto blood, that she caused them all once more to be pardoned, and to be put
out of the Realm, but with express commandment never to return in like
sort: in doing otherwise they should be sure to find no favor. All this
would not serve their turns, but in despite of her Majesty and contempt of
her laws, sundry of them returned, of which some of them being taken, have
received the hire of their graceless disobedience and rebellious attempt.

But that her Majesty seeks not blood, as they most falsely give out,
appears by her clemency used to sundry of them, taken by her soldiers in
the Low Countries, who though they were of sir William Standley his crewe and
adherents, her most professed enemies, yet seeing they were not taken within
England, she graciously pardoned them, and caused to be set at liberty, in
giving some little recompense to those soldiers that had taken them prisoners.
Where is then her rigor you speak of? I hope the king of Spain keeps
another manner of rule in his Countries, over all Spain, Portugal, Lombardie,
Naples, and Cicilia, whosoever speaks a word, or makes the lest sign in the
world to mislike his religion there established, or any one point or
ceremony thereof, his cruel ministers the Inquisitours, cause without
remission to be burnt alive: as for example, There was this last year a
Citizen in Antwarpe, one Gyles Rat a shoemaker, that going into Spain about
some business, was apprehended for smiling at the Image of our Lady, brought
before the Inquisitours, and by them presentlye condemned to fire, and with him
an Englishman for the like cause, whose name the Gentleman that saw them
burned knew not: but he told me that at the time of their execution, there
mounted on a scaffolde thereby two Jesuits, forbidding the people upon pain
of Excommunication to pray for them, saying that they had delivered them both
over in body and soul to the devil, as those that died obstinate and wilful
heretics. I would feign know how he would do with Ministers, if he
should catch them in Spain, as the Queen has done priests in England. As
for his Low Countries, I never heard but of two taken, and that was at the
siege of Dermond, and they were both put in to sackes by the Spaniardes, and
thrown into the river.

This is in deed tyranny, and not that which her Majesty does, who is
always ready to receive into grace and favor those of whom she has any
hope that they will become good subjects, and has (as I have heard) offered
even at the hour of their death her princely mercy and favor to some of them,
if they would have promised to become good subjects.

Oh how different from this is their proceeding here which you see so highly
commended! But it is the nature of men, especially of those, whose judgments
are not settled as they should be, always to mislike and loath those things
to which they are accustomed, thinking other to them unknown far better. If
you did but once see the tyranous usage and explication that is used in matter
of religion to the poor people under the Spanish government in this Country,
I doubt not but you would be of another opinion, especially the woeful slavery
considered in which the clergy, or rather the ravening multitude of Jesuits,
Friars, Monks and priests do keep their mind subjected. It is not
sufficient that they hold their minds in a perpetual despair, pronouncing
upon every frivolous point damnation unto them: but withal, they compel them
perforce to offeringes, to buying of pardons and indulgences, to give them
money toward the reparation of their Churches, pictures, images, and wax
candles, always having one device or other in hand to rob them, and to draw
from them their substance: for whosoever yields not to every of these
demands, is presently an heretic.

The best houses in the Town they take violently from the true owners, and
appropriate unto themselves, saying it is meet that God should first be served
before man. There is no one day but the poor citizens are punished and
pestered with one or other of their orders of Friars, Monks, Mendicants,
Capuchines, Candles, and money toward the reparation of their Churches, and
which they must not be denied, unless you will be presently accused for an
heretic.

But the best is, to see how busy and diligent they are when they hear of a
wealthy man that lies sick, and is in danger of death* This is their
chiefest harvest and most optima praeda: then they commend unto him the
poverty of their cloister, and the merit that he should gain, as being
for ever to be remembered in their masses, as one of their benefactors: the
Jesuits and Cordelleres are at this present in process in Spain about this
matter of visitation of sick men, in articulo mortis. The Jesuits say that
it appertains unto them, because their profession is active, and always
stirring among the flock, and to do good in the world abroad, whereas that
of the Cordelleres is contemplative, and so by consequence, most decent that
they should contain themselves within their cloisters.

The Cordelleres on the other side reply, that their profession is meekness,
innocence, and poverty, and to do good unto all men. As for the Jesuits,
that they are proud, ambitious, aspiring, medlers in matters of state, men of
great riches, and covetous of more, and therefore by no means to be admitted
to such as lie at the article of death, The matter has been much argued of,
and greatly debated in Spain, and besides, the Jesuits have openly inueighed
against them in the publyke schools of Louaine: yet notwithstanding how ever
the cry goes against them, they hold their own. But this by the way,
seeing it comes so well to our purpose, I cannot choose but tell you a pretty
jest that happened this last Summer in these parts.

A Merchant of Antwarpe, whose name was Hamiel, being sick of a consumption
or fever ethike, the Jesuits knowing him to be a man of great possessions,
and without children, presentlye repaired unto him under color of spiritual
consolation, laying before him the vanity of this life, and the certainty of
the world to come: with sundry other persuasions, as of all men living they
have their tongues most at will, withal, commending unto him their order, as
of all other the most meritorious, perfect, and acceptable to God, and to which
our holy father the Pope and his predecessors have granted more indulgences
than to any other order whatsoever: they brought the poor man, being of
himself simple, into their society, thinking that there was no other way to
be saved, and withal, before hand infeoffed their college with his land,
which was two hundred pound a year, giving them besides, much goods and rich
moueables, and when he had so done, died within three months after the same:
his next heirs, by counsel of their friends, put the Jesuits in suit,
against which, though they opposed themselves withal vehemency, yet to their
great shame and reprehension, sentence was given against them. Notwithstanding
they would not give over, but by the means, aid, and support of president
Pameley, who is one of their best children, they appealed from thence to the
council of Brussels, getting the cause after sentence given to be removed, a
thing unusual or scarcely ever heard off before, as yet there the process
hangs, by hook or by crook it is thought they will have it in the end.
Another time a rich and wealthy Merchant of Antwarp, but one in that point
whose devotion and scrupulocitie ouer-went his wisdom, coming to them in
confession, and telling them of some unjust gain with which he felt his
conscience touched, they presently with sundry terrifieng speeches, told him
that he was in the state of damnation, out of which he could not be
delivered, until such time as he had made restitution as well of that
confessed, as of all other money and goods that he had by usury unlawfully
gotten, laying before him, Quod non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituatur
oblatum: with sundry other such sentences, of which they had store: in fine,
they put the poor man into such fear of conscience, that he yielded to make
restitution, if so the same might be done without his undoing, discredit, or
shame. Whereupon to comfort him again, but in deed fearing least that if they
dealt too rigorously with him they should get nothing, they told him, that
if in stead of all such interest and injuries, with which he felt his
conscience burdened, he would only be content to deliver unto them some such
sum of money, as without his undoing, he thought conveniently he might
spare, they would take it upon their souls to see the said sum employed
upon good, virtuous, and charitable uses, to the greater benefit and merit of
his soul, and as a thing more acceptable to God, and less scandelous to the
world than if he should make restitution to whom it appertained, and that were
by that his usury interessed. Whereupon the Merchant being well satisfied in
conscience, gave them the money, and they him their absolution.

But I will hold you no longer with the recital of these things, of which, if
I would entreat, their impiety would yield me too much matter. My principal
meaning and intention only, being to let you see, that under heaven there is
no state so wickedly, impiously, and deuouringly governed in matter of religion
and conscience, as these here under the Spaniard. I think the recital of
their miseries would rather breed in you admiration than belief, so far
does the same exceed the compass of all other tyrannies that ever were used,
there being no calamity in the world of which they have not tasted of. Their
noble men and rulers, in whose virtue and courage consisted their chiefest
refuge in times past, when they were wronged and tyrannized, have been
murdered, strangled, poisoned, and slain by the bloody ministers of their
cruel king: they are taxed in great sums, and numbers of men sent violently
into France and foreign wars, and the relikes of their nobility forced to go
with them in person, to their apparent slaughter, leaving in the mean time
their countries in pray to the enemy, their villages flaming in fire, and
their towns battered about their ears with the Cannon, their privileges are
by wrong and tyranny taken from them, their cities that sometimes striued with
oppulencie and glory with the goodliest and greatest of the world, are
governed by base and barbarous Spaniardes, bridled with their garrisons and
castles, and forraged and spoiled by them, at such time as their payment
fails. No face of justice in their commonwealth, but the same is pliable to
the will of such strangers as are governors of their towns, and captains of
their castles, their goodly havens, harboring sometimes with innumerable
ships laden with merchandise from all parts of the world, are now frequented
even of the fisher-boates, their traffic ceased, and their towns almost
desarte: in the most of which, of ten houses together, there are scarce three
inhabited, their villages abroad burned and ouergrowen with bushes, their
goodlye meddowes and fruitful pastures drowned many miles wide and long, by
letting in of sluses, and cutting down ditches. The mansion houses and
castelles of their Nobility abused and thrown down, they errable ground
waste and untilled, insomuch that there a man may have as much land as he
will, and thanks withal, for the only manuring thereof. As for the poor
laboring people of the country, for the most part they are al starued and
consumed with hunger, of which disease, I my self have known two thousand die
in one summer, so that you may ride in some places an hundred miles without
seeing of a man, woman, or child, unless it be some poor silly soul that
comes creeping out of the woods hunger starued, more like confusitated
ghostes, than a living christian creature. And yet all these in a manner
happier, because they are at an end of their miseries, than such as do live
within the inhabited places of the country, as Cempine and the land of Wast:
and these of all the people in the world I take to be the most wretchedst.
Over every village of these are appointed certain horsemen, to whom they are
all to pay monthly contribution, some ten pounds, some twenty, and some
thirty, some more and some less, I knew one village that paid an hundred
pounds every month, called Turnolt: but they paid it so long, till all the
dwellers ran away, and have now in a manner left it void of inhabitauntes.
Over this village and the whole Country is appointed a Comissarie called
Sygonio, for the payment of their contributions, of all tyrants living the
most cruellest, and of least conscience. Who if they fail, and do not bring
in their moneie at the last day of the month, he sendes forth troops of
horsemen to take the best of them prisoners, and withal, to drive home to
their quarters or garrisons such sheep, oxen, or cattle whatsoever as they
find in those villages, which he causes, if the money follow not within
five or six days at the furthest, to be sold at the drum or Trumpet, and
with^^^ forces them to pay a great fine, the one half (...) which he
retayneth to himself, and the other to the soldiers, for their out-roades and
forberance of the money. But the misery of these poor people ends not here,
for besides all this, they are forced many times to lodge soldiers in their
houses, as they march along the country upon service, at which time it is
incredible what outrages they receive, their cattle killed, their corn
threshed out and given to horse, their chests broken up, their goods even to
the very sheets and tikes of beds, stolen and carried away by the soldiers
when they march, themselves beaten, and their wives and their daughters abused:
and in fine, what else is to the nature of man grievous and intolerable, they
are constrained to endure. Neither is the condition of the poor citizens or
townes-men any better, who being forced to receive garrison, and to lodge
soldiers in their houses, imparting to them the best chambers and commodities
of the same, never hearing from them any other word, especially if they
please not them in all their exhorbitant demands, than Perhamengo, Lutherano,
Borchio, etc. Yet besides, they are daily wearyed out with continual
exactions and taxations, as the hundredth penny, the tenth penny, and once a
year without fail, the fifthly penny of all their goods and lands, besides
infinite other pillages and gatherings toward the making of rampires,
bulwarks, ballasadowes, countercerpes, and the reparation of their walls, and
to giving of munition, bread, beer, and cheese, to such souldyers as shall
pass by their towns distressed of victualles, with infinite such like. I have
known (I speak it of my faith) poor people of Antwarpe forced to sell their
beds they lie upon, to satisfy their tyrannous exactions, which if they
should not do, execution of their goods, attachment of their persons, should
presentlye follow. But which is most beyond reason, whereas within the towns
the most part of their houses are vacant and vnhired, yet the owners of them
are taxed according to the value in which they were wont to be hired.
Insomuch, that in Antwarpe and other towns, it is a matter very usual for
men to disclaim, and quit their own houses, thereby to be exempted of such
payment as otherwise by reason of the^ they are charged with, and that they do
iurisdicially before the magistrate, at which time the Ainan enters in, and
ceaizeth upon them to the kings use. Besides, when as sundry Gentlemen and
other the inhabitants of this country, having certain annual rents issuing
out and charged upon the kings demaines in the Duchy of Brabant, at least to
the yeerelye value of ten thousand pounds, some of the which rents have been
by themselves bought of the states general, some left unto them by their
parents and predecessors. The king unjustly and by tyranny disanulling the
said rents, has, and does, without form of justice, take into his own hands
the said demains, appropriating the use, commodity, and revenue thereof to the
maintenance of his troops of horse men. But what shall I trouble you any
longer with recounting unto you the assize, impositions, taxes, extortions,
pillages, and heavy intolerable burdens laid upon this afflicted poor
people, by their unjust and cruel king. Compare now (I pray you) heerewith,
your estate of government at home, and tell me which of them two you think to
be most fortunate. Does her MAJESTY deal in this order with you, whose
government you so much mislike? Oh God, how can you be so perverse, seeing the
blessedness wherein she maintains you, as not to acknowledge the same? How
gentle are the helps and subsidies which she exacteth of you, without the
undoing or hinderance of any man of whom they are exacted? And on the
otherside, how profusely spends she her own treasure for the maintenance of
your wives, and children, and parents, in repose, justice and security. Oh
pray to God for her long life and prosperous estate, for in her consists the
tipe of your felicity!

But now to the other point of your mislike. Whereas the adversary has
beaten into your heads, that the state stands dangerous, as being far to
feeble and not sufficient to withstand and resist so mighty and opposed an
enemy as is the king of Spain, terrifieng with millions of gold and
innumerable nations over whom he commands, I hope by the clear and evident
reasons I shall show you, to make you understand that the same of him is far
greater than his force, and that there is no prince this day in the world
whose estate stands more tickle and ready to ruin than his, and that there
is no cause why we should fear him, but many why he should fear us, First,
that he is the most mighty and oppulent prince of Europe, I do not deny, if
he had used moderation in his greatness, and acknowledged the benefits which
God has bestowed upon him with thankfulness. But such is the state whereunto
his ambitious aspiring has at this present brought him, or rather the
reuengefull hand of God which hangs over his head for his horrible tyrannies
and odious offenses, especially for his wicked pariacide and murder committed
upon the person of his wife, his son, and sundry others of his best and
truest subjects: that he is in the midst of these his riches, indigent,
poor, and indebted, unable to give satisfaction to such soldiers as he
maintains, to which end he is forced to extort upon his poor subjects, and
tyranize over them. Of this his indigency and beggerie, we see every day
experience here before our eyes, his own natural subjects, the Spaniards,
being the best disciplined soldiers he has, and of whom he makes greatest
account, are forced for want of their payment, which is now three years behind,
to cease his towns and artillery, to contemn his commandments and
proclamations, and finally, to bend their arms and display their Ensigns upon
the walls against the Duke. To remedy which mutiny, there was post upon post
sent into Spain, yet in seven months there could no money be found.
Notwithstanding many and most important detriments, he received by occasion of
this mutiny, as the loss of Breda, the retardaunce of the French succors,
the danger of Numigen, etc. whereas the whole sum they demanded was not much
above fifteen thousand. Besides, do but look into the manner of his
proceedings in these Low countries with his soldiers, (of which because I have
best experience I will chiefly speak) and you shall find nothing in the
world more beggarly and indigent. Neither (as I hear) is it better in his
other provinces, which verily I believe, seeing of all others it imports him
to use them best, as being his eldest, perfectest in discipline, and best
experienced troops, and in fine, those unto whom he chiefliest reposeth, as
the only vpholders and maintaynance of him in his tyranny. Yet was there
never in the world, I dare undertake, king nor prince, how base, banquerout,
or needy so ever, in whose service so many brave soldiers have died of
hunger, or that have used such coosning tricks and shifts to stop
necessities, and to deceive his soldiers as he has done.

First, the country not being yet fully consumed, wasted, and destroyed, he
authorized his soldiers to spoil and steal the goods and cattle of the poor
pesants, forcing them to ransom their houses from fire, and their persons
from murder, by which means the soldiers lingered in such sort, that I have
known them remain three years together without one months pay. But
afterward Antwarpe being rendered, and by reason of the general deuastation of
the country, the soldiers failing to find their wonted relief and pray,
grew into so great and miserable extremity, that it was a great matter to
find twenty soldiers under any Ensign. The Spaniardes mutined upon the
Staunda, whom they found means to appease with some few months payment. The
Wallounds mutined in Laiskine, Hou^ke, and the land of the Wast, the Almaines
went by hundreds begging up and down the streets of Antwarpe bare legged and
bare footed, or in manner naked, the Italians starued in their quarters, and
diverse of them being in garrison in Breda, ran thence to Huisd^n, and to
other towns of the enemy. To remedy all which inconveniences, he found means
to deal with the Italian Bakers of Antwarpe for cloth and silk, as Northern
kersies, pack clothes, baies, refuse Italian silks, taking up the same upon
excessive interest yearly to a certain sum: for receipt of which, and
delivery out again, he appointed a Spaniard, one Christopher Cras^, a man of
most wicked conscience, to be his Treasurer. Then he began to grant paiments to
the whole camp, horse and foot, and unto such Gentlemen and pensioners as were
in great extremity, and had been long suitors: which they having received, were
forced for want of money presently to make sale thereof for the third of that
value in which they received it: so that a soldier having fourteen shillings
a months pay, received only four shillings and six pence. And he has his
factors and broakers abroad to buy those said clothes and silks again, which
he delivers presently out of the first price to the next that comes, and so
still forth delivering and buying the same again for the third part of the
price, insomuch that with an hundred pounds he makes ten thousand pounds in a
year, and yet sometimes he makes them stay four or five months before he
will deliver them cloth, or any contentment at all. And sometimes he never
troubles himself with the delivery of the cloth, but causes their
assignation to be boght, as now at this instant sir William Standley before his
departure had obtained a Liberanc^ for two months for his Regiment, amounting
to an hundred and fifty pounds, the payment thereof has been deferred till
this present, and is now sold in Antwarpe to one of his factors for three
score pounds, and yet he that sold it made a good bargain. I have known
diverse that have sold diverse such Liberancas for thirty pounds, and eight
and twenty pounds in the hundred. Yet this payment how bad so ever has
somewhat con^ented the souldyers four or five years, rather having that than
nothing. But now also the same is dried up and come to nothing. Paymentes have
been this half year very scarce and with much difficulty, for the merchants
have at this instant utterly refused to furnish him with any more wares, both
because the same wherein he stands already indebted unto them amounts to
an excessive matter, as also he begins to wrangle with them, about the
interest of which he craves moderation: seeing besides before their eyes so
many presidents of men ruined, undone, and dishonored, such as he has dealt
withal, of which, what more apparaunt example may there be than that of S.
Siueres a Portugal merchant, and one of the chifest and best respected merchant
of Antwarpe, both for the wealth and credit which he possessed, as also for the
security and uprightness which he handled: the Duke of Parma reducted of
Antwarpe, the passage of the river shut up, and the countries and towns
afflicted with great dearth and scarcity of corn, at which time rye was at 44.
S. sterling the virendell in Antwarpe, and withal being daily cried upon by
the general of Vibres for munition and come to victual the camp, the old store
being clean consumed: knew no other means than to deal earnestly with this
S. Siueres, and other merchants that had trade with Hanborough, Lubeck, and the
Easterlings, which countries were replenished with corn, to make some
adventure thither for the relief of the country: he amongst the rest showed
not himself unwilling to enter into an action so charitable and virtuous, if
so be his pains might be requited, and he sufficiently warranted and kept free
from such danger as might ensue, either by peril of sea, taking of the enemies,
or loss in the same: when it came to this end, the duke sent into Spain, and
procured him the kings Letters of assurance in the most ample manner possible,
encouraging him with much thanks and many promises to proceed, which he did
with the adventure of most part of his credit and goods, insomuch, that he
laded three ships, of which one was scattered by tempest, and cast away upon
the coast of Scotland, the other two came safely home to Callice, but at that
time such was either the ill luck of him, or the good luck of the country,
that upon a new plenty harvest which they had, corn was abated from forty
four shillinges the Virendell, to six shillinges, at which price the Duke, by
the kings appointment, bought his provision and munition, utterly refusing
that of Syueres, so that he was feign, whilst he made his suit to the king,
to keep the same so long upon his own hands, that it venowed and waxed
mustie, in such sort, that he was feign to throw the greatest part away,
without ever to this day being able to receive of the king one penny of
recompense, insomuch that he was forced, to the wonderful grief, shame and
confusion of him, his wife, his children and friends, having before time lived
in the greatest honor and magnificence of any Merchant in the Town, to
break banquerout, and is at this present suing to the Duke, and the privy
Council at Brussels, for a protection to keep his body from attachment.

These are the rewards and recompense that this mighty Monarch gives to
those that imploie their endeavors in his service. Of which if you do desire
to have better experience, look but into the office of his Treasurer at
Brussels, and there you shall daily and hourly see a token sufficient of his
oppulencie and great magnificencie, there shall you find a miserable troop of
sutours, with assignations for money, granted them by the Duke, some of which
have lost a leg or an arm, either thorough age or infirmity, that has
gotten their Lisence and Pasport to depart into their Countries, some
pretending one cause and some another, but no one man able in two years
following to get one penny: so that there is no year but a great number of
them die in the pursuit for hunger, yea, and some of them even at his gates.
Of my sauation I speak it, I have known some poor people, that for the some
of six pounds have followed him three years: when either he goes out or
comes into his house, he is feign to go thorough gardens and buy-wayes, to
deceive his poor suitors, who otherwise assayed him, though in vain, with such
ruthful cries, that it would pearse any man's heart to hear them. Which
beggerlynesse and misery, sundry worthy soldiers of strange nations
seeing, especially the base and unworthy usage which they themselves received,
have abandoned that banquerout service, as John Baptista de Monte, and Camillo
de Monte, two warlike Captains, but now retained under two mighty States, the
one General to the Duke of Florence, the other to the Venetians, who both lie
in wait to cry quittance with him, and by Gods grace shall one day have
means to accomplish their desire. Then sir Martine Skinke, of whose just
coffeehouse and valerous revenge, you your selves in England are witness.
Where are then the mountains of treasure that the mighty king possesses? Or
if ye say he spares them to some other end, I pray you tell me to what, and
when he will use them? If not now the danger of the loss of his country,
fame, and religion, and the greatness of the causes he has undertaken and
considered. No, no, it is pure want and extreme indigences that forces him to
deal so, though he be rich, yet the greatness of the cause he is entered
into, does far exceed the means he has to maintain the same. Upon the
coming down of this last fleet he set up his rest, and lost it, not only
his own, but that also of his friends, the pope, the Duke of Sauoy, the
Geneoises, etc. which set him into such arrerages, that I think he will not
easily come out of them.

As for the treasure of his Indians, where in deed consists the very
marrowe, strength, and substance of all his puissance, I confess the same to
be great, yet his charges considered, making an estimate between the one and
the other, it can no way be able to answer and counteruayle them. And yet
the same has been reasonable well impaired also, since such time as sir
Fraunces Drake and other of your worthy English captains by sea, have begun
to firke him in those. For whereas before he was wont usually to wait his
Indyan fleet home-warde with a Gallyasse or two, only their return
accustomed to be every six months, he is now forced to maintain a great
and mighty Navy of many ships and gallyes, to his inestimable and
continual charges. Notwithstanding all which, his return is seldom above
once a year, and that oftentimes minglingly as may be, and yet they are
sometimes met withal, some of them scattered, some sunk, and some of them
also taken by our English ships.

If you will know what these his great charges are, on which he is enforced
to imploye them. First, consider that he scarcely holds any country in
which he is not constrained to hold garrisons of souldyers. As for these Low
countries, I know it upon good and assured grounds, there has been no year
these twenty years, but they have cost him one with another two millyons and
more yearly above the reuenewe and other commodities received thereout, and
yet how beggarly his souldyers are used, you have heard before.

The rest, for Naples, Cicilia, Portugal maiorque, minorque, the frontires of
Arragon and Navarre, and Lombardie; he is feign to be at charge of many
strong and mighty garrisons by land, and in the most of them many Gallyes or
other shipping in the Havens, and all along the Seacoasts, none of which he
can for his life diminish, for his government is so hateful, that none of these
provinces are his any longer than he has their heads in the bridle. And
besides, his provinces stand so severed and disunited, that the transporting
of his Navy from one to another is infinite chargeable unto him, insomuch that
I have heard some of his Commissioners here swear, that there is no crown of
his that comes from Spain into these Countries by land, but stands them
in five roialles, so infinite is the charge of carriages, conuoyes, and
commissaries, to deliver and receive the same.

Besides all this, he disburseth yearly mighty sums of money to the
Presian, to the end to keep the Turk occupied, of whom he stands mightily
in fear: and truly he has reason, if her Majesty would condescend to such
conditions as have been by this Turk to her proposed. But she like a
christian princess, how greatly so ever to her advantage the same might be,
will not do any thing whereby Christianine might hereafter seem to receive
any detriment.

As for Polonia, the same has been incredible chargeable unto him, as well
for the mighty bribes bestowed upon the nobles of the country, as also the
charges of a great army of Rewtiers: he sent his kinsman Maximilian of
Austria, what by force and what by help of the part which he had gained, and
with his treasures, thought to inuest him in the kingdom. The success of
which enterprise I would not write, being to the whole world notorious and
known. In the consistory of Rome he is feign to entertain a great number of
those hungry Cardidinals in pension and fee, thereby to gain their voices when
need requires, which liberality of his he cannot by any means withdraw,
for in so doing he should be assured to have them his enemies, and contrary
to his proceedings.

Lastly, for conclusion, he makes at this instant open wars with France,
England, and the Low countries: What deem you then hereof? Has he not (trow
you) vent for his treasures? His father was a better soldier and a greater man
of war than he is, and as mighty a prince every deal (his Portugal
Indians only excepted) in place of which he quietly inioyed these his Low
countries, which in respect of their great oppulencie, abundance of riches, and
conuenientnes of situation, were to them accounted nothing inferior. And yet
he never dared attempt to make wars upon France alone, but he first sought by
all possible means to assure himself in friendship with England, giving to
that end great and mighty presents to Cardinal Wolsey, and others of the
council, that in those days were with her Majesty's father of worthy memory
K. Henry the eight: whereas his son makes war with all the world carelessly
at once, but the Italians have a true proverb, Cum tutto abracci^nes iunque
string. And so I hope it shall fare with him.

Now as touching those his mighty and puisant numbers of men, which they say
he is able to make, I take upon me to know the state of his forces as well as
other, and I herein of all other men know him to be most needy and wanting.
For as for Spain, Naples, and Lombardie, of which his only force consists,
and which are his chiefest storehouses of men, it is sufficiently known, that
his drums have gone a whole year beating up and down, according as their
manner is, to get together six thousand men, and those all shepheardes,
hedgebreakers, and such idle trewantly rogues, the most part of which he is
forced to put in garrison for a year or two to fashion them, before he send
the^ to service. I saw about two years agone a fresh levy that came out of
Pastrauia, who put them presently in the castle of Antwarp, drawing out the
old garrison, the most silly naked snakes that ever I saw in my life, such,
as in my conscience, a man in deed would beat ten of them.

As for Germany, out of the which heretofore he has drawn great numbers,
and by their help done great matters before Mastrig in Freisland and those
places, his usage has been so base and miserable unto them, that the old
soldiers are all starued and consumed in his service, whose calamity has so
terrified the rest at home, that no prince in Europe has less credit to
raise men there than he. And though there were no such matter, yet they are no
way bound unto him more than to an other, their profession being to serve
only him that will best pay them best, and yet if he should raise any of
the alliaunces of her Majesty, and the situation of their Country
considered, it should be a matter of great difficulty to join them with his
other troops. Where are then his innumerable legions with which he means to
overcome the world? Alliance he has none, unless it be with the rebellious
league of France: of them he can receive no aid nor comfort, themselves being
miserable and distressed, by reason whereof most burdenous unto him, and yet
there is no man living in the world less beholden unto them than he. For
notwithstanding all his assistance, they would never yield to receive his
forces into their towns or fortresses, serving only their turns on him for
the present time.

As for the pope and the Princes of Italye, what fair weather so ever they do
bear him, he both trusts them, and they him, and great reason they have so
to do. And withal, this malediction hangs upon him, that as he is of all
foreign nations distrusted, doubted, and abhorred, so both he and the very
name of a Spaniard, is most loathsome and hateful to the rest of his own
subjects. Insomuch, that in Millaine the young Gentlemen have a pastime by
night, which they call Caccia Marran, that is, putting on a visard on their
face by night, they go with their long rapiers or picked bastinadoes under
they cloakes out in the Town to seek Spaniardes in the stews or any other
place where they think they are lykely to find any of them, unto whom they
give as many stabbes and blows that they can lay upon them, insomuch that
the Spaniards dare not for their ears abide out of the castle after shutting
in of the gates. As for his dealing in Portugal, who knows not his cruel
tyranie, and the hatred they bear him?

But now come to her MAJESTY, and you shall find another manner of state of
matters: her realm plentifully abounding in men of warlike disposition, of
whom she is loved and adored: her wars are just, charitable, godly, and
defensive, for maintenance of which, besides the trust that she reposeth in
God, who has hitherto mightily and miraculously defended her, she is alied in
straight league, friendship and confederation with the most victorious and
christian king of France, with the kings of Denmark and Scotland, with the
Switzers, and with sundry princes and states of the Empire, al being her
neighbors dominions, united with hers, and thereby ready to assist, aid, and
succor one another in all such occasions as shall or may happen. All this then
considered, tell me, I pray you, what occasion of fear or misdoubt you have.
If you think the English valor not to be compared with that of the Spaniard,
read but the Chronicles, and you shall find how much you are deceived: you
shall find that a small army of Englishmen, under the conduct of that worthy
prince of Wales, eldest son to Edward the third, passed in despite of them
thorough Cauarre into Spain, and there in the midst and bowels of their own
country, overthrew at Nadres their usurping king, Henry the bastard (of whose
raze this man is descended by his grandmother) being accompanied with the
nobility of the country, and 60000. of the brauest fighting men in Spain,
and so utterly overthrew him, that they erected king in his place Don Pedro,
their just and lawful prince of that kingdom, whom by maine force they
constrained all their cities and noble men of the country to receive. Read
besides the valerous conquestes achieved by John Duke of Lancaster, brother
unto the said prince, in Gallicia, against Don John, son of the said Henry
the usurping bastard: besides, the chronicles of Portugal are full of the
material prowess of the English and glorious victories obtained in service of
their king, to whose aid they were called against the said king of Castile

But what need I run back into the passed ages to seek examples? Look but
into the incounters that have been of late days between them and us either by
sea or land, and you shall find that they have always carried the blows. As
by land, at the encountering of Grane and that of Sutphen, where the honor of
the world and ornament of England, sir P. Sidney by his aduenturous valor was
slain, besides many other bickerings and skirmishes of less moment needles to
recite. Of sea matters I account it bootlesse to speak, so greatly and above
measure glorious is the same, and bruited through the world, of the worthy
voiages of sir F. Drake, sir I. Haukins, sir M. Frobisher, C. Raiman, and the
rest of the brave and courageous Gentlemen, who for the benefit of their
country have not spared to make adventure of their lives and fortunes.

But if you desire one example of all, let that then serve of his huge late
fleet, with which, Golyas like, he threatened heaven and earth, and with which
he thought to have circumuented and surprised at unawares her Majesty, whilst
falsely, wickedly, and abusiuely, he entertained her Graces Commissioners in
Flanders with a treaty of peace. To which her Highness like a Christian
princess, and for to avoid the effussion of Christian blood, was very
vnclinable. But God, as he has always done, so at this time did he
miraculously protect her Majesty in such sort, that through the great, careful,
and exceeding valorous resolution of that most worthy and renowned Gentleman
the Lord Admiral of England, of whose courageous behavior and terror, with
which he amazed them, the very enemy himself, though against his will, makes
worthy mention. They were with a small number of English so fiercely and
vigorously encountered, that their resistance not prevailing them, they were
scattered, chased, and utterly discomfited, in such sort as the whole world
knows, so that Lucans verse, me thinks, may very fitly be applied unto
them, Territa quaesitis ostendunt terga Britannis.

Besides, what better trial can you have of the valor of their nation than
this, being thirty thousand, the cream of all their forces, and about the
assembling of which he had been three yares busied, yet when they came upon the
coast of England, dared not to land a man: whereas we the next year
following, with a little Navy, containing not above eleven thousand men, under
the conduct of the two most renowned Captains, sir John Norris and sir Frances
Drake, landed in Spain, burnt his shipping, put his people to the sword, and
his towns to the fire, and coasted thence along into Portugal, and there
landing, marched in his country, even to his gates of Leisbone, with drums
sounding, and ensigns displayed: from whence we returned unfought withal by
any of his forces either by sea or land.

These things well considered, me thinks you have greater reason to hope one
day to see English Ensigns displayed in Madrill, together with the utter
ruin of that proud tyrant of Spain and his holy Father the pope, with all
their rabble, than any way to fear him or his proceedings. And yet there is
one point besides all the above rehearsed, out of which we may receive singular
comfort, as that of which all other most deepelye vexes and afflicts his
cogitations, and which, no doubt before it be long, will give us a great
advantage against him, and that is, the contention which he sees to spring up
in his own house, of which I will briefly discourse unto you the occasions,
because you shall understand the same the better.

He has by several wives three children living, two Daughters and one son,
the Son young of years, sickly of body, pale and weak of complexion, of
wit poor and unfurnished, in a manner a very idiot.

His eldest daughter, whom they call La Infant of Spain, a woman as by birth
great, so proud exceedingly, haughty minded, and above measure aspiring,
prudent, in her speeches maiesticall, in her countenance and actions
courageous: her he has always norished under his own wing, acquainting her
even from her cradle with matters of state and government. In which now, by
reason of her long train and experience therein, she is exceedinglye
practiced and ripe. With her, what weighty matter so ever he undertakes, he
participateth the same before, demanding her advice and counsel, spending
sometimes whole half days they two in communication together. Upon her (the
youths weakness and simplicity of the young prince considered) are the eyes of
all men thrown, upon her depend the nobility, gentilitie and commons, and
innumerable troops of suitors, into whose hearts she has so insinuated her
self, that they do bear an exceeding love and reverence toward her, many
mighty men have bin offered her in marriage, as the Empe^our Rodolph, the king
of Scotland, and diverse other, but she until she see what will become of her
father, whom she sees old, oppressed with infinite cares, and not likely long
to live, upon whose death, her actions and manner of life does assuredly show,
that she is not of metal sufficient to give place to the young idiot her
brother, but at least she means to part stakes with him.

In Spain she knows there is no law Salike, to bridle her ambitious
thoughts, but women may succeed as men, for so grandmother Iouina did
Ferdinando her father. Having these examples before her eyes, she feeds her
mind with high and ambitious desires, of which she has made so clear and
evident demonstrations, that her Father to prevent this mischief that he
fears, was forced this last year to assemble the whole estates of Spain,
and to make them swear to be true unto his son, whom he presently caused to
keep his Court apart, sending him sundry of his council, and commanding the
nobility to be attendant on him, acquainting him, as much as in them lies,
with ma^aging of matters of weight, estate, and government. Besides it is here
bruited for certain among us, that the president of Artois Richardol, who^ the
Duke of Parma had sent into Spain, to make his excuses and iustifications
against certain points of treason, of which he was by the Duke of Pastrauia
and prince of Ascoly accused to the king, is now returned with commission to
assemble the nobles and states of these Countries, and to cause them to take
the like oath to his son, thereby to prevent as well his daughter as the Duke
of Parma of their conceived hopes.

But now to come to his second daughter, whom he has long sithence bestowed in
marriage upon the Duke of Sauoy, with absolute promise and solemn vow between
him and her, to leave her a kingdom for her dowry. She is a princess in
ambition and high desire nothing unequal to her sister, but in wit and courage
far her inferior, she and her husband both already take upon them in their
manner, style, and usage, a state and title far beyond their dignity,
convenient only unto kings. Altessa is the meanest phrase they will be
spoken in unto, refusing any letters that are not so entitled, for such is the
will and pleasure of the king her father. Naples and the Duchy of Millaine
they have already devoured in their hopes, which if her Father at his death
leave not quietly unto them, they will be so bold as strain courtesy with his
son, to get them perforce if he can. On the other side, the states of Italy
like not such a mighty neighbor amongst them, and therefore to prevent both
him and his father in laws desseignment, have made a most straight secret
league and alliance among themselves, tearming the same Ragoyne de Stato: in
which are comprised the pope, the Venetians, the Duke of Florence, the Duke of
Parma, the Dukes of Vrbin, Mantua, and Ferrara: the duke of Parma dared not to
enter in among them, but is forced, though none more agreed to dissemble and
temporize than he for a while, he knows that the king has been exceeding
ielous, and seeks, though slily and dissemblingly, his life, honor, and
reputation. But above all, the dissension of Portugal, to which he persuades
himself to have right, as in truth his title is better than that of the king
of Spaines, sticks deep in his stomach, Manet alta monte repostum, and we
doubt not but one day when occasion shall serve, he will make the world
witness of his coffeehouse, which the king well knows, and greatly
fears, but he must have patience, for he can hardly remedy it, unless the
duke will wittingly overthrow himself, especially having these means in his
hands which he has, not only to work his own security, but to cry
quittance also when time shall serve.

But having now exceeded the limits of a letter, it is time I refrain my pen,
hoping that these alleged demonstrations shall, if not to work the good
effect which I desire in you and other Gentlemen of my country, yet at the
least to manifest the dutiful zeal and love I bear unto the state of my
Country, as to all faithful members thereof, in participating unto them such
things as by painful and dangerous experience I have gathered, and do think
necessary to be known, wherein I have used such truth, that I hope no man
living shall be able to disprove me, though I doubt not but the same shall be
by some maliciously censured, and my self subject to abide the brunt of their
malice, being assured that I shall not avoid the poisoned rancor of their
infamous defaming tongues and pens. For seeing they spare not in their
traitorous speeches and infamous pamphlets, princes, noble men, and
counselors, men of great authority and virtue, it were folly for me to look
to escape scot-free. But such is the joy I conceive in my good meaning, that I
shall receive comfort thereof, as a thing greatly redounding to my credit, of
such men as they are to be ill spoken of.

Now lastly for conclusion, whereas you write that if there were no other
benefit to be gotten in these parts, but attaining the languages of foreine
nations, with the knowledge of military discipline and affairs of matter of
state, wherein you hear my self and others your countrymen have in these
parts greatly profited themselves, it were a motion sufficient not only to
make you leave your country for a time, but to hazard your self to any
dangers in forain parts, I have thought good therein to let you understand,
that albeit I must confess, that I have in those things profited more
perchance, (without ostentatio^ be it spoken) than others of our nation, for
the most part have done: yet as the time now serves, and the case now stands
at this present, there is no possibility that you or any other may in far
longer time than I have spent, attain to the like: and if you could, yet the
dangers that in aduenturing the same you should endure, were far greater
than the benefits you could possibly reap might in any wise counteruaile,
were they such as might answer you expectation. In which respect, I pray you
first consider, that when I came first over hither, the wars then here
undertaken seemed and were in appearance to all the manner sort of men in the
world. But intestine wars between the prince and his subjects, such as no
other foraine prince, and most especially our most noble Queen and Sovereign
was then nothing interessed: whereas since it has been made manifest to the
world that these wars and injuries offered by the king of Spain to those of
the Low countries, whose laws, customs and privileges he has most violently,
tyranously, wrongfully and periuredly broken, whereby he has freed them from
his subjection, yoke, and tyranie, and justly and deservedly for ever lost al
such preheminences, prerogatives, authority, and jurisdiction as he pretended
over them, as more amply appears in the ancient records of the privileges of
these nations, which both he and his predecessors at their entry of government
into these provinces have solemnly vowed and sworn to maintain all in
general, and every in particular inuiolate, and upon that covenant and
condition they have reciprocally sworn to him due fidelity and obeisance, he
failing in the one, they to be exempted from the other. Noreouer, her Majesty
seeing the lamentable and most pitiful cause of her distressed neighbors and
allies, finding no other possible means by laborers, suits, messages, and
sundry Ambassadors which she most honorably sent to the king of Spain for
pacifieng the said troubles, and reconciling the said king and those: sometimes
his said subjects have been enforced to take pity and commiseration of their
most miserable and afflicted estate and distress, and for their relief, to
her excessive and almost importable charges, to undertake a most just, godly,
and charitable defensive war against those that daily seek the blood, lives,
goods, lands and liberties of the inhabitants of the said distressed nations.
Since which being published, I think it not only unlawful, but also a most
heinous and capital crime and offense for any her Majesty's subjects to serve
on the contrary part.

Besides, it shall be good for you and all other good subjects of her Majesty's,
to remember that consideration being had by her Majesty and her most honorable
prudent council, of the loosenes of many of her subjects, and small respect
they had to her Highness and country, and as little to their own safety, her
Majesty has caused to be published and set forth diverse laws, ordinances,
proclamations, and inhibitions, whereby all her subjects (except known
merchants and strangers) are straightly forbidden to pass the seas into any
foreign parts without especial lisence of her Majesty at this time.
Therefore if you or any other her Graces subjects, shall now attempt to pass
the seas without lawful lisence, there is no reason why you should expect any
other than the rigor of the laws and justice, and to be holden guilty of
cases capital, especially such as shall serve under so open and professed an
enemy to the crown and state.

Further, I pray you to have in consideration, that when I came over hither,
the case so stood as all Gentlemen of any quality or merit, were gratefully
received, and employed in good and honorable services: whereas since the
Spaniard has professed himself open enemy to her Majesty and the state of
her realm, he has had all Englishmen in very base account, being ielous
and extremely suspicious of those that be most inward with him, and who for
his sake have made shipwreck not only of their honor and credit, but also of
their loialty, duty and allegiance to her Majesty and their native Country.
Examples whereof are infinite, and partly touched in my Discourse before set
dowue.

Besides, there is of late crept into that nation a viperous brood of Jesuits
and priests, most dangerous and malicious enemies to her Majesty, and to their
own country vile and pernicious, instruments of the pope and his adherents,
who daily (as it is manifest to them that have knowledge and experience of them
and their actions) seek nothing more than the utter ruin, pulling down, and
destruction of her Majesty and their country, which bred and nourished in
them, and al true professors of the Gospel and christian religion thoroughout
christendom, he therefore that thinks to live amongst these pernicious
people in any credit or account, let him, as he worthily does deserve, be
accounted besides his wits, or else disobedient and traitorous to God, her
Majesty, and his country.

As for my part, seeing the impiety of this place and the wicked and
detestable end whereto their drifts and practices are directed, I have long
since retired my self, living aloof from them, abandoning and utterly
rejecting the merit of my long service, and all such hopes and prefermentes,
which I might as well as any man else of my quality of my nation have
pretended and should have as soon obtained. And have ever since by all
possible means, as well by my self as by my friends, labored with her
Majesty's most honorable privy council about my return, which by the
special grace and benignity of my Sovereign, I am in comfort shortly to
obtain, desiring to spend my poor talent, and the residue of my life in the
service of her Majesty, my most honorable princess and sovereign Lady, whom
God of his everlasting goodness bless with many years, and endless prosperity,
to the joy of her subjects, and all faithful christians dispersed throughout
the whole world.

Finis.

