The Complaint of England.

Wherein it is clearly proved that the practices of Traitrous Papists against
the state of this Realm, and the person of her Majesty, are in Divinity
unlawful, odious in Nature, and ridiculous in policy.

In the which they are reproved of wilful blindness, in that they see not the
filthiness of the Romish government: and convinced of desperate madness, in
that they fear not the mischief of Spanish invasion: The former whereof is
exemplified by the Popes practices both here in England, and abroad in other
countries: the later by the Spaniards outrages, in his exactions raised upon
Naples, and his tyrannies executed in the Indies.

Lastly the necessity, equity, and benefits of the late proceeding in justice
are set down; with a friendly warning to seditious Papists for their
amendment; and an effectual consolation to faithful subjects for their
encouragement.

Fata viam inuenient, aderitque vocatus Apollo.

Seen and allowed.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, dwelling in Distaffe lane, near the sign of
the Castle* 1587.

blazon or coat of arms

Sic sibi Walworthus caeso latrone perenne
sic vrbi peperit Londigenisque decus.
Londigena infestum patriae qui nutriet hostem
Londigenis pariet dedecus atque sibi.
TO THE HONORABLE SIR George Barn Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of London;
and the right worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren and assistants, peace and
joy in Christ Jesus.
IT is an axiom concluded in philosophy, and a truth apparent in daily
experience, that small forces firmly united and co^pacted in one, grow to be
mighty in continuance of time: whereas matters of far greater moment being
separated either by casual division, or wilful discord, are easily ruinated,
and suddenly brought to confusion. And therefore Nature in all her actions
intending unity, builds her whole frame upon the groundworke of sweet
harmony, and musical concent: tempering the qualities in each several body
with such indifferent proportion, that albeit some one ouerrule the rest, yet
it is not permitted to overthrow them: but they all by a secret sympathy and
mutual agreement, endeavor to support the one the others burden. But whenever
this vnisone is interrupted by iarring of the parts, then is Nature by violence
rackt out of her course, and thereupon insueth the subversion of the whole.
Seeing then unity is the mark whereat Nature aims, and the very mean to
preserve her works: and seeing such things of all others do chiefly promise
perpetuity, as draw nearest to the rule of Nature; it is an undoubted
consequent that those common wealths have greatest likelihood of prosperity,
and least cause of decaie, wherein concord is nourished, and dissension
suppressed. Mitigation of punishment is a dangerous imboldening of malicious
adversaries; and obstinate purposes, unless they be timely prevented by politic
foresight, and restrained by special penalty, are often times too late
repented, when in the end they burst out into unlawful practices, to the
disturbance of public unity and the procurement of common confusion.
Therefore as the maintenance of unity is an instrument that conserueth the
state: so is execution of justice the golden pillar that vpholdeth unity. The
which prop so long as it shall stand in force (but it must stand in force so
long as England will desire to rest in safety) I hope the Traitrous intents of
Englands and English enemies shall be utterly frustrate, neither shall they
have so great cause to triumph for their victories, as she has now just reason
to complain of their trecheries. For by the cutting off, of putrified members
the whole body may be delivered from peril: and by avoiding odious iarres,
amiable unity may be retained. But if their hidden rancour be suffered
inwardly to fester, and further to disperse it self, then it is greatly to be
feared least the contagion thereof breed a fouler malady, then can be cured
with an ordinary plaster. In respect whereof your honors and worships
travails jointly and severally employed in these dangerous times, as they
argue a studious zeal and affectionate devotion toward your natural Prince
and country: so do they merit all titles of singular commendation. The
renown of diverse your predecessors is with capital letters so inregistred in
the book of Fame, that neither the darkesome veil of Oblivion can ouershadow
it, nor the forked sting of detraction at any time cancel it. In imitation of
whose worthiness if ye shall constantly proceed, as ye have already laudably
begun, it will appear that virtue yet stoopeth not for age, and that common
care is not brought a sleep by private profit. This argument might minister
ample matter of true discourse: but least my words should be wrested beyond the
level of my thoughts, and so attainted with suspicion of flattery, I wrap
that up in silence which I might very well utter without any impeachment of
insinuation; omitting your industrious care for sifting out recusants, your
diligent search for discovery of factions, your watchful regard for appeasing
of mutinies, your charitable provision for relieuing of Orphans, with diverse
other matters of importance greatly behoofefull to the state of this Realm,
and properly incident to the duties of good Magistrates. And seeing these are
the days wherein treason is colored with religion and malice armed with
policy, I have in this treatise detected the dealings of Traitors, and used
dissuasions by manifesting the dangers annexed to their proceedings. The which
for that it is framed in the person of England whom ye have often assisted in
extremities, I have published under your L. and W. patronage, and offer the
same to your acceptance, whom the almighty protect with his power, and guide
with his grace.

Your L. and VV. at command, William Lightfoote.

Ad pontificios Apostrophe.
PApicola ergo fremis, triplicis quod pompa tiarae
sordet, and in nihilum perdita Roma ruit?
Papa quod est vulgo papae; quod Roma, ruina;
missa quod est monstrum; papicola ergo fremis?
Vah freme; frendat aper, furiat rabiosa caterua:
euomat in proprium toxica dir a sinum.
Accingis lateri gladios, vibrasque sagittas,
confodit ast pectus tortilis hasta tuum.
In fumos abeunt cerebri deliria laesi,
machina quam fabricas mole suapte ruit.
Nos ridere minas; nos flocci pendere pugnas;
nos tremere ad belli fulmina falsa nihil.
Pastor oues curat, sic curat Christus ouile,
praedantemque fugat peruigil ipse lupum.
Et nos sub Christi placide requiescimus vmbra:
hem tibi: te fasces, virga, crucesque manent.
Dum simulas Petrum, in petram comping is inepte:
inde luent scapulae; papicola ergo geme.
Dum stimulum calcas, intentat Alecto flagellum,
imminet in poenam vindice dura manu.
Insultas tumidus quasi victima pinguis in aras,
nescius (o) fati; papicola ergo geme.
Pro fremitu gemitus subeat, cedatque dolori
iam dolus, and curae sit tibi sola salus.
Reginam and patriam miseris iactare procellis
impius optasti; papicola ergo geme.
Guil. L.

The Complaint of England.
England speaks.
THe sorrows which I have locked up within the closet of my amazed thoughts,
springing from the infected puddle of those unnatural and mischievous
attemptes, that have been lately practiced for the working of my ruin, by
undermining of my state, are now grown to such extremity of passion, that
they, in a manner, bereave my soul of comfort, and debar my speech of
passage. And although I have small hope by my persuasions to restrain them
from treacherous and desperate enterprises, Small hope to prevail by words
when deeds take no place.
whom by my benefftes I cannot allure to continue in loyal obedience: (who
having their judgment blinded with ambitious desire of promotion; their
hearts obstinately grounded on wilful opinion of error; their minds
dangerously inuenomed with the poison of inueterate malice: have (I fear me)
banished all fear of God, quenched each spark of religion, and renounced all
respect of allegeaunce) yet it may be that if I shall by manifest^ and
infallible demonstration prove, that the instruments they have devised for mine
overthrow, will in conclusion redound to their own destruction: and the weapons
they daily forge to gore my sides withal, must needs in the end cut their
own throats, and be sheathed in their proper intrailes: then (I say) it is
possible that the regard of their own safety, Doubt of danger a bridle for a
brain sick Jade.
may be very forcible to stir up in them some relenting motions, though the
headstrong fury of their resolution will not give them leave to consider the
heynousnesse of their purpose, nor to harken to the justness of my complaint.
At the least I am assured of this, that how soever they have by villainous
dowes sold themselves to be vessels and vassalles of iniquity, how soever
they have received the stamp of the beast in their forehead, how soever they
have taken aforehand the earnest penny of their graund captain Satan to
accomplish his command: yet this I know, that the Almighty, who from the
highest heavens looks with single eye into the bottom and most secret
corners of their double hearts, will in the zeal of his justice award them a
wrathful and irreuocable sentence of indgement, from the which they shall not
appeal, repaying vengeance for their hire; and will in the fullness of his
compassion behold myna innocence, making heaven and earth to wonder at their
madness, the world to witness their outrages, and their own convicted
consciences to testify how undeservedly they have undertaken against me, the
execution of such monstrous and merciless intentions. How can I but blushe to
call them sons, who violating the sacred laws of nature, have sought to
prefer an unjust stepdame before their most loving mother? They that change
the liberty of the Gospel for popish thraldom, must needs live by the
loss, and purchase repentance at too dear a rate.
How can I but sorrow at their senseless and over grown dissolutions, who
rejecting the sweet yoke of dutiful subjection, presume to lift up their heel
against her head, under whose feet they ought to lay down their lives? And
needs must I condemn their abject and caitife courage, who being free borne
and enjoying absolute liberty, are notwithstanding so bewitched with strong
delusions, that going about under a frivolous pretense of purchasing greater
freedom (forsooth) to their consciences, they are contented to abandon
themselves in perpetual flauerie to such tyranny, as does not only accustom
it self to make havoc of substance and possessions; to exercise butcherly
massacres on the body; but it also over charge the soul with clogges of
spiritual bondage, which being once taken are intolerable to bear, and
almost impossible to shake off.

Come near me yet my sons, my disobedient sounes: (woe is me that the
instinct of nature inforceth me to call you sons, who have so much
degenerated in your ungracious behauiours, that you shame and scorn to
acknowledge me for your mother) come near me (I say) sequester not your selves
from my presence, but tell me from what ground this strangeness arises. If
from fear; (which I hardly believe) know that I which enclosed you in my
bowels, nursed you at my breasts, embraced you in mine arms, and carry you still
engraven on the table of my heart, have not forgotten the affection of a
mother, but am willing to grant you pardon for your faults, if you can find
grace to be sorry for the same: and therefore be not afraid. If from shame;
(which I heartily wish) then shall I think that this is the first step to your
amendment, when I perceive you abasht at the conceit of your former lewdnes;
and then shall I hope you will take a new course, when I see you break off
from your old bias. It is no shame to be ashamed of evil doing: it is never
too late to reform bad conditions. The medicine comes not out of time that
brings remedy when it is ministered: and therefore set shame aside. If from
self-love or malice; Truth must needs have a cold suite where malice is
chief Iuror and parti^^iti^ Judge.
(which by conjectures more then probable I am induced deeply to suspect)
remember that selfo love is partial, and bolteth out his verdict before he
have thoroughly examined the cause: know that malice is blind, and lies
always in the heavier balance, making equity to seem light weight: and
therefore away with such companions. So then whence soever this strangeness
arises, draw near notwithstanding, and let us a while reason together. I will
not assume the title of my just authority: I will not challenge the privilege
of a mother: neither will I greatly urge you with the duty of Children: but
we will deal indifferently, and so where the fault is justly found, there
shall the blame worthily remain.

Say on then; what sufficient reasons, or what injurious surmises feed this
discontented humor in you? Why speak you not? what argues this stlence? this
guilty silence? May it sound credible in any impartial ears, that you have
with such rigorous censure condemned me, with such vnslakt thirst of revenge
persecuted me, against whom you cannot allege any colorable accusation?
Answer me, and so disburde^ your consciences; or else bethink you what
answer you will then frame, when you shall be summoned to appear before the
supreme tribunal in the highest court of Parliament; where you cannot plead by
proxy, nor entertain your attorney; where al popish dispensatio^s shall be
frustrate; where no construction of advantage will be admitted; where devised
cauils shall be excluded; where God himself shall be plaintiff, advocate, and
judge, to co^mence action, to bear witness, and to pronounce sentence against
you. If I had consumed your wealth by the exactions of Naples, if I had
disturbed your quiet by the Inquisition of Seuill, Neither private wrong nor
public wrack can serve to bolster out traiterous intentes.
if I had tyrannized your lives by Spanish cruelties, or inthralled your souls
to Romish superstition, then might you have shaped out some shadow of reason,
and pretended argument of probability, for the opposing of your selves, and the
deposing of her, who had sought to forment you with such hellish miseries: yet
were ye foundation too too weak, for to build either open rebellion, Psalm, 10
5.
or secret conspiracy thereupon. Are ye not expressly forbidden to touch the
Lords anointed? and can it then be warranted unto you, to lay violent hands
and griping paws upon her? I warrant you it is a leaden warrant for the
baseness, and brazen for the impudency; try it when you list at the
touchstone, you shall find it not current, but counterfeite; and they will in
fine prove them selves Calves, that hope to suck any comfort or confidence
out of such a Bull.

Know ye not that he who dwells in heaven, Psalm. 2.
laugheth them to scorn that furiously rage, or so much as take counsel
together against him and his anointed? and annexeth to his derision burning
wrath and sore displeasure, bruising them with a rod of iron, and breaking them
in pieces like a potters vessel? Suppose ye that the quarrel of the Lords
anointed concerns him not, or touches him not to the very quick? will not
he, think ye, redress the wrong, and take the cause into his own hands?
have ye lived so long, and learned so little? or do ye know this perfectly, and
yet practice the contrary purposely? O blind as Beetles, if ye see not this: O
faithles as Atheists, if ye believe not this? O foolish as Idiots, if ye beware
it not: Would it not be accounted, I will not say a point of ridiculous folly,
but an evident proof of extreme madness in the highest degree, if a seely
person enfeebled by long sickness, should in the beldem rage and frantic
bitterness of his malady presume to encounter a valiant champion, and to
wrest the weapon out of his hands? And can it in common estimation be thought
less then detestable impiety, that men long languishing in a consumption of
reason, but abounding with a contagious humor of innovation, forlorn in hope,
fallen from grace, and reprobate in sense, shall in the fit and agony of their
brainsicke disease, rear up ladders to scale the Monarchy, combining them
selves by force to seize upon the awful scepter, and with tooth and nail to
bite and scratch after the crown on their Princes head? What is it to wage
battle, They that resist a lawful Prince make war against the living God.
and maintain wars with God, if this be not? This is to verify the fable of
the giants, who are said to have rampired bulwarks, and mounted their engines,
threatening to dislodge Jupiter of his throne.

It is manifest that David the chosen servant of God, 1. Sam. 24.
notwithstanding that Saul causeless pursued him, and like an enraged Tigre
greedily hasting after his pray, so hunted after his soul: yet at such time as
Saul at unawares entered into the cave where David with his servants were
covertly hidden, albeit David was by his men of war animated, and by incessant
importunity urged to lay hold upon present occasion, and so to prevent future
peril, who in most vehement manner enforced their purpose, saying: See, the day
is come whereof the Lord said unto thee, Behold I will deliver thine enemy
into thine hand, and thou shall do with him as it shall seem good to thee:
This example of David ought to be thoroughly waighed and trueite followed.
yet, neither the ruthful consideration of his perplexed estate, nor the
peremptory threats of his sworn enemy, nor the effectual obtestations of
his approved soldiers could any jot prevail with him for the accomplishment
of an action so heinous and accursed. But he was touched in his heart, because
he had touched and cut off the lap of his Lords garment. And thereupon
discovering himself, he inclined his face to the earth, and bowed himself
before Saul, manifessing his innocence. Saul astonished at the matter, and
deeply ravished with the contemplation of such undeserved favor, and
inexpected courtesy, lift up his voice and wept, saying unto David: Thou art
more righteous then I: for I have wrought thee evil, and thou have rendered me
good: for who shall find his enemy, and let him depart free? And afterward
(as appears in thesequel of the history) when Saules power fighting against
the Philistines, was discomfited, and himself despairing of victory, and
weary of life, fell upon the point of his sword: at such time as a young man
of the Amalekites, thinking to deliver an acceptable message, and hoping he
should have reaped a gladsome welcome for reporting such joyful tidings, told
unto David that he at the entreaty and instant request of Saul, had
dispatched him of his life, the enjoying whereof was irksome and full of
anguish unto him: and more, lest he should have omitted any thing, that he
thought might gratify David, or work his singular contentment, he presented
him with the crown that he had taken from Saules head, thereby both confirming
the truth of his speeches, and also (after a sort) installing David in
possession of the same: yet was he so far from rejoicing, either in that his
adversaries death had finished his troubles, and assured him of his life with
security, or that none other could forestall him in obtaining the kingdom,
that he rent his clothes, wept and fasted until evening, and then said to the
messenger: 2. Sam. 1.
How wast thou not afraid to put forth thine hand to destroy the anointed of
the Lord? Thy blood be upon thine own head; for thine own mouth has
testified against thee. And therewith commanded one of his servants to fall
upon him, who smote him that he dyed.

This one example, if the volume of Gods book, (which is the testament of his
truth, and the storehouse of his promises) did not afforde any greater
plenty, might alone suffice, for the deciding of a question so needless, and
so ungodly. This alone might serve for the suppressing of such hateful
conspiracies, as the graceless broodes of mongrell monsters (I mean English
Italianates) do engender and hatch within their devilish conceits. This, yea
this being authentike, undoubted, and entangled with no scruple, might alone
serve for a most exquisite president, whereto ye ought to conform your
thoughts, and whereby ye ought to confirm that reverend opinion, which all
men are to carry of lawful Princes being Gods deputies. In the which sithence
there are diverse occurrents well worthy the observation, it will not be
impertinent slightly to glaunce at, and briefly to comprise the resemblances
and differences, which show themselves in this fact of David, and this faction
of yours: that for so much as the nature of contraries is best tried by
matching and comparing the one with the other: therefore by how much the fact
of David shall appear more just and righteous, by so much will your faction be
proved more odious and damnable. Saul, because he disobeyed the commandment
of the Lord uttered by the mouth of the Prophet Samuel, was forsaken of God:
Gods holy spirit departed from him, and an evil spirit took possession of
him: David was by Samuel anointed king in his stead. Yet would he not presume
to dispossess Saul of his kingdom: but endured grievous calamities which by
the malice of Saul were inflicted upon him. He was distressed in the towns
with doubt of trecheries; vexed in the wilderness with the scourge of penury;
reproched by the churl Nabal with the infamous title of runnagate; constrained
in king Achis Court to counterfeit madness; sustaining a burden of miseries
heavier then Aetna, and almost overwhelmed with an Ocean of perplexities. Yet
did he with all meekness and patience attend the Lords leisure, The
application of the former example.
wholly relying upon his promises, which he knew should be performed at such
time as God in his secret counsel and foreknowledge had determined. But you
like wretches, and of all other most wretched, because wilfully wretched,
living in a land wherein the heavens drop down fatness, where honey
distilleth from the stony rock: a land not much inferior to the land of
Canaan: a land much resembling the happiness of Paradise; (as one of your own
accomplices lately confessed) living under the regiment of a virtuous Princess
and renowned Sovereign; a Princess every way superior to Saul, and cannot
by her greatest enemies be impeached with any crime common to her with Saul:
howbeit it was feared that Agag the Amalekite, Because Saul spared Agag. God
rejected Saul.
the professed adversary of Gods people should have been spared: but (thanked
be God) her loving subjects to their general rejoicing are now disburdened of
that fear. A Princess whose sunbright honor dazeleth the eyes of foreign
Monarchs; whose zealous inclination, like an inestimable Diamond enchased upon
a peereles Jewel, bewtifieth all other virtues that attend upon her person;
whose affectionate love to her subjects is wonderful, passing the love of
David and Jonathan; (and yet was their love passing the love of women) who
tempereth justice with mercy, extending mercy without partiality, and
executing justice without rigor: yet you through abundance and prosperity are
become wanton and insolent; Fullness is the mother of forgetfulness and wealth
nurseth wantonness.
through her too much grace and favor ye are grown obdurate and rebellious;
indeuouring to supplant her, who studieth to support you; devising her
overthrow, whose welfare is the surest ankerhold to defend you from shipwreck.

Saul was rejected of God, yet durst not David annoye him: your dread
sovereign being legitimate heir and rightful successor, was both established
by God, and allowed by men; and is at this day by his singular providence so
miraculouslye preserved, that your wicked imaginations had ere this been her
destruction, and with her had many thousands perished, and with them your
selves (howsoever you persuade your selves) had not he ouerspread her with the
resplendisant beams of his fatherly protection. But you will say she was
excommunicated by Pius Quintus: (more truly might he be termed Impius) this
objection, though it might very well have been answered with silence, being
so weak, lame, and out of joint as it is: yet has it been so thoroughly
canuased, and so plainly confuted already, that it has good cause as much
to be ashamed of the patrones and defenders thereof, as they have just reason
(had they any reason at all) to be ashamed of it. Only, of Pope Pius the
thunderer of that excommunication, and of his equalles, the Popes I mean, (for
of equality otherwise, the Papacy is by all means impatient, and can no more
tolerate a compeere, then the firmament can contain two Suns: as one of
their own side full learnedly squared out the comparison) thus much will I
say: Cui plus licet quam par est, plus vult quam licet: He that may do more
then is meet, will do more then he may.

But to proceed: did not opportunity of revenge with unfolded arms present
her self to David, at such time as Saul unaccompanied entered into the cave
where David with his assistants were assembled? Saul had often served him with
a crooked measure: In revenging no man may be his own car^er.
might he not now have measured to him by the same list? Saul had saluted him
with many cross courtesies: had he not now liberty to pay him home in his
own coin, and to return usury besides the due debt? Had he not ability to
do this? Naie, had he not reason, if he should have reasoned with humane
reason? No doubt David managed a dangerous conflict, and like a Captain most
valiant, gave the repulse to assaults most violent, wherein loyal duty
contended with lawless necessity: and fleshly infirmity combated with
divine ordinance. Desire of a kingdom, having a course to compass it with
such facility, is a plausible Rhetorician, cunning to persuade: (for, Si ius
Violandum est, regni causa Violandum est: if the limittes of law may be
infringed, then for a kingdoms cause may they be infringed) but assurance of
life being environed with manifest hazard of death, is a mighty Orator able
to convince. But as he gains a double conquest, that in conquest can conquer
him self: so shall he be recompensed with treble punishment, that is by any
carnal persuasions entised, whether of benemous hatred, or honorable
advancement, or any other thing whatsoever, to accept of worldly benefit, and
to neglect heavenly prescription. If we shall censure of the matter only
according to ordinary estimation, without question the honor David purchased
by vanquishing the Heathenish Golias, was not half so glorious, as that he
deserved by subduing his own thoughts, in refraining to proffer violence to
an anointed king. Which execrable offense if he had committed, it had exceeded
both the adulterous abusing of Barsabe, and the wrongful murdering of Vrias,
so much as a villainy practiced against a Prince, surpasses an injury
inferred to a private man.

I think it not requisite too much to insist upon every particular
circumstance of the comparison; but I would wish you to weigh this with your
selves. David for fear withdrew himself from Saules presence: some of you of
malicious intent estrange your selves, The practices of Jesuits and S^^^tnarie
pr^^^s.
cursetting over like fugitives into other nations, and there plant your selves
in those Seminaries, whose Gardener is Antichrist, whose seeds are errors,
whose fruits are treasons. Where when you have perfectly learned your lesson,
to transform Christian religion into profane policy, and to change policy
into treachery; then like plants of such a soil, like pupilles of such a
Tutor, like Scollers of ripe wits (yet not so ripe as rotten) ye turn over
a new leaf, and from contemplation ye fall to practice; wherein ye so behave
your selves, that, as he was reputed amongst the barbarous Scythians the
brauest Gentleman that had committed the most bloody slaughters: so is he
amongst you esteemed the notablest Catholic, that can bring most souls to
confusion. And then ye begin to imitate the Snake who castes off her old coat,
but retains her old poison still: so come ye disguised in your habit
marching on like Maskers, having in stead of visors shameless foreheads, and
fronts untaught to blush: but I would ye were Mummers, or else that your lips
were as surely sealed and sered as your consciences are, with an hot iron: for
then should we by your signs give a guess of your meaning. And though ye hoord
up venom in your hearts, yet are your words smoother then oil: though your
speeches be sweeter then honey, yet is the bitterness of gall and wormwood
hidden, yea, the poison of Aspes lurketh under your lips. The Aspe through the
exceeding coldness of his nature, mortifieth the member that he wounds with
his sting. And therefore Cleopatra, at such time as she was deprived of her
paramour Marcus Antonius, being wholly overcome and swallowed up with sorrow,
set two Aspes to her breasts, which benumming her senses cast her into a sleep,
into a dead sleep, even into her last sleep. In like manner, you fastening
upon those that are as devoutly addicted to ye flesh pots of Egypt, as ever the
Egyptian Nueene was enamoured of Antonie, and yet seeming to have queasie
stomachs, loath the heavenly Manna, accounting it a light meat, of evil
nourishment and hard digestion: ye strike while the iron is hot, and finding
them pliable to alteration, ye work them like wax, feeding their humors, and
promising to restore their old delights: and so with your poisoned
persuasions, ye rock some a sleep in ignorance; others ye bring to their
latest sleep, and their longest home. This is the leauell of your devise; The
leaven of ye Jesuits worse then the leaven of the Pharisees.
this is the leaven of your doctrine. A little of this leaven leaueneth ye whole
lump: and therefore let all strive to purge out this leaven, for there is no
leaven like to this leaven, no, not ye leaven of the Pharisees. But those
vp-start merchants that bring over such deceitful drugges, are worthy to pay
their heart-blood for custom; the which howsoever through their packing and
conueyaunce they sometime avoid, let it not imbolden them in their unbridled
presumptions, but let them fear (except they speedily change their copy, and
heartily repent) least the Almighty recompense their leaven with Leuin from
heaven, and strike them with flashing lightning, as he did Tullus Hostilius:
yea, let them fear, least the fire of his indignation devour them, as the
flame licketh up the stuble, and least he rain down upon them snares, fire,
brimstone, storm and tempest: for this is the portion of hypocrites.

Yet if ye did thus desist, and surcease from heaping up the full measure of
your wickedness, then should not my soul be confounded with so great
astonishment. But as the wild Iuie creeping along on the ground, begins at
the first to embrace the lower part of the Oak, and so cunningly climeth up by
degrees, till at last it ouerpeere the highest branch, and then eating through
the rind pierces to the inward pithe, sucketh out the purest sap and
natural moisture, to the imperishing and decaying of the whole trunk: or as
poison having attainted the least member of the body, and farthest distant
from the heart, disperseth it self into the hidden passages of the veins, and
beats up and down in every path till it have found the highway to the
heart: where so soon as it is settled, it bends his force, and exercises all
violence, till it have choked the fountain, and rased the foundation of life:
so do ye lay your platform, first by parasiticall insinuation to nestle in
the consciences of inferior persons, hoping to fortify your faction, by
linking a multitude into the same confederacy: but the mark you shoot at, is
the sacred person of her majesty. But before either your dissembled zeal, or
your glosing flattery, or your deadly poison, take so deep root, rise to so
full height, or breed so incurable a mischief: your hope shall (I hope) be
disappointed, your selves shall be rooted from yt earth, and rotte in the air,
that so your venom may return into your own bosoms. Never were the fennes
of Lerna so dangerous: never was that monster Hidra so pernicious, to the
inhabitants bordering and confining thereby: as the dens of traitrous
papists, and the devises of that seuen-headed Romish Beast would prove fatal
to me and mine, if the puissant and victorious Lion of ye tribe of Judah, did
not with vigilant eyes watch over us for our defense, and with his outstretched
arm uphold us from falling into ye gaping jaws and bottomless gulf of so
ravening a bloodsucker. It is recorded in history, how that notable robber
Cacus was accustomed to dragge cattle backwarde by the tails into his Cave:
to the end that the print of their footing appearing contrary, he might escape
free from suspicion of the theft: so is it your fashion to inuegle diverse of
those whom you intend to make attors in your tragical exploites, giving them
instructions to practice popular demeanure, and carry a countenance of ordinary
conformity, Papists under holy looks carry hollow hearts
howsoever they stand in heart affected to the truth, or infected with treason:
showing them selves in this point like to cunning watermen, who cast their eye
one way, when they take their course another. The Lord will (I doubt not) in
due time allot to such halting ambodexters, success answerable to their
sinister meanings: that as yt Flindermouse lighting into the Hawks tala^ts,
argued she was in mouse, by the proportion of her body: and after falling into
the Cattes claws, pleaded she was a bird by the fluttering of her wings: and
was of the one disdained, and of the other devoured: so I wish that such
hollow hearted votaries as serve the time, but to serve their turn, lookinge
when time will turn, that they may turn with time: might be thoroughly tried,
slowly trusted, but rather surely trussed, and so receive a competent guerdon
for their demerites. And though they seek to shadow their purposes with a
veil of obscuritye, and shuffle up their acts in tenebris: yet if that
careful circumspection be had, which the necessity of these times requires,
and the sutlety of such enemies importunately craves, it will be a matter of no
great difficultye, to discern the Wolves, though they wander in sheep
clothinge, by the noise of their howling: and to descrye the Ass, though he
iette in the Lions skin, by the length of his ears. Yea, unless the
multitude of our offenses stop the course of Gods mercies, and eclypse the
brightness of his favor that has so long shyned upon us, he will so
disclose their whisperinges in their secret chambers, that they shall be preached
on the house tops: he will cause the fowls of the air, and the beasts of the
field to bewraye and proclayme their driftes, manifesting his glory in the
preservation of his heritage, and confusion of their adversaries. And as he
broke ye wheels of the Egyptians Chariots, when they pursued the Israelites:
so will he dashe in pieces all their engines, and force them to cry out, as
the Egyptians then did, saying: We will flee from the face of Israel, Exodus
14.
for the Lord fights for them against the Egyptians. Then shall they that
have accepted ye wages of unrighteousness, burst out with Balaam into these
words: Number. 23.
how shall we curse, where God has not cursed? or how shall we detest where the
Lord has not detested? Then shall their great Master for grief of heart roar
out with julian the Apostata, saying: Vicisti Galilaee, vicisti: acknowledging
his overthrow to proceed from Christ, whom he has as scornefully abused as
ever did Julian; confessing him in word, but in heart denying him: profaning
the sincerity of his gospel, reproching the baseness of his humanity,
despitefully persecuting him in his members, and (what in him lies) crucifying
again the son of God.

With this hope, as with a precious cordial, do I recomfort my languishing
spirits: with this as with a sovereign restority, do I revive my fainting
courage: with this as with a gentle emplaster, do I qualify the rigor of my
passionate and biting grieuances, knowing that he which keeps Israel, does
neither slumber nor sleep: Genes. 41.
but he will busy Pharaos fantasy with troublesome dreams, for ye releasing
of Joseph, and the sustayning of Jacob: Ester. 6.
he will deprive Assuerus of his natural rest, for the deliverance of Israel,
and the destruction of Haman: Dan. 3.
and notwithstanding Nebuchadnezzar command Gods children to be thrown into
the fiery Furnace: yet shall the fire forget his property to burn, the flame
shall forgo his scorching heat, and alter the effects prescribed by nature:
his Angel shall with watchful regard minister unto them, so that, not one
hair of their head shall be burnt, neither their coats changed, nor any smell
of fire shall come upon them. Though the Midianites and Amalekites marshall
their forces, Iudic. 7.
and encampe against the Lords people, like grasshoppers for multitude, and as
the sands by the sea fide, which are without number: yet will he give Gedeon
the victory, while they as men distract of their wits, shall broche the breasts
of their neighbors and fellows in arms with their own swords. Psalm. 118.
This is the Lords doing, and it is wonderful in our eyes. Wonderful in
deed, and passing wonderful, if we behold it with fleshly eyes, and measure
it by the level of carnal capacity: but if God sharpen the eyesight of our
faith, then shall we clearly perceive, that he tendereth the safety of his
chosen, as the apple of hie eye, and causes all his creatures to employ their
service to their behoof: giving withal his and their enemies to understand,
that al wisdom is folly, and all strength infirmitye, that is opposed against
the Lord of hoastes.

Now seeing the matter stands thus, tell me (ye perverse generation) with
what hope do ye cast to co^triue so execrable purposes? Nauis stultorum.
Now can ye expect a prosperous wind to land your vessel at ye desired haven,
seeing your ship is fraighted with superstition and ballasted with treason:
such trumperies as he that flies on the wings of the winds utterly
abhors? Why despise ye ye Lords holy temple in Jerusalem? Why trudge ye so
fast unto Dan to offer? 1. Sam. 5.
why post ye from Dan to Bethel to please Jeroboam? Behold, to obaie is better
then sacrifice: and to hearken to the voice of God, is better then the fat of
Rams. How can Dagon the Idol of the Philistines stand, where the Ark of God
is in place? needs must he fall flat to the earth: and though the Idolatrous
priests labor to erect him again, yet shall his latter fall be more shameful
then ye first: his head and his hands shall be cut of: he shall neither have the
reason, nor the power to lift up himself any more. The Pope compared to the
Idol of the Philistines.
The Dagon of ye Philistiues was said to be like a man in ye upper parts, but
from the nauill downward like a fish: your Dagon of Rome, is neither flesh
nor fish: but as he flesheth him self by bathing in the blood of faithful
and innocent Martyrs: so makes he all fish that comes to net, by fashioning
religion as may best serve to increase his revenue, and enrich his coffers.
Whose misshapen deformities if they were artificially pourtracted and lively
depainted in fresh colors as an object for every man's eye, then might I
question as the Poet did: Spectatum admissirisum teneatis amici?
Friends, had you leave to look your fill,
how could you choose but laugh?


Why then are ye so highly offended that Dagon is fallen? why take ye it so at
ye heart, that I have abridged his authority, and emptied my cask of such
stinking dregs? have I done any other thing then cast corrupted and unsavory
salt on the dunghill, as his proper place? Therefore let me say unto you, as
Ioas said to the men ye were so furiously incensed against Gedeon, for breaking
down the altar of Baal: Iudic. 6.
will ye plead Baals cause? or will ye save him? he that will contend for
him, let him die ere morning. If he be God, let him plead for him self
against him that has cast down his altar.

David sorrowed and repented him self in yt he had cut off Saules skirt. O
grief to be commended so accompanied with grace. You storm and repine that
you cannot cut short the blossom of my joy, and glory of my garland. O grief
to be condemned so far past all grace. But repent, repent even while it is
called too day: fall down upon the bended knees of your hearts before the
Lords footestoole: with all humility and supplication sue for grace at the
throne of grace. Which unless ye do, know for a certainty, that as David's
commendation dies not, so your condemnation sleeps not: only the Lord
lifts up his hand on high, that he may inflict the deeper wou^d when he
strikes. Obedience to Princes a principle in nature.
Now if this singular example of David pierce not your hearts with a godly
remorse, yet consider that obedience to Princes is a principle in nature, who
has ingraued in every man's mind a religious impression of duty in subjects
toward their sovereigns. Yea, she has instituted a law which the very
unreasonable creatures duly observe among themselves: as, the beasts give
place to the Lion, and the fowls yield reverence, to the Eagle. Neither has
there been any nation so destitute of ciuility, wherein some one, either for
that he was descended from royal parentage, or for the honorable opinion they
conceived of his virtues, obtained not the greatest titles of dignity, and
retained not the highest seat of pre-eminence. Though Iezebel were a woman of
a vile disposition, who reposed her chief felicity in the performing of wicked
and tyrannous actions: yet was not the light of nature so quite extinguished in
her, but that she judged it an inexpiable offense to murder a lawful King.
For when Jehu the son of Nimshi, 2. Reg. ^.
was by Elizeus commanded to smite the house of Ahab, and to avenge the blood
of the servants and Prophets of the Lord: having slain Iehoram (the younger
son of Ahab, who reigned over Israel after the death of his brother Ahaziah) he
came to Izreel, where Jezebel painting her face, Iezebel condemned treason
against Princes.
and tiring her head, looked out at the window, and said: Had Zimri peace that
slew his master? Which speech, though it were grounded upon a wrong
conjecture: (because that burden was specially laid upon the house of Ahab by
Gods appointment, and Iehu particularly deputed to that charge: whereas Zimri
having no express warrant to show, went further then his commission extended)
yet it implies thus much, that she thought it a most odious crime, and was
also persuaded that vengeance should duly and continually attend upon the
same, even at the hard heels, as it had done upon Zimri. And therefore
Jezebel, not able to discern the difference in those deeds, nor to give a
distinction answerable to the natures of the facts, upon premises of diverse
quality, inferred probably, though indirectly, a sem blable conclusion. For
albeit the Lord by yt mouth of his Prophet denounced dreadful threatninges
against the family of Baasha: yet was not Zimri commanded to conspire against
Elah the son of Baasha, nor by killing of him to aspire to ye kingdom, nor
by incroching upon the kingdom to root out the stock of Baasha. Therefore
the treason that he wrought against his Lord and master, the crueltyes he
practysed against that house and lineage, were requited unto him, at such time
as the hearts of the people being alienated from him, they consented to
abrogate that usurped authority, as the birds agreed to disrobe Aesopes dawe
of his stolen plumes: and making Omri their general, they went and besieged
Tirzah, where Zimri kept him self in hold: which being taken, he for fear he
should have fallen into his enemies hands, fled into the kings palace, and
setting the house on fire burnt him self and so dyed.

So then the difference to be noted between Iehu and Zimri is apparent enough.
Whereof, whether Iezebel were in deed ignorant, or that she did of set
purpose compare Iehu to Zimri, either to dau^t him with the conceit, or
disgrace him with the reproach of so infamous a comparison: yet is this
necessarily to be gathered, ye she accounted the slaying of his natural
anointed Prince, a thing most worthy all titles of opprobrious ignominy, and
all scourges of extreme revenge. Iezebel shall sentence against traitors.
Shall not then Iezebel be justified in respect of you? Nay, shall not Iezebel
rise in judgment and condemn you? And how shameful will your overthrow be,
when the testimony and verdit of so graceles a woman, shall stand in force
against you: who (because ye are birds of ye same fether she was of) would no
doubt affourd you all possible favor, if ye indignity of your cause were
capable of any color or excuse? What shall I think, what may I hope, or what
must I not fear, if these examples drawn out of holy scriptures, work not in
you proportional effect? If the word of God, which is so mighty in operation:
which surpasses in sharpnes any two edged sword: H^b. 4.
which enters even through to the dividing in sunder of the soul and the
spirit, the ioints and the marrow: If (I say) it wound not your thoughts, but
ye you stand as still and void of sense, as if it turned edge: then needs
must my wits be wrapped up in amazement, and my smiling hope be changed into
cheerles fear: and where I perceive the putrefaction to exceed all possibility
of remedy by applying mild and temperate medicines, there must I use violent
means, sharp corrosiues, yea, cauterie and incision. And though you contemn
divine oracles, yet will not I refuse to harken to ye holesom counsel of ye Peet
where he says: Cuncta prius tentanda, sed immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum, ne pars sincera trahatur.
Which is, Try first all ways to salve the sore,
if cureles thou it see:
Then cut it off, lest sounder parts
therewith infected be.


But because ye so much affect the title of Romanists, look a little into the
lives of ancient Romans, and you shall see how much ye come behind them in
virtuous endeavors, and how far ye go beyond them in leude conditions. At how
light a price did Curtius value his life, The very heathens have preferred
their countries ^^^ty before their own life.
when he threw himself headlong into ye pestilent gulf, which belched up
deadly corruption, and breathed out infectious vapors; which could not by any
other means be stopped, but by casting that jewel into it, which of all other
under the Sun was most precious? Which thing when the Citizens of Rome, had
with wastfull loss of their treasures in vain assaied to effect, he knowing
nothing could in worthiness compare with man's soul, voluntarily accorded to
sacrifice himself for the sauegard of his country. What should I talk of
Mutius Scaeuola, who because he failed in dispatching Porsenna, ye enemy that
sought the wrack of his native city, punished that oversight in himself, by
consuming his hand in ye flame? To what end should I record the invincible
magnanimity of Horatius Cocles, who to withstand the furious incursion of his
countries foes, kept all alone the passage where the enemies gave the assault,
and by his single resistance gave singular proof of his incredible valor? what
should I stand to commend ye honorable dealing of Fabritius Consul of Rome, to
whom, during ye wars he held with Pirrhus king of ye Epirotes, the kings
phisicio^ made proffer ye upon assurance of reward he would poison his master:
but Fabritius princely courage disdaining to co^quere his enemy by intrapping
him in snares of villainy, presently disclosed the matter to Pirrhus? God grant
that all foreign Princes may carry such minds as Fabritius did: and the almighty
defend my soueraign from all such attendants as Pirrhus phisician was: that no
English breast harbor any Spanish heart, nor subjects hand acquaint it self with
tempering Italian physic. To be short, what shall I need to extol At.
Regulus for his unspotted fidelity, who having entered into solemn oath,
either to send back the captives from Rome to Carthage, or else to render
himself prisoner into their hands: when be saw ye delivery of the captives
would prejudice ye honor of his country, he was content rather to return to
his enemies, and to endure most exquisit torments, then either to make breach
of his promise, or to infer detriment to the common wealth: thinking it better
to end his life in torture as a faithful captive, then to prolong it in
pleasure like a perjured senator. I am ye more willing to co^ceale and pass
over the application of these examples, because it does redouble my sorrows to
think, ye heathens should overcome Christians: or Romans Englishmen in piety
and devotion to their country. But (O unspeakable grief) I can neither find in
you Curtius faith, nor Scaeuolas zeal, nor Horatius courage, nor Regulus
co^stancy. You attempt my destruction, contrary to Curtius; you imagine your
soueraigns death, contrary to Scaeuola: you desire to bring in strange forces,
contrary to Horatius: you deny loialtie to your friends, whereas Regulus
performed faithfulness to his enemies. Regulus kept promise we his foes, because
he would not indamage his country: you break promise we your friends, and enter
league we your foes, because ye would ruinate your country. Unworthy therefore
are ye to be numbered among such men: Traitors are men in shape, but beasts in
behavior.
unworthy to live among christian men: nay, unworthy to carry ye names of men,
having little in effect but ye outward shape of men. Ye have defaced the beauty
of humane nature, in deforming your minds with brutish behauior. Ye have
learned to weaue Spiders webbes, and to hatch Cocatrices eggs. Ye have learned
of the Tode to swell above natural proportion: of the Wolf to bark against ye
Moon: of ye wild Ass to braie against the thunder: of the Owl to eschew the
light of the Sun: and of ye Viper to gnaw through ye bowels of your mother.
Much more I might say, but I willingly refrain, least my speeches should seem
rather to be distempered with partial choler, then seasoned with loving
affection.

I could never yet understand that any traitor closed up his last days with
honor, or ye his gray hairs went down to ye grave in peace: The end of
Traitors nuserable.
but though for a time he so flourished in pomp of worldly felicity, ye there
might seem neither to have bin place for better fortune, nor fear of worse:
yet was his iollitie naught else but grins to entangle his desires withal, ye
being dronken we excess of vanity, and furfetting upon al variety of
pleasure, he might be pampred up like an Ox ye in the stall is made fat for the
slaughter. To which purpose if I should begin to discourse, besides ye I should
enter into a wide open field: I should also light a candle at noone day, in
reporting that whereof these times have made you eiewitnesses. Therefore I will
only point we the finger at one or two examples taken forth of our own
Chronicles: which, for ye they are in their kind passing notable, ought not to
be buried in silence. Richard the usurper, raging like a foming Boar, sought
by force to open the way to his wilful and inordinate desire of soueraintie,
sparing neither age, sex, affinity nor degree, till he had invested himself
with the regal Diadem, and was then persuaded that he had so firmly
established his regiment, that he might without danger give fortune the
defiance: yet see, a little cloud rising from the sea, did on ye sudden so
darken the Sunshine of his devises, that as one surprised with trembling fear,
and weelded in an endless Labyrinth, he sound no issue to wade through, but was
affrighted with guilty suspicion by day, and terrified with fearful visions by
night: neither felt he any release until death hastened to demand his right,
and to take just revenge upon him. Who, though he were a king, yet being slain
in the field was disaraied of his armor and robes, and stripped naked was thrown
overthwart a horsback with his face groueling to the earth: and so besmeared
with mire and gore was hurried from Bosworth to Lecester: and there in stead of
funeral solemnities, he had black fame for his herault: shame for his
shrouding sheet: and never dying obloquie for his sepulcher. Neither were ye
executioners of his commands exempted from penalty. For Sir James Tarrell
(who was by him advanced for the murder of the young king, his nephew) was in
the reign of king Henry the seventh beheaded at the Tower hill for treason. A
vicious life ends sildom with a happy heath.
Miles Forest peece-meale rotted away. John Dightons death, though it be not
certainly specified, yet we may weout any breach of charity suppose, ye it was
not greatly discrepant from ye former course of his life.

And no marvel if the Lord of hosts be so ielous over his Vicegerent, and
pour out such rigorous punishments upon archtraitors conspiring against his
anointed, seeing he suffers not petie trecheries, though in degree far
inferior, to escape unrevenged. As may appear by Henry Banester servant to the
Duke of Buckingham: who though he were brought up under the Duke, and had from
him received many benefits: yet at such time as the Duke being encountered with
great extremities, and on every side maruellously distressed, committed his
life to Banesters secrecy, thinking it the safest refuge and sanctuary that he
could repair unto: Banester in expectation of the reward that was promised by
proelamation to him that could discover him, readely co^descended to befraie
his Lord. But shortly after it came to pass ye his son and heir fell mad
and died in a Bores stie: his eldest daughter was stricken with leprosy: his
second son was taken lame, and his yoongest son drowned in a pudle: and
lastly Banester himself was arraigned for murder, and with much ado
escaping, was frustrated of that golden recompense which he preferred before
his Lords life, and his own reputation. I speak not this to patronage the
Dukes action, the equity of whose cause I refer to the censure of the wise,
but seeing all deeds are to be measured by the intent of the doer, and the
sequel of the fact, needs must he be noted for a faithles caitife that began
his action in wretched avarice, and ended it in shameful misery. If I should
draw these and such like particulars into the form of an induction, and
thereupon grounding a general conclusion should say, that never traitor to his
prince atchiued happy and prosperous end, I think it would be hard for you to
give an instance to the contrary: unless happily you please to reply, by
nominating any of the straggling extrauagants, Jesuits by profession are in
condition Iscariotes.
that carrying the title of Jesuits lead the lives of Iscariots, and either by
raunging abroad, or dissembling at home, chance to escape the whip. But they
must imagine that forbearance is no quittance, and the longer they run on the
score, the harder will the reckoning prove when it comes to payment. Howsoever
one traitor list to descant upon the fall of another, imputing his overthrow to
second causes, ascribing it to fatal influence, and angry stars: wresting it
either to want of policy, or neglect of opportunity; or default of secrecy;
or his too much carelesnes, or his too little courage; and with these vain
illustons flatter his conceit, hoping that he shall ouerleap that stumbling
block whereat his fellow traitor broke his neck: though debating the matter
with himself, he impart his purpose to no other: yet may he be sure, that he
whose eyes are as flames of fire: who searches the heart, and the reins: who
brings light out of darkness: to whom darkness is no darkness, but the night is
as clear as the day: he may be sure (I say) that he both can and will at his
good pleasure bewraie him for the upholding of his glory, and maintenance of
his anointed. Therefore if I may either command as a mother, or entreat as a
friend, or avuise as a well willer; if either the declining course of my years
may plead pity, or the sincerity of my meaning gains credit, or my experience
in miseries give direction; let these words, which my fainting breath and
faultring tongue can scarcely utter, dehort you from prosecuting those
villainies that ye have wickedly attempted, and forewarn you to avoid that peril
ye have desperately incurred.

If I should recount the benefits that from time to time I have over prodigally
bestowed upon you, I doubt I should sooner weary my self with the rehersall,
then breed in you any thankful acknowledgement of the same. Est aliqua ingrato
meritum exprobrare voluptas.
Yet because it somewhat eases ye stomach, to exprobrate to ungrateful
persous good turns past; I must affirm that which you can not deny, that since
Brute first set foot within my shore, I never was endowed with so bountiful
blessings, never more decked with ornaments of peace, never less travailed with
incombrances of war: so that I may confidently avouch, that mercy and truth
are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed each other: truth has
flourished out of the earth, and righteousness has looked down from heaven. But
if ye look a little abroad, ye may see others tossed in ye raging tempests;
whereas your selves stand on the shore not threatened by any such ieopardy: you
triumph in garla^ds of Olive, when your neighbors are constrained to wear the
wreathes of Cypres: Deus nobis haec otia fecit.
and you may joyfully sing Te Deum in the highest note, when they (God knows)
are feign to cry Miserere in a mournful voice. The nations round about you are
infested with martial horror, with clattering of armor, with thundering of
shot, with shreeking of women, wailing of children, slaughter of men,
desolation of provinces, Amos. 6.
and infinite such spectacles of dread and terror. But you have stretched your
selves upon beds of iuorie, ye have eat the lambs of the flock, and calves of
the stall; ye have sung to the sound of the viole, and invented to your selves
instruments of music: ye have drunk your wine in bowls, and anointed your
selves with the costliest ointme^ts: but who among you has been sorry for the
affliction of Joseph? who has called his imprisonment to remembrance? who
among you has not sought to throw him into the dungeon again? or which of you
has nor gone about to trouble Israel? and as ye have increased in iollitle, so
have ye multiplied in transgression: Hosea. 4.
therefore will the Lord turn your glory into shame. Ye have covertly girded
your loins with the weapons of war in the time of peace, intending if
opportunity had served your purpose, 2. Sim. 3.
to do to your brethren as Ioab did to Abner, when he flatteringly embraced
him with the one hand, and cruelly with the other gave him his deaths wound.
Ye have perverted the course of nature in causing troublsom storms to arise in
the golden days of ye Alcyon. In deed I confess it is an impessible thing
that light should make agreement with darkness, or truth have society with
error. The mortal hatred and unappeased contention, Genes. 25.
that insued betwixt Jacob and Esau was not obscurely prognostieated at their
nativity, when they strove and wrestled together in Rebeccaes womb, to the
great discomfort of her soul. The rooted enimitie that you carry against the
professors of the Gospel, The coals of hatred that Papists rake by in their
brells must needs vent (...) the smoke of slandrous re^orts
howsoever it be raked up in the deceiptfull cinders of counterfeit amity, yet
does it so vehemently strive to burst out, that if it should not find a
louerhole and place of vent to issue forth by the smoke of slandrous reports
and fabulous rumors (which are commonly coined for the nourishing of
discouragement and false suspicions in true subjects hearts) it would so scald
and blister your lips, that by the same as by a certain cognizance we might
descry you. In your hearts you ever follow the fashion of the Swallow, that
delights to fly against ye wind: in your speeches you play the Lapwing, that
flickereth a loose in a place some what distant from her neast, to withdraw the
passengers thence.

The Poets pleasantly devise that when Jupiter had made man, glorying in the
workmanship thereof, he brought him to find-fault Momus, and demanded what he
could epsy in him worthy reprehension: Momus commended the orderly feature and
seemly disposition of the lineame^ts: but one thing (says he) I greatly
dislike, that thou have forgotten to frame a window in his breast, whereby it
might be known whether his heart and his tongue went together or not. If the
consciences of traitorous Papists might be as througly ransackt, and as deeply
sounded, as they may be justly doubted, there would be found cakes of foul
cankered malice, and long festred choler buried under painted hoods, and
mealemouthed protestations. Then would the grutchings and murmurings of Esau
come to light, Genes. 27.
who threatened to slay his brother Jacob after the days of mourning were
finished. But take ye heed to your selves, lest the mischief ye intend against
others, be in the end derived upon your own pates. For it often times comes
to pass that God snareth the wicked in their proper inventions, and punishes
them by the same means whereby they offend. Thomyris queen of Scithia, after
she had vanquished Cyrus, smote off his head, and threw it into a vessel of
blood, saying: Now drink thou blood thy belly full, which thou have hitherto
so much thirsted after. Crassus being flaine in the expedition against the
Parthians, they took molten gold and poured it into his mouth, saying: Now
glut and accloie thy self with gold, Iudic. 1.
wherewith thy vnstaunched hunger was never yet satisfied. And when the
Israelites had taken Adoni-bezek, they cut off the thumbes of his hands, and
the great toes of his feet: whereupon he confessed, saying: Seventy kings
haning the thumbes of their hands and of their feet cut off, gathered bread
under my table: as I have done, so God has rewarded me.

Your desire is to erect a fresh the pageant of papistrie; and for the
compassing thereof, ye are willing, not only to contribute your bracelets and
earerings to the making of the golden calfe, Exodus ^^.
as the idolatrous childrent of Israel did: but ready also to offer your sons
in sacrifice, as the unnatural king of Moab did, 2. Reg 3.
to pacify his incensed Gods: naie, The Papists are content to hazard their
lives for the restoring of the Romish Religion.
contented to make your own lives a prate as the Athenians did, when they
accorded by casting of lottes to surrender themselves to be devoured of that
hideous monster Minotaurus. Those among you that have rotted in the corruption,
and wallowed in the filthiness of their opinions, longing with the dog to
return to their old vomit, deserve to be laughed at for their madness:
concerning whom we may cry out with the Prophet: Is there no baulme at Gilead?
Ierem. 8.
is there no Physician there? why then is not the health of the daughter of my
people healed? And those may be compared to the Scarabie, which being bred in
the dunghill prospers there exceeding well: but if she happen to settle
under the rose tree, she dies inco^tinently. The other that never saw
papistrie in his highest ruff, but through the seducing of their old
masters, have been brought to the bent of their bow, are to be pitied for
their folly: of whom we may say with the Orator, that they may seem to have
sucked error out of their Nurses breasts with the very milk of their
infancy; and these are like the foolish fly that dallieth so long with the
candle, till she senge her wings in the flame: these play as did the fond
Satyr, who espying the fire that Prometheus first brought down from heaven,
would needs kiss it because it glistered in his eyes. Both these sorts
jointly considered, resemble that sottish Grillus; who, when he with the rest
of his companions had by the polliticke and ingenious stratageme of Ulysses
escaped from out the den of that deformed Ciclop Polyphemus, would needs
have gone back, with the hazard of his life to have recovered his girdle that
he left behind him. And being afterward in the same voyage by the
enchantments of Circes changed into the form of an hog refused to return to
the shape of a man. The pope is that monster and astonishment of nature, who
has so long inchained christian souls in miserable thraldom and more then
Egiptian servitude, The Romish Religion more infected with errors then Augaeus
stable was filled with ordure.
where they have continued locked up in his darkesome dungeon as in the shadow
of death: which is more replentisht with ordure then Augaeus stable, and
therefore requires a mightier and more puissant champion to purge it then
Hercules was. He is that abominable strumpet that so long besotted ye world
with her witchcraftes and sorceries; that made The kings and inhabitants of the
earth dronken with the wine of her fornication. Apocal. 17
But in the hand of the Lord there is a cup and the wine is red, it is full
mixed, and he pours out of the same: Psalm. 75.
surely all the wicked of the world shall wring out and drink the dregs thereof.
If all the wicked shall drink of it, then of all the most wicked, in respect of
whom Jeroboam may be reputed for righteous, he, even he of all others ye most
wicked, shall have a large draught for his share, he shall turn off a full
carouse.

If ye would but fasten your eyes upon me a while, ye might in my forehead
easily reads what would be your own destinies under his government. For
though time has healed the wounds with which he despitefully mangled my body
yet ye skars and blemishes remain still behind. My meaning is, there yet lives
many a one, whose father, mother, brother, sister, kinsman or friend, this
savage Antichrist has wrongfully murdered, and by vntimelydeath abridged ye
date of their days; co^fiscating their goods, and leaving their posterity not
only fatherles children, but also comfortles orphans. When I look back to the
calamity of those times, I feel my poor heart begin to resolve into streams of
blood, and mine eyes melt into floods of tears, at the only remembrance
thereof; even as the carcass of a murtherd man gusheth forth into bleeding at
the presence of the murderer. Hercules when he came up from hell, looking back
at the wonderful dangers that he had waded through, shook for joy. And how can
I but rejoice with trembling before my Lord God, who has taken off my purple
garment, and clothed me with a white robe; who has wiped away the tears from
mine eyes, and crowned me with joy and gladness? Therefore blessed be my Lord ye
has greeted his spouse with this consolation: Behold winter is past, Cant. 2.
the storm is blown over, and gone away. Yea, for ever magnified he his name
that has respected the lowly essate of his handmaid. How might I now express
ye moitie of grief that I then felt when my bosom was bedewed with the warim
blood of guiltles martirs? when reverent old age wanted due obsequies? These
things are too true to be denied, and to apparent to be dissembled.
when flouring youth was causeles cropped in his prime? when woman's weakness was
not spared, no, not the woman with child? but (O more then barbarous cruelty)
when the infant springing out of the mothers womb was thrown again into the
fire? what should I speak of burning the hands of persons uncondemned? or of
privy slaughters committed in prisons? seeing to ye former example I doubt
whether Phalaris hunself (if he had then lived) could have added ame thing for
the aggravating of their tyranny. Think with your selves how I groned under
the importable weight of so lamentable distresses: which if they did then craze
my heart, they would now force it to break in sunder.

But (as Capnio said) quum duplicarentur lateres, tum venit Moses: when Pharao
caused the task of brick to be doubled, then came Moses. And when burdens begin
to grow ouergrieuous, then arises up deliverance. When ye Philistines offered
sacrifice to their God Dagon, Iudic. 16.
scoffing and insulting at the misery of Samson, whose eyes they had before
bored out, then was their comical pastime interturbed with a tragical
conclusion: the house came tumbling on their heads, and God made him their
scourge whom they made their game. Proverb. 16.
For pride goes before destruction and a high mind before a fall: Luc. 18.
and could it be that God should not avenge his elect which cried day and
night unto him, yea, though he suffered them long?

When Nessus the Centaure intending to ravish Dianeira, had received his
deaths wound for his hire at Hercules hand, he then besought her of pardon,
and making semblance of great sorrow, he gave her of his blood, enioyning her
to reserve it as a rare monument and rich treasure, the virtue whereof he
said was inualuable: for thereby she might at her pleasure reclayme the
wandering affection of her husband, if he should chance at any time through
distoialtie to estraunge himself from her company. Of which thing she
afterward making trial, washed his shirt in the blood, which so soon as he
had at unawares put on, he was therewith poisoned. In like case the Pope
indeuouring to despoile the Church of England of her dignities by incrochement
and intrusion; and to curtoll the prerogative of the royal state by
usurpation: had in a happy hour both the check and the mate given him;
whereupon he almost in utter despair of filling up so great a breach, has
scattered abroad his lying spirits to inueigle our malcontent Romanistes, to
revolt from obeisance, warranting them by force of his absolution, as by Nessus
blood, to rectify all imaginary and supposed injuries, wherewith they shall
find themselves never so little agreeued: and thus do they (you I mean)
practice to execute this devise: but (thanks be given to our merciful God) to
your own subuersions. The differences are: what Dianeira did was upon ignorant
zeal: what you do is upon pestilent rancour. Hercules embraced strange love
contrary to duty: but her Majesty tendereth you far above your deserts.

But least I might be thought to compose clamorous inuectiues against the Sea
of Rome, not sufficiently poized with their just moments of reason; I will
allege some specialties for the confirming of my assertion. As touching the
scope of their doctrine, because it is a matter not wholly incident to the
meannes of my caparitie, and somewhat without the compass of this discourse, I
purposely relinquish it. Howbeit if I should descend to the discussing of
particularities I could challenge him of many scismaticall points built upon
humane tradition, and repugnant to the verity of holy Scriptures. For how
has he infersed his (...) and (...) to continue the wodden worshipping of
images? to the which I may (not unfitly) apply the poetical Ironie, which is
used against the Egiptians that adored Onions and Garlike, as the Papists do
trees and stocks: O sanctae gentes quibus innascuntur in hortis Numina.
O holy people they whose Gods
Within their Gardens grow.


How has he multiplied Mediators, making some of salvation, others of
intercession; derogating from the office of Christ, to maintain ye invocation
of Saints? whereas the Scripture precisely designeth one, saying: There is one
God, 1. Tim. 2.
and one mediator between God and man, which is the man Jesus Christ. How has
he foisted in his distinction of mortal and venial sins, to prop his
Purgatory that is now so ruinous for lack of reparation? We are taught in Gods
word, that all sins are venial in Christ, except the sin against the holy
Ghost: (which is therefore called of Saint John, 1. John. 5. Romans 6. Marc. 3.
a sin unto death) and all mortal in their own nature. For the wages of
sin is death. And, all sins shall be forgiven unto the children of men, and
blasphemies wherewith they blaspheme: but he that blasphemeth against the
holy Ghost, shall never have forgiveness, but is culpable of eternal damnation.
These may serve to give you a taste, seeing it stands not with my purpose to
frame any co^trouersial treatise: but ye may guess the beast by his paw. In
general this is to be observed in their doctrine, that they when they are had
in chase, they have so many muces, inturninges: winding corners, and starting
holes, that but for the tracke of their footing it were hard to overtake them.
In their intricate sophisines and inexplicable quiddities, they play like the
fish called the Cuttle, which when the fisherman is ready to lay hand upon
her, casts forth a slimis black humor like unto ink, which darkening the
upper face of the water, causes the fisherman to fail of his aim, and by
that means she escapes: and I may say of them as Caesar said of the Scithians
whose manner it was to lurk in uncouth thickets: Difficilius est inuenire, quam
superare: It is an harder matter to find them out then to overcome them.

Touching his government, it is nothing else but a mighty faction of men, and
armed power of Princes bending their forces directly against the Gospel of
peace. How intolerable is his ambition that arrogateth to himself
Universality, trusting to draw not only Jordan like the Behemoth, but the
four quarters of the world into his mouth? Job. 40.
And yet behold his shameless hypocrisy, The Pores ambitious pride shadowed
with a show of humility.
who claiming supreme jurisdiction in all causes, and throughout all Countries,
yet vaileth bonnet, and abaseth his style calling himself seruum seruorum Dei.
Of which dissembled humility this Distich was compiled, not altogether
unworthy the rehearsal. Roma tibi quondam suberant Domini dominorum,
Seruorum serui nunc tibi sunt Domini:
Which is Time was (O Rome) when Lords of Lords,
to thee did beck and bow:
Time's past: and servants servants are
thy Lords and masters now.


Has he not always under a color of piety and religion, broched most impious
and least religious practices? So that long since the Germans perceiving his
iugling, how he fostered contentions, cloked murders wincked at heresies, and
dispensed with all crimes how capital so ever, if he might thereby either
dilate his segniories, or furnishe his treasury, rejected his pretensed
authority: and marking how outragiously he set up his bristles and whetted
his tuskes against such as crossed his devises, anathematising them with the
horrible curse of Shimei, and rattling out his excommunications against them,
they both sharply reproved and openly derided his Bulls before the which he
was accustomed to prefix the name of the almighty, most blasphemously making
it to lead the way to his devilish execrations: so that it became amongst
them a common byworde: In nomine Dei incipit omne malum: all mischief begins
in Gods name. And to gleane a few ears out of a full sheafe, I will set down
some several examples. In the time of Gregory the ninth, sprang up the
division of the Guelfes and the Gibellines: the Guelfes bolstering out the
swelling insolency of the Popedom, and the Gibellines assisting the just
title of the imperial majesty. Through the which occasion, most tumultuous
vprores and deadly wars were arreared: the fury whereof being scarce calmed
and allaied within one hundred years after, has left a perpetual memory to
the world, How the fable of Elses and Goblins first came up.
by those terms of elfes and goblins, that are at this day more generally
known then rightly understood. During which faction Boniface the eight aspired
to ye Sea: who being maliciously inflamed against the families of Column and
Vrsini, because they favored the Gibellines, wrought them all possible
despite, in putting their bodies to the sword, their houses to the sack, and
their goods to the spoil. And so irreconcilable was this his wrath that on
Ashwednesday when he sprinkled ashes on his Cardinals heads, coming to
Porcherus Archbishop of Genna, who was of the Gibellines, whereas he had used
these words to the others: Memento homo quod cinis es, and in cinerem
reuerteris: That is; Remember man that thou art ashes and into ashes thou shall
return: Here was a hot stomach and cold devotion.
a sudden fit of cheler boiling in his stomach, caused him to forget the depth
of his devotion, and alter the form of his speech; so that throwing the ashes
into the Archbishops face, he blustred out in these terms; Memento homo quod
Gibellinus es, and cum Gibellinis moriere: Remember fellow that thou art a
Gibelline, and with ye Gibellines thou shall to the pot. Deus bone, tantaene
animis coelestibus irae? Good God, can holy heads harbor such rancorous
hatred?

How mischieuously did Gregory the seventh conspire with the states of
Saxony, against Henry the fourth Emperor of Germany, when commencing
quarrel against him, he co^uented him of heresy, for bestowing
ecclesiastical promotions upon persons both insufficient for their gifts, and
defamed for their behauiours? and sentencing against him, he adjudged him to
do daily penance at the Churche-dore of Peter and Paul, for the space of one
whole year. Moreover he enforced him barefooted and barelegged to creep to
kiss his feet. And during this turmoyle, he suborned Rodolphe Duke of
Saxony to invade the Empire: whereof the Emperor being advertised, thought it
was now high time to resist so dangerous a practice, and hasting into
Germany he encountered Rodolphe, A guilty conscience is a biting corrosiue.
and in five several battayles discomfited him. Rodolphe shortly after lying
on his death bed, was presented with his own hand that had been smitten off
in fight. Which when he beheld, turning his face to the Bishops that stood
about him, he said: This is the right hand, wherewith I vowed my faith to the
Emperor; now is the same become a witness of my breach of fidelity, and
traitorous attemptes against my soueraign: chiefly by your, even by your
instigation and procurement, my Lords. If I might without offense spur the
Pope a question, I would feign know whether S. Peter's keys hang (as he says)
at his girdle for that end to bar the gates of unity, and open the doors of
dissension? If there be a blessing laid up in store for the peacemakers, let
him tell me what shall be the reward of such as kindle coals of mutiny and
sedition? Especially seeing he is in double fault that gives offense by his
example. Was not the presumption of Alexander the third unmeasurable, and the
pride Lucifer-like, that he exercised against the Emperor Frederick, surnamed
Barbarossa, upon whose back when he had set the states of Italy and Venice,
and also captiuated Otto the Emperors son, working upon this advantage he
constrained him to yield to such unreasonable conditions, as better agreed with
his impudent and vaineglorious nature to demand, then with Frederickes
magnanimity to condescend unto. So that he was driven to prostrate himself in
Venice at the Popes feet; and yet he not contented with this, more then humble
submission, contumeliously trod upon his neck, abusing that text of
scripture: Psalm. 91.
Super Aspidem and Basiliscum, etc. Thou shall walk upon the Adder and the
Basiliske, the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou tread under thy feet. The
Emperor seeing himself so disdainefully ouercrowed by a dunghill crauen, could
not suppress his heroical stomach, but answered again; Non tibi sed Petro:
I do this in reverence of Peter, and not for fear of thee. Whereat the Pope
rauing, with open mouth intercepted his words exclaming, Et mihi and Petro:
thou shall dos this reverence both to Peter and me. This ruffling champion was
(no doubt) profoundly instructed in the school of Christ; Mat. 12.
whose lowliness was such that he brake not the bruised reed, nor quenched
the smoking flax: he reproved his Disciples, when they would have had fire to
come down from heaven and consume the Samaritans, Luc. 11. Mat. 11. Christ's
school is of humility: but the Pope may be turned out for a non profi^ient.
saying: Ye know not of what spirit ye are. He willed them to learn of him:
For I am (says he) lowly and meek: and so shall ye find rest to your souls.
What should I rehearse the broiles, wherewith Gregory the ninth pestered
Frederike the second? who for that in a cause which admitted no dilatorie
circumstance, but as it imported matter of singular consequence, so it required
means of present expedition, for that (I say) he departed without taking
solemn farewell and humble leave of the Popes holiness, having levied a supply
of soldiers to pass into Asia for reskuing of the distressed Christians in
their wars against the Sarasens, he was retracted by the Popes countermaund,
that he sent to the Christian army straightly interdicting them to follow the
Emperous conduct: neither could he by any intercession obtain release, until
he had thrown a honey sop into Corberus jaws, and stopped the Popes mouth with
payment of an hundred and twenty thousand ounces of gold.

These things being so plain that they can not be ouershadowed with any
pretense, me thinks the painters answer was reasonably framed, that he made
in defense of his workmanship: who being checked because he dad drawn the
counterfeit of S. Peter too high colored, whom they affirmed to have been of
pale countenance, foreworne with careful vigilancie and paineful travail,
which he always took about his pastoral affairs and Apostolical
negotiations: I have (said he) made him not as he was on earth, but as he is
now in heaven: from whence looking down into the lives of his successors, he
blusheth for shame to see their shameless misdemeanure. And as the Pope has
in other countries plaide his vagaries, to the disturbance of public unity
and racking of common wealths by pillage and extortio^: so has he vexed me
with violent turmoiles and chargeable impositions to my no small grief, and no
less detriment. I can not yet forget the dealing of that greedy cormorant,
and sweating Bull of Basan, A last of the Popes practice here in England.
whom I lastly recited, who in the reign of king Henry the third, sent over
his Legate, rentgatherer, or caterpiller, to purloine from me of every Church
throughout the Realm a yearly revenue of four marks: the which to what
sum it amounts I refer to your consideration. His letters mandatorie were
delivered into the hands of the Archbishops and Bishops for assisting of the
Legate in his collection: enioining them withal to provide three hundred of
the best benefices, to be employed upon three hundred Italians at his
appointment. Was not this to charge them to rend the fleeces from off their own
backs, for the covering of his filthiness? The king being certified of the
matter calls a Synod of Bishops, and causing conference to be had in their
convocation house, The king of Englands care for the welfare of his Realm and
subjects.
he thereupon addresseth his letters to the Pope, in his own name, and in the
behalf of his subjects. But when he saw his travel bestowed this way to be
frustrate, he imparted the matter to his Lords assembled in Parliament,
discoursing what inconveniences must of necessity ensue, if they obeyed the
Popes precept: and in most earnest and discrete manner he debateth the cause
severally with every particular Bishop, willing them to weane their affection
from strangers, and not practice the undoing of their native country for
gratifying of the Pope. But finding them perverse he mingleth his entreaty
with menaces, denouncing openly against them the penalties of the laws and
ancient statutes of his Realm: charging them further upon their allegiance to
deliver no money out of the Realm to the beggering of the State. They (as best
became them) yielded at the last, obedience to their Liege Lord.

But Gregory thus defeated of his purpose and crossed with a contrary cue,
clean beside his expectation, began to make battery with his gunshot of
excommunication, directed to the Bishop of Worcester, of whose inclination he
was best persuaded, with command to prosecute it in most vehement sort, that no
possible furtherance should be omitted for the effectuating thereof against a
certain day prescribed, wherein the Audit of this sacred receipte must be
given up. The matter was so diligently trauersed, what with the kings
Ambassadors on the one side, to appease the Pope; what with the insatiable
covetousness of the Pope on the otherside to impouerish the Realm, that
notwithstanding all importunity, submission and reasonable proffers that the
king could make, no speech of reconcilement would be harkened unto, until he
had granted the Pope a tenth of all goods moveable in England and Scotland:
The king in his own Realm ouerwaighed by the usurped authority of the Pope.
and then (to use Matthaeus Parisiensis his own words) Our Lord the Pope being
before inwardly inflamed above all things to suppress the hautinesse of the
king, recomforted with these promises, was made to consent. The which how
pernicious it became to the state of this Realm can hardly by any estimate be
comprehended. For irregular custom having once set in his foot, would not for
many years after take the repulse. So that the Church of Rome has to her
shame approved the verity of this saying; Religio peperit Diuitias; sed Filia
deuorauit Matrem: Religion brought forth Riches; but the Daughter swalowed up
the Mother, like the Vipers brood. Such gourmandisers as pray upon Princes,
whereas they ought of duty to pray for them, will be found to have run
far into arrerages, when it shall be said unto them, Give account of thy
stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward. Of such it may be said, as
Alcibiades said to Pericles, when he perceived him very careful to make up his
reckonings to the Athenians; O how much better were it for thee, if thou
could devise to give no accounts at all. The king of Englands Exchecquer
disfurnished under pretense of ransoming the Pope.
It is not unknown how the treasure of this realm was of late years
transported, when that ambitious Prelate Cardinal Woolsey conveyed at one time
out of the Kings Exchecker two hundred and forty thousand pounds sterling,
for relieuing of Pope Clement, whom the Duke of Bourbon after the sacking of
Rome, drew forth of the Castle of Saint Angelo, and detained him prisoner in
the Emperors army. The which sums of money he converted to furnish the
french King with necessaries to make war upon the Emperor, who was then in
league with King Henry of England.

What should I speak of pardons, Peter Pence, with a number such polling and
pedling devises of oppression wheref the manifestation of the Gospel has
clearly disburdened you? What should I declare how licentiously he has
presumed to co^troll the mighty kings of England, infringing their liberties,
abrogating their ordinances, repealing their statutes, and ingrating upon their
prerogatives? Wherein if he were at any time gainsaid or ouerthwarted, he then
cast about to depose them. As, Henry the second was suspended from his Crown
by the space of four days; went barefoote to Thomas Beckets Tomb dying the
rough stones with his blood: and most unkingly deiecting himself to be
discipled with the rod, of the Monks of Canterbury. King John was miserably
vexed by Innocent the third, forced at last to resign his Crown with all
title of soueraintie both in England and Ireland into Pandulphus hand, who
detaining it five days, then restored it. This unfortunate King after a
troublesome and litigious reign was in the end poisoned by a traitorous
Moonke; as also Henry the seventh Emperor of Germany was by a Dominicane
Friar, who ministering ye sacrament unto him, had before dipped the oste in
poison. I must needs highly commend the courage of king Henry ye first, The
magnanimity of king Henry the first, in withstanding the Hope.
who being in contention with Anselme about inuestitures, pleaded the
sufficiency of his own authority within his proper territories, saying;
There is an ancient custom of my kingdom ordained by my Father, that no
person shall sue any appeal from us to the Pope: whosoever will attempt to
violate this custom, does offend against our Majesty, and the Crown of
England: he that will seek to despoile us of our Crown, is an enemy, and a
Traitor to our person. And again, when Anselme would have had him follow the
Popes Letters: what have I to do with the Popes Letters, I will not break the
laws of my Realm for the pleasure of any Pope.

As touching his market-making and whole sale of spiritual promotions to raw
and bankerout chapmen, it was truly said that the state of Asses was much
better then of Horses; because the Horses were feign to post to Rome for
benefices, but the Asses obtained them. Of his ordinary absolution for money
without respect of crime, he descanted pretily that said, Friars were fed fat
with men's sins. Of the scismes in his Sea, he spoke rightly, ye being asked
why in their suffrages they prayed not for Cardinals and Bishops, that is
(quoth he) understood where we say, Oremus pro scismaticis and haereticis; let
us pray for scismatikes and heretics. I omit his beastly gain raked out of
ye sinkhole of brothel-houses. I loath to think upon his tolerating of ye most
stinking sin of abominable Sodomitrie: in commendation whereof John Casus
Archbishop of Beneuentane, ye Popes Legate to the Venetians wrote a book. O
detestable impudency, to magnify that in words, yea in writing, ye only
thought whereof wounds the heart with horror. Indeed Sinesius wrote a pamphlet
in praise of Baldnes: Fauorinus commended ye quartane ague: Apuleus ye Ass:
Erasmus not vnwittily blazed the praise of Folly: and one of late painted out
the praise of nothing, yet to some purpose: but what age ever hatched such a
forlorn monster as this? Yet was he a devout Catholic, a Romish Prelate, and
one of special account with his holiness: therefore I mate well think like
master like man: But room now, else shall we bring all Rome on our back: for
the Pope sits in S. Peter's Chair forsooth. Why, so did the Scribes and
Pharisees in Moses seat: yet no into the holier men for that. So that I may
justly say of him, as Themistocles said to a certain odd Seriphian, who
objected to Themistocles that his renown arose more through the glory of his
country, then by the merit of his virtues: Not so: said Themistocles: for if
I were a Seriphian I would not live without honor: and though thou were an
Athenian thou could not live without shame. So, if Saint Peter were at Rome,
It is an odious comparison betwixt S. Peter, and the Pope.
he lived not like the Pope: and if the Pope sit in Saint Peter's Chair, yet he
lives not like Saint Peter. Yet dare his blind bold bayards make comparison,
and cast him their gauntlet that will avouch the contrary. For they affirm
his integrity of life to be unspotted, and the sincerity of his doctrine
uncorrupted. They will say Saint Peter wrought miracles: I cannot deny it: and
to counteruaile that the Pope speaks Oracles: I dare not believe it: and they
cannot prove it. But I iump in opinion with him, who answered, when as the Pope
vainly vaunted of his heaps of gold, saying: I cannot say as S. Peter did,
gold and silver have I none: No (said the other) nor you cannot do as S. Peter
did, cause the lame to arise and walk. But as Neanthus having got Orpheus
harp went about iangling and iarring so long, that whereas he expected the
trees should have dansed after his pipe, he brought the dogs about his ears:
so ye Pope has so long bosted of Peter's succession, that ye simplest discern
his doubling, and he that has but half an eye may find out his gross
iugling, and legerdemain. Yea, God has raised up diverse of his own part, to
publish his dealings, who if they should all have held their peace, the very
stones would have cried out for the displaying of the same. I will not wade any
farther in recounting the actions of holy Father Pope, and holy mother Church,
being matter so tedious for the length, and for the beastlines so loathsome;
but will knit it up with this conceited Pasquine: Roma quid est? amor est.
qualis? praeposterus. Vnde hoc?
Romamares. Noli dicere plura, scio.


And yet behold, your restles and retchles desire longs and labors to
inthronize this bloodsucking Canniball, this brocher of quarrelles, this
patron of heresies, this robber of churches, this controller of Princes, this
enemy of Christ. Both the means and the end of alteration are matters of
exceeding mischief and extreme folly.
Neither are the means whereby ye would plant him any less pestilent, then
the end wherefore. Invasion of the Spaniard is the means; advancing of
Papistrie is the end. It is a common saying, He blames Neptune without cause,
that having once made shipwreck, will to sea the second time. You have had
already some experience of the Spaniardes disposition among your selves, and
may elsewhere take perfitter notice. So that in this your intent I cannot more
aptly compare you then to a fool that laugheth and makes semblance of mirth
when he goes to the stocks to be punished for his folly. But if it be a point
of wisdom for a man to look to his own house when he sees his neighbors
roof on fire, then first learn that point, least in neglecting it ye ouersee
the best point in your tables. What the Spaniard has attempted in the low
countries, is better known then I am able to report: and what he had attained
ere this, may partly be coniectured, if God had not moved her Majesty's mind,
and strengthened her hand to bridle his tyrannies, to succor their distresses,
and support his own truth. Consider what he has done in the kingdom of
Naples and in the Indies, and trust him accordingly. When Naples came to his
hands, it had in it ten Princes, nine chief Officers, nineteen Dukes, one and
twenty Marquises, three and thirty Earls, besides of Barons and Lords a great
number. He obtained it by a pretensed title of marriage, after it had been
defended a long time against the Emperor by Francis the french king: under
whose regiment the people had retained their accustomed franchises and
liberties. How ye king of Spain came to ^^^y the realm of Naples.
But when the french king was taken prisoner at Pauia, one condition of his
delivery was, that he should from thence forward withdraw his forces out of ye
kingdom of Naples: by which means it came to the king of Spaines possession.
The Spaniardes at their first coming showed themselves most pliable in their
behauiors, promising golden mountains, and vowing all service to the
Neapolitanes for the defense of their country and continuance of their
freedoms. And thus by cloked amity they crept into credit: so that diverse of
the chief of them were employed in the strongest fortresses, and best fensed
castles in the country. The king of Spain to curry favor with them and to rock
suspicion a sleep, appointed ye Prince of Salerne their own countriman to be
his Lieutenant. During the while he was sole governor they enjoyed all
benefits that they had before time. Not long after he sent thither one Don
Pietro a Spaniard, whom he joined in commission with the Prince. This fellow
sought by raising false reports of the Prince to discredit him with ye king and
commons: and by indirect practices to indaunger his life. Which when the Prince
saw, he willingly sequestered himself departing to his castle, and left all
affairs to be ordered by Don Pietro. The Spaniard not thus contented contrived
matter of accusation against the Prince, charging him with treason: whereto he
refused not to make his answer. Which when he came to have done, the Spaniard
had suborned a villayne pryuily to lurk in the mountains to have murdered
him with a gunne, who missing his body struck him in ye leg. The Prince seeing
himself environed with manifest peril, took his way to Venice: upon whose
departure the Spaniard immediately proclaimed him traitor. The prince framed
his complaint to the king, but found no remedy. Not only was the offender
released from sentence of law: but al inborne subjects of ye realm were
discharged from bearing rule or office whatsoever. All Merchants and artificers
were prohibited to keep any kind of armor or weapon in their houses: yea, so
much as sword or dagger. Only to gentlemen it was permitted to have their
swords and targets and none other. If all paiments which all the kings ye
reigned before in Naples were laid together, they are not co^parable to
th'extraordinary taxes ye king of Spain has exacted of them. The grievous
exactions raised upon the Neapolitans.
Every fourth or fifth year they paid sometime two hundred thousand, sometime
four* and sometime a million of gold. Al such as had lands were called to know
by what title they kept the^: if they had not evidence presently to show, they
were defeated, though they were able to declare their possession of an hundred
or two hundred years. Again, all such, as either themselves or their
ancestors had born any kind of magistracy, were called to account, and
notwithstanding they had been cleared many years before by receiving their
quietus est: yet if ye quittance were lost by reason of time, they were
condemned to repay ye whole. I might make special relation of all accises,
customs, and exactions, that he imposes upon al manuary trades and
mechanical faculties: upon al commodities ye may any way grow to the
inhabitants: but they would require a large treatise. But think to what an
huge mass of money it amou^teth when the Farmar of the butchery and pultry of
the city of Naples pays daily three hundred ducats: when vittailers pay five
ducats for yearly obedience: shoomakers one french crown: filkemakers five:
when for every chimney he has six shillings threepence: of every stru^pet or
curtizan three shillings penny half penny, and of all others in proportion. Every
head of great cattle pays three Caualluchi (of the which, fourteen or
fifteen make a penny) every head of small pays two: and (as it is credibly
recorded) that tax in one year, only in two shieres Apulia and Calabria came
to four hundred thousand french crowns sterling: and there followed the next
year after, a tax of six hundred thousand french crowns. We use to say,
where nothing is to be had the king loses his right. But ye Spaniard though
he make his gain his right, and his will his law: though he have brought the
people to a low ebb and a miserable state, yet will he have what taxes soever
he list to levy, though he rake it out of their bowels, and pull their skins
over their ears for it.

These are his practices in Naples: The cruelty of the Spaniards in the Indies.
but ye execrable tyrannies which the Spaniards have showed on ye Indians, as
they do almost surmou^t credit, so can they hardly be furnished with terms
effectual to decipher them. They have dispeopled in India more then ten
realms, greater then al Spain, Aragon, and Portugal: which now remain as a
wilderness abandoned and desolate, being before as populous as was possible.
Within the space of forty years, they as in a common butchery slaughtered of
innocent lambs, above twelve millions, men, women, and children. At their first
arrival they were entertained we performance of al serviceable courtesies, ye
Indians most humbly submitting themselves unto them, and after a sort adoring
the^ as divine creatures descended from heaven: but after they were too well
acquainted we their savage cruelties, they fled from them as from hateful
furies broke loose out of hell. The Spaniards made it a sport to murder the
Indians.
The Spaniards customarily disported themselves in laying of wagers which of
them should we one thrust of a sword panch or bowell an Indian brauest in the
midst: or we one blow most deliuerly strike off his head: or best disme^ber him
we one stroke. They used to mutrher ye lords and nobility, by broiling them on
gredirons with a soft fire underneath, that yelling and despairing in those
lingering torments they might so give up the ghost. Four or five of the Lords
on a time being roasted on this manner, with their pitiful roaring and
lamentation disquieted the Captain (the caytiffe I should say) and broke his
sleep: whereupon for his better quiet he commanded them to be strangled: This
Perillus wanted but a Phalaris to serve him of the same sauce.
the Ser geant would not suffer them to die so easy a death: but himself
putting bullets in their mouth to the end they should not cry, roasted them
softly after his desire. If at any time by due order and formal process of
law, a malefactor being a Spaniard were put to death by the Indians, the
Spaniards ordained a decree among them selves, that for one Spaniard they were
to flay an hundred Indians. A certain Indian Lord flying from out the I Will
Hispaniola into the I Will Cuba, was by the Spaniards so continually pursued, that
at last they apprehended him, and burned him with the rest of his company. When
he was bound to the stake, a Franciscan Friar began to common with him touching
the knowledge of God and principles of Christian faith. Which things albeit
the noble man had never heard of before, yet he gave good ear to ye Friar who
was earnest to persuade him ye if he believed those matters wherein he
instructed him, he should go to heaven to enjoy everlasting happiness:
otherwise, there was no way but to hell with him to endure perpetual torments.
The L. somewhat pawsing at the matter demanded of the religious, whether the
Spaniardes went. To heaven without question, said the Friar, because they die
in the Catholic faith: the L. hearing him say so, The Indian though it better
to be in hell then to live with the Spaniards.
answered immediately without any further deliberation, that he would not go
to heaven, because he would not come in place where Spaniards were, nor have
society with a nation so cruel. When a certain tyrannical governor entered
upon the firm land, a Lord of the country to gain his good will and to avoid
torture, presented him with the weight of nine thousand Ducates. The Spaniardes
thinking to wring out of him an ample booty by compulsion, who of his voluntary
accord had made so large a proffer, laid hold on him, fastened him to a stake,
and setting him on the earth with his feet stretched out, put fire thereto, to
make him bring forth more treasure. The L. sent to his house, and caused three
thousand Castillans more to be brought and delivered to them. They not yet
satisfied gave him the torments a fresh: not ceasing to fry his feet at the
fire, till the sinews brast and the marrowe spange forth, trilling down to
the soles of his feet: so that of the same cruelty he died.

Another monster after he had wrought a most bloody massacre upon diverse Lords
and other Indians, out of whose hands one noble man with his retinew to the
number of thirty or forty had escaped, and enclosed themselves within a temple,
the Spaniarde following after them, neither waighed ye reverence of the place,
nor the innocenci^ of the persons, but deuoide of all humanity and compassion,
set fire on ye temple and so burned them. Himself in the mean while used like
gesture and behauior, as did Nero when he had caused Rome to be fired, and he
beholding it sat singing and playing on his harp. This tyrant passed on to
Mexico trampling in humane blood. Motenzuma king of Mexico being advertised of
his coming sent a thousand presents to welcome him, Corpora magnanimo satis
est. etc.
and met him at the bars of the city attended on with an honorable troop of
nobles: but that same day by a devilish Spanish suttletie they got the king
into their hands and then loded him with bolts and gyues. The Indians though
they were greatly agreeued at the wrongful imprisonment of their king, yet
because he had given the^ straight commandment that they should not seek to
revenge ye despite, they endeavored themselves with pageants, dansings and such
pastimes, as they could best devise to reco^fort their captive king, assembling
as nigh the house where their king was as they could. Besides the flower of
their nobility gathered together in a place adjoining to the walls of ye
palace where Motensuma was, under show of fained mirth hiding sad hearts and
heavy cheeres. The Spaniard purposing to strike a terror into the inhabitants
bordering and confining thereby, determined to publishe a frightfull spectacle:
and gave his helhoundes charge that at an appointed hour they should set upon
them, The Indians lamentation for the merciles cruelties of the Spaniards at
Mexico
and sieve ye young gentlemen being above two thousand, and slew ye rest with an
horrible slaughter. The Indians are wont in doleful manner to bewail and
deplore ye outrageous calamity of ye day, especially the destruction of ye
offspring of their nobility, in whom their joy and glory did principally
consist. This devil incarnate was accustomed when he went to make war on any
City or province, to carry thither of the Indians yoaked together an huge
multitude, to fight against their neighbors and brethren, and allowing no
sustena^ce to ten or twenty thousand ye he led a long in his army, he licensed
them to eat ye Indians which they could take. So ye he had in his camp an
ordinary shambels of man's flesh, where before his face they killed and roasted
children; they murthred men only to have from them their hands and their feet
which they counted ye daintiest morsells. Another villainy he used, which was
to ouercharge ye miserable people we cumbersome burdens chaining them together
by the necks; and when any happened for lack of meat, or length of journey, or
excess of weight to faint or fall sick, because he would not stay to unlock
the chain, for ye speedier dispatch he cut off the head from ye shoulders, so
ye head tumbled one way, and the body another. Thus many times of three or
four thousand shere returned not to their houses six a live. The poor
wretched creatures, when they were to go on these voiages in this manner, parting
ye one from ye other they would say: In ye places where we were wont to serve
the Christians, howbeit we travailed sore, yet at ye last we came home again
to our houses, our wives, and our children; but now we go without hope ever to
come back again to see them. What should I talk of eight hundred Indian souls
partakers of reason given for one Mare? Or of their forraging with fierce
mankind Mastifes, hunting after men and women? From the which a seely woman
seeing she could not escape, hanged her self, having tied at her foot her
young babe of a year old: but by the time she was dead, the curres came and
straightwaies devoured the infant. Another hunting abroad after Venison, and
finding no game met with a woman, whom he bereft of her tender child: cut off
first his arms, then his legs, casting them to his dogs for liuerie, and
lastly threw the whole carcass among them.

It is impossible for me to utter in words the merciles dealings of the
Spaniardes in the Indies, Non mihi si centum Dens or a sonanti^ linguis
Ingeniumque capax totumque Helicona dedisset, etc.
the ghastly remembrance whereof is able to daunt the stoutest courage. So that
after this show it is altogether superfluous to bring upon the stage the wicked
practices of the holy Inquisition, unless it were to fill up a room of
impiety if any be vacant. Therefore only thus much, they greatly pretend
supporting of the Catholic faith, but they wholly intend the multiplying of
their private commodity: to whom I may apply the fable of the Lion, who being
hurt by the Bull commanded all horned beasts presently to avoid the forest,
upon pain of his displeasurs. Amongst the rest ye made have away, was a beast
ye had a bunch of flesh in his forehead: the For meeting him asked whether he
posted so fast: he answered, good faith I neither justly know, nor greatly
care, so I were once gone. Why so I pray thee? Tush, what a question is that?
as if thou were ignorant of the late edict ye Liou caused to be published, that
no horned beast should remain within the wood. I know it well: but that is no
reason why thou should either flee or fear: for thine is no horn and
therefore it co^cerns thee not. Marry, that is true: but yet if the Lio^ say it
is an horn, in what case am I then? So he that comes within the claws of that
holy Court, whatsoever his religion be, if his purse be well replenished, he
shall either burn for an heretic, or pay well for the sagots. Whether he
can say Shibboleth, or Sibboleth it skilleth not: they will bear him down he
is an Ephraimite. Such are ye Spaniards, such are their fruits: fruits far
worse then the fruits of Sodom. For they though bewtifull in show, yet being
handled fall to ashes, only to the deluding of him that would crop them: these
glorious in appearance, but being touched turn to poison, even to the
destroying of them that credit them. Are ye then so foolish to look for Grapes
upon thorns, or Figs upon thistles? Do ye take pleasure in the Sirenes
song? or pity of the Crocodiles tears? will ye follow the Hiaenas voice? or
dare ye swallow a Spanish bait? Sic notus Ulysses? Know ye not an Eft from an
Eele? Learn to answer them as the Fore answered the sick old Lion, when he
entreated him to enter into his den. Naie, says the Fore: -- Nam me vestigia
terrent:
Omnia te aduersum spectantia, nulla retrorsum.
The tracks and footesteps that I spy
make me suspect some train:
Since all look forward to thy den,
but none look back again.


Remember the reward the Sabines bestowed upon the damsel Tarpeia, A friendly
caveat, to forewarne traitors from peril by the example of others.
when she in lieu of betraying the City of Rome into their hands, had
demanded those things which they wore on their left arms: they granted, and
after they had compassed their purpose, they performed their promise. But
whereas she thought to have received their golden bracelets, she was
overwhelmed and slain with their steel targates: both which things they
carried on their left arms. The Spaniardes are perfect in Gordians precept,
who wills, if thou would have thine enemy flee, to make him a golden
bridge to run over. The Spaniard knows that ye readiest way to win a fort is
to batter it with bullets of gold. He knows this; he uses this: too well he
knows this to his advantage; too much he uses this; and too late he has
used it to my grief. It is a saying well known; Proditionem amo sed odi
proditorem. Me thinks your dealings are lively described in the picture of
Fury, who is painted with a sword in his hand, and for the impatient desire of
revenge wherewith he is inflamed, desperately rusheth upon a iauelin, slayeng
himself while he attempteth to annoie his adversary: ye are far more
besotted than that foolish fellow that was content to forgo one of his eyes,
conditionally his companion might loose both. But if this that I have said do
not alter your minds, I doubt whatsoever may be said will be insufficient. And
therefore in respect of your obstinacy I am to wish that ye might be dealt
withal as the eagle deals with her young ones, who tumbleth such out of her
nest as can not steadfastly look against the sun beams: or that there were
some devise for the riddance of traitorous papists out of the realm, like to
that which king Edgar invented for the auoidance of wolves when he bound the
Welshmen to pay their tribute with wolves skins.

If happily your malady be past recovery, I will notwithstanding comfort my
self by repeating the words which Mardocheus used, in a case that threatened as
great extremity. When Haman had obtained of king Assuerus that all the Jews
within his Provinces should be destroyed, Ester. 4
An example of singular comfort to all faithful subjects.
and had got the proscription confirmed under the kings seal manuell,
Mardocheus being a Jew, and uncle to queen Ester, certified her by the kings
Eunuchs of Hamans proceedings, and sent her the copy of the commission,
charging her to become petitioner and frame supplication to the king for her
people. When Ester heard the words of Mardocheus she commanded the Eunuche to
tell him, that the law was so: whosoever should come into the kings presence
uncalled, must die, unless the king of his grace held forth his scepter unto
him: Now, says she, I have not been called to the king these thirty days,
which when Mardocheus understood, he returned her this answer: Think not with
thy self that thou shall escape in the kings house more then all the Jews.
For if thou hold thy peace at this time, comfort and deliverance shall
appear to the Jews out of another place, but thou and thy fathers house shall
perish. And who knows whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time?
So though you being animated through the Popes absolution, and in hope of I
know not what lordly preferments have agreed among your selves to make away
with such as shall not be found to have an Auemaria sticking betwixt their
teeth, or an Agnus Dei couched in their bosom: yet because your rage is raised
against the Lord, and your tumult ascended into his ears, I trust he will do to
you and to your confederats as he did to proud Senacherih, put an hook into
your nostrils and a bridle into your jaws. For as it was prophesied of Troie,
that it should not be subdued so long as the Palladium, which fell down from
heaven upon the walls thereof, remained within it: so I am assured that England
shall have rest from all her enemies so long as Gods holy word shall be sincerely
preached and diligently followed. Our sins the means to draw Gods plagues upon
us.
For there is nothing that can withdraw his blessings from us, or draw his
punishments upon us, but our stiffnecked and uncircumcised hearts, which neither
have thankfuly received his truth, nor yielded obedience unto ye same. And were
it not ye there is a zealous Moses among us, whose prayers appear before the
Lord as incense, and the lifting up of whose hands is as an evening sacrifice:
1. Pet. 2.
were there not a just Loath who day by day vexes his soul in seeing our
unlawful deeds, and by continual intercession slaketh the heat of Gods
wrath: I fear me your ungodly purposes had ere this prevailed, and his heavy
indignation consumed us. Exodus 17.
But whenever Moses hands shall begin to ware weary: when Loath shall once
depart out of Sodom, then I fear lest God lay the raines on your neck, and ye
yoke on ours: lest he grant unto you power to despoile, and allott unto us
sudden destruction: then I fear least as the flood was in the spring of the
year, and the burning of Sodom at the rising of the Sun: So I fear (I say)
least Gods coming unto us be in the winter of our faith, and the summer of our
pride: and least he thrust the sickle of his vengeance into the full harvest
of our iniquities. Let us therefore learn to love him as a father: and let us
not forget to fear him as a Lord. Let us not despise the riches of his
bountifulnes patience, and long sufferance: knowing that by the same he
allureth and leads us on to repentance: the differring whereof is most
dangerous, for so much as it is to be given of his mercy, and not commanded
at our pleasure: Nam qui promittit poenitenti venia^, non promittit peccanti
poenitentiam: He ye promises pardon to him that repentes, does not promise
repentance to him ye offends.

As for you let this suffice, that there was a curse denounced against him,
that should build up Jericho again: that Achan, with his family, his
cattle, his implementes, and all that he had, was stoned and burnt in the
vallie of Achor because he had taken a Babilonish garment, certain shikels of
silver, and a wedge of gold, being excommunicate things, and hid them in his
tent: and dare ye then shrine such abhominatio^s in your hearts? Surely I
greatly doubt, ye as the Lord plagued al Israel till they had punished Achan,
so he will not leave to scourge us till we have rooted out all of Achans
brood. The example of Tarquin in cutiing off the tops of the poppies was
most happily imitated to the glory of God and benefit of the Realm: for by
that means I trust the stalks will soon wither away. The Queen of Scots the
root of infinite mischiefs.
But while the root remained whole, it nourished a great number of noisome and
superfluous branches. Our malcontent Romanists were so affectionately devoted
to the contriuing of her contentment, as Aeolus was desirous to gratify Juno
when he said: Tuus, O Regina, quid optes Explorare labor: me iussa capessere
fas est.
To think the thing thou feign would have,
pertaines (O Queen) to thee:
But to perform what ere thou crave,
that duty longs to me.


Your villainies before their late discovery, seemed in your own conceits
wellnigh to have attained the highest step of their perfection: so that if
Sinon could have brought the horse within ye gates of Troy, he should then have
given the watchword to the Grecian Fleet houering aloof at Tenedos. Then
would it have been to late to have wished for Hector, when Politus should have
been slain at the altar and sanctuary; when Cassandra should have been
ravished in the temple; and Priamus murdered in his own Palace. O
unspeakable grief! all these valefull calamities to have sprung from one
Helena? How much better had it been that that Helena had never been borne? or
being borne, a thousand times better, she should have been thrown into the
midst of the sea with a millstone about her neck, then to have bin the
subject for so many tragedies. When Iabin king of Canaan sought to oppress
Israel by the hands of Sisera his captain; ^udic. 4.
the Lord raised up Deborah and Barak to overthrow his power. But the mother of
Sisera making just reckoning of victory, looked out at the window, and cried
through the lattesse, why is his Chariot so long a coming? why tarry the
wheels of his Chariot? have they not gotten, and now they divide the spoil?
etc. The mother, sister, cousin, or friend of Sisera, or how soever she were
allied unto him, looked, and long she looked; but in stead of Sisera, contrary
to her hope, she saw Iehu come to do justice. The Lord looked also down from
heaven, he saw your devises: he liked them not, but laughed because he
perceived your day was coming: yea, he looked long: at last he saw justice
done, and it pleased him well. For my part I will ever pray, that I may rather
bear the burden of Deborahs song, then the burden of Phineas wives sorrow.
The song of the one was; So let all thine enemies perish O Lord: Sic (...)
di^^^ (...). bethae mal^ v^lunt.
but they that love him shall be as the sun when he rises in his might. The
sorrow of the other was; The glory is departed from Israel; for the Ark of the
Lord is taken.

But because a live dog is more to be doubted then a dead Lion, I wish that
all their lurking holes may be narrowly searched, and they ferretted out of
their Conniburrowes, Psalm. 101.
where privily they lay wayt for innocent blood. I pray God, her Majesty may
perfilly learn David's song, Traitors presume upon her M^i^^^^^s mercy.
who said he would sing unto the Lord of mercy and judgment. Her clemency
has been most notoriously abused; the music had almost been mard, and all
like to be brought into an unpleasant discord, while she harped so long upon
one string. The servants of Benhadad king of Syria, 1. Reg. 2^.
what injuries soever they had wrought Israel, yet when they were fallen into
the lapse they comforted themselves with these words: Behold, we have heard
say that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings; let us
therefore put sackcloth about our loins, and ropes about our heads, and go to
ye king of Israel: it may be that he will save our lives. They stood upon what
may be, and what he will do: not upon what must be, and what he ought to do;
and thus they made mercy the groundwork of their mischief. But the king of
Israel was reproved by the Prophet, who told him; because thou have let go
out of thy hands a man whom I appointed to die, thy life shall go for his
life and thy people for his people. No less are those runnagate ruffians to be
regarded, who practice to steal away the hearts of ye people, crying out with
the black mouth of Rabsakeh: What say ye unto me, we trust in the Lord our God?
Esaias. 36.
Is not that he whose high places, and whose altars Ezechias took down? and am
I come up without the Lord to this land? therefore let not Ezechias deceive you,
for he shall not be able to deliver you. And as Artabanus king of the Persians
answered the letters of Alexander emperor of Rome, saying: In stead of paper J
assign him the field, a lance for the pen, blood for ink, and wounds for
words: So these companions for disputations bring dispensations: for reasons
treasons, arguing ab vtili, and not ab honesto: concluding neither honestum nor
vtile: arming their religion with atheism: and supporting their faith by
faithless trecheries. Yet when they are cut short by justice, Papists make
treason the truit of conscience.
they wouldimpudently face out the matter, that they die for their conscience,
whereas (God knows) their conscience was dead long before. But we may answer
their great master, as king Richard the first did, when the Pope sent to him
commanding him to release the Bishop of Beauuois and his Archdeacon, whom he
called his sons, being taken by Earl John the kings brother in the field,
and by the king committed to prison, he sent to the Pope their complete armor,
with this message, Genes. 37.
Vide an tunica filij tui sit an non: see whether this be thy sons coat, or
not. Let the pope look whether his Jesuits iett in the garments of godly
Churchmen, or rather of roisting vagabondes: let him say if these be the
doings of men that deal upon zealous conscience, or rather upon traitorous
intent. These are they yt by their whispering tales would put men in fear where
there is no cause of fear: giving false fires, and striking up hot alarmes,
when there is neither shot nor soldier nigh hand, Papists endeavor to amaze
men with causeless fear.
thinking to make men afraid of skarcrowes, of their own shadows, or rather of
nothing at al. These are they that construe every accident that befalles to ye
advantage of their purpose, speaking as they would feign have it. These are
they that use wicked consultation in holy places, profaning temples by their
lewd conference, and making the house of prayer a den of thieves. In a
Churchyard in Paris shortly after the bloody massacre sprung up a Palm tree:
which the Papists straight interpreted to be a sign that the Protestants were
fully vanquished, and the lot of victory fallen to their part. But it was
indeed a true token, and Time which is Truths mother, has proved it so to
be, that howsoever they practiced by violence to extirpate true professors, yet
maugre their malice, his servants should flourish like the Palm tree, and that
from their blood as from the ashes of the Phoenix should revive a glorious of
spring. For the blood of Martyrs is the seed of the Church. And therefore as
Alexander the great courageously answered, when his soldiers would have
dissuaded him from going unto India because the image of Orpheus swet: what?
(quoth Alexander) does Orpheus sweat? then I know we shall make work for the
Poets: so we, though, not Orpheus image, but Orpheus Ape, Neanthus whom I
touched before; though (I say) the Pope sweat and swear, and take on as one of
his predecessors did for his pie: yet we know that in mainetaining Gods truth,
and obeying our sovereign we shall do a work acceptable to him: but they and
you, which do the contrary, will make work dangerous to your souls,
damageable to your country, and only profitable for the hangman. I wish you
better, and I would I might hope better of you; and when I see you begin to
amend, then shall you see me leave off to mistrust. But though faintnes now
enforce me to shut up my complaint, yet until that time, neither can I be
freed from fear, nor you cleared from suspicion.

O Loving God, and most merciful Father, A prayer for the preservation of her
majesty and continuance of the gospel.
who hold in thy hand the hearts of all Princes, and turnest them which way
stands best with thy divine pleasure, we beseech thee so to order the
thoughts of thy servant our dread sovereign, and so to dispose all her
actions, that as a faithful handmaide, she may study to please thee, and as a
careful nurse seek to cherish thy Church. And forasmuch as thy glory is
chiefly showed by bringing to pass thy will through weak means and feeble
instruments, assist her we pray thee with thy spirit, that being weak in her
self she may be strengthened by thy arm, to confound all such as shall with
Holofernes assault thy people. And as thou have hertofore oftentimes redeemed
her out of ye mouth of the lion, so defend her still, that neither open force
nor secret villainy at any time prevail against her. And seeing thesmall
grain of thy Gospel which by her hand thou have graciously sown amongst us in
the field of thy Church, has been so watered with the heavenly dew of thy
blessing, that the birds come now and build in the branches thereof: and the
slender vine that thou broughtest out of Egypt, and plantedst in this land,
has through thy goodness taken such root, that the mountains are now
covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof spread abroad like the
goodly Cedar trees: we beseech thee to watch over it, that neither the
Caterpiller which lurketh in corners consume it, nor the wild Boar out of the
wood destroy it, but that being nourished by thee, it may grow up before thee,
and bring forth fruit unto thee. Remember not our former iniquities, but let
thy tender mercies prevent our imminent miseries. And as in the days of Joshua
thou did stay the sun in the firmament until thy people had clean
vanquished their and thine enemies: so now maintain the throne of thine
anointed, that her days may be as the days of heaven for brightness, and as
that day of Joshua for continuance, that she may weed out the adversaries of thy
truth, that so the work which thou have mercifully begun, may be prosperously
perfited by her. Let it never be told in Gath that the glory of Jacob is
darkened; let it never be published in Ashkelon that ye scepter of Judah is
fallen, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, and the uncircumcised
begin to triumph. But let all the world know that thou carest for thy people
and vpholdest thine heritage. As for thine enemies they shall be as the smoke
that vanishes in the wind; as the wax that melts at the fire; and as the
dust that is scattered before the tempest. They shall perish, yea they shall
all perish at the rebuke of thy countenance.


