THRENODIA IN OBITVM D. EDOVARDI LEWKENOR Equitis, and D. SVSANNAE Coniugis
charissimae.

FUNERAL VERSES Upon the death of the right Worshipful Sir EDWARD LEVVKENOR
Knight, and Madame SVSAN his Lady.

With DEATHS APOLOGY, and a Reioynder to the same.

PROVE. 10.8. Memoria Iusti benedicta.

LONDON Printed by Arnold Hatfield for Samuel Macham and Matthew Cook, and are
to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Tigers head. 1606

blazon or coat of arms HONORI AC MEMORIAE CHARISSIMORVM CONIVGVM EDOVARDI ET
SVSANNAE LEVVKENORVM.
QVORVM ILLE NOBILI FAMILIA IN AGRO HARTFORDIENSI NATVS, A PVERITIA OPTIMIS
DISCIPLINIS INNVTRITVS, ADOLESCENS SOCIVS COLLEGII D. IOHANNIS IN ACADEMIA
CANTABRIGIENSI, POSTQVAM EVASIT IN VIRVM S. PRINCIPIS ELIZABETHAE DOMESTICVS
PRIMVM, EXINDE IN AGRO SVFFOLCIENSI EIRENARCHA, POST IN AMPLISSIMVM ORDINEM
SVPREMAE CVRIAE PARLIAMENTI NOVIES CONSCRIPTVS, POST REMVM A IACOBO MAGNO
FOELICE BRITANNIARVM MONARCHA EQVESTRI DIGNITATE ORNATVS, CVI VNO ORE OMNES
CONSENTIVNT, CIVEM FVISSE BONVM, MELIOREM MAGISTRATVM, VIRVM OPTIMVM;
CLIMACTERICO SVO AD SVPEROS CONCESSIT.

IIII. NONAS OCTOBREIS.

HAEC ILLVSTRIS HEIGH AMORVM FAMILIA CVM SORORE COHAERES, FOEMINA RARI EXEMPLI,
PIETATE AC MODESTIA SINGVLARI, ANNO AETATIS SVAE LVI, VIRVM CVI SE NVNQVAM IN
VIVIS ANTEFERRE SVSTINVIT, MORIENS VNO DIE PRAECESSIT.

VIXERE CONIVGES SINE QVERELA, AN. XXXVI. VNIS EXEQVIIS SVNT ELATI, AN. M.DC.
v. V. ID. IAN. FILIOS SVPERSTITES RELIQVERVNT II, FILIAS VI.

PARENTIBVS OPTIMIS AC DVLCISSIMIS B. M. P. E. LEWKENOR F.

YE learned Sisters, which mount Helicon
And high Parnassus cragges uneath to scale,
Your best beloved seats in times begone
Have enterchanged, for that lowly dale
Amid'st the which sweet CAME does softly slide;
Willing may seem longer with you to bide;
And with his BRIDGE does couple what his streams divide:
So may you never of your change repent,
Or think to change again for other place:
So may the rigor of the Heavens relent,
Which on your mansions fair with frowning face
Has looked too long, and this contagious ill
Be soon remoou'd, and far kept from them still;
So may your numbrous nurselings all your houses fill:
So lastly may our PHOEBVS deigne to see
And with his gracious sight those Temples bless,
And consecrate them with his Majesty;
The highest pitch of all their happiness:
No less than those your other dear delight
Which by the FOORD of OVSE are stately pight,
And since that day do rise and threaten heavens height:
As ye vouchsafe to lend your willing ear
And condescend to Shepherd swains request:
If yet the same but equal shall appear,
And to your selves may work no great unrest:
Scarce may though needs it must his suite be told,
O grief who seeks the cause of grief t'vnfolde!
And double grief which does from remedy withholde!
Lewknor alas is dead, that worthy Knight:
And followed his good Lady dead before:
And both within a day. Help us to dight
Their herses with your plaints, and if no more
Help with your tears our common loss bewail.
Your tears are left if other power do fail;
And fellowship is ease though grief do naught avail.
If of this pair one from his tender years
Was wholly yours denoted heart and will;
Nor that alone but of his equal peers
Few might in all your arts surpass his skill:
If in your Court he did sometimes defend
No vulgar place: O you that wont to lend
Your tears to others loss, some on your own exspend.
You shall not mourn alone; the State has lost
A Senator of many Parliaments:
The Church may well account her loss is most
Of such a son. The Country sad laments
A wise and upright Iusticer: The poor
A worthy house keeper. O if no more
Ye feel your own, yet others damage help deplore.
And if how much he in your gifts surpast,
So much the Graces sweet his Lady graced:
A right Susanna, virtuous, fair, and chaste,
A lilly bright though now by death effaced:
If both in every part of virtue were
A matchless match, a pair without compeare:
For Virtues sake weep while ye may not weep a tear.
Whereto serves all your skill if not for this
To blazon far and wide well purchasd praise;
And register to all posterities
In honors just records; what might vpraise
A caytiue courage unto fair pretense;
And teach a gentle Spirit fly from hence
To highest heaven? Lo here your arts chief excellence.
Living and dead your faculty is debt
To good desert: which paid in life may have
Malignity perhaps thereat to fret;
Not so in death: No envy lets the grave
Discharge this debt with safety every deal,
And let eternal Fame the acquittance seal,
The world be witness unto whom ye may appeal.
Besides, O let me tell you otherwise
Ye owe this duty to that worthy pair:
Since first from you the danger did arise
Which wrought their death. That harm ye ought repair,
So might it be repaired. O that it might!
Butah for life the recompense is light
To wail the dead, or verses in their praise endight.
Pardon my grief if ought my tongue have strayd
Dread Ladies: well I wot unguilty all
Ye been of blame herein. It was misse-sayd:
No greater sorrow might your selves befall.
But this is true, from that unhappy place
Whose late infection did your nurselings chase
To diverse parts; this mischief came. Thus was the case.
Two sons they had (Ah now no longer they)
This worthy pair were hanging on your breast;
Their chiefest joy and care: when they heard say
Contagious Agues did begin t'infest
The place whereas ye dwell: Not feared in vain
As since the sad event has showed it plain;
And such before the Pestilence are wont to reign.
Nature and Reason bad them seek to shend
From danger those their hopes: They send straightway
To fetch them home. Their Father had a friend
Of well-approued faith full many a day
Whose son in equal danger with his own
He could not leave, but sent all vnbeknowen
His Father for him to. Hence has this sorrow grown.
O weak and feeble wit of mortal wight!
Which wor'st not what to take and what refuse,
Choosing the worst, thou ween'st to hit the right;
And leauest the best which wisdom were to choose!
As now this worthy knight, he would set free
His own from harm, and save from ieopardie
His friends also: but all his care turns contrary.
Not many days but sick began to fall
This youth I told in kindness brought away:
Before I should have told you first of all,
His fearelesse Father which mislik't his stay
From you as loss of time; had thought again
Have sent him back. The knight needs would retain
Him with his sons; which turned himself and them to pain.
But now his father began most instantly
Request he might remove him home from thence:
(It was within a mile or two thereby)
Scarce might he speak so much without offense;
But heard straight way. And set you then so light
Your only son, as that regardlesse quite
Even of his life you would remove him in this plight?
Except you fear that ought should lack him here.
Ah nay, quoth he: But this; your household's great
And what a grief and trouble both it were
Besides the danger if this sickness seat
It self therein, (they feared the pocks) Alas!
I would it not for all that is or was:
So said, full little hoped he what would come to pass.
To whom the knight. The eternal Wisdom hie
Which rules this world knows what he has to done:
And what is best for us: who seeks to fly
With wind and sail from him is all as soon
Atach'd, as he that ever frames him still
To suffer what he must. Is death such ill
As is default in duty? No: God work his will:
So said, yet as he could did fair provide
Both for his guest and all their safeties.
But who can shun the ill that must betide?
Him lightly touched the deadly mischief flies;
Ceaz'd on his hosts that had him entertained,
And showed this goodly part of love unfeigned.
Ay me that cruel death should rage thus unrestrained.
Ah good Tisander who can half express
What raging sorrow tare thy heart in twain,
When thou beheldst them brought to this distress?
How dolefully thy hap thou did complain,
And praydst the heavens upon thy self might light
Or on thy son, or both, their utmost spite;
To scuse this gentle Lady and this courteous Knight.
Nor were we seely sheepheards ought behind,
To send our plaints and prayers to the skies;
Too well was now our griefe-deiected mind
Suited unto our pluncket liueries.
This comfort have we; if that fellon Death,
If Destinies sad, or if the grave beneath
Had not been deaf; these had not lost their vital breath.
How shall I that sad households grief relate
Their Masters fastened both to sickly bed?
How shall I tell alas! your woeful state
Twice Orphans now? the vows, the tears ye shed,
Now for one Parent: Then the other: Again for both?
But all in vain. Lo first your Mother go'th;
Your Father follows fast, how ever ye be loath.
To whom when first the heavy word was brought
Of greatest loss that ever he might hear,
(O would to God it could have been forethought
That message sad would touch his heart so near)
And is she gone? (said he) Are ills so rife?
Well may I say I had as good a wife
As lives: Dearest I come; what boots me longer life?
But who had seen how Grace performed her part,
To teach the patient mind her cross to bear:
And how the gentle Knight with manly heart
Swallowed his grief: And when the trickling tear
Fell from his eye that still on heaven did feed,
Albe his countenance gave his heart did bleed,
Would say; I held my peace because it was thy deed.
Ay me! for sobs I cannot tell the rest.
He Is dead! o death! for virtuous enterprise.
Ah gentle Sisters beat your pensive breast,
And choose the mournful'st notes you can devise,
To accent your sad verses ruthfullest:
And when you have a while your grief expressed
Recomfort ours. Ye Muses ye can do it best.
The power of words is subject to your skill:
And words well placed can charm the wounded heart,
Up then ye Muses. And if so ye will,
We sheepheards swains will help to bear a part.
Up thou first mournfullest Melpomene,
And Erato with thee: Terpsichore
Shall with Thaleia sing, when PHOEBVS shall you see.
THRENODIAE In funere Clarissimorum Coniugum D. EDVVARDI and SVSANNAE
LEVVKNORVM.
Pars prior: Quae vt plurimum fletus habet and querelas.
CVR per vos, Elegi, Lasciua poemata famam
Quaerunt, cur proprium destituistis opus?
Munera vestra vocant, passis prodite capillis,
Pullae sint vestes, funera vestra vocant.
Occidit, heu, Lewknor Musarum gloria, tantum
Lugeat amissum virque puerque virum.
Credibile est, nimium iam saeuas, (...), benigna
Parcas nascenti fila dedisse nanu.
Tantus erat morum candor, tanta art politum
Ingenium foelix, tantus vbique favor:
Vt, quanuis stirpem clara de gente referret,
Dotibus his claros nobilitaret auos.
Nec tamen ingentes fortuna maligna negauit
Illi, quas doctis saepe negauit, opes.
Huic cumulo accedit pietas insignis in illos,
In quos caelestis lex iubet esse pios.
Cura Dei, and prolis vitam laudauit, at alter
Coniugis, and vita, and morte patebat amor.
Cuius vt aspexit morientia lumina, dixit,
Aut viue, aut comitem me quoque mortis habe.
Vota valent. Quos fidus amor, dum vita manebat,
Iunxit, disiunctos noluit esse rogus.
In terra ossa iacent, animae super astra volarunt,
Vtrunque, and merito fama loquetur anus.
THO. SOTHEBY Coll. S. Joan.

In Coniunctum EDOVARDI LEVVKNORIS Militis dignissimi, and SVSANNAE vxoris
eiusdem eximiae obitum.
ERgo Caballinos laticas mihi Musa propinat
Torpentem reuocans ad sua pensa? sequor;
Par est vt celebrem Par hoc tam nobile, vinctus
Sermo, vinxerunt quos ita fata, decet:
Par est vt metro Par includatur in vno,
Cui fuit in seros vnio tracta dies.
Vndique par video, nec par tamen vndique; dispar
Gaudet inaequali tendere Musa gradu;
Ecce palam numeris subsidit clauda secundis,
Nunc laxum fundit, nunc breue cogit iter;
Ecquid inamoenis Elegeia Consona bustis?
Ecquid and ad moestos ire parata rogo?
An quia Par sexu constabat dispare, carmen
Iure suum vir habet, foemina iure suum?
Praecedit passu subl mior ille virili,
Foemineos comitans contrahit illa pedes;
Fortunati ambo, fatis aequalibus ambo;
Vita pares vidit, vidit and vrna pares;
Sic quos cepir amor vitae, dum viuere fas est,
Hos vno cepit tempore mortis amor.
E Coll. Regis.

In obitum clarissimi viri Edwardi Lewkneri, Equitis illustriss. and Susannae
coniugis, Feminae lectissimae.
QVi fit (inaequali, vos quae sine lege sorores,
Ducitis instabili stamina nostra manu)
Qui fit, vt indigni supera, qua v^scimur, aura,
Annis tot vestra saepe fruantur open?
Cum tamen interea, si quis virtute, vel vnus
Prae reliquis clarus, protinus ille perit.
Ah! quid non potius vestras conuertitis iras?
Ah! quid non illos (mors homicida) petis?
Abstulit vna dies, and funere mersit acerbo,
Nobile par, restant vix pietate pares;
Scilicet eximium clara cum coniuge, morti
Lewknerum; nobis funera bina dedit.
Funera bina? quid? an non tristis funere luctus
Vel satis est vno, plus satis, idque Viri?
At si Nobilitas quicquam si stemma valeret,
Priscum aliquid potuit stemma valere tuum.
Si quid relligio, virtus, pietasque fidesque
Relligione, fide, quis pietate prior?
Sed neque relligio, pietasue auertere mortem,
Nec virtus quicquam flectere tanta potest.
Crudelis, tanta nondum satiabere praeda,
Sanguine nec tanti es exsaturata viri?
Quin dulcem thalami consortem sauciet vna
Falx tua? quin pereant foemina, virque simul?
Numquid non satis est clarum extinxisse maritum,
Posset vt in viuis haec superesse tamen?
Digna quidem vita hac, dignissima pluribus annis,
Et tampraeclaro foemina digna viro;
Quae facile primum meruit, virtute, pudicis
Moribus, and vera relligione, locum.
Non satis, hanc comitem, fuit, extinxisse iugalem,
Posset vt in viuis hic superesse tamen?
Sed quos vna dies pariter iuuenilibus annis
Coniunxit sancto condiditi inque toro;
Ecce vno pariter nunc condidit vrna sepulchro,
Et pene vna dies funera bina dedit.
Nobile virtutis, vitae, morumque dederunt
Exemplum; haud post se nomen inane ferent.
Scilicet exemplo tandem hoc ediscite viui,
Ex horum vita, viuere, morte, mori.
G. H. T. C. C.

In obitum clarissimi and pientissimi viri, Domini EDOVARDI LEVKENER Militis,
qua generis splendore, qua omni virtutum genere ornatissimi, necnon lectissimae
foeminae, eiusdem coniugis, Dom. SVSANNAE LEVKNER, (...).
HEu miseranda lues! audax corrodere sanctum
Diuina pectus nobilitate viri,
Foedere qui sacro nulli pietate secundus,
Hanc sibi coniunxit relligione parem.
Nam prudens and doctus erat, decus atque piorum;
Virtutis cultrix nec minus illa fuit:
Mecoenas, columen, spes, deliciaeque bonorum;
Solamen miseris nec minus illa fuit.
Christicolae pariterque fuerunt Coelicolaeque:
Semper luce pares, nunc quoque morte pares.
Sed cum nomen habet de CANDESCENTE LVCERNA:
Hoc iam perge tuis pandere Musa modis.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Heu miseranda lues! hac non splendente lucerna,
Hinc tot pullati syrmate longo gemunt.
Quin si non cunctis gratissima vita fuisset,
Nunc tua tam multis funera moesta forent?
G.E. C.Eman.

In Edouardum Lewkenor Militem, viri tum pietate, tum doctrina sum
spectabilem; and Susannam ipsius coniugem, foeminam lectissimam, simul mortuos,
eodemque tumulo conditos, Epicedium.
ERgone iam extinctus gelidi sub mole sepulchri
Ille iacet verae relligionis honos?
Ergone and illa simul lectissima foemina coniux
Morte perempta graui contumulata iacet?
Hei mihi, quis poterit lachrymas retinere cadentes?
Hei, perijt nostri gloria magna soli!
Heu, iacet Eduardus, niueus cui pectore candor,
Vnum cui coelum cura laborque fuit.
Cui pietas, doctrina, genus, prudentia constans,
Canaque honoranda cum probitate fides.
Heu Susanna iacet, coeli germana propago.
Verae foeminei deliciae generis;
In miseros cui larga manus, pia cura suorum,
Virtutis studium, and relligionis amor.
Sic vno quos vita thoro coniunxerat, vna
Mors tulit, and vno condidit hoc tumulo.
Ergo ambos flete o vates, totumque iubete
Parnassum alternos ingeminare sonos.
Hasque illis lachrymas isthaec monimenta sacrate,
Et funus luctu concelebrate graui.
At vos o manes, quorum nec longa vetustas,
Nobile nec delet nomen auara dies,
Vos iuuat interea meliores quaerere seeds,
Queis datur aeterna cum Jove pace frui.
G.S. C.Eman.

In obitum praeclarissimi viri Dom. EDVARDI LEVVKENORIS Militis, and eius
charissimae coniugis, Dominae SVSANNAE LEVVKENORIS.
MIlitis egregij meditaberis (...) miram?
Proh dolor extinctum conspice Lewkenorem,
Non modo diuitijs and auito stemmate clarum,
Sed musa, ingenio, sed pietate virum.
Clerus, eques, populus pullata vest Britannus
Hunc cassum lugent lumine Lewkenorem.
Te quoque (qua socia plures foeliciter annos
Lewkenor exegit) chara Susanna, tuum
Lewkenorem moestae properantem ad limina mortis
Et pudor and pietas deseruisse vetant.
Vos simul extinctos crudeli funere mecum
Defleturo puto pectora mill pia:
Vos and longa dies and vita nouissima iunxit,
Nec nostro licuit dissociare metro.
C.O.

In obitum viri nobilissimi iuxta ac doctissimi Edouardi Leukenor and Susannae
suae.
EXtincta vt nuper petijt pia foemina coelos
plausaque supernos vidit aditque locos
Nos o noster adi: quid enim disiungimur, inquit,
tam nos quid separat terra minuta duos?
Dixit and in pennas cessit visura penates
pennas quas pietas struxit and egit amor.
Quae te dulce caput diuis diuortia nostris
disiungunt, cur pars tu mihi pacis abes?
Astra inter iuncti carpamus gaudia, dixit,
tenuat and in nihilum cessit imago suum:
Ille nihil notam effigiem sed prendere captans
excussit terras induiturque polos.
Eurydicen quaestus Lewknor, vt nulla superstes
comparuit terris aequoreisue fretis:
Nequicquam sperent coniux te tartara dixit,
emicat and coeli coerula scandit ouans.
G.H. T.C.

In obitum religiosissimi Militis Edouardi Leukneri.
DIcitur Ismarius chara pro coniuge vates
Per vada Cocyti, per Phlegetontij aquas
Transmisisse viam, nigrique ad limina Ditis
Sistens, Threijciae succinuisse lyrae:
Vmbrarumque deum neruisque and carmine mulcens
Eurydicen proprio restituisse Lari.
Heu nunc aut alter nigrantia tecta Tyrannus
Possidet, aut peior quam solet esse Dea est.
Nuper Leuknerus funesta morte perempta
Coniuge, sponte sua liuida stagna petit:
Per tenebrasque iter emensus, manesque silentes,
Constitit ad furui limina caeca dei:
Plangens orabat miseram sibi reddere sponsam,
Moturus verbis marmora dura suis.
Cumque diu frustra tot singultantia verba
Misisset, (tantus est feruor amoris) ait;
Vt potero lucem aut coeli connexa tueri
Cum mihi surrepta est lux mea vita mea?
Vel mihi reddatur coniux aut ipse maritae,
Vel seruato duos, vel mage perde duos!
Dixerat, assensit diri inclementia Regis
Atque ambos contra iusque piumque tenet.
Hoc ego non agitem? dic o saeuissime custos
Tartarei claustri, quid velit iste furor?
Quid? tibi commissa est nigri custodia regni
Imperium in manes est tibi sort datum,
Imperium in manes miseros tibi cessit and vmbras!
Diceris in sanctos iuris habere nihil;
Foelices sanctorum animae sunt cura Tonantis.
Sed quid ego haec frustra: vindicis ira venit.
Nam quoniam inuitis rapuisti hos inuide nobis,
Inuito rapiat qui colit astratibi.
In obitum viri vere Mecoenatis Eduardi Leuknori, and Susannae eius coniugis
pientissimae, Epicedium.
SIc turtur moritur, suumque plorat
Solas flebiliter virum inter vlmos:
Sic fretus cythara maritus audax
Tristeis ingreditur domos profundi:
Ereptam sequitur suam vt Susannam
Leuknorus reducem suam vt Susannam
Concinnet, (pietas!) opesque spernit:
It virtus comes, vt chorus sororum
Et quicquid Charitum, Cupidinumque est:
Si fas est tumulo tegi ipsum Amorem
Hoc vellet tumulo tegi ipsius ipso.
Anagr. in nomen: LEVCENORVS, Luce nos ure.
At tua quando dedit virtus iam viuere coelis
Seu diuus epulis vna cum coniuge Diuum
Accumbis, sieve orb seeds pars dignior orbis
Respice NOS, ac LVCE tua foeliciter URE.
H.G. T.C.

VNde mihi insolito stupuerunt corda dolor?
Quidue grauis versat tantum mea pectora luctus?
Men's equidem praesaga mali, quid triste minetur
Nescio, sic caeco turbantur corda tumultu;
An mihi dilectus nimium decessit amicus?
An mihi chara parens? An multum frater amatus?
Hei mihi quod multo merser grauioribus vndis:
Occidit (heu pietas!) pietatis amantior alter
Quo nusquam in terris vixit, nec mortuus vsquam est:
Quandoquidem nobis nec mortuus ille putandus;
Semper enim viuet nato dum vita supersit,
Felicem o natum donat qui viuere patri.
T.B. Clar.

In obitum illustrissimi Equitis Eduardi Leukenor: vxorisque clarissimae,
Carmen lugubre.
HEu, quanti gemitus? infoelix ales ab vlmo
Quos memorat casus? volucres in damna trahuntur.
An amor extinctae moliri tanta palumbae
Impulit, vt sociam sibi mortem quaereret vltro?
Impulit vnus amor. nec enim sine coniuge coniux
Ibit adastra. Duos eadem lux perdat amantes
Optauit toties, sed cui nil fata negare
Ausint; aut poterant superi; pia vota secundant,
Vna dies inter tantum fluit, ambo feruntur.
R. Theol. C.T.

In obitum vere illustrissimi viri, and tam gratiae, quam naturae and artium
praesidijs instructissimi, D. Eduardi Leukenor Militis, nec non in Susannam
vxorem charissimam foeminam lectissimam (...).
HEi mihi quam subito passim tua funera flere
Cogimur inuiti Lewkenori, diemque supremum
Condecorare tuum lachrymis rorantibus ora?
Quem pietas celebrem, patriae prudentia charum,
Integritas vitae illustrem grauitasque senilis,
Natales clarum, mundo quem fecerat ardens
Conspicuum Zelus de relligione tuenda.
Dotibus ingenij ac artis quem docta Minerua
Ornarat mire, cuius suadela sedebat
In labijs; nunc te miseri deflemus ademptum,
Quem Deus e coelo virtutibus auxerat istis.
Sed nec diuini satis est heu stamina vitae
Abrupisse viri Parcis, nisi coniugis alma
Vno eodemque ictu filum fatale rescindant.
Quam pietas, quam castus Amor, Prudentiae, forma
Grataque quam comitas, sanctoque modestia vultu
Foeminei ornabant vera ornamenta pudoris.
Vos studiosa cohors, Respublica, Curia, Templa,
Vos rus deplorat. lachrymas Academia fundit.
Vnice vos deflent proles generosa superstes,
Et famuli famulaeque omnes vos vnice deflent.
Non tamen in medio hoc luctu solatia desunt.
Nam quos iunxit amor and connubialia iura,
Non mors disiunxit, non funera, neue sepulchrum:
Ambo sed aethereis volitant super aethera pennis,
Limen and augusti simul ingrediuntur Olympi,
Et coelo regnant cum Christo rege, supremo.
S.W.C. Eman.

Ad viri clarissimi nomen qui nuper migrauit ad caelites, allusio.
SInescis (Hospes) iste Lewkenor cui
Plebes, Patresque, paruulis misti senes,
Moesti, dolentes, lacrymas impendimus;
Quis qualis olim: Sic habe; Lychnus fuit.
Ellychnium hoc mortale cui corpusculum,
Nunc ecce puluis tenuis and cinisculus:
Diuiniori accensa men's spiramine
Depasta corpus, flammula huic lychno fuit:
Oleum, charisma sanctioris Spiritus:
Iam dignitatis gradus iste celsior,
Qui quemque solus indicat quanti siet,
Lychnuchus; vnde latius puro nitens
Radiata virtus emicabat lumine.
O quanta noctis insecuta est illico
Caligo; quanta in hoc quidem coenaculo
Obscuritatis vmbra communis domus,
Extinctus hinc vt iste Lychaus ignibus
Suam rem sit flammulam coelestibus!
G.B. C.E.

In obitum D. EDOVARDI LEVVKENOR pietatis, simul ac eruditionis exemplaris,
natalium splendore illustris, and doctorum patroni benignissimi, carmen funebre.
E Effugit fatum miseros; ferendum:
D Ducit inuitos alios; sequendum:
V Vnicum nostri decus (ah dolendum)
A Abstulit aeui.
R Regijs aequant humiles tabernas,
D Dum ferae cunctos rapiunt sorores.
V Viue, fata instant, animaeque gaudent
S Soluere claustra.
L Lugeat quisquis, te, Edouarde, nouit,
E Et tuum corpus tumulo repostum
V Vidit indignum perijsse, longum
V Viuere dignum.
C Charior Diuis pietate nemo,
N Nemo, quem Musae magis approbarent,
O Omnibus gratus, patriae paterque
R Rite vocandus.
T. SOTHEBY. Coll. S.I.

Ad Lectorem.
CArmina qui tristes quae dictauere Camoena
Culta parum; verum qualiacunque legis,
Da veniam: decuit sic indulgere dolori,
Materiae cultus conuenit iste suae.
Perlege non ficto quas fundimus ore querelas:
Sollicita verus non eget art dolor.
Dumque legis luge, tristique adscribere turbae,
Nec pudeat socijs ingemuisse malis.
Forsitan and duro tibi ni de robore pectus'st
Decurrit moestis guttula fusa genis;
Sic sine: Neue pium tibi mascula forte doloris
Officium virtus impedijsse velit.
O been si multis fuerit signata lituris,
Pagina si lacrimas quas petit omnis habet!
His quoque (quos omnis iam deficit humor) ocellis
Qui prope iam tantis diriguere malis,
Dum mihi quae cernis scribuntur carmina, Lector
Si qua fides, calidam defluit imber aquae.
Sed lacrimis modus esto. Alias iam tangere chordas
Incipe vel Cleio vel magis Vranie.
THRENODIAE In funere Clarissimorum Coniugum D. EDOVARDI and SVSANNAE
LEVVKENORVM. Pars altera. In qua potissimum encomia mortuorum, viuorum alloquia.
In obitum sanctissimi and literatissimi viri Domini Edwardi Leuknor, carmen
funebre.
ESse quid hoc dicam monstri? quod nostra vocatas
Inuito quae saepe mihi quasi gurgite manant
Extorquent nullas iam cornea lumina guttas;
Quique genas largo rorantes imbre rigauit,
Accersitus abest, and ocellis deficit humor.
Sustulit (ah quanto cogor memmisse dolor!)
Mors scelerata virum grandaeui Nestoris annos
Commeritum, si sancta fides, pietasque valerent
Parcarum cohibere manus; venerandaque virtus
Tempora mercedem vitae spatiosa referret.
Quem genus atque domus titulis ornabat auitis
Natiuusque decor generoso corpore fulsit
Cui largo defudit opes bona copia cornu
Quemque insigne tulit, sublimen, nomen in astra,
Et quodcunque viris accedat pulchrius extra.
Sed partem laudis vix vllam ponimus istis
Haec inculpatae radijs, languentia fundunt
Defluuia and fuscum vitae subiecta colorem:
Semper eum pietas teneris decorauit ab annis,
Prima aetas dulcem musarum fecit alumnum,
Saepe puer tulerat sapientis signa Mineruae
Et redijt victor pallenti vinctus oliua,
Virque viris palmam si quid prudentia iussit
Si probitas quid agi, facile abstulit omibus vnus.
Caetera quae restant quid nunc memorare necesse est?
Qua manifesta manent, vitae, semperque manebunt
Argumenta piae, quae postera me reticente
Secula narrabunt; seri dicentque nepotes?
Quae neque, si vellem, breuiter decurrere possem.
Quare agite o docti and mecum, studiosa caterua
Atque, superuacuo gemitu lachrymisque remotis
Condignum tanto celebremus nomine funus;
Illi marmorea aeternum de laud sepulchrum,
Inscriptum titulo sacro statuamus and aurum;
Vt tanto succedat auo sua sera propago,
Et memor, and meritae, fiat simul aemula laudis.
G.W.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
I.C. Trin. Coll. Cantab.

In obitum EDVVARDI LEVVKNERI Equitis clarissimi, and SVSANNAE coniugis feminae
lectissimae.
ABstulit vna dies cara cum coniuge clarum
Leuknerum, atque vno condidit in tumulo.
Insignes pietate ambos; natalibus ambos
Insignes, omni denique laud pares.
(...), Candidus.
Candorem praeferre vides ipsum tibi nomen,
Quippe inerat candor moribus ingenuis.
Vir Musas coluit, Musae coluere vicissim
Artibus ingenuis, egregijsque virum.
Hunc vbi iam durae rapit inclementia mortis,
Lecta parum coniux occupat ante mori.
Non tulit aspectum morientis; praeripuitque
Femina fatalem fortior ire viam.
Id luctum geminare, quibusdam forte videtur,
Non geminat, minuit tantus amor gemitus.
Iunxerat vna dies feliciter: abstulit vna,
Nec mors coniunctos diuidit atra duos.
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...);
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
A. DOVVNES Graecus Professor Regius Cantabrigiae.

(...).
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...);
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...);
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
I.B. C.S.I.

(...).
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).

In obitum praestantissimi viri Domini Edouardi Leukenor, Militis,
charissimaeque vxoris Dominae Susannae Leukenor foeminae lectissimae, Carmen
funebre.
QVId memorem claram stirpem? quid munera mentis?
Quid doctrinarum pectora plena penu?
Quidue tuam dicam linguarum cognitionem?
Quam doctis doctus faueris ipse viris?
Quid referam, tua simplicitas, prudentia quanta?
Qua patriam promptus iuueris vsque tuam.
Quid mores suaues, candorem carmine pingam?
Non minus ipsa re; nomine (...) eras.
Te Leuknore magis pietas celebrauit, and ardens
Saluificae Christi relligionis amor.
Qui Christum coluere pio es complexus amore,
Praeconum Christi maxima cura tibi.
Tu moreris, nostrae noxae meritae sapientis
Exemplo orbari consilioque viri.
Quin moritur tecum pia foemina and optima coniux,
Vna dulce fuit viuere, dulce mori.
Felices animas! quas nos gaudere sinamus
Coelesti in regno, te, bone Christ, frui.
THOMAS HARRISON C.T.

In obitum viri pietatis and eruditionis nomine clarissimi Edouardi Leuknor
Suffolciensis Equitis aurati, and lectissimae foeminae Susannae coniugis eius.
VEre (...) eras (...); vere ergo vocari
(...) poteras, fuit omen nomine in isto:
Vere sanctus eras vita, sermon benignus,
Ingenio lenis, sic vt non mitior alter,
Pacis amans, litisque expers, fautorque bonorum,
Musarum summus verbis factisque patronus,
Iustitiae exemplar, sine fuco and fraud, sequenti
Praesentique aeuo, causarumque arbiter aequus:
Denique totus eras niueus: niueo ergo lapillo
Dignus; te propter candorem pectoris omnes
Laudarunt passim, celebrantes funera fletu.
Ingens ad tumulum confluxit turba virorum,
Accurrunt tristes, pueri, iuuenesque, seneque,
Et properant matres simul innuptaeque puellae,
Plebeij, procerum necnon generosa propago.
Auxit and hunc populi luctum charissima coniux,
Quae tibi per multos annos sociata cubili,
Horis ante obitum paucis disiuncta recessit.
At quos iunxit amor viuos, disiungere nunquam
Mors poterit, manet haec tecum, aeternumque manebit;
Disiunctos terra, coelum coniunxit in aeuum,
Haec in vtrumque meum testentur carmina amorem.
I. A. Coll. S. Joan.

In coniunctum Edouardi Lewkenoris Militis dignissimi, and Susannae vxoris
eiusdem eximiae, obitum.
TEmpore si nostro vixisset Naso, quid ille
De modo defunctis diceret? Vnus erant;
Vnus erant vere tam vir, quam nobilis vxor;
Vnus corporibus, cordibus vnus erant;
Vna domus dominis, thalamus fuit vnus amicis;
Deuotis vnum numen, and vna fides;
An non ergo fuit diuinis nexa Catenis
Copula, tam multis copula nexa modis?
An non vt pariter nexa est, pariterque soluta
Diuina simul hoc contigit esse manu?
Se potuit non illa queri, non ille relictum,
Terrigenas vna deposuere domos;
Sic finire dies decuit, sic ducere; primis
Vltima, mors vitae sic fuit apta suae.
Viuite foelices, alijs sponsalibus instat
Praefinita dies, instat and alter hymen;
Interea tellus lauds aequabit Olympo,
Sieve Edouarde tuas, sieve Susanna tuas;
Quas been religio meruit, quas munera Musis,
Quas been mors meruit, quas been vita prior.
E Coll. Regio.

In coniunctum EDOVARDI LEVVKENORIS Militis dignissimi and SVSANNAE vxoris
eiusdem eximiae, obitum.
VIrque vxorque diu pariter vixere, quid inde?
Et pariter vitam deseruere suam;
Quam been conueniunt? quam justice consona votis?
Quam been respexit summus vtrumque Deus?
Qui sic imposuit vitae, sinemque labori
Sic vt vtrique suus possit abesse dolor;
O vos foelices dicam, queis corpore iunctis
Aequali semper viuere sort datum;
At ter foelices animas, queis carne solutis
Iam datur in clara luce videre Deum.
E Coll. Regio

Amplissimi viri EDVARDI LEVVKNOR militis, (...), eruditorum patroni
singularis, and coniugis SVSANNAE, foeminae lectissimae memoriae, Carmen.
HInc abit Eduardus Lewknor, quis sanctior ille?
Aut quis Apollineo doctior ore fuit?
Ille fuit morum (...), nubecula nulla,
Eclepsis radijs nec fuit vlla suis.
Instar Crystalli (...), nec naeuus in ipso,
Sed sine nube nitens, sed sine fraud virens.
Verius es Magnes, quid enim non attrahis? olim
Laudem, nunc lachrimas vrbis and orbis habes.
Aliud.
LEwknor abis? nobis magnos abeundo laturus
Luctus, aetherijs gaudia magna polis.
Ridet adesse hymnis; elegis iam deflet abesse;
Te tuus ether habens; te tua terra carens.
Miles abit, sequiturque suam been fidus amantem
Susannam vxorem dulce decusque suum.
Vna voxerunt ambo, simul ambo abierunt,
Et simul Elysijs, exspatiantur agris.
DA. DOLBEN. Coll. S. Joan.

Epitaphium.
SI nescis, Lector, tumulo conduntur in isto
Digni nominibus foemina virque suis.
H^nc eten^m fecere viro Leucanera nomen
Candida men's, purae relligionis amor.
Su^^^^^m vxori nomen dedit vna matronis
G^mma colenda, Fides intemerata thori.
O male! cur ambos simul inuida fata tulere?
Quam vellem vl^erius viueret is vel ea:
O been! viuentes quos vis sociauit amoris,
Vita cedentes hos sociauit humus.
Epitaphium.
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
In egregium Equitem.
(...)
(...).
Aliud.
QVae been conueniunt, genus, ars, opulentia, virtus,
Raro conueniunt, sunt tamen ista tibi.
Mortemque hoc superas, quod tantum corpus ademit,
Non tibi virtutes, nec tua parta tuis.
Aliud.
QVid septem errantes numerantur in aethere stellae,
Quando arts vno tot nituere viro?
Iuncta quod his pieta, dici sphaera vltima possis,
Teque mori, mea non, sed tua Musa vetat.
TO. THEOBALD Coll. Trin.

(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
Within this monument enclosed of twice two couples been
The bodies twain. Areed who can what might this riddle mean.
The Explication.
The bodies whose they be we know too well:
Four couples thus. In wedlocks happy bands
First were they joined: And next, one Death did quell
Them both at once: For third, this Tomb so stands
Their common sepulture: And last of all,
Coupled they been in joys celestial.
W. B.

In Lewknorum nobis ereptum coelo additum.
MAgnus honos magnum, praeclaro stemmate nasci,
At mayor stirpem vincere mente suam;
Dispeream ni Leuknerus generosior ortu^
Et genus and formam vicerit ingenio.
Vicerit ingenio tali, quale haud periturum
Credidimus, sed mox mors inopina rapit.
Nec mirum: tales citius sibi Rector Olympi
Vendicat, and nostros non sinit esse diu.
Ergo mihi salve aeternum, aeternumque valeto
Sancte vir, aeternum nomen ab orb feres.
QVos viuos thorus vnus, amor coniunxerat vnus,
Vnaque defunctos nunc habet vrna duos.
Et quos October modo nobis abstulit vnus,
Si non coniungat pagina nostra, nefas.
Viuite foelices animae simul, vnus Olympus
Vos habeat, Phoebe haec, tu (bone) Phoebus eris.
In obitum viri nobiliss. iuxta ac doctiss. D. Eduardi Lewkenor and Susannae
suae.
Ad vxorem.
VSque adeone tibi charus (lectissima) coniux
Vt prae te possit nullus adire n^cem?
Ad virum.
Tu quoque sic properas gratas periture sub vmbras,
Foemina quod potuit te sine obire necem?
Ad vxorem.
Siste monent Musae gradieris sera sub vmbras,
Vir tuus vt praeeat, foemina siste monent.
Vxor.
Mallem mill pati mortes; concedite Musae
Me sine quam pereat pars prior ille mei.
Ad virum.
At tu cui melior finxit praecordia Phoebus
Per si quid nostri sit tibi dulce mane.
Vir.
Te, te, mitte preces; sequar o sequar vmbra per vmbras
Chara animae coniux; Pieri mitte preces.
Ad vtrumque.
Foelices animae, virtus quas acrior egit
Viuere nec solas nec potuisse mori.
Gu. Hu. T. C.

In obitum viri illustrissimi qua virtute and pietate, qua natalibus and
doctrina, Dom. EDOVARDI LEVVKENOR cum lectissima coniuge D. SUSANNA vnius diei
interuallo erepti, Epicedium.
NVper vt extinctum vidit LEVVKENORA VIRTUES
Et comitem SANCTAE CONIVGIS ire suae,
Prospiciens alijs dum certa pericula temnit
Officij and ne pars desiet vlla cauet:
Fleuit. Et hanc meritis mercedem talibus inquit
SVMME DEVS? sic heu, sic datur esse PIIS?
Cui PIETAS. Miserae Mors vltima linea vitae,
Atque eadem aeternae est ianua certa PIIS.
Quid miserare HOMINES? Nempe his occumbere FATVM est.
Quidue PIOS? LVCRVM est. Hoc quoque quod CITIVS.
Quod PARITER rapti caussa haec super vna querelae est:
Atqui erat EX VOTO hoc. Sic voluere mori.
G.B. C.E.

The same in English, verse for verse.
When Virtue lately did behold Sir Edward Lewkenor die,
And hence depart in his religious Ladies company;
Others from danger whiles to save, his own he does neglect,
That only shunnes in virtuous deed to show the least defect:
She wept, And ah for such deserts this recompense (quoth she)
O highest God? Thus thus alas! reward'st thou piety?
To whom Religion thus. Death is this wretched life's last date,
And to the godly Death the same is life-eternals gate.
Why wailest thou men? To whom to die once it is destiny;
Or why the godly? It Is their gain. And more if speedily
That one cause of complaint remains; together these be gone:
But this was evermore their wish; neither would live alone.
Vere nobilis and pius D. Edouardus Lewkenor sero sepultus, lugendus semper.
POst cita fata tibi funus serum obtigit. At quam
Post tua sera dolor funera longus erit.
Vita breuis, funus serum tumulusque perennis;
At dolor est vita longior and tumulo.
I Leuknere, anima haec astris est dignior: istic
Laeta superuiuet and tumulo, and lachrymis.
In Coniuges coniunctissimos.
DVxere vitam nec diuturnam satis
Simitu beatam amore dulci coniuges;
Clausere demum, at citius, extremum diem
Simitu beati morte sancta coniuges,
Quin and supremi compotes ambo poli
Hausere puri poculum vnum nectaris;
Et nunc eadem vestiuntur gloria
Beati amore, morte, coelo coniuges.
IOS. HALL. Coll. Eman.

In obitum religiosissimi Militis Edoardi Leukneri.
LEuknerus iste, quem sepultum in marmore
Plangunt amici, (turba moesta and languida)
In fornicato coelitum palatio,
Inter micantes syderum globos sedet.
Vbi praemiorum iustus arbiter Deus,
Stellis tot ornat fulgidis celsum caput
Quot ante gessit cord virtutes suo.
Illic beato conditoris in sinu
Lustratur illa, quae per obscurum vident
Quicunque carnis non soluti vinculis
Caliginosum hoc incolunt tentorium.
Nos turba tristis interim fata incessimus,
Et saxa tanquam fixa terrae, quaerimus
Illum in sepulchro: cui tamen virtus sua
Etiam ante mortem fecit in coelo locum.
Humana spes aeternitatis inclytae,
Niuis instar esset, quam procellosi furor
Percussit Austri, visque flammantis Dei:
Si mors triumphum consequatur alterum,
Animamque tumulus idem, and ossa contegat.
Sed non vigorem saeua mors tantum tenet;
Condi sepulchro corpus haud anima potest,
Emergit illa, mensque magnorum virum
Aeternitatis arduam calcat viam.
Habe ergo (gurges corporum) corpus tibi:
Quondam beati spiritus habitaculum
Vanum trophaeum sit licet tantum viri
Corpus, thesaurus mayor quam vt cedat tibi.
Ode, in qua D. D. Edouardi and Susannae Leukenorum coniugum and inuicem
amantissimorum and cum caeteroqui multifariam tum breui mortis interuallo
nobilium, apotheosis.
PAr inuidendum, nec lachrymabili
Vexanda versu funera, funera
Auctura stellas, and sub axes
Conspicuam meritura sortem,
Seu vos repostas imperio iuuat
Vrgere terras, seu dare splendida
Inter paternos iura ciues,
Seu liquido radiare ponto.
Nam nec superbas Naxia flectere
Edocta tigres dignior asseri,
Nec saeuus Orion minaci
Vel iaculo violence vel ense.
Foecunda coelo copia fortium
Nec insolenti sydera pellice
Grauantur olim, RARA castis
Conqueritur plaga sub maritis.
Hoc fine vestras fas mihi tollere
Lauds and amplo dicere carmine
Diuisa vix vlla duorum
Fata mora, parilesque cursus.
Simul profecti non simul ad locum
Venistis ambo: nam prior optima
Dignata Nympharum corona est
Et volucres agitauit alas,
Vel illa sexus munere libera
Palmae appropinquans, and melior pede,
Vel faecis expers, humidaque
Mole carens, propiorque Diuis.
Proh quanti amare est? non tulit hanc vicem
Lato relictus sponsus in aequore
Iam solus, haerentemque gliscit
Qualibet expedijsse metam?
Non ille vitae parcus and omnium
Contemptor, atras quo redimat moras,
Sed nulla cunctantem sub arcto
Vota iuuant, spacioque languet.
Fertur Cupido purpureas sibi
Dempsisse pennas protinus and viro
Aptasse prudens his perito
Remigijs sapienter vti.
Tum copulantur. Nunc quoque (si fides)
Caelo receptos ludere sic iuuat,
Nymphamque porrectam marito
Praetimidas glomerare plantas.
SAMVEL COLLINAEVS C. Regal.

TEn thousand thanks ye Muses for your pain.
How may poor shepherd ever hope requite
Your courtesy, but debtor still remain?
Unless you take this recompense though light,
TO admire your skill; and wish your Poesy
May give, or from your subject take eternity.
But might it not offend your learned ears,
The ruder song of simple country swains
Uncunning all, be joined to your tears?
Small cunning needs him that indeed complains.
Ah well I wot our rymes be base and poor;
But if they shall express our grief, we wish no more.
FUNERAL VERSES Upon the death of the religious, famous and virtuous knight
Sir Edward Leuknor and Dame Susan his wife.
IF ever Country, cause had to complain,
For loss of one who did her state uphold
By justice due, the right for to maintain,
And beat down wrong with courage good and bold:
Then Suffolk mourn, for thou have lost that wight
This worthy man Sir Edward Lewkenor Knight.
If ever children yet had cause to say,
We are deprived of loving Parents dear,
Who trained us up in fear of God always,
Whose virtues true, did in their life appear;
Then children mourn, more cause have you than other,
Deprived at once of father and of mother.
If Shepherd true had ever cause to weep
For loss of such, who loved him as their life,
For tender lambs, for faithful loving sheep,
Who loved his peace, and loathed all iar and strife:
Mourn gentle shepherd now great cause you have,
For those two friends that covered lie in grave.
Amongst the rest who take the mourning parts,
Do we their servants join our willing hands:
In outward black and with true sabled hearts
Do we all mourn, who ti'd in duties bands,
Did late enjoy masters so dear and kind,
Too good for us, upright in heart and mind.
Farewell my light, says doleful Denham town,
My joy, my stay, my comfort in distress:
My living life is now by death pulled down,
And for my joy I mourn in heaviness:
But cheer thy self, let hope thy grief assuage,
Of God supply in this succeeding age.
The poorer sort may sing their songs of grief,
With tuning woe, with sad and moistened tears,
For loss of these, who fed them with relief,
And to their cry did open both their ears.
The poores complaint did never come in vain,
For which on earth their lasting fame shall reign.
O Traitorous death, the stays of public State
Which pluck'st away! Cruel, which Parents dear
From children! Impious, which do separate
Pastors from sheep! Unjust, with heavy cheer,
Which bid'st us servants seek worse services!
Which rob'st the poor! Hard hearted, merciless!
But welcome Death, for thou art sent of God
To them for joy, to us for smarting rod.
S.P.

Upon the death of the most religious Knight Sir EDWARD LEVVKENOR.
LEt others lend their tears, others their verse;
I Will stand a dumb admirer at thy hearse.
These be the things which may adorn thy death
And give thy name an ever living breath.
Yet shall my tongue-tide admiration tell
As much as others tears and verses will.
That grief which can express it self is small,
That Is great which makes men in amazement fall.
Upon the death of the most virtuous and religious Lady Madame SVSAN LEVVKENOR,
in allusion to her name signifying a Lilly.
Fair Lilly flower thou bear thy name aright:
Amongst the Dames thou wast for woman head,
As is among the flowers the Lilly bright:
Like flower thou have not left us in thy stead,
For beauty and sweetness, bounty, modesty,
And lilly love, and purest chastity,
And chiefly for thy sweetest sweetness piety.
Thou wast. A woeful word alas to say:
Now like a Lilly which unkindly frost,
Or soultering heat through Phoebus piersant ray
Has smitten; right anon soon has it lost
That goodly state became it erst so well,
And that pure white wherein it did excel,
Yet of the former sweetness does retain some smell:
Or as the Lilly rauncht with cruel hand,
From tender stalk to dight some garland gay,
Has reau'd the garden where it wont to stand
Of that fair sight which there it did display.
So thou, o cruel Death! whose fell despite
Of fairest flower has robbed our garden quite,
Fair Lilly, thou in heavens garland shin'st more bright.
O! as the Lilly cropped does yet retain
Within her root some part of living power,
Which may with Springs return put forth again,
And many stalks adorn each with his flower:
So might it o fair Lilly fare with thee,
Many like flowers for one God let us see;
O goodly sight! And so it is, or so shall be.
W.B.

On the death of Sir EDWARD LEVKNOR and his Lady.
DEath came to him: she willing he should live,
Called pale Death unto her weary bed,
And wished her dearest husband might survive,
And that she might be stricken in his sted:
He heard her suit; and death importuned
To ceaze on him, and suffer her alive;
So each would feign their life for other give.
Death with the choice amazed; at last thus sed,
It Is pity that a pair of souls so dear
Should by my fatal stroke be severed:
One would be loath to live without his fere,
One shall not be without the other dead.
Ah Death; I wist not erst thou were so witty,
But call'st thou Pity this? 'twas cruel pity.
Upon the death of the worthy Knight Sir Edward Lewkenor and his virtuous
Lady.
SHould I inuoke your aid (you luklesse nine)
Or pray you help my sorrow-burthened verse?
Sits not with mournful plaintifs to be fine,
Or stately strowe fresh flowers on fading hearse:
Suffice me that my sorrows self may be
Both Muse and matter to mine Eligee.
Nor need I now those howling hirelings aid
That help affection with their mourning art:
Tribute of tears is easy to be paid;
Soon weep the eyes when wounded is the heart:
Let fained love shed tears enforcedly,
Unfeigned mine will weep unfeignedly.
Had not the headlong fates with ruthlesse spite
Bereaved these Worthies of beloved breath,
My sullen words had not my thoughts endight;
Nor had I worn a sable Cypress wreath:
But now (unhappy now!) the heavens so ordain.
What heavens decree, we spurn thereat in vain.
If heavens fate-binding doom be such and such,
Why do I fill the air with bootlesse plaints?
Let not my wailefull verses hapless touch
Disturb the arches of these quiet saints.
But o let passions tongue have leave to speak,
Lest passions fury make his prison break.
Ah never let me so respectlesse part,
But rather let these sorrow-drenched eyes
Stream out whole fountains from my sobbing heart;
And let my plainings echo to the skies:
So may the euer-turning heavens proclaim
Our homebred sorrows to another maine.
Let not those days be marked except with tears,
Or wiped out of the Calendar of Time:
Nor hang in file on Genius silver hears
Guilty of so inexpiable crime.
As wont the guilty conscience fly the light,
Let them be covered all with pitchy night.
Let not, o let not aftertimes record,
The fatal sisters lawless power of death
Was such. O why should these sad days afford
Matter for backe-bite Momus brood to breath
Their joyful Ioes to a higher strain,
Or frame triumphals to their bitter vain?
As if (o madness!) any would be glad
Or please their moody fancies at this sight?
When Enuies self at this event is sad;
And black-mouthed venomous unhallowed spite
Dares not profane those sacred altars Fame,
Erects and justly to their virtuous name.
And o what madness has my wit distraught,
Unkindly to envy their high estate?
I saw their happy souls with pleasures fraught
Triumphant enter in Elisium's gate.
Elizaes spirit with the blessed rest
Did flock to welcome so desired guest.
Live long in bliss you heauen-beloued souls
For us; since we your dearest presence lost,
Since what we most desire great God controules:
Yet shall our comfort in this one be most,
That what your happy breath whilst you did live,
The same your blessed memory shall give.
W. Firmage.

DEATHS APOLOGY, and a Reioynder to the same.
STay, Stay good men: Run not so fast away.
My word I will not harm you: once trust Death.
Lo here my dreadful dart aside I lay.
See, see these fearful fools; As if full eath
I could not soon at take ye if me list.
Was never man could yet out-runne me that I wist.
But hearken Sirs the whiles I here defend
Mine innocence against your harmless spite:
Ye talk and write your list, as if ye wend
That Death were deaf, or had no sense of sight
In these large eye-holes: Rest persuaded thus
I hear ye all, and read I trow, vt Clericus.
In every leaf before (lo here the priefe)
Ye rail on me, and at your pleasure call
False, cruel, cursed; Traitor, fellon, thief.
Once shall I be avenged on ye all.
Nay stay: I Will keep my word now; though not long
But this I say, be Judge your selves, ye do me wrong.
For first I plead I am an officer
Of highest God, whom ye have all agilt:
Was never Hangman counted Murderer,
Or once araigned for the blood he spilt.
Nor am I Traitor false, that warn before,
Let no man trust me; Thus I counsel evermore.
I am no Thief, for naught I take away:
The soul and body both I leave behind:
But this is true, that from the baser clay
I separate the purer spirit the mind.
Multiplication or Alchymy
You might me thinks more truly call my maistery.
Yet not (which laws forbid) of heaped gold;
This worlds good I recke not all a bean;
And whatsoeu'r I be I dare be bold
Of couetise to justify me clean:
Of briberie and partiality
No officer I trow is in this world so free.
But to be faultlesse I account but small:
Except I well deserve I naught excuse,
What ever crime that I am charged withal:
O then ungrateful men which thus abuse
Your chiefest friend! and rage as ye were wood
At him that is the only worker of your good.
From wretched world the confines of your life,
To blissful Paradise from whence ye fell,
By one offense occasioning the strife
Twixt God and you, which did you all expel,
Two ways there lie; one kept with brandish't flame
Of Angels sword, no mortal wight may pass the same.
But I am Porter to that other gate,
Straight is the wicket, nor without my leave
May force or skill win entrance thereat:
O foolish men! what madness does bereave
Your better wits, which ought of Death to crave,
That through that happy gate you might free passage have.
As wandering Pilgrim from his native soil
With many weary steps which long has strayed,
And in his journey found but pain and toil,
And dangers derne that have him often dismayed;
How gladly does he climb the welcome raft,
That to his country soon and safely shall him waft?
O men your life is but a Pilgrimage,
Heaven is your native seat of blessedness:
This world here yields you sorry herbigage,
Sweat, Sorrow, sickness, Pain, all wretchedness:
Mine is that only Barge, that through Gods grace
Shall fair and well transport you to your dwelling place.
Were 't not well done to leave you here behind,
That love your exile, like your misery,
And cast your countries care all out of mind?
(But for the Sovereign Majesty's decree,
Which bids me bring your lives all to one end,
And send to Hell such as to Heaven will not wend.)
O if unwieldy Age with stealing pase
Approaching fast should cast upon your back
His heavy burden: when your riue'ld face
The former beauties painted pride should lack,
When every sense wax dull, ears deaf, eyes dim,
Taste all vnsau'ry, stark and stiff each joint and limb.
How would ye then bewail each weary day,
And wish ye rid at once out of your pain?
Why is this loathed light (Thus would ye say)
On wretched wights alas bestowed in vain?
And life on such as no life's joy can have
Which long for Death; which glad and feign would find the grave?
As when the painful labourer has spent
Some longer light of swelting Phoebus ray,
And faithfully has paid the common rent
Of sweating brow unto this earthly clay,
To win his bread: how sweet a thing is sleep,
That his forwearied limbs in dreamelesse rest does steep?
Such Sleep is Death; such Day this life of your;
The longer still more painful than at first:
All is but toil full wast of troublous hours,
Yet of declining Age the last are worst.
But how would ye complain of tedious day,
If neither Sun would go, nor sleep would come away?
Besides from these complaints, what shall I tell
That greater mischief whence I set you free?
No pain or torment were it that of Hell
Is half such ill as Sins base slavery;
Satan's by Sin. O ever wretched men,
Till from this Death, which only can Death rid you clean!
This knew right well, the pair you so lament,
With other Saints whose memories ye praise;
To whom the ioiful'st message could be sent
From heaven, was grant of what they wished always;
Soon to be loosed from these bonds of Sin,
To be with Christ; and soon eternal glory win.
But you o servile kind rest well appaid
With this your Bridewell: nor that worthy name
Ye all unworthy bear which should vpbraid
Your recreant thoughts, does ought up lift the same
To where your Savior lo aduan'ct on hie
Does glorious sit, at Gods right hand in Majesty.
There crowned with him these two and all the rest
Which while they lived prepared and wished to die,
Are now secure of all that might infest
Their blessed state; of Sin, of misery.
You wail their Death, they pity this your pain,
And would not be for all this world vndead again.
Is this enough to clear mine innocence,
And prove my good desert? or have ye ought
Which here against may make the least pretense?
Say hardly what you can. But well bethought
With Tragic terms ye cursed my cruelty
Which both at once this virtuous pair have done to die.
Thereto (said some) it was a sinful deed
So virtuous part thus ill to recompense.
But this it proves me thinks that greatest meede
It is to virtue soon to go from hence.
If God be just (as sure he is) the best
Amongst rewards he gives unto the worthiest.
Nor was that least reward, (which you complain)
To pay with Curtuous duty Natures debt:
Was never any man that could maintain
To longer term a point of virtue yet.
O goodly praise and even to be enui'd!
These virtuously did when they lived, and whiles they di'd.
And if such gain it be to leave this light,
And loss to live though you account it gain:
If fellowship in you increase delight,
In sorrow somewhat mitigate the pain:
For them it was the best (say what ye will)
To go together; whether Death be good or ill.
Besides, in truth these two by just account,
In life but one both Flesh and Spirit were:
And as in laws esteem they did amount
But to one person; so they seemed to bear
One mind. And wa'st not fit one Dust one Grave;
One Soul one Entrance into heavenly ioies should have?
Far be from Death such cruelty, to part
So one a pair? to break so even a yoke:
Here to themselves were wont to wish you dare
Might never fail to hit them at one stroke.
Go blessed Spirits yfere, which lovely late
Were in your life; nor in your death be separate.
But O base Earthwormes! whether shall I call
Boldness or madness rather this of your?
Dare you presume to emplead the Lord of all,
Or ask a reason of that Sovereign power,
Why this he does or thus? Because he will:
His pleasure 's just; and that shall be performed still.
That will of his I do but execute,
As now to take this Lady and her Knight
At once away: His pleasure absolute
Was such. O cease this vn-approached light
With feeble eyes to view; nigh not this flame
Poor flies, for fear your wings be sienged with the same.
And yet for Providence this let me say
(If that high Wisdom need defense of me)
Why should ripe corn in field for harvest stay;
Or mellow Apple hang upon the tree?
These two were ripe for heaven, or never none;
The bough but touched with gentle hand, they fell alone.
What need more words? If ought be done amiss
Blame not the servant for the Masters will:
I did mine office. If such villainies
As Murder, Theft, and Treason, I have still
Detested: If base Gain has not infect
These guilty hands: if of no crime I be detect:
O if I show you Christ in glorious throne;
With him the Court of heaven, where be my friends
The Patriarchs and Prophets every one;
Apostles, Martyrs; all which at their ends
Long wished for before fair welcomed me:
If through my means this pair with these now joined be.
O men I crave no favor; do me right:
Condemn not thus a guiltless innocent.
Or if ye think to spend your hateful'st spite
On him that you least harm yet never meant,
O let me die (lo here when all is seid
The surest proof to die not il, Death would be dead.)
I know I must. And well I am content
To leave this thanklesse office. what you men
Account worst ill, let be my punishment,
Soon let me die. Cry louder yet Amen.
But Sirs you must go first no remedy
Whilst any one of you's alive Death cannot die.
Come then: Who shall be first, which to dispatch
That Hangman Death; through his own noble heart
To stabbe the Traitor; will this dagger snatch?
Or with this halter, less to feel the smart;
Will help to hang the Fellon speedily?
Or with himself empoison him more cunningly?
Thou have deserved to die. Take here this knife:
Do some just thing alive, with edge or point.
And thou in this disgrace; what boots thee life?
From yonder Tower thou may thy neck disioynt.
Thou know not how to live: why draw'st thou breath?
Needs must thou die: choose while thou may some fairer death.
Thy dearest friend, thy love, thy life is gone:
Unfaithful, senseless block! why stai'st behind?
Thy goods be lost, why make thou bootlesse moan,
Till beggerie or famine do thee find?
O Coward! will thou take this injury
Without revenge? Or die or kill: And kill and die.
Old man, I know thou have of life thy fill,
Die. Die poor babe; thy life begins with tears.
Die wretched men, you call upon me still.
You happy; die whilst yet no ill appears.
Die all: that once the fear of Death were past:
T's but a minutes while. As good at first as last.
A REIOINDER TO Death.
O Subtle Death that would enmoue my mind
To loath this life, and from my pensive breast
Dislodge it self: The stronger law of kind
(A secret bond which can not be expressed)
Enchaines that with this body still to dwell.
I hate thee Death; suppose that why I can not tell.
Yet if from God from whom none ill may be
This life do come, 'ts good: if that be ill
Which good depriues; for all thy Sophistry
I know thee well, The work of Satan's will,
The wrack of Nature, The first borne of Sin,
Gods curse, The wretchedness we men be wrapped in.
Thou plead'st thou art an Officer. No less
Is Satan's self the cruel fiend of Hell.
Thy wicked words thy murdering mind express,
That would persuade weak men themselves to quell.
Traitor, thou give no warning, that we know:
Not thou, that none thee trust; but wisdom warns so.
A threefold thief thou are, which take away
Soul from the body, body from the soul,
Both from the world. And that which thou do say
To scuse thy coueteise, I can control
By text of holy writ: Three other more
To thee there been, whose greediness never says ho.
Art thou not partial which alike do take
Unequals all? why stays thy fatal blow
From traitorous wretches? first why do thou make
The best thy mark? God mercy would it so;
The best be fit for heaven the worst may mend.
So would his Justice all our lives came to one end.
No thank to thee. well yet thou freest our life
From many miseries. So greater ill
Secures the less: As where the Plague is rise,
It cease other sickness. will thou still
Vaunt from sins bondage how thou set'st us free?
That honor's Christ's (vain boaster) 'ts no thank to thee.
What? Do the damned Ghosts from sin surcease?
Or see they Christ? or rest in heavenly bliss?
As true it is that these which now in peace
Have left this world, which knew they should not miss
Of better-changed life were friends to thee:
O no they wished and longed for eternity.
And dare thou mention Christ with caytiue tongue
Thine enemy, thy conqueror, thy death?
Or promise Paradise? o filth and dung!
Which nigh infectest with thy noisome breath
Those heavenly ioies. So vaunted once the Fly
She raised the dust, whilst on the waine she pearch't on hie.
Thou like Death well. No wonder that at all:
Fools love themselves though riuals be away.
That passes yet, where thou do sadly call
To help dispatch thee, men themselves to slay.
Thy worth's not such. Nor we such fools to die
(O subtle folly!) soon the fear of death to fly.
I can a better way than that, I trow:
I will despise and scorn thy hurtlesse hiss,
Alas poor worm thy sting is gone I know,
Do then thy worst: Thy worst shall be my bliss
I have deserved to die; And so I shall.
I must; when God is pleased I am content withal.
Yet shall it not be vengance for my sin:
Christ is my boot that never made offense.
His death or rather life shall entrance win
For me to Heaven, when thou debarred from thence
Shall headlong into lowest Hell be cast.
Go now and vaunt to give the thing thou never have!
As to the rest; if in disgrace I be;
The more I Will scorn thee. If my state be base;
I Will live in spite of Death, more bold, more free,
Let them fear Death that stand in Fortunes grace.
Needs must I die? what skils it when or how?
One life I have, let Tyrants take of that enough.
My friends are gone. Their happiness is more.
I Will love them in their issue left alive.
O might I lead them their high steps to adore
Though far before, and to their Fame survive,
My faith should well appear though left behind:
If not; their Death with grief shall oftener come to mind.
My goods are lost. No goods; or else not mine.
I had not lost them had they been mine own:
Ill mote I thrive if for such loss I pine,
My patience left, my state's not overthrown.
If I be wronged, I Will wreake me at my will:
I Will take a noble vengeance, and do good for ill.
What say thou Death? Put on thy dreadfulst face:
And arm thy murdering hand with bloody dart.
From virtues path I will not step a pace,
(With God to friend) all should it stick my heart.
Thus lived this pair whose bodies dead here lie
Thus di'd. O Christ so let me live, so let me die.
Lo here I meek me to thy governance
Lord of my life and death; welcome thy will.
Thy sovereign wisdoms gracious purueyance
Shall be my wish, please thee to spare or spill.
If thy offense as greatest ill I fly,
That while I neither care nor fear, to live or die.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 1. lin. 2. uneath to p. 3. l. 4. bites the grave. p. 12. l. 10. defletura
p. 12. l. 17. supremos p. 13. l. 18. tantu'st p. 14. l. 11. it chorus. p. 14.
l. 18. mensis p. 15. l. 13. R. Theob. p. 16. l. 3. vndique vos p. 16. l. 4.
vndique deflent.


