THE BRVISING OF THE SERPENTS Head.

A Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross September 9. 1621.

BY ROGER LEY Master of Arts, and Minister of Gods Word in Shoreditch.

GENESIS 3.15. I will put enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy
seed and her seed: it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel.

LONDON Printed by John Dawson for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Royal Exchange. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Mr. ROBERT DVCIE Alderman of London peace and
salvation.
YOur ear has been partaker of that I now present to your eye. In all
things usually one sense makes way for the other, and the second perfecteth
the first: for hearing does render that but far off, which seeing gives
nearer hand. A speaker is then happiest in his labor, when words are permanent
and fixed. And that, either in the heart and meditation of the hearer, when the
Spirit and finger of God, by zeal and industrious labor printeth them there,
as so many engraven letters: or when to help memory, they are exposed to
public view; for sounds do pass in the air, this has the privilege of a
constant continuance. Sermons delivered in that audience, are principally for
the governors of this Honorable City. Therefore I offer it to you by
dedication, as I did before in speaking unto many. Many were absent, you a
present hearer in the time of vacation, when your place being Sheriff required
residence. Moreover, being for a time a labourer in your Parish, as smaller
rivers use not to break out into several Channels if one be preserved full: I
let this come to you among the rest, as with a greater confluence. Small I
term this gift in respect of the Author, and his sufficience. The words
eminence which may be seen in plannesse, and native simplicity; is only worth
the reckoning. God the great guide of this world has given the smallest
stars their influence. And the milky circle in Heaven (so it is called)
consists of those stars that are scarce discernable, they are not for that
excluded from the Firmament. For although the great Philosopher supposed that
circle to be lower, and out of the Heavens: yet the fictions of unskillful
antiquity made it the way to Paradise, and the caelestiall Court. My desire is,
that the word being forcible in the meanest instrument, may move in the Orb by
this public passage, to direct on earth, and yield the way to Heaven: For
this end, I hold it better to commit the prosperous success of it to him
above, that committed the deliverance to me: then to fear the uncertain
censures of a Critic. This being the intent of the Writer, I desire the
Readers true practice, and entertainment may make it good.

Your unfeigned well-willer, in all observance and due respect. ROGER LEY.

THE BRVISING OF THE Serpents Head. At Paul's Cross. September. 1621.
LVKE, 11.21. When a strong man armed keeps his palace, his goods are in
peace.

22. But when a stronger then he shall come upon him and overcome him, he
takes from him all his Armor wherein he trusted and divides his spoils.

23. He that is not with me, is against me, and he that gathers not with me,
scatters.


IT is a fault grievous and yet too common, that good things are least
esteemed: but of all errors the basest is to misconster good actions and to
deprave the shining worth of excellency. This as it is the basest, so the last
shift of men hardened against goodness, for when the desert of others seems
to touch and wound their insufficience: then they cast blemishes upon that
which was feared to lay some blots upon their unworthiness. The story of our
Savior affords us an incomparable example. He came to his own, and his own
received him not. He came not among them empty handed without favors, nor led
an unprofitable life: but all his works were witnesses of his love, and all
their wants and miseries evident declarers of an incomparable working, Having
now cast out a Devil which made the people wonder, the Pharisees swelling with
envy said he did it by the power of the chief Devil, so to disgrace the
work they could not hinder. Against these men he directs his speech, and
shows in them their intolerable blasphemy, a sin against the holy Ghost,
never to have pardon. Our present History then sets out a double conflict of
Christ the King and Savior of the world against Satan the enemy of mankind,
the Devil in the body and in the tongue: in the body of a poor man possessed,
in the tongue of the proud and rebellious Pharisees. The one was a Devil blind
and dumb, the other a seeing and a slandering adversary. Because violence does
not make an enemy so dangerous as when craft conueyeth his enterprise by some
secret undermining; the blind and dumb man soon cured where the enemy showed
himself by force, but these cauillers under whose lips lay hid the poison of
Asps, were not so soon put to silence. These Pharisees seemed holy men, they
called the chief Devil Beelzebub out of zeal and a devout pretense in
detestation of their ancestors idolatry, who worshipped Baal, and among
several kinds of that heathenish idol (which had many names according to the
places of worship) Baalzebub; whose name they now abhord. And because all
things require government, they supposed Beelzebub the chief in hell, seeing
withal so many miracles performed by Christ they said he did combine with the
chief Devil and by that power cast them out. This calumny is confuted by
sundry arguments. First, out of the seventeenth verse. Every Kingdom divided
against it self is brought to desolation, and a house divided against it self
cannot stand. If Satan also be divided against himself, and Beelzebub the
chief join with Christ against the less; how could that government in dure?

The second argument we have verse, 19. Their judgment was partial and with
respect of persons, for their children cast out Devils and had no blame. He
means the Jewish exorcists, who had a power given them from above by calling
upon Gods name to cast out these unclean spirits. It is more then probable
these Jews did cast them out by using the name of Christ which then was become
famous. S. John says to our Savior, Mark 9.38. Master we saw one casting
out Devils in thy name and he follows not us. These then escaped the Jewish
hatred, but Christ did not: therefore he infers against them, they shall be
your judges to condemn you, that malice the cause of slander, and that the
mother of falsehood have cast upon me this iniustimputation. A thir^ argument
is in these words. A strong man keeps his house and goods until a stronger
force him out and take possession in his place. I do this expelling him with
my word: therefore his power is subject unto mine, and my miracle is true; ye
ought then to embrace my saying, and to stand to my cause confirmed with such
clear testimony: or to be scattered in your fond devises, so to reap the
fruit of your own folly.

In the handling of these words I mean not to stand so much upon possession of
the body, and of Christ the deliverer: but that the subject may something suit
with the eminence of this place, and the full scope and latitude of the words:
rather show a recovering of the soul, a renewing of the world, and a subduing
of sin by the Gospel. For the consent of interpreters extend this saying to
this as the full and perfect meaning, expounding pounding it not merely of a
bodily dispossession, but of the whole proceeding of Christ in the strength of
his Kingdom. The words yield the same of necessity, (...) all his armor, the
entering his palace, and dividing his spoils, cannot limit this victory to a
bodily deliverance alone. Nos quondam arma eius regnique militiam in ^^s suum
redegit says S. Hilarie. Christ has taken us who were once the Devils armor
and force of his Kingdom, and brought us under his own power. The whole world
is the house of Beelzebub, so Erasmus. And Calvin, quicquid corporibus
praestitit Christus ad animas referri voluit, whatsoever Christ performed to
the body, he would have the same referd unto the soul. It is plainly shown
from the 24. Verse. of this Chapter following the Text immediately. He
compares the nation of the Jews to a man possessed as the Devils house. (S.
Matthew makes it more plain) Christ did drive him out and cleansed the house by
his Gospel, but because they entertained his words with scorn and neglected
him; the house was empty: then comes the unclean spirit with seven worse
then himself, who finding the house empty swept and garnished, he makes it
his habitation, and the end thereof is worse then the beginning. So dangerous a
sin is Apostasy, and so truly did he threaten that wicked generation being
rebels against the truth: for what decayed house, or miserable ruin of any
building can compare with those empty Jews, that would not acknowledge their
Lord?

And that which Esaias the Prophet spoke of the soul Cap. 53. verse 4. He took
our infirmities and bare our sicknesses, meaning sin and the maladies of the
mind: S. Matthew chap. 8. verse 17. applies to casting out of Devils and
curing of diseases. For both are the work of one Lord, for one and the same
end to make us acknowledge him the only redeemer. As the battering of the
walls of a City, is but a preparatiue to handy strokes and the overthrow of
the dwellers: so the casting out of Satan from the body the case and outside of
the soul, is a sign of saving power that cures both soul and body, and will
expel the enemy from all his usurped places. David reasoned from one good
turn to another, 1. Samuel 17.36. Thy servant slew both the Lion and the
Bear, and this uncircumcised Philistim shall be as one of them seeing he has
defied the armies of the living God. Moreover the Lord that delivered me from
the paw of the Lion and the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this
Philistim, in like manner these words of Christ take occasion from the miracle,
to express his Sovereign might in redeeming from the paw of hell and
destruction. Let us therefore take the whole world for a haunted house. We find
it so Job 1.7. I come (says he) from going to and fro in the earth, and from
walking up and down in it. The greatest strength of it his weapons and
munition, the greatest wit and policy of it, if it be foolishness with God as
the Apostle calls it, it cannot but savor of the wisdom of this Serpent. 1.
Cor. 3.
If these places be the prime of our microcosme, the head and glory of all our
Island they cannot but be assaulted. And if the cry of vices be not untrue, the
walking of some dangerous spirit may raise up our suspicion and complaint.
Whose puisance to show, whose dealing to discover, and to uncase his villainy
that lurketh in our presence; as in it self is profitable: so more auailable
when the power of heaven is shown that overthrows it. In the seeing of both
we may do as the world usually does, take part with the stronger side. To one
we mustioyne, no staying in the midst. Christ says so in the last of these
verses. He that is not with me is against me. That God is strongger: and his
quarrel safer, the beginning speaks evidently. Christ enters into the
strong man's Palace, Overcomes him, takes from him all his armor wherein he
trusted, and deuideth his spoils. I find then in this Text that which either
is expressed or employed in every Sermon, a Doctrine and a Use: the strength of
our Savior affirmed, and our obedient service enforced. In the first of these
a power of usurpation and a power of jurisdiction. In the usurped power we find
two parts: the strong man's industry. He is armed and keeps his Palace: and
his security, his goods are in peace. The lawful power has two parts: Christ's
victory: But when a stronger then he shall come upon him and overcome him: and
his gain: he takes from him all his armor wherein he trusted and deuideth
his spoils. The next Verse is a reproof of unprofitable servants which make
no use of this benefit. He opens in them two things, a base negligence, and
a vain confidence. First, the negligent stander by that is neither hot nor
cold, is cast out as distasted by his palate, he that is not with me is against
me. Secondly, his vain hope. Let him heap, and build, and frame his works
together: all is to be blown away with the breath of Gods displeasure, he
that gathers not with me scatters. Of these parts in order.

His industry, when a strong man armed keeps his Palace.

The beginning having dwelt longer upon the sense of the words to free them
from obscurity, each part may be past over with better expedition. These first
words note unto us the power of our enemy called the strong Man, and his
diligence, he is armed and keeps his Palace. Hard it is to match with one so
well provided. Our Savior speaks of him thus, Now is the Prince of this
world cast out, John 21.31. And to show, we might imagine something above the
world, and the reach of mortal powers (because the greatest Potentate is but
an arm of flesh) he is called the God of the world, 2. Cor. 4.4. In whom the
God of this world has blinded the eyes of them that believe not. He is called
the Prince of the power of the air. Ephesians. 2.2. Sunt magnapars little quae in
imperijs geruntur and fiunt says Peucer. In the business of Kingdoms they have
a hand and a great stroke. Insidiantur atrocius ijs qui ad gubernaculasedent
says the same Author: They assault them most dangerously, who sit at the
helm of government, and he adds the reason that the disease having gotten
and possessed the head, the infection might spread abroad upon the body, and
destroy all like a common pestilence. It was for some thing he fell to this
temptation in assaulting Christ whom he felt so impregnable. All these things
will I give thee, she wing him the world and glory of it. He had some show for
his promise, although his reason was unsound: saying, it is delivered unto me,
and to whomsoever I will I give it. Luke 4.6. This authority is first and
principal in the Infidels, who wanting the true guide by an inevitable fall
do light upon the false. In them he rules and leads them on to his own
ends, and these are of greatest power, and possess the chief rooms in his
house by domineering in the world. That we may not fail of the truth, have
recourse unto the fountain and beginning which usually gives the cleerest
evidence, we shall find greatness and ungodliness grow together. The first
City that was built had Cain to be the founder, called Enoch after his sons
name. From him came Lamech, Genesis 4.
and from that wicked race descended the great men of the earth. Iabal the
father of such as dwell in tents, Iubal of skillful musicians, and Tubal Cain
of artificers in brass and iron. No words of Abel but religion and slaughter
together. Of Seth and Enos coming at last in Abels room, it is reported, Genesis
4.26. Then (as if it had been long looked for before) then began men to call
upon the name of the Lord. But time the great friend and enemy to the earth,
as it brought about this good turn, did wear out that happy season. Genesis 6.1.
For when they began to multiply, the sons of God, took unto them the
daughters of men, and from so bad a copulation, we could not expect but a like
progeny: the flood swept away the generation at last, only eight were found
fit to be saved in the Arc, and one Cham in the company. After this beginning
to relate what followed, though briefly were too tedious. Let us look at our
own times, find we not the strong man armed in his Palace? How are the
spacious places and gardens of the world inhabited by them that know not the
worship of God? And in Christian Kingdoms how has idolatry prevailed, and
provoked the highest? a sin to states both dangerous and fatal: it often
overthrew the Jews, and now has so exasperated the Judge of the earth, that
Turkish cruelty has cut of the goodliest branches of this Vine, and that City
which the Tartarian conqueror judged fit to command the world, is become the
chief seat of this Mahometant tyrant. Room the other eye of Europe helps
him forward by hindering a reformation, to this effect the Dragon and the Beast
join together their forces. Let none think this imputation is iniust, time
and evil custom make way to a destroyer by soiling religion with superstition
and idolatry. The spirit of God speaks so much almost in plain terms,
Revel. 9.20. When the Angels were loosed from the river Euphrates, to bring so
many millions to kill the third part of men; yet the rest of men repented not
of the works of their hands, that they should not worship Devils, and idols of
gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and wood, which neither can see, nor
hear, nor walk. Who has come from the river Euphrates, and slain so many
but the Turk? bringing so many millions to destroy. Of whom has he slain
them but of Christians? and who worship Images but the Christians? the
followers of Mahomet hate idols, and the professors of Christ are in love with
them. By the way then, see how little good Christendom can expect while
Antichrist and his Kingdom stand. In the mean time see the strong man armed
keeping his Palace, the two imperial Cities, one rent from the Christians,
the other renting in pieces the truth of Christianity. Romulus built it at
first in blood, and that in the blood of a brother, since having got an Empire
by the every and oppression, now supports it self the same way, as if it
would ratify that maxim in Philosophy: We are nourished by those means from
whence we arise and spring up. For now a Monarchy over the conscience, a new
privilege is that they challenge, cruelty to uphold it, and commodity gleaned
in devotion to uphold themselves: these are the chief Pillars to maintain
their state. When Christ came in person to bind this strong man, the Romans had
Jury under their dominion, Herod an Idumean was their King, religion was
corrupted with traditions, the sects of Saducees and Pharisees made a division
within: and therefore their outward misery was the greater. And at our
Saviors second coming, this is his own prediction, The Son of man shall
not find faith upon the earth, so mightily does this strong man enlarge his
territories. Come unto Gods own house his Church, where religion is truly
professed, where God has his Church, he will have his Chapel, having most
cause to be stir himself least he be a looser, thither he conuerts his
greatest forces to work in all sorts and by all devises. And that two ways,
either to quench the least sparks that are to advance the truth, or to deprave
and corrupt it by turning matters the wrong way, and mixing evil with the
good. Sometimes he is a solicitor to set forwards his own business in
consultations. Many times he helps the Judge in giving sentence. He can do as
with Achabs Prophets enter and seduce in the place of sanctity. He aduanceth
many men into offices, and specially where money makes the way, for those are
his usual stairs. When he has set them up they must honor their Patron and
benefactor, and he a little direct them in execution. And that no place may
want him, in the good actions of many, he foisteth some lamenesse, and
cloggeth the endeauours of honest men.

This strong man is not armed alone, but skill can do equal mischief, 2.
Cor. 11.14. Satan is transformed into an Angel of light. Not in shape, for the
Angels have no countenance, or visible form; but as Zanchie says, he
counterfeiteth holiness, that his counsels may be heard. Like a corrupt
Tradesman, he can sophisticate his unprofitable commodity, and color his
harms with gilded pretenses. In the Church he can sow faction under pretense
of zeal, and cherish curiosity under tenderness of conscience. In the common
affairs of this life, he can make bribery walk under the name of thankfulness,
and gratuitie: oppression under thrift, pride under commendable fashion and
ciuility. These tricks make him dance in a net, gulling the world as it were
in laughter, and by his policies he will prevail. The reason is if vice were
seen in his own apparel, it would scare the beholder with a fearful and
ugly visage, therefore he does furnish it up with the choicest ornaments, and
paints over the deformities with better shows, to make it pass for
commendable. What thing is so bad or base, but one cassiering modesty, and an
honest mind, will by wit and worldly reasons justify and make good. So when
the heart is set upon pleasure, and the desire begins to burn after some
particular gain: politic resolution persuades either it may be just, or not
so bad as some think, either a tolerable or a necessary evil. Hereupon it
follows that among Christians, some for their profit and content will defend
those faults, which the wiser Heathen have detested in their writings. As he
could not have dealt with Saul that came to him in his troubles, but in the
shape of Samuel, 1. Sam 28.13.
the witch said gods are come out of the earth: so could he not have the
applause of the simple world, but by an earthly divinity, when new found
reasons, and crafty proiects turn matters into another mould, and rob the
great thief, even sin of his own appearance. Neither could we have among us
so much professing, and little good dealing, except there were this mystery of
hypocrisy. Here then wefeele him, here we have just cause to fear him;
demon meridianus this Devil at noone day is most dangerous: As at first in
Paradise and under the Serpent he got the day, so does he in the Church of
God, and by his subtilty. S. Bern. super cantica. Ser. 33
Bernard complaind in his times that the Church of God had three adversaries,
then did the night of Popery draw on far, brought in by the last of the
three. The first was the fear of the night, when tyrants did persecute the
Martyrs in the primitive Church. The second was the arrow that flies by day,
the fond opinions of heresy, flying by the invention of the supporters upon
the feathers of vain glory. But (says he) the patience of the Saints overcame
the first, and the wisdom of the learned destroyed the second. The third was
the pestilence in the darkness the sin of hypocrisy and false appearance
that nothing could with stand: they name Christ and serve Antichrist, they
profess God and deny him also. Therefore he takes up the complaint of
Hezekia, Behold in peace bitterness bitterness: the Church was then worst of all.
Amara prius in caede martyrum, amarior post in conflictu haeretieorum,
amariffima nunc in moribus domesticorum. Bitterness at first in the death of
Martyrs, bitterness in corrupted manners. May not reformation renew a complaint,
and say the world is always like it self. As the hottest weather does soonest
putrify: so abundance of peace and many blessings; have not these made the
rottenes come nearer to the heart? Let a general discourse which cannot
tarry, point at the tops of a few ill fruits and easiest discerned. Our women
turned into the shapes of men, our men and especially they of the gallants rank
grown effeminate. Drunkenesse so great that to cast out this Devil were a
miracle indeed, to bring in request again the moderate and temperate living
of ancient times. And that every age may bring up some new monster, fumum
vendunt and fumo pereunt, the selling of fume, immoderate smooking wastes both
the body and the purse; a mischief unheard of in former ages befitting no
season but this of the doting and declining world. Garments the memorials of
sin should teach us our losses and our sorrow, when Adam had forsaken God and
his innocence forsaken him, shame and necessity procured a covering for his
nakedness. But now they are not so much remembrancers of the old; Cyp. de
disciplina and habitu. Varg.
as actors of new sins; and plain representations of each idle fancy: S.
Cyprian complained in his time, that when God had said thou can not make one
hair white or black, the women did confute the Scripture, and turned their
hair to yellow; the color he did mislike as too ominous of hell fire; malo
praesagio futurorumcapillos iam tibi flammeos auspicaris, with an ill presage
of what was to follow they flamed already. Now this color is fallen about the
neck and other places, that poor whitenes the token of innocence and
sincerity wears out of request. But these follies may plead custom, and it
seem a vain thing to contradict them. This superficial badnes being so
confirmed, and like to hold his own, cannot but suppose a worse whereon it
builds. Where the face of corruption appears outwardly any way; it shows
the inward parts to be worse deformed: Yet thus must it be where truth does
shine so clear, and men love darkness more then light: if the Church yield
not good fruit, it must needs ouerflow with weeds, knowledge does make it rank
and proud. And when the beams of supernatural direction fall down in so
powerful a manner, yet obstinacy beats back these gracious offers,
refusing the influence, strange and unnatural effects must needs follow. For
as the carcass of a man is more noisome then the putrefaction of fruits and
plants, because the temper excelled them in the soundness: so where much good
is, and blessedness it self turned into surfeit, those declinations are most
pernicious.

We have now seen the strong man armed keeping his Palace, within and without
the Church, his strength and policy joined together: but hitherto we have only
traced him as Prince of the Air. Now let our discourse be sub tecto, as well
as sub dio, see his mansion and enter his roof a while: that as his intents
are to bring confusion and public misery, we may now see the place of
residence whence these plots and stratagems have their hatching. Every man by
nature is the child of wrath, conceived in sin and being readiest to incline
the worst, way easily listeneth to this evil master. He insinuates himself
by sweet and pleasant beginnings, then custom gives him possession, at last
the soul and body become the house, and fall subject to his government.
Witchcraft does sometimes manifest his hatred to the body, when God gives him
leave to torment the outward part of the creature, in heavenly mercy giving
warning to every spectator, what it is to be under this hellish tyranny. Such
accidens come among us for this end to draw up the minds loaded with earthly
cares to these considerations. These instances as strange things have been
played, and made matters of pastime, but may serve for edification. For thereby
we learn the truth of eternal life. If a bad spirit come and offer his
service to torment, we conclude there is a good spirit to save, that spiritual
powers do govern these earthly affairs, and a Divine power commands all.
We learn the love of God that fuffereth him not to hurt all as well as some
few: the truth of religion which his slaves do first renounce, and then he
marks them for his own; first they deny Baptism, then his own Sacraments
succeed to make them fast. And why does he not sease upon every adulterous
body? the reason is God holds him in. Or that he snatcheth not away the souls
of such as imagine mischief, the cause is Gods mercy who suspendeth execution,
not suffering to proceed according to desert, 2. Pet. 3.9.
as S. Peter shows, the Lord is not slack concerning his promise as some
think, But is long suffering toward us not willing any should perish, but
that all should come to repentance. These trialls may come upon the good
because in them some parcel of sin remains, Jobs body was not exempted
from this tormentor, but let wicked men be persuaded, he rules them and their
affairs; perhaps they prosper and therefore believe it not: it is a cold
comfort when he uses them for himself, and delights in their prosperity. In
the mind he can darken the motions of understanding, dazzle and possess the
fancy, hinder the outward senses and delude them, he can stir up the
appetite, and inflame the desires of them he tempts, and suppress them
again as he thinks good. De operib. Dei part. 1. lib. 4. cap. 11.
Only as Zanchy says (who shows all these at large) he cannot remove or
turn the will, God has given a man his resolution free, Because it is the
hinge that moves all about, and the wheel by which the actions are turned: he
may tempt and persuade he cannot command; in the midst of violent assaults,
God has left a man so much liberty.

I will end this point with a reason why the Lord does grant him this strength.
The woeful cause is the sin of man. He tempted Eve in the shape of a Serpent
by outward invasion, and uttered his meaning to Christ in that temptation by
outward dealing. For they were innocent and free from sin, he could take no
footing in the inward affections: but now an evil heart gives him an easy
passage to enter and come in, thereupon he is more powerful and irresistable.
As original sin does give him entrance, evil practice does further his
dominion. The breaking of Gods commandment is the cause, that the rejecting of
one ruler leading to peace and blessedness; causes subjection to the slavish
labor of so vile a commander. For this is Gods order, first to give a Law, and
afterward to turn over him that stubburnly offends to this his executioner.
S. Paul shows this was the reason the Infidels did fall so fearfully, Romans
1.21.
Because when they knew God they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, their foolish heart was
darkened. Therefore God gave them over to a reprobate mind, and to do things
not convenient as the Apostle rehearses. The light of nature taught them
better things then their lives did express. Which knowledge is so great, that
by it way may be made for Divine instruction. Lactantius is bold to affirm so
much of the knowledge of Infidels. L. diu. inst. cap. 5
Quod si vel Orpheus vel hi nostri quae natura ducente senserunt in perpetuum
defendissent, eandem quam nos sequimur doctrinam comprehensa veritate
tenuissent. If Orpheus and such like had constantly maintaind those things
which nature taught them, they would at last have come to the Doctrine which we
do follow. This is the reason, why the power of spiritual tyranny is so
great among the Heathen, because they transgress the rules of nature and their
conscience. Now wherefore he should scourge the Church, and prevail so much,
there cannot but be greater reason. For where a full hand powers out benefits
in abundance, and gross unthankfulness returns back to heaven from whence
they flow: God may then complain as he did with Esaias, Esaias 1.2.
I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me.
And except it were for the chosens sake, for Gods glory, and his service which
must have an abiding place, how could a Church polluted with impiety expect any
mercy or continuance? Besides, the devils rage does glorify God the more by
exercising the faithful, who against the stream of sin, keep an even
course, and a steadfast profession.

This for the reason of his progress and strength. In this Doctrine observe
yet a limitation: These spiritual powers are not such absolute Lords to do
what they list among any, no not among Infidels, though they be powers of
darkness: but only so far as God sees fit in just judgment to execute his
just wrath. God turned the hearts of the Egyptians to his people, to hasten
them out of the land, and furnished them with jewels for their journey. Christ
was at that Counsel which gave sentence for his own death, or else it could
not have gone forwards. Well may Hosius allege even that for the defense of
Counsels, that the judgment of the Church is not destitute of the holy Spirit.
For Caiphas the high Priest (or Pope of the Jews if we may so call him, John
11.50.
spoke by inspiration. It is necessary that one die for the people, and that
the whole Nationperish not. Therefore let us conceive his dominion very large
and eminent, (...) as the Text names it, a Hall or a Palace, as if a Cottage or
mean dwellings did not contain him: his working is by permission, he is set
on as a mastife, and pulled off again by Gods appointment and pleasure.
Otherwise his own habitation is the the deep, as appears, Luke 8.31. When
the Legion was cast out of the man, they made supplication to Christ not to
send them into the deep, but give them more employment by allowing their
entrance into the the heard of swine. It is then evident hell is his dwelling,
except God employ and suffer him. So in the midst of his working a hand above
restrains him from prosecuting his malice with extreamities, this is the
worlds comfort, his intents are limited. And so much of the strong man's
industry, He is armed and keapeth his Palace, the next part follows, His
goods are in Peace, which is his security.

I gather two observations from these words. First, none can deliver himself
from spiritual bondage, (...) his goods are in peace. When wickedness has got
the upper hand, and temptation borne the sway: vice grows into a habit, and
custom is a second nature. Hardly can one master it upon even ground, but when
these bonds do fetter a wicked person, and disarme him of his own right: he
does live at another beck, and how can he then make head again to purpose,
or recover himself by strong resistance? The goods cannot shake of the
possessor, nor the house expel the master, such are offenders in continuing
evil: led as slaves, and dragd along as sheep unto the slaughter, fallen into
a pit whence they cannot come out, or quit themselves again. Which should
teach every one not to yield at first, least giving the raines to his managing,
their falls grow fearful, and their dangers almost desperate: yet for them
thus hardened in vice, because Divinity gives a salve for every sore they must
endeavor and distrust their own power. Now wrestling is able to shake off his
yoke, but in using the means which God has appointed, whereby they deny
themselves: and adding to their labor constant prayer and invocation: they
take upon them an easy yoke and a light burden of their Savior the stronger
man. Repentance undoes the knot which tied the soul in this captivity: prayer
renounceth all power in him that prays, even as among men he that asks
help of another, and makes daily supplication, does show how little his own
ability can perform, and how ill the matter goes with him. Thus sorrow for
sin, repentance, prayer, and steadfast endeavor joined: may work a cure
under God, and that be done under the sasegard of the Almighty, that none of
himself can compass Prayer and fasting was able to expel the devil which
the Disciples could not cast out. Let this consideration correct their
mistaking, who hope to conquer and shake of their sins, not using religious
means and exercises. No hope to prevail in such combats without a full
repentance, with an absolute resignation of the soul into the Saviors hand.
See here the power of a poor captive in himself, fastened in the nets of his
own weauing, entangled in the labarinth of his folly, no way to save himself.

His goods are in Peace.

Secondly, the words yield us this Doctrine. Satan fights not against
himself to disadvantage or disgrace his government, but keeps close
together, and tieth his instruments in a strong confederacy that their uniting
may make him more invincible. The words import so much. His goods are in Peace.
Sometimes it must needs be otherwise with Christ and his Gospel, for when
ungodliness does glue and cling together, either among his own or others; he
comes often with stir and division, and renteth all in pieces for a time.
Here then we find the case variable, sometimes wickedness finds great
disagreement, as experience teaches; sometimes great league and fellowship, as
both experience and this Text do manifest; so it is in the government of
Christ, sometimes division and stir, sometimes peace and union: we may use
Solomon's saying in this cause; Eccles. 9.2.
All things come alike to all. Therefore in such variety of times and
accidents, it is an uncertain and groundless affirmation to make peace an
infallible sign of the Church. The Papists say and in some sort truly, John
10.16.
we are all called members of one body under one head Christ, Romans 12. And by
our Savior, One Shepherd, and one sheepfold, therefore diversity of opinion
does argue a false profession. True indeed in the true members of Christ's
elected congregation, but in the outward fellowship and face of an visible
multitude not ever true, where many are among us that are not of us the Apostle
says. In that one sheepfold where Christ was Shepherd, was not one Judas
found who had war and treason in his heart and turned against his Master? yet
could the chief Priests, and Pharisees, and Pylate agree well enough in
murdering him without traitors among themselves. Outward peace to keep
conformity with others is not in the power of any, but this approaches nearest
to the truth, the true members of Christ are peacable, and full of charity,
and being linked under one head by faith do accord among themselves: but God
sets near them enemies that love not peace even of their own, to be as
thorns in their sides, and to raise them from temporal security. Harding
complains that before Luther came, the people were vnanimes in dome of one
mind in the house, but since how many divisions have happened? Concerning
their spiritual consent in superstition I will use the phrase of the Text, The
strong man armed kept his Palace and his goods were in peace. Sarcerius an
expositor makes it a particular instance, Qualia tempora fuerunt sub Papatu,
Of this sort were the Popish times. May we speak of outward peace and
temporal, and not find these accusers faulty? Christianity will have this
peace kept with Alients, as an argument of the mind bent to unity; that we
may be merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful and kind to all: that the
glory of a quiet and peacable mind may shine forth to confound the censures of
each ill willervnto Sion. If by this kind of coniecturing, or rather
demonstration; an equal judge may give sentence: see whose fingers have been
oftnest in treasons; whose practices have been massacres; who they are that
stir every cole to fire the states of the world and to raise combustion. This
kind of peace as it has been hardly seen toward us, but when necessity made
them quiet, and God by providence tied their hands and confounded their
devises, so has it been a stranger among them that talk of peace. To revive
their unquietness by relation, or show their dissentions out of stories would
sooner want time then matter. Or to observe distractions in the head, the
choosing of one Pope against another, and the Church at the same time under
more heads then one. Whatsoever the sheep were surely then there was not one
shepherd. The bones they have cast among Princes that out of their dissentions
they might bring their own ends about, cannot be unknown to him that knows
any thing. From whence we justly may collect, the head set up for unity did
plot disagreement, he was not here what he did profess, neither led the
members by a Christian-like direction. If to set iarres and prey upon the
flock be no good sign of a true shepherd, this note of unity is a poor
signification for them. Bell. prefat. in lib. de Summo Pontifice.
Bellarmine does plainly confess that this state has been so shaken with
enemies, and bad lives of the Popes, as also with grievous Schism: that for
the glory of it, it stands not by it self, but strangely supported by divine
preservation manifested in their infirmity. Indeed it often happens by a
Syncretismus as the ancients called it, that in bred hatred and dissension
wears out by an enemy abroad, so policy (which the children of this world
have) makes states and humors otherwise differing among them to accord: lest
their walls which began to shake should fall down quite, if they kept not
close together. To this cause they have a second help, to mussle men's mouths,
and fetter their consciences, that in some places none may dispute; the
Scripture which perhaps would raise stir enough may not be read; they will
keep peace though by taking away Gods weapon. A guilty conscience is betrayed
in this, when all adventures of trial in these conflicts are so debard: and
like it is if they had given so much liberty to their own, as we have given
both them and ours: their remainder had been grievously impouerished, and
brought to a smaller quantity by this time. As for our writings that turn the
word of God speaking more generally into particular application, they are
afraid at their looks, neither can endure they should come to a public
view. Then which argument fetchd from their depth of their misdoubting
conscience, no testimony against them can be greater. Their fears are more
then Panike, moved by great occasion, Gods word directed aright, is like the
fiery tongues wherein the holy Ghost did sit upon the Apostles, which tongues
were divided: being a fire to burn up the hay and stubble of false tradition,
and like enough to make a division, whereof they complain so grievously. The
spirit in them comes like that mighty wind which filled the house wherein the
assembly was gathered: But as antiquity fained of Aeolus, he kept the winds
under huge Mountains least all should be ouerturned. And the great commander
of heaven and earth deputed an inferior Lord to rule them.

-- Regemque dedit qui saedere cert^,
Et premere, and laxas sciret dare iussus habenas.
That King was appointed to stint their unruliness: so is the divine word by a
counterfeit show of a divine authority to be kept under: and he below to play
fast and loose, expounding all after his own law and counsel. Thus the candle
being put under a bushel (as a dark night sometimes preuents a skirmish) may
keep men from quarelsome protestations. Upon these terms their peace
stands, and they are forced to hold with both hands least it ouergoe them
Zanchie relates a decree made in Italy, Tom. 8. de scriptura. Comment. in cap.
1. ad Titum.
the Scripture is permitted to be read of the better sort, only with condition
that they expound nothing but with the Church of Rome. Claudius Espenceus one
of their own, reports that an Italian Bishop told him, that learned men in
Italy were afraid to study the Scriptures, least by them they might be drawn
into heresy: and they rather employed their time upon the Popes law books and
the decretals. A franciscan Friar plainly said the Council of Trent, the
Lutherans did prevail upon none so much as them which were exercised in the
Scripture. To show what tyranny keeps their affairs in peace observe one
proof insted of many. Zanchie relates it in his book de Ecclesia, One of the
Regular Canons wrote a book, in which he proves the Pope may be called into
question, and censured by the Church, the reason is because he is our brother,
and Christ says, If thy brother offend thee tell the Church. That he is our
brother he proves, for in saying the Lords prayer he calls God father: if
then all be children in respect of God they must be brethren among themselves.
The book for this fault was called in, an excommunication was sent out, and the
Author had a check: yet was the argument so strong, that none could answer
it so well as one Courtier, who wished his holiness never to say our Father, so
by not acknowledging a superior with that Title he might put his greatness out
of question. So strange a slavery is produced by this usurped power, that an
eminence and prorogatiue must be claimed above the nature of man, and the
quality of a sinful creature, and a point of belief and conscience made not
to move in it any question. By ignorance then is the peace grounded and
maintaind by tyranny, not easy to be discernd whether more barbarous or
ridiculous. Well wereit if we could learn wit by their example, that every
ignorant invention did not forge out a new conceit against the present times.
Or that some crasie and misalledging brains, soothed up by an in bred
curiosity, did not so much slight antiquity and authority, as not care what
is generally established, and has been used many ages in the Church: even in
the purer time before corruption. For upon any dissension, thoughts in a
ceremony or small ordinance, we know what complaint the adversary raises.
Moreover a small controversy in a branch, depends upon a root, and adhereth
to some question of great moment, the same principles in disputation against an
indifferent ceremony if they should take place: will overthrow whole frames of
government. But to come to the last blow with our adversaries. Let truth be
wayed in an even balance, though quarrelers see not their own blemishes so
directly as they espy another, peace is no such universal blessing among
them. All of them or at least the more sober sort allow not the Jesuits
practices and positions. In free will and predestination the Dominicans and the
Jesuits consent not, nor the Dominicans and Franciscans about the original
sin of the Virgin Mary: to omit the scruples of Thomas and Scotus with their
followers in more subtle matters. That of the Virgin Mary's freedom from
original sin, was so hotly defended by both parties, that the Council of
Trent durst not decide it for fear of a Schism. Where knowledge does abound,
and men have liberty to speak, the corruption of many will abuse it. Nec per
se mala est eruditio, sed plerumque gignit factiones and dissidia says
Erasmus: learning is not evil in it self, but for the most part it
ingendereth factions and division. If knowledge then have a freer passage for
all sorts among us, their peace has some advantage. Besides when a reformation
is published, all cannot have one consent in clearing things of moment, hid
before and now come to more open light. And if among so many that embrace the
reformed religion, good and bad, wise and foolish, sober and curious had all
consented; it had been a sign of false Doctrine rather then true: for tares
spring up with wheat, and God joins some corrections with his blessings,
weeds may grow alone sometimes, and here our Savior speaks of the devil,
and makes it one part of his strength, His goods are in peace. But see the
face of former times, did not some say at first I am of Paul's, I am of Apollos,
and others of Cephas: a new Doctrine came up, and ignorant people could not
keep a sober course in entertaining it. As for the grossest deuisers among us,
they are partly scattered and suppressed, but if we speak of settled Churches,
see worse then we have had. The Corinthians doubted of the resurrection. The
Galathians called for the ceremonies of the law so stiffly, that S. Paul feared
his labor had been lost. This one opinion of retaining ceremonies is called
by Musculus perpetuum certamen an everlasting contention of those times: And
the Apostles were enforced to call a general Council at Jerusalem to take it
up, and yielding to some infirmities for a time forbade eating of blood a thing
in it self indifferent. Reu. 2.6.
Then came in Simon with his devises, and the sect of the Nicolaitans which God
hated. Ebion and Cerinthus denying the eternal Godhead of Christ are supposed
to have given occasion to S. John to write his Gospel. All this while we find
not among the Heathen any notorious breaches about the principles of their
idolatry. After this when Constantine had given peace to the Church, and men
might use more liberty: the Arrians their successors ouerflowed in such a
number, that it was said of Athanasius, their strong opposer and a great
defender of the truth. He against all the world, and all the world against him.
This is the decree of God, and therefore his great wisdom, that by bandying
the truth to and fro the substance of it might be gotten out at last, and
others raised by the adversary from sloth to search it, to make it shine more
clearly as gold in the furnace, and praise him that keeps it safe in so many
hasards. And if we will make the best of a bad matter, we may say and not
altogether untruly, we are beholden to Heretics for a great part of the
truth: for they have stird up the pens of the learned, and occasioned the holy
decrees of faithful and religious Councels. To conclude this point. Arguments
from peace and consent, are no certain or demonstratiue proof either of a
good or a bad cause: Peace among Saints under Christ as we consider it in the
mind, is a spiritual virtue: as we consider it a beautiful ornament, or
sweet harmony, when multitudes are coupled in a bond of happy society, it is a
temporal blessing, for spiritual things are in the mind. Matters of this
quality do ebb and flow, sometimes given, and sometimes taken away from the
Church. When Gods heritage transgresses, breaches are often made, and his own
scourged most severely. David a man nearest him is extremely threatened after
his offense, The sword shall never depart from thy house: 2. Sam. 12.10.
although he was so just and penitent, with his reign so happy and
flourishing. Every Church has in it both good and bad, therefore no peace can
continue long without some impediment. Our Savior says, I came not to send
peace into the world but a sword, this was the reason, some would embrace him
and others refuse: so father would be against son, and son against father,
and a man's enemies would be they of his own household. S. Paul likewise
affirms, 1. Cor. 11.19.
There must be heresies among you that they which are approved may be made
manifest. the light and fantastical head to vain devises fit for him, and the
just against him to manifest himself, and express his gifts in maintaining
the perfect truth. The devil as he uses does imitate God in part, though in
another intent, sometime he sets dissension among his own, yet warreth not
against himself, though his be divided, he is not. For this is the difference
between his possession and others, he keeps his palace not to defend but to
destroy it, and if dissension fit his purpose, he can scourge his own with
this rod, to please himself in their torment. But when occasion requires
unity, he will not divide against himself, but keeps this forces whole to
do greater mischief, as Herod and Pylate enemies before were reconciled at
the death of Christ: and brethren in evil communicate their counsels. This
makes him stronger, and keeps his palace in greater security, because His
goods are in peace. Hitherto of the usurped power.

The second part follows; the lawful power, first the victory, When a
stronger then be shall come upon him and overcome him. The particle but notes
a coherence, we must look for some thing besides the words. Consider it then
as the branch of an argument. He is the stronger that over comes, but plain
it is he yields to my command: therefore ascribe strength unto me. The
Papists use this argument to confirm their exercising and adiuring the devil,
and from the fuccesse of their words strive to justify a counterfeit miracle,
because sometime he goes back, and seems to yield to their holy water, and
the sign of the Cross. We answer the devil does delude them, that by
leaving the body he may possess the soul, and establish superstition. They
reply, and say this is the Pharisees answer, who said casting out and
dispossession was by covenant and compact: and did not approve the stronger man
by his work. But this is insufficient, for the Pharisees said Christ was not
strong enough to work these miracles of himself, but Satan was divided, and
gave him help: we call not the strength of Christ into question. As for the
adversary he dissenteth not from his own party, but seems to fly that by a
strategem he might deceive them. Secondly, Antichrist does work lying wonders,
the Scripture does prophecy as much, but no lying wonder can be without show of
a true and mighty operation: therefore they must work miracles with some
notable point of dissembling. Christ had power to cure diseases as well as to
dispossess unclean spirits, his miracles were beyond all exception: one did
help to confirm another, and both joined to confirm his Doctrine. Herein
they fail: They cannot do as Christ did, heal diseases: therefore their
halting betraies their lamenesse, and we may suspect their dealings are
unsound. Thirdly, some of their miracles are forged, all the world knows it
well: if then the viewing of them may help our iudgementin esteeming these,
they come both from one Fountain, for truth and false-hoode have no
fellowship. To dissemble and give out is great policy sometimes, and we know
they deal with a great politician, who may not refuse to loose a little for
the gaining of more: as in Magic he is content to subject himself, as if
words could command him, which cannot be done indeed: but this counterfeit
service makes him a master, and the commander that calls him the greater
slave. In the primitive Church when miracles did last, this exorcising had a
divine power, for which there was great reason, seeing in so dangerous a time
the Infidels did worship these powers of darkness. Christ gave his followers a
gift to show the truth and strength of his profession, for to encourage his
own, and convert the obstinate minds of others. Lactantius speaks of the
efficacy thereof in this manner. 2. Diu. inftit. 16.
Cuius nomine adiurati corporibus excedunt, quorum verbis tanquam flagris
verberati: non modo daemonas se esse confitentur, sed etiam nomina sua edunt.
Being adjured by the name of Christ they go out of bodies, by words as whips
they are beaten and tormented, and do not only confess they ate devils, but
tell their names. Likewise Cyprian in his book to Demetrianus, the Christians
great enemy, tells him what kind of Gods he worshipped. O si audire eos
velles, etc. O that thou would hear them, when they are adjured by our
spiritual stripes, and our tormenting words, are cast out of possessed bodies,
feeling the power of God, and confessing the judgment to come. These were
testimonies of Christ the stronger man, having all power in Heaven and Earth
subject to his word. Some suppose that as a testimony of Christ's victory over
him, he cannot come to Heaven as he did before the incarnation. In the old
testament when the Angels came before the Lord, a spirit came to offer his
service to seduce King Achab: 1. Kings 22.21.
and make him fall before his enemies in the battle. And when the children of
God stood before his presence, Satan was among them, Job. 1. But they suppose
he cannot come thither any more since Christ ascended vpin person, and to that
purpose allege the place, Luke 19.18. I saw Satan as lightening fall from
heaven, and Reu. 12.9. Michael expeld the Dragon from thence with his Angels,
their place was no more found in heaven, the old Serpent that deceives the
world was cast out into the earth, and his Angels with him: and therefore S.
Paul calls him Prince of the power of the Air, because his ruling is
confined within that space, he can go no higher. These are a vouched with
great probability. But sure it is, Christ shook his Kingdom in the earth,
being borne and sent into the world to destroy his works: that the people
which sat in darkness before might see great light, and they be delivered
which sat in the region and shadow of death. As light which shines from
heaven is diffused (nothing in nature having a power to spread it self more
suddenly) illustrating the whole Hemisphere or half at once: so did this Son
of righteousness, as was said, Psalm. 19. Nothing was hid from the heat
thereof: but beyond the regions of Jury, his Apostles carried it far and wide
into many Nations. This was the stronger hand of this Conqueror, that by a
people scorned as for superstition by others, and then torn by the Romans,
being the weaker side: he gave laws unto the mighty, and cast him out of the
world then strongly possessed, and kept as his own house in sin and ignorance.
The Oracles were put down after his incarnation, where the devil had long
time given advise and answers. Augustus Caesar inquiring at Delphes who should
succeed him in the Empire, had this for an answer. Peucerus de Oraculis, page
251.
(...). etc.

An Hebrew child, King of the Gods, has commanded me to leave this house and
return to hell: therefore henceforth forsake our Altars. And he is bound for
a thousand years, Revel. 20. Which we may take from the rising of Constantine
until the reign of Otoman, or howsoever; in that space Christ did greatly
confound his Kingdom, and set up his own: The success we have seen, our
Saviors victory, to open it more fully, note the person called the stronger
Man, and the means used to subdue him.

Christ is God, equal with the Father, his strength is in the World, and
beyond, it every way infinite. God is Almighty, this attribute is prefixed
before other Articles in the beginning of the Creed, for in who^ will any
believe but one able and potent, least his confidence deceive him. Might then
makes way to all belief, and belief to all performances, for Faith
overcomes the world says S. John. He is called the Lord of Hosts, 1. John
5.4.
all power being his army. Let men muster, plot, and labor never so much: this
power commands them and theirs, the strength of this huge World is to him but
as an arrow in the hand of a Giant, aimed and shot forth by his own direction.
The spiritual powers are to minister and serve in their stations, ready to
attend and execute his precepts. And if one Angel made such a slaughter in
Senacheribs army in one night, what was the power of him that sent him. Divine
strength as it animateth faith, so is it the ground of all religion. Men are
made to reverence it, and the end of all actions is to acknowledge: and nothing
is more distasted by the Almighty God, then to see arrogant presumption, or
negligent observance admire strength any other way. Weak creatures live by it,
and the name of a creature has it engraven as the proper stamp. To use the
Prophets words, shall the strong man glory in his strength? or the wise man in
his wisdom? or the rich man in his wealth? or any man in any thing, seeing the
earth is weak and the inhabitants therein, he bears up the Pillars of it.
Is any good expected? Hope for it hence. Is any enjoyed? Give glory to the
founder, all is received from this fulness. Psalm 68. ver. 34. Ascribe ye
strength unto God, his excellency is over Issrael, and his strength is the
Clouds.

Every good thing is but a gift, and giving can only make it prosper: greatest
hopes do sometimes break in the midst, because the receivers of fruit
respect not the Tree whence they fall. They look at their own beginnings, and
at their own ends, and their courses in the proceeding attend their own
desires. And though this strength might say unto the fool deal not so madly,
and to the ungodly set not up your horn: though promotion come neither from
the East, nor the West, nor from the South: a dull desire cannot look so high
as heaven, neither acknowledges any ruler but one who leads by common sense.
He will sleep at a Sermon, that can wake at the discourse of a commodity: or
a mishap can keep from sleeping. And slight the strict advise of Scripture;
when the words of a great man in politic respect make him double diligent.
Generally inbusinesse of moment (though living being and moving be from God)
who will not more cheerfully rely upon friends and strong helpers, then on
Gods furtherance and promised assistance? By this strength unlikely matters
have come to pass most usually, great imaginations have been dissolved with a
blast, dying hopes have been revived from the grave: all which proclaim an
unconquered and inscrutable power of the Lord in working; not acknowledged by
rash censurers, but easily discerned by the judgment of truth. Even when
ungodliness is grownelofty, it either falls of it self, or by the push of a
like adversary is cast under foot; all strength we see wearing out, and this
force of Divine power breaking down the gate that will not open, that
howsoever the beginnings go, at last the stronger man will overcome. From
hence let every prosuming enemy be danted, though fortified in his wickedness.
Let every wearied servant be encouraged, to pass even through the valley of
the shadow of death and fear no evil. Job had complained, and his
uncomfortable friends made him sometimes bitter, at last the Lord did challenge
him to answer, and called him hither. Job 38.4.
Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the Earth, when I shut up the
Sea with doors. Have thou commanded the morning since thy days, and caused
the day spring to know his place? Nabuchodonosor, in the height of his
arrogance boasted of his great Palace, and building: but for his labor had an
ill reward, he was made fellow with the beasts of the field, Dan. 4.25.
Till he knew the most High ruled in the Kingdom of men, and gave it to whom
he would. S. Peter seeing Christ under the burden of our sins, laying a side
his honor, and ready to be apprehended, went out of the way to help him, and
wounded one of the high Priests servants. This persuasion called him into a
right frame. Think thou that I cannot pray to my Father, Matthew. 26.58.
and he shall presently give me more then twelve legions of Angels. This one
groundwork of true obedience made Job know his vileness, the lofty tyrant his
weakness, the zealous Disciple his due compass: as general patterns unto all,
to limite their extrauagant humors, and always ^are to keep within their
bounds. That neither the complaint of natures weakness should urge distrust in
necessity; nor presumption swell in windy shows, nor busy attempting meddle
beyond the rule of Gods direction. Weak is that strength which his arm does
not support, and strong are those endeauours he blesses, though full of
weakness.

We have seen the stronger man, able to overcome by power and greatness: now
see the way of conquering, and the strength destroyed that lay against him. All
know his force is infinite, but by what conueiance this virtue is expressed, and
frames the Creature, is wonderful: who can trace the footsteps? Semper agens
and semper quietus, as Austen speaks, always working, and always quiet. He
works without change, without labor or any difficulty. To speak the nearest
to truth is to speak the greatest, his will is his work, his word his law, he
commanded and they were created. Among men words being of small worth are said
to be but wind, their labors must toil a little in effecting things of
moment: but God decrees, and the Scripture reduces all to his word, which
executes his sentence: By this effectual means all are brought about, and
that by a double word, to which hell and Satan and all his enemies yield. The
word whose sound we hear to teach us, and his word of providence whereby he
sustaineth us, whereof the enemy makes confession Matthew. 4.4. Man shall not
live by bread alone but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.
The first rules within, the second without: and one goes along with the other
to judge and correct the Worlds courses.

The first comes and overcomes, It is the power of God to salvation, Romans
1.16. If that power excels all which goes beyond all, nothing can equal
it. It subdueth the mind, and coming into the bosom medleth with a man's
secrets, with an invisible control. It works upon tyrants themselves, and
pierces into that place where neither tyranny nor the whole earth can get an
entrance. It brings every high thought into captivity, and the proudest is
brought upon his knees in lowest submission if he once be sensible of
himself. The word of God is quick, and powerful and sharper then any two
edged sword, piercing even to the dividing assunder of the soul and spirit:
and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and intents
of the heart, Heb. 4.12. Strong in success, when God gives his commandment
upon the Earth it runs swiftly: and nothing can stop, or cast impediments
sufficient in the way. Compared for that end to leaven, hid in three measures
of meal till the whole was leauened: to mustard-seede a little grain, yet
cast into a garden grows into a great Tree, and the fowls of the Air are
lodged in the branches. Upon small and poor beginnings it has taken such
root, and fixed it self where it got possession, that no Dominion has been
larger.

It was at first, and shall be last, though people fall and Kingdoms like to
Kings have their periode. Though nations loose it, and where the day is gone
before the night may be expected: though persecution has made it almost
invisible: yet has the Sun risen again, or shined in another place, it has
been raised up against the hope of ill willers, and beyond the reach of humane
wisdom and worldly helpers. This word expels Satan, and as by saying the
word the devils obeyed and the possessed were set free: so are sinful hearts
gained out of thraldom, by him that came to preach deliverance to the
captives, and to set the bruised at liberty. But one may think where is this
power if we judge by the success, so many hearts continue flinty in their
sins, as if the spiritual weapon wanted power, or the strong man trusting in
his Armor were able to bear of the blow. Good fellowship can sometimes wash
away the strokes it gives, bad example can ouermatch it beyond comparison: and
custom can sear the conscience, that often hearing cares not if reprehension
beat again, and again upon a known fault. Besides it savors of simplicity,
teaches a man to deny himself, to take up the cross, to turn out of his
beloved way, and repent: that the Pillars of strength and policy are here
defective: and in their room all points of infirmity.

These manifold supposed wants that arise from the ill speeding, may have an
answer branching out into equal diversities: for this strength is not always
seen, nor always working. If God should let his power and judgments dwell
upon the conscience of every reprobate mind, confusion would fill all places.
Many hearers are condemned and made evil by the strength of the Word, one that
has no resolution to amend, in hearing takes truth by the half, and
snatcheth sentences to his purpose. When he hears of Gods mercy there is an
occasion to presume: or of judgment, when he sees not the effect at first,
there is an occasion of doubt, of negligence, and deferring. The Law being
unfolded, and strict obedience urged, gives occasion to reject that service as
a severe task, or a yo^ke too tedious to carry. And the word of God is strong
still, as physic may be strong though it cannot cure: but account it strong
as physic, it either works the good or the bad way: either as the savor of
life unto life, or the savor of death unto death, as the Apostle speaks.
Moreover the word is a saving instrument, and has one end and property, for
this makes an instrument more perfect, to execute one sufficient service and
there rest, seeing nature makes (...), every thing for a peculiar end,
therefore it may want some ornaments and perfections which belongs to other
ordinances. The weaker it is, if stronger effects be produced, the principal
agent is more commended, and made manifest, and for this cause God has kept
the glory of all works to himself, imparting only some portion to the
means. The word then being an instrument is weaker, because it aims at one
end only, to make way for judgment, and not to execute it, and because it
depends upon God the chief worker: but in this regard exceeding mighty,
because the hand of God goes with it, so it can make no show at all, yet
enforce the good and terrify the bad. As the strongest body is weak, and
stirs not without the soul, so are words nothing without him that giues-them
efficacy from above. Shouting and sound of trumpets were no such engines in
military assaults; these by Gods appointment did fell the walls of Jericho. And
S. Paul shows the scribe and wise man has no share in this business, rather
shut out.

God (says he) has chosen the foolish things of the world to condemn the
wise, 1 Cor. 1.27.
and the weak things of the world to confound the mighty: And adds the
reason, that no flesh might glory in his presence. Herein then consists the
words glory, that going the more unlikely way to work, it speedeth, and where
it speedeth not, confusion follows immediately. Let any without partiality
see, by what mean beginnings, against what heat of persecution, the strength
of the Lord subdued hell, and planted religion by the first converting of the
Gentiles, with the Apostles and their followers: it may turn the Atheist, and
raise the most dull and frozen spirits into admiration. In reforming religion
we have seen the like, if the first hopes failed, the second have sped, and by
no power or policy of the earth does the Gospel enjoy prosperity. If any
intent of persecution, or crafty dealing could have given it a deadly wound,
the face of it had not been left to appear before this time to make show, ^or
the voice of it to speak for it self. This must teach us to carry a constant
hope, let the strong man move, and his instruments thunder out their
threatenings, and where they thunder least, color their close devises to
confound all in the end; a vain expectation must be the fruit of such
confidence, and their own confusion finish up their labor. This rock cannot
remove, nor the stronger side fall though it suffer many foiles, 1. Esdras
4.41.
and some disadvantage. Let our conclusion go with the Apocry phall History.
Diverse were severally conceited where was the greatest strength found, some
gave it to Princes, some to women, and to wine, but truth obtaind it from the
rest, she spoke for him, that spoke for her: so went the judgment of the King,
and the cry of others. Magnaest veritas and praeualet, great is the truth and
prevails. And so much for the first means whereby the stronger man subdueth,
the power of his word.

The second is his word of providence, the mighty voice in operation, at whose
command all things move and obey in Heaven and Earth.

The rising of some, and the falling of others, and in a word the falling of a
sparrow: the carriage of great and small meet in this government. Solomon will
have us know, Eccles. 3.14. What he purposes shall stand, to it can no man
add, and from it can none diminish; that we might fear before him.

But here his footesteps are hardly perceived. The strong Man swaieth so much,
and the worlds behavior appears so strange: that his presence seems very
remote, and his Majesty to keep retired and withdrawn. As in the former word
of saving health, the victory stood doubtful in the eyes of carnal
apprehension: the case is here the very same. Claudian guided by uncertain
rules, shows how they gave him a halting opinion between contraries, so many
Eclipses does this light suffer, such thrusting there is against God and
godliness, such prevailing of the bad and pride withal: that he meruailed the
God of all things should be in the earth, and give no more proof of his
strength and victory. In these terms he opens his doubtful meaning. When I
see the glorious frame of Heaven and Earth, the bounds of the Sea, Summer and
Winter fitly disposed in their seasons, the courses of day and night so orderly
to succeed: I thought God had given these laws by singular wisdom, and
adorned his gifts with such distinction. But when I saw such darkness upon the
affairs of men, the proud and ungodly flourishing, and the innocent under
foot: rursus labefacta cadebat religio, religion began to fail. Though his
own plain reason did ground him well in part, Yet did a Heathenish mind thus
plunge him in distraction. There is but a hairs breadth between the practice
of many Christians, and this man's opinion, if the best ways be not prosperous
they are forsaken, and howsoever men have a meaning, the double dealing is to
common.

See then on what ground it stands: Many times the Lord will not show his
might, his enemy gets the upper hand, impiety will domineere, no way to cross
it: where is then this victory mentioned in the Text? It appears that this
objection may be forcible, because David or the Author of the 73. Psalm,
confessed that his feet were almost gone when he beheld the prosperity of
ungodliness.

But going at last into the Sanctuary, he beheld the slippery place of such
doubtful felicity, and found the glory to be but small which a moment can
bring to desolation, or joy in a dream that ends with the night when one
awaketh.

May it not rather amaze the enemy, and confound ungodliness, when prosperity
shall be great, that destruction may be answerable? Nothing can match with his
wisdom, that knows how to give way to folly, that he may pluck down the
power of it being grown ripe, and defeat such advancement in the height.
Aristotle truly shows a great man may not at all times, declare himself,
among inferiors, it were (...) to wrestle among the weaker, or dispute among
the foolish, 4. Ethic. 3.
the world is too weak and base to receive this strength of God in confounding
the devil. If the Almighty should strive, what place were left either for good
or bad, to finish their own intentions, or run out their courses? If his
justice did punish every sin who could endure it? if he did reward every
virtue, where were the patience of Saints of glorious in earth, or their reward
so great in heaven? The world would too much ingrosse the loves of men, if all
things did run smoothly as they would imagine. See how vainly weak desires
strive to fix a rest in the confines of this present State, though such small
occasion be given, and the ways thereof filled with garboils and confusion. Take
one that lives in a troubled place, suppose he be sick and diseased in his
body, his friends leave him, or fail in their comforts, and age hasten on the
remembrance of his departure: we shall often find, the love of life will make
one so qualified, to stick in this mirie place, and dote upon these
transitory shadows. For this cause the Lord shows his scourges rather then
his benefits, reserving the beauty of absolute government in the full luster
till another season, yet here begins and lays the foundation of his
victory. His works (although the beginning and the end cannot be of one form)
want not to an indifferent beholder. Satan and the malice of his instruments
receive many a grievous foil, the professors of his truth many encouragements,
and none shall want his aid that duly craves it. Help was promised to S. Paul
when it seemed denied, and he buffeted with Satan's messenger.

This promisefaild not, 1. Cor. 12.9.
being a general stay in hardest conflicts: My grace is sufficient for thee,
for my strength is made perfect in weakness, So strong is the hand of God where
it least appears. And this much of Christ's victory, But when a stronger then
he shall come upon him and overcome him.

Now follows the gain. He takes from him all his armor wherein he trusted
and deuideth his spoils.

The devil trusts in his armor, as if he prevailed more by men's weakness,
then his own power, a perverse carriage is made his furniture: yield not your
members (...) weapons of unrighteousness, or arms unto sin, Romans 6.13. Christ
trusts not in his armor, but in himself, redeeming by his infinite merit,
and saving by his grace: Satan wins upon advantage. Christ rather against
advantage; and above ordinary possibility. Having conquered his and our enemy,
the next work is to disarme the usurper, and take away his weapon. The body
and the soul are the prize gained in this conquest, first possessed by a
destroyer, and made his instruments: now gained and honored so highly, as to
make up a trophey, to yield the Savior praise and glory. These then are only
happy, being made the spoils of Christ, that as shields, or any spoils in
war, are kept as monuments to posterity, she wing forth his worthiness that
won them to after ages: so the soul and body of one redeemed in glorifying
God for deliverance, are made partakers of redemption, and salvation: A proof
we have here of the souls worthiness, that the Son of God refused not to
enter the lists of opposition for it. It excels the whole world, Christ
says the gain of the world is nothing to the loss of a man's soul. Matthew.
12.29.
For as the soul is Gods vessel (for S. Matthew uses the word (...) noting
so much) all things are the subjects of the soul, serving it as so many
inferiors. Joy is in heaven for one soul gained from the claws of this
spiritual deuourer. From it proceeds religious worship, and from it alone. Die
it cannot, so it becomes an everlasting heritage, and by consequence a
greater purchase. Christ takes this for himself, Ye were as sheep going
astray but are now returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls. 1. Pet.
2.25. The bodies also engaged formerly to the enemy, are partakers in the
ransom. Testimonies fail not to give assurance, blessings exhibited to the
soul are sealed, and conveyed by ordinances corporal. The body is washed in
Baptism, fed in his Supper, and to be raised up at the last day. Our Savior
suffered in both, afflicted in the garden, and fallen into an agony: and after
died for sin upon the Cross. As he suffered, he overcame, and as he overcame
he gained: he saves both, and makes his conquest absolute. A servant is said
to have his name a seruando from preserving. In war when they had taken
prisoners, they used not extremities, but those whom by law, they might have
killed, by equity they made their servants. Christ having vanquished the strong
Man, is become the absolute Lord. He takes from him all his armor wherein he
trusts and deuideth his spoils. In the mean time, poor man that makes so
much estimation of himself, see what reckoning God and the truth make of him.
He whose thoughts never cease almost from domineering, is but another
vassalat the best, won by the law of Arms, and only happy in being
conquered.

The Text makes him yet lower, armor, goods, weapons, spoils and a house are
things without life, not stirring except they be stird: to these are men
resembled. We may then well cry out, I nunc superbe. Let pride go on, Sen.
and sinful arrogance weary out it self in boasting. Well may this point
conclude with this observation, the mother of humility, therefore the first
step to grace.

All are but instruments, either under a good or a bad agent; as goods are
only good for use, and weapons put of and on at another pleasure. Tully said
of Augustus, the commonwealth should make use of him but no further, only to
destroy a contrary faction Mark Antony and his adhaerents, ornandus laudandus
tollendus, he was to be praised, cherished, and after removed out of the way:
so are all men, though with great difference but for (...) turn, if they
suruay justly their own abilities. God may say to the best as he did to them
that bare the burden and the heat of the day, may not I do with mine own
what I list, and as the Prophet in alike business, Let not the axe boast against
him that heweth with it. Esaias, 10.15. Blessedness is their reward for they fight
under his Banner, yet not of their own choosing, their ways are isntrumental.
But of all other a wicked man has small cause to triumph, where the enemy is
his leader, and although no counsel can tame him, this one meditation might
cool his courage. If some tormentor of the Commonwealth did consider, that
only by Gods permission, and the devils instigation he may or must be a plague
to inferiors for a time, because of the uncharitableness of men, of
covetousness, sacrilege, and such incurable sins: to take that by rapine,
which will be got to no good uses. If the ambitious climber did suppose, God
gave some way to his humors, and if he serves not him that set him up, he
shall nevertheless find true these words of Cyprian, Cui plus dignitatis
ascribitur ab eoplus exigetur seruitutis, to whom God alotteth the greatest
dignity he requires from him greatest service: that either a ruin will come
here, or at last a worse fire then Phaeton had, if his chariot keep not a
right course.

If the voluptuous Libertine did consider, though God may let him enjoy his
delicacy with content, finding him good for nothing else, hating instruction
and unfit for Discipline, but the end is to fat him against the day of
slaughter, that all these are given up as slaves, to him that will correct them
as slaves hereafter, if it did not amend them, it might amaze them in their bad
proceedings.

But to conclude the point with, the greate^t Universality, we must account all
but (...) and (...) spoils, instruments, and another possession. We may read
the characters of obedience in the face of the whole Earth, and the state
thereof framed by providence to subjection, and every degree of men appointed
to some service. The meaner sort subject to the greater, stir not without
them, and the greater stand not without the meaner. God has linked one with
the other to bridle both, and they either agree or disagree as he in mercy or
judgment shall appoint. Particular orders show the like, every son subjected
to his parent, every servant to his master, all Nobility to the Prince, and he
to God, and all these by careful provision: as the Son of man came not to be
served but to serve, and as the Apostle counsels, let him that has an
office wait upon his office. That I may call the whole world as Aristotle does
a servant, instrumentum animatum, a living instrument: the great dealers in it
are least of all themselves, the more they are, the greater their debt, the
more they stir, the more they are led and wrought upon. And so much of the
second part of the Text; our Saviors power. A compendious dispatch shall soon
finish the last, which contains a use for his Auditors.

First, he strike that negligence, He that is not with me is against me. There
are Neutralls in the world, some it seemed at that time, stood steadfast neither
with Christ, nor the Pharisees: they gave both the hearing, but did according
to their own pleasures, to show it were no news, if after times, and perhaps
these of ours swarm with a like company. But if some stay between good and
bad, how do these words comprehend all under good and bad, admitting none of a
middle rank. Surely, Psalm 69.28
as the Psalmist did pray that his enemies might be blotted out of the Book of
the living, when in very truth they were never written there, for then their
names could not have been raced out: only in presuming hypocrisy they had
written themselves there, therefore he prays God would renounce them openly,
and prove them to be none of his: so is it here, no Neutralls but in opinion,
others may think them so, or they themselves, but Christ flatly discardeth all
such. He that is not with me is against me.

We need not with S. Ieromie expound it of the devil in particularly, but
including others with him, refer it to those idle hearers, which heard his
words, and saw miracles to no purpose, and so were enemies. Quisquis non
adiuuat quodammodose opponit says Calvin, he that does not help, apposeth in
a sort, such negligence makes the enemies more arrogant, and the well willers
more discouraged: even in humane affairs a man is more open for his enemies to
play upon, if his friends fail him, then if he had not any. And what greater
enemic has religion then devotion without practice: this makes all the world
superficial, and Sermons heard like orations, the vehemence of Gods command is
let slip, and this made a business of the ear. And when faults are commonly
taxed, the hearers account all but a wornesubiect, and a beaten theme, whereby
the word is become as sounding brass, or empty crackes to no end: so these
indifferent friends turn grievous adversaries. August. 1. de peccatorum
meritis, 28.
Let us think with S. Austen nec est vlli vllus medins locus, vt possit esse
nisi cum diabolo qui non est cum Christo. There is no middle place for any, he
must needs be with the devil that is not with Christ. If then we be not
Christ's enemies, we must do two things that we may be with him, maintain his
cause when we see his commandment: and vindicate his honor, if any disgrace
his words and offend him. By the first we make confession of our faith upon
occasion, speak his truth and practice it, so we honor him as his followers,
save our selves by the right course, and gain others to him by example. This
benefit is great. Many stand with him, that many do stand for: And example
because it beats upon the senses, by an open Oratory proves the strongest
mouer. As among plants that grow, the seed lies in the fruit: so the fruit of
a godly life is as seed, it propagateth religion, and stirs up others to
godliness. Christ says, Let yourlight shine before men. S. Austen reasons
why? Mat. 5.14.
seeing else where he commands good works should be done in secret, and
answers, not that any should praise you but conuersi fiant, quod est, may
glorify your Father which is in heaven, and become worshippers of him by your
example. Secondly, we must reprove sin, vindicate his honor, account his
enemies (considering their wickedness) our own. Nothing is more defaced then
godliness, one reason whereof is this, men sufferit to rest securely under their
nose, and where sin is not controld it waxes shameless. The Prophet Esaias
foretold of Christ, Esaias 53.2.
He should grow up as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground, the
world should yield him small moistures, and his truth would be bended and bowed
like a tender sprig of small account. One complained of nature, that man the
best creature was brought into the world weakest, naked, destitute, and unable
to help himself. So fares it with the best cause of truth and honesty, having
plain dealing for a companion, when vice is armed, and wants not the fence of
a guardian and protector. The earth is become a stage, and the chief actors
egregious hypocrites, it yields the show of soundnes when the inward substance
is rotten, pretending much and performing little. Men will fight rather pro
focis then pro aris, for their private respects, then Gods glory. Perhaps a
religious cause may have defenders, but if it be opposed, or procure hatred,
and cross other men's humors, that once it become a burden or a charge, they
cast it off, though they loose Christ and all by the departure. They follow
sin with the swinge of the time, and will go with the stream though they
drown in the end. Ruffin upon the Creed shows no disgrace can harm one for
doing good, Christ for us stooped to infirmities, and was borne of a Virgin,
which humiliation was no stain to his Divinity, or blemish to his person, he
proves it by a similitude, Si quis vide at paruulum in profundo caeni necari,
etc. If a man of worth see a child ready to be choked in the mud, though he get
some mire by plucking him out, can we account him deformed or polluted: in like
case let a man do good, the aspersions cast upon him can be no dishonor. And
how can he expect the favor of Christ, that plays the flincher, or if he
belong to him not sympathise in his disgrace, Or to speak of convenient
regards, how can he refuse justly to undergo a burden for Christ, that took
so many loades of heavy carriage before for him. Infinite commodity might
redound to his Kingdom by this spiritual fortitude, the stout reprehension of
a sinner might perhaps recall him at last, or make his proceedings more calm,
and cool him where it could not save him. The opposition of the wicked in a
bad cause, or the helping of the weaker side in a good may meet with iarres,
and rubs in the way, but the end which tries all, shall crown those attempts
with honor.

But in standing thus firmly with Christ, wisdom and discretion must be
guides, when there are apparent testimonies, no good can come, it is in vain
to stir. One may better spare the labor, then put the Scripture to a
swearing man in a drunken fit, or counsel a man bent to scorn and derision.
Devotion without circumspection betrays the truth, and counsel then loses
the Majesty with the success. To expect a fit time, to fear worse
inconveniences in them that are reprehended, or to make them hate weak ones,
non videtur cupiditatis occasio, sed consilium Charitatis, such forbearance is
not an occasion of case and lust, but the counsel of Charity says S. Austen.
Solomon's counsel puts in this caution, Aug. 1. de Ciu. Dei c. 9.
Reprove not a scorner least he hate thee, but rebuke a wise man and he will
love thee Pro. 9.8. Our Savior also did charge his Disciples not to give a
holy thing to dogs, nor to cast pearls before swine, One is set to bark
against the truth, and the other to wallow in the mire of pollution. But when
occasion serves, every one is bound to stand with Christ, though it cost him
strokes, better to endure them then the blows of Gods indignation. A white
liuerd professor is here disclaimed: He that is not with me is against me.

He that gathers not with mescattereth. The former point was directed against
a sinners negligence, this ouerturnes his confidence. The hypocrite has a hope
though it prove like a spiders web, he gathers, but to small purpose. If
offenders had not in them this vain humor, they would not heap so many
sins, nor treasure up so much wrath against the day of wrath. As the writers
of moral Phylosophie say all virtues do meet in prudence, that knows how
to carry things wisely, so all vices seem united in covetousness. For
covetousness is called the root of all evil, and too much gathering is the
common disease of the times. View then all sins comprehended in this, or this
for all the rest, their end is gathering, therefore can bring no happiness. He
that is gathering, is laboring and still toiling. He is only happy that
leaves gathering, and makes some use of his labors which is the true fruition
of them. Some there are as men given over to the captivity of their base
affections, which take no pleasure but in raking together, nothing can be wrung
away with cheerefulnes but comes like so many drops of blood, whose minds none
if they were wise would have for their wealth. For heaping up wealth is like
building, only to delight in finishing the work, and making good use of the
possession by employment, (...) says Aristotle; Arist. 10. Ethic. 7.
Happiness is in quiet, press the word, we shall then find quiet, when we leave
gathering. From that ground the Philosopher could prove, felicity had no
absolute place in any worldly practice, for all things are passed over with
care and travel. Eccles. 1.18.
The argument indeed is Solomon's; when he considered the best gathering which
he did wish for as the choifest; even there, in much wisdom he found grief,
and he that increases knowledge, increases, sorrow, for care and trouble of
the mind is not wanting in those labors; and in the next Chapter he comes to
the sweetest gathering, in compassing of pleasures, because a man must bestow
some travel they at last do tire and weary a man out: he proves them vanity
and vexation of spirit. Nothing that savors of this life can be better,
therefore no good gathering without Christ. But among all, the covetous toyling
for estates, has bundles to gather up, filled with thorns and netles, abounding
with difficulties and vexation: to remove if it were possible a griping fist,
hunting after commodity with too much eagernes. As if God would teach men by
the rough and craggy passages, this was not his best way, and that he has
framed men according to his own Image, and given them a divine soul for some
other end then like a mole to dig in the earth, blinded with baseness. Wherefore
do men's affections run after Mammon in steed of God, or why do they adore
it in his room? we call that every ones God upon which his desires dote and
run, and so here, if wealth drown all other cares, and possess the mind as
principal. So bad is covetousness where it seems most harmless, what then
where it works upon advantage? and grateth upon the necessities of others? In
this age every one stretches out all gain to the uttermost, and the labors
of the meaner sort never less regarded, one profession strives to eat up
another. Yet have we a general complaint of want, as if the curse of scattering
went along with this scraping. As fast as the Tennant brings in, or the debtor
pays, pride and other moths, perhaps an unthrifty son, wast and wear out
all again. Sometimes the labors of one in need, when they as fertile fields
should return to another, gain with some advantage: while too much use is
made of them, ones estate and the others hope do break together. Suppose a
miserable gatherer may escape these miseries, a scattering time will come at
last, death will scatter the household, and divide the goods, it seuereth the
two near friends soul and body, and for a time sends them into remote and
distant Countries. Then as Job says, Job 27.8.
The hypocrite though he gains where is his hope? Like the chafe which the
wind drives from the face of the earth, or scattered as our Savior
pronounces here.

If then we will gather and gain too, we must gather with Christ and we shall
not scatter, Time employed in his worship, though it be gone (as all time has
wings) stays in the book of God, and brings reward. Whatsoever labor in
his service, or cost is bestowed to maintain and further it, is laid out
safely. The choicest grain lies longest in the earth, indures the storms of
Winter, but springs up with a gainefull crop: so the best works have their
goodness covered, and longest tarry for recompense, but faithful is he that
promises, an assured time shall bring them up. Cast thy bread upon the waters,
Eccles. 11.1.
for after many days thou shall find it: To teach a worldly mind that seems
to cast all upon waters, no benefit redounding back (and therefore they cast
so little) that treasure laid up in heaven shall never be lost. Let us then
gather time by taking opportunity to do good. Let us gather the word which
Christ disperseth among us as seed, or the souls Manna, which only can feed
it in the staruing wilderness of this life: Use it, or else it will putrify
as Manna did. From the judgments and plagues of God, gather occasions of
admonition and repentance. And by this kind of gathering we shall get all.

Open thy mouth wide and I shall fill it, Psalm 81.10
says God to his people. His rewards are not like fruits of a cold
benevolence, or a mean collection: but himself, his Son, the first fruits
of blessedness here, and eternal glory hereafter in due time. In the naming
whereof I may justly make mine own period, and yours. Instructions are
gathered that we may disperse and publish them for others, to show by precept
and pattern, all gatherings one day must have a like conclusion. The end of
Preaching is practice, and the end of practice is the end of all. Therefore let
me wind up these with our Saviors counsel here, and S. Paul's in another
place. So gather that you may not scatter, so run that ye may obtain.

FINIS.

